[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lol045)  [Next](lol047) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ACPKVU/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Myths and Legends of our Own Land*, by Charles M. Skinner, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_2H_4_0046"></span>

### THE LOST GRAVE OF PAINE

Failure to mark the resting-places of great men and to indicate the
scenes of their deeds has led to misunderstanding and confusion among
those who discover a regard for history and tradition in this practical
age. Robert Fulton, who made steam navigation possible, lies in an
unmarked tomb in the yard of Trinity Church—the richest church in
America. The stone erected to show where Andre was hanged was destroyed
by a cheap patriot, who thought it represented a compliment to the spy.
The spot where Alexander Hamilton was shot in the duel by Aaron Burr is
known to few and will soon be forgotten. It was not until a century of
obloquy had been heaped on the memory of Thomas Paine that his once
enemies were brought to know him as a statesman of integrity, a
philanthropist, and philosopher. His deistic religion, proclaimed in
"The Age of Reason," is unfortunately no whit more independent than is
preached in dozens of pulpits to-day. He died ripe in honors, despite
his want of creed, and his mortal part was buried in New Rochelle, New
York, under a large walnut-tree in a hay-field. Some years later his
friends removed the body to a new grave in higher ground, and placed
over it a monument that the opponents of his principles quickly hacked
to pieces. Around the original grave there still remains a part of the
old inclosure, and it was proposed to erect a suitable memorial—the
Hudson and its Hills the spot, but the owner of the tract would neither
give nor sell an inch of his land for the purpose of doing honor to the
man. Some doubt has already been expressed as to whether the grave is
beneath the monument or in the inclosure; and it is also asserted that
Paine's ghost appears at intervals, hovering in the air between the two
burial-places, or flitting back and forth from one to the other,
lamenting the forgetfulness of men and wailing, "Where is my grave? I
have lost my grave!"

<div>

 

 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Rising Of Gouverneur Morris](lol047)
