[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lol067)  [Next](lol069) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ACPKVU/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Myths and Legends of our Own Land*, by Charles M. Skinner, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_2H_4_0069"></span>

### THE LAST SHOT AT GERMANTOWN

Many are the tales of prophecy that have been preserved to us from war
times. In the beginning of King Philip's war in Connecticut, in 1675, it
was reported that the firing of the first gun was heard all over the
State, while the drumbeats calling settlers to defence were audible
eight miles away. Braddock's defeat and the salvation of Washington were
foretold by a Miami chief at a council held in Fort Ponchartrain, on
Detroit River, the ambush and the slaughter having been revealed to him
in a dream. The victims of that battle, too, had been apprised, for one
or two nights before the disaster a young lieutenant in Braddock's
command saw his fellow-officers pass through his tent, bloody and torn,
and when the first gun sounded he knew that it spoke the doom of nearly
all his comrades. At Killingly, Connecticut, in the autumn before the
outbreak of the Revolution, a distant roar of artillery was heard for a
whole day and night in the direction of Boston, mingled with a rattle of
musketry, and so strong was the belief that war had begun and the
British were advancing, that the minute men mustered to await orders. It
was afterward argued that these noises came from an explosion of
meteors, a shower of these missiles being then in progress, invisible,
of course, in the day-time. Just after the signing of the Declaration of
Independence the royal arms on the spire of the Episcopal church at
Hampton, Virginia, were struck off by lightning. Shortly before the
surrender of Cornwallis a display of northern lights was seen in New
England, the rays taking the form of cannon, facing southward. In
Connecticut sixty-four of these guns were counted.

At the battle of Germantown the Americans were enraged by the killing of
one of their men who had gone out with a flag of truce. He was shot from
the windows of Judge Chew's house, which was crowded with British
soldiers, and as he fell to the lawn, dyeing the peaceful emblem with
his blood, at least one of the Continentals swore that his death should
be well avenged. The British reinforcements, sixteen thousand strong,
came hurrying through the street, their officers but half-dressed, so
urgent had been the summons for their aid. Except for their steady tramp
the place was silent; doors were locked and shutters bolted, and if
people were within doors no sign of them was visible. General Agnew
alone of all the troop seemed depressed and anxious. Turning to an aide
as they passed the Mennonist graveyard, he said, "This field is the last
I shall fight on."

An eerie face peered over the cemetery wall, a scarred, unshaven face
framed in long hair and surmounting a body clothed in skins, with the
question, "Is that the brave General Gray who beat the rebels at Paoli?"
One of the soldiers, with a careless toss of the hand, seemed to
indicate General Agnew. A moment later there was a report, a puff of
smoke from the cemetery wall, and a bullet whizzed by the head of the
general, who smiled wanly, to encourage his men. Summary execution would
have been done upon the stranger had not a body of American cavalry
dashed against the red-coats at that moment, and a fierce contest was
begun. When the day was over, General Agnew, who had been separated from
his command in the confusion of battle, came past the graves again.
Tired and depressed, he drew rein for a moment to breathe the sweet air,
so lately fouled with dust and smoke, and to watch the gorgeous light of
sunset. Again, like a malignant genius of the place, the savage-looking
stranger arose from behind the wall. A sharp report broke the quiet of
evening and awoke clattering echoes from the distant houses. A horse
plunged and General Agnew rolled from his saddle, dead: the last victim
in the strife at Germantown.

<div>

 

 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: A Blow In The Dark](lol069)
