[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lol070)  [Next](lol072.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ACPKVU/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Myths and Legends of our Own Land*, by Charles M. Skinner, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_2H_4_0072"></span>

### LORD PERCY'S DREAM

Leaving the dissipations of the English court, Lord Percy came to
America to share the fortunes of his brethren in the contest then raging
on our soil. His father had charged him with the delivery of a certain
package to an Indian woman, should he meet her in his rambles through
the western wilds, and, without inquiring into the nature of the gift or
its occasion, he accepted the trust. At the battle of the
Brandywine—strangely foretold by Quaker prophecy forty years before—he
was detailed by Cornwallis to drive the colonial troops out of a
graveyard where they had intrenched themselves, and though he set upon
this errand with the enthusiasm of youth, his cheek paled as he drew
near the spot where the enemy was waiting.

It was not that he had actual physical fear of the onset: he had dreamed
a dream a few nights before, the purport of which he had hinted to his
comrades, and as he rode into the clearing at the top of Osborn's Hill
he drew rein and exclaimed, "My dream! Yonder is the graveyard. I am
fated to die there." Giving a few of his effects to his brother
officers, and charging one of them to take a message of love to his
betrothed in England, he set his lips and rode forward.

His cavalry bound toward the scene of action and are within thirty paces
of the cemetery wall, when from behind it rises a battalion of men in
the green uniform of the Santee Rangers and pours a withering fire into
the ranks. The shock is too great to withstand, and the red-coats
stagger away with broken ranks, leaving many dead and wounded on the
ground. Lord Percy is the coolest of all. He urges the broken columns
forward, and almost alone holds the place until the infantry, a hundred
yards behind, come up. Thereupon ensues one of those hand-to-hand
encounters that are so rare in recent war, and that are the sorest test
of valor and discipline. Now rides forward Captain Waldemar, chief of
the rangers and a half-breed Indian, who, seeing Percy, recognizes him
as an officer and engages him in combat. There is for a minute a clash
of steel on steel; then the nobleman falls heavily to the earth—dead.
His dream has come true. That night the captain Waldemar seeks out the
body of this officer, attracted by something in the memory of his look,
and from his bosom takes the packet that was committed to his care.

By lantern-light he reads, carelessly at first, then rapidly and
eagerly, and at the close he looks long and earnestly at the dead man,
and seems to brush away a tear. Strange thing to do over the body of an
enemy! Why had fate decreed that they should be enemies? For Waldemar is
the half-brother of Percy. His mother was the Indian girl that the earl,
now passing his last days in England, had deceived with a pretended
marriage, and the letters promise patronage to her son. The half-breed
digs a grave that night with his own hands and lays the form of his
brother in it.

<div>

 

 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Saved By The Bible](lol072.md)
