[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lol177)  [Next](lol179) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ACPKVU/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Myths and Legends of our Own Land*, by Charles M. Skinner, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_2H_4_0181"></span>

### TWO LIVES FOR ONE

The place of Macon, Georgia, in the early part of this century was
marked only by an inn. One of its guests was a man who had stopped there
on the way to Alabama, where he had bought land. The girl who was, to be
his wife was to follow in a few days. In the morning when he paid his
reckoning he produced a well-filled pocket-book, and he did not see the
significant look that passed between two rough black-bearded fellows who
had also spent the night there, and who, when he set forth, mounted
their horses and offered to keep him company. As they rode through the
deserted village of Chilicte one of the twain engaged the traveller in
talk while the other, falling a little behind, dealt him a blow with a
loaded whip that unseated him. Divining their purpose, and lacking
weapons for his own defence, he begged for mercy, and asked to be
allowed to return to his bride to be, but the robbers had already made
themselves liable to penalty, and two knife-thrusts in the breast
silenced his appeals. The money was secured, the body was dropped into a
hollow where the wolves would be likely to find and mangle it, and the
outlaws went on their way.

Men of their class do not keep money long, and when the proceeds of the
robbery had been wasted at cards and in drink they separated. As in
fulfilment of the axiom that a murderer is sure to revisit the scene of
his crime, one of the men found himself at the Ocmulgee, a long time
afterward, in sight of the new town—Macon. In response to his halloo a
skiff shot forth from the opposite shore, and as it approached the bank
he felt a stir in his hair and a touch of ice at his heart, for the
ferryman was his victim of years ago. Neither spoke a word, but the
criminal felt himself forced to enter the boat when the dead man waved
his hand, and he was rowed across, his horse swimming beside the skiff.
As the jar of the keel was felt on the gravel he leaped out, urged his
horse to the road, sprang to the saddle, and rushed away in an agony of
fear, that was heightened when a hollow voice called, "Stay!"

After a little he slackened pace, and a farmer, who was standing at the
roadside, asked, in astonishment, "How did you get across? There is a
freshet, and the ferryman was drowned last night." With a new thrill he
spurred his horse forward, and made no other halt until he reached the
tavern, where he fell in a faint on the steps, for the strain was no
longer to be endured. A crowd gathered, but he did not see it when he
awoke—he saw only one pair of eyes, that seemed to be looking into his
inmost soul—the eyes of the man he had slain. With a yell of terror and
of insane fury he rushed upon the ghost and thrust a knife into its
breast. The frenzy passed. It was no ghost that lay on the earth before
him, staring up with sightless eyes. It was his fellow-murderer—his own
brother. That night the assassin's body hung from a tree at the
cross-roads.

<div>

 

 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: A Ghostly Avenger](lol179)
