[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lol126)  [Next](lol128.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ACPKVU/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Myths and Legends of our Own Land*, by Charles M. Skinner, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_2H_4_0129"></span>

### BALANCED ROCK

Balanced Rock, or Rolling Rock, near Pittsfield, Massachusetts, is a
mass of limestone that was deposited where it stands by the great
continental glacier during the ice age, and it weighs four hundred and
eighty tons (estimated) in spite of its centuries of weathering. Here
one of the Atotarhos, kings of the Six Nations, had his camp. He was a
fierce man, who ate and drank from bowls made of the skulls of enemies,
and who, when he received messages and petitions, wreathed himself from
head to foot with poison snakes. The son of this ferocious being
inherited none of his war-like tendencies; indeed, the lad was almost
feminine in appearance, and on succeeding to power he applied himself to
the cultivation of peaceful arts. Later historians have uttered a
suspicion that he was a natural son of Count Frontenac, but that does
not suit with this legend.

The young Atotarho stood near Balanced Rock watching a number of big
boys play duff. In this game one stone is placed upon another and the
players, standing as far from it as they fancy they can throw, attempt
to knock it out of place with other stones. The silence of Atotarho and
his slender, girlish look called forth rude remarks from the boys, who
did not know him, and who dared him to test his skill. The young chief
came forward, and as he did so the jeers and laughter changed to cries
of astonishment and fear, for at each step he grew in size until he
towered above them, a giant. Then they knew him, and fell down in dread,
but he took no revenge. Catching up great bowlders he tossed them around
as easily as if they had been beechnuts, and at last, lifting the
balanced rock, he placed it lightly where it stands to-day, gave them a
caution against ill manners and hasty judgments, and resumed his slender
form. For many years after, the old men of the tribe repeated this story
and its lesson from the top of Atotarho's duff.

<div>

 

 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Shonkeek-moonkeek](lol128.md)
