[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lol174)  [Next](lol176.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ACPKVU/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Myths and Legends of our Own Land*, by Charles M. Skinner, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_2H_4_0178"></span>

### THE HUNTER OF CALAWASSEE

Through brisk November days young Kedar and his trusty slave, Lauto,
hunted along the Calawassee, with hope to get a shot at a buck—a buck
that wore a single horn and that eluded them with easy, baffling gait
whenever they met it in the fens. Kedar was piqued at this. He drained a
deep draught and buttoned his coat with an air of resolution. "Now, by
my soul," quoth he, "I'll have that buck to-day or die myself!" Then he
laughed at the old slave, who begged him to unsay the oath, for there
was something unusual about that animal—as it ran it left no tracks, and
it passed through the densest wood without halting at trees or
undergrowth. "Bah!" retorted the huntsman. "Have up the dogs. If that
buck is the fiend himself, I'll have him before the day is out!" The
twain were quickly in their saddles, and they had not been long in the
wood before the one-horned buck was seen ahead, trotting with easy pace,
yet with marvellous swiftness.

Kedar, who was in advance, whipped up his horse and followed the deer
into a cypress grove near the Chechesee. As the game halted at a pool he
fired. The report sounded dead in the dense wood, and the deer turned
calmly, watched his pursuer until he was close at hand, then trotted
away again. All day long he held the chase. The dogs were nowhere within
sound, and he galloped through the forest, shouting and swearing like a
very devil, beating and spurring the horse until the poor creature's
head and flanks were reddened with blood. It was just at sunset that
Kedar found himself again on the bank of the Calawassee, near the point
he had left in the morning, and heard once more the baying of his
hounds. At last his prey seemed exhausted, and, swimming the river, it
ran into a thicket on the opposite side and stood still. "Now I have
him!" cried the hunter. "Hillio, Lauto! He's mine!" The old negro heard
the call and hastened forward. He heard his master's horse floundering
in the swamp that edged the river—then came a plash, a curse, and as the
slave arrived at the margin a few bubbles floated on the sluggish
current. The deer stood in the thicket, staring with eyes that blazed
through the falling darkness, and, with a wail of fear and sorrow, old
Lauto fled the spot.

<div>

 

 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revenge Of The Accabee](lol176.md)
