[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lol105)  [Next](lol107.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ACPKVU/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Myths and Legends of our Own Land*, by Charles M. Skinner, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_2H_4_0108"></span>

### SATAN AND HIS BURIAL-PLACE

Satan appears to have troubled the early settlers in America almost as
grievously as he did the German students. He came in many shapes to many
people, and sometimes he met his match. Did he not try to stop old Peter
Stuyvesant from rowing through Hell Gate one moonlight night, and did
not that tough old soldier put something at his shoulder that Satan
thought must be his wooden leg? But it wasn't a leg: it was a gun,
loaded with a silver bullet that had been charged home with prayer.
Peter fired and the missile whistled off to Ward's Island, where three
boys found it afterward and swapped it for double handfuls of doughnuts
and bulls' eyes. Incidentally it passed between the devil's ribs and the
fiend exploded with a yell and a smell, the latter of sulphur, to
Peter's blended satisfaction and alarm. And did not the same spirit of
evil plague the old women of Massachusetts Bay and craze the French and
Spaniards in the South? At Hog Rock, west of Milford, Connecticut, he
broke up a pleasant diversion:

     

         "Once four young men upon ye rock

         Sate down at chuffle board to play

         When ye Deuill appearde in shape of a hogg

         And frightend ym so they scampered away

         And left Old Nick to finish ye play."

One of the first buildings to be put up in Ipswich, Massachusetts, was a
church built on a ledge above the river, and in that church Satan tried
to conceal himself for purposes of mischief. For this act he was hurled
from the steeple-top by some unseen instrument of righteousness with
such force that his hoofmark was stamped into a solid stone near by.
This did not deter him from mounting to the ridge-pole and assuming a
defiant air, with folded arms, when Whitefield began to preach, but when
that clergyman's tremendous voice was loosed below him he bounced into
the air in terror and disappeared.

The Shakers report that in the waning of the eighteenth century they
chased the evil one through the coverts of Mount Sinai, Massachusetts,
and just before dawn of a summer morning they caught and killed and
buried him. Shakers are spiritualists, and they believe their numbers to
have been augmented by distinguished dead, among whom they already
number Washington, Lafayette, Napoleon, Tamerlane, and Pocahontas. The
two first named of these posthumous communists are still seen by members
of the faith who pass Satan's grave at night, for they sit astride of
white horses and watch the burial spot, lest the enemy of man arise and
begin anew his career of trouble. Some members of the brotherhood say
that this legend typifies a burial of evil tendencies in the hearts of
those who hunted the fiend, but it has passed down among others as a
circumstance. The Shakers have many mystic records, transmitted verbally
to the present disciples of "Mother Ann," but seldom told to scoffers
"in the world," as those are called who live without their pure and
peaceful communes. Among these records is that of the appearance of John
the Baptist in the meeting-house at Mount Lebanon, New York, one Sunday,
clothed in light and leading the sacred dance of the worshippers, by
which they signify the shaking out of all carnal things from the heart.

<div>

 

 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Peter Rugg, The Missing Man](lol107.md)
