[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lol155)  [Next](lol157) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ACPKVU/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Myths and Legends of our Own Land*, by Charles M. Skinner, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_2H_4_0158"></span>

### A DINNER AND ITS CONSEQUENCES

The Nipmucks were populous at Thompson, Connecticut, where they
skilfully tilled the fields, and where their earthworks, on Fort Hill,
provided them with a refuge in case of invasion. Their chief,
Quinatisset, had his lodge on the site of the Congregational church in
Thompson. They believed that Chargoggagmanchogagog Pond was paradise—the
home of the Great Spirit and departed souls—and that it would always
yield fish to them, as the hills did game. They were fond of fish, and
would barter deer-meat and corn for it, occasionally, with the
Narragansetts.

Now, these last-named Indians were a waterloving people, and to this day
their "fishing fire"—a column of pale flame—rises out of Quinebaug Lake
once in seven years, as those say who have watched beside its waters
through the night. Knowing their fondness for blue-fish and clams, the
Narragansetts asked the Nipmucks to dine with them on one occasion, and
this courtesy was eagerly accepted, the up-country people distinguishing
themselves by valiant trencher deeds; but, alas, that it should be so!
they disgraced themselves when, soon after, they invited the
Narragansetts to a feast of venison at Killingly, and quarrelled with
their guests over the dressing of the food. This rumpus grew into a
battle in which all but two of the invites were slain. Their hosts
buried them decently, but grass would never grow above their graves.

This treachery the Great Spirit avenged soon after, when the Nipmucks
had assembled for a powwow, with accessory enjoyments, in the grassy
vale where Mashapaug Lake now reflects the charming landscape, and
where, until lately, the remains of a forest could be seen below the
surface. In the height of the revel the god struck away the foundations
of the hills, and as the earth sank, bearing the offending men and
women, waters rushed in and filled the chasm, so that every person was
drowned, save one good old woman beneath whose feet the ground held
firm. Loon Island, where she stood, remains in sight to-day.

<div>

 

 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The New Haven Storm Ship](lol157)
