[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lol192)  [Next](lol194.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ACPKVU/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Myths and Legends of our Own Land*, by Charles M. Skinner, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_2H_4_0197"></span>

### THE SKY WALKER OF HURON

Here is the myth of Endymion and Diana, as told on the shores of Saginaw
Bay, in Michigan, by Indians who never heard of Greeks. Cloud Catcher, a
handsome youth of the Ojibways, offended his family by refusing to fast
during the ceremony of his coming of age, and was put out of the
paternal wigwam. It was so fine a night that the sky served him as well
as a roof, and he had a boy's confidence in his ability to make a
living, and something of fame and fortune, maybe. He dropped upon a tuft
of moss to plan for his future, and drowsily noted the rising of the
moon, in which he seemed to see a face. On awaking he found that it was
not day, yet the darkness was half dispelled by light that rayed from a
figure near him—the form of a lovely woman.

"Cloud Catcher, I have come for you," she said. And as she turned away
he felt impelled to rise and follow. But, instead of walking, she began
to move into the air with the flight of an eagle, and, endowed with a
new power, he too ascended beside her. The earth was dim and vast below,
stars blazed as they drew near them, yet the radiance of the woman
seemed to dull their glory. Presently they passed through a gate of
clouds and stood on a beautiful plain, with crystal ponds and brooks
watering noble trees and leagues of flowery meadow; birds of brightest
colors darted here and there, singing like flutes; the very stones were
agate, jasper, and chalcedony. An immense lodge stood on the plain, and
within were embroideries and ornaments, couches of rich furs, pipes and
arms cut from jasper and tipped with silver. While the young man was
gazing around him with delight, the brother of his guide appeared and
reproved her, advising her to send the young man back to earth at once,
but, as she flatly refused to do so, he gave a pipe and bow and arrows
to Cloud Catcher, as a token of his consent to their marriage, and
wished them happiness, which, in fact, they had.

This brother, who was commanding, tall, and so dazzling in his gold and
silver ornaments that one could hardly look upon him, was abroad all
day, while his sister was absent for a part of the night. He permitted
Cloud Catcher to go with him on one of his daily walks, and as they
crossed the lovely Sky Land they glanced down through open valley
bottoms on the green earth below. The rapid pace they struck gave to
Cloud Catcher an appetite and he asked if there were no game.
"Patience," counselled his companion. On arriving at a spot where a
large hole had been broken through the sky they reclined on mats, and
the tall man loosing one of his silver ornaments flung it into a group
of children playing before a lodge. One of the little ones fell and was
carried within, amid lamentations. Then the villagers left their sports
and labors and looked up at the sky. The tall man cried, in a voice of
thunder, "Offer a sacrifice and the child shall be well again." A white
dog was killed, roasted, and in a twinkling it shot up to the feet of
Cloud Catcher, who, being empty, attacked it voraciously.

Many such walks and feasts came after, and the sights of earth and taste
of meat filled the mortal with a longing to see his people again. He
told his wife that he wanted to go back. She consented, after a time,
saying, "Since you are better pleased with the cares, the ills, the
labor, and the poverty of the world than with the comfort and abundance
of Sky Land, you may return; but remember you are still my husband, and
beware how you venture to take an earthly maiden for a wife."

She arose lightly, clasped Cloud Catcher by the wrist, and began to move
with him through the air. The motion lulled him and he fell asleep,
waking at the door of his father's lodge. His relatives gathered and
gave him welcome, and he learned that he had been in the sky for a year.
He took the privations of a hunter's and warrior's life less kindly than
he thought to, and after a time he enlivened its monotony by taking to
wife a bright-eyed girl of his tribe. In four days she was dead. The
lesson was unheeded and he married again. Shortly after, he stepped from
his lodge one evening and never came back. The woods were filled with a
strange radiance on that night, and it is asserted that Cloud Catcher
was taken back to the lodge of the Sun and Moon, and is now content to
live in heaven.

<div>

 

 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Coffin Of Snakes](lol194.md)
