[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lol143)  [Next](lol145) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ACPKVU/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Myths and Legends of our Own Land*, by Charles M. Skinner, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_2H_4_0146"></span>

### THE WESSAGUSCUS HANGING

Among the Puritans who settled in Wessaguscus, now Weymouth,
Massachusetts, was a brash young fellow, of remarkable size and
strength, who, roaming the woods one day, came on a store of corn
concealed in the ground, in the fashion of the Indians. As anybody might
have done, he filled his hat from the granary and went his way. When the
red man who had dug the pit came back to it he saw that his cache had
been levied on, and as the footprints showed the marauder to be an
Englishman he went to the colonists and demanded justice. The matter
could have been settled by giving a pennyworth of trinkets to the
Indian, but, as the moral law had been broken, the Puritans deemed it
right that the pilferer should suffer.

They held a court and a proposition was made and seriously considered
that, as the culprit was young, hardy, and useful to the colony, his
clothes should be stripped off and put on the body of a bedridden
weaver, who would be hanged in his stead in sight of the offended
savages. Still, it was feared that if they learned the truth about that
execution the Indians would learn a harmful lesson in deceit, and it
was, therefore, resolved to punish the true offender. He, thinking they
were in jest, submitted to be bound, though before doing so he could
have "cleaned out" the court-room, and ere he was really aware of the
purpose of his judges he was kicking at vacancy.

Butler, in "Hudibras," quotes the story, but makes the offence more
serious—

     

        "This precious brother, having slain,

        In time of peace, an Indian,

        Not out of malice, but mere zeal,

        Because he was an infidel,

        The mighty Tottipotimoy

        Sent to our elders an envoy

        Complaining sorely of the breach Of league."

But the Puritans, having considered that the offender was a teacher and
a cobbler,

     

        "Resolved to spare him; yet, to do

        The Indian Hoghan Moghan, too,

        Impartial justice, in his stead did

        Hang an old weaver that was bed-rid."

The whole circumstance is cloudy, and the reader may accept either
version that touches his fancy.

<div>

 

 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Unknown Champion](lol145)
