[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lol112)  [Next](lol114.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ACPKVU/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Myths and Legends of our Own Land*, by Charles M. Skinner, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_2H_4_0115"></span>

### HOWE'S MASQUERADE

During the siege of Boston Sir William Howe undertook to show his
contempt for the raw fellows who were disrespectfully tossing
cannon-balls at him from the batteries in Cambridge and South Boston, by
giving a masquerade. It was a brilliant affair, the belles and blades of
the loyalist set being present, some in the garb of their ancestors, for
the past is ever more picturesque than the present, and a few roisterers
caricaturing the American generals in ragged clothes, false noses, and
absurd wigs. At the height of the merriment a sound of a dirge echoing
through the streets caused the dance to stop. The funeral music paused
before the doors of Province House, where the dance was going on, and
they were flung open. Muffled drums marked time for a company that began
to file down the great stair from the floor above the ball-room: dark
men in steeple-hats and pointed beards, with Bibles, swords, and
scrolls, who looked sternly at the guests and descended to the street.

Colonel Joliffe, a Whig, whose age and infirmity had prevented him from
joining Washington, and whose courtesy and intelligence had made him
respected by his foes, acted as chorus: "These I take to be the Puritan
governors of Massachusetts: Endicott, Winthrop, Vane, Dudley, Haynes,
Bellingham, Leverett, Bradstreet." Then came a rude soldier, mailed,
begirt with arms: the tyrant Andros; a brown-faced man with a sailor's
gait: Sir William Phipps; a courtier wigged and jewelled: Earl
Bellomont; the crafty, well-mannered Dudley; the twinkling, red-nosed
Shute; the ponderous Burnet; the gouty Belcher; Shirley, Pownall,
Bernard, Hutchinson; then a soldier, whose cocked hat he held before his
face. "'Tis the shape of Gage!" cried an officer, turning pale. The
lights were dull and an uncomfortable silence had fallen on the company.
Last, came a tall man muffled in a military cloak, and as he paused on
the landing the guests looked from him to their host in amazement, for
it was the figure of Howe himself. The governor's patience was at an
end, for this was a part of the masquerade that had not been looked for.
He fiercely cried to Joliffe, "There is a plot in this. Your head has
stood too long on a traitor's shoulders."

"Make haste to cut it off, then," was the reply, "for the power of Sir
William Howe and of the king, his master, is at an end. These shadows
are mourners at his funeral. Look! The last of the governors."

Howe rushed with drawn sword on the figure of himself, when it turned
and looked at him. The blade clanged to the floor and Howe fell back
with a gasp of horror, for the face was his own. Hand nor voice was
raised to stay the double-goer as it mournfully passed on. At the
threshold it stamped its foot and shook its fists in air; then the door
closed. Mingled with the strains of the funeral march, as it died along
the empty streets, came the tolling of the bell on South Church steeple,
striking the hour of midnight. The festivities were at an end and,
oppressed by a nameless fear, the spectators of this strange pageant
made ready for departure; but before they left the booming of cannon at
the southward announced that Washington had advanced. The glories of
Province House were over. When the last of the royal governors left it
he paused on the threshold, beat his foot on the stone, and flung up his
hands in an attitude of grief and rage.

<div>

 

 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Old Esther Dudley](lol114.md)
