[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lol122)  [Next](lol124) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ACPKVU/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Myths and Legends of our Own Land*, by Charles M. Skinner, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_2H_4_0125"></span>

### WAHCONAH FALLS

The pleasant valley of Dalton, in the Berkshire Hills, had been under
the rule of Miacomo for forty years when a Mohawk dignitary of fifty
scalps and fifty winters came a-wooing his daughter Wahconah. On a June
day in 1637, as the girl sat beside the cascade that bears her name,
twining flowers in her hair and watching leaves float down the stream,
she became conscious of a pair of eyes bent on her from a neighboring
coppice, and arose in some alarm. Finding himself discovered, the owner
of the eyes, a handsome young fellow, stepped forward with a quieting
air of friendliness, and exclaimed, "Hail, Bright Star!"

"Hail, brother," answered Wahconah.

"I am Nessacus," said the man, "one of King Philip's soldiers. Nessacus
is tired with his flight from the Long Knives (the English), and his
people faint. Will Bright Star's people shut their lodges against him
and his friends?"

The maiden answered, "My father is absent, in council with the Mohawks,
but his wigwams are always open. Follow."

Nessacus gave a signal, and forth from the wood came a sad-eyed,
battle-worn troop that mustered about him. Under the girl's lead they
went down to the valley and were hospitably housed. Five days later
Miacomo returned, with him the elderly Mohawk lover, and a priest,
Tashmu, of repute a cringing schemer, with whom hunters and soldiers
could have nothing in common, and whom they would gladly have put out of
the way had they not been deterred by superstitious fears. The strangers
were welcomed, though Tashmu looked at them gloomily, and there were
games in their honor, Nessacus usually proving the winner, to Wahconah's
joy, for she and the young warrior had fallen in love at first sight,
and it was not long before he asked her father for her hand. Miacomo
favored the suit, but the priest advised him, for politic reasons, to
give the girl to the old Mohawk, and thereby cement a tribal friendship
that in those days of English aggression might be needful. The Mohawk
had three wives already, but he was determined to add Wahconah to his
collection, and he did his best, with threats and flattery, to enforce
his suit. Nessacus offered to decide the matter in a duel with his
rival, and the challenge was accepted, but the wily Tashmu discovered in
voices of wind and thunder, flight of birds and shape of clouds, such
omens that the scared Indians unanimously forbade a resort to arms. "Let
the Great Spirit speak," cried Tashmu, and all yielded their consent.

Invoking a ban on any who should follow, Tashmu proclaimed that he would
pass that night in Wizard's Glen, where, by invocations, he would learn
the divine will. At sunset he stalked forth, but he had not gone far ere
the Mohawk joined him, and the twain proceeded to Wahconah Falls. There
was no time for magical hocus-pocus that night, for both of them toiled
sorely in deepening a portion of the stream bed, so that the current ran
more swiftly and freely on that side, and in the morning Tashmu
announced in what way the Great Spirit would show his choice. Assembling
the tribe on the river-bank, below a rock that midway split the current,
a canoe, with symbols painted on it, was set afloat near the falls. If
it passed the dividing rock on the side where Nessacus waited, he should
have Wahconah. If it swerved to the opposite shore, where the Mohawk and
his counsellor stood, the Great Spirit had chosen the old chief for her
husband. Of course, the Mohawk stood on the deeper side. On came the
little boat, keeping the centre of the stream. It struck the rock, and
all looked eagerly, though Tashmu and the Mohawk could hardly suppress
an exultant smile. A little wave struck the canoe: it pivoted against
the rock and drifted to the feet of Nessacus. A look of blank amazement
came over the faces of the defeated wooer and his friend, while a shout
of gladness went up, that the Great Spirit had decided so well. The
young couple were wed with rejoicings; the Mohawk trudged homeward, and,
to the general satisfaction, Tashmu disappeared with him. Later, when
Tashmu was identified as the one who had guided Major Talcott's soldiers
to the valley, the priest was caught and slain by Miacomo's men.

<div>

 

 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Knocking At The Tomb](lol124)
