[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lol133)  [Next](lol135) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ACPKVU/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Myths and Legends of our Own Land*, by Charles M. Skinner, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_2H_4_0136"></span>

### AUNT RACHEL'S CURSE

On a headland near Plymouth lived "Aunt Rachel," a reputed seer, who
made a scant livelihood by forecasting the future for such seagoing
people as had crossed her palm. The crew of a certain brig came to see
her on the day before sailing, and she reproached one of the lads for
keeping bad company. "Avast, there, granny," interrupted another, who
took the chiding to himself. "None of your slack, or I'll put a stopper
on your gab." The old woman sprang erect. Levelling her skinny finger at
the man, she screamed, "Moon cursers! You have set false beacons and
wrecked ships for plunder. It was your fathers and mothers who decoyed a
brig to these sands and left me childless and a widow. He who rides the
pale horse be your guide, and you be of the number who follow him!"

That night old Rachel's house was burned, and she barely escaped with
her life, but when it was time for the brig to sail she took her place
among the townfolk who were to see it off. The owner of the brig tried
to console her for the loss of the house. "I need it no longer," she
answered, "for the narrow house will soon be mine, and you wretches
cannot burn that. But you! Who will console you for the loss of your
brig?"

"My brig is stanch. She has already passed the worst shoal in the bay."

"But she carries a curse. She cannot swim long."

As each successive rock and bar was passed the old woman leaned forward,
her hand shaking, her gray locks flying, her eyes starting, her lips
mumbling maledictions, "like an evil spirit, chiding forth the storms as
ministers of vengeance." The last shoal was passed, the merchant sighed
with relief at seeing the vessel now safely on her course, when the
woman uttered a harsh cry, and raised her hand as if to command silence
until something happened that she evidently expected. For this the
onlookers had not long to wait: the brig halted and trembled—her sails
shook in the wind, her crew were seen trying to free the cutter—then she
careened and sank until only her mast-heads stood out of the water. Most
of the company ran for boats and lines, and few saw Rachel pitch forward
on the earth-dead, with a fierce smile of exultation on her face. The
rescuers came back with all the crew, save one—the man who had
challenged the old woman and revengefully burned her cabin. Rachel's
body was buried where her house had stood, and the rock—before
unknown—where the brig had broken long bore the name of Rachel's Curse.

<div>

 

 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Nix's Mate](lol135)
