[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lol153)  [Next](lol155) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ACPKVU/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Myths and Legends of our Own Land*, by Charles M. Skinner, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_2H_4_0156"></span>

### ORIGIN OF A NAME

The origin of many curious geographical names has become an object of
mere surmise, and this is the more the pity because they suggest such
picturesque possibilities. We would like to know, for instance, how
Burnt Coat and Smutty Nose came by such titles. The conglomerate that
strews the fields south of Boston is locally known as Roxbury
pudding-stone, and, according to Dr. Holmes, the masses are fragments of
a pudding, as big as the State-house dome, that the family of a giant
flung about, in a fit of temper, and that petrified where it fell. But
that would have been called pudding-stone, anyway, from its appearance.
The circumstance that named the reef of Norman's Woe has passed out of
record, though it is known that goodman Norman and his son settled there
in the seventeenth century. It is Longfellow who has endowed the rock
with this legend, for he depicts a wreck there in the fury of a winter
storm in 1680—the wreck of the Hesperus, Richard Norman, master, from
which went ashore next morning the body of an unknown and beautiful
girl, clad in ice and lashed to a broken mast.

But one of the oddest preservations of an apposite in name is found in
the legend of Point Judith, Rhode Island, an innocent *double entendre*.
About two centuries ago a vessel was driving toward the coast in a gale,
with rain and mist. The skipper's eyes were old and dim, so he got his
daughter Judith to stand beside him at the helm, as he steered the
vessel over the foaming surges. Presently she cried, "Land, father! I
see land!" "Where away?" he asked. But he could not see what she
described, and the roar of the wind drowned her voice, so he shouted,
"Point, Judith! Point!" The girl pointed toward the quarter where she
saw the breakers, and the old mariner changed his course and saved his
ship from wreck. On reaching port he told the story of his daughter's
readiness, and other captains, when they passed the cape in later days,
gave to it the name of Point Judith.

<div>

 

 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Micah Rood Apples](lol155)
