[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lol197)  [Next](lol199) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ACPKVU/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Myths and Legends of our Own Land*, by Charles M. Skinner, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_2H_4_0202"></span>

### THE ORIGIN OF WHITE-FISH

An Indian who lived far in the north was so devoted to the chase that he
was never at home for the whole of a day, to the sorrow of his two boys,
who liked nothing so much as to sport with him and to be allowed to
practise with his weapons. Their mother told them that on no account
were they to speak to him of the young man who visited the lodge while
their father was away, and it was not until they were well grown and
knew what the duty of wives should be that they resolved to disobey her.
The hunter struck the woman dead when he learned of her perfidy. So
greatly did her spirit trouble them, however, that they could no longer
abide in their old home in peace and comfort, and they left the country
and journeyed southward until they came to the Sault Sainte Marie.

As they stood beside the falls a head came rolling toward them on the
earth—the head of the dead woman. At that moment, too, a crane was seen
riding on the surface of the water, whirling about in its strongest
eddies, and when one of the boys called to it, "O Grandfather, we are
persecuted by a spirit; take us across the falls," the crane flew to
them. "Cling to my back and do not touch my head," it said to them, and
landed them safely on the farther shore.

But now the head screamed, "Come, grandfather, and carry me over, for I
have lost my children and am sorely distressed," and the bird flew to
her likewise. "Be careful not to touch my head," it said. The head
promised obedience, but succumbed to curiosity when half-way over and
touched the bird's head to see what was the matter with him. With a
lurch the crane flung off his burden and it fell into the rapids. As it
swept down, bumping against the rocks, the brains were pounded out and
strewn over the water. "You were useless in life," cried the crane. "You
shall not be so in death. Become fish!" And the bits of brain changed to
roe that presently hatched to a delicate white fish, the flesh whereof
is esteemed by Indians of the lakes, and white men, likewise. The family
pitched a lodge near the spot and took the crane as their totem or
name-mark. Many of their descendants bear it to this day.

<div>

 

 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Spirit Of Cloudy](lol199)
