[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lol198)  [Next](lol200) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ACPKVU/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Myths and Legends of our Own Land*, by Charles M. Skinner, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_2H_4_0203"></span>

### THE SPIRIT OF CLOUDY

Among the lumbermen of Alger, Michigan, was William Cloud, an Indian,
usually called Cloudy, who was much employed on a chute a mile and a
half out of the village. The rains were heavy one spring, and a large
raft of logs had been floated down to the chute, where they were held
back by a gate until it was time to send them through in a mass. When
the creek had reached its maximum height the foreman gave word to the
log-drivers to lower the gate and let the timber down. This order came
on a chilly April night, and, as it was pitchy dark and rain was falling
in sheets, the lumbermen agreed to draw cuts to decide which of them
should venture out and start the logs. Cloudy drew the fatal slip. He
was a quiet fellow, and without a word he opened the door, bent against
the storm, and passed into the darkness. An hour went by, and the men in
the cabin laughed as they described the probable appearance of their
comrade when he should return, soaked through and through, and they
wondered if he was waiting in some shelter beside the path for the
middle of the night to pass, for the Indians believed that an evil
spirit left the stream every night and was abroad until that hour.

As time lengthened the jest and talk subsided and a moody silence
supervened. At length one of the number resolved to sally out and see if
any mishap had fallen to the Indian. He was joined by three others, and
the party repaired to the creek. Above the chute it was seen that the
gate—which was released by the withdrawal of iron pins and sank of its
own weight-had not quite settled into place, and by the light of a
lantern held near the surface of the rushing current an obstruction
could be dimly seen. The gate was slightly raised and the object drawn
up with pike-poles. It was the mangled body of Cloudy. He was buried
beside the creek; but the camp was soon abandoned and the chute is in
decay, for between the hours of ten and twelve each night the wraith of
the Indian, accompanied by the bad spirit of the stream, ranges through
the wood, his form shining blue in the gloom, his groans sounding above
the swish and lap of the waters.

<div>

 

 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Sun Fire At Sault Sainte Marie](lol200)
