[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lol193)  [Next](lol195) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ACPKVU/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Myths and Legends of our Own Land*, by Charles M. Skinner, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_2H_4_0198"></span>

### THE COFFIN OF SNAKES

No one knew how it was that Lizon gained the love of Julienne, at L'Anse
Creuse (near Detroit), for she was a girl of sweet and pious
disposition, the daughter of a God-fearing farmer, while Lizon was a
dark, ill-favored wretch, who had come among the people nobody knew
whence, and lived on the profits of a tap-room where the vilest liquor
was sold, and where gaming, fighting, and carousing were of nightly
occurrence. Perhaps they were right in saying that it was witchcraft. He
impudently laid siege to her heart, and when she showed signs of
yielding he told her and her friends that he had no intention of
marrying her, because he did not believe in religion.

Yet Julienne deserted her comfortable home and went to live with this
disreputable scamp in his disreputable tavern, to the scandal of the
community, and especially of the priest, who found Lizon's power for
evil greater than his own for good, for as the tavern gained in
hangers-on the church lost worshippers. One Sunday morning Julienne
surprised the people by appearing in church and publicly asking pardon
for her wrong-doing. It was the first time she had appeared there since
her flight, and she was as one who had roused from a trance or
fever-sleep. Her father gladly took her home again, and all went well
until New-Year's eve, when the young men called d'Ignolee made the
rounds of the settlement to sing and beg meat for the poor—a custom
descended from the Druids. They came to the house of Julienne's father
and received his welcome and his goods, but their song was interrupted
by a cry of distress—Lizon was among the maskers, and Julienne was gone.
A crowd of villagers ran to the cabaret and rescued the girl from the
room into which the fellow had thrust her, but it was too late—she had
lost her reason. Cursing and striking and blaspheming, Lizon was at last
confronted by the priest, who told him he had gone too far; that he had
been a plague to the people and an enemy to the church. He then
pronounced against him the edict of excommunication, and told him that
even in his grave he should not rest; that the church, abandoned by so
many victims of his wiles and tyrannies, should be swept away.

The priest left the place forthwith, and the morals of the village fell
lower and lower. Everything was against it, too. Blight and storm and
insect pest ravaged the fields and orchards, as if nature had engaged to
make an expression of the iniquity of the place. Suddenly death came
upon Lizon. A pit was dug near his tavern and he was placed in a coffin,
but as the box was lowered it was felt to grow lighter, while there
poured from it a swarm of fat and filthy snakes. The fog that overspread
the earth that morning seemed to blow by in human forms, the grave
rolled like a wave after it had been covered, and after darkness fell a
blue will-o'-the-wisp danced over it. A storm set in, heaping the
billows on shore until the church was undermined, and with a crash it
fell into the seething flood. But the curse had passed, and when a new
chapel was built the old evils had deserted L'Anse Crease.

<div>

 

 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mackinack](lol195)
