[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lol179)  [Next](lol181.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ACPKVU/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Myths and Legends of our Own Land*, by Charles M. Skinner, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_2H_4_0183"></span>

### THE WRAITH RINGER OF ATLANTA

A man was killed in Elliott Street, Atlanta, Georgia, by a cowardly
stroke from a stiletto. The assassin escaped. Strange what a humming
there was in the belfry of St. Michael's Church that night! Had the
murderer taken refuge there? Was it a knell for his lost soul, chasing
him through the empty streets and beginning already an eternal
punishment of terror? Perhaps the guilty one did not dare to leave
Atlanta, for the chimes sang in minor chords on several nights after.
The old policeman who kept ward in an antiquated guardhouse that stood
opposite the church—it was afterward shaken down by earthquake—said that
he saw a human form, which he would avouch to be that of the murdered
man, though it was wrapped in a cloak, stalk to the doors, enter without
opening them, glide up the winding stair, albeit he bent neither arm nor
knee, pass the ropes by which the chimes were rung, and mount to the
belfry. He could see the shrouded figure standing beneath the gloomy
mouths of metal. It extended its bony hands to the tongues of the bells
and swung them from side to side, but while they appeared to strike
vigorously they seemed as if muffled, and sent out only a low, musical
roar, as if they were rung by the wind. Was the murderer abroad on those
nights? Did he, too, see that black shadow of his victim in the belfry
sounding an alarm to the sleeping town and appealing to be avenged? It
may be. At all events, the apparition boded ill to others, for, whenever
the chimes were rung by spectral hands, mourners gathered at some
bedside within hearing of them and lamented that the friend they had
loved would never know them more on earth.

<div>

 

 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Swallowing Earthquake](lol181.md)
