[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lol190)  [Next](lol192.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ACPKVU/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Myths and Legends of our Own Land*, by Charles M. Skinner, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_2H_4_0195"></span>

### MICHEL DE COUCY'S TROUBLES

Michel De Coucy, of Prairie de Rocher, Illinois, sat before his door
humming thoughtfully, and trying to pull comfort out of a black pipe..
He was in debt, and he did not like the sensation. As hunter, boatman,
fiddler he had done well enough, but having rashly ventured into trade
he had lost money, and being unable to meet a note had applied to Pedro
Garcia for a loan at usurious interest. Garcia was a black-whiskered
Spaniard who was known to have been a gambler in New Orleans, and as
Michel was in arrears in his payments he was now threatening suit.
Presently the hunter jumped up with a glad laugh, for two horsemen were
approaching his place—the superior of the Jesuit convent at Notre Dame
de Kaskaskia and the governor of the French settlements in Illinois, of
whom he had asked advice, and who had come from Fort Chartres, on the
Mississippi, to give it in person. It was good advice, too, for the
effect of it was that there was no law of that time—1750—by which a
Spaniard could sue a Frenchman on French territory. Moreover, the bond
was invalid because it was drawn up in Spanish, and Garcia could produce
no witness to verify the cross at the bottom of the document as of
Michel's making.

Great was the wrath of the Spaniard when Michel told him this, nor was
it lessened when the hunter bade him have no fear—that he might be
obliged to repudiate part of the interest, but that every livre of the
principal would be forthcoming, if only a little time were allowed. The
money lender walked away with clenched fists, muttering to himself, and
Michel lit his pipe again.

At supper-time little Genevieve, the twelve-year-old daughter of Michel,
did not appear. The table was kept waiting for an hour. Michel sat down
but could not eat, and, after scolding awhile in a half-hearted fashion,
he went to the clearing down the road, where the child had been playing.
A placard was seen upon a tree beside the way, and he called a passing
neighbor to read to him these words: "Meshell Coosy. French rascal. Pay
me my money and you have your daughter. Pedro Garcia."

Accustomed as he was to perils, and quick as he generally was in
expedient, Michel was overwhelmed by this stroke. The villagers offered
to arm themselves and rescue the child, but he would not consent to
this, for he was afraid that Garcia might kill her, if he knew that
force was to be set against him. In a day or two Michel was told to go
to Fort Chartres, as favorable news awaited him. He rode with all speed
to that post, went to the official quarters, where the governor was
sitting, and as he entered he became almost insane with rage, for Garcia
stood before him. Nothing but the presence of others saved the
Spaniard's life, and it was some time before Michel could be made to
understand that Garcia was there under promise of safe conduct, and that
the representatives of King Louis were in honor bound to see that he was
not injured. The points at issue between the two men were reviewed, and
the governor gave it as his decision that Michel must pay his debt
without interest, that being forfeit by the Spaniard's abduction of
Genevieve, and that the Spaniard was to restore the girl, both parties
in the case being remanded to prison until they had obeyed this
judgment.

"But I have your promise of safe conduct!" cried the Spaniard, blazing
with wrath.

"And you shall have it when the girl returns," replied the governor.
"You shall be protected in going and coming, but there is no reference
in the paper that you hold as to how long we may wish to keep you with
us."

Both men were marched away forthwith, but Michel was released in an
hour, for in that time the people had subscribed enough to pay his debt.
The Spaniard sent a messenger to a renegade who had little Genevieve in
keeping, and next day he too went free, swearing horribly, but glad to
accept the service of an armed escort until he was well out of town.
Michel embraced his child with ardor when once she was in his arms
again; then he lighted his pipe and set out with her for home, convinced
that French law was the best in the world, that Spaniards were not to be
trusted, and that it is safer to keep one's earnings under the floor
than to venture them in trade.

<div>

 

 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Wallen's Ridge](lol192.md)
