[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lol147)  [Next](lol149.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ACPKVU/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Myths and Legends of our Own Land*, by Charles M. Skinner, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_2H_4_0150"></span>

### THE SKELETON IN ARMOR

The skeleton of a man wearing a breastplate of brass, a belt made of
tubes of the same metal, and lying near some copper arrow-heads, was
exhumed at Fall River, Massachusetts, in 1834. The body had been
artificially embalmed or else preserved by salts in the soil. His arms
and armor suggest Phoenician origin, but the skeleton is thought to be
that of a Dane or Norwegian who spent the last winter of his life at
Newport. He may have helped to carve the rock at West Newbury, or the
better-known Dighton rock at Taunton River that is covered with
inscriptions which the tides and frosts are fast effacing, and which
have been construed into a record of Norse exploration and discovery,
though some will have it that the inevitable Captain Kidd cut the
figures there to tell of buried treasure. The Indians have a legend of
the arrival of white men in a "bird," undoubtedly a ship, from which
issued thunder and lightning. A battle ensued when the visitors landed,
and the white men wrote the story of it on the rock. Certain scholars of
the eighteenth century declared that the rock bore an account of the
arrival of Phoenician sailors, blown across the Atlantic and unable or
unwilling to return. A representation of the pillars of Hercules was
thought to be included among the sculptures, showing that the castaways
were familiar with the Mediterranean. Only this is known about Dighton
Rock, however: that it stood where it does, and as it does, when the
English settled in this neighborhood. The Indians said there were other
rocks near it which bore similar markings until effaced by tides and
drifting ice.

Longfellow makes the wraith of the long-buried exile of the armor appear
and tell his story: He was a viking who loved the daughter of King
Hildebrand, and as royal consent to their union was withheld he made off
with the girl, hotly followed by the king and seventy horsemen. The
viking reached his vessel first, and hoisting sail continued his flight
over the sea, but the chase was soon upon him, and, having no
alternative but to fight or be taken, he swung around before the wind
and rammed the side of Hildebrand's galley, crushing in its timbers. The
vessel tipped and sank, and every soul on board went with her, while the
viking's boat kept on her course, and after a voyage of three weeks put
in at Narragansett Bay. The round tower at Newport this impetuous lover
built as a bower for his lady, and there he guarded her from the dangers
that beset those who are first in savage countries. When the princess
died she was buried in the tower, and the lonely viking, arraying
himself in his armor, fell on his spear, like Brutus, and expired.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Martha's Vineyard And Nantucket](lol149.md)
