[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lol151)  [Next](lol153.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ACPKVU/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Myths and Legends of our Own Land*, by Charles M. Skinner, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_2H_4_0154"></span>

### THE CROW AND CAT OF HOPKINSHILL

In a wood near Hopkins Hill, Rhode Island, is a bowlder, four feet in
diameter, scored with a peculiar furrow. Witch Rock, as it is called,
gained its name two centuries ago, when an old woman abode in a deserted
cabin close by and made the forest dreaded. Figures were seen flitting
through its shadows; articles left out o' nights in neighboring
settlements were missing in the morning, though tramps were unknown;
cattle were afflicted with diseases; stones were flung in at windows by
unseen hands; crops were blighted by hail and frost; and in stormy
weather the old woman was seen to rise out of the woods and stir and
push the clouds before her with a broom. For a hundred yards around
Witch Rock the ground is still accursed, and any attempt to break it up
is unavailing. Nearly a century ago a scoffer named Reynolds declared
that he would run his plough through the enchanted boundary, and the
neighbors watched the attempt from a distance.

He started well, but on arriving at the magic circle the plough shied
and the wooden landside—or chip, as it was called—came off. It was
replaced and the team started again. In a moment the oxen stood unyoked,
while the chip jumped off and whirled away out of sight. On this, most
of the people edged away in the direction of home, and directly there
came from the north a crow that perched on a dead tree and cawed. John
Hopkins, owner of the land, cried to the bird, "Squawk, you damned old
Pat Jenkins!" and the crow took flight, dropping the chip at Reynolds's
feet, at the same moment turning into a beldam with a cocked hat, who
descended upon the rock. Before the men could reach her she changed into
a black cat and disappeared in the ground. Hunting and digging came to
naught, though the pursuers were so earnest and excited that one of them
made the furrow in the rock with a welt from his shovel. After that few
people cared to go near the place, and it became overgrown with weeds
and trees and bushes.

<div>

 

 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Old Stone Mill](lol153.md)
