[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lol184)  [Next](lol186.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ACPKVU/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Myths and Legends of our Own Land*, by Charles M. Skinner, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_2H_4_0188"></span>

### THE UNDER LAND

When the Chatas looked into the still depths of Bayou Lacombe,
Louisiana, they said that the reflection of the sky was the empyrean of
the Under Land, whither all good souls were sure to go after death.
Their chief, Opaleeta, having fallen into this bayou, was so long
beneath the water that he was dead when his fellows found him, but by
working over him for hours, and through resort to prayers and
incantations of medicine men, his life returned and he stood on his feet
once more. Then he grieved that his friends had brought him back, for he
had been at the gates of the Under Land, where the air is blithe and
balmy, and so nourishing that people live on it; where it is never
winter; where the sun shines brightly, but never withers and parches;
and where stars dance to the swing of the breezes. There no white man
comes to rob the Indian and teach him to do wrong. Gorgeous birds fly
through changing skies that borrow the tints of flowers, the fields are
spangled with blossoms of red and blue and gold that load each wind with
perfume, the grass is as fine as the hair of deer, and the streams are
thick with honey.

At sunset those who loved each other in life are gathered to their
lodges, and raise songs of joy and thankfulness. Their voices are soft
and musical, their faces are young again and beam with smiles, and there
is no death. It was only the chiefs who heard his story, for, had all
the tribe known it, many who were old and ill and weary would have gone
to the bayou, and leaped in, to find that restful, happy Under Land.
Those who had gone before they sometimes tried to see, when the lake was
still and dappled with pictures of sunset clouds, but the dead never
came back—they kept away from the margin of the water lest they should
be called again to a life of toil and sorrow. And Opaleeta lived for
many years and ruled his tribe with wisdom, yet he shared in few of the
merry-makings of his people, and when, at last, his lodge was ready in
the Under Land, he gave up his life without a sigh.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: An Averted Peril](lol186.md)
