[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lol169)  [Next](lol171.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ACPKVU/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Myths and Legends of our Own Land*, by Charles M. Skinner, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_2H_4_0173"></span>

### LAKE OF THE DISMAL SWAMP

Drummond's Pond, or the Lake of the Dismal Swamp, is a dark and lonely
tarn that lies in the centre of this noted Virginia morass. It is, in a
century-old tradition, the Styx of two unhappy ghosts that await the end
of time to pass its confines and enjoy the sunshine of serener worlds. A
young woman of a family that had settled near this marsh died of a fever
caused by its malarial exhalations, and was buried near the swamp. The
young man to whom she was betrothed felt her loss so keenly that for
days he neither ate nor slept, and at last broke down in mind and body.
He recovered a measure of physical health, after a time, but his reason
was hopelessly lost.

It was his hallucination that the girl was not dead, but had been exiled
to the lonely reaches of this watery wilderness. He was heard to mutter,
"I'll find her, and when Death comes I'll hide her in the hollow of a
cypress until he passes on." Evading restraint, he plunged into the fen,
and for some days he wandered there, eating berries, sleeping on
tussocks of grass, with water-snakes crawling over him and poisonous
plants shedding their baneful dew on his flesh. He came to the lake at
last. A will-o'the-wisp played along the surface. "'Tis she!" he cried.
"I see her, standing in the light." Hastily fashioning a raft of cypress
boughs he floated it and pushed toward the centre of the pond, but the
eagerness of his efforts and the rising of a wind dismembered the frail
platform, and he fell into the black water to rise no more. But often,
in the night, is seen the wraith of a canoe, with a fire-fly lamp
burning on its prow, restlessly urged to and fro by two figures that
seem to be vainly searching for an exit from the place, and that are
believed to be those of the maiden and her lover.

<div>

 

 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Barge Of Defeat](lol171.md)
