[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lol156)  [Next](lol158) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ACPKVU/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Myths and Legends of our Own Land*, by Charles M. Skinner, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_2H_4_0159"></span>

### THE NEW HAVEN STORM SHIP

In 1647 the New Haven colonists, who even at that early day exhibited
the enterprise that has been a distinguishing feature of the Yankee,
sent a ship to Ireland to try to develop a commerce, their trading posts
on the Delaware having been broken up by the Swedes. When their agent,
Captain Lamberton, sailed—in January—the harbor was so beset with ice
that a track had to be cut through the floes to open water, five miles
distant. She had, moreover, to be dragged out stern foremost—an ill
omen, the sailors thought—and as she swung before the wind a passing
drift of fog concealed her, for a moment, from the gaze of those on
shore, who, from this, foretold things of evil. Though large and new,
the ship was so "walty"—inclined to roll—that the captain set off with
misgiving, and as she moved away the crew heard this solemn and
disheartening invocation from a clergyman on the wharf:—"Lord, if it be
thy pleasure to bury these, our friends, in the bottom of the sea, take
them; they are thine: save them."

Winter passed; so did spring; still the ship came not; but one afternoon
in June, just as a rain had passed, some children cried, "There's a
brave ship!" for, flying up the harbor, with all sail set and flaunting
colors, was a vessel "the very mould of our ship," the clergyman said.

Strange to tell, she was going flat against the wind; no sailors were on
her deck; she did not toss with the fling of the waves; there was no
ripple at her bow. As she came close to land a single figure appeared on
the quarter, pointing seaward with a cutlass; then suddenly her main-top
fell, her masts toppled from their holdings, the dismantled hulk
careened and went down. A cloud dropped from heaven and brooded for a
time above the place where it had vanished, and when it lifted the
surface of the sea was empty and still. The good folk of New Haven
believed that the fate of the absent ship had been revealed, at last,
for she never came back and Captain Lamberton was never heard from.

<div>

 

 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Windam Frogs](lol158)
