[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lol181)  [Next](lol183) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ACPKVU/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Myths and Legends of our Own Land*, by Charles M. Skinner, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_2H_4_0185"></span>

### LAST STAND OF THE BILOXI

The southern part of this country was once occupied by a people called
the Biloxi, who had kept pace with the Aztecs in civilization and who
cultivated especially the art of music. In lives of gentleness and peace
they so soon forgot the use of arms that when the Choctaws descended on
their fields they were powerless to prevent the onset. Town after town
they evacuated before the savages, and at last the Biloxi, reduced to a
few thousands, were driven to the mouth of the Pascagoula River,
Mississippi, where they intrenched themselves, and for a few months
withstood the invaders. But the time came when their supplies were
exhausted, and every form was pinched with hunger. Flight was
impossible. Surrender commonly meant slaughter and outrage. They
resolved to die together.

On a fair spring morning the river-ward gates of their fort were opened
and the survivors of that hapless tribe marched forth, their chief in
advance, with resolution on his wasted face, then the soldiers and
counsellors, the young men, the women and children, and the babes asleep
on the empty breasts of their mothers. As they emerged from the walls
with slow but steady step they broke into song, and their assailants,
who had retired to their tents for their meal, listened with surprise to
the chorus of defiance and rejoicing set up by the starving people.
Without pause or swerving they entered the bay and kept their march. Now
the waters closed over the chief, then the soldiers—at last only a few
voices of women were heard in the chant, and in a few moments all was
still. Not one shrank from the sacrifice. And for years after the echo
of that death-song floated over he waves.

Another version of the legend sets forth that the Biloxi believed
themselves the children of the sea, and that they worshipped the image
of a lovely mermaid with wondrous music. After the Spaniards had come
among this gay and gentle people, they compelled them, by tyranny and
murder, to accept the religion of the white man, but of course it was
only lip-service that they rendered at the altar. The Biloxi were
awakened one night by the sound of wings and the rising of the river.
Going forth they saw the waters of Pascagoula heaped in a quivering
mound, and bright on its moonlit crest stood a mermaid that sang to
them, "Come to me, children of the sea. Neither bell, book, nor cross
shall win you from your queen." Entranced by her song and the potency of
her glances, they moved forward until they encircled the hill of waters.
Then, with hiss and roar, the river fell back to its level, submerging
the whole tribe. The music that haunts the bay, rising through the water
when the moon is out, is the sound of their revels in the caves
below—dusky Tannhausers of a southern Venusberg. An old priest, who was
among them at the time of this prodigy, feared that the want of result
to his teachings was due to his not being in a perfect state of grace.
On his death-bed he declared that if a priest would row to the spot
where the music sounded, at midnight on Christmas, and drop a crucifix
into the water, he would instantly be swallowed by the waves, but that
every soul at the bottom would be redeemed. The souls have never been
ransomed.

<div>

 

 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Sacred Fire Of Nachez](lol183)
