[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lol221)  [Next](lol223.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ACPKVU/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Myths and Legends of our Own Land*, by Charles M. Skinner, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_2H_4_0226"></span>

### HOW THE CRIME WAS REVEALED

In 1853 a Hebrew peddler, whose pack was light and his purse was full,
asked leave to pass the night at the house of Daniel Baker, near
Lebanon, Missouri. The favor was granted, and that was the last seen of
Samuel Moritz; although, when some neighbors shook their heads and
wondered how it was that Baker was so well in funds, there were others
who replied that it was impossible to keep track of peddlers, and that
if Moritz wanted to start on his travels early in the morning, or to
return to St. Louis for goods, it mattered to nobody. On an evening in
1860 when there was a mist in the gullies and a new moon hung in the
west, Rev. Mr. Cummings, a clergyman of that region, was driving home,
and as he came to a bridge near "old man" Baker's farm he saw a man
standing on it, with a pack on his back and a stick in his hand, who was
staring intently at something beneath the bridge. The clergyman greeted
him cheerily and asked him if he would like to ride, whereat the man
looked him in the face and pointed to the edge of the bridge. Mr.
Cummings glanced down, saw nothing, and when he looked up again the man
with the pack had disappeared. His horse at the same moment gave a snort
and plunged forward at a run, so that the clergyman's attention was
fully occupied until he had brought the animal under control again; when
he glanced back and saw that the man was still standing in the bridge
and looking over the edge of it. The minister told his neighbors of this
adventure, and on returning with two of them to the spot next morning
they found the body of old man Baker swinging by the neck from a beam of
the bridge exactly beneath where the apparition had stood—for it must
have been an apparition, inasmuch as the dust, damped though it had been
with dew, showed no trace of footprint. In taking down the body the men
loosened the earth on a shelving bank, and the gravel rolling away
disclosed a skeleton with some bits of clothing on it that were
identified as belongings of Samuel Moritz. Was it conscience, craziness,
or fate that led old man Baker to hang himself above the grave of his
victim?

<div>

 

 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Banshee Of The Bad Lands](lol223.md)
