[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lol231)  [Next](lol233) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ACPKVU/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Myths and Legends of our Own Land*, by Charles M. Skinner, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_2H_4_0237"></span>

### A YELLOWSTONE TRAGEDY

Although the Indians feared the geyser basins of the upper Yellowstone
country, believing the hissing and thundering to be voices of evil
spirits, they regarded the mountains at the head of the river as the
crest of the world, and whoso gained their summits could see the happy
hunting-grounds below, brightened with the homes of the blessed. They
loved this land in which their fathers had hunted, and when they were
driven back from the settlements the Crows took refuge in what is now
Yellowstone Park. Even here the soldiers pursued them, intent on
avenging acts that the red men had committed while suffering under the
sting of tyranny and wrong. A mere remnant of the fugitive band gathered
at the head of that mighty rift in the earth known as the Grand Canon of
the Yellowstone—a remnant that had succeeded in escaping the bullets of
the soldiery,—and with Spartan courage they resolved to die rather than
be taken and carried away to pine in a distant prison. They built a raft
and placed it on the river at the foot of the upper fall, and for a few
days they enjoyed the plenty and peace that were their privilege in
former times. A short-lived peace, however, for one morning they are
aroused by the crack of rifles—the troops are upon them.

Boarding their raft they thrust it toward the middle of the stream,
perhaps with the idea of gaining the opposite shore, but, if such is
their intent, it is thwarted by the rapidity of the current. A few among
them have guns, that they discharge with slight effect at the troops,
who stand wondering on the shore. The soldiers forbear to fire, and
watch, with something like dread, the descent of the raft as it passes
into the current, and, with many a turn and pitch, whirls on faster and
faster. The death-song rises triumphant above the lash of the waves and
that distant but awful booming that is to be heard in the canon. Every
red man has his face turned toward the foe with a look of defiance, and
the tones of the death-chant have in them something of mockery no less
than hate and vaunting.

The raft is now between the jaws of rock that yawn so hungrily. Beyond
and below are vast walls, shelving toward the floor of the gulf a
thousand feet beneath—their brilliant colors shining in the sun of
morning that sheds as peaceful a light on wood and hill as if there were
no such thing as brother hunting brother in this free land of ours. The
raft is galloping through the foam like a racehorse, and, hardened as
the soldiers are, they cannot repress a shudder as they see the fate
that the savages have chosen for themselves. Now the brink is reached.
The raft tips toward the gulf, and with a cry of triumph the red men are
launched over the cataract, into the bellowing chasm, where the mists
weep forever on the rocks and mosses.

<div>

 

 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Broad House](lol233)
