[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lol249)  [Next](lol251.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ACPKVU/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Myths and Legends of our Own Land*, by Charles M. Skinner, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_2H_4_0256"></span>

### THE DEVIL AND THE DALLES

In days when volcanoes were playing in the Northwest and the sternly
beautiful valley of the Columbia was a hell of ash and lava, the fiend
men of the land met at intervals on the heated rocks to guzzle and riot
together. It was at one of these meetings in the third summer after
Tacoma had stopped spouting that the devil urged a lesson from the
growing peace and joy of nature, and prayed the fiend men to desist from
killing and eating each other and live in love.

With a howl of rage at such a proposal they set upon him, tossing their
tails in such a threatening manner that he deemed it best to be off, and
as his hoofs clattered over the country his brain was busy in devising
an escape. Nearing the mountain bulwarks of an inland sea, whose
breakers' rhythmic roar he heard above the yells of his pursuers, a hope
came into his head, and new vigor into his tail, though you might have
thought the latter accession was not needed, for his tail was of
prodigious length and strength. He whirled this limb aloft and beat it
on the earth. A chasm opened at the stroke, and the devil skipped across
to the safe side of it.

Safe? No; for the fiend men in advance took the leap and came beside
him. The tormented one could thrash any two of them at once, but he was
not equal to a thousand. He brandished his weapon once more and it fell
with a crash. Earth shook, dust arose in clouds, and a deeper cleft than
before yawned through the valley. Again the fiend men tried to reach
him, and, though the gap was bigger and many fell into it, hundreds made
the jump and overtook him. He must make one more attempt. The tail
revolved for a third time, and with the energy of despair he flailed the
ground with it.

A third ravine was split through the rock, and this time the earth's
crust cracked away to the eastward, giving outlet to the sea, which came
pouring through the canon, breaking rocks from mountains and grinding
them to powder in its terrific progress. Gasping with fatigue, the
unhappy one toiled up a hill and surveyed his work with satisfaction,
for the flood engulfed the fiend men and they left no member of their
race behind them.

When they had all been happily smashed or drowned, the devil skipped
lightly over the channels he had cut and sought his family, though with
a subdued expression of countenance, for his tail—his strength and
pride—was bruised and broken beyond repair, and all the little imps that
he fathered to the world afterward had little dangling tails like
monkeys' instead of megatheriums', and in time these appendages
disappeared. But what was the use of them? The fiend men they had fought
against were dead and the rising race they could circumvent by subtler
means. The inland sea drained off. Its bed is now the prairie, and the
three strokes of the devil's tail are indelibly recorded in the bed of
the Columbia at the Dalles. And the devil never tried to be good again.

<div>

 

 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Cascades Of The Columbia](lol251.md)
