[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lol215)  [Next](lol217.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ACPKVU/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Myths and Legends of our Own Land*, by Charles M. Skinner, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_2H_4_0220"></span>

### SAVED BY A LIGHTNING-STROKE

There was rough justice in the West in the old days. It had to be dealt
severely and quickly, for it was administered to a kind of men that
became dangerous if they saw any advantage or any superiority in their
strength or numbers over the decent people with whom they were cast.
They were uncivilized foreigners and native renegades, for the most
part, who had drifted to the frontier in the hope of making a living
without work more easily than in the cities. As there were no lawyers or
courts and few recognized laws, the whole people constituted themselves
a jury, and if a man were known to be guilty it was foolishness for any
one to waste logic on his case. And there is almost no record of an
innocent man being hanged by lynchers in the West. For minor offences
the penalty was to be marched out of camp, with a warning to be very
cautious about coming that way again, but for graver ones it was death.

In 1840 a number of desperate fellows had settled along Cedar River,
near its confluence with the Iowa, who subsisted by means of theft from
the frugal and industrious. Some of these men applied themselves
especially to horse-stealing, and in thinly settled countries, where a
man has often to go twenty or thirty miles for supplies, or his mail, or
medical attendance, it is thought to be a calamity to be without a
horse.

At last the people organized themselves into a vigilance committee and
ran down the thieves. As the latter were a conscienceless gang of
rascals, it was resolved that the only effectual way of reforming them
would be by hanging. One man of the nine, it is true, was supposed
before his arrest to be a respectable citizen, but his evil
communications closed the ears of his neighbors to his appeals, and it
was resolved that he, too, should hang.

Not far away stood an oak with nine stout branches, and to this natural
gallows the rogues were taken. As a squall was coming up the ceremonies
were short, and presently every limb was weighted with the form of a
captive. The formerly respectable citizen was the last one to be drawn
up, and hardly had his halter been secured before the storm burst and a
bolt of lightning ripped off the limb on which he hung. During the delay
caused by this accident the unhappy man pleaded so earnestly for a
rehearing that it was decided to give it to him, and when he had secured
it he conclusively proved his innocence and was set free. The tree is
still standing. To the ruffians it was a warning and they went away.
Even the providential saving of one man did not detract from the value
of the lesson to avoid bad company.

<div>

 

 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Killing Of Cloudy Sky](lol217.md)
