[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lol222)  [Next](lol224) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ACPKVU/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Myths and Legends of our Own Land*, by Charles M. Skinner, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_2H_4_0227"></span>

### BANSHEE OF THE BAD LANDS

"Hell, with the fires out," is what the Bad Lands of Dakota have been
called. The fearless Western nomenclature fits the place. It is an
ancient sea-bottom, with its clay strata worn by frost and flood into
forms like pagodas, pyramids, and terraced cities. Labyrinthine canons
wind among these fantastic peaks, which are brilliant in color, but
bleak, savage, and oppressive. Game courses over the castellated hills,
rattlesnakes bask at the edge of the crater above burning coal seams,
and wild men have made despairing stand here against advancing
civilization. It may have been the white victim of a red man's jealousy
that haunts the region of the butte called "Watch Dog," or it may have
been an Indian woman who was killed there, but there is a banshee in the
desert whose cries have chilled the blood that would not have cooled at
the sight of a bear or panther. By moonlight, when the scenery is most
suggestive and unearthly, and the noises of wolves and owls inspire
uneasy feelings, the ghost is seen on a hill a mile south of the Watch
Dog, her hair blowing, her arms tossing in strange gestures.

If war parties, emigrants, cowboys, hunters, any who for good or ill are
going through this country, pass the haunted butte at night, the rocks
are lighted with phosphor flashes and the banshee sweeps upon them. As
if wishing to speak, or as if waiting a question that it has occurred to
none to ask, she stands beside them in an attitude of appeal, but if
asked what she wants she flings her arms aloft and with a shriek that
echoes through the blasted gulches for a mile she disappears and an
instant later is seen wringing her hands on her hill-top. Cattle will
not graze near the haunted butte and the cowboys keep aloof from it, for
the word has never been spoken that will solve the mystery of the region
or quiet the unhappy banshee.

The creature has a companion, sometimes, in an unfleshed skeleton that
trudges about the ash and clay and haunts the camps in a search for
music. If he hears it he will sit outside the door and nod in time to
it, while a violin left within his reach is eagerly seized and will be
played on through half the night. The music is wondrous: now as soft as
the stir of wind in the sage, anon as harsh as the cry of a wolf or
startling as the stir of a rattler. As the east begins to brighten the
music grows fainter, and when it is fairly light it has ceased
altogether. But he who listens to it must on no account follow the
player if the skeleton moves away, for not only will it lead him into
rocky pitfalls, whence escape is hopeless, but when there the music will
intoxicate, madden, and will finally charm his soul from his body.

<div>

 

 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Standing Rock](lol224)
