[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lol252)  [Next](lol254) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ACPKVU/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Myths and Legends of our Own Land*, by Charles M. Skinner, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_2H_4_0259"></span>

### HUNGER VALLEY

East of San Francisco is a narrow valley opening to the bay of San
Pablo. In spite of its pleasant situation and fruitful possibilities, it
had no inhabitants until 1820, when Miguel Zamacona and his wife Emilia
strayed into it, while on a journey, and, being delighted with its
scenery, determined to make it their home. In playful mockery of its
abundance they gave to it the name El Hambre \[Hunger\] valley.

After some weeks of such hardship as comes to a Mexican from work,
Miguel had built an adobe cabin and got a garden started, while he
caught a fish or shot a deer now and then, and they got on pretty well.
At last it became necessary that he should go to Yerba Buena, as San
Francisco was then called, for goods. His burros were fat and strong,
and there should be no danger. Emilia cried at being left behind, but
the garden had to be tended, and he was to be back in exactly three
weeks. She waited for twenty-two days; then, her anxiety becoming
unendurable, she packed an outfit on a burro and started on the trail.
From time to time she called his name, and "Miguel!" echoed sweetly from
hills and groves, but there was no other answer, save when an owl would
hoot. Rolled in a blanket she slept on lupin boughs, but was off at peep
of day again, calling—calling—high and clear among the solitudes.

During the second day her burro gave a rasping bray, and a hee-haw
answered from the bush. It was Miguel's burro. He had come at last!
Leaping to her feet, in her impatience, she ran to meet him, and found
him lying on the earth, staring silently at the sky. All that day she
sat beside him, caressing his hand, talking, crying, bathing his face
with water from the marsh—the poison marsh—and it was not until sunset
that she could bring herself to admit that he was dead—had been dead for
at least two days.

She put the blanket over him, weighted it with stones, and heaped reeds
upon it; then she started for home. A wandering trader heard her story,
but years elapsed before any other settler entered Hunger valley. They
found her skeleton then in the weedy garden. The adobe stands tenantless
in the new village of Martinez, and the people have so often heard that
the ghosts of the Zamaconas haunt the place that they have begun to
disbelieve it.

<div>

 

 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Wrath Of Manitou](lol254)
