[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lol218)  [Next](lol220.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ACPKVU/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Myths and Legends of our Own Land*, by Charles M. Skinner, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_2H_4_0223"></span>

### THE SCARE CURE

Early in this century a restless Yankee, who wore the uninspiring name
of Tompkinson, found his way into Carondelet—or Vuide Poche, the French
settlement on the Mississippi since absorbed by St. Louis—and cast about
for something to do. He had been in hard luck on his trip from New
England to the great river. His schemes for self-aggrandizement and the
incidental enlightenment and prosperity of mankind had not thriven, and
it was largely in pity that M. Dunois gave shelter to the ragged,
half-starved, but still jaunty and resourceful adventurer. Dunois was
the one man in the place who could pretend to some education, and the
two got on together famously.

As soon as Tompkinson was in clothes and funds—the result of certain
speculations—he took a house, and hung a shingle out announcing that
there he practised medicine. Now, the fellow knew less about doctoring
than any village granny, but a few sick people that he attended had the
rare luck to get well in spite of him, and his reputation expanded to
more than local limits in consequence. In the excess of spirits that
prosperity created he flirted rather openly with a number of virgins in
Carondelet, to the scandal of Dunois, who forbade him his house, and of
the priest, who put him under ban.

For the priest he cared nothing, but Dunois's anger was more serious—for
the only maid of all that he really loved was Marie Dunois, his
daughter. He formally proposed for her, but the old man would not listen
to him. Then his "practice" fell away. The future looked as dark for him
as his recent past had been, until a woman came to him with a bone in
her throat and begged to be relieved. His method in such cases was to
turn a wheel-of-fortune and obey it. The arrow this time pointed to the
word, "Bleeding."

He grasped a scalpel and advanced upon his victim, who, supposing that
he intended to cut her throat open to extract the obstacle, fell
a-screaming with such violence that the bone flew out. What was supposed
to be his ready wit in this emergency restored him to confidence, and he
was able to resume the practice that he needed so much. In a couple of
years he displayed to the wondering eyes of Dunois so considerable an
accumulation of cash that he gave Marie to him almost without the
asking, and, as Tompkinson afterward turned Indian trader and quadrupled
his wealth by cheating the red men, he became one of the most esteemed
citizens of the West.

<div>

 

 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Twelfth Night At Cahokia](lol220.md)
