[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lol213)  [Next](lol215.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ACPKVU/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Myths and Legends of our Own Land*, by Charles M. Skinner, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_2H_4_0218"></span>

### FALLS OF ST. ANTHONY

Several of the Dakotas, who had been in camp near the site of St. Paul,
left their families and friends, when the hunting season opened, and
went into the north. On their arrival at another village of their tribe,
they stayed to rest for a little, and one of the men used the time to
ill-advantage, as it fell out, for he conceived an attachment for a girl
of this northern family, and on his way southward he wedded her and took
her home with him. Proper enough to do, if he had not been married
already. The first wife knew that any warrior might take a second, if he
could support both; but the woman was stronger than the savage in her
nature, and when her husband came back, with a red-cheeked woman walking
beside him, she felt that she should never know his love again. The man
was all attention to the young wife, whether the tribe tarried or
travelled. When they shifted camp the elder walked or rowed behind with
her boy, a likely lad of ten or twelve.

It was when they were returning down the river after a successful hunt
that the whole company was obliged to make a carry around the quick
water near the head of St. Anthony's Falls. While the others were
packing the boats and goods for transportation by hand to the foot of
the cataract, the forsaken wife chose a moment when none were watching
to embark with her boy in one of the canoes. Rowing out to an island,
she put on all her ornaments, and dressed the lad in beads and feathers
as if he were a warrior. Her husband, finding her absent from the party,
looked anxiously about for some time, and was horrified to see her put
out from the island into the rapid current. She had placed the child
high in the boat, and was rowing with a steady stroke down the stream.
He called and beckoned franticly. She did not seem to hear him, nor did
she turn her head when the others joined their cries to his. For a
moment those who listened heard her death-song, then the yeasty flood
hid them from sight, and the husband on the shore fell to the earth with
a wail of anguish.

<div>

 

 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Flying Shadow And Track Maker](lol215.md)
