[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lol263)  [Next](lol265.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ACPKVU/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Myths and Legends of our Own Land*, by Charles M. Skinner, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_2H_4_0272"></span>

### STORIED SPRINGS

Like the Greeks, the red men endowed the woods and waters with tutelary
sprites, and many of the springs that are now resorted to as fountains
of healing were known long before the settlement of Europeans here, the
gains from drinking of them being ascribed to the beneficence of spirit
guardians. The earliest comers to these shores—or, rather, the earliest
of those who entertained such beliefs—fancied that the fabled fountain
of eternal youth would be found among the other blessings of the land.
To the Spaniards Florida was a land of promise and mystery. Somewhere in
its interior was fabled to stand a golden city ruled by a king whose
robes sparkled with precious dust, and this city was named for the
adventurer—El Dorado, or the Place of the Gilded One. Here, they said,
would be found the elixir of life. The beautiful Silver Spring, near the
head of the Ocklawaha, with its sandy bottom plainly visible at the
depth of eighty feet, was thought to be the source of the life-giving
waters, but, though Ponce de Leon heard of this, he never succeeded in
fighting his way to it through the jungle.

In Georgia, in the reputed land of Chicora, were a sacred stream that
made all young again who bathed there, and a spring so delectable that a
band of red men, chancing on it in a journey, could not leave it, and
are there forever.

In the island of "Bimini," one of the Lucayos (Bahamas), was another
such a fountain.

Between the Flint and Ocmulgee Rivers the Creeks declared was a spring
of life, on an island in a marsh, defended from approach by almost
impenetrable labyrinths,—a heaven where the women were fairer than any
other on earth.

The romantic and superstitious Spaniards believed these legends, and
spent years and treasure in searching for these springs. And, surely, if
the new and striking scenes of this Western world caused Columbus to
"boast that he had found the seat of paradise, it will not appear
strange that Ponce de Leon should dream of discovering the fountain of
youth."

The Yuma Apaches had been warned by one of their oracles never to enter
a certain canon in Castle Dome range, Arizona, but a company of them
forgot this caution while in chase of deer, and found themselves between
walls of pink and white fluorite with a spring bubbling at the head of
the ravine. Tired and heated, they fell on their faces to drink, when
they found that the crumbling quartz that formed the basin of the spring
was filled with golden nuggets. Eagerly gathering up this precious
substance, for they knew what treasure of beads, knives, arrows, and
blankets the Mexicans would exchange for it, they attempted to make
their way out of the canon; but a cloudburst came, and on the swiftly
rising tide all were swept away but one, who survived to tell the story.
White men have frequently but vainly tried to find that spring.

In Southwestern Kansas, on a hill a quarter-mile from Solomon River, is
the Sacred Water, pooled in a basin thirty feet across. When many stand
about the brink it slowly rises. Here two Panis stopped on their return
from a buffalo hunt, and one of them unwittingly stepped on a turtle a
yard long. Instantly he felt his feet glued to the monster's back, for,
try as he might, he could not disengage himself, and the creature
lumbered away to the pool, where it sank with him. There the turtle god
remains, and beads, arrows, ear-rings, and pipes that are dropped in, it
swallows greedily. The Indians use the water to mix their paint with,
but never for drinking.

The mail rider, crossing the hot desert of Arizona, through the cacti
and over holes where scorpions hide, makes for Devil's Well, under El
Diablo—a dark pool surrounded with gaunt rocks. Here, coming when the
night is on, he lies down, and the wind swishing in the sage—brush puts
him to sleep. At dawn he wakens with the frightened whinny of his horse
in his ears and, all awake, looks about him. A stranger, wrapped in a
tattered blanket, is huddled in a recess of the stones, arrived there,
like himself, at night, perhaps. Poising his rifle on his knee, the
rider challenges him, but never a sign the other makes. Then, striding
over to him, he pulls away the blanket and sees a shrivelled corpse with
a face that he knows—his brother. Hardly is this meeting made when a
hail of arrows falls around. His horse is gone. The Apaches, who know no
gentleness and have no mercy, have manned every gap and sheltering rock.
With his rifle he picks them off, as they rise in sight with arrows at
the string, and sends them tumbling into the dust; but, when his last
bullet has sped into a red man's heart, they rise in a body and with
knives and hatchets hew him to death. And that is why the Devil's Well
still tastes of blood.

Among the Balsam Mountains of Western North Carolina is a large spring
that promises refreshment, but, directly that the wayfarer bends over
the water, a grinning face appears at the bottom and as he stoops it
rises to meet his. So hideous is this demon that few of the mountaineers
have courage to drink here, and they refuse to believe that the
apparition is caused by the shape of the basin, or aberrated reflection
of their own faces. They say it is the visage of a "haunt," for a
Cherokee girl, who had uncommon beauty, once lived hard by, and took
delight in luring lovers from less favored maidens. The braves were
jealous of each other, and the women were jealous of her, while she—the
flirt!—rejoiced in the trouble that she made. A day fell for a
wedding—that of a hunter with a damsel of his tribe, but at the hour
appointed the man was missing. Mortified and hurt, the bride stole away
from the village and began a search of the wood, and she carried bow and
arrows in her hand. Presently she came on the hunter, lying at the feet
of the coquette, who was listening to his words with encouraging smiles.
Without warning the deserted girl drew an arrow to the head and shot her
lover through the heart—then, beside his lifeless body, she begged
Manitou to make her rival's face so hideous that all would be frightened
who looked at it. At the words the beautiful creature felt her face
convulse and shrivel, and, rushing to the mirror of the spring, she
looked in, only to start back in loathing. When she realized that the
frightful visage that glared up at her was her own, she uttered a cry of
despair and flung herself into the water, where she drowned.

It is her face—so altered as to disclose the evil once hid behind
it—that peers up at the hardy one who passes there and knows it as the
Haunted Spring.

The medicinal properties of the mineral springs at Ballston and Saratoga
were familiar to the Indians, and High Rock Spring, to which Sir William
Johnson was carried by the Mohawks in 1767 to be cured of a wound, was
called "the medicine spring of the Great Spirit," for it was believed
that the leaping and bubbling of the water came from its agitation by
hands not human, and red men regarded it with reverence.

The springs at Manitou, Colorado (see "Division of Two Tribes"), were
always approached with gifts for the manitou that lived in them.

The lithia springs of Londonderry, New Hampshire, used to be visited by
Indians from the Merrimack region, who performed incantations and dances
to ingratiate themselves with the healing spirit that lived in the
water. Their stone implements and arrow-heads are often found in
adjacent fields.

The curative properties of Milford Springs, New Hampshire, were revealed
in the dream of a dying boy.

A miracle spring flowed in the old days near the statue of the Virgin at
White Marsh, Maryland.

Biddeford Pool, Maine, was a miracle pond once a year, for whoso bathed
there on the 26th of June would be restored to health if he were ill,
because that day was the joint festival of Saints Anthelm and Maxentius.

There was a wise and peaceable chief of the Ute tribe who always
counselled his people to refrain from war, but when he grew old the
fiery spirits deposed him and went down to the plains to give battle to
the Arapahoe. News came that they had been defeated in consequence of
their rashness. Then the old man's sorrow was so keen that his heart
broke. But even in death he was beneficent, for his spirit entered the
earth and forthwith came a gush of water that has never ceased to
flow—the Hot Sulphur Springs of Colorado. The Utes often used to go to
those springs to bathe—and be cured of rheumatism—before they were
driven away.

Spring River, Arkansas, is nearly as large at its source as at its
mouth, for Mammoth Spring, in the Ozark Mountains, where it has its
rise, has a yield of ninety thousand gallons a minute, so that it is,
perhaps, the largest in the world. Here, three hundred years ago, the
Indians had gathered for a month's feast, for chief Wampahseesah's
daughter—Nitilita—was to wed a brave of many ponies, a hundred of which
he had given in earnest of his love. For weeks no rain had fallen, and,
while the revel was at its height, news came that all the rivers had
gone dry. Several young men set off with jars, to fill them at the
Mississippi, and, confident that relief would come, the song and dance
went on until the men and women faltered from exhaustion. At last,
Nitilita died, and, in the wildness of his grief, the husband smote his
head upon a rock and perished too. Next day the hunters came with water,
but, incensed by their delay, the chief ordered them to be slain in
sacrifice to the manes of the dead. A large grave was dug and the last
solemnities were begun when there was a roaring and a shaking in the
earth—it parted, and the corpses disappeared in the abyss. Then from the
pit arose a flood of water that went foaming down the valley. Crazed
with grief, remorse, and fear, Wampahseesah flung himself into the
torrent and was borne to his death. The red men built a dam there later,
and often used to sit before it in the twilight, watching, as they
declared, the faces of the dead peering at them through the foam.

During the rush for the California gold-fields in the '50's a party took
the route by Gila River, and set across the desert. The noon temperature
was 120, the way was strewn with skeletons of wagons, horses, and men,
and on the second night after crossing the Colorado the water had given
out. The party had gathered on the sands below Yuma, the men discussing
the advisability of returning, the women full of apprehension, the young
ones crying, the horses panting; but presently the talk fell low, for in
one of the wagons a child's voice was heard in prayer: "Oh, good
heavenly Father, I know I have been a naughty girl, but I am so thirsty,
and mamma and papa and baby all want a drink so much! Do, good God, give
us water, and I never will be naughty again." One of the men said,
earnestly, "May God grant it!" In a few moments the child cried,
"Mother, get me water. Get some for baby and me. I can hear it running."
The horses and mules nearly broke from the traces, for almost at their
feet a spring had burst from the sand-warm, but pure. Their sufferings
were over. The water continued to flow, running north for twenty miles,
and at one point spreading into a lake two miles wide and twenty feet
deep. When emigration was diverted, two years later, to the northern
route and to the isthmus, New River Spring dried up. Its mission was
over.

<div>

 

 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Lovers' Leaps](lol265.md)
