[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lol227)  [Next](lol229) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ACPKVU/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Myths and Legends of our Own Land*, by Charles M. Skinner, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_2H_4_0233"></span>

### THE RIVER OF LOST SOULS

In the days when Spain ruled the Western country an infantry regiment
was ordered out from Santa Fe to open communication with Florida and to
carry a chest of gold for the payment of the soldiers in St. Augustine.
The men wintered on the site of Trinidad, comforted by the society of
their wives and families, and in the spring the women and camp-followers
were directed to remain, while the troops set forward along the canon of
the Purgatoire—neither to reach their destination nor to return. Did
they attempt to descend the stream in boats and go to wreck among the
rapids? Were they swept into eternity by a freshet? Did they lose their
provisions and starve in the desert? Did the Indians revenge themselves
for brutality and selfishness by slaying them at night or from an
ambush? Were they killed by banditti? Did they sink in the quicksands
that led the river into subterranean canals? None will ever know,
perhaps; but many years afterward a savage told a priest in Santa Fe
that the regiment had been surrounded by Indians, as Custer's command
was in Montana, and slain, to a man. Seeing that escape was hopeless,
the colonel—so said the narrator—had buried the gold that he was
transporting. Thousands of doubloons are believed to be hidden in the
canon, and thousands of dollars have been spent in searching for them.

After weeks had lapsed into months and months into years, and no word
came of the missing regiment, the priests named the river El Rio de las
Animas Perdidas—the River of Lost Souls. The echoing of the flood as it
tumbled through the canon was said to be the lamentation of the
troopers. French trappers softened the suggestion of the Spanish title
when they renamed it Purgatoire, and—"bullwhackers" teaming across the
plains twisted the French title into the unmeaning "Picketwire." But
Americo-Spaniards keep alive the tradition, and the prayers of many have
ascended and do ascend for the succor of those who vanished so strangely
in the valley of Las Animas.

<div>

 

 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Riders Of The Desert](lol229)
