[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lol211)  [Next](lol213) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ACPKVU/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Myths and Legends of our Own Land*, by Charles M. Skinner, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_2H_4_0216"></span>

### PIPESTONE

Pipestone, a smooth, hard, even-textured clay, of lively color, from
which thousands of red men cut their pipe-bowls, forms a wall on the
Coteau des Prairies, in Minnesota, that is two miles long and thirty
feet high. In front of it lie five bowlders, the droppings from an
iceberg to the floor of the primeval sea, and beneath these masses of
granite live the spirits of two squaws that must be consulted before the
stone can be dug. This quarry was neutral ground, and here, as they
approached it, the men of all tribes sheathed their knives and belted up
their axes, for to this place the Great Spirit came to kill and eat the
buffalo, and it is the blood of this animal that has turned the stone to
red. Here, too, the Thunder Bird had her nest, and her brood rent the
skies above it with the clashing of their iron wings.

A snake having crawled into this nest to steal the unhatched thunders,
Manitou caught up a piece of pipestone, hastily pressed it between his
hands, giving it the shape of a man, and flung it at the reptile. The
stone man's feet stuck fast in the ground, and there he stood for a
thousand years, growing like a tree and drawing strength and knowledge
out of the earth. Another shape grew up beside him—woman. In time the
snake gnawed them free from their foundations and the red-earth pair
wandered off together. From them sprang all people.

Ages after, the Manitou called the red men to the quarry, fashioned a
pipe for them, told them it was a part of their flesh, and smoked it
over them, blowing the smoke to north, south, east, and west, in token
that wherever the influence of the pipe extended there was to be
brotherhood and peace. The place was to be sacred from war and they were
to make their pipes from this rock. As the smoke rolled about him he
gradually disappeared from view. At the last whiff the ashes fell out
and the surface of the rock for miles burst into flame, so that it
melted and glazed. Two ovens opened at its foot, and through the fire
entered the two spirits Tsomecostee and Tsomecostewondee—that are still
its guardians, answering the invocations of the medicine-men and
accepting the oblations of those who go to make pipes or carve their
totems on the rock.

<div>

 

 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Virgins' Feast](lol213)
