[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](eti08)  [Next](eti10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1892062186/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Etidorhpa*, by John Uri Lloyd, \[1897\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

### CHAPTER II.

#### A FRIENDLY CONFERENCE.

It is rare, in our present civilization, to find a man who lives alone.
This remark does not apply to hermits or persons of abnormal or
perverted mental tendencies, but to the majority of mankind living and
moving actively among their fellows, and engaged in the ordinary
occupations of humanity. Every man must have at least one confidant,
either of his own household, or within the circle of his intimate
friends. There may possibly be rare exceptions among persons of genius
in statecraft, war, or commerce, but. it is doubtful even in such
instances if any keep all their thoughts to themselves, hermetically
sealed from their fellows. As a prevailing rule, either a loving wife or
very near friend shares the inner thought of the most secretive
individual, even when secrecy seems an indispensable element to success.
The tendency to a free interchange of ideas and experiences is almost
universal, instinct prompting the natural man to unburden his most
sacred thought, when the proper confidant and the proper time come for
the disclosure.

For months I kept to myself the events narrated in the preceding
chapter. And this for several reasons: first, the dread of ridicule that
would follow the relation of the fantastic occurrences, and the possible
suspicion of my sanity, that might result from the recital; second, very
grave doubts as to the reality of my experiences. But by degrees
self-confidence was restored, as I reasoned the matter over and
reassured myself by occasional contemplation of the silvery hair I had
coiled in my pocket-book, and which at first I had expected would vanish
as did the stranger's knife. There came upon me a feeling that I should
see my weird visitor again, and at an early day. I resisted this
impression, for it was a feeling of the idea, rather than a thought, but
the vague expectation grew upon me in spite of myself, until at length
it became a conviction which no argument

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

or logic could shake. Curiously enough, as the original incident receded
into the past, this new idea thrust itself into the foreground, and I
began in my own mind to court another interview. At times, sitting alone
after night, I felt that I was watched by unseen eyes; these eyes
haunted me in my solitude, and I was morally sure of the presence of
another than myself in the room. The sensation was at first unpleasant,
and I tried to throw it off; with partial success.. But only for a
little while could I banish the intrusive idea, and as the thought took
form, and the invisible presence became more actual to consciousness, I
hoped that the stranger would make good his parting promise, "I will see
you again."

On one thing I was resolved; I would at least be better informed on the
subject of hallucinations and apparitions, and not be taken unawares as
I had been. To this end I decided to confer with my friend, Professor
Chickering, a quiet, thoughtful man, of varied accomplishments, and
thoroughly read upon a great number of topics, especially in the
literature of the marvelous.

So to the Professor I went, after due appointment, and confided to him
full particulars of my adventure. He listened patiently throughout, and
when I had finished, assured me in a matter-of-fact way that such
hallucinations were by no means rare. His remark was provoking, for I
did not expect from the patient interest he had shown while I was
telling my story, that the whole matter would be dismissed thus
summarily. I said with some warmth:

"But this was not a hallucination. I tried at first to persuade myself
that it was illusory, but the more I have thought the experience over,
the more real it becomes to me."

"Perhaps you were dreaming," suggested the Professor.

"No," I answered; "I have tried that hypothesis, and it will not do.
Many things make that view untenable."

"Do not be too sure of that," he said; "you were, by your own account,
in a highly nervous condition, and physically tired. It is possible,
perhaps probable, that in this state, as you sat in your chair, you
dozed off for a short interval, during which the illusion flashed
through your mind."

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

"How do you explain the fact that incidents occupying a large portion of
the night, occurred in an interval which you describe as a flash?"

"Easily enough; in dreams time may not exist: periods embracing weeks or
mouths may be reduced to an instant. Long journeys, hours of
conversation, or a multitude of transactions, may be compressed into a
term measured by the opening or closing of a door, or the striking of a
clock. In dreams, ordinary standards of reason find no place, while
ideas or events chase through the mind more rapidly than thought."

"Conceding all this, why did I, considering the unusual character of the
incidents, accept them as real, as substantial, as natural as the most
commonplace events?"

"There is nothing extraordinary in that," he replied. "In dreams all
sorts of absurdities, impossibilities, discordancies, and violation of
natural law appear realities, without exciting the least surprise or
suspicion. Imagination runs riot and is supreme, and reason for the time
is dormant. We see ghosts, spirits, the forms of persons dead or
living,—we suffer pain, pleasure, hunger,—and all sensations and
emotions, without a moment's question of their reality."

"Do any of the subjects of our dreams or visions leave tangible
evidences of their presence?"

"Assuredly not," he answered, with an incredulous, half-impatient
gesture; "the idea is absurd."

"Then I was not dreaming," I mused.

Without looking at me, the Professor went on: "These false presentiments
may have their origin in other ways, as from mental disorders caused by
indigestion. Nicolai, a noted bookseller of Berlin, was thus afflicted.
His experiences are interesting and possibly suggestive. Let me read
some of them to you."

The Professor hereupon glanced over his bookshelf, selected a volume,
and proceeded to read: <span id="fr_0"></span>[\*](#fn_0)

"I generally saw human forms of both sexes; but they usually seemed not
to take the smallest notice of each other, moving as in a market place,
where all are eager to press through the crowd; at times, however, they
seemed to be transacting business with each other. I also saw several
times, people on horseback, dogs, and birds.

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

"All these phantasms appeared to me in their natural size, and as
distinct as if alive, exhibiting different shades of carnation in the
uncovered parts, as well as different colors and fashions in their
dresses, though the colors seemed somewhat paler than in real nature.
None of the figures appeared particularly terrible, comical, or
disgusting, most of them being of indifferent shape, and some presenting
a pleasant aspect. The longer these phantasms continued to visit me, the
more frequently did they return, while at the same time they increased
in number about four weeks after they had first appeared. I also began
to hear them talk: these phantoms conversed among themselves, but more
frequently addressed their discourse to me; their speeches were
uncommonly short, and never of an unpleasant turn. At different times
there appeared to me both dear and sensible friends of both sexes, whose
addresses tended to appease my grief, which had not yet wholly subsided:
their consolatory speeches were in general addressed to me when I was
alone. Sometimes, however, I was accosted by these consoling friends
while I was engaged in company, and not unfrequently while real persons
were speaking to ale. These consolatory addresses consisted sometimes of
abrupt phrases, and at other times they were regularly executed."

Here I interrupted: "I note, Professor, that Mr. Nicolai knew these
forms to be illusions."

Without answering my remark, he continued to read:

"There is in imagination a potency far exceeding the fabled power of
Aladdin's lamp. How often does one sit in wintry evening musings, and
trace in the glowing embers the features of an absent friend?
Imagination, with its magic wand, will there build a city with its
countless spires, or marshal contending armies, or drive the
tempest-shattered ship upon the ocean. The following story, related by
Scott, affords a good illustration of this principle:

"'Not long after the death of an illustrious poet, who had filled, while
living, a great station in the eyes of the public, a literary friend, to
whom the deceased had been well known, was engaged during the darkening
twilight of an autumn evening, in perusing one of the publications which
professed to detail the habits and opinions of the distinguished
individual who was now no more. As the reader had enjoyed the intimacy
of the deceased to a considerable degree, he was deeply interested in
the publication, which contained some particulars relating to himself
and other friends. A visitor was sitting in the apartment, who was also
engaged in reading. Their sitting-room opened into an entrance hall,
rather fantastically fitted up with articles of armor, skins of wild
animals, and the like. It was when laying down his book, and passing
into this hall, through which the moon was beginning to shine, that the
individual of whom I speak saw right before him, in a standing posture,
the exact representation of his departed friend, whose recollection had
been so strongly brought to his imagination. He stopped for a single
moment, so as to notice the wonderful accuracy with which fancy had
impressed upon the bodily eye the peculiarities of dress and position of
the illustrious poet. Sensible, however, of the delusion, he felt no
sentiment save that of wonder at the extraordinary accuracy of the
resemblance, and stepped onward to the figure, which resolved itself as
he approached into the various materials of

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

which it was composed. These were merely a screen occupied by great
coats, shawls, plaids, and such, other articles as are usually found in
a country entrance hall. The spectator returned to the spot from which
he had seen the illusion, and endeavored with all his power to recall
the image which had been so singularly vivid. But this he was unable td
do.. And the person who had witnessed the apparition, or, more properly,
whose excited state had been the means of raising it, had only to return
to the apartment, and tell his young friend under what a striking
hallucination he had for a moment labored.'"

Here I was constrained to call the Professor to a halt. "Your stories
are very interesting," I said, "but I fail to perceive any analogy in
either the conditions or the incidents, to my experience. I was fully
awake and conscious at the time, and the man I saw appeared and moved
about in the full glare of the gaslight,"—"Perhaps not," he answered; "I
am simply giving you some general illustrations of the subject. But here
is a case more to the point."

Again he read:

"A lady was once passing through a wood, in the darkening twilight of a
stormy evening, to visit a friend who was watching over a dying child.
The clouds were thick—the rain beginning to fall; darkness was
increasing; the wind was moaning mournfully through the trees. The
lady's heart almost failed her as she saw that she had a mile to walk
through the woods in the gathering gloom. But the reflection of the
situation of her friend forbade her turning back. Excited and trembling,
she called to her aid a nervous resolution, and pressed onward. She had
not proceeded far when she beheld in the path before her the movement of
some very indistinct object. It appeared to keep a little distance ahead
of her, and as she made efforts to get nearer to see what it was, it
seemed proportionally to recede. The lady began to feel rather
unpleasantly. There was some pale white object certainly discernible
before her, and it appeared mysteriously to float along, at a regular
distance, without any effort at motion. Notwithstanding the lady's good
sense and unusual resolution, a cold chill began to come over her. She
made every effort to resist leer fears, and soon succeeded in drawing
nearer the mysterious object, when she was appalled at beholding the
features of her friend's child, cold in death, wrapt in its shroud. She
gazed earnestly, and there it remained distinct and clear before her
eyes. She considered it a premonition that her friend's child was dead,
and that she must hasten to her aid. But there was the apparition
directly in her path. She must pass it. Taking up a little stick, she
forced herself along to the object, and behold, some little animal
scampered away. It was this that her excited imagination had transformed
into the corpse of an infant in its winding sheet."

I was a little irritated, and once more interrupted the reader warmly:
"This is exasperating. Now what resemblance is there between the
vagaries of a hysterical, weak-minded woman, and my case?"

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

He smiled, and again read:

"The numerous stories told of ghosts, or the spirits of persons who are
dead, will in most instances be found to have originated in diseased
imagination, aggravated by some abnormal defect of mind. We may mention
a remarkable case in point, and one which is not mentioned in English
works on this subject; it is told by a compiler of Les Causes Célèbres.
Two young noblemen, the Marquises De Rambouillet and De Precy, belonging
to two of the first families of France, made an agreement, in the warmth
of their friendship, that the one who died first should return to the
other with tidings of the world to come. Soon afterwards De Rambouillet
went to the wars in Flanders, while De Precy remained at Paris, stricken
by a fever. Lying alone in bed, and severely ill, De Precy one day heard
a rustling of his bed curtains, and turning round, saw his friend De
Rambouillet, in full military attire. The sick man sprung over the bed
to welcome his friend, but the other receded, and said that he had come
to fulfill his promise, having been killed on that very day. He further
said that it behooved De Precy to think more of the after world, as all
that was said of it was true, and as he himself would die in his first
battle. De Precy was then left by the phantom; and it was afterward
found that De Rambouillet had fallen on that day."

"Ah," I said, "and so the phantom predicted an event that followed as
indicated."

"Spiritual illusions," explained the Professor, "are not unusual, and
well authenticated cases are not wanting in which they have been induced
in persons of intelligence by functional or organic disorders. In the
last case cited, the prediction was followed by a fulfillment, but this
was chance or mere coincidence. It would be strange indeed if in the
multitude of dreams that come to humanity, some few should not be
followed by events so similar as to warrant the belief that they were
prefigured. But here is an illustration that fits your case: let me read
it:

"In some instances it may be difficult to decide whether spectral
appearances and spectral noises proceed from physical derangement or
from an overwrought state of mind. Want of exercise and amusement may
also be a prevailing cause. A friend mentions to us the following case:
An acquaintance of his, a merchant, in London, who had for years paid
very close attention to business, was one day, while alone in his
counting house, very much surprised to hear, as he imagined, persons
outside the door talking freely about him. Thinking it was some
acquaintances who were playing off a trick, he opened the door to
request them to come in, when to his amazement, he found that nobody was
there. He again sat down to his desk, and in a few minutes the same
dialogue recommenced. The language was very alarming. One voice seemed
to say: 'We have the scoundrel in his own counting house; let us go in
and seize him.' 'Certainly,' replied the other voice, 'it is right to
take him; he has been guilty of a great crime, and ought to be brought
to condign

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

punishment.' Alarmed at these threats, the bewildered merchant rushed to
the door; and there again no person was to be seen. He now locked his
door and went home; but the voices, as he thought, followed him through
the crowd, and he arrived at his house in a most unenviable state of
mind. Inclined to ascribe the voices to derangement in mind, he sent for
a medical attendant, and told his case, and a certain kind of treatment
was prescribed. This, however, failed; the voices menacing him with
punishment for purely imaginary crimes continued, and he was reduced to
the brink of despair. At length a friend prescribed entire relaxation
from business, and a daily game of cricket, which, to his great relief,
proved an effectual remedy. The exercise banished the phantom voices,
and they were no more heard."

"So you think that I am in need of out-door exercise?"

"Exactly."

"And that my experience was illusory, the result of vertigo, or some
temporary calenture of the brain?"

"To be plain with you, yes."

"But I asked you a while ago if specters or phantoms ever leave tangible
evidence of their presence." The Professor's eyes dilated in
interrogation. I continued: "Well, this one did. After I had followed
him out, I found on the table a long, white hair, which I still have,"
and producing the little coil from my pocket-book, I handed it to him.
He examined it curiously, eyed me furtively, and handed it back with the
cautious remark:

"I think you had better commence your exercise at once."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[18:\*](eti09.htm#fr_0) This work I have found to
be Vol. IV. of Chambers’ Miscellany, published by Gould and Lincoln,
Boston.—J. U. L.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. A Second Interview With the Mysterious
Visitor](eti10)
