[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](eti10)  [Next](eti12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1892062186/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Etidorhpa*, by John Uri Lloyd, \[1897\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

## THE MANUSCRIPT OF I—AM—THE—MAN.

### CHAPTER IV.

#### A SEARCH FOR KNOWLEDGE.—THE ALCHEMISTIC LETTER.

I am the man who, unfortunately for my future happiness, was
dissatisfied with such knowledge as could be derived from ordinary books
concerning semi-scientific subjects in which I had long been absorbed. I
studied the current works of my day on philosophy and chemistry, hoping
therein to find something tangible regarding the relationship that
exists between matter and spirit, but studied in vain. Astronomy,
history, philosophy and the mysterious, incoherent works of alchemy and
occultism were finally appealed to, but likewise failed to satisfy me.
These studies were pursued in secret, though I am not aware that any'
necessity existed for concealment. Be that as it may, at every
opportunity I covertly acquainted myself with such alchemical lore as
could be obtained either by purchase or by correspondence with others
whom I found to be pursuing investigations in the same direction. A
translation of Geber's "De Claritate Alchemiæ," by chance came into my
possession, and afterwards an original version from the Latin of
Bœrhaave's "Elementa Chemiæ," published and translated in 1753 by Peter
Shaw. This magnificent production threw a flood of light upon the early
history of chemistry, being far more elaborate than any modern work. It
inspired me with the deepest regard for its talented author, and
ultimately introduced me to a brotherhood of adepts, for in this
publication, although its author disclaims occultism, is to be found a
talisman that will enable any earnest searcher after light to become a
member of the society of secret "Chemical Improvers of Natural
Philosophy," with which I affiliated as soon as the key was discovered.
Then followed a systematic investigation of authorities of the
Alchemical

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

<span id="img_03500"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![FAC-SIMILE OF PAGE
OF MANUSCRIPT.](tn/03500.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/03500.jpg)  
FAC-SIMILE OF PAGE OF MANUSCRIPT.  
</span>

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span> <span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> School, including
Geber, Morienus, Roger Bacon, George Ripley, Raymond Lully, Bernard,
Count of Trevise, Isaac Hollandus, Arnoldus de la Villanova, Paracelsus,
and others, not omitting the learned researches of the distinguished
scientist, Llewellyn.

I discovered that many talented men are still firm believers in the lost
art of alchemy, and that among the followers of the "thrice-famed
Hermes" are to be found statesmen, clergymen, lawyers, and scientific
men who, for various reasons, invariably conceal with great tact their
connection with the fraternity of adepts. Some of these men had written
scientific treatises of a very different character from those
circulating among the members of our brotherhood, and to their
materialistic readers it would seem scarcely possible that the authors
could be tainted with hallucinations of any description, while others,
conspicuous leaders in the church, were seemingly beyond occult
temptation.

The larger number, it was evident, hoped by studies of the works of the
alchemists, to find the key to the alkahest of Van Helmont, that is, to
discover the Philosopher's Stone, or the Elixir of Life, and from their
writings it is plain that the inner consciousness of thoughtful and
scientific men rebelled against confinement to the narrow bounds of
materialistic science, within which they were forced to appear as
dogmatic pessimists. To them scientific orthodoxy, acting as a weight,
prohibited intellectual speculation, as rank heresy. A few of my
co-laborers were expert manipulators, and worked experimentally,
following in their laboratories the suggestions of those gifted students
who had pored over precious old manuscripts, and had attempted to solve
the enigmatical formulas recorded therein, puzzles familiar to students
of Hermetic lore. It was thus demonstrated,—for what I have related is
history,—that in this nineteenth century there exists a fraternity, the
members of which are as earnest in their belief in the truth of Esoteric
philosophy, as were the followers of Hermes himself; savants who, in
secret, circulate among themselves a literature that the materialism of
this selfsame nineteenth century has relegated to the deluded and murky
periods that produced it.

One day a postal package came to my address, this being the manner in
which some of our literature circulated, which, on

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

examination, I found to be a letter of instruction and advice from some
unknown member of our circle. I was already becoming disheartened over
the mental confusion into which my studies were leading me, and the
contents of the letter, in which I was greatly interested, made a
lasting impression upon me. It seemed to have been circulating a long
time among our members in Europe and America, for it bore numerous
marginal notes of various dates, but each and every one of its readers
had for one reason or another declined the task therein suggested. From
the substance of the paper, which, written exquisitely, yet partook of
the ambiguous alchemistic style, it was evident that the author was well
versed in alchemy, and, in order that my position may be clearly
understood at this turning point in a life of remarkable adventure, the
letter is appended in full:

#### THE ALCHEMISTIC LETTER.

TO THE BROTHER ADEPT WHO DARES TRY TO DISCOVER ZOROASTER'S CAVE, OR THE
PHILOSOPHERS' INTELLECTUAL ECHOES, BY MEANS OF WHICH THEY COMMUNICATE TO
ONE ANOTHER FROM THEIR CAVES.

Know thou, that Hermes Trismegistus did not originate, but he gave to
our philosophy his name—the Hermetic Art. Evolved in a dim, mystic age,
before antiquity began, it endured through the slowly rolling cycles to
be bandied about by the ever-ready flippancy of nineteenth century
students. It has lived, because it is endowed with that quality which
never dies—truth. Modern philosophy, of which chemistry is but a
fragment, draws its sustenance from the prime facts which were revealed
in ancient Egypt through Hermetic thought, and fixed by the Hermetic
stylus.

"The Hermetic allegories," so various in interpretable susceptibility,
led subsequent thinkers into speculations and experimentations, which
have resulted profitably to the world. It is not strange that some of
the followers of Hermes, especially the more mercurial and imaginative,
should have evolved nebulous theories, no longer explainable, and
involving recondite spiritual considerations. Know thou that the
ultimate on psycho-chemical investigation is the proximate of the
infinite. Accordingly, a class came to believe that a projection of
natural mental faculties into an advanced state of consciousness called
the "wisdom faculty" constitutes the final possibility of Alchemy. The
attainment of this exalted condition is still believed practicable by
many earnest savants. Once on this lofty plane, the individual would not
be trammelled by material obstacles, but would abide in that spiritual
placidity which is the exquisite realization of mortal perfection. So
exalted, he would be in naked parallelism with Omniscience, and through
his illuminated understanding, could feast his soul on those exalted
pleasures which are only less than deific.

Notwithstanding the exploitings of a number of these philosophers, in
which, by reason of our inability to comprehend, sense seemed lost in a
passage

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

of incohesive dreamery and resonancy of terminology, some of the purest
spiritual researches the world has ever known, were made in the dawn of
history. The much abused alchemical philosophers existed upon a plane,
in some respects above the level of the science of to-day. Many of them
lived for the good of the world only, in an atmosphere above the
materialistic hordes that people the world, and toiling over their
crucibles and alembics, died in their cells "uttering no voice." Take,
for example, Eirenæus Philalethes, who, born in 1623, lived
contemporaneously with Robert Boyle. A fragment from his writings will
illustrate the purpose which impelled the searcher for the true light of
alchemy to record his discoveries in allegories, and we have no right to
question the honesty of his utterances:

"The Searcher of all hearts knows that I write the truth; nor is there
any cause to accuse me of envy. I write with an unterrified quill in an
unheard of style, to the honor of God, to the profit of my neighbors,
with contempt of the world and its riches, because Elias, the artist, is
already born, and now glorious things are declared of the city of God. I
dare affirm that I do possess more riches than the whole known world is
worth, but I can not make use of it because of the snares of knaves. I
disdain, loathe, and detest the idolizing of silver and gold, by which
the pomps and vanities of the world are celebrated. Ah! filthy evil! Ah!
vain nothingness! Believe ye that I conceal the art out of envy? No,
verily, I protest to you; I grieve from the very bottom of my soul that
we (alchemists) are driven like vagabonds from the face of the Lord
throughout the earth. But what need of many words? The thing that we
have seen, taught, and made, which we have, possess, and know, that we
do declare; being moved with compassion for the studious, and with
indignation of gold, silver, and precious stones. Believe me, the time
is at the door, I feel it in spirit, when we, adeptists, shall return
from the four corners of the earth, nor shall we fear any snares that
are laid against our lives, but we shall give thanks to the Lord our
God. I would to God that every ingenious man in the whole earth
understood this science; then it would be valued only for its wisdom,
and virtue only would be had in honor."

Of course there was a more worldly class, and a large contingent of
mercenary impostors (as science is always encumbered), parasites, whose
animus was shamefully unlike the purity of true esoteric psychologists.
These men devoted their lives to experimentation for selfish
advancement. They constructed alchemical outfits, and carried on a
ceaseless inquiry into the nature of solvents, and studied their
influences on earthly bodies, their ultimate object being the discovery
of the Philosopher's Stone, and the alkahest which Bœrhaave asserts was
never discovered. Their records were often a verbose melange, purposely
so written, no doubt, to cover their tracks, and to make themselves
conspicuous. Other Hermetic believers occupied a more elevated position,
and connected the intellectual with the material, hoping to gain by
their philosophy and science not only gold and silver, which were
secondary considerations, but the highest literary achievement, the
Magnum Opus. Others still sought to draw from Astrology and Magic the
secrets that would lead them to their ambitious goal. Thus there were
degrees of fineness in a fraternity, which the science of to-day must
recognize and admit.

Bœrhaave, the illustrious, respected Geber, of the alchemistic school,
and none need feel compromised in admiring the talented alchemists who,
like

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Geber, wrought in
the twilight of morn for the coming world's good. We are now enjoying a
fragment of the ultimate results of their genius and industry in the
materialistic outcomes of present-day chemistry, to be followed by
others more valuable; and at last, when mankind is ripe in the wisdom
faculty, by spiritual contentment in the complacent furtherings beyond.
Allow me briefly to refer to a few men of the alchemistic type whose
records may be considered with advantage.

Rhasis, a conspicuous alchemist, born in 850, first mentioned orpiment,
borax, compounds of iron, copper, arsenic, and other similar substances.
It is said, too, that he discovered the art of making brandy. About a
century later, Alfarabe (killed in 950), a great alchemist, astonished
the King of Syria with his profound learning, and excited the admiration
of the wise men of the East by his varied accomplishments. Later,
Albertus Magnus (born 1205), noted for his talent and skill, believed
firmly in the doctrine of transmutation. His beloved pupil, Thomas
Aquinas, gave us the word amalgam, and it still serves us.
Contemporaneously with these lived Roger Bacon (born 1214), who was a
man of most extraordinary ability. There has never been a greater
English intellect (not excepting his illustrious namesake, Lord Bacon),
and his penetrating mind delved deeper into nature's laws than that of
any successor. He told us of facts concerning the sciences, that
scientific men can not fully comprehend to-day; he told us of other
things that lie beyond the science provings of to-day, that modern
philosophers can not grasp. He was an enthusiastic believer in the
Hermetic philosophy, and such were his erudition and advanced views,
that his brother friars, through jealousy and superstition, had him
thrown into prison—a common fate to men who in those days dared to think
ahead of their age. Despite (as some would say) of his mighty reasoning
power and splendid attainments, he believed the Philosopher's Stone to
be a reality; he believed the secret of indefinite prolongation of life
abode in alchemy; that the future could be predicted by means of a
mirror which he called Almuchese, and that by alchemy an adept could
produce pure gold. He asserted that by means of Aristotle's "Secret of
Secrets," pure gold can be made; gold even purer and finer than what men
now know as gold. In connection with other predictions he made an
assertion that may with other seemingly unreasonable predictions be
verified in time to come. He said: "It is equally possible to construct
cars which may be set in motion with marvelous rapidity, independently
of horses or other animals." He declared that the ancients had done
this, and he believed the art might be revived.

Following came various enthusiasts, such as Raymond, the ephemeral (died
1315), who flared like a meteor into his brief, brilliant career; Arnold
de Villanova (1240), a celebrated adept, whose books were burned by the
Inquisition on account of the heresy they taught; Nicholas Flame\], of
France (1350), loved by the people for his charities, the wonder of his
age (our age will not admit the facts) on account of the vast fortune he
amassed without visible means or income, outside of alchemical lore;
Johannes de Rupecissus, a man of such remarkable daring that he even
(1357) reprimanded Pope Innocent VI., for which he was promptly
imprisoned; Basil Valentine (1410), the author of many works, and the
man who introduced antimony. (antimonaches) into medicine; Isaac of
Holland who, with his son, skillfully made artificial gems that could
not be distinguished from the natural; Bernard Trevison (born

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 1406), who spent
$30,000 in the study of alchemy, out of much of which he was cheated by
cruel alchemic pretenders, for even in that day there were plenty of
rogues to counterfeit a good thing. Under stress of his strong alchemic
convictions, Thomas Dalton placed his head on the block by order of the
virtuous (?) and conservative Thomas Herbert, ’squire to King Edward;
Jacob Bohme (born 1575), the sweet, pure spirit of Christian mysticism,
"The Voice of Heaven," than whom none stood higher in true alchemy, was
a Christian, alchemist, theosophist; Robert Boyle, a conspicuous
alchemical philosopher, in 1662 published his "Defense of the Doctrine
touching the Spring and Weight of the Air," and illustrated his
arguments by a series of ingenious and beautiful experiments, that stand
to-day so high in the estimation of scientific men, that his remarks are
copied verbatim by our highest authorities, and his apparatus is the
best yet devised for the purpose. Boyle's "Law" was evolved and
carefully defined fourteen years before Mariotte's "Discours de la
Nature de l’ Air" appeared, which did not, however, prevent French and
German scientific men from giving the credit to Mariotte, and they still
follow the false teacher who boldly pirated not only Boyle's ideas, but
stole his apparatus.

Then appeared such men as Paracelsus (born 1493), the celebrated
physician, who taught that occultism (esoteric philosophy) was superior
to experimental chemistry in enlightening us concerning the
transmutation of baser metals into gold and silver; and Gueppo Francisco
(born 1627), who wrote a beautiful treatise on "Elementary Spirits,"
which was copied without credit by Compte de Gabalis. It seems
incredible that the man (Gueppo Francisco), whose sweet spirit-thoughts
are revivified and breathe anew in "Undine" and "The Rape of the Lock,"
should have been thrown into a prison to perish as a Hermetic follower;
and this should teach us not to question the earnestness of those who
left us as a legacy the beauty and truth so abundantly found in pure
alchemy.

These and many others, cotemporaries, some conspicuous, and others whose
names do not shine in written history, contributed incalculably to the
grand aggregate of knowledge concerning the divine secret which enriched
the world. Compare the benefits of Hermetic philosophy with the result
of bloody wars ambitiously waged by self-exacting tyrants—tyrants whom
history applauds as heroes, but whom we consider as butchers. Among the
workers in alchemy are enumerated nobles, kings, and even popes. Pope
John XXII. was an alchemist, which accounts for his bull against
impostors, promulgated in order that true students might not be
discredited; and King Frederick of Naples sanctioned the art, and
protected its devotees.

At last, Count Cagliostro, the chequered "Joseph Balsamo" (born 1743),
who combined alchemy, magic, astrology, sleight of hand, mesmerism, Free
Masonry, and remarkable personal accomplishments, that altogether have
never since been equalled, burst upon the world. Focusing the gaze of
the church, kings, and the commons upon himself, in many respects the
most audacious pretender that history records, he raised the Hermetic
art to a dazzling height, and finally buried it in a blaze of splendor
as he passed from existence beneath a mantle of shame. As a meteor
streams into view from out the star mists of space, and in corruscating
glory sinks into the sea, Cagliostro blazed into the sky of the
eighteenth century, from the nebulæ of alchemistic

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

speculation, and extinguished both himself and his science in the light
of the rising sun of materialism. Cagliostro the visionary, the poet,
the inspired, the erratic comet in the universe of intellect, perished
in prison as a mountebank, and then the plodding chemist of to-day, with
his tedious mechanical methods, and cold, unresponsive, materialistic
dogmas, arose from the ashes, and sprang into prominence.

Read the story backward, and you shall see that in alchemy we behold the
beginning of all the sciences of to-day; alchemy is the cradle that
rocked them. Fostered with necromancy, astrology, occultism, and all the
progeny of mystic dreamery, the infant sciences struggled for existence
through the dark ages, in care of the once persecuted and now traduced
alchemist. The world owes a monument to-day more to Hermetic heroes,
than to all other influences and instrumentalities, religion excepted,
combined, for our present civilization is largely a legacy from the
alchemist. Begin with Hermes Trismegistus, and close with Joseph
Balsamo, and if you are inclined towards science, do not criticise too
severely their verbal logorrhea, and their romanticism, for your science
is treading backward; it will encroach upon their field again, and you
may have to unsay your words of hasty censure. These men fulfilled their
mission, and did it well. If they told more than men now think they
knew, they also knew more than they told, and more than modern
philosophy embraces. They could not live to see all the future they
eagerly hoped for, but they started a future for mankind that will far
exceed in sweetness and light the most entrancing visions of their most
imaginative dreamers. They spoke of the existence of a "red elixir," and
while they wrote, the barbarous world about them ran red with
blood,—blood of the pure in heart, blood of the saints, blood of a
Saviour; and their allegory and wisdom formulæ were recorded in blood of
their own sacrifices. They dreamed of a "white elixir" that is yet to
bless mankind, and a brighter day for man, a period of peace, happiness,
long life, contentment, good will and brotherly love, and in the name of
this "white elixir" they directed the world towards a vision of divine
light. Even pure gold, as they told the materialistic world who worship
gold, was penetrated and whelmed by this subtle, superlatively refined
spirit of matter. Is not the day of the allegorical "white elixir"
nearly at hand? Would that it were!

I say to you now, brothers of the eighteenth century, as one speaking by
authority to you, cease (some of you) to study this entrancing past,
look to the future by grasping the present, cast aside (some of you) the
alchemical lore of other days, give up your loved allegories; it is a
duty, you must relinquish them. There is a richer field. Do not delay.
Unlock this mystic door that stands hinged and ready, waiting the touch
of men who can interpret the talisman; place before mankind the
knowledge that lies behind its rivets. In the secret lodges that have
preserved the wisdom of the days of Enoch and Elias of Egypt, who
propagated the Egyptian Order, a branch of your ancient brotherhood, is
to be found concealed much knowledge that should now be spread before
the world, and added to the treasures of our circle of adepts. This
cabalistic wisdom is not recorded in books nor in manuscript, but has
been purposely preserved from the uninitiated, in the unreadable brains
of unresponsive men. Those who are selected to act as carriers thereof,
are, as a rule, like dumb water hearers, or the dead sheet of paper that
mechanically

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

preserves an inspiration derived from minds unseen: they serve a purpose
as a child mechanically commits to memory a blank verse to repeat to
others, who in turn commit to repeat again—neither of them speaking
understandingly. Search ye these hidden paths, for the day of mental
liberation approaches, and publish to the world all that is locked
within the doors of that antiquated organization. The world is nearly
ripe for the wisdom faculty, and men are ready to unravel the golden
threads that mystic wisdom has inwoven in her web of secret knowledge.
Look for knowledge where I have indicated, and to gain it do not
hesitate to swear allegiance to this sacred order, for so you must do to
gain entrance to the brotherhood, and then you must act what men will
call the traitor. You will, however, be doing a sacred duty, for the
world will profit, humanity will be the gainer, "Peace on Earth, Good
Will to Man," will be closer to mankind, and at last, when the sign
appears, the "white elixir" will no longer be allegorical; it will
become a reality. In the name of the Great Mystic Vase-Man, go thou into
these lodges, learn of their secrets, and spread their treasures before
those who can interpret them.

Here this letter ended. It was evident that the writer referred to a
secret society into which I could probably enter; and taking the advice,
I did not hesitate, but applied at once for membership. I determined,
regardless of consequence, to follow the suggestion of the unknown
writer, and by so doing, for I accepted their pledges, I invited my
destiny.

My guest of the massive forehead paused for a moment, stroked his long,
white beard, and then, after casting an inquiring glance on me, asked,
"Shall I read on?"

"Yes," I replied, and The—Man—Who—Did—It, proceeded as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. The Writing of My Confession](eti12)
