[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](eti12)  [Next](eti14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1892062186/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Etidorhpa*, by John Uri Lloyd, \[1897\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

### CHAPTER VI.

#### KIDNAPPED.

The events just narrated occurred in the prime of my life, and are
partly matters of publicity. My attempted breach of faith in the way of
disclosing their secrets was naturally infamous in the eyes of my
society brethren, who endeavored to prevail upon me to relent of my
design which, after writing my "Confession," I made no endeavor to
conceal. Their importunities and threatenings had generally been
resisted, however, and with an obliquity that can not be easily
explained, I persisted in my unreasonable design. I was blessed as a
husband and father, but neither the thought of home, wife, nor child,
checked me in my inexplicable course. I was certainly irresponsible,
perhaps a monomaniac, and yet on the subject in which I was absorbed, I
preserved my mental equipoise, and knowingly followed a course that
finally brought me into the deepest slough of trouble, and lost to me
forever all that man loves most dearly. An overruling spirit, perhaps
the shade of one of the old alchemists, possessed me, and in the face of
obstacles that would have caused most men to reflect, and retrace their
steps, I madly rushed onward. The influence that impelled me, whatever
it may have been, was irresistible. I apparently acted the part of
agent, subject to an ever-present master essence, and under this
dominating spirit or demon my mind was powerless in its subjection. My
soul was driven imperiously by that impelling and indescribable
something, and was as passive and irresponsible as lycopodium that is
borne onward in a steady current of air. Methods were vainly sought by
those who loved me, brethren of the lodge, and others who endeavored to
induce me to change my headstrong purpose, but I could neither accept
their counsels nor heed their forebodings. Summons by law were served on
me in order to disconcert me, and my numerous small debts became the
pretext for legal warrants, until at last all my papers (excepting

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

my "Confession"), and my person also, were seized, upon an execution
served by a constable. Minor claims were quickly satisfied, but when I
regained my liberty, the aggression continued. Even arson was resorted
to, and the printing office that held my manuscript was fired one night,
that the obnoxious revelation which I persisted in putting into print,
might be destroyed. Finally I found myself separated by process of law
from home and friends, an inmate of a jail. My opponents, as I now came
to consider them, had confined me in prison for a debt of only two
dollars, a sufficient amount at that time, in that state, for my
incarceration. Smarting under the humiliation, my spirit became still
more rebellious, and I now, perhaps justly, came to view myself as a
martyr. It had been at first asserted that I had stolen a shirt, but I
was not afraid of any penalty that could be laid on me for this
trumped-up charge, believing that the imputation and the arrest would be
shown to be designed as willful oppression. Therefore it was, that when
this contemptible arraignment had been swept aside, and I was freed
before a Justice of the Peace, I experienced more than a little surprise
at a rearrest, and at finding myself again thrown into jail. I knew that
it had been decreed by my brethren that I must retract and destroy my
"Confession," and this fact made me the more determined to prevent its
destruction, and I persisted sullenly in pursuing my course. On the
evening of August 12th, 1826, my jailer's wife informed me that the debt
for which I had been incarcerated had been paid by unknown "friends,"
and that I could depart; and I accepted the statement without question.
Upon my stepping from the door of the jail, however, my arms were firmly
grasped y two persons, one on each side of me, and before I could
realize he fact that I was being kidnapped, I was thrust into a closed
coach, which immediately rolled away, but not until I made an outcry
which, if heard by anyone, was unheeded.

"For your own sake, be quiet," said one of my companions in confinement,
for the carriage was draped to exclude the light, and was as dark as a
dungeon. My spirit rebelled; I felt that I was on the brink of a
remarkable, perhaps perilous experience, and I indignantly replied by
asking:

"What have I done that you should presume forcibly to imprison me? Am I
not a freeman of America?"

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

"What have you done?" he answered. "Have you not bound yourself by a
series of vows that are sacred and should be inviolable, and have you
not broken them as no other man has done before you? Have you not
betrayed your trust, and merited a severe judgment? Did you not
voluntarily ask admission into our ancient brotherhood, and in good
faith were you not initiated into our sacred mysteries? Did you not
obligate yourself before man, and on your sacred honor promise to
preserve our secrets?"

"I did," I replied; "but previously I had sworn before a higher tribunal
to scatter this precious wisdom to the world."

"Yes," he said, "and you know full well the depth of the self-sought
solemn oath that you took with us—more solemn than that prescribed by
any open court on earth."

"This I do not deny," I said, "and yet I am glad that I accomplished my
object, even though you have now, as is evident, the power to pronounce
my sentence."

"You should look for the death sentence," was the reply, "but it has
been ordained instead that you are to be given a lengthened life. You
should expect bodily destruction; but on the contrary, you will pass on
in consciousness of earth and earthly concerns when we are gone. Your
name will be known to all lands, and yet from this time you will be
unknown. For the welfare of future humanity, you will be thrust to a
height in our order that will annihilate you as a mortal being, and yet
you will exist, suspended between life and death, and in that
intermediate state will know that you exist. You have, as you confess,
merited a severe punishment, but we can only punish in accordance with
an unwritten law, that instructs the person punished, and elevates the
human race in consequence. You stand alone among mortals in that you
have openly attempted to give broadly to those who have not earned it,
our most sacred property, a property that did not belong to you,
property that you have only been permitted to handle, that has been
handed from man to man from before the time of Solomon, and which
belongs to no one man, and will continue to pass in this way from one to
another, as a hallowed trust, until there are no men, as men now exist,
to receive it. You will soon go into the shadows of darkness, and will
learn many of the mysteries of life, the undeveloped mysteries that

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

are withheld from your fellows, but which you, who have been so
presumptuous and anxious for knowledge, are destined to possess and
solve. You will find secrets that man, as man is now constituted, can
not yet discover, and yet which the future man must gain and be
instructed in. As you have sowed, so shall you reap. You wished to
become a distributor of knowledge; you shall now by bodily trial and
mental suffering obtain unsought knowledge to distribute, and in time to
come you will be commanded to make your discoveries known. As your
pathway is surely laid out, so must you walk. It is ordained; to rebel
is useless."

"Who has pronounced this sentence?" I asked.

"A judge, neither of heaven nor of earth."

"You speak in enigmas."

"No; I speak openly, and the truth. Our brotherhood is linked with the
past, and clasps hands with the antediluvians; the flood scattered the
races of earth, but did not disturb our secrets. The great love of
wisdom has from generation to generation led selected members of our
organization to depths of study that our open work does not touch upon,
and behind our highest officers there stand, in the occult shades
between the here and the hereafter, unknown and unseen agents who are
initiated into secrets above and beyond those known to the ordinary
craft. Those who are introduced into these inner recesses acquire
superhuman conceptions, and do not give an open sign of fellowship; they
need no talisman. They walk our streets possessed of powers unknown to
men, they concern themselves as mortals in the affairs of men, and even
their brethren of the initiated, open order are unaware of their exalted
condition. The means by which they have been instructed, their several
individualities as well, have been concealed, because publicity would
destroy their value, and injure humanity's cause."

Silence followed these vague disclosures, and the carriage rolled on. I
was mystified and alarmed, and yet I knew that, whatever plight be the
end of this nocturnal ride, I had invited it—yes, merited it—and I
steeled myself to hear the sentence of my judges, in whose hands I was
powerless. The persons on the seat opposite me continued their
conversation in low tones, audible only to themselves. An individual by
my side neither

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

moved nor spoke. There were four of us in the carriage, as I learned
intuitively, although we were surrounded by utter darkness. At length I
addressed the companion beside me, for the silence was unbearable.
Friend or enemy though he might be, anything rather than this long
silence. "How long shall we continue in this carriage?"

He made no reply.

After a time I again spoke.

"Can you not tell me, comrade, how long our journey will last? When
shall we reach our destination?"

Silence only.

Putting out my hand, I ventured to touch my mate, and found that he was
tightly strapped,—bound upright to the seat and the back of the
carriage. Leather thongs held him firmly in position; and as I pondered
over the mystery, I thought to myself, if I make a disturbance, they
will not hesitate to manacle me as securely. My custodians seemed,
however, not to exercise a guard over me, and yet I felt that they were
certain of my inability to escape. If the man on the seat was a
prisoner, why was he so reticent? why did he not answer my questions? I
came to the conclusion that he must be gagged as well as bound. Then I
determined to find out if this were so. I began to realize more forcibly
that a terrible sentence must have been meted me, and I half hoped that
I could get from my partner in captivity some information regarding our
destination. Sliding my hand cautiously along his chest, and under his
chin, I intended to remove the gag from his mouth, when I felt my flesh
creep, for it came in contact with the cold, rigid flesh of a corpse.
The man was dead, and stiff.

The shock unnerved me. I had begun to experience the results of a severe
mental strain, partly induced by the recent imprisonment and extended
previous persecution, and partly by the mysterious significance of the
language in which I had recently been addressed. The sentence, "You will
now go into the Valley of the Shadow of Death, and learn the mysteries
of life," kept ringing through my head, and even then I sat beside a
corpse. After this discovery I remained for a time in a semi-stupor, in
a state of profound dejection,—how long I can not say. Then I
experienced an inexplicable change, such as I imagine

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

comes over a condemned man without hope of reprieve, and I became
unconcerned as a man might who had accepted his destiny, and stoically
determined to await it. Perhaps moments passed, it may have been hours,
and then indifference gave place to reviving curiosity. I realized that
I could die only once, and I coolly and complacently revolved the
matter, speculating over my possible fate. As I look back on the night
in which I rode beside that dead man, facing the mysterious agents of an
all-powerful judge, I marvel over a mental condition that permitted me
finally to rest in peace, and slumber in unconcern. So I did, however,
and after a period, the length of which I am not able to estimate, I
awoke, and soon thereafter the carriage stopped, and our horses were
changed, after which our journey was resumed, to continue hour after
hour, and at last I slept again, leaning back in the corner. Suddenly I
was violently shaken from slumber, and commanded to alight. It was in
the gray of morning, and before I could realize what was happening, I
was transferred by my captors to another carriage, and the dead man also
was rudely hustled along and thrust beside me, my companions speaking to
him as though he were alive. Indeed, as I look back on these maneuvers,
I perceive that, to all appearances, I was one of the abducting party,
and our actions were really such as to induce an observer to believe
that this dead man was an obstinate prisoner, and myself one of his
official guards. The drivers of the carriages seemed to give us no
attention, but they sat upright and unconcerned, and certainly neither
of them interested himself in our transfer. The second carriage, like
that other previously described, was securely closed, and our journey
was continued. The darkness was as of a dungeon. It may have been days,
I could not tell anything about the passage of time; on and oh we rode.
Occasionally food and drink were handed in, but my captors held to their
course, and at last I was taken from the vehicle, and transferred to a
block-house.

I had been carried rapidly and in secret a hundred or more miles,
perhaps into another state, and probably all traces of my journey were
effectually lost to outsiders. I was in the hands of men who implicitly
obeyed the orders of their superiors, masters whom they had never seen,
and probably did not know. I needed no reminder of the fact that I had
violated every sacred pledge

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

voluntarily made to the craft, and now that they held me powerless, I
well knew that, whatever the punishment assigned, I had invited it, and
could not prevent its fulfillment. That it would be severe, I realized;
that it would not be in accordance with ordinary human law, I accepted.

Had I not in secret, in my little room in that obscure Stone Tavern,
engrossed on paper the mystic sentences that never

<span id="img_05200"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![I WAS TAKEN FROM
THE VEHICLE, AND TRANSFERRED TO A BLOCK-HOUSE.](tn/05200.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/05200.jpg)  
“I WAS TAKEN FROM THE VEHICLE, AND TRANSFERRED TO A BLOCK-HOUSE.”  
</span>

before had been penned, and were unknown excepting to persons initiated
into our sacred mysteries? Had I not previously, in the most solemn
manner, before these words had been imparted to my keeping, sworn to
keep them inviolate and secret? and had I not deliberately broken that
sacred vow, and scattered the hoarded sentences broadcast? My part as a
brother in this fraternal organization was that of the holder only of
property that belonged to no man, that had been handed from one to
another through the ages, sacredly cherished, and faithfully protected
by men of many tongues, always considered a trust,

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

a charge of honor, and never before betrayed. My crime was deep and
dark. I shuddered. "Come what may," I mused, reflecting over my perfidy,
"I am ready for the penalty, and my fate is deserved; it can not but be
a righteous one."

The words of the occupant of the carriage occurred to me again and
again; that one sentence kept ringing in my brain; I could not dismiss
it: "You have been tried, convicted, and we are of those appointed to
carry out the sentence of the judges."

The black silence of my lonely cell beat against me; I could feel the
absence of sound, I could feel the dismal weight of nothingness, and in
my solitude and distraction I cried out in anguish to the invisible
judge: "I am ready for my sentence, whether it be death or imprisonment
for life"; and still the further words of the occupant of the carriage
passed through my mind: "You will now go into the Valley of the Shadow
of Death, and will learn the mysteries of Life."

Then I slept, to awake and sleep again. I kept no note of time; it may
have been days or weeks, so far as my record could determine. An
attendant came at intervals to minister to my wants, always masked
completely, ever silent.

That I was not entirely separated from mankind, however, I felt assured,
for occasionally sounds of voices came to me from without. Once I
ventured to shout aloud, hoping to attract attention; but the persons
whom I felt assured overheard me, paid no attention to my lonely cry. At
last one night, my door opened abruptly, and three men entered.

"Do not fear," said their spokesman, "we aim to protect you; keep still,
and soon you will be a free man."

I consented quietly to accompany them, for to refuse would have been in
vain; and I was conducted to a boat, which I found contained a
corpse—the one I had journeyed with, I suppose—and embarking, we were
silently rowed to the middle of the river, our course being diagonally
from the shore, and the dead man was thrown overboard. Then our boat
returned to the desolate bank.

Thrusting me into a carriage, that, on our return to the river bank we
found awaiting us, my captors gave a signal, and I was driven away in
the darkness, as silently as before, and our journey

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

was continued I believe for fully two days. I was again confined in
another log cabin, with but one door, and destitute of windows. My
attendants were masked, they neither spoke to me as they day after day
supplied my wants, nor did they information on any subject, until at
last I abandoned all hope of ever regaining my liberty.

<span id="img_05400"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![THE DEAD MAN WAS
THROWN OVERBOARD.](tn/05400.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/05400.jpg)  
“THE DEAD MAN WAS THROWN OVERBOARD.”  
</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. A Wild Night.—I Am Prematurely Aged](eti14)
