[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](eti28)  [Next](eti30.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1892062186/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Etidorhpa*, by John Uri Lloyd, \[1897\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

## INTERLUDE.—THE STORY AGAIN INTERRUPTED.

### CHAPTER XXII.

#### MY UNBIDDEN GUEST DEPARTS.

Once more I must presume to interrupt this narrative, and call back the
reader's thoughts from those mysterious caverns through which we have
been tracing the rapid footsteps of the man who was abducted, and his
uncouth pilot of the lower realms. Let us now see and hear what took
place in my room, in Cincinnati, just after my visitor, known to us as
The-Man-Who-Did-It, had finished reading to me, Lewellyn Drury, the
custodian of this manuscript, the curious chapter relating how the
underground explorers lost weight as they descended in the hollows of
the earth. My French clock struck twelve of its clear silvery notes
before the gray-bearded reader finished his stint for the occasion, and
folded his manuscript preparatory to placing it within his bosom.

"It is past midnight," he said, "and it is time for me to depart; but I
will come to you again within a year.

"Meanwhile, during my absence, search the records, question authorities,
and note such objections as rise therefrom concerning the statements I
have made. Establish or disprove historically, or scientifically, any
portion of the life history that I have given, and when I return I will
hear what you have to say, and meet your argument. If there is a doubt
concerning the authenticity of any part of the history, investigate; but
make no mention to others of the details of our meetings."

I sat some time in thought, then said: "I decline to concern myself in
verifying the historical part of your narrative. The localities you
mention may be true to name, and it is possible that you have related a
personal history; but I can not perceive that I am interested in either
proving or disproving it. I will

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

say, however, that it does not seem probable that at any time a man can
disappear from a community, as you claim to have done, and have been the
means of creating a commotion in his neighborhood that affected
political parties, or even led to an unusual local excitement, outside
his immediate circle of acquaintances, for a man is not of sufficient
importance unless he is very conspicuous. By your own admission, you
were simply a studious mechanic, a credulous believer in alchemistic
vagaries, and as I revolve the matter over, I am afraid that you are now
trying to impose on my credulity. The story of a forcible abduction, in
the manner you related, seems to me incredible, and not worthy of
investigation, even had I the inclination to concern myself in your
personal affairs. The statements, however, that you make regarding the
nature of the crust of the earth, gravitation, light, instinct, and
human senses are highly interesting, and even plausible as you artfully
present the subjects, I candidly admit, and I shall take some pains to
make inquiries concerning the recorded researches of experts who have
investigated in that direction."

"Collect your evidence," said he, "and I shall listen to your views when
I return."

He opened the door, glided away, and I was alone again.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIII. I Question Scientific Men.—Aristotle's
Ether](eti30.md)
