[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](eti58)  [Next](eti60.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1892062186/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Etidorhpa*, by John Uri Lloyd, \[1897\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_352">p. 352</span>

## INTERLUDE.

### CHAPTER LII.

#### THE LAST FAREWELL.

My mysterious guest, he of the silver, flowing beard, read the last word
of the foregoing manuscript, and then laid the sheet of paper on the
table, and rested his head upon his hand, gazing thoughtfully at the
open fire. Thus he sat for a considerable period in silence. Then he
said:

"You have heard part of my story, that portion which I am commanded to
make known now, and you have learned how, by natural methods, I passed
by successive steps while in the body, to the door that death only, as
yet, opens to humanity. You understand also that, although of human
form, I am not as other men (for with me matter is subservient to mind),
and as you have promised, so you must act, and do my bidding concerning
the manuscript."

"But there is surely more to follow. You will tell me of what you saw
and experienced beyond the end of earth, within the possessions of
Etidorhpa. Tell me of that Unknown Country."

"No," he answered; "this is the end, at least so far as my connection
with you is concerned. You still question certain portions of my
narrative, I perceive, notwithstanding the provings I have given you,
and yet as time passes investigation will show that every word I have
read or uttered is true, historically, philosophically, and spiritually
(which you now doubt), and men will yet readily understand how the
seemingly profound, unfathomable phenomena I have encountered may be
verified. I have studied and learned by bitter experience in a school
that teaches from the outgoings of a deeper philosophy than human
science has reached, especially modern materialistic science

<span id="page_353">p. 353</span>

which, however, step by step it is destined to reach. And yet I have
recorded but a small part of the experiences that I have undergone. What
I have related is only a foretaste of the inexhaustible feast which, in
the wisdom expanse of the future, will yet be spread before man, and
which tempts him onward and upward. This narrative, which rests against
the beginning of my real story, the Unknown Country and its
possibilities should therefore incite to renewed exertions, both mental
and experimental, those permitted to review it. I have carried my
history to the point at which I can say to you, very soon afterward I
gave up my body temporarily, by a perfectly natural process, a method
that man can yet employ, and passed as a spiritual being into the
ethereal spaces, through those many mansions which I am not permitted to
describe at this time, and from which I have been forced unwillingly to
return and take up the semblance of my body, in order to meet you and
record these events. I must await the development and expansion of mind
that will permit men to accept this faithful record of my history before
completing the narrative, for men are yet unprepared. Men must seriously
consider those truths which, under inflexible natural laws, govern the
destiny of man, but which, if mentioned at this day can only be viewed
as the hallucinations of a disordered mind. To many this manuscript will
prove a passing romance, to others an enigma, to others still it will be
a pleasing study. Men are not now in a condition to receive even this
paper. That fact I know full well, and I have accordingly arranged that
thirty years shall pass before it is made public. Then they will have
begun to study more deeply into force disturbances, exhibitions of
energy that are now known and called imponderable bodies (perhaps some
of my statements will then even be verified), and to reflect over the
connection of matter therewith. A few minds will then be capable of
vaguely conceiving possibilities, which this paper will serve to
foretell, for a true solution of the great problems of the ethereal
unknown is herein suggested, the study of which will lead to a final
elevation of humanity, such as I dare not prophesy."

"Much of the paper is obscure to me," I said; "and there are occasional
phrases and repetitions that appear to be interjected,

<span id="page_354">p. 354</span>

possibly, with an object, and which are yet disconnected from the
narrative proper."

"That is true; the paper often contains statements that are
emblematical, and which you can not understand, but yet such portions
carry to others a hidden meaning. I am directed to speak to many persons
besides yourself, and I can not meet those whom I address more directly
than I do through this communication. These pages will serve to instruct
many people—people whom you will never know, to whom I have brought
messages that will in secret be read between the lines."

"Why not give it to such persons?"

"Because I am directed to bring it to you," he replied, "and you are
required:

"First, To seal the manuscript, and place it in the inner vault of your
safe.

"Second, To draw up a will, and provide in case of your death, that
after the expiration of thirty years from this date, the seals are to be
broken, and a limited edition published in book form, by one you select.

"Third, An artist capable of grasping the conceptions will at the proper
time be found, to whom the responsibility of illustrating the volume is
to be entrusted, he receiving credit therefor. Only himself and yourself
(or your selected agent) are to presume to select the subjects for
illustration.

"Fourth, In case you are in this city, upon the expiration of thirty
years, you are to open the package and follow the directions given in
the envelope therein."

And he then placed on the manuscript a sealed envelope addressed to
myself.

"This I have promised already," I said.

"Very well," he remarked, "I will bid you farewell."

"Wait a moment; it is unjust to leave the narrative thus uncompleted.
You have been promised a future in comparison with which the experiences
you have undergone, and have related to me, were tame; you had just met
on the edge of the inner circle that mysterious being concerning whom I
am deeply interested, as I am in the continuation of your personal
narrative, and you have evidently more to relate, for you must have
passed into that Unknown Country. You claim to have

<span id="page_355">p. 355</span>

done so, but you break the thread in the most attractive part by leaving
the future to conjecture."

"It must be so. This is a history of man on Earth, the continuation will
be a history of man within the Unknown Country."

"And I am not to receive the remainder of your story?" I reiterated,
still loth to give it up.

"No; I shall not appear directly to you again. Your part in this work
will have ended when, after thirty years, you carry out the directions
given in the sealed letter which, with this manuscript, I entrust to
your care. I must return now to the shore that separated me from my
former guide, and having again laid down this semblance of a body, go
once more into"—

He buried his face in his hands and sobbed. Yes; this strange, cynical
being whom I had at first considered an impertinent fanatic, and then,
more than once afterward, had been induced to view as a cunning
impostor, or to fear as a cold, semi-mortal, sobbed like a child.

"It is too much," he said, seemingly speaking to himself; "too much to
require of one not yet immortal, for the good of his race. I am again
with men, nearly a human, and I long to go back once more to my old
home, my wife, my children. Why am I forbidden? The sweets of Paradise
can not comfort the mortal who must give up his home and family, and yet
carry his earth-thought beyond. Man can not possess unalloyed joys, and
blessings spiritual, and retain one backward longing for mundane
subjects, and I now yearn again for my earth love, my material family.
Having tasted of semi-celestial pleasures in one of the mansions of that
complacent, pure, and restful sphere, I now exist in the border land,
but my earth home is not relinquished, I cling as a mortal to former
scenes, and crave to meet my lost loved ones. All of earth must be left
behind if Paradise is ever wholly gained, yet I have still my sublunary
thoughts.

"Etidorhpa! Etidorhpa!" he pleaded, turning his eyes as if towards one I
could not see, "Etidorhpa, my old home calls. Thou knowest that the
beginning of man on earth is a cry born of love, and the end of man on
earth is a cry for love; love is a gift of Etidorhpa, and thou,
Etidorhpa, the soul of love, shouldst have compassion on a pleading
mortal."

He raised his hands in supplication.

<span id="page_356">p. 356</span>

"Have mercy on me, Etidorhpa, as I would on you if you were I and I were
Etidorhpa."

Then with upturned face he stood long and silent, listening.

"Ah," he murmured at last, as if in reply to a voice I could not catch,
a voice that carried to his ear an answer of deep disappointment; "thou
spokest truly in the vision, Etidorhpa; it is love that enslaves
mankind; love that commands; love that ensnares and rules mankind, and
thou, Etidorhpa, art the soul of Love. True it is that were there no
Etidorhpa, there would still be tears on earth, but the cold,
meaningless tears of pain only. No mourning people, no sorrowful
partings, no sobbing mothers kneeling with upturned faces, no planting
of the myrtle and the rose on sacred graves. There would be no
child-love, no home, no tomb, no sorrow, no Beyond"—

He hesitated, sank upon hip knees, pleadingly raised. his clasped hands
and seemed to listen to that far-off voice, then bowed his head, and
answered:

"Yes; thou art right, Etidorhpa—although thou bringest sorrow to
mortals, without thee and this sorrow-gift there could be no bright
hereafter. Thou art just, Etidorhpa, and always wise. Love is the seed,
and sorrow is the harvest, but this harvest of sadness is to man the
richest gift of love, the golden link that joins the spirit form that
has fled to the spirit that is still enthralled on earth. Were there no
earth-love, there could be no heart-sorrow; were there no craving for
loved ones gone, the soul of man would rest forever a brother of the
clod. He who has sorrowed and not profited by his sorrow-lesson, is
unfitted for life. He who heeds best his sorrow-teacher is in closest
touch with humanity, and nearest to Etidorhpa. She who has drunk most
deeply of sorrow's cup has best fitted herself for woman's sphere in
life, and a final home of immortal bliss. I will return to thy realms,
Etidorhpa, and this silken strand of sorrow wrapped around my heart,
reaching from earth to Paradise and back to earth, will guide at last my
loved ones to the realms beyond—the home of Etidorhpa."

Rising, turning to me, and subduing his emotion, ignoring this outburst,
he said:

"If time should convince you that I have related a faithful history, if
in after years you come to learn my name (I have

<span id="page_357">p. 357</span>

<span id="img_35700"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![I STOOD ALONE IN
MY ROOM HOLDING THE MYSTERIOUS MANUSCRIPT.](tn/35700.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/35700.jpg.md)  
“I STOOD ALONE IN MY ROOM HOLDING THE MYSTERIOUS MANUSCRIPT.”  
</span>

<span id="page_358">p. 358</span> <span id="page_359">p. 359</span>

been forbidden to speak it), and are convinced of my identity, promise
me that you will do your unbidden guest a favor."

"This I will surely do; what shall it be?"

"I left a wife, a little babe, and a two-year-old child when I was taken
away, abducted in the manner that I have faithfully recorded. In my
subsequent experience I have not been able to cast them from my memory.
I know that through my error they have been lost to me, and will be
until they change to the spirit, after which we will meet again in one
of the waiting Mansions of the Great Beyond. I beg you to ascertain, if
possible, if either my children, or my children's children live, and
should they be in want, present them with a substantial testimonial.
Now, farewell."

He held out his hand, I grasped it, and as I did so, his form became
indistinct, and gradually disappeared from my gaze, the, fingers of my
hand met the palm in vacancy, and with extended arms I stood alone in my
room, holding the mysterious manuscript, on the back of which I find
plainly engrossed:

"There are more things in Heaven and Earth, Horatio,  
Than are dreamt of in your philosophy."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epilogue. Letter Accompanying the Mysterious Manuscript](eti60.md)
