[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](eti59)  [Next](eti61.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1892062186/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Etidorhpa*, by John Uri Lloyd, \[1897\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_360">p. 360</span>

### EPILOGUE.

#### LETTER ACCOMPANYING THE MYSTERIOUS MANUSCRIPT.

The allotted thirty years have passed, and as directed, I, Llewellyn
Drury, now break the seals, and open the envelope accompanying the
mysterious package which was left in my hand, and read as follows:

Herein find the epilogue to your manuscript. Also a picture of your
unwelcome guest, I—Am—The—Man, which you are directed to have engraved,
and to use as a frontispiece to the volume. There are men yet living to
bear witness to my identity, who will need but this picture to convince
them of the authenticity of the statements in the manuscript, as it is
the face of one they knew when he was a young man, and will recognize
now that he is in age. Do not concern yourself about the reception of
the work, for you are in no wise responsible for its statements.
Interested persons, if living, will not care to appear in public in
connection therewith, and those who grasp and appreciate, who can see
the pertinence of its truths, who can read between the lines and have
the key to connected conditions, will assuredly keep their knowledge of
these facts locked in their own bosoms, or insidiously oppose them, and
by their silence or their attacks cover from men outside the fraternity,
their connection with the unfortunate author. They dare not speak.

Revise the sentences; secure the services of an editor if you desire,
and induce another to publish the book if you shrink from the
responsibility, but in your revision do not in any way alter the meaning
of the statements made in the manuscript; have it copied for the
printer, and take no part in comments that may arise among men
concerning its reception. <span id="fr_14"></span>[\*](#fn_14.md) Those who
are

<span id="page_361">p. 361</span>

best informed regarding certain portions thereof, will seemingly be
least interested in the book, and those who realize most fully these
truths, will persistently evade the endorsement of them. The scientific
enthusiast, like the fraternity to which I belong, if appealed to, will
obstruct the mind of the student either by criticism or ridicule, for
many of these revelations are not recorded in his books.

You are at liberty to give in your own language as a prologue the
history of your connection with the author, reserving, however, if you
desire to do so, your personality, adding an introduction to the
manuscript, and, as interludes, every detail of our several
conversations, and of your experience. Introduce such illustrations as
the selected artist and yourself think proper in order to illuminate the
statements. Do not question the advisability of stating all that you
know to have occurred; write the whole truth, for although mankind will
not now accept as fact all that you and I have experienced, strange
phases of life phenomena are revealing themselves, and humanity will yet
surely be led to a higher plane. As men investigate the points of
historical interest, and the ultra-scientific phenomena broached in this
narrative, the curtain of obscurity will be drawn aside, and evidence of
the truths contained in these details will be disclosed. Finally, you
must mutilate a page of the manuscript that you may select, and preserve
the fragment intact and in secret. Do not print another edition unless
you are presented with the words of the part that is missing. <span
id="fr_15"></span>[\*](#fn_15.md)

(Signed.) I—AM—THE—MAN.

NOTE BY MR. DRURY.—Thus the letter ended. After mature consideration it
has been decided to give verbatim most of the letter, and all of the
manuscript, and to append, as a prologue, an introduction to the
manuscript, detailing exactly the record of my connection therewith,
including my arguments with Professors Chickering and Vaughn, whom I
consulted concerning the statements made to me directly by its author. I
will admit that perhaps the opening chapter in my introduction may be
such as

<span id="page_362">p. 362</span>

to raise in the minds of some persons a question concerning my mental
responsibility, for as the principal personage in this drama remarks:
"Mankind can not now accept as facts what I have seen." Yet I walk the
streets of my native city, a business man of recognized thoughtfulness
and sobriety, and I only relate on my own responsibility what has to my
knowledge occurred. It has never been intimated that I am mentally
irresponsible, or speculative, and even were this the case, the material
proof that I hold, and have not mentioned as yet, and may not,
concerning my relations with this remarkable being, effectually
disproves the idea of mental aberration, or spectral delusion. Besides,
many of the statements are of such a nature as to be verified easily, or
disproved by any person who may be inclined to repeat the experiments
suggested, or visit the localities mentioned. The part of the whole
production that will seem the most improbable to the majority of
persons, is that to which I can testify from my own knowledge, as
related in the first portion and the closing chapter. This approaches
necromancy, seemingly, and yet in my opinion, as I now see the matter,
such unexplained and recondite occurrences appear unscientific, because
of the shortcomings of students of science. Occult phenomena, at some
future day, will be proved to be based on ordinary physical conditions
to be disclosed by scientific investigations \[for "All that is is
natural, and science embraces all things "\], but at present they are
beyond our perception; yes, beyond our conception.

Whether I have been mesmerized, or have written in a trance, whether I
have been the subject of mental aberration, or have faithfully given a
life history to the world, whether this book is altogether romance, or
carries a vein of prophecy, whether it sets in motion a train of wild
speculations, or combines playful arguments, science problems, and
metaphysical reasonings, useful as well as entertaining, remains for the
reader to determine. So far as I, Llewellyn Drury, am concerned, this
is—

THE END.

<span id="page_363">p. 363</span>

<span id="img_36300"></span> <span align="CENTER">
[![Manuscript](tn/36300.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/36300.jpg.md)  
  
</span>

Had the above communication and the missing fragment of manuscript been
withheld (see page [161](eti31.htm#page_161).md), it is needless to say
that this second edition of Etidorhpa would not have appeared.

On behalf of the undersigned, who is being most liberally scolded by
friends and acquaintances who can not get a copy of the first edition,
and on behalf of these same scolding mortals, the undersigned extends to
I-Am-The-Man the collective thanks of those who scold and the
scolded.—J. U. L.

<span id="page_364">p. 364</span> <span id="page_365">p. 365</span>

<span id="img_36400"></span> <span align="CENTER">
[![Manuscript](tn/36400.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/36400.jpg.md)  
  
</span>

This introduction, which in the author's edition was signed by the
writer, is here reprinted in order that my views of the book be not
misconstrued.—J. U. L.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_14"></span>[360:\*](eti60.htm#fr_14.md) From a review of the
fac simile (see [p. 35](eti11.htm#page_35).md), it will be seen that an
exact print word for word could not be expected. In more than one
instance subsequent study demonstrated that the first conception was
erroneous, and in the interview with Etidorhpa (see [p.
252](eti47.htm#page_252).md), after the <span id="page_360">p. 360</span>
page had been plated, it was discovered that the conveyed meaning was
exactly the reverse of the original. Luckily the error was discovered in
time to change the verse, and leave the spirit of this fair creature
unblemished.—J. U. L.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[361:\*](eti60.htm#fr_15.md) I have excised a
portion (see [p. 190](eti36.htm#page_190).md).—J. U. L.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Life of Prof. Daniel Vaughn](eti61.md)
