[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tms07)  [Next](tms09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER VI

## INCANTATION AND PRAYER

A STUDY of the Roman prayers which have come down to us, whether they be
found in their original integrity as in the Carmen Saliare, the Carmen
Arvale, the prayer of the Umbrian Attiedii, those of the farmer recorded
by Cato in his De Agricultura; or whether, like those embedded in the
Fasti of Ovid, they have been modified by the poets to meet the
requirements of meter--all will, we believe, show that they are, in
their essential nature, magic incantations. Our problem is not whether
prayer has developed from incantation or whether a spell is a
degenerated prayer. <span id="fr_443"></span>[1](#fn_443) It would seem,
after a detailed study of a large number of Roman prayers, that these
always retained some of the characteristics of an incantation; and if
there is any difference between the two it lies chiefly not in the
prayer or incantation as such, but in the mental attitude of the person
toward the object of his incantation or prayer, and in the consequent
change in the tone and, in a limited degree, in the form of the
incantation.

It will be necessary at the outset to define what we mean by
"incantation." An incantation is a command (or, rarely, a wish), usually
chanted, addressed to the subject of the magic rite. <span
id="fr_444"></span>[2](#fn_444) The shepherdess in the song of
Alphesiboeus in Vergil's eighth Eclogue repeats nine times the words
"Lead Daphnis home from the city, my charms, lead Daphnis home." In
certain rites of riddance described by Ovid  <span
id="fr_445"></span>[3](#fn_445) a child is to be protected by an
incantation and a magic act. The protection is commanded in these words:
"Birds of the night, spare the entrails of the boy." Such incantations
containing a command are found commonly in private magic, and traces of
their influence may be seen in the Roman State religion. If the spell
was intended to harm a person, the State could interfere to protect
him. <span id="fr_446"></span>[4](#fn_446) For instance, it was not
unusual for a farmer whose crops had failed to accuse another of having,
by a spell (carmen), lured the crops away. Tibullus, in a poem  <span
id="fr_447"></span>[5](#fn_447) in which he complains that an old
beldame has bewitched Marathus, takes the opportunity to recount various
feats of witches, such as transferring crops from one field to another.
Similarly, Pliny the Elder records  <span
id="fr_448"></span>[6](#fn_448) that a certain freedman, Furius, by
using better implements and better methods than his neighbor, was able
to obtain richer crops from a smaller strip of land. A neighbor haled
Furius before the tribes and accused him of having bewitched his field.
But when they saw his sturdy slaves and his implements of
witchcraft--hoes, rakes, and ploughs--they acquitted him.

The Romans of later days restricted the use of the term carmina to
slander and libel, giving the names dirae and defixiones to such spells
as we have just mentioned.

The tendency of the growing mind of early man was to personify the
object addressed; and along with this tendency came another--to assign a
spirit to the object (animism), causing the spell to change its
character somewhat. But, as we have suggested, the difference between a
spell and a prayer lies not so much in any inherent change in the nature
of either as in a shift in the attitude of mind toward the object to be
influenced and in the consequent alteration in the tone of the prayer.
In magic the process is purely mechanical. The person performing the
rite wills a certain effect which is bound to ensue if the magic act and
the incantation have been flawless. The volition lies with the person.
In the case of prayer, however, the worshiper addresses a divinity,
all-powerful in his sphere, whose will he must win just as he would win
the will of a person. Here, then, lies the fundamental difference
between incantation and prayer, so far, at least, as the mental attitude
of the person is concerned: in the incantation the will of the person,
in the prayer the will of the divinity, determines the effect.
Furthermore, when with the passing of the years ancient religions
degenerated into mere forms without meaning, and the notion of the
divinity involved in the rite was lost, the prayer once more took on the
nature of a spell.

We have a clear illustration of this degenerative tendency in the case
of the curious goddess Carna who in ancient times had control over the
vital organs of the human being. Carna was a recognized divinity of the
Roman State religion; but in the popular religio she was considered a
witch. The goddess has survived in modern Tuscany where she is known as
Carradora, a kindly spirit with substantially the same functions as the
ancient Carna. <span id="fr_449"></span>[7](#fn_449)

We shall attempt in this chapter to show that a Roman prayer and a Roman
incantation had six elements in common and that in only one essential
point were they different. In order to do this we must first notice the
characteristics of a Roman incantation and then see whether these
characteristics are to be found in the Roman prayer.

As characteristics of the Roman incantation we may mention the
following: (1) It was in the form of a command; (2) it was chanted; (3)
it was uttered in an undervoice; (4) in order to be effective it must be
repeated; (5) the wording of the incantation must be exact; (6) the
usual purpose of the incantation was secretly to secure evil ends; (7)
no god was involved in the incantation.

### Prayer a Command

In magic rites, the incantation is almost always in the form of a
command. Thus a charm for driving away gout reads: <span
id="fr_450"></span>[8](#fn_450) "Away, away from my feet and from all my
limbs, gout and every muscular pain." We have seen in the rites of
Crane, the witch who possessed the power to keep off bloodsucking
vampires, that these baleful creatures are addressed in the form of a
command. <span id="fr_451"></span>[9](#fn_451) This direct address in
the form of a command is found in rites of the State religion. At the
Festival of the Spirit of the Mildew (Robigalia), the Priest of Mars
commands Robigus to spare the young blades of grain. <span
id="fr_452"></span>[10](#fn_452) Again, the shady merchant who desired
to rid himself and his wares of evils attending a questionable deal
commanded the waters of the Spring of Mercury to wash away his past
perjuries. <span id="fr_453"></span>[11](#fn_453) In the rites of
treaty-making preserved by Livy  <span id="fr_454"></span>[12](#fn_454)
the formula begins with a command: "Hear, Jupiter, hear, spokesman of
the Alban People, hear, Alban People." In declaring war, the fetial
began: <span id="fr_455"></span>[13](#fn_455) "Hear, Jupiter, and thou,
Janus Quirinus, and all ye gods celestial and terrestrial and ye gods
infernal, hear." Romulus in vowing a temple to Jupiter prayed: "But do
thou, father of gods and men, at least keep the enemy from here, take
away terror from the Romans, and stay their foul flight."  <span
id="fr_456"></span>[14](#fn_456)

### Prayers Chanted

That incantations were chanted is a matter of common observance and
scarcely needs illustration. That the word carmen means "song" is
evidence of this. For example, in magic rites, the purpose of which was
to induce a dislocated or broken bone to come together, the incantation
was sung (cantare). <span id="fr_457"></span>[15](#fn_457) Again, a
witch composed a charm for Tibullus, to be chanted three times, after
which he had to spit; then Delia's husband would believe gossip about
other lovers of Delia, but not about her and Tibullus. <span
id="fr_458"></span>[16](#fn_458)

The two oldest prayers of the Romans which we possess--the Carmen Arvale
and the Carmen Saliare--were both chanted. Livy writes  <span
id="fr_459"></span>[17](#fn_459) that "the leaping priests went through
the city chanting their hymns." There is reason to believe that the old
prayers which Cato has preserved for us in his treatise on agriculture
were originally in metrical form; but in the directions given to the
worshiper the verb dicito, and not cantato, precedes the prayer, showing
that, in Cato's time at least, such prayers were "spoken" rather than
"sung." However, these prayers, even in the form in which they are found
in Cato, are predominantly spondaic, in keeping with the slow movement
of the chant and with the solemn religious character of the rites. In
ceremonies intended to bring thunderbolts down from the sky,
incantations were used. <span id="fr_460"></span>[18](#fn_460)

### Prayers Uttered in an Undervoice

Normally prayers were uttered aloud by the Romans. But we have reason to
believe that at times they were chanted in an undervoice. <span
id="fr_461"></span>[19](#fn_461) We know that magic rites were commonly
accompanied by an incantation which was either sung almost inaudibly or
muttered. <span id="fr_462"></span>[20](#fn_462) The prayer of the
Fratres Attiedii at Iguvium was so repeated, as were the prayers
recorded in Cato. Cicero definitely states that men pray silently to the
gods, but he does not tell us the sort of prayers thus offered. <span
id="fr_463"></span>[21](#fn_463) Horace, however, sheds some light on
the question where he satirizes the man whom the people believe to be
good, who sacrifices a pig or an ox and cries to Janus and to Apollo
that all may hear, but in an undervoice prays to Laverna, the goddess of
theft, that he may be able to deceive his fellows. <span
id="fr_464"></span>[22](#fn_464) In the country festival described by
Tibullus, <span id="fr_465"></span>[23](#fn_465) the worshiper is bidden
to call upon the god audibly for the flocks but in undertones for
himself. Juvenal represents  <span id="fr_466"></span>[24](#fn_466) a
mother praying in an undervoice for beauty for her sons but in louder
tones for the same gift for her daughters. Persius complains  <span
id="fr_467"></span>[25](#fn_467) that his fellows petitioned aloud in
the temples for a sound mind and an honorable name, but inaudibly for
the death of a relative or the finding of treasure. Seneca laments
 <span id="fr_468"></span>[26](#fn_468) the fact that men in their
madness whisper the vilest prayers to the gods. Finally, the Chief
Priest, while lashing an errant Vestal, prayed inaudibly. <span
id="fr_469"></span>[27](#fn_469) It seems, then, that prayers were
normally uttered aloud; but when a worshiper wanted to pray for evil (as
would be the case also in a magic rite) he uttered his prayers so that
no one but the god could hear.

The fact that people prayed for things of which they were ashamed may
explain why they whispered their prayers; but it will not explain why
the priests mumbled their prayers. The reason probably lies in the fact
that they were of magical significance, and if they reached the ears of
the unholy or the stranger

they might prove dangerous. Thus Ovid informs us  <span
id="fr_470"></span>[28](#fn_470) that it was considered impious for one
to know the charms and arts by which Jupiter was drawn down from the
sky. That the priests repeated their prayers inaudibly is shown by a
passage in Ovid  <span id="fr_471"></span>[29](#fn_471) where the poet
bids the reader stand at the side of the priest officiating at the
Carmentalia; by keeping thus close, he will hear the priest mutter two
names not before known to him, referring to Porrima and Postverta, two
goddesses who had control over the manner of birth of the child, whether
head or foot foremost.

### Prayers Repeated

Again, repetition characterized the magic incantation. For instance, the
incantation of the lover in Vergil's eighth Eclogue, already referred
to, was repeated nine times; the incantation which the witch formulated
for Tibullus had to be uttered three times. <span
id="fr_472"></span>[30](#fn_472) At the conclusion of the prayer to
Pales we read the words:  <span id="fr_473"></span>[31](#fn_473) "With
these words the goddess must be appeased. So do you, facing the east,
utter them four times. . . ." The verses of the Carmen Saliare were each
chanted three times, as the Leaping Priests of Mars danced in threefold
measure. Fowler, who on the whole is not inclined to identify spell and
prayer, writes  <span id="fr_474"></span>[32](#fn_474) that the verses
"seem certainly to belong rather to the region of magic than of religion
proper." Repetition was also characteristic of the Carmen Arvale and the
prayer of the Fratres Attiedii.

### Exactness in Naming the God and in the Wording of the Prayer

To the savage mind, merely mentioning the name of the person whose will
was to be influenced was sufficient to work a spell. It was necessary
for the name to be correct; and from this habit of the age of magic
arose the scrupulous exactness with which the Romans addressed their
divinities. If the divinity had several names, the worshiper would
address him by them all. Horace, for example, invokes Ilithyia (Diana)
to protect mothers and adds, "whether you prefer to be addressed as
Lucina or as Genitalis."  <span id="fr_475"></span>[33](#fn_475) Again,
Horace bids Father Matutinus begin his song; but he adds cautiously,
"or, if you prefer the name, Janus."  <span
id="fr_476"></span>[34](#fn_476) Lucius in Apuleius' Metamorphoses <span
id="fr_477"></span>[35](#fn_477) addresses the Queen of Heaven as Ceres,
Venus, the sister of Phoebus, Proserpina, or "by whatever name, with
whatever rite, in whatever appearance it is right to invoke thee." In
the formula of devotio prescribed in Macrobius we read:  <span
id="fr_478"></span>[36](#fn_478) "Dis Pater, or by whatever name it is
right to address thee . . . " Again, in Servius, we read  <span
id="fr_479"></span>[37](#fn_479) that the pontiffs prayed: "Jupiter
Optimus Maximus, or by whatever name you wish to be addressed." Finally,
if the sex of the divinity was unknown, they would add "whether god or
goddess, male or female."  <span id="fr_480"></span>[38](#fn_480) Thus
the sex of Pales and Pomonus (Pomona) was indeterminate.

Not only was it necessary for the divinity to be properly addressed, but
the prayer had to be uttered exactly as prescribed for the sacrifice
involved; if there was a mistake in the wording, the whole rite had to
be repeated or an atoning sacrifice had to be made. <span
id="fr_481"></span>[39](#fn_481) We learn from the accounts of the
Fratres Attiedii that if the brethren made an error in the prayer they
had to repeat it. Juvenal represents  <span
id="fr_482"></span>[40](#fn_482) a woman standing before an altar with
veiled head praying that her paramour may win a prize for his
lyre-playing. The words she utters are dictata--repeated after the
priest.

### Prayers for Ill

Magic acts were more often calculated to do harm than good. Such magic
practices were rampant as early as 450 B.C., as is evidenced by the
provisions against them in the Laws of the Twelve Tables. Rome thus
officially looked with disfavor upon magic intended to harm, although
magic principles of similarity and contact were to be found in almost
every rite of the Romans. Servius states the attitude of a much later
generation of Romans toward the art when he writes: "While the Romans
adopted many rites, they always condemned magic, for it was considered a
base art."  <span id="fr_483"></span>[41](#fn_483)

We shall give a few examples of prayers for evil, gathered from various
Latin authors. Catullus prays to the gods to inflict evil upon one who
has harmed his friends. <span id="fr_484"></span>[42](#fn_484) Vergil
offers us three illustrations of prayers for evil--at least from our
point of view. As the body of his son lies at his feet, slain by the
sword of Pyrrhus, Priam prays  <span id="fr_485"></span>[43](#fn_485)
the gods to bring a like fate upon the murderer. Evander invokes  <span
id="fr_486"></span>[44](#fn_486) the gods that the murders and other
high-handed acts of the tyrant Mezentius be visited in kind upon the
Etruscans themselves. Ascanius, before entering into combat with
Remulus, calls <span id="fr_487"></span>[45](#fn_487) upon Jupiter to
aid him. In return for the god's assistance Ascanius will offer
sacrifice at his altar. We have already seen how the Roman of Horace's
day would pray for success in theft and that his sins and cheadngs might
be cloaked. Propertius, like many of his fellow Romans, was quite
willing to pray for evil. When, for example, a Roman praetor has
displaced him in Cynthia's favor, Propertius prays: "But do you now,
Venus, aid me in my grief, that he (the praetor) may destroy himself
through his persistent lechery."  <span id="fr_488"></span>[46](#fn_488)

The story is told in Velleius  <span id="fr_489"></span>[47](#fn_489)
that Merula, who, before Cinna's arrival in Rome, had abdicated his
office as consul, having opened his veins with suicidal intent, implored
the gods to vent their wrath on Cinna and his party, a petition which
might well have been made in the form of an incantation. In Juvenal's
satires we have many instances of prayers offered to the gods for
questionable ends: riches, the largest money chest in the whole city,
beauty for one's sons, a prize for lyre-playing at the Capitoline
Games. <span id="fr_490"></span>[48](#fn_490) Petronius laments  <span
id="fr_491"></span>[49](#fn_491) the fact that because of the degeneracy
of the times the people pray, not for eloquence or the blessings of
philosophy, but for the death of a rich neighbor or the unearthing of
buried treasure. Persius, like Juvenal, was wholly out of sympathy with
the things for which his fellows prayed in their temples: while they
petitioned aloud for a sound mind, a fair name, and trustworthiness,
their real prayers were for the death of a kinsman or the finding of a
treasure. Such people, in order to make their prayers acceptable, would
plunge their heads two or three times in the holy waters of the Tiber.
 <span id="fr_492"></span>[50](#fn_492) Sejanus, the commander of the
praetorian cohort under Tiberius, prays  <span
id="fr_493"></span>[51](#fn_493) for honors and for wealth; but in these
he finds, as it were, just so many stories of a lofty tower from which
he is doomed to plunge all the farther to his destruction. The Lares to
whom Tibullus prays with tenderness and affection, Juvenal represents
the Romans of his day invoking as follows:  <span
id="fr_494"></span>[52](#fn_494) ". . . Little Lares of mine, whom I
usually entreat with flakes of incense or spelt or slender garland, when
shall I bag some game to give me security for my declining years, to
protect me against the mat and the staff of the mendicant?" The objects
of this man's prayer include twenty thousand sesterces in interest,
small dishes of plain silver, two sturdy slaves, a "stooping engraver"
(curvus caelator), and a painter. These he considers a wretched return
for his piety.

### No God Involved

We come at this juncture to the one element in a prayer which
distinguishes it from an incantation. In a prayer the worshiper
addresses a divinity, all-powerful in his sphere, whose will must be won
by sacrifice and prayer. In magic, on the other hand, no god is
involved. <span id="fr_495"></span>[53](#fn_495)

Of course we must recognize that a prayer, in which a god is addressed,
may possess one or all of the characteristics of an incantation; and the
more of these elements it contains the closer it will be to pure
incantation. There will also be corresponding changes in the psychology
of the worshiper; for in the stage between the pure incantation, where
no god is involved, and the prayer, in which a god is invoked, there
must be times when the worshiper is uncertain whether he himself
controls the result or whether there is a controlling force superior to
him.

It will be necessary to show how the idea of god, all-powerful in his
particular field, developed. In the age of magic, man believes that
there is a mysterious quality (mana) residing in things and that this
quality, if good (positive mana), can be made useful to him by the
performance of a magic act of compulsion, accompanied by an incantation
or charm; or, if it be harmful (negative mana), it must be avoided;
that, when this is impossible, rites of purification must be performed
to rid one of the contagion of the tabooed thing. Gradually, with the
failure of magic to do what was expected of it, another stage developed
in which spirits, not unlike man himself, with human emotions much like
his own--spirits not yet developed into gods in the usual sense of that
word--were thought to invest the things about him; and they had to be
induced to serve him in much the same way as he would induce his friends
to assist him, by entreaty and by offering gifts. There was a term for
these undeveloped gods, numina; and the Romans never got far beyond this
stage in their conception of gods.

We have tried to show in this chapter that the Roman prayers which have
come down to us have certain elements in common with the incantation:
they were chanted; they were usually in the form of a command, often
uttered in an undervoice; they were, either in whole or in part,
repeated; the wording had to be exact; the purpose of many of them was
evil. We have, further, tried to show that there was one definite
advance in prayer over the incantation, which was the result of a change
in the mental attitude of the worshiper; that whereas no divinity was
invoked in the incantation, in the prayer a numen or a fully developed
god was invoked. Finally, in magic, the volitional element appears in
the person; in religion, it rests with the divinity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_443"></span>[1](tms08.htm#fr_443) See W. Warde Fowler, The
Religioms Experience of the Roman People, pp. 185-187.

<span id="fn_444"></span>[2](tms08.htm#fr_444) See F. B. Jevons, The
Idea of God, p. 115ff.

<span id="fn_445"></span>[3](tms08.htm#fr_445) Fasti VI. 155-162.

<span id="fn_446"></span>[4](tms08.htm#fr_446) Apuleius, Apologia XLVII.

<span id="fn_447"></span>[5](tms08.htm#fr_447) I. 8, 17-23.

<span id="fn_448"></span>[6](tms08.htm#fr_448) Naturalis Historia XVIII.
41-42.

<span id="fn_449"></span>[7](tms08.htm#fr_449) Macrobius, Saturnalia I.
12, 31-33; see C. G. Leland, Etruscan Roman Remains, P. 108.

<span id="fn_450"></span>[8](tms08.htm#fr_450) Marcellus, De medicina
XXXVI.

<span id="fn_451"></span>[9](tms08.htm#fr_451) Macrobius, Saturnalia 1.
12, 31-33.

<span id="fn_452"></span>[10](tms08.htm#fr_452) Ovid, Fasti IV. 911.

<span id="fn_453"></span>[11](tms08.htm#fr_453) Ovid, Fasti V. 681-682.

<span id="fn_454"></span>[12](tms08.htm#fr_454) I. 24, 7.

<span id="fn_455"></span>[13](tms08.htm#fr_455) Livy I. 32, 10.

<span id="fn_456"></span>[14](tms08.htm#fr_456) Livy I. 12, 5.

<span id="fn_457"></span>[15](tms08.htm#fr_457) Cato, De Agricultura
CLX.

<span id="fn_458"></span>[16](tms08.htm#fr_458) I. 2. 41-62.

<span id="fn_459"></span>[17](tms08.htm#fr_459) I. 20, 4.

<span id="fn_460"></span>[18](tms08.htm#fr_460) Ovid, Fasti 111.
323-325.

<span id="fn_461"></span>[19](tms08.htm#fr_461) See Pease's note on
Cicero, De Divinatione I. 57, 129.

<span id="fn_462"></span>[20](tms08.htm#fr_462) See Lucan, Bellum Civile
VI. 685-686.

<span id="fn_463"></span>[21](tms08.htm#fr_463) Cicero, De Divinatione
I. 57, 129.

<span id="fn_464"></span>[22](tms08.htm#fr_464) Epistulae I. 16. 57-62.

<span id="fn_465"></span>[23](tms08.htm#fr_465) II. 1. 84.

<span id="fn_466"></span>[24](tms08.htm#fr_466) X, 289-292.

<span id="fn_467"></span>[25](tms08.htm#fr_467) II. 6.

<span id="fn_468"></span>[26](tms08.htm#fr_468) Epistulae Morales X. 5.

<span id="fn_469"></span>[27](tms08.htm#fr_469) Plutarch, Nyma X.

<span id="fn_470"></span>[28](tms08.htm#fr_470) Fasti III. 323-325.

<span id="fn_471"></span>[29](tms08.htm#fr_471) Fasti I. 631-632.

<span id="fn_472"></span>[30](tms08.htm#fr_472) I. 2. 54.

<span id="fn_473"></span>[31](tms08.htm#fr_473) Ovid, Fasti IV. 777-778.

<span id="fn_474"></span>[32](tms08.htm#fr_474) The Religious Experience
of the Roman People, p. 187.

<span id="fn_475"></span>[33](tms08.htm#fr_475) Carmen Saeculare 13-16.

<span id="fn_476"></span>[34](tms08.htm#fr_476) Sermones II. 6. 20-23.

<span id="fn_477"></span>[35](tms08.htm#fr_477) XI. 2.

<span id="fn_478"></span>[36](tms08.htm#fr_478) Saturnalia III. 9, 10.

<span id="fn_479"></span>[37](tms08.htm#fr_479) On Vergil's Aeneid II.
351.

<span id="fn_480"></span>[38](tms08.htm#fr_480) Cato, De Agricultura,
CXXXIX.

<span id="fn_481"></span>[39](tms08.htm#fr_481) See Cato. De Agricultura
CXXXIX.

<span id="fn_482"></span>[40](tms08.htm#fr_482) VI. 390-392.

<span id="fn_483"></span>[41](tms08.htm#fr_483) On Vergil's Aeneid IV.
493.

<span id="fn_484"></span>[42](tms08.htm#fr_484) XXVIII. 14-15.

<span id="fn_485"></span>[43](tms08.htm#fr_485) Aeneid II. 535-539.

<span id="fn_486"></span>[44](tms08.htm#fr_486) Aeneid VIII. 484.

<span id="fn_487"></span>[45](tms08.htm#fr_487) Aeneid IX. 625-629.

<span id="fn_488"></span>[46](tms08.htm#fr_488) III. 8, 13-14.

<span id="fn_489"></span>[47](tms08.htm#fr_489) II. 22, 2.

<span id="fn_490"></span>[48](tms08.htm#fr_490) See VI. 385-388; X.
23-25; X. 289-292.

<span id="fn_491"></span>[49](tms08.htm#fr_491) Satyricon LXXXVIII.

<span id="fn_492"></span>[50](tms08.htm#fr_492) Persius II. 3. 16.

<span id="fn_493"></span>[51](tms08.htm#fr_493) Juvenal X. 243-245.

<span id="fn_494"></span>[52](tms08.htm#fr_494) Juvenal IX. 137-140.

<span id="fn_495"></span>[53](tms08.htm#fr_495) See, for example, Lucan,
Bellum Civile VI. 523-526.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII: Naturalism and Animism](tms09)
