[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tms08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER VII

## NATURALISM AND ANIMISM

THE subject of animism was discussed in the introductory chapter, <span
id="fr_496"></span>[1](#fn_496) and the reader is referred to the
principles laid down there. It remains, however, to enlarge upon and
illustrate these principles with special reference to Roman life. But
first let us say something about a period which, according to some
scholars--who are probably right--antedated animism. To this period the
name naturism or naturalism has been given. <span
id="fr_497"></span>[2](#fn_497) Man, in this period, conceives of things
as living, not because they possess spirits like himself, but because
they possess powers, usually evil, such as he observes in lightning, in
the wild beast, in the river. Certain it is that the Romans often
directly addressed objects, in an entirely impersonal way. We have
already noted this in the case of the worshiper at the Festival of
Pales, who prays to "the springs and the spirits of the springs."  <span
id="fr_498"></span>[3](#fn_498) Vesta, too, the Roman goddess of fire,
must have been thus addressed; for in her temple there was no cult
statue, only the sacred fire--Vesta herself.

In this chapter, then, it will be our purpose to discuss in some detail
several elements of nature worship among the Romans: stones and trees;
springs, rivers, the sea, rain; fire, both in its helpful and in its
harmful aspect. Generally, in the fully developed religions, these
objects are worshiped as spirits, if not as gods; but, as we shall see,
there is abundant evidence that the objects themselves were also
worshiped.

### The Worship of Stones

The belief in the sanctity of stones was not uncommon in antiquity.
Jacob, we recall, on a certain occasion, used stones for a pillow and on
awakening, since he realized, because the Lord had appeared to him in a
dream, that the place was sacred, "took the stone that he had put for
his pillows, and set it up for a pillar, and poured oil upon the top of
it."  <span id="fr_499"></span>[4](#fn_499) The pouring of oil upon the
stone indicates that Jacob believed that God was in it. Again, when
Joshua gave his last charge to the people before his death, he used a
stone as witness to his words. We read  <span
id="fr_500"></span>[5](#fn_500) that he "took a great stone, and set it
up there under an oak, that was by the sanctuary of the Lord. And Joshua
said unto all the people, Behold, this stone shall be a witness unto us;
for it hath heard all the words of the Lord which he spake unto us: it
shall be therefore a witness unto you, lest ye deny your God." The
Greeks, as we know, worshiped meteoric stones. <span
id="fr_501"></span>[6](#fn_501) Thus Zeus was worshiped near Gythion as
a stone, probably a meteorite. <span id="fr_502"></span>[7](#fn_502) At
Delphi was to be seen the stone which Cronus, as the story had it,
swallowed in place of Zeus. <span id="fr_503"></span>[8](#fn_503) Again,
in the province of Cyrenaica there was a rock, sacred to the South Wind,
which no human hand was permitted to touch. <span
id="fr_504"></span>[9](#fn_504) And the image of the Great Mother,
brought to Rome in 204 B.C., was simply a rough black meteoric
stone. <span id="fr_505"></span>[10](#fn_505)

Survivals of stone worship are to be found among modern Christian
peoples. Thus in Galicia, where in pre-Christian times stones were
especially worshiped, ardent Catholics of to-day are in the habit of
kissing stones in order to add potency to their prayers in the
church. <span id="fr_506"></span>[11](#fn_506)

To return to Roman times: Pliny the Elder records  <span
id="fr_507"></span>[12](#fn_507) an odd superstition about the magic
potency of certain stones. It seems that childbirth was eased if a
stone, which had, by separate blows, killed a man, a boar, and a bear,
was cast over the roof of the house in which a pregnant woman lay.

The magic power of a stone, in all probability a meteorite, to cause
rain, we have already noted in the discussion of the aquaelicium. <span
id="fr_508"></span>[13](#fn_508) The Aos, in our day, worship sacred
stones with sacrifice and prayer and believe that certain boulders
control the weather. <span id="fr_509"></span>[14](#fn_509)

In the earliest worship of Jupiter, as Feretrius, on the Capitoline
Hill, before the god had a temple or even an altar, the oak was his
dwelling place. It was at this oak, as the Romans believed, that Romulus
hung the spoils which he had taken from the King of the
Caeninenses. <span id="fr_510"></span>[15](#fn_510) In historical times,
however, a flint stone, possibly an ax or a knife--a reminiscence of the
stone age--was the only representation of the god in the temple. We have
noted above, in the passage quoted from Joshua, the close connection
between the oak and stones. This is probably due to the fact that both
are hard and enduring, a quality which they can communicate magically.
Both, too, in ancient Latium, were used to mark the boundaries between
farms.

A flint stone in the temple of Jupiter on the Capitol was used by the
fetials in making oaths "by Jupiter the Stone." In taking such oaths in
private life, the Pater Patratus held the stone in his hand and said:
 <span id="fr_511"></span>[16](#fn_511) "If I wittingly deceive, then
may Jupiter cast me out from my property, leaving the city and the
citadel safe, as I now cast away this stone." Again, in making a treaty,
a fetial struck the sacrificial pig, first saying:  <span
id="fr_512"></span>[17](#fn_512) "If (the Roman people) shall be the
first to defect (from the terms of this treaty) . . . do you then, O
Jupiter, so strike the Roman people as I shall here to-day strike this
pig . . . "

Originally an image of Jupiter was taken along with the fetials into
foreign countries, but because of the distances over which it had to be
carried as Roman sway was extended, the image was later left at home,
and the sacred staff belonging to it was used in its place. <span
id="fr_513"></span>[18](#fn_513) This shows once more the primitive
manner of thought which makes something which has been in contact with
the god serve as the god himself.

The boundaries between farms in ancient Latium were marked by terminal
stones or by stocks of trees. Certain of these were regarded as gods and
were worshiped from time immemorial. <span
id="fr_514"></span>[19](#fn_514) Here we have one of the most primitive
types of worship among the Romans. At first, doubtless, the stone
itself--a fetish <span id="fr_515"></span>[20](#fn_515)--was worshiped,
then the spirit resident in the stone. Terminus seems never to have
developed beyond the latter stage. Terminal stones were inserted in
place with solemn ceremony. A hole was dug for the stone. Into it the
blood of the sacrificial animal was allowed to drip, and into it were
thrown the bones and ashes, together with incense and products of the
farm. Upon these was rammed the terminal stone, properly oiled and
garlanded. In later times, other objects were discovered under the
stones--charcoal, shattered earthenware vessels, broken glass, bronze
coins, and gypsum.

On February twenty-third, in the country, the Terminalia marked the
yearly dramatization of the original ceremony. <span
id="fr_516"></span>[21](#fn_516) The owners of adjacent farms adorned
their respective sides of the boundary stone with garlands; an altar was
erected and fire was brought from the home hearth by the wife. An old
man, having chopped up wood and piled it high, started the fire. Into it
some of the produce of the farm was thrown three times from a basket.
The onlookers made libations of wine. In historical times, the blood of
a lamb and a suckling pig and, sometimes, of a kid was sprinkled on the
stone; but it seems that in olden times blood sacrifice was
forbidden. <span id="fr_517"></span>[22](#fn_517) Feasting and songs in
praise of Terminus concluded the rites. The offerings to the stone
increased its magic power of warding off evils from the farm and gave it
strength to oppose all attempts to change the limits of the farm.

In the city, in the temple of Jupiter on the Capitoline, there was a
stone said to be Terminus, and above it was an opening to the sky, for
Terminus had to be worshiped in the open air. According to the story,
when the foundations were being laid for the temple in the reign of
Tarquin the Proud, all the gods save Terminus and Youth could be "moved"
from their places by the religious exauguratio.

### Trees and Groves

That early peoples looked with awe upon trees, groves, and forests
scarcely needs illustration when we recall that in primitive times
forests covered vast portions of the earth's surface which are now
cultivated fields. Such primeval forests existed in Italy. The house of
King Latinus, writes Vergil, <span id="fr_518"></span>[23](#fn_518) was
located "in a forest, awful, and hallowed by his ancestors." Classical
writers refer to forests which had become mere names in their own day.
The Ciminian Forest in Etruria, for example, was as impregnable and
fearful as those of Germany, and even traders refused to pass through
it. Once, in a combat between the Etruscans and the Romans, the former
fled out in rout into the forest. Scarcely any Roman but the general
himself was willing to pursue them. Later, however, when the general's
brother volunteered to pass through, attended only by a slave, and
succeeded in his attempt--a fact which causes the historian to
marvel--the general and his army braved the forest and debouched upon
the Etruscan plain beyond. <span id="fr_519"></span>[24](#fn_519)

This feeling of awe in the presence of trees is natural enough to early
man. The movement of the tree, with the creaking of its branches and the
whispering of its leaves when fanned by the breeze, was sufficient to
endow it with personal life. Hence there is frequent mention in Roman
literature of "voices" coming from sacred groves. For instance, among
the prodigies which preceded a pestilence in the reign of King Tullius
was "a loud voice, heard coming from a grove on the mountain top." <span
id="fr_520"></span>[25](#fn_520) Again, among the prodigies foreboding
the murder of Julius Caesar was "a mighty voice, clearly heard
everywhere throughout the silent groves." <span
id="fr_521"></span>[26](#fn_521) It was quite natural, then, for the
poet Ovid to say, in describing a dark grove of oaks, "a spirit resides
here," <span id="fr_522"></span>[27](#fn_522) and for Pliny the Elder to
write:  <span id="fr_523"></span>[28](#fn_523) "Trees were temples of
spirits; and, in accordance with the ancient ritual, the simple country
folk even now dedicate to a god a tree which excels its neighbors. For
we do not honor statues which glisten with gold and ivory more than our
groves and the quietude that reigns in them. . . . " Tibullus, when his
duties called him into the fields, would pause in worship at a garlanded
tree trunk or an ancient boundary stone. <span
id="fr_524"></span>[29](#fn_524) Once after the Emperor Verus had
recovered from an illness, Cornelius Fronto, the tutor of Marcus
Aurelius, prayed in thanksgiving at every sacred grove and tree. <span
id="fr_525"></span>[30](#fn_525)

When a Roman made a clearing in the forest for the pasturing of cattle
or the reclamation of new arable land, it was necessary to appease the
unknown spirits whose domain had been poached upon, that they might work
no ill on the cattle to be pastured or on the crops to be planted there.
Cato has left us an account of such a ceremony. <span
id="fr_526"></span>[31](#fn_526) As we shall see, it was not only
intended as an atoning sacrifice, but also (as in the other sacrifices
described by Cato) was thought to add strength to the spirits addressed.
We translate such portions of this passage as are necessary for the
understanding of the rite:

"A grove should be cleared in the Roman manner as follows. Do so with a
pig as an atoning sacrifice, and thus formulate your words: 'If thou art
a god, or if thou art a goddess, to whom this spot is sacred, as it is
right to make atonement to thee with the sacrifice of a pig . . .
whether I or some one at my bidding shall do it . . . I utter prayers of
goodness, that thou mayest be favorable and propitious to me, my home,
and my slaves, and my children. To this end, from the offering of the
atoning sacrifice of the pig, receive thou strength.' If you are minded
to do any digging, offer a second atoning sacrifice in the same way, and
say this besides: 'for the sake of doing this work.'"

All peoples have considered groves sacred. We are indebted to Frazer for
the following instance: <span id="fr_527"></span>[32](#fn_527) ". . .
not far from Idua Oronn, in Southern Nigeria, there is a sacred grove of
Abang 'Ndak, where no branch may be cut nor leaf plucked under pain of
death."

According to Apuleius, <span id="fr_528"></span>[33](#fn_528) wayfarers
who were religiously inclined would pause at sacred groves, offering
apples and uttering prayers. Italy in ancient times was dotted with
almost countless sacred groves. In Rome, too, many cults sought the
shelter of groves. Perhaps the most famous of these was that of the
Arval Brothers. We have already had occasion to mention this grove in
connection with the subject of taboo. <span
id="fr_529"></span>[34](#fn_529) Originally, iron graving instruments
were forbidden in it, but with time the Brothers came to offer an
atoning sacrifice before taking the iron instrument into the grove and
again after removing it. Curiously enough, several of these inscriptions
have survived. <span id="fr_530"></span>[35](#fn_530) From them we learn
that two ewe lambs were offered to the Mother of the Lares and two
wethers to the Lares themselves.

Another sacred grove which seems to have been thronged with worshipers
on February first was that of Helernus, to whom the pontiffs offered a
black ox. <span id="fr_531"></span>[36](#fn_531) Hence Helernus must
have been a chthonic divinity.

Space will not allow descriptions of the many other sacred groves, of
Diana at Aricia, Egeria outside the Porta Capena, Juno at Falerii, and a
host of others. The fact that they were so numerous indicates that the
ancients held them as especially holy.

Men came to have a feeling of friendly awe for trees and often
identified the duration of their own lives with the lives of particular
trees. For example, when a palm-shoot grew up between the slabs of stone
in front of his house, the Emperor Augustus caused the tree to be
transplanted to the inner court, where it shared an honored place with
his home gods. <span id="fr_532"></span>[37](#fn_532) Doubtless Augustus
believed that there was some connection between the palm tree's life and
his own. This belief is world-wide. <span
id="fr_533"></span>[38](#fn_533) Again, the Caesars had a grove of
laurels at Veli, from which any member of the family who was about to
celebrate a triumph took a branch. He afterwards planted a branch in the
grove again--probably the same one which he had carried in his triumph.
A sympathetic connection was believed to exist between the life of the
Caesar who planted the shoot and the life of the laurel itself, for the
withering of the tree was prophetic of the death of the Caesar. <span
id="fr_534"></span>[39](#fn_534) On the country estate of the Flavians
stood an ancient oak which sent forth a branch on each of three
occasions when the Empress Vespasia gave birth to a child. <span
id="fr_535"></span>[40](#fn_535)

This idea is a primitive survival. Among the savages to-day the belief
is persistent that man has an "external soul" <span
id="fr_536"></span>[41](#fn_536) which may reside in any object, often a
plant of a tree. Thus Frazer informs us  <span
id="fr_537"></span>[42](#fn_537) that, "Among the M'Bengas in Western
Africa, about the Gaboon, when two children are born on the same day,
the people plant two trees of the same kind and dance round them. The
life of each of the children is believed to be bound up with the life of
one of the trees: and if the tree dies or is thrown down, they are sure
that the child will soon die . . . "

In primitive times, when forests were to be found everywhere, dangerous
enemies came from them. What, then, was more natural than for the Romans
to perform rites of aversion on the spot where the enemies had appeared?
In this way the Romans explained a festival called the Lucaria, which
was celebrated in a large wood located between the Salarian Road and the
Tiber. According to Festus  <span id="fr_538"></span>[43](#fn_538) the
reason for the worship of this grove was that the Romans, on one
occasion, having been defeated in battle by the Gauls, fled in rout to
it for safety. This explanation as given by Festus may contain the
truth. However, to understand the Lucaria we need go no further than the
universality of the belief in the sanctity of trees, and the reasons
which we have already suggested for that belief.

In Rome there were several trees which all Romans held sacred. The
Ruminal fig tree on the Palatine Hill--under which, according to the
story invented by a later generation to explain the tree, Remus and
Romulus had been suckled--was worshiped (originally by shepherds on
behalf of their flocks), with offerings of milk. In 58 A.D. the tree,
which had been transplanted to the Forum by magic, began to wither, a
fact which caused great consternation among the Romans. This
consternation disappeared only when the tree began to show signs of
reviving. <span id="fr_539"></span>[44](#fn_539) The tree doubtless was
worshiped at first; but because the Romans believed that Ruminalis was
connected with ruma or rumis, "a teat," they created two new divinities,
Jupiter Ruminalis and Rumina. In historical times Rumina had a shrine
near the Ruminal fig tree.

On the seventh of July--the Nones of the Goat--the day on which Romulus
was believed to have been caught up to heaven at the Swamp of the Goat
in the Plain of Mars, women, both bond and free, sacrificed the milky
juice of the fig to Juno of the Goat and feasted beneath the sacred wild
fig tree. Originally here the tree itself was worshiped. <span
id="fr_540"></span>[45](#fn_540)

In the grove at Nemi grew a sacred tree whose boughs only a runaway
slave might break. The possession of the branch, popularly identified
with the "golden bough" of Vergil, entitled the slave to fight to the
death the priest of Diana, the King of the Grove (Rex Nemorensis). If
the slave succeeded in killing the priest, he himself became King. It is
recorded that Caligula suborned a powerful slave to kill the priest at
Nemi who had occupied the office too long to suit the mad emperor. <span
id="fr_541"></span>[46](#fn_541)

On the Esquiline Hill was a grove known as the Fagutal, containing a
shrine of Jupiter with a beech tree sacred to him. <span
id="fr_542"></span>[47](#fn_542)

In Italy all oak trees were sacred to Jupiter. The oldest cult of
Jupiter was associated with an oak tree on the Capitoline Hill. Under
the cult name Feretrius, Jupiter was, in early times, worshiped as an
oak sacred to the shepherds of the community. It was at this tree that
Romulus, as the story went, dedicated the arms taken in single combat
with the king of the Caeninenses. Later, men peopled the oak with a
spirit and built an altar under its shadow. In historical times Jupiter
Feretrius was worshiped on this spot in a small temple. With him were
associated the fetials whose duties were concerned with treaties and
with the declaration of war. <span id="fr_543"></span>[48](#fn_543) Livy
records  <span id="fr_544"></span>[49](#fn_544) an illuminating instance
of the oak conceived of as a spirit. In 458 B.C., the Aequians broke a
treaty with the Romans, and, when the Romans sent deputies to the enemy
to protest, the Aequian general bade them "tell to the oak" the
instructions which they had received from the Roman Senate. One of the
deputies on departing said: "Let this consecrated oak and whatever gods
exist hear that this treaty has been broken by you." The tree is here
felt to have the power to hear the grievances of the Romans against the
Aequians.

There was an ancient grove of Juno Lucina on one of the spurs of the
Esquiline Hill in which grew an ancient lotus tree called the "hairy"
tree (capillata). The reason for this strange name was that the Vestals,
when they cut off their hair, suspended it on this tree. Frazer,
supporting his conclusion by parallels from Morocco and Germany,
believes that the purpose was to prevent the hair from falling into the
hands of witches who might work evil upon the good Vestals. <span
id="fr_545"></span>[50](#fn_545)

The Romans considered some trees lucky, others unlucky. According to the
pontiffs, those trees which bore light-colored fruit were lucky, those
which bore dark fruit were unlucky. The same tree--the fig for
example--might be lucky or unlucky, depending on whether its figs were
light or dark. It is probable, too, that trees which bore no fruit were
also thought to be unlucky. <span id="fr_546"></span>[51](#fn_546)

### Water

In seeking to understand the worship of water by the Romans, it must be
remembered that primitive man associates motion of any sort, whether it
be that of swaying branch or dashing cataract or purling stream, with
animate life--with spirits. Again, springs bubble from the earth--the
seat of mysterious chthonic forces--the same earth which belches forth
hot sulphur or mephitic vapors and volcanic lava and ashes. Water, too,
possesses healing and cleansing virtues, real and magical. And, finally,
the hyperactive imagination of the savage easily led him to believe that
the babbling of the springs and rivulets was the voice of the spirits
themselves. In the case of the Romans, their dependence upon springs for
a supply of cool water during the burning heat of summer tended to add
to the sanctity of these springs. Whatever the cause, the Romans, as
well, indeed, as all other peoples, considered springs sacred. <span
id="fr_547"></span>[52](#fn_547) For example, among the Arabs of
Palestine to-day each village has its sacred fountain with special
curative powers. <span id="fr_548"></span>[53](#fn_548) Once more, the
efficacy of the waters of Lourdes is familiar to every traveler in
France. And in England, Protestant as well as Catholic farmers believe
that the waters and the moss from the well of St. Walstan, near Norwich,
can cure diseases of animals. <span id="fr_549"></span>[54](#fn_549)

The Romans, we find, worshiped springs, not usually, indeed, as gods
with statues and all the paraphernalia of a State cult, but as spirits
(numina). At the shepherd festival of Pales (we repeat), the farmer
calls upon the divinity "to appease the springs and the spirits of the
springs."  <span id="fr_550"></span>[55](#fn_550) Here, the springs
themselves, as distinct from the spirits dwelling in them, are
worshiped--a most primitive type of ceremony. Seneca the Philosopher
writes as follows about the worship of springs by his fellow countrymen:
 <span id="fr_551"></span>[56](#fn_551) "We worship the headwaters of
great streams; the spot where the giant river breaks forth suddenly from
its hidden source has its altars. Hot springs are worshiped by us; and
the darkness or unfathomable depth of certain pools renders them
sacred."

Once during an illness the epigrammatist Martial was forbidden to drink
cooled water; but he disobeyed the prohibition and drank water from a
spring in the house of a friend. In spite of this he recovered his
health and offered to the spring a sow which he had vowed. <span
id="fr_552"></span>[57](#fn_552) Sacred springs, on the other hand,
might harm the person who desecrated them. It seems that the Emperor
Nero on one occasion took a bath in the sacred source of the Marcian
Waters which, according to the tradition, had been brought through
aqueducts to Rome by King Ancus Marcius. An illness which resulted from
this imperial caprice was ascribed by the people to the vengeance of the
gods for his having polluted the holy waters. <span
id="fr_553"></span>[58](#fn_553) The ode of Horace addressed to the
spring Bandusia is familiar to all. The poet celebrated the rite,
probably on October thirteenth, the day of the Festival of Fons, with
sacrifice of a kid and wine and blossoms to the spirit of the
spring. <span id="fr_554"></span>[59](#fn_554) On this day chaplets were
thrown into springs, and wells were garlanded. <span
id="fr_555"></span>[60](#fn_555) Ovid represents Numa, the traditional
founder of the Roman religion, sacrificing sheep and offering wine to a
spring in a grove at the base of the Aventine Hill. <span
id="fr_556"></span>[61](#fn_556)

While we read about a god Fons, and while there was a shrine dedicated
to Fons outside Rome near one of its gates, and an altar of Fons on the
Janiculum Hill, it is difficult to say with conviction that there was a
cult of Fons worshiped under State supervision at a particular temple
with priests and sacrifices. It would seem, rather, that the god of
fountains was still in a multiple state, like fauns, nymphs and the
like, thus representing a transition stage between spirit and god. The
presence of so many springs in different parts of Italy, on each of
which the people of a particular locality had to depend for their supply
of water, would tend to preserve the multiple nature of the god.

We have record of a number of famous springs in Italy. That of Egeria
 <span id="fr_557"></span>[62](#fn_557) in the sacred grove not far from
the Capene Gate on the Appian Road is particularly famous, because from
it, in early times at least, the Vestals drew water to cleanse their
sacred vessels. This spring still bubbles forth near the Villa
Fonseca. <span id="fr_558"></span>[63](#fn_558) According to the story,
the worship of Egeria came from the sacred grove of Diana at Nemi, where
the spring poured its healing waters into the lake. Egeria and her
sisters the Camenae were worshiped especially by prospective mothers.
When the Albans migrated to Rome, they brought the cult with them to the
grove of the Muses which, in Juvenal's time, had become a squatting
place for indigent Jews; and so the spring itself had lost most of its
pristine sanctity.

There was a health-giving spring in Latium near the Numicus River,
called Juturna, <span id="fr_559"></span>[64](#fn_559) which Varro
placed among "the proper gods and nymphs." The worship of Juturna was
transferred to Rome, to the pool near the temple of Vesta in the Forum.
It seems likely that in later times the Vestals drew water from this
spring rather than from that of Egeria. At any rate its waters were used
for sacrificial purposes; and persons who made use of water in their
daily occupations celebrated a festival of Juturna in January.

Near the city of Padua, at a place called Aponus in ancient times, were
many fissures in the earth, through which burst the crackling flames of
sulphur. The water of the near-by lake--called "a present spirit" by
Claudian--possessed healing virtues. <span
id="fr_560"></span>[65](#fn_560)

The pleasant Roman habit of investing the springs with spirits is
illustrated in one of Pliny's letters, where he describes the headwaters
of the Clitumnus, a small river in Umbria which flows into a branch of
the Tiber. On the banks of the Clitumnus grazed cattle whose brilliant
color was due, as the Romans believed, to their having drunk of and
bathed in its waters. From the shores of this stream came the white
horses which were sacrificed to Jupiter after a triumphal procession to
the Capitol. <span id="fr_561"></span>[66](#fn_561) The waters were so
clear that Pliny could count, on the bottom, coins which the worshipers
had offered to the spirit of the water. <span
id="fr_562"></span>[67](#fn_562) Superstition had it that the Clitumnus
not only reflected perfectly the human form, but reflected character as
well. <span id="fr_563"></span>[68](#fn_563) The spirit of the stream
possessed a statue which occupied an ancient temple. That it actually
functioned as an oracle in Pliny's day was attested by existing oracular
responses attributed to it. Pliny remarks to the friend to whom the
letter is addressed that he may perhaps find amusement in reading the
countless inscriptions dedicated to the Clitumnus by persons who had
been cured by its waters. In the neighborhood, in addition to the temple
of Clitumnus, could be found many chapels dedicated to the spirits which
presided over the various springs in the neighborhood. Pliny, in another
letter, <span id="fr_564"></span>[69](#fn_564) mentions a sacred lake
near Ameria, whose waters no ship was allowed to touch. Again, the Elder
Pliny notes certain springs at Sinuessa, which were said to have the
power to prevent childlessness and to cure insanity, and still others
which were especially beneficial in the treatment of sore eyes, ears, or
feet, and for healing fractures and wounds of all sorts. <span
id="fr_565"></span>[70](#fn_565)

At least one Roman spring was potent to wash away the perjuries of the
shady merchant. This was that of Mercury which lay near the Capene Gate.
Ovid's description of the rites is illuminating: <span
id="fr_566"></span>[71](#fn_566)

"There is a spring of Mercury \[he writes\] in the neighborhood of the
Capene Gate. If you are pleased to believe those who have tested it, the
spring possesses a spirit. To it comes the merchant with his tunic
caught up; and, being ceremonially pure, he draws water to carry home in
an urn which has been fumigated. With this water he drenches a laurel
spray, and with the drenched laurel he sprinkles all the wares that are
presently to have new owners. He also sprinkles his own hair with the
dripping laurel and goes through prayers in a voice which is wont to
deceive. 'Wash away past perjuries,' he says, 'wash away my faithless
words of the past day.'"

The word numen is here used for the spirit animating the spring; and it
is important to note that, as often in the case of water spirits, the
water itself is addressed. Furthermore, we observe that a Roman might
pray to his gods for evil as well as for good.

There is abundant evidence that rivers were worshiped by the Latins.
River water and even the reeds growing along the banks were powerful
agents in rites of purification. <span id="fr_567"></span>[72](#fn_567)
In the old Roman days auspices were taken by magistrates before crossing
a river or any water which arose from a sacred source. This was
especially the case with the Petronia, a small tributary of the Tiber.
Magistrates regularly took the auspices before crossing this stream to
attend to business on the other side. The practice, however, had died
out before Cicero's time. <span id="fr_568"></span>[73](#fn_568)
Occasionally in magic rites the command was given not to cross a running
stream, showing the persistence of the belief that streams resented a
person's crossing them. <span id="fr_569"></span>[74](#fn_569)

August twenty-seventh marked the Festival of Volturnus. Now Volturnus
was the name of a river in Campania, and as one of the calendars
definitely states that the sacrifice was "to the river Volturnus" we may
conclude that the festival was originally held in honor of this river.
We know that there was a festival of Volturnus held every year at
Casilinum, a small town in Campania. <span
id="fr_570"></span>[75](#fn_570) But the Festival of Volturnus occurred
also in Rome, and so scholars have concluded that Volturnus was an old
name for the Tiber. <span id="fr_571"></span>[76](#fn_571) But what is
to forbid the transference of the rites of a Campanian river god to
Rome, there to be identified with the Tiber? Such transference was
natural to the Romans, as we have seen in the case of the springs Jutuma
and Egeria.

The Tiber was considered holy from the earliest days of Rome, and was
believed to watch over the homes in the city. <span
id="fr_572"></span>[77](#fn_572) The antiquity of its worship is
attested by the fact that the Tiber appeared in the "litany" of the
pontiffs and in the prayers of the augurs. <span
id="fr_573"></span>[78](#fn_573) In one of the fragments of
Ennius, <span id="fr_574"></span>[79](#fn_574) we read a portion of a
prayer formula, presumably uttered by AEneas: "Thee, Father Tiber, with
thy holy stream . . . " Servius, commenting on Vergil's imitation of the
line, states that the words "Help, Tiber, with thy waters" were part of
a formal prayer. The story of Horatius Cocles is familiar to all. As he
leaped into the Tiber, he called upon the river to protect him. <span
id="fr_575"></span>[80](#fn_575) Horace represents a mother praying that
her son be cured of a fever. If the boy is relieved, the mother will
make him stand naked in the Tiber. <span
id="fr_576"></span>[81](#fn_576) We learn from Persius that when a Roman
had prayed for evil--such as the death of a kinsman or a ward--he must
plunge his head two or three times in the holy waters of the Tiber in
order to make his prayers acceptable. <span
id="fr_577"></span>[82](#fn_577) A proposal was laid before the Senate
in the reign of Tiberius to change the course of the lakes and streams
which emptied into the Tiber. The inhabitants opposed the alteration,
protesting that their rivers were under the protection of the
gods. <span id="fr_578"></span>[83](#fn_578) At Horta--the modern
Orte--there was an altar to Tiber, erected, however, not by a native of
the town but by a Roman. Inscriptions indicate that the river god was
worshiped at Rome, at Ostia, and elsewhere. <span
id="fr_579"></span>[84](#fn_579)

Mommsen has conjectured  <span id="fr_580"></span>[85](#fn_580) that the
Festival of the Portunalia which occurred on August seventeenth was in
honor of the Tiber; and he bases his conclusion on the fact that in the
late calendar of Philocalus the day is also called Tibernalia. This
seems to be evidence enough to identify the two. But, if this be the
case, how are we to explain the keys and the gates which are regularly
associated with Portunus? The rites of the Argei offer us a possible
clue. On March sixteenth and seventeenth, as we have seen, a solemn
procession made a circuit of the twenty-seven chapels called Argei
located in various parts of the city. Rush puppets, bearing the same
name and resembling bound men, were made in the chapels, where they
reposed until May fourteenth and fifteenth, when the pontiffs and
generals (Praetores) carried them in procession to the Sublician Bridge.
Here the Vestals threw them into the river. The puppets may have
represented, by substitution a survival of the time when old men had
actually been sacrificed and thrown into the Tiber, possibly to pacify
the river god for the building of the bridge. May it not be possible
that the keys of Portunus were intended to unlock the various shrines in
which the puppets had been placed prior to the procession?

The Romans worshiped not only springs and rivers but the waters of the
sea as well. Neptune, afterwards identified with the Greek Poseidon, may
possibly have been originally a god of fresh water; <span
id="fr_581"></span>[86](#fn_581) certainly the little we know about the
Roman Neptune does not point to a sea god.

The Romans were not naturally given to navigation. We read frequently in
the Roman poets about the impiety of the man who first entrusted his
bark upon the ocean. <span id="fr_582"></span>[87](#fn_582) Evidently
there was a strong tradition that it was wrong to sail the sea. When,
then, a Roman was compelled to embark upon the ocean, he performed
sacrifice to appease the spirits of the waters. For example, Roman
generals before departing by sea against the enemy regularly made
sacrifice to the Tempests and to the waves of the sea. <span
id="fr_583"></span>[88](#fn_583) There was a temple of the Tempests near
the Capene Gate, built by the Scipio who was consul in 259 B.C. after
his fleet had been saved from shipwreck off the coast of Corsica. The
epitaph of Scipio records the event. <span
id="fr_584"></span>[89](#fn_584) Readers of Vergil will remember that in
order to secure favorable weather and a safe passage from Sicily, after
celebrating games in honor of Anchises, AEneas offered sacrifice and
libations to the Winds, to Neptune, and to the sea, before sailing
against the enemy. <span id="fr_585"></span>[90](#fn_585) The sacrifice
was made both to Neptune and to the sea, showing that a distinction was
made between the god and the sea. The sacrifice to the sea was a
primitive survival.

This account of water worship may fittingly close with some notice of
Jupiter as a rainmaker. In this capacity he is mentioned for the first
time in literature by Tibullus. <span id="fr_586"></span>[91](#fn_586)
This seems strange in view of the common use of the expression Jupiter
Pluvius in our own day. From the earliest times, however, the god was
associated with rain-making; the non-appearance of the epithet Pluvius
in ancient times may be accounted for by the fact that rain-making was a
magic or quasi-magic ceremony, and hence no god need originally have
been involved at all. The name Jupiter alone is frequently used by Roman
writers for rain. Thus Vergil, in his seventh Eclogue (60), represents
one of the shepherds saying: "And Jupiter shall descend in joyous rain."

### Fire

Fire, like water, is regularly used to remove the harmful effects of
contact with persons and things which are, as we say, taboo, and for
driving away evils of all sorts, whether spiritual or physical. Thus
persons who attended a Roman funeral had to be sprinkled with water and
to walk over fire in order to remove the contagion of death--a rite
usually called the "fire walk." <span id="fr_587"></span>[92](#fn_587)
Early man may have believed that he could thus set up a fiery barrier
between himself and the spirits of the dead which were likely to harrow
him. This possibility is suggested by similar rites among other peoples
where the avowed purpose is apotropaic. Thus Frazer records  <span
id="fr_588"></span>[93](#fn_588) that ". . . The Tumbuku of Central
Africa, on the shores of Lake Nyasa, resembled the Romans in practising
both the barrier by fire and the barrier by water after a funeral; for
on returning from a burial all who had taken part in it washed in a
river, and after that, on their way home to the village, they were met
by a native doctor or wizard, who kindled a great fire on the path, and
all the mourners had to pass through the flames. . . ."

At the Roman Festival of Pales, in April, the farmer, his family, and
his flocks jumped through three bonfires of bean straw; <span
id="fr_589"></span>[94](#fn_589) the object was to burn away evils, seen
and unseen, and, in the case of women, to induce fertility by driving
out all interfering influences. Ovid discloses the curious psychology of
the worshiper when he says, <span id="fr_590"></span>[95](#fn_590)
"Consuming fire cleanses all things and refines the impurities from
metal; therefore it cleanses sheep and shepherd." Rites similar to this,
in which flocks are driven through bonfires, are common among many
peoples. The usual purpose is to ward off witches. Sometimes, however,
the object is to assist the growth of crops and flocks. Thus we
read: <span id="fr_591"></span>[96](#fn_591) ". . . at the Beltane
fires, formerly kindled in the Highlands of Scotland on May Day (only
ten days later than the Palilia), the person who drew the black lot (a
piece of oatmeal cake blackened with charcoal) had to leap thrice
through the flames for the sake of 'rendering the year productive of the
sustenance of man and beast .......'"

I give one more illustration, taken from Italian religion. Every year,
at the Festival of Apollo Soranus, at the base of Mount Soracte, certain
priests called Wolves of Soranus walked barefoot over hot ashes without
being burned. <span id="fr_592"></span>[97](#fn_592) This miraculous
immunity was due, as Varro suggests, <span
id="fr_593"></span>[98](#fn_593) to the fact that they had first treated
their feet with some medicated preparation. We are not concerned here
with the various problems in connection with the rite, but with the
so-called "fire walk" which had many parallels among other peoples,
ancient and modern; its purpose was doubtless, as in the case of the
Roman "fire walk" after funerals, both cathartic and apotropaic. For
similar reasons a bride had to touch fire as well as water. <span
id="fr_594"></span>[99](#fn_594)

The Romans employed burning sulphur in magic as well as in religious
rites. The reason for its use, in addition to its apotropaic powers as
fire, is probably that sulphur possesses disinfectant, and medicinal
properties, a fact which the Romans themselves recognized. Moreover,
sulphur suggested to the Roman mind hot sulphur springs and volcanoes
and the fears that these inspired. Again, the Romans believed that
thunderbolts received their light from sulphur and that sulphur fumes
accompanied a discharge of lightning.

We shall note a few instances of the magic and religious use of sulphur.
Tibullus, while a witch droned incantations, purified his sweetheart
Delia with burning sulphur, and thus, by performing an assisting magic
rite, restored her to health. <span id="fr_595"></span>[100](#fn_595) In
the rites of the Festival of Pales, the shepherds burned sulphur, and
its fumes purified the sheep. <span id="fr_596"></span>[101](#fn_596) A
similar rite has survived down to modern times in Esthonia, where the
people on St. George's Day--within a few days of the time of the ancient
Festival of Pales--used to purify the cattle with sulphur as a
protection against witches. <span id="fr_597"></span>[102](#fn_597)

Not only sulphur but other combustible substances were used as purifying
agents. A witch, for example, purified Tibullus from the harmful effects
of magic by using blazing pine torches. <span
id="fr_598"></span>[103](#fn_598)

One of the most frequent conceptions among savages is that love is fire
and, more particularly, that fire represents the male principle and
water the female principle. <span id="fr_599"></span>[104](#fn_599)
Hence transition is easy to the belief that maidens may be impregnated
by fire. Among the Romans, miraculous impregnation by fire accounted for
the birth of Servius Tullius, Romulus and Remus, and the King of
Praeneste. Servius has told at length the story of the birth of the
latter. He writes:  <span id="fr_600"></span>[105](#fn_600)

". . . There were once two brothers at Praeneste who were called divine.
While their sister was sitting by the hearth, a spark, leaping out,
pierced through her womb, and by it, as the story goes, she conceived
and subsequently bore a child. She cast the boy away at the Temple of
Jupiter. Some maidens, however, who were on their way to procure water,
found and picked up the child near a fire which was not far away from
the spring. From this circumstance he was called the son of Vulcan . .
."

We have noticed the use of fire as a purifying agent in magic and in
religious rites and as the male principle in life. We have now to
consider fire as a spirit, or, we should rather say, two spirits, for
fire in its helpful aspect--in cooking the food and warming the
home--was known as Vesta, while as a destructive force it was called
Vulcan.

The Romans looked upon fire as a god. Ovid, for example, in a passage in
which he seeks to explain the use of fire at the Festival of Pales,
calls fire, as well as water, a god. <span
id="fr_601"></span>[106](#fn_601)

The origin of the worship of Vesta--fire in its helpful aspect--goes
back to primitive days when it was necessary to keep fire alive for the
use of the community. The fire was in the care of the unmarried
daughters of the family, who were, in reality, the priestesses of the
sacred fire in the home. After the main course of the noon meal, silence
was commanded, and a portion of the sacred salt-cake, made by the hands
of the daughters of the home, was cast from a platter into the fire as a
sacrifice to Vesta. <span id="fr_602"></span>[107](#fn_602) As many of
the religious forms of the Roman family had their counterpart in the
State religion, so the worship of fire in the home had its counterpart
in the Roman State religion. <span id="fr_603"></span>[108](#fn_603) The
seat of the worship of Vesta in Rome was the circular "temple" of Vesta,
shaped like a primitive hut. Here Vesta--the sacred fire of the
State--was tended by six maiden priestesses, who renewed it every year,
on March first, from a spark formed by friction. <span
id="fr_604"></span>[109](#fn_604) There was no statue of Vesta in the
"temple": the fire was the goddess herself. This fact shows the
persistence with which Vesta resisted the anthropomorphizing influence
in Roman religion.

The development of destructive fire into a god was quite natural. Early
man saw that fire not only warmed his body and made his food more
palatable, but burned down his hut and brought death and destruction in
its wake. Vesta, as we have seen, was fire in its helpful aspect;
Vulcan, on the contrary, was destructive fire. There is no reason why
Vulcan, as fire, should have been worshiped at the hearth with Vesta,
for Vesta was never considered a destructive force, nor was Vulcan ever,
in historical times at least, considered beneficent. <span
id="fr_605"></span>[110](#fn_605) Vergil, Ennius and Roman writers
generally gave the name Vulcan to destructive fire. <span
id="fr_606"></span>[111](#fn_606) Ostia was the seat of an ancient and
flourishing cult of Vulcan, a fact due, doubtless, to the danger in the
hot season to the granaries located on the Tiber. Here Vulcan had a
temple, a pontiff, and a praetor, also an aedile for performing the
sacrifices. <span id="fr_607"></span>[112](#fn_607) At Rome the temple
of Vulcan was appropriately located outside the walls of the city; there
by rites and sacrifices the city was protected against fire. <span
id="fr_608"></span>[113](#fn_608)

Vulcan was concerned in two Roman rites. In June, Fishermen's Games,
so-called, were,celebrated across the Tiber by the City Praetor on
behalf of the Tiber fishermen. The fish caught by the fishermen were
taken, not to market, but to the Square of Vulcan, where they were
offered alive on an altar to that god in place of human souls. <span
id="fr_609"></span>[114](#fn_609) On August twenty-third occurred the
Festival of Vulcan, at a time when his aid would be necessary to avert
fires which were likely to break out. Varro informs us  <span
id="fr_610"></span>[115](#fn_610) that people cast animals (presumably
fish) into the fire "in place of themselves." In both these rites, the
fish were offered as substitutes for human lives, which were thus to be
saved miraculously from destructive fire. The fish, having come from the
Tiber whose waters were used to extinguish fires, would be magically
effective in preventing them. We gather one additional fact about the
festival from one of Pliny's letters, <span
id="fr_611"></span>[116](#fn_611) in which we read that, on the night of
the Festival of Vulcan, Pliny's uncle used to begin studying at night by
lamplight--not, however, Pliny assures us, for luck. It would seem from
this statement that the Romans used to light their lamps ceremonially on
this night for good luck.

To summarize: We have seen in this chapter that in the period when early
man was employing a magic act and an incantation, mechanically, to
effect a desired result, he would address various objects in nature
directly--a tree, a stone, a spring, a river, the sea, rain--with no
feeling that these objects possessed spirits like himself. They were
believed to have strange powers, potent for ill. Then, for various
reasons which we shall mention shortly, he began to consider that these
things possessed spirits much like his own. For he saw that things in
nature moved just as he moved; that trees whispered when fanned by the
winds; that forests roared when lashed by storms; that springs and
rivulets babbled as they flowed; and thus gradually he came to people
these objects with spirits like himself. Furthermore, dreams aided him
in this; for he found that when he dreamed, his soul would fly away from
the body for the time being, and that he would take with him and use the
things which he normally had about him in his waking moments. Hence
these, too, he peopled with spirits.

We have seen that the belief in the sanctity of stones is common to all
peoples, and that the oak and the stone often are closely connected in
worship, possibly because of their hard and enduring nature which can be
magically communicated to person, thing, or action. Many of the stones
worshiped by ancient peoples were meteorites. Thus the Romans used a
meteorite in performing magic rites to produce rain. Inasmuch as the
stone had fallen from the sky, it was magically equivalent to the sky,
and hence could cause it to overflow with rain. A flint stone was the
only representation of Jupiter Feretrius in historical times, and before
that the oak seems to have been the dwelling place of the god. The flint
and the oak were at first worshiped directly. The Romans used this stone
in taking oaths and in treatymaking. They furthermore marked off
boundaries with stocks and stones, and these were often considered
sacred. At first the stone itself was worshiped, and then the spirit
resident in it; but we have seen that the worship of the terminal stone
probably never developed much further than the fetish stage.

The fact that sparks are produced by striking one stone against another
must have created a feeling of awe among primitive peoples. <span
id="fr_612"></span>[117](#fn_612)

The Romans, in common with all peoples, considered forests sacred. There
were several reasons for this. In the first place, from the forest came
dangers of all sorts, particularly wild beasts and enemies. It was
natural, then, for early man to perform magic rites of aversion in the
place from which these evils had come. Furthermore, trees move; and it
is a common observation, as we have already noted, that primitive people
associate motion of any sort in nature with animate life. The sounds,
too, which came from the forest were, to the imagination of early man,
human voices. He thus associated human life with trees, and often
identified his own life with that of a particular tree. The death of the
tree foreboded his own death. The fact that lightning so often strikes
trees and kills persons under them doubtless led early man to fear them.

We are not surprised, then, to find that before a clearing was made in a
forest in historical times the numerous spirits of the trees, as well as
the evil spirits which haunted the forest, had to be appeased with
sacrifice.

We have remarked, further, that the Romans considered water sacred,
whether as spring, river, sea, or rain. The reason for this, as in the
case of trees, may be partly the fact that primitive man associates
motion of any sort with animate life. Further, the resemblance of the
purling of springs to the human voice may have aided the animizing
process.

The Romans used water from springs and from running streams to wash away
the evil effeas of contact with persons and things possessing a
mysterious power to harm. Since, in daily life, they found that water
cleansed their bodies and their utensils, they believed that it was
effective as well in washing away evils, seen and unseen. ne sprinkling
of water at religious and magic ceremonies was a survival of an earlier
washing. Springs, too, might cause as well as cure disease, if their
waters were desecrated. Again, Roman business men had no scruples
against using the waters of a holy spring to cleanse themselves and
their wares after a shady business transaction.

It was religiously dangerous for a person to cross a running stream and,
in certain cases, religious rites had to be performed before doing so.
The sanctity of rivers may be due to the fact that every year they took
their toll of human life; and this association of the river with the
power to harm may ultimately have led to river-worship. Here, again, the
motion of the river and the sound of its flowing waters aided the
animizing process.

The worship of the sea was of late origin; and this is strange, for the
Romans early came to dread that restless expanse which so often
destroyed human life, which threw up on its shores strange creatures,
and which later brought dangerous enemies; further, the curious rise and
fall of its surface and the mysterious rhythmic churning of its waters
added to its uncanniness. And so the Romans avoided the sea.

One of the earliest Roman worships was that of rain. Here, again, rain
itself was addressed first, and then Jupiter, the maker of rain. Rain
and Jupiter are often synonymous. Rain has the power to harm. It must,
therefore, be induced to do good. Furthermore, the fact that rain came
from the sky and was associated with destructive lightnings added an
element of religious awe to it.

We have seen that the Romans regularly employed fire in magic and in
religious rites in order to remove the harmful effects of contact with
objects possessing dangerous powers--corpses, for instance. Furthermore,
like savages of to-day, they set up bonfires and the "fire walk" as
barriers between themselves and the spirits of the dead. This use of
fire was both cathartic (to remove evils actually present) and
apotropaic (to keep away potential evils, such as the spirits of the
dead).

In rites of purification, sulphur was commonly used, because of the
purificatory powers possessed by the fire itself. Further, sulphur
possesses medicinal and disinfectant properties. Coupled with this, in
the mind of the worshiper, were the association with awesome sulphur
springs and volcanoes and the belief that lightning received its light
from sulphur.

The Romans, in common with savages of to-day, believed that fire was the
male principle in life. Consistently with this belief, they explained
certain miraculous births through impregnation of a virgin by a spark
from the hearth.

Fire in its helpful aspect was called Vesta; fire as a destructive force
was known as Vulcan. Vesta never outgrew her character as a mere spirit,
for the sacred fire was her only representation in the "temple" of
Vesta. The conception of a god of destructive fire grew quite naturally
from the realization that fire not only helped but also harmed.

Doubtless, at first, fire was conceived of as a single spirit. Hence it
was possible for men to think of a maiden as impregnated by a spark from
a hearth, whose fire, in historical times, was conceived of as feminine.
With the growth in knowledge of the uses of fire in cooking and heating,
this phase of fire became feminine, because fire for such purposes was
employed by women in the house. The fire, however, which destroyed the
forest had all the force of man, and so was considered masculine.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_496"></span>[1](tms09.htm#fr_496) Chapter 1, pp. 16-24.

<span id="fn_497"></span>[2](tms09.htm#fr_497) Edward Clodd, Animism, p.
22.

<span id="fn_498"></span>[3](tms09.htm#fr_498) Chapter 1, p. 23.

<span id="fn_499"></span>[4](tms09.htm#fr_499) Genesis XXVIII. 11-18.

<span id="fn_500"></span>[5](tms09.htm#fr_500) Joshua XXIV. 26-27.

<span id="fn_501"></span>[6](tms09.htm#fr_501) Pliny, Naturalis Historia
II. 149-150.

<span id="fn_502"></span>[7](tms09.htm#fr_502) A. B. Cook. Zeus, Vol. I.
p. 520.

<span id="fn_503"></span>[8](tms09.htm#fr_503) Lactantius, Divinae
Institutiones I. 20.

<span id="fn_504"></span>[9](tms09.htm#fr_504) Pliny, Naturalis Historia
11. 115.

<span id="fn_505"></span>[10](tms09.htm#fr_505) Livy XXIX. 10 and 14.

<span id="fn_506"></span>[11](tms09.htm#fr_506) See H. W. Howes. in Folk
Lore XXXVIII (1927), p. 358.

<span id="fn_507"></span>[12](tms09.htm#fr_507) Naturalis Historia
XXVIII. 33.

<span id="fn_508"></span>[13](tms09.htm#fr_508) See Chapter IV, pp.
133-135.

<span id="fn_509"></span>[14](tms09.htm#fr_509) See review of J. P.
Mills. The Ao Nagas, in Folk Lore XXXVIII (1927). P. 94.

<span id="fn_510"></span>[15](tms09.htm#fr_510) Livy I. 10; Dionysius of
Halicarnassus II. 34.

<span id="fn_511"></span>[16](tms09.htm#fr_511) Festus: Lapidem silicem
(Mueller, p. 115).

<span id="fn_512"></span>[17](tms09.htm#fr_512) Livy I. 24. 4-9.

<span id="fn_513"></span>[18](tms09.htm#fr_513) Servius on Vergil's
Aeneid XII. 206.

<span id="fn_514"></span>[19](tms09.htm#fr_514) Siculus Flaccus in
Gromatici Veteres I. 141; the complete Latin text is to be found in
Frazer, The Fasti of Ovid, Vol. II, p. 483, note 1. See also Dionysius
of Halicarnassus, Antiquitates Romanae II. 74; Augustine, De Civitate
Dei IV. 23; Fowler, The Roman Fertivals, pp. 324-327.

<span id="fn_515"></span>[20](tms09.htm#fr_515) See F. B. Jevons, The
Idea of God in Early Religions, p. 21.

<span id="fn_516"></span>[21](tms09.htm#fr_516) For the Festival of
Terminus see Ovid, Fasti II. 639-684; Horace, Epodi II. 59-60; Dionysius
of Halicarnassus, Antiquitates Romanae II. 74; Festus: Terminus
(Mueller, p. 368).

<span id="fn_517"></span>[22](tms09.htm#fr_517) Plutarch, Quaestiones
Romanae XV, Numa XVI. 1.

<span id="fn_518"></span>[23](tms09.htm#fr_518) Aeneid VII. 172.

<span id="fn_519"></span>[24](tms09.htm#fr_519) Livy IX. 36.

<span id="fn_520"></span>[25](tms09.htm#fr_520) Livy I. 31. 3.

<span id="fn_521"></span>[26](tms09.htm#fr_521) Vergil, Georgica I,
476-477; see also Pliny, Naturalis Historia XVII. 243.

<span id="fn_522"></span>[27](tms09.htm#fr_522) Ovid, Fasti III.
295-296.

<span id="fn_523"></span>[28](tms09.htm#fr_523) Naturalis Hisioria XII.
3.

<span id="fn_524"></span>[29](tms09.htm#fr_524) I. 1. 11-12.

<span id="fn_525"></span>[30](tms09.htm#fr_525) Fronto, Ad Verum
Imperatorem II. 6 (Naber, p. 133).

<span id="fn_526"></span>[31](tms09.htm#fr_526) De Agricultura CXXXIX.

<span id="fn_527"></span>[32](tms09.htm#fr_527) The Fasti of Ovid, Vol,
III. P. 352.

<span id="fn_528"></span>[33](tms09.htm#fr_528) Florida I. 1.

<span id="fn_529"></span>[34](tms09.htm#fr_529) Chapter III, p. 000.

<span id="fn_530"></span>[35](tms09.htm#fr_530) H. Dessau, Inscriptiones
Latinae Selectae 5047, 5048.

<span id="fn_531"></span>[36](tms09.htm#fr_531) Ovid, Fasti II. 67-68,
VI. 105-106; Festus: Furvum (Mueller, P. 93). See Georg Wissowa,
Religion und Kultus der Romer, p. 236. The ascription of the Festus
reference to Helernus depends upon Merkel's change in the manuscript
reading Eterno to Elerno.

<span id="fn_532"></span>[37](tms09.htm#fr_532) Suetonius, Augustus
XCII. 1.

<span id="fn_533"></span>[38](tms09.htm#fr_533) See Frazer. The Fasti of
Ovid, Vol. II. p. 402.

<span id="fn_534"></span>[39](tms09.htm#fr_534) Suetonius, Galba 1. 1 ;
Pliny, Naturalis Historia XV. 137.

<span id="fn_535"></span>[40](tms09.htm#fr_535) Suetonius, Vespasian, V.
2.

<span id="fn_536"></span>[41](tms09.htm#fr_536) See G. W. Gilmore.
Animism, pp. 51-58.

<span id="fn_537"></span>[42](tms09.htm#fr_537) J. G. Frazer, The Golden
Bough, Vol. XI, pp. 160-164; see also Ernest Crawley, Studies of Savages
and Sex, pp. 172-173.

<span id="fn_538"></span>[43](tms09.htm#fr_538) Festus: Lucaria
(Mueller, p. 119).

<span id="fn_539"></span>[44](tms09.htm#fr_539) For the Ficus Ruminalis
see Livy I. 4, 5, X. 23, 12; Pliny, Naturalis Historia XV. 77; Varro,
Res Rusticae II. 11, 5; Varro, De Lingua Latina V. 54; Servius on
Vergil's Aeneid VIII. 90; Festus: Ruminalem (Mueller, p. 270) ;
Plutarch, Romulus IV. 1; Augustine, De Civitate Dei VI. 10.

<span id="fn_540"></span>[45](tms09.htm#fr_540) See Chapter Ill. pp.
000-000.

<span id="fn_541"></span>[46](tms09.htm#fr_541) Suetonius, Caligula
XXXV. 3.

<span id="fn_542"></span>[47](tms09.htm#fr_542) Festus: Fagutal
(Mueller, p. 87).

<span id="fn_543"></span>[48](tms09.htm#fr_543) Livy I. 10; Dionysius of
Halicarnassus II. 34; Propertius V (IV). 10.

<span id="fn_544"></span>[49](tms09.htm#fr_544) III. 25.

<span id="fn_545"></span>[50](tms09.htm#fr_545) See Frazer, The Fasti of
Ovid, Vol. II, p. 385; Pliny, Naturalis Historia XVI. 235; Festus:
Capillatam (Mueller, p. 57).

<span id="fn_546"></span>[51](tms09.htm#fr_546) For lucky and unlucky
trees see Macrobius, Saturnalia III. 20, 2; Festus: Felices (Mueller. p.
92).

<span id="fn_547"></span>[52](tms09.htm#fr_547) See Servius on Vergil's
Bucolica I. 52; Horace, Carmina I. 1, 22.

<span id="fn_548"></span>[53](tms09.htm#fr_548) Folk Lore XXXVIII
(1927), p. 117.

<span id="fn_549"></span>[54](tms09.htm#fr_549) Folk Lore XXXVIII
(1927), p. 362.

<span id="fn_550"></span>[55](tms09.htm#fr_550) Ovid, Fasti IV. 759-760.

<span id="fn_551"></span>[56](tms09.htm#fr_551) Seneca, Epistulae
Morales XLI. 3.

<span id="fn_552"></span>[57](tms09.htm#fr_552) VI. 47.

<span id="fn_553"></span>[58](tms09.htm#fr_553) Tacitus, Annales XIV.
22.

<span id="fn_554"></span>[59](tms09.htm#fr_554) III. 13.

<span id="fn_555"></span>[60](tms09.htm#fr_555) Varro, De Lingma Latina
VI. 22.

<span id="fn_556"></span>[61](tms09.htm#fr_556) Fasti III. 300-302.

<span id="fn_557"></span>[62](tms09.htm#fr_557) For this spring see:
Plutarch, Numa XIII. 2; Ovid, Fasti III. 275-276; Juvenal III. 11-20;
Livy 1. 19, 5, 1. 21, 3; Festus: Egeriae nymphae (Mueller, p. 77).

<span id="fn_558"></span>[63](tms09.htm#fr_558) Frank Granger, The
Worship of the Romans, p. 121.

<span id="fn_559"></span>[64](tms09.htm#fr_559) Varro, quoted in Servius
on Vergil's Aeneid XII. 139.

<span id="fn_560"></span>[65](tms09.htm#fr_560) Claudianus, Carminum
Minorum Corpusculum XLIX.

<span id="fn_561"></span>[66](tms09.htm#fr_561) See Claudianus, De Sexto
Consulatu Honorii Augusti 506-514.

<span id="fn_562"></span>[67](tms09.htm#fr_562) Pliny, Epistulae VIII.
8.

<span id="fn_563"></span>[68](tms09.htm#fr_563) Claudianus, loc. cit.

<span id="fn_564"></span>[69](tms09.htm#fr_564) Pliny, Epistulae VIII.
20.

<span id="fn_565"></span>[70](tms09.htm#fr_565) Naturalis Historia XXXI.
6-12.

<span id="fn_566"></span>[71](tms09.htm#fr_566) Ovid, Fasti V. 673-682.

<span id="fn_567"></span>[72](tms09.htm#fr_567) Servius on Vergil's
Aeneid VIII. 33.

<span id="fn_568"></span>[73](tms09.htm#fr_568) Festus: Peremne
(Mueller, p. 245) ; Petronia (ibid., p. 250) Servius on Vergil's Aeneid
IX. 24; Cicero, De Natura Deorum II. 3, 9; De Divinatione II. 36. 77.
and Pease's note.

<span id="fn_569"></span>[74](tms09.htm#fr_569) Apuleius, Metamorphoses
I. 13.

<span id="fn_570"></span>[75](tms09.htm#fr_570) R. M. Peterson, The
Cults of Campania, p. 42.

<span id="fn_571"></span>[76](tms09.htm#fr_571) W. Warde Fowler. The
Roman Festivals, p. 214.

<span id="fn_572"></span>[77](tms09.htm#fr_572) Ausonius, Opuscula X.
379-380.

<span id="fn_573"></span>[78](tms09.htm#fr_573) Cicero, De Natura Deorum
Ill. 52; Servius on Vergil's Aeneid VIII. 330.

<span id="fn_574"></span>[79](tms09.htm#fr_574) Ethel M. Steuart, The
Annals of Quinims Ennims, frag. 19, p. 6; Servius on Vergil's Aeneid
VIII. 72; Livy 11. 10; J. G. Frazer, The Fasti of Ovid, Vol. IV. pp.
170-171.

<span id="fn_575"></span>[80](tms09.htm#fr_575) Livy, loc. cit.

<span id="fn_576"></span>[81](tms09.htm#fr_576) Sermones II. 3, 288-292.

<span id="fn_577"></span>[82](tms09.htm#fr_577) Persius II. 3, 16.

<span id="fn_578"></span>[83](tms09.htm#fr_578) Tacitus, Annales I. 79.

<span id="fn_579"></span>[84](tms09.htm#fr_579) Lily R. Taylor, The
Cults of Ostia, P. 34; Local Cults in Etruria, pp. 101-102.

<span id="fn_580"></span>[85](tms09.htm#fr_580) C. I. L. p. 336 (second
edition).

<span id="fn_581"></span>[86](tms09.htm#fr_581) Von Domaszewski.
Neptunus auf lateinischen Inschriften in Abhandlung zur romischen
Religion, p. 19.

<span id="fn_582"></span>[87](tms09.htm#fr_582) See Kirby Smith's note
on Tibullus I. 3, 37-40; Vergil, Bucolica IV. 31-33.

<span id="fn_583"></span>[88](tms09.htm#fr_583) Cicero, De Natura Deorum
III. 20, 52.

<span id="fn_584"></span>[89](tms09.htm#fr_584) H. Dessau, Inscriptiones
Latinae Selectae, no. 3; Ovid, Fast; VI. 193.

<span id="fn_585"></span>[90](tms09.htm#fr_585) Appian, Bellum Civile V.
11. 98.

<span id="fn_586"></span>[91](tms09.htm#fr_586) I. 7,26.

<span id="fn_587"></span>[92](tms09.htm#fr_587) Festus: Aqua et igni
(Mueller, P. 3).

<span id="fn_588"></span>[93](tms09.htm#fr_588) See note on Ovid, Fasti
IV. 791, in Frazer, The Fasti of Ovid, Vol. III. p. 371.

<span id="fn_589"></span>[94](tms09.htm#fr_589) Ovid, Fasti IV. 725-727,
781-782, 805; Tibullus II. 5, 89-90; Propertius V. 4. 75-78.

<span id="fn_590"></span>[95](tms09.htm#fr_590) Fasti IV. 785-786.

<span id="fn_591"></span>[96](tms09.htm#fr_591) Frazer, The Fasti of
Ovid, Vol. III, P. 343.

<span id="fn_592"></span>[97](tms09.htm#fr_592) For this rite see Pliny,
Naturalis Historia VII. 19; Servius on Vergil's Aeneid XI. 784-785;
Silius Italicus V. 175-181; Strabo V. 2, 9; Dionysius of Halicarnassus,
Antiquitates Romanae III. 32. Compare Frazer's note on Ovid, Fasti IV.
553; he maintains that Feronia, not Apollo Soranus, was concerned in the
rite.

<span id="fn_593"></span>[98](tms09.htm#fr_593) According to Servius on
Vergil's Aeneid XI. 785.

<span id="fn_594"></span>[99](tms09.htm#fr_594) Plutarch, Quaestiones
Romanae I.

<span id="fn_595"></span>[100](tms09.htm#fr_595) Tibullus 1. 5, 9-12.

<span id="fn_596"></span>[101](tms09.htm#fr_596) Ovid, Fasti IV.
739-740.

<span id="fn_597"></span>[102](tms09.htm#fr_597) See Frazer's note on
Ovid, Fasti IV. 739.

<span id="fn_598"></span>[103](tms09.htm#fr_598) Tibullus 1. 2, 61.

<span id="fn_599"></span>[104](tms09.htm#fr_599) Plutarch, Quaestiones
Romanae 1; Varro, De Lingua Latina V. 61.

<span id="fn_600"></span>[105](tms09.htm#fr_600) On Vergil's Aeneid VII.
678.

<span id="fn_601"></span>[106](tms09.htm#fr_601) Fasti IV. 788.

<span id="fn_602"></span>[107](tms09.htm#fr_602) Servius on Aeneid 1.
730. See W. Warde Fowler, The Religious Experience of the Roman People,
p. 73.

<span id="fn_603"></span>[108](tms09.htm#fr_603) Fowler, The Religious
Experience of the Roman People, pp. 136-137.

<span id="fn_604"></span>[109](tms09.htm#fr_604) See Ovid, Fasti III.
141-144; Festus: Ignis Vestae (Mueller, p. 106) ; Macrobius, Saturnalia
I. 12, 6; Servius on Aeneid II. 296-297; Fowler, The Religious
Experience of the Roman People, p. 136.

<span id="fn_605"></span>[110](tms09.htm#fr_605) See H. J. Rose,
Primitive Culture in Italy, pp. 43-44.

<span id="fn_606"></span>[111](tms09.htm#fr_606) Aeneid V. 662, VII. 77;
Ennius. quoted in Festus (Mueller, P. 153) under Metonymia; Tibullus 1.
9, 49-50; Fronto, Ad Marcum Caesarem IV. 5, 2 (page 68 in the edition of
S. A. Naber).

<span id="fn_607"></span>[112](tms09.htm#fr_607) See Lily Ross Taylor,
The Cults of Ostia, pp. 14-20.

<span id="fn_608"></span>[113](tms09.htm#fr_608) Vitruvius, De
Architectura 1. 7. 1.

<span id="fn_609"></span>[114](tms09.htm#fr_609) Festus: Piscatorii ludi
(Mueller, p. 238).

<span id="fn_610"></span>[115](tms09.htm#fr_610) De Lingua Latina VI.
20.

<span id="fn_611"></span>[116](tms09.htm#fr_611) III. 5, 8.

<span id="fn_612"></span>[117](tms09.htm#fr_612) See Frazer, Myths of
the Origin of Fire, pp. 106 and 226.
