[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tms04)  [Next](tms06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER III

## MISCELLANEOUS TABOOS

IN the last chapter, after illustrating the terms positive and negative
mana, we discussed the taboo on blood and five other taboos which are
allied with it--on women, children, death, leather, and days. The
present chapter will illustrate rather fully and attempt to explain
several more taboos which were prevalent among the Romans--those on sex,
men, strangers, slaves, and on linen, knots, iron and places.

### Sex

Among all peoples, chastity is often obligatory before the performance
of religious duties. In certain Roman priesthoods, the taboo on sexual
intercourse lasted for a long period of years; in some religious rites,
abstinence was enjoined only at specific times, particularly on the eve
of a religious festival. Even outside the Roman State religion, chastity
was occasionally required before the performance of certain daily tasks.
The most familiar example of forced chastity over a period of years is
that of the Vestal Virgins. Chastity as a preparation for religious
rites was familiar at the festivals of Ceres and of Bacchus, both
divinities of the products of the earth; we know, too, that beekeepers,
on the day before they handled the hives, had to refrain from
intercourse. <span id="fr_196"></span>[1](#fn_196)

The Vestal's vow of virginity lasted for thirty years. <span
id="fr_197"></span>[2](#fn_197) During the first ten years she was a
novice, during the next ten she performed the sacred duties of the
order, and during the last ten she taught the girls who had just entered
the order. After thirty years she was allowed to return to secular life
and marry, if she chose, but this rarely happened.

One is forced to believe that the Vestals, despite their vows of
chastity and their putative holiness, were a little lower than the
angels. The maiden Tarpeia, who treacherously opened the portals of the
Citadel to Tatius the Sabine, was a Vestal; she used her sacred office
of drawing water from the holy spring of the Muses as a pretext for
admitting the enemy. <span id="fr_198"></span>[3](#fn_198) If we are to
give credence to these stories, unchastity among the Vestals seems to
have been common. The founder of Rome saw the light of day as the result
of the ravishing of the Vestal Rhea by the god Mars. In 483 B.C.,
soothsayers were consulted about the meaning of certain portents from
the gods: they reported that sacred rites had been neglected.
Accordingly, Oppia, a Vestal, was charged with having broken her vow,
and was buried alive. <span id="fr_199"></span>[4](#fn_199) During the
period of the First Samnite War, Minucia, a Vestal, brought suspicion
upon herself because of her fondness for prety dresses; on the evidence
of a slave she was charged with unchastity and was buried alive near the
Colline Gate at a place afterwards called the Accursed Plain--presumably
from this event. <span id="fr_200"></span>[5](#fn_200) At the time of
the Second Punic War, two Vestals, Opimia and Floronia, violated their
vows of chastity, and were detected: one committed suicide, the other
was buried alive at the Colline Gate. Lucius Cantilius, one of the
clerks of the pontiffs, charged with a liaison with Floronia, was
scourged to death. <span id="fr_201"></span>[6](#fn_201) Catiline was
accused of incest with a Vestal, a half-sister of Cicero's wife; but she
was acquitted, probably because of influential friends. <span
id="fr_202"></span>[7](#fn_202) We are not surprised to read that Nero,
who had no regard for anything sacred, deflowered a Vestal. <span
id="fr_203"></span>[8](#fn_203) Juvenal, with a contemptuous sneer,
accused Crispinus of a liaison with a Vestal; <span
id="fr_204"></span>[9](#fn_204) but Domitian's interest in Crispinus
prevented the traditional punishment for the crime. Incest with Vestals
seems to have been condoned by Vespasian and Titus; <span
id="fr_205"></span>[10](#fn_205) but Suetonius tells us that Domitian
visited offenders, at first with capital punishment, and later on with
the extreme penalty, burial alive. Oculata and Varronilla broke their
vows, and Domitian allowed them to choose their mode of death. Their
lovers suffered banishment. Cornelia, the chief of the Vestals, had been
acquitted once; but she was accused again, convicted, and buried alive,
and her paramours were beaten to death with rods. One, an ex-praetor,
was allowed to go into exile. In at least one instance--that of the
Vestal Posturnia--the charge of unchastity was quashed; but, as Livy
says, <span id="fr_206"></span>[11](#fn_206) she was under suspicion
because of her free and easy manner. We recall that Vestals were
supposed to dress modestly in white, to keep their eyes on the ground
and their thoughts on holy things.

Colorable offenses of the Vestals were punished as follows: <span
id="fr_207"></span>[12](#fn_207) the Vestal was stripped and placed in a
dark place. The Chief Priest, with an arras between him and the peccant
Vestal, lashed her with thongs to drive out the evil as well as to
punish her. When a Vestal broke her vow of chastity a terrible fate
awaited her if she could not prove her innocence or if she had no
influential friends to espouse her cause. She was buried alive in a
small underground chamber located within the city walls, at one of the
gates. She was stripped of her sacred fillets, tied down on a covered
litter in such a way that she might utter no sound, and conveyed to the
Great Roman Forum, where the people who attended the litter made way for
her to pass. When the procession arrived at the tomb, the Chief Priest
loosened the cords which bound her, and, raising his hands toward the
sky, prayed inaudibly. Then he brought the Vestal from the litter and
laid her on the steps of the tomb. She then descended by a ladder into
the subterranean room and was left to die, with the small comfort,
however, of a bed, a lamp, some bread, milk and water; for since she had
been consecrated to religion, it would have been impious to allow her to
die of hunger.

Among many peoples, there is supposed to exist some connection between
fertility in women and fertility in the earth. This is not difficult to
understand when we remember that among savage peoples the men are
engaged in hunting, fishing, and fighting, while the women plough and
sow. This connection is suggested, for example, by the common practice
 <span id="fr_208"></span>[13](#fn_208) of throwing products of the
earth, such as rice, at marriage ceremonies and at the birth of
children. A Roman bride who desired to be prolific should be wed, as the
superstition went, "in the very bosom of Mother Earth, among the ripened
crops, above the fruitful soil." <span id="fr_209"></span>[14](#fn_209)
The fertility of the earth and of the crops would thus be communicated
to the bride.

At several Roman festivals whose purpose was to assist the ripening of
the crops, abstinence from sexual intercourse was enjoined upon the
worshipers. Thus during the nine nights of the Festival of Ceres married
women must not touch a man. <span id="fr_210"></span>[15](#fn_210) At
the

Festival of the Ambarvalia no one who had had sexual intercourse the
night before might approach the altar. <span
id="fr_211"></span>[16](#fn_211) Inasmuch as primitive people thus
closely associate the fertility of women with the fertility of the soil,
the lashing of women at the Lupercalia may well have been intended to
promote fertility in the crops. Again, in the rites of the Argei, which
were closely connected with crops, and at the Festival of Pales, the
Vestals had important functions. <span id="fr_212"></span>[17](#fn_212)
At the Festival of Vesta, they offered sacred cakes, made in the
primitive way by the three eldest Vestals out of the first grain
garnered in May. <span id="fr_213"></span>[18](#fn_213) The burying of
Vestals when they had broken their vows of chastity, then, may
conceivably have been a sacrifice to the Earth whose products they were
likely to harm by their immorality. Ovid himself comes close to this
interpretation when he says: <span id="fr_214"></span>[19](#fn_214)
"Thus the unchaste Vestal perishes, because she is buried in that earth
which she contaminated. For Earth and Vesta are the same divinity."

We have the definite statement of Propertius <span
id="fr_215"></span>[20](#fn_215) that there was a connection between
sexual purity and good crops. At Lanuvium, in a grove of Juno the
Savior, there was a pit in which a hungry snake awaited his yearly feast
of barley cakes. These cakes were carried in baskets by maidens who were
blindfolded and then lowered into the pit. If the girls were pure, the
snake snatched away the food. Thus proved to be virgins, they returned
home to their parents, while the shepherds cried out in joy, "The year
will be fruitful." If, however, the girls were impure and the snake
refused their gifts of food, they were punished by law--perhaps, as in
the case of the Vestals, by being buried alive. Thus the rite was not
only a test of the virginity of the maidens, but their purity had some
mysterious effect in assuring good crops. The same reason, as we have
seen, may be given for the sacrifice of the Vestals who broke their vow
of chastity.

There is a modern parallel among the Ibibio in southern Nigeria, who
wipe out the pollution of adultery by sacrifice to the Earth or to their
ancestors. <span id="fr_216"></span>[21](#fn_216)

In some Roman rites, abstinence from sexual intercourse was required,
especially on the eve of a religious festival. The wife of the Priest of
Jupiter must not have touched her husband until after the ceremony of
cleansing in the temple of Vesta. <span id="fr_217"></span>[22](#fn_217)
We have seen that during the Festival of Ceres women had to sleep
alone. <span id="fr_218"></span>[23](#fn_218) The same prohibition
applied to the worshipers in the Festival of Bacchus, also a god of one
of the products of the earth. <span id="fr_219"></span>[24](#fn_219)
Here again, in rites of an agricultural nature, sexual purity was
necessary for the good of the crops. The Emperor Severus Alexander would
regularly worship his Lares early in the morning, unless he had lain
with his wife the night before. <span id="fr_220"></span>[25](#fn_220)

Cooks, bakers, butlers must be chaste. <span
id="fr_221"></span>[26](#fn_221) If one was sexually impure he had to
wash in a running stream before touching the contents of the storeroom.
We have already observed that beekeepers, before handling their hives,
had to refrain from sexual intercourse. Frazer gives us an interestmg
parallel. He writes: <span id="fr_222"></span>[27](#fn_222) "The Masai
think that if the couple were to break the rule of continence while the
wine is brewing, not only would the wine be undrinkable but the bees
which made the honey would fly away." In such cases as these of course,
the person does not know why he observes the taboo. At any rate the
taboo on sexual intercourse among savages, as well as among civilized
peoples, is required of persons engaged in occupations necessary for the
good of the community. <span id="fr_223"></span>[28](#fn_223)

In Oriental rites abstinence was a familiar requirement for worshipers.
In the case of Isis, a ten days' abstinence was demanded, as we learn
from the restive complaint of Propertius: <span
id="fr_224"></span>[29](#fn_224) "The rites of Isis are now returning
again to give me gloom; for Cynthia ten nights now has been continually
engaged in worship." Tibullus similarly lamented the fact that Delia was
separated from him during her observance of the rites of Isis. <span
id="fr_225"></span>[30](#fn_225) Among the Gauls, too, persons who were
chaste were most acceptable in religious rites. <span
id="fr_226"></span>[31](#fn_226) The sexual purity of children may
account for their employment in these rites. Thus children were used to
bring provisions from the sacred storeroom. <span
id="fr_227"></span>[32](#fn_227)

The taboo on sex is difficult to explain. Generally speaking, however,
we may ascribe it to the belief that the weakness following upon the
sexual act will be communicated to the religious rite or to the action
proposed. Specifically, in the case of the Vestals, the prohibition is
referable to the principles of sympathetic magic. Assume a belief in the
connection between chastity and the fertility of the crops, and that is
sufficient to cause the prohibition. In some cases there may be
originally a biological reason corresponding to the period after
detumescence, when the savage would naturally be chaste. Thus chastity
before certain religious rites would be an unconscious--instinctive, if
you will--conservation of the sexual strength for expression during the
festival involving the fertility of the crops.

### Men

Men were, naturally, debarred from rites in which women's interests were
especially involved. The taboo on men in such cases is due to the fact
that they were strange creatures, physiologically unlike women, and so
potentially dangerous. Hence the presence of men in women's rites
interferes with their efficacy. This was particularly the case in the
Festival of the Good Goddess (Bona Dea). The temple of this divinity had
been dedicated by an heiress of the Claudian family who had never had
intercourse with a man. <span id="fr_228"></span>[33](#fn_228) We recall
that the notorious Clodius, dressed as a music girl, entered the house
of Julius Caesar with the connivance of Caesar's wife when the rites
were being held there. This sacrilege was a first-rate scandal at the
time and led to Caesar's divorcing his wife Pompeia. <span
id="fr_229"></span>[34](#fn_229) Again, all men, except the Chief
Priest, were prohibited from the worship of Vesta. <span
id="fr_230"></span>[35](#fn_230) A curious instance of this taboo is
recorded in one of Pliny's letters. <span
id="fr_231"></span>[36](#fn_231) When the Vestal Cornelia, who had been
accused of breaking her vows, was descending into her living tomb, her
dress caught. The public executioner turned as if to disentangle it, but
Cornelia drew back shuddering "as if to ward off the foul contagion from
her chaste and pure body." Men were allowed to worship at all the
shrines of Diana except one in the Patrician Quarter of Rome. The
reason, as given by Plutarch, <span id="fr_232"></span>[37](#fn_232) is
that a man had once tried to deflower a woman in the temple and had been
torn to pieces by the dogs. Thereafter men avoided the temple.

Strangers

Cicero explicitly states that the Romans had an aversion to
foreigners. <span id="fr_233"></span>[38](#fn_233) Servius says that in
ancient days the Romans seldom welcomed strangers unless they had the
"right of hospitality" (ius hospitii).  <span
id="fr_234"></span>[39](#fn_234) The uncanny feeling which the Romans
had from early times in the presence of their Italian neighbors is shown
by the fact that they associated sorcery with the Marsians--the leaders
of the Italian allies in the war for the Roman franchise. They were
believed to have descended from Circe and to have inherited her magic
powers. <span id="fr_235"></span>[40](#fn_235) Again, the sons of King
Ancus considered it an outrage that the Roman State should fall into the
hands of a foreigner. <span id="fr_236"></span>[41](#fn_236)

The Roman's feeling toward his enemies is well illustrated by the words
of a consul during the Second Punic War, who accused Hannibal's soldiers
of eating human flesh. Even to touch these men, he felt, would be an act
of impiety. <span id="fr_237"></span>[42](#fn_237) After the defection
of the city of Capua to Hannibal and its subsequent capture by the
Romans in 211 B.c., the statues which the Romans had purloined from the
city were placed in the hands of the College of Priests, presumably to
be purified from contact with the enemy. <span
id="fr_238"></span>[43](#fn_238) Some notion of taboo may lie behind the
expulsion of the foreign Volscians from the sacred games in Rome in 491
B.c. The Volscians, at least, so interpreted it. <span
id="fr_239"></span>[44](#fn_239) The brother of Scipio the Elder was
once fined for some reason or other, and he was given the choice of
furnishing security or going to jail. A tribune--the father of the
famous Tiberius and Gaius Gracchus--saved him from prison by his veto on
the ground that the prison had been contaminated by enemy prisoners.
This feeling of danger from contamination by foreigners was a
sufficiently strong motive to use as a pretext to save Scipio's
brother. <span id="fr_240"></span>[45](#fn_240)

In one religious rite, of whose nature, however, we know nothing, it is
expressly stated that the stranger must depart from the sacrifice. <span
id="fr_241"></span>[46](#fn_241) The Romans had many requirements which
the young girl who aspired to be a Vestal had to meet: among them, that
her father must have his residence in Italy. <span
id="fr_242"></span>[47](#fn_242) In certain rites at Iguvium, a
procession about the town was made by the Fratres Attiedii. From these
rites foreigners were excluded. "Send beyond the boundaries the Tadinate
people, the Tadinate tribe, the Tuscan and the Narcan folk, the Iapudic
folk (saying), 'if any remain, then bring (such person) whither it is
lawful to bring him, do unto him as it is lawful to do.'" <span
id="fr_243"></span>[48](#fn_243)

We have already seen that certain priests called verbenarii went with
the Roman armies into foreign lands, bearing with them the sacred herbs
which were used to disinfect the army from contagion of blood and
foreign influences. <span id="fr_244"></span>[49](#fn_244) One of the
war-heralds in the ceremony of treaty-making took the sacred herbs from
the citadel and touched the head of the chief herald to keep him free
from contamination. <span id="fr_245"></span>[50](#fn_245)

A curious case of taboo, germane to the taboo on strangers, is found in
Livy's account of early Rome. In 445 B.C., a tribune proposed a bill to
legalize marriage between the plebeians and the patricians. The consuls
opposed the measure on the ground that, if it were allowed, religion
would be thrown into confusion and nothing would be left uncontaminated.
From the patrician point of view, the plebeians were taboo and hence
dangerous to the religious system. At any rate, so they interpreted the
point for the edification of the plebeians, whom they wanted to keep
from usurping their immemorial rites. Again, the election of a plebeian
consul was looked upon as impious. <span
id="fr_246"></span>[51](#fn_246) In the consulship of Marcus Valerius
and Quintus Apuleius an attempt was made on the part of the plebeians to
secure representation in the college of augurs and pontiffs. The
patricians were against the measure, contending that the gods would
oppose such contamination. <span id="fr_247"></span>[52](#fn_247)

It seems odd that among the Romans, as well as among other ancient
peoples and among savages of our own day, strangers, who are ordinarily
taboo, should often be treated with great consideration; <span
id="fr_248"></span>[53](#fn_248) but the explanation is quite simple. As
the stranger possesses mana which is at least potentially dangerous, he
must be prevented from doing barm; and this end is attained by feeding
and housing him. <span id="fr_249"></span>[54](#fn_249) The Malays, we
read, <span id="fr_250"></span>[55](#fn_250) fear the Jakuns who are
skilled in magic and can, by striking two sticks together, cause an
enemy to die. But they can do good, too; and for this reason the Malays
treat the Jakuns with respect.

Casar writes the following concerning the Germans: <span
id="fr_251"></span>[56](#fn_251) "They do not think it right to violate
a guest; those who, for whatever cause, have come to them, they keep
from harm and hold sacred; the houses of all are open to them; with them
food is shared." The Germans housed and fed the stranger as if he were
their own; and thus becoming one of them in reality, he was no longer
able to do them harm. The Romans thus welcomed foreign gods within their
gates, albeit outside the sacred pomerium. <span
id="fr_252"></span>[57](#fn_252)

### Slaves

The presence of slaves was believed to interfere with the efficacy of
many religious rites, both Greek and Roman. <span
id="fr_253"></span>[58](#fn_253) The Romans, for example, had to repeat
the Great Games of 491 B.c., because, on the morning set for the games,
a citizen had driven a recalcitrant slave through the circus where the
games were to be held. <span id="fr_254"></span>[59](#fn_254) It appears
that the young rake Clodius flooded with slaves the theater where games
in honor of the Great Mother were being held--a pollution which angered
his arch-enemy Cicero. <span id="fr_255"></span>[60](#fn_255) The rites
of Hercules at the Greatest Altar in the Cattle Market were, for many
years, performed by members of two distinguished Roman families. One
family, however, seems to have gained the chief control of the cult and
to have delegated the performance of the rites to certain public slaves.
As a punishment for this pollution by contact with slaves, the family
died out. <span id="fr_256"></span>[61](#fn_256) Among the
qualifications necessary for a Vestal was that neither of her parents
might have been a slave. <span id="fr_257"></span>[62](#fn_257)

Slave women were excluded from the temple of the Goddess of the Morning
(Mater Matuta), whom the Romans identified with the Greek goddess
Ino-Leucothea, because of many similarities in ritual, and myth. Each
free woman, however, might bring a slave girl into the sacred precincts,
but she had to slap the face of the girl before doing so. <span
id="fr_258"></span>[63](#fn_258) The slap on the face may be considered
a magic transfer, for the occasion only, of the freedom of the mistress
to the slave. Similar temporary manumissions occurred at the Festival of
Saturn and at the Festival of the Lares of the Crossroads (Compitalia).
At this latter festival, the overseer was the sacrificer, apparently for
the slaves of the family. <span id="fr_259"></span>[64](#fn_259) Slaves
were also admitted to the rites of Fors Fortuna. The reason, as stated
by Ovid, was that Servius Tullius, the founder of the temple, had been
born a slave. <span id="fr_260"></span>[65](#fn_260) Despite the taboo
on slaves in religious worship, it seems that a slave might have the
right of refuge at the statue of a god. <span
id="fr_261"></span>[66](#fn_261) Slaves were allowed to take part in
rites in honor of the dead. <span id="fr_262"></span>[67](#fn_262)

The Emperor Claudius offered a public prayer whenever a bird of ill omen
appeared on the Capitol. From this rite he ordered all slaves and
artisans to withdraw. <span id="fr_263"></span>[68](#fn_263) Nero, in 60
A.D., instituted games on the model of the Olympic Games; and while
considerable license was allowed, pantomime actors, being slaves, were
excluded because of the religious character of the games. <span
id="fr_264"></span>[69](#fn_264)

The taboo on slaves seems to have been partly an artificial one. It may
have been fostered by the free people in order to keep religious matters
strictly in their own hands. The fact that slaves were usually
foreigners may have been a contributing cause.

### Linen and Wool

That the Romans had an uncanny feeling with regard to linen is suggested
occasionally in their literature. Corpses, for instance, were regularly
shrouded in linen. <span id="fr_265"></span>[70](#fn_265) This in itself
would be sufficient to invest linen with harmful mana. After the bones
of a cremated body had been sprinkled with wine and soaked in milk, the
moisture was removed with linen cloths. <span
id="fr_266"></span>[71](#fn_266) It is possible that the linen on the
breastplate of a Roman soldier had magical significance, probably
warding off the spirits of the enemies slain in battle. <span
id="fr_267"></span>[72](#fn_267) Just before Galba was assassinated, he
put on a linen cuirass, "although openly averring that it would avail
little against so many swords." <span id="fr_268"></span>[73](#fn_268)
He probably felt that the only help it could give him was magical. The
Roman standards may have been of linen. <span
id="fr_269"></span>[74](#fn_269)

In religious rites linen was usually taboo. Servius states  <span
id="fr_270"></span>[75](#fn_270) that linen was "foreign to Roman
ritual." The heralds who were entrusted with the responsibility of
declaring war and making treaties were not allowed to wear linen
garments. <span id="fr_271"></span>[76](#fn_271) Again, if the wife of
the Priest of Jupiter sewed her woolen garment with a linen thread, she
had to perform an atoning sacrifice.

In spite of Servius' words, linen was occasionally used in religious
rites. We have a definite statement of the Emperor Marcus Aurelius to
this effect, in a letter written to his old teacher Fronto, where, among
other things, he writes about a certain town: <span
id="fr_272"></span>[77](#fn_272) "There was no corner without a shrine,
a holy place, a temple. Besides, many books of linen were to be found in
the temples, and the linen was of religious significance." He describes
these books as sacra, not as religiosa. The latter adjective, as we have
already noted, was regularly used in the sense of taboo, particularly
the taboo on death. Sacer, too, often has the same connotation; but in
this passage the context seems to demand sacra in the usual sense of
"holy." A possible explanation may be that the taboo on linen began
gradually to disappear under the Empire because of the growing
familiarity with its use in Oriental cults. However, Marcus Aurelius'
remark on the religious importance of the linen in the books naturally
suggests that he had some reason for mentioning the fact to Fronto:
possibly Fronto had usually associated some feeling of taboo with linen.
The rolls containing the names of the magistrates, which were kept in
the temple of Juno Moneta, were called "linen books."  <span
id="fr_273"></span>[78](#fn_273) Again, a Roman consul who had won a
victory over the Samnites forced the vanquished enemy to serve in his
army, using novel religious rites at their induction. These soldiers
made up his "linen legion," so called because the sacrifice of induction
was made in an enclosure covered with linen; and the forms used in the
ritual were read by an old priest from a linen book. <span
id="fr_274"></span>[79](#fn_274) The explanation of these rites is
similar to that of the presence of linen on the breastplate of the Roman
soldier. The soldiers were foreigners, and hence were taboo to a Roman.
The rites were magical, intended to drive away evil forces which were
felt to be attached to foreigners.

Sometimes an uncanny association was attached to wool. Thus there is
record of a rain of wool following upon the death of a distinguished
Roman. <span id="fr_275"></span>[80](#fn_275) Fillets worn by the
priests and priestesses were commonly made of wool. <span
id="fr_276"></span>[81](#fn_276) In the case of the Vestals they were
tokens of chastity. Ovid mentions  <span
id="fr_277"></span>[82](#fn_277) wool among the instruments of
purification called februa. The wife of the Priest of Jupiter wore a
kind of veil on her head at sacrifices; to this was attached a spray of
the pomegranate tree, the two ends of which were fastened with
wool. <span id="fr_278"></span>[83](#fn_278) The envoy who went to the
borders to demand satisfaction of a nation which had wronged the Roman
people wore a woolen covering on his head. <span
id="fr_279"></span>[84](#fn_279)

Wool was regularly used in Roman religious rites. At the Festival of the
Lares of the Crossroads, woolen images of men and women and balls of
wool--the images representing all free men and women, the balls
representing all slaves--were suspended at night at the crossroads and
probably also at the housedoors. These represented a substitute for an
earlier human sacrifice to the spirits of the dead in the underworld who
might harm the living. Festus says: <span
id="fr_280"></span>[85](#fn_280) " . . . As many balls as there are
slaves and as many effigies as there are freeborn men and women in the
family are set up, that the spirits may spare the living and be content
with these balls as substitutes." That human sacrifice prevailed in Rome
up to 97 B.C. is proved by a decree of the Senate of that year which
provided "that no human being be immolated. . . ." <span
id="fr_281"></span>[86](#fn_281) In the rites of the Sacrifice of the
Pregnant Cow (Fordicidia), Ovid represents Numa slaying two ewes, whose
fleece he spreads on the ground, and on these he lies in worshiping
Faunus. <span id="fr_282"></span>[87](#fn_282)

The fact that linen was commonly used by priests in Oriental cults, not
only for clothing but as a veil for sacred things, may have tended to
add negative mana to it at Rome where wool was normally worn in
religious rites. In the tale of Thelyphron, for instance, which we
related in our first chapter, <span id="fr_283"></span>[88](#fn_283) the
Egyptian prophet who brought the corpse to life was clad in linen. We
know that the worshipers of Isis dressed in linen. <span
id="fr_284"></span>[89](#fn_284) Apuleius, who was initiated into the
mysteries of Isis and Osiris, calls linen "the purest covering for
divine things." <span id="fr_285"></span>[90](#fn_285) Wool, he reminds
us, was considered unclean by the followers of Orpheus and Pythagoras.
The Jewish prophets wore linen. <span id="fr_286"></span>[91](#fn_286)
In Leviticus we read the specifications for the high priest's
dress: <span id="fr_287"></span>[92](#fn_287) "He shall put on the holy
linen coat, and he shall have the linen breeches upon his flesh, and
shall be girded with a linen girdle, and with the linen mitre shall he
be attired: these are holy garments . . ."

We have seen, then, that the Romans had an uncanny feeling about the
presence of linen in religious rites because of its association with
dead bodies and with magic, particularly the magic of aversion in the
case of the spirits of slain enemies. We have seen, too, that linen was
regularly worn by devotees of Oriental cults and that this would have a
tendency to increase the danger of a material which was already endowed,
for other reasons, with negative mana. Thus the taboo on linen may be
closely linked up with the taboos on death and on the stranger.
Furthermore, wool was commonly used in religious rites, and since wool
was the older material, the gods would naturally be averse to adopting
linen, which was new and was associated with death, magic, and foreign
rites.

### Knots

Rites of binding and tying and the use of knots were common in Roman
magic. For example, while his sweetheart Delia lay ill, Tibullus
performed magic rites for her recovery and made nine vows to Trivia,
"his head veiled in wool and with loosened tunic." <span
id="fr_288"></span>[93](#fn_288) Images of lovers, which were employed
by witches, were commonly bound with magic threads. <span
id="fr_289"></span>[94](#fn_289) Belief in the dangerous character of
knots of all sorts, in religious rites, is not confined to any one
people. Frazer writes, for instance: <span
id="fr_290"></span>[95](#fn_290) ". . . among the gypsies of
Transylvania, as soon as the birth-pains set in, every knot is untied,
not only on the clothes of the woman in labor, but also on everything in
her neighborhood. . . ."

We know that knots, as well as things tied or bound, were considered
harmful in all religious rites among the Romans. This may have been due
to fear that the binding principle would be carried over to the rites
and hinder their effectiveness. Servius, in his commentary on Vergil's
Aeneid,  <span id="fr_291"></span>[96](#fn_291) says: " . . . In sacred
rites, it is customary for nothing to be bound." The requirement that
women must have their hair flowing and their garments ungirt in all
religious rites is attributable to the taboo on knots. The wife of the
Priest of Jupiter must leave her hair untouched by a comb on at least
three occasions: during the ceremonial procession among the shrines
called Argei, <span id="fr_292"></span>[97](#fn_292) at the Festival of
Vesta until the Tiber had carried the sweepings from the temple of Vesta
to the sea, <span id="fr_293"></span>[98](#fn_293) and during the
ritualistic "moving" of the shields in March. <span
id="fr_294"></span>[99](#fn_294) At funerals women wore their hair
streaming and their garments had to be ungirt. <span
id="fr_295"></span>[100](#fn_295) A pregnant woman loosened her hair
before praying to Juno Lucina, a goddess of childbirth, in order "that
the goddess might tenderly release her child."  <span
id="fr_296"></span>[101](#fn_296) Knots in any form were forbidden at
the rites of this deity. <span id="fr_297"></span>[102](#fn_297)
Crossing of the legs or fingers was considered harmful to pregnant
women. <span id="fr_298"></span>[103](#fn_298) A person who was minded
to do one harm could be forestalled by crossing the legs and
intertwining the fingers. <span id="fr_299"></span>[104](#fn_299) Dido,
in preparing for self-destruction, pretended to her sister Anna that she
was performing magic rites to destroy her lover. We read: <span
id="fr_300"></span>[105](#fn_300) "Dido calls to witness the
gods--having freed one foot of its sandal, and with garment ungirt." The
reason for thus baring her foot and loosing her dress is, as Servius
thinks, <span id="fr_301"></span>[106](#fn_301) "that she may be freed
and AEneas be entangled."

The Priest of Jupiter must have no knots on his conical cap, his girdle,
or any part of his dress. <span id="fr_302"></span>[107](#fn_302) He was
forbidden to touch ivy or to walk under vines, probably because of the
grasping knotty character of their tendrils. <span
id="fr_303"></span>[108](#fn_303) In Livy's account of the inauguration
of Numa, representing, no doubt, that of a typical Roman priest, we read
 <span id="fr_304"></span>[109](#fn_304) that the curved wand of the
augur must be without a knot. The worshipers at the festival of the
Lemuria must have nothing binding on their feet. <span
id="fr_305"></span>[110](#fn_305) The sacrificial animal had to be led
to the altar by a rope in which there was no knot. <span
id="fr_306"></span>[111](#fn_306) Animals were unyoked at country
festivals, and the sacrificial victim must be one that had never touched
a yoke or been mated. <span id="fr_307"></span>[112](#fn_307)

A curious case of taboo is recorded by Pliny the Elder. <span
id="fr_308"></span>[113](#fn_308) According to the law of most country
districts in Italy, women were not permitted to spin or to carry their
spindles uncovered as they walked on the highroads, for the crops would
be harmed thereby. The reason for this taboo seems to be that as the
threads became tangled on the spindle, so, by the principle of sympathy,
the crops would become tangled with weeds. Again, for the same reason,
women were not allowed to spin at the time of the Festival of the
Ambarvalia. <span id="fr_309"></span>[114](#fn_309)

Similarly rings, which, like knots, were commonly used in magic rites,
were taboo. The Priest of Jupiter was not allowed to wear a ring unless
it was broken and stoneless. <span id="fr_310"></span>[115](#fn_310) In
the religious rites which Numa performs in the sacred grove of Faunus,
as described by Ovid, the king is forbidden to wear a ring. <span
id="fr_311"></span>[116](#fn_311)

In all the instances cited--whether the taboo be on rings, dressed hair,
crossed legs, crossed fingers, fettered culprit, peasant's spindle, or
actual knots in clothes or rope--the same principle is involved: as the
ring, the crossed legs, the fetters, the spindle, the knot, bind
physically, so they bind the god and his rites--a survival of the
earliest days when man believed that a thing or action which resembled
another thing or action (whether actual or conceived in the imagination)
was one and the same thing.

Servius has an inkling of the principle in his comments on the lines of
Vergil which describe the priest Helenus removing his sacred fillets
before approaching the temple of Apollo: <span
id="fr_312"></span>[117](#fn_312) "In the procedure of sacred rites,
this (i.e. the removing of the fillets) is appropriate both for soul and
body; for generally those things which cannot be done with respect to
the soul can be done with respect to the body--as loosing or
binding--that the soul may, from resemblance, perceive what it cannot of
itself perceive." The priest Helenus laid aside his fillets, and, thus
removing the binding principle, he was free to receive the inspiration
of the god.

We know that knots and rings were commonly used in magic, especially in
rites intended to bind lovers together; and so it may be barely possible
that the priests of the Roman State religion deliberately discouraged
objects and actions which belonged to popular rites of magic. Whether
this be true or not, the Romans had a feeling that knots had some evil
influence on religious rites; hence they avoided them. The most natural
explanation of the taboo is on the principle of similarity.

### Iron and Bronze

The taboo on iron dates from the beginning of the Iron Age when
religious conservatism forbade the use of the strange new material in
place of the usual bronze. <span id="fr_313"></span>[118](#fn_313) It
has been suggested that the magic significance of iron arose from its
susceptibility to magnetism which, as the superstitious Romans often
believed, it derived from witchcraft. <span
id="fr_314"></span>[119](#fn_314) The Romans believed that the lodestone
recruited its strength from iron. Roman priests, in at least one
instance, used the lodestone's powers to bring about a mysterious
attraction between an iron image of Mars--presumably a small one--and an
image of Venus, made of lodestone. <span
id="fr_315"></span>[120](#fn_315) Thus did the priests blithely employ
science for their own ends.

In many magic rites, iron early lost its power to harm. In the charm,
for instance, which Cato has left us in his treatise on agriculture,
iron figured in a helpful way. We give Cato's directions for inducing a
broken or a dislocated bone to come together: <span
id="fr_316"></span>[121](#fn_316)

"If a bone has been dislocated, it will become whole by this charm. Take
a green reed, four or five feet long; split it in the middle, and let
two men hold the pieces against the hip joints. Begin to chant: 'Motas
vaeta daries dardares astataries dissunapiter,' until the pieces of the
reed come together. Keep tossing iron above. When the pieces of the reed
have come together, and the one touches the other, seize them with the
hand, and cut them right and left; bind them to the dislocation or to
the fracture, and it will become sound. And yet every day chant (as
above), or in the following manner: 'Huat haut huat istasis tarsis
ardannabou dannaustra.'"

This is a piece of sheer magic. As the two split pieces of reed come
together, so the broken pieces of the bone will mend. The element in the
rite that concerns us especially here, however, is the tossing of iron
above the broken bone. The iron apparently is used to ward off any evil
influences which might hinder the mending of the bone. We find a similar
use of iron in the case of the Priest of Jupiter, who placed a piece of
iron under his pillow at night in order to ward off evil
influences. <span id="fr_317"></span>[122](#fn_317) A like superstition
had it that iron, placed beneath the straw on which hens had dropped
their eggs, would keep the eggs from spoiling. <span
id="fr_318"></span>[123](#fn_318)

Another quality of iron may, along with its magnetic powers, help to
account for its taboo in certain rites. Man must have noticed at a very
early time that sparks flew from iron and stone when they were struck
together.

The Arval Brothers were originally forbidden to use iron implements for
engraving inscriptions in their sacred grove. They therefore performed
an atoning sacrifice with a lamb and a pig in advance, in order to avoid
the displeasure which the gods might feel because of their having used
an iron graving tool. The atoning sacrifice was made again when the iron
instrument was taken from the grove. <span
id="fr_319"></span>[124](#fn_319) Similarly, no iron implement could be
used in repairing the Sublician Bridge, which was made entirely of wood
and fastened with wooden pins. <span id="fr_320"></span>[125](#fn_320)
While it seems probable that the prohibition here is a religious one,
there is a possibility, as Pliny suggests, <span
id="fr_321"></span>[126](#fn_321) that it may have been necessary in
order to facilitate tearing the bridge down quickly at the approach of
an enemy. There was a similar taboo on iron at the building of the
temple of Solomon. <span id="fr_322"></span>[127](#fn_322) In the
regulations of the temple of Jupiter Liber at Furfo a special provision
was made allowing iron to be used in repairing the temple, showing that
there must have been some misgivings as to the propriety of its
use. <span id="fr_323"></span>[128](#fn_323)

Servius records <span id="fr_324"></span>[129](#fn_324) that if a man
bound in chains entered the house of a flamen he must be loosened from
his chains and that these had to be lowered through the skylight into
the street. Here, not only the fact that the man was bound and in chains
of iron made him dangerous, but also the fact that he was a criminal;
for criminals were regularly taboo in Rome. <span
id="fr_325"></span>[130](#fn_325)

In historical times, bronze was commonly used in magic as well as in
religious rites. Vergil, for instance, represents  <span
id="fr_326"></span>[131](#fn_326) Dido pretending to consult a witch who
cuts herbs by moonlight with a bronze sickle. In the magic rites of the
Silent Goddess, Tacita (to which we shall return in a later chapter), an
old witch sews up the head of a small fish with a bronze needle, in
order by sympathetic magic to bind the lips of a slanderous
person. <span id="fr_327"></span>[132](#fn_327) Marcellus Empiricus, in
his directions for the preparation of amulets, includes implements of
reed, of copper, and of glass, but not of iron. <span
id="fr_328"></span>[133](#fn_328) We know that both Etruscans and Romans
used only bronze ploughshares to dig furrows in founding their
cities; <span id="fr_329"></span>[134](#fn_329) and their priests, as
well as those of the Sabines, used bronze razors. <span
id="fr_330"></span>[135](#fn_330) The hair and nails of the Priest of
Jupiter must be cut, not with iron, but with a bronze knife. <span
id="fr_331"></span>[136](#fn_331) The dress worn by the flamens while
offering sacrifice was fastened with a clasp of bronze. <span
id="fr_332"></span>[137](#fn_332) The Leaping Priests of Mars wore
bronze corselets. <span id="fr_333"></span>[138](#fn_333) While Italy
was being threatened by the Goths, there was an eclipse, and the night
rang with wailings and the beating of bronze. <span
id="fr_334"></span>[139](#fn_334) Again, during the revolt of the Roman
soldiers in Pannonia, an eclipse of the moon caused panic in the camp.
The air rang with the crash of trumpets and other bronze implements.
These were calculated, as Tacitus says, <span
id="fr_335"></span>[140](#fn_335) to aid the moon in her labors; but, as
a modern scholar has recently suggested, <span
id="fr_336"></span>[141](#fn_336) they may have been believed to drive
away the goblin which was swallowing up the moon.

### Places

That certain places were affected by the feeling of taboo we have
already shown; and the reason for the uncanny feeling in each case was
that associated with the place was a particular form of taboo: in the
case of burial grounds, for instance, the taboo on the corpse.

Thunder and lightning have always caused feelings of uneasiness among
men, whether savage or civilized. Juvenal, for instance, writes: <span
id="fr_337"></span>[142](#fn_337) "There are those who tremble and
blanch at every lightning flash; and when it thunders they are helpless
even on the first rumbling in the sky." It is not strange, then, that
places struck by lightning should be considered taboo by the Romans.
Such places were surrounded with a low well-shaped wall and marked with
an inscription indicating that the thunderbolt had been duly
buried. <span id="fr_338"></span>[143](#fn_338) A lamb was sacrificed in
expiation. <span id="fr_339"></span>[144](#fn_339) There seems to have
been a college of priests whose duty was properly to care for the rites
of "burying the thunderbolt."  <span id="fr_340"></span>[145](#fn_340)
On one occasion the temples of Jupiter and Minerva were struck by
lightning and Nero, on the advice of soothsayers, purified the whole
city. <span id="fr_341"></span>[146](#fn_341) The Emperor Galba's
grandfather once performed an expiatory sacrifice after a place had been
struck by lightning. <span id="fr_342"></span>[147](#fn_342) According
to the laws of Numa, a man who had been struck by lightning must not be
lifted above the knees and no rites of burial could be performed. <span
id="fr_343"></span>[148](#fn_343) Such a man might not be cremated and
must be buried, presumably on the spot where he had been struck. <span
id="fr_344"></span>[149](#fn_344)

Many taboos on places arose from particular events which had proved
disastrous. For instance, there was a taboo on the right-hand passage of
the Carmental Gate because the three hundred and six members of the
Fabian family had passed through it to fight against the Veii, never to
return. <span id="fr_345"></span>[150](#fn_345) Gervasius von Tilbury
furnishes us with a parallel from Naples. <span
id="fr_346"></span>[151](#fn_346) He and a friend tried to enter the
city by the lefthand side of the city gate, when an ass, laden with
wood, blocked the way and forced the travelers to use the right side. On
reaching the home of their host, the latter inquired by which side of
the gate they had entered, and, when he learned that they had used the
right-hand side, he said: "Every one who enters the city by the
right-hand side will succeed in whatever business he has in hand; every
one on the contrary who enters on the left will find and meet with
nothing but disappointment." The dusty traveler for the moment began to
yield to the superstition; but catching himself he muttered piously: "In
Thy hands, O Lord, are all things, and there is nothing that can resist
Thy power."

We have in the last two chapters treated the following taboos in Roman
life: blood, women, children, death and corpses, sex, men, strangers,
slaves, linen, knots, iron, and places. Of these, the taboo on blood has
been found to have arisen either from instinct or because of the
association of death and suffering with its presence; that on women and
children from the fact that they are weak physically, and this weakness,
by the familiar law of association by similarity, may be communicated to
the religious rite, affecting it adversely. Furthermore, the presence of
blood at menstruation and at the birth of the child adds to women and
children the uncanniness of blood. That on corpses may be attributed to
man's instinct for self-preservation; the strangeness of the dead body
may add to its mysterious character; moreover, man associates death with
the agonies of the last moments of the sick man, and hence fears death.
The taboo on sexual intercourse may perhaps best be explained on the
ground that after the sexual act comes a period of weakness which will
be communicated magically to the religious rite or to the actions of
daily life. The taboo on men is due to their physical unlikeness to
women; that on strangers may be due both to the fact that what is new or
unfamiliar is dangerous and to the association of ideas of death and
blood and pain with the stranger. That on slaves seems to have been
entirely artificial; but, inasmuch as slaves were foreigners, the taboo
on strangers may apply here also. The taboo on linen may be due to its
association with corpses, to its strangeness in comparison with wool
(the older material), and to its use in Oriental rites--a taboo,
therefore, on that which is foreign. The taboo on knots is obvious: the
principle of sympathetic magic holds here. As the knot binds, so the
action is bound. The taboo on iron is due to its strangeness at the time
when it was introduced, to its susceptibility to magnetism, and to its
power of producing sparks when struck. The taboo on places has no one
origin. The uncanniness of each place has a special cause: contact with
death, association with disaster, and the like.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_196"></span>[1](tms05.htm#fr_196) Columella, De Re Rustica
IX. 14, 3.

<span id="fn_197"></span>[2](tms05.htm#fr_197) For the Vestals, see
Plutarch, Numa X; Gellius, Noctes Atticae I. 12; Frazer's note on Ovid,
Fasti VI. 283.

<span id="fn_198"></span>[3](tms05.htm#fr_198) Livy I. 11. 6-9.

<span id="fn_199"></span>[4](tms05.htm#fr_199) Livy II. 42, 10-11.

<span id="fn_200"></span>[5](tms05.htm#fr_200) Livy VIII. 15, 7-8.

<span id="fn_201"></span>[6](tms05.htm#fr_201) Livy XXII. 57.

<span id="fn_202"></span>[7](tms05.htm#fr_202) Sallust, Bellum Catilinum
XV. 1; Orosius VI. 3; Cicero, Oratio in Toga Candida.

<span id="fn_203"></span>[8](tms05.htm#fr_203) Suetonius, Nero XXVIII.
1.

<span id="fn_204"></span>[9](tms05.htm#fr_204) IV. 8-10; see Mayor's
notes on these lines.

<span id="fn_205"></span>[10](tms05.htm#fr_205) Suetonius, Domitianus
VIII. 3-4; see Pliny, Epistulae IV. 11, 6.

<span id="fn_206"></span>[11](tms05.htm#fr_206) IV. 44, 11-12.

<span id="fn_207"></span>[12](tms05.htm#fr_207) Plutarch, Numa X.

<span id="fn_208"></span>[13](tms05.htm#fr_208) See W. Warde Fowler, The
Roman Festivals, p. 94.

<span id="fn_209"></span>[14](tms05.htm#fr_209) Apuleius, Apologia
LXXXVIII.

<span id="fn_210"></span>[15](tms05.htm#fr_210) Ovid, Metamorphoses X.
431-435.

<span id="fn_211"></span>[16](tms05.htm#fr_211) Tibullus Il. 1. 11-12.

<span id="fn_212"></span>[17](tms05.htm#fr_212) See Fowler, The Roman
Festivals, pp. 114-115.

<span id="fn_213"></span>[18](tms05.htm#fr_213) Servius on Vergil's
Bucolica VIII. 82.

<span id="fn_214"></span>[19](tms05.htm#fr_214) Fasti VI. 459-460.

<span id="fn_215"></span>[20](tms05.htm#fr_215) V. 8, 1-14; see Frazer,
The Fasti of Ovid, Vol. II, pp. 296-297.

<span id="fn_216"></span>[21](tms05.htm#fr_216) Amaury Talbot, Life in
Southern Nigeria, p. 220.

<span id="fn_217"></span>[22](tms05.htm#fr_217) Ovid, Fasti VI. 227-232.

<span id="fn_218"></span>[23](tms05.htm#fr_218) Ovid, Metamorphoses X.
431-435.

<span id="fn_219"></span>[24](tms05.htm#fr_219) Livy XXXIX. 9. 4. XXXIX.
10, 1. XXXIX. 11, 2; Ovid, Fasti II. 327-330.

<span id="fn_220"></span>[25](tms05.htm#fr_220) Aelius Lampridius,
Severus Alexander XXIX. 2.

<span id="fn_221"></span>[26](tms05.htm#fr_221) Columella, De Re Rustica
XII. 4, 2ff.

<span id="fn_222"></span>[27](tms05.htm#fr_222) Tolemism and Exogamy,
Vol. II, p. 411.

<span id="fn_223"></span>[28](tms05.htm#fr_223) Frazer, The Fasti of
Ovid, Vol. IV. pp. 205-206.

<span id="fn_224"></span>[29](tms05.htm#fr_224) III. 31, 1-2; see also
III. 26, 15-16 (Lucian Mueller's edition).

<span id="fn_225"></span>[30](tms05.htm#fr_225) I. 3. 23-26.

<span id="fn_226"></span>[31](tms05.htm#fr_226) Aelius Spartianus,
Pescennius Niger VI. 7.

<span id="fn_227"></span>[32](tms05.htm#fr_227) Columella, De Re Rustica
XII. 4. 2ff.

<span id="fn_228"></span>[33](tms05.htm#fr_228) Ovid, Fasti V. 153-156;
see also Tibullus III. 5, 7-8.

<span id="fn_229"></span>[34](tms05.htm#fr_229) Plutarch, Caesar IX-X;
see Dio Cassius XXXVII. 35 and 45.

<span id="fn_230"></span>[35](tms05.htm#fr_230) Ovid, Fasti VI. 437-454;
Lactantius, Divinae Institutiones III. 20; Aelius Lampridius, Antoninus
Heliogabalus VI. 7.

<span id="fn_231"></span>[36](tms05.htm#fr_231) Epistulae IV. 11, 9.

<span id="fn_232"></span>[37](tms05.htm#fr_232) Plutarch, Quaestiones
Romanae III.

<span id="fn_233"></span>[38](tms05.htm#fr_233) Tusculanae Dispulationes
IV. 11. 27.

<span id="fn_234"></span>[39](tms05.htm#fr_234) Servius on Vergil's
Aeneid VIII. 269.

<span id="fn_235"></span>[40](tms05.htm#fr_235) Pliny, Naturalis
Historia VII. 2, 15.

<span id="fn_236"></span>[41](tms05.htm#fr_236) Livy I. 40, 2.

<span id="fn_237"></span>[42](tms05.htm#fr_237) Livy XXIII. 5.

<span id="fn_238"></span>[43](tms05.htm#fr_238) Livy XXVI. 34, 12; see
Macrobius, Saturnalia III. 3, 1.

<span id="fn_239"></span>[44](tms05.htm#fr_239) Livy II. 37. 9.

<span id="fn_240"></span>[45](tms05.htm#fr_240) Gellius, Noctes Atticae
VI. 19, 7.

<span id="fn_241"></span>[46](tms05.htm#fr_241) Festus: aesto (Mueller,
p. 82).

<span id="fn_242"></span>[47](tms05.htm#fr_242) Gellius, Noctes Atticae
I. 12. 8.

<span id="fn_243"></span>[48](tms05.htm#fr_243) The translation is that
of H. J. Rose in Primitive Culture in Italy, p. 67.

<span id="fn_244"></span>[49](tms05.htm#fr_244) Pliny, Naturalis
Historia XXII. 1, 5.

<span id="fn_245"></span>[50](tms05.htm#fr_245) Livy I. 24, 4-6.

<span id="fn_246"></span>[51](tms05.htm#fr_246) Livy IV. 3, 9, and 2.
5-7.

<span id="fn_247"></span>[52](tms05.htm#fr_247) Livy X. 6.

<span id="fn_248"></span>[53](tms05.htm#fr_248) Livy I. 34. 11.

<span id="fn_249"></span>[54](tms05.htm#fr_249) Westermarck, The Origin
and Development of Moral Ideas, I. 570ff., 590ff.

<span id="fn_250"></span>[55](tms05.htm#fr_250) Tylor, Primitive
Culture, Vol. I, p. 114,

<span id="fn_251"></span>[56](tms05.htm#fr_251) Bellum Gallicum VI. 23.

<span id="fn_252"></span>[57](tms05.htm#fr_252) See W. Warde Fowler, The
Religious Experience of the Roman People, pp. 223-247.

<span id="fn_253"></span>[58](tms05.htm#fr_253) See Frazer, The Fasti of
Ovid, Vol. IV, pp. 290-291.

<span id="fn_254"></span>[59](tms05.htm#fr_254) Livy II. 36. 1.

<span id="fn_255"></span>[60](tms05.htm#fr_255) Cicero, De Haruspicum
Responso XI-XII.

<span id="fn_256"></span>[61](tms05.htm#fr_256) Livy I. 7, 12-14.

<span id="fn_257"></span>[62](tms05.htm#fr_257) Gellius, Noctes Atticae
I. 12. 5.

<span id="fn_258"></span>[63](tms05.htm#fr_258) Ovid, Fasti VI. 481;
Plutarch, Quaestiones Romanae XVI.

<span id="fn_259"></span>[64](tms05.htm#fr_259) Cato, De Agricultura V.
1-4; Dionysius of Halicarnassus,

<span id="fn_260"></span>[65](tms05.htm#fr_260) Antiquitates Romanae IV.
14, 3-4.

<span id="fn_261"></span>[66](tms05.htm#fr_261) Ovid, Fasti VI. 783-784.
Seneca, De Clementia 1. 18, 2.

<span id="fn_262"></span>[67](tms05.htm#fr_262) Dionysius of
Halicarnassus IV. 14, 3-4.

<span id="fn_263"></span>[68](tms05.htm#fr_263) Suetonius, Claudius
XXII.

<span id="fn_264"></span>[69](tms05.htm#fr_264) Tacitus, Annales XIV.
21.

<span id="fn_265"></span>[70](tms05.htm#fr_265) Apuleius, Metamorphoses
IV. 11.

<span id="fn_266"></span>[71](tms05.htm#fr_266) Tibullus III. 2. 15-22.

<span id="fn_267"></span>[72](tms05.htm#fr_267) Livy IV. 20. 7.

<span id="fn_268"></span>[73](tms05.htm#fr_268) Suctonius, Galba XIX.1.

<span id="fn_269"></span>[74](tms05.htm#fr_269) Propertius V. 3. 64.

<span id="fn_270"></span>[75](tms05.htm#fr_270) On Vergil's Aeneid XII.
120.

<span id="fn_271"></span>[76](tms05.htm#fr_271) Ibidem.

<span id="fn_272"></span>[77](tms05.htm#fr_272) Cornelius Fronto, Ad
Marcum Caesarem IV. 4.

<span id="fn_273"></span>[78](tms05.htm#fr_273) Livy IV. 7. 12.

<span id="fn_274"></span>[79](tms05.htm#fr_274) Livy X. 38.

<span id="fn_275"></span>[80](tms05.htm#fr_275) Pliny, Naturalis
Historia 11. 56, 147.

<span id="fn_276"></span>[81](tms05.htm#fr_276) Ovid, Fasti III. 30.

<span id="fn_277"></span>[82](tms05.htm#fr_277) Fasti II. 21.

<span id="fn_278"></span>[83](tms05.htm#fr_278) Servius on Vergil's
Aeneid IV. 137.

<span id="fn_279"></span>[84](tms05.htm#fr_279) Livy I. 32. 6.

<span id="fn_280"></span>[85](tms05.htm#fr_280) Pilae effigies (Mueller,
p. 239) ; Laneae (p. 121). Macrobius, Saturnalia I. 7, 35.

<span id="fn_281"></span>[86](tms05.htm#fr_281) Pliny, Naturalis
Historia XXX. 1, 12.

<span id="fn_282"></span>[87](tms05.htm#fr_282) Ovid, Fasti IV, 652-660.

<span id="fn_283"></span>[88](tms05.htm#fr_283) See Chapter 1, pp. 5-7.

<span id="fn_284"></span>[89](tms05.htm#fr_284) Tibullus I. 3. 30.

<span id="fn_285"></span>[90](tms05.htm#fr_285) Apologia LVI.

<span id="fn_286"></span>[91](tms05.htm#fr_286) Leviticus VI. 10.

<span id="fn_287"></span>[92](tms05.htm#fr_287) Leviticus XVI. 4.

<span id="fn_288"></span>[93](tms05.htm#fr_288) Tibullus I. 5, 15-17.

<span id="fn_289"></span>[94](tms05.htm#fr_289) Vergil, Bucolica VIII.

<span id="fn_290"></span>[95](tms05.htm#fr_290) J. G. Frazer, The Fasti
of Ovid, Vol. III, p. 61.

<span id="fn_291"></span>[96](tms05.htm#fr_291) IV. 518.

<span id="fn_292"></span>[97](tms05.htm#fr_292) Gellius, Noctes Atticae
X. 15, 30.

<span id="fn_293"></span>[98](tms05.htm#fr_293) Ovid, Fasti VI. 227-232.

<span id="fn_294"></span>[99](tms05.htm#fr_294) Ibid., III. 397-398.

<span id="fn_295"></span>[100](tms05.htm#fr_295) Ovid, Fasti IV. 854;
Plutarch, Quaestiones Romanae XIV; Tibullus III. 2. 11.

<span id="fn_296"></span>[101](tms05.htm#fr_296) Ovid, Fasti III.
257-258.

<span id="fn_297"></span>[102](tms05.htm#fr_297) Servius on Vergil's
Aeneid IV. 518.

<span id="fn_298"></span>[103](tms05.htm#fr_298) Ovid, Metamorphoses IV.
297-300.

<span id="fn_299"></span>[104](tms05.htm#fr_299) Apuleius, Metamorphoses
III. 1.

<span id="fn_300"></span>[105](tms05.htm#fr_300) Vergil, Aeneid IV. 518.

<span id="fn_301"></span>[106](tms05.htm#fr_301) Servius on Vergil's
Aeneid IV. 518.

<span id="fn_302"></span>[107](tms05.htm#fr_302) Gellius, Noctes Atticae
X. 15, 9.

<span id="fn_303"></span>[108](tms05.htm#fr_303) Plutarch, Quaestiones
Romanae CXII; Gellius, Noctes Atticae X. 15, 13; Festus, Ederam
(Mueller, p. 82).

<span id="fn_304"></span>[109](tms05.htm#fr_304) Livy I. 18, 7.

<span id="fn_305"></span>[110](tms05.htm#fr_305) Ovid, Farii V. 432.

<span id="fn_306"></span>[111](tms05.htm#fr_306) Juvenal XII. 3-6.

<span id="fn_307"></span>[112](tms05.htm#fr_307) Tibullus II. 1, 7;
Ovid, Fasti I. 83, III. 375-376, IV. 335-336.

<span id="fn_308"></span>[113](tms05.htm#fr_308) Naturalis Historia
XXVIII. 28.

<span id="fn_309"></span>[114](tms05.htm#fr_309) Tibullus II. 1, 10.

<span id="fn_310"></span>[115](tms05.htm#fr_310) Gellius, Noctes Atticae
X. 15, 6.

<span id="fn_311"></span>[116](tms05.htm#fr_311) Ovid, Fasti IV.
657-658.

<span id="fn_312"></span>[117](tms05.htm#fr_312) Servius on Vergil's
Aeneid III. 370.

<span id="fn_313"></span>[118](tms05.htm#fr_313) See J. G. Frazer, The
Golden Bough, Vol. II, p. 230.

<span id="fn_314"></span>[119](tms05.htm#fr_314) M. Cary and A. D. Nock,
in The Classical Quarterly, XXI (1927), pp. 125-127; see Propertius V.
5, 9-10.

<span id="fn_315"></span>[120](tms05.htm#fr_315) Claudius Claudianus,
Carminum Minorum Corpusculum XXIX. 25-27.

<span id="fn_316"></span>[121](tms05.htm#fr_316) De Agricultura CLX.

<span id="fn_317"></span>[122](tms05.htm#fr_317) See Frank Granger, The
Worship of the Romans, p. 164.

<span id="fn_318"></span>[123](tms05.htm#fr_318) Pliny, Naturalis
Historia X. 54, 152.

<span id="fn_319"></span>[124](tms05.htm#fr_319) Henzen, Acta Fratrum
Artalium, pp. 128-135.

<span id="fn_320"></span>[125](tms05.htm#fr_320) Pliny, Naturalis
Historia XXXVI. 15, 100; Dio III. 45.

<span id="fn_321"></span>[126](tms05.htm#fr_321) Pliny, Naturalis
Historia XXXVI. 100.

<span id="fn_322"></span>[127](tms05.htm#fr_322) I Kings VI. 7.

<span id="fn_323"></span>[128](tms05.htm#fr_323) Dessau, Inscriptiones
Latinae Selectae 4906.

<span id="fn_324"></span>[129](tms05.htm#fr_324) On Vergil's Aeneid II.
57; see also Gellius, Noctes Atticae X. 15, 8.

<span id="fn_325"></span>[130](tms05.htm#fr_325) W. Warde Fowler, The
Religious Experience of the Roman People, p. 32.

<span id="fn_326"></span>[131](tms05.htm#fr_326) Aeneid IV. 513; see
also Macrobius, Saturnalia V. 19, 7-14; Ovid, Metamorphoses VII. 227.

<span id="fn_327"></span>[132](tms05.htm#fr_327) Ovid, Fasti 11.
575-578.

<span id="fn_328"></span>[133](tms05.htm#fr_328) I. 85; VIII. 49, 50;
see Tavenner, op. cit. p. 121, note 294.

<span id="fn_329"></span>[134](tms05.htm#fr_329) Plutarch, Romulus XI.
2; Zollaras VII. 3.

<span id="fn_330"></span>[135](tms05.htm#fr_330) Macrobius, Saturnalia
V. 19, 13.

<span id="fn_331"></span>[136](tms05.htm#fr_331) Servius on Vergil's
Aeneid I. 448.

<span id="fn_332"></span>[137](tms05.htm#fr_332) Festus: Infibulati
(Mueller, p. 113).

<span id="fn_333"></span>[138](tms05.htm#fr_333) Livy I. 20, 4.

<span id="fn_334"></span>[139](tms05.htm#fr_334) Claudianus, De Bello
Gothico 233-234.

<span id="fn_335"></span>[140](tms05.htm#fr_335) Annales 1. 28.

<span id="fn_336"></span>[141](tms05.htm#fr_336) J. G. Frazer, The Fasti
of Ovid, Vol. IV, p. 48.

<span id="fn_337"></span>[142](tms05.htm#fr_337) Juvenal XIII. 223-224.

<span id="fn_338"></span>[143](tms05.htm#fr_338) Festus: Fulguritum
(Mueller, p. 92) ; Bidental (p. 33). Fowler, The Religious Experience of
the Roman People, p. 37. Wissowa, Religion und Kultus der Romer, p. 122
and note 3.

<span id="fn_339"></span>[144](tms05.htm#fr_339) Festus: Bidental
(Mueller, P. 33) ; Horace, Ars Poetica 470-472.

<span id="fn_340"></span>[145](tms05.htm#fr_340) See Wissowa, op. cit,,
P. 131,

<span id="fn_341"></span>[146](tms05.htm#fr_341) Tacitus, Annales XIII.
24.

<span id="fn_342"></span>[147](tms05.htm#fr_342) Suetonius, Galba IV. 2.

<span id="fn_343"></span>[148](tms05.htm#fr_343) Festus: Occisum
(Mueller, p. 178).

<span id="fn_344"></span>[149](tms05.htm#fr_344) Pliny, Naturalis
Historia II. 145.

<span id="fn_345"></span>[150](tms05.htm#fr_345) Ovid, Fasti II.
201-202; Livy II. 49, 8.

<span id="fn_346"></span>[151](tms05.htm#fr_346) Translated in
Comparetti, Vergil in the Middle Ages, p. 261.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV: Magic Acts: The General Principles](tms06)
