[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc14000)  [Next](cc14002) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 14: Isaiah, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii"></span>

<span id="ii-p1"></span>TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE

<span id="ii-p2"></span>In preparing the First Volume of the Commentary
On Isaiah, many attempts were made, but without success, to procure the
French Translation. After much fruitless labor, and some expense, a copy
of that rare work, which happens to be in the possession of the Parker
Society, has been kindly lent to the Translator, who takes this
opportunity of conveying his warmest thanks for this favor. The
references in the foot-notes of the present and future Volumes will give
some idea of the assistance derived from that source. But it has also
supplied materials for a history, more complete than we could formerly
give, of this Commentary, and of the forms in which it was successively
brought before the public.

<span id="ii-p3"></span>Various scribes, on some occasions, united their
efforts to obtain a perfect record of what had been uttered by the
Reformer in his private Lessons, as they were called, which he delivered
to students of theology. But, in the present instance, we are indebted
almost exclusively to the earnest, judicious, and unwearied labors of
one man, *Mr. Nicolas Des Gallars*, a minister of Geneva, from whose
notes, after having been revised by the Author, the first Latin edition
was printed in 1550. He appears to have executed, under the Author’s
eye, a French Translation, which came forth almost simultaneously with
the Latin copy, and enjoyed the advantage of being known to be well
authenticated. After the lapse of several years, Calvin availed himself
of a season of leisure for re-writing this Commentary, added more than a
third to its original size,  <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) and made
such extensive alterations, that he ventured to call it “a new work.”
 <span id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1) It bears the date of 15th January
1559. The third edition, which is dated 1583, lays claim to still
greater accuracy; for it professes to have received corrections from the
Author’s Manuscript.

<span id="ii-p6"></span>While the Commentary was thus extensively
circulated,  <span id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2) the benefits of it were
chiefly confined to those who were acquainted with the Latin language;
for even the French reader was left to struggle with all the
imperfections which belonged to the first edition. At least, it was only
eleven years before the last mentioned date, and eight years after the
Author’s death, that a new French translation appeared, which was
printed at Geneva by *Francois Perrin*, in 1572. There is reason to
believe that the first French translation would be treated by the second
translator with great deference, and that he would scarcely consider
himself to be at liberty to depart from it, except for the purpose of
introducing the extensive alterations and additions which had been made
to the original work. Let us hope that some future editor, having
obtained access to copies now slumbering in the shelves of our
continental neighbors, or perhaps of our own countrymen, will enjoy the
satisfaction of collating the earlier and later editions in both
languages, and will be enabled to reveal the steps by which this
valuable Commentary passed from the first rough notes of the labourious
scribe to the form which was imparted to it by the fastidious
corrections of the Author.

<span id="ii-p8"></span>This Volume contains an “Address to the Readers”
by *Nicolas des* *Gallars*, Latinized *Gallasius*, (which appears to
have been prefixed to his French translation of the Commentary,) his
Epistolary Dedication of the Latin edition of 1583 to a learned author
and eminent printer, John Crispin, and a short “Address to the Readers”
by the latest French translator, all of which, it is hoped, will be
perused with deep interest. The relation in which *Gallars* stood to
Calvin, and to his published writings, has thrown around him many
pleasing associations; and his style, both Latin and French, displays
such judgment, and taste, and scholarship, as justifies the marked
preference given to him by the Reformer, and assures the reader that the
responsible office which he held could not have been committed to abler
hands.

<span id="ii-p9"></span>The Notes added to these Volumes shew that it is
the aim of the Calvin Society not only to give exact Translations, but
to aid the investigation of dark passages by the labors of modern
critics. Among the works which have been consulted with greatest
advantage may be named “The Prophecies of Isaiah, Earlier and Later, by
*Joseph Addison* *Alexander*, Professor in the Theological Seminary,
Princeton, New Jersey,” an exceedingly valuable addition to the stores
of exegetical theology, and not a little enhanced by the care with which
the learned editor, Dr. Eadie, has superintended the British edition.
Yet we are again and again constrained to remark the extent to which the
critical researches of our own age have been anticipated by the sagacity
of the Reformer, to whom our greatest men delight in acknowledging their
obligations. “Calvin,” says Professor Alexander, “still towers above all
interpreters in large commanding views of revelation, in its whole
connection, with extraordinary insight into the logical relations of a
passage, even where its individual expressions were not fully
understood. These qualities, together with his fixed belief of
fundamental doctrines, his eminent soundness of judgment, and his
freedom from all tendency to paradox, pedantic affectation, or fanciful
conceit, place him more completely on a level with the very best
interpreters of our day than almost any intervening writer.”

<span id="ii-p10"></span>Auchterarder, *3d September*, 1851.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[1](cc14001.htm#fr_0) <span id="ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p4"></span> See page 17.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[2](cc14001.htm#fr_1) <span id="ii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ii-p5"></span> See Com. On Isaiah, vol. 1, p. 16.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[3](cc14001.htm#fr_2) <span id="ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p7"></span> See page 15.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Gallars' Preface to the Reader](cc14002)
