[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc14006)  [Next](cc14008) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 14: Isaiah, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii"></span>

<span id="viii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 19

<span id="viii.i"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p1"></span>Isaiah Chapter 19:1-25

<span id="viii.i-p2"></span>**1**. The burden of Egypt. Behold, the Lord
rideth upon a swift cloud, and shall come into Egypt: and the idols of
Egypt shall be moved at his presence, and the heart of Egypt shall melt
in the midst of it.

<span id="viii.i-p3"></span>**1**. Onus Ægypti. Ecce Iehova equitat
super nubem celerem, et veniet in Ægyptum; et commovebuntur idola Ægypti
a facie ejus, et cor Ægypti dissolvetur in medio ejus.

<span id="viii.i-p4"></span>**2**. And I will set the Egyptians against
the Egyptians: and they shall fight every one against his brother, and
every one against his neighbour; city against city, *and* kingdom
against kingdom.

<span id="viii.i-p5"></span>**2**. Et committam Ægyptios cum Ægyptiis,
pugnabit quisque tunc contra fratrem suum; quisque, inquam, contra
proximum suum; civitas contra civitatem, et regnum contra regnum.

<span id="viii.i-p6"></span>**3**. And the spirit of Egypt shall fail in
the midst thereof; and I will destroy the counsel thereof: and they
shall seek to the idols, and to the charmers, and to them that have
familiar spirits, and to the wizards.

<span id="viii.i-p7"></span>**3**. Et exinanietur spiritus Ægypti in
medio ejus: et consilium ejus destruam, etiamsi quærant illod apud
idola, apud magos, apud pythones, apud divinos.

<span id="viii.i-p8"></span>**4**. And the Egyptians will I give over
into the hand of a cruel lord; and a fierce king shall rule over them,
saith the Lord, the Lord of hosts.

<span id="viii.i-p9"></span>**4**. Et tradam Ægyptios in manum domini
sævi, et rex fortis dominabitur eis, dicit Dominus Iehova exercituum.

<span id="viii.i-p10"></span>**5**. And the waters shall fail from the
sea, and the river shall be wasted and dried up.

<span id="viii.i-p11"></span>**5**. Tunc deficient aquæ a mari, et
fluvius exsiccabitur atque arescet.

<span id="viii.i-p12"></span>**6**. And they shall turn the rivers far
away; *and* the brooks of defence shall be emptied and dried up: the
reeds and flags shall wither.

<span id="viii.i-p13"></span>**6**. Elongabuntur flumina; exhaurientur
et siccabuntur rivi munitionis, arundo et carectum succidentur.

<span id="viii.i-p14"></span>**7**. The paper reeds by the brooks, by
the mouth of the brooks, and every thing sown by the brooks, shall
wither, be driven away, and be no *more*

<span id="viii.i-p15"></span>**7**. Herbæ ad rivum et super os rivi, et
omnis sementis rivi arescet, et propelletur, ut non sit.

<span id="viii.i-p16"></span>**8**. The fishers also shall mourn, and
all they that cast angle into the brooks shall lament, and they that
spread nets upon the water shall languish.

<span id="viii.i-p17"></span>**8**. Et moerebunt piscatores, et lugebunt
omnes qui hamum projiciunt in rivum; qui expandunt rete super faciem
aquarum debilitabuntur.

<span id="viii.i-p18"></span>**9**. Moreover, they that work in fine
flax, and they that weave networks, shall be confounded.

<span id="viii.i-p19"></span>**9**. Qui in lino optimo operantur
erubescent, et qui texunt plagas foratas, (*vel, pellucidas*.)

<span id="viii.i-p20"></span>**10**. And they shall be broken in the
purposes thereof, all that make sluices *and* ponds for fish.

<span id="viii.i-p21"></span>**10**. Erunt enum retia ejus dissipata; et
omnes architecti retis (*vel, mercedis*) tristes erunt anima.

<span id="viii.i-p22"></span>**11**. Surely the princes of Zoan *are*
fools, the counsel of the wise counsellors of Paroaoh is become brutish:
how say ye unto Paraoh, I *am* the son of the wise, the son of ancient
kings?

<span id="viii.i-p23"></span>**11**. Certe stulti principes Zoan;
prudentum consiliariorum Pharaonis consilium unfatuatum est. Quomodo
dicitis Pharaoni, Filius sapientum ego, et filius regum antiquorum?

<span id="viii.i-p24"></span>**12**. Where *are* they? Where *are* thy
wise *men*? And let them tell thee now, and let them know what the Lord
of hosts hath purposed upon Egypt.

<span id="viii.i-p25"></span>**12**. Ubi nunc prudentes tui? ut
annuntient tibi, aut etiam sciant quid decreverit Iehova exercituum
super Ægyptum.

<span id="viii.i-p26"></span>**13**. The princes of Zoan are become
fools, the princes of Noph are deceived; they have also seduced Egypt,
*even they that are* the stay of the tribes thereof.

<span id="viii.i-p27"></span>**13**. Infatuati sunt principes Zoan,
decepti sunt principes Noph, seduxerunt Ægyptum angulus tribuum ejus.

<span id="viii.i-p28"></span>**14**. The Lord hath mingled a perverse
spirit in the midst thereof; and they have caused Egypt to err in every
work thereof, as a drunken *man* staggereth in his vomit.

<span id="viii.i-p29"></span>**14**. Iehova miscuit in medio ejus
spiritum perversitatis; et seduxerunt Ægyptum in omni opere ejus,
quemadmodum circumagitur ebrius in vomito suo.

<span id="viii.i-p30"></span>**15**. Neither shall there be *any* work
for Egypt, which the head or tail, branch or rush, may do.

<span id="viii.i-p31"></span>**15**. Nec erit Ægypto opus quod faciat
caput vel cauda, ramus aut juncus.

<span id="viii.i-p32"></span>**16**. In that day shall Egypt be like
unto women; and it shall be afraid and fear, because of the shaking of
the hand of the Lord of hosts, which he shaketh over it.

<span id="viii.i-p33"></span>**16**. In die illa erit Ægyptus instar
mulierum; horrebit enim et pavebit a facie agitationis manus Iehovæ
exercituum, quam agitabit ipse super eam.

<span id="viii.i-p34"></span>**17**. And the land of Judah shall be a
terror unto Egypt; every one that maketh mention thereof shall be afraid
in himself, because of the counsel of the Lord of hosts, which he hath
determined against it.

<span id="viii.i-p35"></span>**17**. Et erit terra Iuda Ægyptiis in
tremorem. Omnis qui recordatus fuerit illius pavebit super ipsam,
propter consilium Iehovæ exercituum, quod decrevit super eam.

<span id="viii.i-p36"></span>**18**. In that day shall five cities in
the land of Egypt speak the language of Canaan, and swear to the Lord of
hosts: one shall be called, The city of destruction.

<span id="viii.i-p37"></span>**18**. In die illa erunt quinque civitates
in terra Ægypti loquentes labio Canaan, et jurantes per Iehovam
exercituum. Civitas desolationis una vocabitur.

<span id="viii.i-p38"></span>**19**. In that day shall there be an altar
to the Lord in the midst of the land of Egypt, and a pillar at the
border thereof to the Lord.

<span id="viii.i-p39"></span>**19**. In die illa erit altare Iehovæ in
medio terræ Ægypti, statua item juxta terminum ejus Iehovæ.

<span id="viii.i-p40"></span>**20**. And it shall be for a sign and for
a witness unto the Lord of hosts in the land of Egypt: for they shall
cry unto the Lord because of the oppressors, and he shall send them a
savior, and a great one, and he shall deliver them.

<span id="viii.i-p41"></span>**20**. Eritque in signum et in testem
Iehovæ exercituum, in terra Ægypti; quia clamabunt ad Iehovam propter
oppressores, et mittet eis servatorem et principem, ut liberet eos.

<span id="viii.i-p42"></span>**21**. And the Lord shall be known to
Egypt, and the Egyptians shall know the Lord in that day, and shall do
sacrifice and oblation; yea, they shall vow a vow unto the Lord, and
perform *it*

<span id="viii.i-p43"></span>**21**. Et cognoscetur Iehova ab Ægyptiis,
cognoscent, inquam, Ægyptii Iehovam in illo die; et facient sacrificium
et oblationem, vovebuntque vota Iehovæ et reddent.

<span id="viii.i-p44"></span>**22**. And the Lord shall smite Egypt; he
shall smite and heal *it*: and they shall return *even* to the Lord, and
he shall be entreated of them, and shall heal them.

<span id="viii.i-p45"></span>**22**. Itaque percutiet Iehova Ægyptum,
percutiens et sanans; convertentur enim ad Iehovam, et exorabitur ab
eis, et sanabit eos.

<span id="viii.i-p46"></span>**23**. In that day shall there be a
highway out of Egypt to Assyria, and the Assyrian shall come into Egypt,
and the Egyptian into Assyria; and the Egyptians shall serve with the
Assyrians.

<span id="viii.i-p47"></span>**23**. In die illa erit via ab Ægypto in
Assyriam; commeabunt Assyrii in Ægyptum, et Ægyptii in Assyriam; et
colent Ægyptii Assyrios (*vel, cum Assyriis.*)

<span id="viii.i-p48"></span>**24**. In that day shall Israel be the
third with Egypt and with Assyria, *even* a blessing in the midst of the
land:

<span id="viii.i-p49"></span>**24**. In die illa erit Israel tertia cum
Ægypto, et Assyria benedictio in medio terræ.

<span id="viii.i-p50"></span>**25**. Whom the Lord of hosts shall bless,
saying, Blessed *be* Egypt my people, and Assyria the work of my hands,
and Israel mine inheritance.

<span id="viii.i-p51"></span>**25**. Quia benedicet illi Iehova
exercituum, dicens: Benedictus populus meus Ægyptius, et opus manus meæ
Assyrius, et hæreditas mea Israel.

<span id="viii.i-p52"></span> 

<span id="viii.i-p53"></span><span id="viii.i-p53.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p54"></span>**l.** *The burden of Egypt.* The Prophet
here prophesies against *Egypt,* because it was a kind of refuge to the
Jews, whenever they saw any danger approaching them; for when they had
forsaken God, to whom they ought to have had recourse, they thought that
they had no help left to them but in the Egyptians. It was therefore
necessary that that kingdom should be overthrown, that its wealth or its
forces might no longer deceive the Jews; for so long as Egypt was
prosperous, the Jews thought that, on account of its being exceedingly
populous and highly fortified, they were far removed from danger, and
therefore despised God, or at least paid scarcely any regard to his
promises. This led to evil consequences in two respects; first, because
when they ought to have relied on God alone, they were puffed up with
that vain confidence in Egypt; and secondly, because whenever the Lord
punished them, they defended themselves against his chastisements by the
power of the Egyptians, as if by human resources they could make void
his judgments, when they ought to have been turned to God altogether. On
this subject Isaiah speaks more fully in a later portion of this book.
(<span id="viii.i-p54.2"></span>[Isa
30:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#002)<span id="viii.i-p54.2"></span>.)

<span id="viii.i-p55"></span>*Behold, the Lord rideth on a swift cloud.*
This mode of expression is found also in other passages of Scripture,
but in a general form. (<span id="viii.i-p55.1"></span>[Ps
104:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#003)<span id="viii.i-p55.1"></span>.)
The Prophet applies it to this prediction, because the Egyptians thought
that they were so well fortified on all sides, that there was no way by
which God could approach them. He therefore ridicules their foolish
confidence, and exhibits the exalted power of God, when he *rideth on a
swift cloud,* by which he will easily make a descent upon them, and
neither walls nor bulwarks shall hinder his progress. Again, because in
addition to earthly aid the Jews were likewise bewitched by a false
religion, on this ground also the Prophet ridicules their madness,
because God will dash to the ground all the assistance which they
expected to obtain from idols. I pass by the foolish notion which many
have entertained, as to the idols which Christ overthrew in Egypt, when
he was carried thither in infancy; for it does not deserve a refutation.
(<span id="viii.i-p55.2"></span>[Mt
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#014)<span id="viii.i-p55.2"></span>.)
This passage has been perverted to prove it, and to prove many
conjectures of the same kind. But the Prophet’s meaning is totally
different; for he speaks of the defeat of the Egyptians by the
Assyrians, and shews that it ought to be ascribed to God, and not, as
irreligious men commonly do, to fortune. He shews it to be a judgment of
God, by whose hand all things are governed.

<span id="viii.i-p56"></span>*And the idols of Egypt shall be moved at
his presence.* He declares that *the idols* shall fall; that is, that
they shall be of no avail to the Egyptians, though they rely on their
assistance, and think that they are under their protection. No nation
ever was so much addicted to superstitions; for they worshipped cats,
and oxen, and crocodiles, and even onions, and plants of every sort, and
there was nothing to which they did not ascribe some kind of divinity.
He means that the power of all those false gods, whom the Egyptians had
taken for their protectors, will be overthrown. Having declared that the
Egyptians rely in vain on their superstitions, he likewise casts down
the pride which they cherished as to their earthly resources.

<span id="viii.i-p57"></span>*And the heart of Egypt shall melt in the
midst of her.* By the word *heart* he means the courage which sometimes
fails even the bravest men, so that they do not attempt any action, even
when their strength and forces are abundant, and in this manner he
declares that they will be at war with God, who will *melt their hearts*
within them, before they are called to contend with their enemies. Not
only does he threaten that they will be terrified, but he likewise adds
*in the* *midst* of the whole kingdom, where they had an exceedingly
safe and peaceful dwelling, because they were far removed from every
attack. It was the duty of all believers to consider this, when war was
waged against the Egyptians; and we also ought to behold the same thing
exemplified in all revolutions of kingdoms, which proceed solely from
the hand of God. If *the heart melts,* if the strength fails, in men who
are usually brave, and who had formerly displayed great courage, this
ought to be ascribed to the vengeance of God.

<span id="viii.i-p58"></span><span id="viii.i-p58.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p59"></span>**2.** *And I will set the Egyptians
against the Egyptians.* Here he describes more particularly the calamity
which the Lord had determined to bring on Egypt. By the expression, *I
will set,* he means the internal struggles, in which those who ought to
be mutual defenders cut down one another; and no evil can be more
destructive than this to a state or a people. It was of importance also
to convince the Jews that God, in whose hands are the hearts of men,
(<span id="viii.i-p59.1"></span>[Pr
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro021.htm#001)<span id="viii.i-p59.1"></span>,)
could by his unseen influence inflame the Jews to mutual animosities,
that they might slay each other, though they were victorious over
foreign enemies. Hence we learn that nations never rise in a seditious
manner, unless the Lord *set them* against each other, as when one
brings forward gladiators to the place of combat. He inflames their
minds for battle, and prompts them to slay each other by mutual wounds;
and therefore, as we ought to reckon it an evidence of God’s favor, when
friendship is cherished among citizens, so we ought to ascribe it to his
vengeance, when they rage against and slay and injure one another.

<span id="viii.i-p60"></span>*And they shall fight every one against his
brother.* For the sake of heightening the picture, he adds what was
still more monstrous, that those who were related to them by blood would
take up arms to destroy each other; for if men are worse than beasts
when, forgetting their common nature, they engage in battle, how much
more shocking is it to nature that brethren or allies should fight with
each other! But the more monstrous it is, the more ought we to
acknowledge the judgment of God and his terrible vengeance.

<span id="viii.i-p61"></span>*City against city, and kingdom against
kingdom.* Isaiah appears to advance by degrees; for he mentions, first,
*a brother;* secondly, *a neighbor;* thirdly, *cities;* and, fourthly,
*kingdoms* By *kingdoms* he means *provinces,* into which Egypt was
divided, which the Greeks called <span id="viii.i-p61.1"></span>νομοἰ,
the term by which the Greek translators have rendered it in this
passage.  <span id="fr_25"></span>[26](#fn_25)

<span id="viii.i-p96"></span><span id="viii.i-p96.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p97"></span>**3.** *And the spirit of Egypt shall be
emptied.*  <span id="fr_26"></span>[27](#fn_26) As Isaiah had, a little
before, deprived the Egyptians of courage, so he now takes away their
understanding, both of which are exceedingly necessary for the defense
of kingdoms; for when these have been taken away, there is no
possibility of transacting national affairs. Now, the Egyptians had so
high an opinion of their own wisdom, that they reckoned themselves
superior to other nations; and it is well known that they haughtily
despised all other nations as barbarians, as if there had been no
civilization, refinement, learning, or skill, but in Egypt alone. They
boasted that they were the inventors of learning, that philosophy and
astronomy came from them, and, in short, that Egypt was the workshop of
all the liberal arts; and therefore they would never have thought it
possible that they should fail in wisdom and prudence, and
unquestionably, if this prediction had come to their knowledge, they
would have laughed at it in disdain, and would have thought, that sooner
would the waters of the sea be dried up, and everything be overturned,
than this should befall those who imagined that prudence was their
birthright. But Isaiah declares it boldly, for he did not speak from
himself.

<span id="viii.i-p99"></span>Again, since he had predicted that they
would be deprived of courage, in which they excelled, the context
requires us to understand the meaning to be, that they would be struck
with blindness; for both faculties of the soul depend entirely on the
favor of God. Consequently, <span id="viii.i-p99.1"></span>רוח (*rūăch*)
means here understanding and sagacity, which ought to be carefully
observed, for many are mistaken as to the meaning of this word. When he
immediately adds, *I will destroy the counsel thereof,* this is a
stronger expression of the former statement; for it shews what is the
cause of that *emptiness,* namely, that God will take and carry away
their *counsel.*

<span id="viii.i-p100"></span>*Even though they seek it.* This is spoken
by anticipation, for he meets the objections of the Egyptians, who might
have said, “Have we not gods whom we can consult? Have we not magicians,
diviners, and soothsayers? Do you reckon those to be of no value?” He
threatens that all these things will be of no avail to them, to whatever
extent they may rely on them, and be puffed up with the empty name of
wisdom. I shall not spend much time on these names, though it is
probable that Isaiah’s enumeration proceeds by gradual advancement.
First, he mentions *gods,* next *magicians,* and afterwards *diviners*
and *fortune-tellers* They had their oracles, in which they placed the
highest confidence. Next after them came the *magicians,* though these
too had great influence. In matters of smaller moment they consulted the
soothsayers. Superstitious men are so restless that nothing can satisfy
them; for they are fickle and unsteady, and sometimes resort to one
remedy and sometimes to another; and indeed Satan deceives them in such
a manner, that at first he holds out to them the appearance of peace and
quietness, which they think that they have fully obtained, but
afterwards shews them that they have not reached it, and distresses and
harasses them more and more, and compels them to seek new grounds of
confidence. Thus our minds cannot obtain rest and peace but in God
alone. And undoubtedly the Prophet condemns those arts as contrary to
reason; for God has revealed all that is necessary to be known by means
of the arts and sciences, which he intended to be used, and of which he
approves. If any man shall wish to be wise in any other manner, he must
have Satan for his teacher.

<span id="viii.i-p101"></span><span id="viii.i-p101.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p102"></span>**4.** *And I will deliver the Egyptians
into the hand of a cruel master.*  <span id="fr_27"></span>[28](#fn_27)
He now shews what will happen to the Egyptians, after having lost
courage and been deprived of understanding. Nothing will be left for
them but to be reduced to slavery; for a nation destitute of these must
fall of its own accord, even though it were not violently attacked by
any enemy. Of such aids, therefore, God deprives those on whom he
determines to take vengeance, and shuts them out from every method of
upholding their liberty. Yet the Prophet threatens what is still more
shocking, that not only will the empire of which the Egyptians proudly
vaunted fall down, but the inhabitants also will undergo hard bondage.
Though the adjective <span id="viii.i-p103.1"></span>קשה, (*kāshĕh,*)
*cruel,* is in the singular number, yet he says in the plural number,
that they shall be subject to *lords,* which is harder to endure than if
there had been but one lord to whom they were subject.

<span id="viii.i-p104"></span>*And a powerful king*  <span
id="fr_28"></span>[29](#fn_28) *shall rule over them.* He means that the
power of the tyrant to whom he will subject them shall be so great, that
it will not be easy to restore them to liberty. Historians shew that
various changes occurred in many countries, which they who subdued them
were unable to hold and retain; for to keep what has been obtained is
often more difficult than to conquer. But the Prophet intimates that
this condition will not be easily changed, and that the bondage of the
Egyptians shall be of long duration, because no one will dare to enter
the lists with an exceedingly powerful conqueror. We may also understand
the meaning to be, that the princes of smaller nations will deal more
gently with their people than more powerful monarchs, who, relying on
their greatness, allow themselves to do whatever they please; for,
reckoning their power to be unlimited, they set no bounds to their
freedom of action, and rush forward, without restraint, wherever their
passions drive them. Whether the one view or the other be adopted, it
will amount to this, that the Egyptians, who consider themselves to be
the highest and most distinguished of all men, shall fall under the
power of another, and shall be oppressed by hard bondage, that is, by
the bondage of *a powerful king,* whom no one will dare to oppose. Hence
we see how great is the folly of men who are desirous to have a powerful
and wealthy king reigning over them, and how justly they are punished
for their ambition, though it cannot be corrected by the experience of
every day, which is everywhere to be seen in the world. France and
Spain, at the present day, boast that they are governed by mighty
princes, but feel to their cost how little advantage they derive from
that which dazzles them by a false pretense of honor. But on this
subject we have spoken formerly in another place.  <span
id="fr_29"></span>[30](#fn_29) (<span id="viii.i-p106.1"></span>[Isa.
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#007)<span id="viii.i-p106.1"></span>.)

<span id="viii.i-p107"></span><span id="viii.i-p107.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p108"></span>**5.** *Then the waters shall fail from
the sea.* He follows out the subject which he had already begun, that
the fortifications, by which the Egyptians thought that they were
admirably defended, will be of no avail to them. They reckoned
themselves to be invincible, because they were surrounded by the sea,
and by the Nile, and by fortifications; and historians tell us that it
was difficult to gain entrance to them, because the Nile had no mouth,
by which they could not easily prevent ships from landing. They
therefore boasted that their situation was excellent, and that they were
strongly fortified by nature, in like manner as the inhabitants of
Venice, at the present day, think that, in consequence of being
surrounded by deep ditches, they are impregnable; but fortresses are
useless, when God has determined to punish us.

<span id="viii.i-p109"></span><span id="viii.i-p109.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p110"></span>**6.** *And the brooks of defence shall be
emptied and dried up.*  <span id="fr_30"></span>[31](#fn_30) What he
adds about fortifications is to the same purpose with what he had stated
immediately before. He alludes to the embankments, which not only
restrained the overflowing of the Nile, but protected the whole country;
as if he had said that the embankments will not be needed, because the
Nile will be dried up. Now, it is certain that the Nile was not laid
dry, and yet the Prophet did not foretell what was not accomplished. We
must therefore call to remembrance what we have already said, that on
account of our stupidity those calamities are represented to us in a
lively manner, which places them as it were before our eyes; for we need
to have a representation made to us which is fitted to impress our
minds, and to arouse us to consider the judgments of God, which
otherwise we despise. We ought to observe the haughtiness of the
Egyptians, whose resources were so various and abundant, and who thought
that it was impossible for them to be overtaken by such a calamity.

<span id="viii.i-p112"></span><span id="viii.i-p112.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p113"></span>**7.** *And the reed and the rush shall
wither.* He mentions *the* *reed* and *the rush,* because they had
abundance of them, and employed them for various purposes; or, it may be
thought to mean that the marshes will be dried up.

<span id="viii.i-p114"></span>*By the mouth of the brooks.* Some render
it *embankments,* but it rather means the fountain itself, which seldom
is dried up, though torrents or rivers fail. By *the mouth,* therefore,
he means the source of the river which shall be dried up in such a
manner that no part of the country can be watered. Though the source of
the Nile was at a great distance, yet not without reason did the Prophet
threaten that that river, on whose waters the fertility almost of the
whole land depended, shall be dried up at its very source; for in that
country rain seldom falls, but its place is supplied every year by the
Nile. If that river overflow but scantily, it threatens scarcity and
famine; and therefore, when the Prophet threatens that it will be dried
up, he means that the whole country will be barren. For this reason he
says also, that, even at its very *mouth,* from which the waters spring
up, there will be a lack of waters, so that in that place the herbs will
be withered.

<span id="viii.i-p115"></span><span id="viii.i-p115.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p116"></span>**8.** *And the fishers shall mourn.*
Isaiah still keeps in his eye the condition of Egypt. We have formerly
mentioned  <span id="fr_31"></span>[32](#fn_31) that the prophets made
use of those figures of speech by which, when any country is mentioned,
they chiefly name those things which abound in that country, and for
which it is celebrated. Thus, when a vinebearing country is spoken of,
they mention vines; if it abound in gold, they speak of gold; and if it
abound in silver, they speak of silver. Accordingly, when he speaks of
Egypt, which was well watered, and contained abundance of streams, he
mentions *fishing.*

<span id="viii.i-p118"></span>*They who spread a net on the face of the
waters shall languish.* Some translate the word <span
id="viii.i-p118.1"></span>אמללו, (ă*mlālū*,) “they shall be cut off,”
but the more correct rendering is, “they shall be weakened;” for this
corresponds to the mourning and lamentation which was formerly
mentioned. Now, we know that in that country there was a great number of
fishers, and that these formed a great part of the wealth of Egypt. When
fishers were taken away, of whom there were vast numbers among the
Egyptians, and of whom their wealth chiefly consisted, they must have
been *weakened*. Now, if the nation be deprived of that which is its
ordinary food, great poverty will follow. He therefore describes an
astonishing change that shall pass on the whole country.

<span id="viii.i-p119"></span><span id="viii.i-p119.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p120"></span>**9.** *And they who work in the finest
flax.* As he spoke of mourning, so he now speaks of shame; for they who
formerly earned an abundant livelihood by this trade will have no gains.
Now, the two occupations are closely connected, to weave nets and to
fish. Yet it is doubtful if he speaks of those only who manufactured
nets; for if we understand <span id="viii.i-p120.1"></span>שריקות,
(*sĕrīkōth*) to mean certain very fine linens, it is probable that the
latter clause relates to other productions of the loom, manufactured out
of small fine thread, and of the most elegant workmanship. We know that
linens of very great value were woven in Egypt, and there may be good
reason for interpreting the phrase *white nets,* or, as we have rendered
it, “perforated,” to mean also linen garments, which were more costly in
proportion to the greater delicacy of their texture.

<span id="viii.i-p121"></span>It will thus be a metaphorical expression,
by which the Prophet indirectly taunts them with their unbecoming
luxury, alleging that the Egyptians cover themselves with linen garments
in the same manner as if they clothed themselves with a net. If this
meaning be adopted, it will agree with the following verse; and indeed I
do not see how such exquisite skill in weaving can be applied to
fishing. But if it be thought better to understand the whole as relating
to fishes, the meaning will be, that they who had been much employed in
fishing, and had found it to be a profitable occupation, will be
overwhelmed with sorrow.  <span id="fr_32"></span>[33](#fn_32)

<span id="viii.i-p123"></span><span id="viii.i-p123.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p124"></span>**10.** *And all that make ponds.* As to
the word <span id="viii.i-p124.1"></span>שכר, (*secher,*) there is no
absolute necessity, in my opinion, for translating it *a net;* for the
derivation shews it, on the contrary, to denote a lucrative occupation.
 <span id="fr_33"></span>[34](#fn_33)

<span id="viii.i-p126"></span>Where fishes are very abundant, they are
also preserved in pools and ponds; because the fishers would otherwise
be constrained to sell them at a very low price. Besides, when they
throw a net, they are not always successful. He therefore follows out
the same subject, “It will not be possible either to take or to preserve
fishes. Pools will be of no use.”

<span id="viii.i-p127"></span><span id="viii.i-p127.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p128"></span>**11.** *Surely the princes of Zoan are
fools.* Here he joins wisdom with folly, and not without reason; for it
is impossible to take away from men a conviction of their wisdom, which
leads them to believe, in opposition to God himself, that they are wise.
It is therefore a kind of acknowledgment, when he calls those persons
wise whom he at the same time accuses of folly or stupidity. Though the
Hebrew particle <span id="viii.i-p128.1"></span>אך, (ă*ch,*) sometimes
means *but,* yet as the Prophet appears to attack the Egyptians, I
choose rather to render it “surely,” or “truly,” or “now at least;” for
he scoffs *at the counselors of Pharaoh* for wishing to be regarded, and
believing themselves to be, exceeding wise, though they are the most
foolish of all men. Thus it is an exclamation: “Where is that wisdom of
Egypt? Where are the counselors who held all men in contempt? Why do
they not preserve their kingdom?” Now, at least, it is evident what kind
of wisdom they had. This tends to confirm and seal the prophecy, in
which the Prophet obviously does not speak of things unknown, but has
before his eyes, as it were, the destruction of Egypt. “Armed therefore
with the authority of God, I venture to pronounce all those princes to
be fools, though they think that they are wise.”

<span id="viii.i-p129"></span>Finally, the Prophet shews that vain is
the glory of men who, without God, claim for themselves even a spark of
wisdom; because their folly is at length exposed, and when the actual
trial comes, they shew that they are children. The Lord permits them,
indeed, to achieve many exploits, that they may obtain reputation among
men, but in the end he infatuates them, so that, notwithstanding their
sagacity and long experience, they act more foolishly than children. Let
us therefore learn to seek from the Lord the spirit of wisdom and
counsel, and if he shall bestow it upon us, let us use it with propriety
and moderation; for God opposes the wisdom of men when they claim more
than they have a right to claim, and those who are too ambitious to
exalt themselves, must be punished for their folly; and therefore he
often puts them to shame, that it may be made manifest that their wisdom
is nothing but empty smoke. There is no wisdom but that which is founded
on the fear of God, which Solomon also declares to be the chief part of
wisdom. (<span id="viii.i-p129.1"></span>[Prov.
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#007), [Prov.
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#010)<span id="viii.i-p129.1"></span>.)

<span id="viii.i-p130"></span>*How say ye to Pharaoh, I am the son of
the wise, the son of ancient kings?* He reproves the counsellors of
Pharaoh for flattering him, as courtiers are wont to flatter princes;
for they utter nothing but what is intended to soothe and gratify the
ears of princes, because this is the way by which they succeed and
obtain favor. Thus, amidst many flatteries and lies, there is no room
for truth. Though this vice is commonly found in the courts of great
princes, yet at that time it abounded chiefly among the Egyptians. They
boasted that they were the most ancient of all nations, and that they
were the inventors of the arts, and of all liberal education; and if
such a conviction existed even among the common people, how much
stronger must it have been in the kings themselves?

<span id="viii.i-p131"></span>The boasting related to two points,
antiquity and knowledge; and Isaiah reproves both, or at least says that
they will be of no value. Pharaoh boasted both of the antiquity and of
the wisdom of his nation; and indeed this was common among the whole
people; but he speaks chiefly of the king as the head, in whom this
haughtiness was more conspicuous than among ordinary persons. Now, we
ought not to boast of the wisdom of our ancestors, as if it belonged to
us by hereditary right, but we must look to heaven and ask it from its
Author. So far as relates to antiquity, it is a foolish and idle boast;
and yet princes are so deeply infected by this vice, that they would
willingly seek their birth and descent out of the world, and cannot
easily be drawn away from that vanity. This madness is heightened by
flatterers, who have contrived, as we perceive, many things about the
genealogy of certain princes. No song is more delightful to them than
when they are separated from the common herd of men, like demigods or
heroes. But it frequently happens, that when they carry their curiosity
to excess in inquiring about their grandfathers and great-grandfathers,
they lay themselves open to ridicule, because it is found that they are
descended from one of the common people.

<span id="viii.i-p132"></span>I have heard an amusing anecdote, related
by persons worthy of credit, about the Emperor Maximilian, who was very
eager to inquire into his descent, and was induced by a silly trifler to
believe that he had traced his lineage to Noah’s ark. This subject made
so powerful an impression on his mind, that he left off all business,
applied himself earnestly to this single investigation, and would allow
no one to draw him away from it, not even the ambassadors who came to
treat with him about important matters. All were astonished at this
folly, and silently blamed him for it, but no one had power or courage
to suggest a remedy. At length his cook, who was likewise his jester,
and often entertained him with his sayings, asked leave to speak, and,
as one who was desirous to uphold the Emperor’s dignity, told him that
this eagerness to trace his descent would neither be useful nor
honorable; for, said he, at present I revere your majesty, and worship
you as a god; but if we must come to Noah’s ark, there we shall all be
cousins, for we are all descended from it. Maximilian was so deeply
affected by this saying of the jester, that he became ashamed of his
undertaking, though formerly neither friends, nor counsellors, nor
business could dissuade him from it; for he perceived that his name
which he wished to render more illustrious by inquiring into his remote
ancestors, would be altogether degraded if they came to its earliest
source, from which princes and peasants, nobles and artisans, are
descended.

<span id="viii.i-p133"></span>What is blamed even by jesters and fools
must be great madness; and yet it is not a vice which has lately sprung
up, but is deeply rooted in the minds of almost all men. In order to
avoid it, let us learn to depend on God alone, and let us prefer the
blessedness of adoption to all riches, and lineage, and nobility. So far
as relates to the kings of Egypt being descended from very ancient
kings, who had kept possession of the throne for many ages, they were as
proud as if wisdom had been born with them.  <span
id="fr_34"></span>[35](#fn_34)

<span id="viii.i-p135"></span><span id="viii.i-p135.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p136"></span>**12.** *Where are thy wise men? that they
may tell thee.* Though literally it runs thus, “*And* they shall tell
thee, and shall know,” yet the word ought to be regarded as meaning,
“that they may tell thee, and even that at length they may know;” for
this mode of expression is frequently employed by the Hebrews. The
Egyptians had their diviners from whom they thought that nothing,
however secret, was concealed; for they consulted them about the
smallest and greatest affairs, and held their replies to be oracles. The
Prophet, mocking that vanity, says, “How shall they tell what they do
not know? Have they been admitted to the counsel of God?” It is also
probable that he condemns the art which they used in divination, because
it was not only unlawful, but also made use of absolute tricks and
deceptions.

<span id="viii.i-p137"></span>There are three ways in which we may
foresee or know what is future. The first and chief way is, by the
revelation of the Spirit, which alone can make us certain, as by the
gift of prophecy, which is rare and uncommon. The second is, by
astronomy. The third is, by a comparison of past events, from which
prudence is commonly obtained

<span id="viii.i-p138"></span>As to a knowledge of the stars, from their
position and conjunction, some things may occasionally be learned, such
as famine, scarcity, pestilence, abundant harvests, and things of that
sort; but even these cannot be certain, for they rest on mere
conjecture. Now, we ought always to consider what relation the stars
bear to these lower regions; for the actions of men are not regulated by
them, as idle and false astrologers imagine, a vast number of whom, at
the present day, endeavor to insinuate themselves into the minds of
princes and subjects, as if they possessed a knowledge of everything,
both present and future. Such men resemble the impostors of whom the
Prophet speaks, who deceive men by their jugglery. Yet princes lend an
attentive ear to such persons, and receive them as gods; and indeed they
deserve to be thus imposed upon, and are justly punished for their
curiosity.

<span id="viii.i-p139"></span>They likewise boast of magic, in which
those Egyptian diviners were skilled. But they add many things which are
worse, and more abominable, exorcisms and calling on devils, than which
nothing more destructive can be expressed or conceived. The Lord
pronounces a curse on such conjectures and arts of divination, and the
issue of them cannot but be disastrous and wretched. And if they were
formerly condemned in the Egyptians, how much more do they deserve
condemnation in those who use the name of God as a pretext? It is
wonderful that men otherwise acute and sagacious should be so childishly
deceived by such jugglery, so that they appear to be deprived of
understanding and judgment; but it is the Lord’s righteous vengeance,
who punishes the wickedness of men.

<span id="viii.i-p140"></span>Again, when from past events we calculate
what is future, and judge by experience and observation what is most
proper to be done, that cannot in itself be blamed; but neither can we
by these means learn with certainty what is future, for the matter
always lies in conjecture. Yet Isaiah directly attacks that sagacity
which is universally applauded as something highly excellent, not
because it is in itself sinful, but because we can scarcely find an
acute or ingenious person who does not confidently believe that his
skill places within his reach all that deserves or is necessary to be
known. In this manner they despise the secret providence of God, as if
nothing were hidden from them.

<span id="viii.i-p141"></span>*What the Lord of hosts hath decreed.*
There is still another vice, that craftiness and sleight of hand are
preferred by them to true wisdom. But Isaiah expressly censures that
pride which led men endued with great abilities to measure events by
their own judgment, as if the government of the world were not in the
hand of God; and therefore with their divination he contrasts the
heavenly decree. And hence learn how skillfully Isocrates says,

<span id="viii.i-p142"></span> “<span
id="viii.i-p142.1"></span>Κράτιστον εἶναι παρὰ μὲν θεοῦ εὐτυχίαν, παρὰ
δὲ ἡμῶν αὐτῶν εὐβουλίαν,  
“that the best gift of God is success, and the best gift from ourselves
is prudence.”

<span id="viii.i-p143"></span>At first sight, this maxim of the elegant
orator appears beautiful; but since he robs God of the spirit of
prudence and bestows it on mortals, the distribution is both wicked and
foolish, to ascribe to men sound counsel, and to leave nothing to God
but prosperous fortune. Now, if any one neglect the methods by which God
teaches us, and resort to Satan’s impostures, he richly deserves to be
deceived and involved in the greatest disgrace; for he seeks remedies
that are nowhere to be found, and despises those which were offered by
God.

<span id="viii.i-p144"></span><span id="viii.i-p144.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p145"></span>**13.** *The princes of Zoan are become
infatuated, the princes of Noph are deceived.* *Zoan* was one of the
chief cities of Egypt; *Noph* also was highly celebrated;  <span
id="fr_35"></span>[36](#fn_35) but what cities they were we cannot with
certainty determine. Some think that one of them was Alexandria, the
antiquity and wealth of which may be inferred from many passages of
Scripture, which serve also to refute the notion of those who think that
it was founded by Alexander the Great; for although it had been
frequently destroyed, yet he did not build it anew, but only repaired
it. That at one time it was an independent state, and allied to the
Egyptians, and that it was one of the most flourishing cities in the
whole world, is evident from <span id="viii.i-p146.1"></span>[Na
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#008)<span id="viii.i-p146.1"></span>.
The Prophet justly represents the stupidity of the princes to be the
forerunner of its destruction; because the chief strength of any
commonwealth or kingdom consists in wisdom and prudence, without which
neither great riches nor a numerous population can be of any avail.

<span id="viii.i-p147"></span>*A corner of its tribes have deceived
Egypt.*  <span id="fr_36"></span>[37](#fn_36) I consider the word
*corner* to be here used metaphorically for the chief part of a building
on which the whole weight rests; and I choose rather to view it in the
nominative than in the accusative case.  <span
id="fr_37"></span>[38](#fn_37) It ought, I think, to be viewed as
referring to those wise men by whom the Egyptians supposed themselves to
be so powerfully defended that no evil could befall them. But Isaiah
says that this is too feeble a support, because, having been deceived in
their counsels, they ruined Egypt; and therefore he holds up to mockery
that pretended wisdom which, when it is not accompanied by the fear of
God, ought to be called vanity and folly, and not wisdom. Not only do
men abuse an excellent gift of God, but they are puffed up with vain
ambition, and are more delighted with cunning than with real prudence.
To this is added a devilish fury, which leads them to disregard the
providence of God, and to bring down all events to the level of their
own capacity. This is the reason why Scripture so frequently attacks
wise men of that description, and declares that they are fools. They
usurp what belongs to God, and claim it for themselves; which is
shocking and intolerable sacrilege. We need not wonder if the Lord make
fearful displays against such wise men, so that with all their great
acuteness and ingenuity they stumble and fall in the smallest matters,
and run into great dangers which any peasant or artisan would have
foreseen. Let these things be a warning to us, that we may not be elated
or lay claim to the praise of wisdom. If we have any abilities or
prudence, we ought to ascribe it wholly to God, and conform ourselves to
the rule of sobriety and modesty; for if our wisdom rest on God he will
truly be a steadfast corner-stone, which no one shall shake or
overthrow.

<span id="viii.i-p150"></span><span id="viii.i-p150.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p151"></span>**14.** *The Lord hath mingled a spirit of
perverseness.* Because it was a thing unexpected and incredible that the
leaders of a sagacious and prudent nation would destroy the country by
their stupidity, the Prophet therefore ascribes it to the judgment of
God, that the Jews may not shut their eyes against an example so
striking and remarkable, as irreligious men usually attribute the
judgments of God to chance when anything new or unexpected has happened.
The expression is metaphorical, as if one were to mix wine in a cup,
that the Lord thus intoxicates the wise men of this world so that they
are stunned and amazed, and can neither think nor act aright. The
consequence is, that they deceive Egypt, because, first, they were
themselves deceived. That the Egyptians suffer themselves to be imposed
on, and cannot guard against the deception, is the judgment of the Lord.

<span id="viii.i-p152"></span>And yet Isaiah does not represent God to
be the Author of this folly in such a manner that the Egyptians could
impute blame to him, but we ought to view the matter in this light: “Men
have in themselves no understanding or judgment, for whence comes wisdom
but from the Spirit of God, who is the only fountain of light,
understanding, and truth? Now, if the Lord withhold his Spirit from us,
what right have we to dispute with him? He is under no obligations to
us, and all that he bestows is actually a free gift.” Yet when he
strikes the minds of men with *a spirit of giddiness,* he does it always
for good reasons, though they are sometimes concealed from us. But very
frequently he punishes with blindness those wicked men who have risen up
against him, as happened to those Egyptians who, puffed up with a
conviction of their wisdom, swelled with pride and despised all other
men. It is therefore superfluous to dispute here about predestination,
for the Lord punishes them for open vice; and, accordingly, when God
blinds men or gives them over to a reprobate mind, (<span
id="viii.i-p152.1"></span>[Ro
1:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#028)<span id="viii.i-p152.1"></span>,)
he cannot be accused of cruelty; for it is the just punishment of their
wickedness and licentiousness, and he who acts justly in punishing
transgressions cannot be called the Author of sin.

<span id="viii.i-p153"></span>Let us now attend to the manner of
punishing. He delivers them up to Satan to be punished; for he it is,
strictly speaking, that mingles the spirit of giddiness and
perverseness; but as he does nothing but by the command of God, it is
therefore said that God does what Satan does. The statement commonly
made, that it is done by God’s permission, is an excessively frivolous
evasion; for the Prophet has expressed more than this, namely, that this
punishment was inflicted by God, because he is a righteous judge. God
therefore acts by means of Satan, as a judge by means of an executioner,
and inflicts righteous punishment on those who have offended him. Thus
in the book of Kings we read that Satan presented himself before God,
and asked leave to deceive Ahab’s prophets; and having obtained it, he
then obeyed the command of God, for he could have done nothing by
himself. It is unnecessary to produce a multitude of quotations in a
matter so obvious.

<span id="viii.i-p154"></span>*And they have misled Egypt in all her
work.* When he adds that her counsellors *deceived* her, he points out a
second judgment of God; for it might have happened that the princes were
deprived of understanding, and resembled *drunkards,* and yet the common
people continued to possess some judgment; but here he says, that the
impostors obtained also the power of leading astray so as to deceive the
people. This is a two-fold vengeance of God, both on them that lead
astray, and on those who are led astray by them.

<span id="viii.i-p155"></span>*As a drunken man staggereth in his
vomit.* By a *vomit* He means shameful drunkenness. This is added (<span
id="viii.i-p155.1"></span>πρὸς αὔξησιν) by way of amplification, in
order to shew that they were not ordinary drunkards, who have still some
understanding left, but that they resembled swine.

<span id="viii.i-p156"></span><span id="viii.i-p156.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p157"></span>**15.** *Neither shall Egypt have any work
to do.* This is the conclusion of the former statement, for it means
that all the Egyptians shall be stupefied to such a degree that whatever
they undertake shall be fruitless. This must happen where there is no
counsel, and it is the righteous punishment of our pride and rashness.
He therefore intended to describe the result and effect, so as to shew
that it will be unhappy and miserable.

<span id="viii.i-p158"></span>*Head or tail, branch or rush.* When he
threatens both the *head* and the *tail*, he means, that all ranks, from
the highest to the lowest, all without exception, shall be deprived of
counsel, so that they will not succeed in anything. Or perhaps it will
be thought rather to mean the order which they observe in their actions.
Hence we learn, that both the beginning and the end of everything depend
on God; for we ought to ask from him counsel, and prudence, and success,
if we do not wish that the same thing should happen to us which happened
to the Egyptians.

<span id="viii.i-p159"></span><span id="viii.i-p159.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p160"></span>**16.** *In that day shall Egypt be like
women.* He again repeats what he had formerly said, that the Egyptians
will have nothing that is manly. Some think that he alludes to an
effeminate custom, on account of which the ancient historians censured
the Egyptians, namely, that, by inverting the order of things, women
appeared in public and transacted the affairs of state, and men
performed the occupations of women. It is possible that the Prophet may
have had this in his eye, but when I take a more careful view of the
whole passage, this conjecture cannot be admitted; for here he threatens
a judgment of God, which will hold up men to astonishment. If he were
speaking of an ordinary custom, this would not apply to the matter in
hand, for he does not charge the hearts of the Egyptians with being
effeminate, but, on the contrary, threatens that they shall be struck
with such dread that in no respect will they differ from women. The
Egyptians not only thought that they were able to maintain war, but
attacked without provocation, and gave aid to other nations. We see that
heathen writers relate many of the exploits of the Egyptians, and
expatiate largely on their praises; and, therefore, although the
Egyptians were feeble and effeminate in comparison with other nations,
yet they wished to retain the praise and renown of warlike men.

<span id="viii.i-p161"></span>*Because of the shaking of the hand of
Jehovah of hosts.*  <span id="fr_38"></span>[39](#fn_38) The sudden
change which is now effected is a striking display of the judgment of
heaven, and therefore he adds, that *the shaking of the hand of God*
will be the cause of the terror. By these words he shews that this war
will be entirely carried on by the Lord, and therefore that the
Egyptians cannot stand against it, because they have not to do with men.
What Isaiah declares concerning Egypt ought to be likewise applied to
other nations; for if wars arise and insurrections spring up, we ought
to acknowledge it to be a judgment of God when men lose courage and are
overwhelmed with terror. We see how the most warlike nations give way,
and shew themselves to be less courageous than women, and are vanquished
without any preparations of war, whenever the Lord strikes their minds
with dread.

<span id="viii.i-p163"></span><span id="viii.i-p163.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p164"></span>**17.** *And the land of Judah shall be a
terror to the Egyptians.* Some explain it simply to mean, that the land
of Judah will be an astonishment to the Egyptians as well as to other
nations, and compare this passage with the saying which has formerly
come under our observation, “You shall be an astonishment.”  <span
id="fr_39"></span>[40](#fn_39) But I think that the meaning of the
Prophet here is different, for he intended to point out the reason why
the Lord would make such a display against the Egyptians. It was because
they had brought destruction on the Jews, for they had turned them aside
from the confidence which they ought to have placed in God, as princes
frequently solicit their neighbors, and offer them their aid, that they
may afterwards make use of them for their own advantage. Now the Lord
had forbidden them (<span id="viii.i-p165.1"></span>[De
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#016)<span id="viii.i-p165.1"></span>)
to resort to the Egyptians for the purpose of asking assistance from
them; but those wretched people, instead of obeying God, listened to the
solicitation of unbelievers who made offers to them, and on this account
they were justly punished.

<span id="viii.i-p166"></span>But the Egyptians also, who had given
occasion to their unbelief and distrust, did not pass unpunished, for
they were so sharply chastised that whenever they remembered the Jews
they were overwhelmed with terror. Hence we ought to draw a profitable
doctrine, that they who have turned aside the Church from obeying and
trusting in God, and who, by fear, or counsel, or any enticements, have
given occasion for offense, will be severely punished. The meaning of
the Prophet’s words is as if we should say, that the look of a woman
will bring a blush on him who has seduced her, when the disgrace of the
uncleanness shall have been laid open, and when God shall come forth as
the avenger of conjugal fidelity.

<span id="viii.i-p167"></span><span id="viii.i-p167.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p168"></span>**18.** *In that day there shall be five
cities.* After having threatened the Egyptians, and at the same time
explained the reason of the divine judgment, he comforts them, and
promises the mercy of God. He declares that they will be in part
restored, and will regain a prosperous and flourishing condition; for he
says that out of six *cities five* will be saved, and only one will
perish. He had already foretold a frightful destruction to the whole
kingdom, so that no one who examines the former prediction can think of
anything else than a condition that is past remedy. He therefore
promises that this restoration will be accomplished by the extraordinary
kindness of God, so that it will be a kind of addition to the redemption
of the Church, or a large measure of the grace of God, when the Redeemer
shall be sent.

<span id="viii.i-p169"></span>The manner of expression is somewhat
obscure, but if we observe it carefully, there is no difficulty about
the meaning; for the Prophet means that on1y the sixth part of the
cities will be destroyed, and that the rest will be saved. The
difficulty lies in the word <span id="viii.i-p169.1"></span>ההרס,
(*hăhĕrĕs*.) Some read it <span id="viii.i-p169.2"></span>החרס,
(*hăchĕrĕs*,) that is, *of* *the sun*, but they have mistaken the letter
<span id="viii.i-p169.3"></span>ה (*he*) for <span
id="viii.i-p169.4"></span>ח (*cheth*,) which resembles it. Those who
explain it *“of the* *sun,”* think that the Prophet spoke of Heliopolis;
 <span id="fr_40"></span>[41](#fn_40) but this does not agree with the
context; and he does not merely promise that *five* *cities* would be
restored, (for how inconsiderable would such a restoration have been!)
but generally, that *five* cities out of six would be saved. We know
that the cities in Egypt were very numerous. I do not mention the fables
of the ancients, and those who have assigned to them twenty thousand
cities. But still, there must have been a vast number of cities in a
country so highly celebrated, in a kingdom so flourishing and populous,
with a climate so mild and temperate. Let us then suppose that there
were a thousand cities in it, or somewhat more. He says that only the
sixth part will perish, that the rest will be restored, so that but few
will be destroyed. From what follows it is evident that this restoration
must be understood to relate to the worship.

<span id="viii.i-p171"></span>*Speaking with the lip of Canaan.* By the
word *lip* he means the *tongue*, (<span
id="viii.i-p171.1"></span>συνεκδοχικῶς,) taking a part for the whole. He
expresses their agreement with the people of God, and the faith by which
they will make profession of the name of God; for by the *tongue* he
metaphorically describes confession. Since there was but one language
which acknowledged and professed the true God, that is, the language of
that nation which inhabited the land of Canaan, it is evident that by
such a language must be meant agreement in religion. It is customary
enough to employ these modes of expression, “to speak the same
language,” or, “to speak a different language,” when we intend to
describe agreement or diversity of opinion. But at the same time it must
be remembered that it is not every kind of agreement that is sufficient,
as if men were to form a conspiracy about the worship which they
preferred, but if they agree in the truth which was revealed to the
fathers. He does not merely say that the Egyptians will speak the same
language, but that they will speak the language *of Canaan*. They must
have changed their language, and adopted that which God had sanctified;
not that the dialect was more holy, but it is commended on account of
its containing the doctrine of truth.

<span id="viii.i-p172"></span>This ought to be carefully observed, that
we may understand what is the true method of agreement. We must by all
means seek harmony, but we must see on what conditions we obtain it; for
we must not seek any middle course, as is done by those who overturn
religion, and yet who wish to be regarded as peace-makers. Away with
such fickle and changeful tongues! Let the truth itself be preserved,
which cannot be contained but in the word. Whosoever shall determine to
agree to it, let him talk with us, but away with every one who shall
corrupt it, choose what language he may. Let us abide firmly by this. It
will therefore be impossible for the Egyptians to speak the language of
Canaan till they have first relinquished their own language, that is,
till they have relinquished all superstitions. Some refer this to the
age of Ptolemy, but it is absurd, and we may infer from what follows
that the Prophet speaks of piety and of the true worship of God.

<span id="viii.i-p173"></span>*And swearing by Jehovah of hosts.* First,
employing a figure of speech in which a part is taken for the whole, he
shews that their conversation will be holy, by exhibiting a single class
of them, for in *swearing* they will make profession that they worship
the true God. It may also be read, *swearing to the Lord*, or, *by the*
Lord, for <span id="viii.i-p173.2"></span>ל (*lamed*) often signifies
*by*. If we read, “to the Lord,” the meaning will be, that they will
promise obedience to him, and that by a solemn oath, as when any nation
promises fidelity to its prince; as if he had said, “They will
acknowledge the authority of God, and submit to his government.” But
since another reading has been more generally approved, I willingly
adopt it; for since one part of the worship of God is *swearing*, by
taking a part for the whole, as I have said, it fitly describes the
whole of the worship of God. Again, to “swear by the Lord” often means
to testify that he is the true God. (<span id="viii.i-p173.3"></span>[De
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#013)<span id="viii.i-p173.3"></span>.)
In a word, it denotes a perfect agreement with the Church of God.

<span id="viii.i-p174"></span>Hence we ought to learn that outward
confession is a necessary part of the true worship of God; for if any
person wish to keep his faith shut up in his heart, he will have but a
cold regard for it. (<span id="viii.i-p174.1"></span>[Rom.
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#010)<span id="viii.i-p174.1"></span>.)
True faith breaks out into confession, and kindles us to such a degree
that we actually profess what we inwardly feel. “To me,” says the Lord
in another passage, “every knee shall bow, and every tongue shall
swear.” (<span id="viii.i-p174.2"></span>[Isa
45:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#023)<span
id="viii.i-p174.2"></span>.) Accordingly, there ought to be an outward
worship and outward profession wherever faith dwells. It ought also to
be observed, that those things which belong to the worship of God ought
not to be applied to any other purpose, and therefore it is a
profanation of an oath if we swear by any other. It is written, “Thou
shalt swear by my name.” (<span id="viii.i-p174.3"></span>[De
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#013)<span id="viii.i-p174.3"></span>.)
Accordingly, he is insulted and robbed of his honor, if the name of
saints, or of any creature, be employed in an oath. Let it likewise be
observed with what solemnity oaths should be made; for if by swearing we
profess to worship God, we ought never to engage in it but with fear and
reverence.

<span id="viii.i-p175"></span>*One shall be called the city of
desolation.* When he devotes to destruction every sixth city, he means
that all who are not converted to God, so as to worship him, perish
without hope of salvation; for he contrasts the cities of Egypt which
shall begin to acknowledge God with those which are destined to
destruction. Where the worship of God is wanting, nothing but
destruction can remain behind. <span id="viii.i-p175.1"></span>הרס
(*hĕrĕs*) denotes execration and curse, which is followed by ruin and
eternal death.

<span id="viii.i-p176"></span><span id="viii.i-p176.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p177"></span>**19.** *In that day shall there be an
altar in the midst of the land of Egypt.* He continues what he had said
in the former verse, and states more clearly that the aspect of Egypt
will be renewed, because there true religion will flourish, the pure
worship of God will be set up, and all superstitions will fall to the
ground. He employs the word *altar* to denote, as by a sign, the worship
of God; for sacrifices and oblations were the outward acts of piety. By
*the midst of Egypt* he means the chief part of the whole kingdom, as if
he had said, “in the very metropolis,” or, “in the very heart of the
kingdom.”

<span id="viii.i-p178"></span>*And a statue*  <span
id="fr_41"></span>[42](#fn_41) *to the Lord.* Let it not be supposed
that by *statue* are meant images which carry the resemblance of men or
of saints; but memorials (<span id="viii.i-p179.1"></span>μνημόσυνα) of
piety; for he means that they will be marks similar to those which point
out the boundaries of kingdoms, and that in this manner signs will be
evident, to make known to all men that God rules over this nation. And
indeed it usually happens that a nation truly converted to God, after
having laid aside idols and superstitions, openly sets up signs of the
true religion, that all may know that the worship of God is purely
observed in it.

<span id="viii.i-p180"></span>Josephus relates (Ant. 13. 3. 1,) that
Onias perverted this passage, when he fled to Ptolemy Philometor,  <span
id="fr_42"></span>[43](#fn_42) whom he persuaded that it would be
advantageous to erect an altar there, on which the Jews who dwelt in
that country might sacrifice; and he brought forward this passage,
alleging that what the Prophet had foretold ought to be accomplished.
The wicked and ambitious priest persuaded the king to do this, though it
was openly opposed by the Jews; for the king looked to his own
advantage, and that scoundrel, who had been deprived of his rank, sought
to obtain additional honor and advancement; so that no entreaty could
prevent the execution of that wicked counsel. But Isaiah simply
describes the pure worship of God under the figure of signs which were
then in use; for he has his eye upon his own age and the men with whom
he had to do. This passage, therefore, was wickedly and maliciously
perverted by Onias.

<span id="viii.i-p182"></span>But not less impudently do the Popish
doctors of the present day torture a passage in Malachi to defend the
sacrifice of the Mass. When he says that “a pure oblation will
everywhere be offered to God,” (<span id="viii.i-p182.1"></span>[Mal
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#011)<span id="viii.i-p182.1"></span>,)
they infer that it is some sacrifice different from the ancient
sacrifices, because oxen and sheep must no longer be sacrificed, and
therefore that it is the Mass. A witty and ingenious argument truly!
Now, it is evident that under the legal figure Malachi describes nothing
else than the pure worship of God, as Isaiah does here; and we ought
carefully to observe such forms of expression, which are frequently
employed by the prophets.

<span id="viii.i-p183"></span>This will be clearly explained by a
passage in Joel, which we shall quote as an example. “Your sons and your
daughters,” says he, “shall prophesy, and your young men shall see
visions, and your old men shall dream dreams.” (<span
id="viii.i-p183.1"></span>[Joe
2:28](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#028)<span id="viii.i-p183.1"></span>.)
Peter shews (<span id="viii.i-p183.2"></span>[Ac
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#016)<span id="viii.i-p183.2"></span>)
that this prediction was fulfilled, when the apostles spoke various
languages through the inspiration of the Holy Spirit. Having formerly
been uneducated men, they began to be qualified for declaring the
mysteries of God. On that occasion we perceive no “dreams,” so that it
might be thought that Peter quoted that passage inappropriately; but it
is evident that Joel there describes nothing else than prophecy, and for
the purpose of adorning it, he mentioned “visions and dreams,” by means
of which the Lord anciently held communication with the prophets. (<span
id="viii.i-p183.3"></span>[Nu
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#006)<span id="viii.i-p183.3"></span>.)
He kept in view the ordinary custom of that age; for otherwise the Jews
would have found it difficult to comprehend the gifts of the Spirit
which at that time were unknown. Having been reared under that
preparatory instruction of the Law,  <span
id="fr_43"></span>[44](#fn_43) they could rise no higher than where they
were conducted by sacrifices, ceremonies, sacraments, and signs.  <span
id="fr_44"></span>[45](#fn_44) So then the prophets addressed them as
children, who ought to have nothing set before them beyond what they can
learn in a homely style (<span id="viii.i-p185.1"></span>παχυμερέστερον)
by custom and experience.

<span id="viii.i-p186"></span>This doctrine will unfold to us various
passages, the obscurity of which might lead to much hesitation. It is
plain that the Prophet speaks of the kingdom of Christ, and that these
things were not fulfilled before his coming. We must therefore take away
the shadows and look at the reality of things, in order that by the
*altar* we may understand a true and sincere calling on God. But by
these signs the Prophet likewise shews that the worship of God cannot be
maintained without external acts of devotion, though we have no right to
lay down rules for them. Away with the inventions of men, that we may
listen to God alone on this subject.

<span id="viii.i-p187"></span><span id="viii.i-p187.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p188"></span>**20.** *And he will send them a Savior.*
We cannot serve God unless he first bestow his grace upon us; for no one
will dedicate himself to God, till he be drawn by his goodness, and
embrace him with all his heart. He must therefore call us to him before
we call upon him; we can have no access till he first invite us.
Formerly he shewed that they must be subdued by various afflictions in
order that they may submit to God, and now he repeats the same thing;
for men never deny themselves and forsake idle follies any farther than
the scourge compels them to yield obedience. But he likewise adds
another kind of invitation, that, having experienced the kindness of
God, they will freely approach to Him.

<span id="viii.i-p189"></span>*They will cry unto the Lord.* The *cry*
of which he speaks proceeds from faith, for they would never resort to
this refuge till they had been allured and delighted by the goodness of
God. When the Lord promises that he will send a *Savior*, by whose hand
the Egyptians will be delivered, this can mean no other than Christ; for
Egypt was not delivered from its distresses before the doctrine of
Christ reached it. We read of various changes which that country
suffered for four hundred years, foreign and civil wars by which it was
wasted and almost destroyed; but when we would be ready to think that it
is utterly ruined, lo! it is converted to the Lord, and is rescued from
the hand of enemies and tyrants. Thus Christ delivered that country,
when it had begun to know him. In like manner, we must be brought to the
knowledge and worship of God, that, where we have suffered various
afflictions, we may learn that salvation is found in him alone. Would
that the world would now learn this lesson, having suffered so many
calamities that it appears to be on the brink of ruin! For what can be
the issue but that it shall either perish or by repentance acknowledge
that it has been justly punished for so great wickedness?

<span id="viii.i-p190"></span>*That he may deliver them.* When he adds
these words, we ought to draw from them a profitable doctrine, that God
assists us through Christ, by whose agency he gave deliverance to his
own people from the beginning. He has always been the Mediator, by whose
intercession all blessings were obtained from God the Father; and now
that he has been revealed, let us learn that nothing can be obtained
from God but through him.  <span id="fr_45"></span>[46](#fn_45)

<span id="viii.i-p192"></span><span id="viii.i-p192.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p193"></span>**21.** *And the Lord shall be known by
the Egyptians.* Isaiah now adds what was most important; for we cannot
worship the Lord, or call upon him, till we have first acknowledged him
to be our Father. “How,” says Paul, “shall they call on him whom they
know not?”  <span id="fr_46"></span>[47](#fn_46) (<span
id="viii.i-p194.1"></span>[Ro
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#014)<span
id="viii.i-p194.1"></span>.) We cannot be partakers of the gifts of God
for our salvation without previously having true knowledge, which is by
faith. He therefore properly adds, the knowledge of God, as the
foundation of all religion, or the key that opens to us the gate of the
heavenly kingdom. Now, there cannot be knowledge without doctrine; and
hence infer, that God disapproves of all kinds of false worship; for he
cannot approve of anything that is not guided by knowledge, which
springs from hearing true and pure doctrine. Whatever contrivance
therefore men may make out of their own minds, they will never attain by
it the true worship of God. We ought carefully to observe passages like
this, in which the Spirit of God shews what is the true worship and
calling of God, that, having abandoned the inventions to which men are
too obstinately attached, we may allow ourselves to be taught by the
pure word of God, and, relying on his authority, may freely and boldly
condemn all that the world applauds and admires.

<span id="viii.i-p195"></span>*The Egyptians shall know.* It is not
without good reason that he twice mentions this *knowledge*. A matter of
so great importance ought not to be slightly passed by; for it holds the
chief place, and without it there is nothing that can properly be called
worship.

<span id="viii.i-p196"></span>*And shall make sacrifice and oblation.*
This passage must be explained in the same manner as the former, in
which he mentioned an *altar*. What would have been the use of
sacrifices after the manifestation of Christ? He therefore describes
metaphorically confession of faith and calling on God, which followed
the preaching of the gospel. Here he includes everything that was
offered to God — slain beasts, bread, fruits of every description, and
all that was fitted to express gratitude. But we must attend to the
difference between the Old and New Testaments, and under the shadows of
ceremonies we must understand to be meant that “reasonable worship” of
which Paul speaks. (<span id="viii.i-p196.1"></span>[Ro
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#001)<span id="viii.i-p196.1"></span>.)

<span id="viii.i-p197"></span>*And shall vow vows to the Lord and
perform them.* What he adds about *vows* is likewise a part of the
worship of God. The Jews were accustomed to express their gratitude to
God by *vows*, and especially they rendered thanksgiving by a solemn
vow, when they had received from God any extraordinary blessing. Of
their own accord also, when any one chose to do so, they made *vows* on
various occasions. (<span id="viii.i-p197.1"></span>[Deut.
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#006), [Deut.
23:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#021)<span
id="viii.i-p197.1"></span>.) And yet every person was not at liberty to
make this or that vow according to his own pleasure; but a rule was laid
down. (<span id="viii.i-p197.2"></span>[Nu
30:3](../../../bib/kjv/num030.htm#003)<span id="viii.i-p197.2"></span>.)
Whatever may be in that respect, it is evident that by the word *vows*
the Prophet means nothing else than the worship of God, to which the
Egyptians devoted themselves after having learned it from the word of
God; but he mentions the acts of devotion by which the Jews made
profession of the true worship and religion.

<span id="viii.i-p198"></span>Hence the Papists draw an argument to
prove, that whatever we vow to God ought to be performed; but since they
make vows at random, and without any exercise of judgment, this passage
lends no aid to defend their error. Isaiah foretells what the Egyptians
will do, after having embraced and followed the instruction given by
God.  <span id="fr_47"></span>[48](#fn_47) In like manner, when David
exhorts the people to vow and to perform their vows, (<span
id="viii.i-p199.1"></span>[Ps
76:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#011)<span
id="viii.i-p199.1"></span>,) they think that he is on their side; but be
does not therefore exhort them to make unlawful and rash vows. (<span
id="viii.i-p199.2"></span>[Ec 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#002)<span
id="viii.i-p199.2"></span>.) There always remains in force the law of
vows, which we are not at liberty to transgress, namely, the word of
God, by which we learn what he requires from us, and what he wishes us
to vow and perform. We never received permission to vow whatever we
please, because we are too much disposed to go to excess, and to take
every kind of liberty with regard to God, and because we act more
imprudently towards him than if we had to deal with men. It was
therefore necessary that men should be laid under some restraint to
prevent them from taking so great liberties in the worship of God and
religion.

<span id="viii.i-p200"></span>This being the case, it is evident that
God permits nothing but what is agreeable to his law, and that he
rejects everything else as unacceptable and superstitious. What a man
has vowed of his own accord, and without the support of the word, cannot
be binding. If he perform it, he offends doubly; first, in vowing
rashly, as if he were sporting with God; and secondly, in executing his
resolutions wickedly and rashly, when he ought rather to have set them
aside and repented. So far, therefore, is any man from being bound by
vows, that he ought, on the contrary, to turn back and acknowledge his
sinful rashness.

<span id="viii.i-p201"></span>Now, if any one inquire about the vows of
Papists, it will be easy to shew that they derive no support from the
word of God. If those things which they highly applaud and reckon to be
lawful, such as the vows of monks, are unlawful and wicked, what opinion
must we form of the rest? They vow perpetual celibacy, as if it were
indiscriminately permitted to all; but we know that the gift of
continence is not an ordinary gift, and is not promised to every one,
not even to those who in other respects are endued with extraordinary
graces. Abraham was eminent for faith, steadfastness, meekness, and
holiness, and yet he did not possess this gift. (<span
id="viii.i-p201.1"></span>[Gen. 11:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#029),
[Gen. 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#001)<span
id="viii.i-p201.1"></span>.) Christ himself, when the apostles loudly
commended this state of celibacy, testified that it is not given to all.
(<span id="viii.i-p201.2"></span>[Matt.
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#012)<span id="viii.i-p201.2"></span>.)
Paul states the same thing. (<span id="viii.i-p201.3"></span>[1 Cor.
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#007),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#009),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#026)<span id="viii.i-p201.3"></span>.)
Whosoever, therefore, does not possess this gift of continence, if he
vow it, does wrong, and will be justly punished for his rashness. Hence
have arisen dreadful instances of want of chastity, by which God has
justly punished Popery for this presumption.

<span id="viii.i-p202"></span>They likewise vow poverty, as if they
would have nothing of their own, though they have abundance of
everything beyond other men. Is not this an open mockery of God? The
obedience which they vow is full of deceit; for they shake off the yoke
of Christ, that they may become the slaves of men. Others vow
pilgrimages, to abstain from eating flesh, to observe days, and other
things full of superstition. Others promise to God toys and trinkets, as
if they were dealing with a child. We would be ashamed to act thus, or
to pursue such a line of conduct towards men, among whom nothing is
settled till it has been agreed to on both sides by mutual consent. Much
less is it lawful to attempt anything in the worship of God but what has
been declared by his word. What kind of worship will it be, if the
judgment of God has no weight with us, and if we yield only to the will
of men? Will it be possible that it can please God? Will it not be
(<span id="viii.i-p202.1"></span>ἐθελοθρησκεία) “will-worship,” which
Paul so severely censures? (<span id="viii.i-p202.2"></span>[Col
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#023)<span id="viii.i-p202.2"></span>.)
In vain, therefore, do they who make such vows boast that they serve
God; and in vain do they endeavor to find support in this passage; for
the Lord abhors that kind of worship.

<span id="viii.i-p203"></span><span id="viii.i-p203.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p204"></span>**22.** *Therefore Jehovah will smite
Egypt.* From what has been already said the Prophet draws the
conclusion, that the chastisement which he has mentioned will be
advantageous to the Egyptians, because it will be a preparation for
their conversion;  <span id="fr_48"></span>[49](#fn_48) as if he had
said, that it will be for the good of Egypt that the Lord will punish
her. Those who translate the words, “he will strike with a wound that
may be healed,” misinterpret this passage, and greatly weaken the
Prophet’s meaning; for it means that the wounds will be advantageous to
them, and that by means of these wounds the Lord will bring them back.
Hence we ought to conclude, that we must not refuse to be chastised by
God, for it is done for our benefit. (<span
id="viii.i-p205.1"></span>[Prov. 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#012)<span id="viii.i-p205.1"></span>;
<span id="viii.i-p205.2"></span>[Heb
12:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#005)<span
id="viii.i-p205.2"></span>.) Exemption from punishment would cherish a
disposition to sin with less control. As men are exceedingly prone to
give way to their own inclinations, whenever God spares them for a
little, it is necessary on this account that the Lord should prevent
this danger, which he does by chastisements and stripes, which excite
and arouse us to repentance. A remarkable instance of this is here
exhibited in Egypt, which abounded in superstitions and wickedness, and
went beyond all nations in idolatry, and yet experienced the mercy of
God.

<span id="viii.i-p206"></span>*For they shall be turned to Jehovah.* We
must attend to the manner of its accomplishment, which is, their
conversion to God. It is the explanation of the former clause; as if he
had said, “God will heal the Egyptians, because they shall be
converted.” The copulative <span id="viii.i-p206.1"></span>ו (*vau*)
signifies *for*. Hence we infer that conversion may be said to be a
resurrection from eternal death. We are utterly ruined so long as we are
turned away from God; but when we are converted, we return to his favor,
and are delivered from death; not that we deserve the favor of God by
our repentance, but because in this manner God raises us up, as it were,
from death to life. To repentance is added a promise, from which we
conclude, that when we sincerely repent,  <span
id="fr_49"></span>[50](#fn_49) we do not in vain implore forgiveness.
Now, when the Prophet says that the Lord will be gracious and reconciled
to the Egyptians, he at the same time shews, that as soon as they have
been converted, they will obtain forgiveness. It will therefore be a
true conversion when it is followed by a calling on God. But without
faith (<span id="viii.i-p207.1"></span>[Ro
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#014)<span id="viii.i-p207.1"></span>)
it is impossible to call on God; for even the ungodly may acknowledge
sin; but no man will have recourse to the mercy of God, or obtain
reconciliation, till he be moved by a true feeling of repentance, which
is likewise accompanied by faith.

<span id="viii.i-p208"></span>*And will heal them.* He does not repeat
what he had said, that God strikes in order to *heal;* but he promises
*healing* in another sense, that is, that God will cease to inflict
punishments. The former healing, which he mentioned a little before, was
internal; but the latter relates to stripes and wounds. In short, he
means that it will be a speedy remedy for all their distresses. After
having been reconciled to God, there is nothing in us that calls for
punishment; for whence comes punishment but on account of guilt? and
when guilt is pardoned, exemption from punishment will quickly follow.
 <span id="fr_50"></span>[51](#fn_50) And if we be chastised, it is an
evidence that we are not yet sufficiently prepared for repentance.

<span id="viii.i-p210"></span>In a word, let us remember this order,
which the Prophet points out to us; first, that stripes prepare men for
repentance; secondly, that they are healed, because they are delivered
from eternal destruction; thirdly, that when they have been brought to
the knowledge of their guilt, they obtain pardon; fourthly, that God is
gracious and reconciled to them; fifthly, that chastisements cease after
they have obtained pardon from God. There is no man who ought not to
acknowledge in himself what Isaiah here declares concerning the
Egyptians, in whom the Lord holds out an example to the whole world.

<span id="viii.i-p211"></span><span id="viii.i-p211.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p212"></span>**23.** *In that day.* The Prophet now
foretells that the Lord will diffuse his goodness throughout the whole
world; as if he had said, “It will not be shut up in a corner, or
exclusively known, as it formerly was, by a single nation.” Here he
speaks of two nations that were the most inveterate enemies of the
Church, and that appeared to be farther removed than any other from the
kingdom of God; for much more might have been expected from distant
nations, because the nations here mentioned openly made war with God and
persecuted his Church. And if the Lord is so gracious to the deadly
enemies of the Church, that he pardons and adopts them to be his
children, what shall be the case with other nations? This prophecy thus
includes the calling of all nations.

<span id="viii.i-p213"></span>*There shall be a highway.* Now, when he
says that, in consequence of a *highway* having been opened up, there
will be mutual access that they may visit each other, he describes
brotherly intercourse. We know that the Egyptians carried on almost
incessant wars with the Assyrians, and cherished an inveterate hatred
towards each other. He now foretells that the Lord will change their
dispositions, and will reconcile them to each other, so that they will
have mutual communications, mutual coming in and going out, in
consequence of laying open the *highways* which were formerly shut. Here
we ought to observe what we formerly remarked at the fourth verse of the
second chapter,  <span id="fr_51"></span>[52](#fn_51) namely, that when
men have been reconciled to God, it is likewise proper that they should
cherish brotherly kindness towards each other. Strife, quarreling,
disputes, hatred, and malice, ought to cease when God has been pacified.
We need not wonder, therefore, that he says that a highway to Egypt is
opened up for the Assyrians; but this ought undoubtedly to be referred
to the reign of Christ, for we do not read that the Egyptians were on a
friendly footing with the Assyrians till after they had known Christ.

<span id="viii.i-p215"></span>*And the Egyptians shall serve the
Assyrians, (or, with the Assyrians.)*  <span
id="fr_52"></span>[53](#fn_52) This clause may be rendered, “shall serve
God;” but as the name of God is not expressed here, it may refer to the
Assyrians, which is also pointed out by the particle <span
id="viii.i-p216.1"></span>את (ĕ*th*.)  <span
id="fr_53"></span>[54](#fn_53) It may therefore be explained thus. They
who formerly burned with a desire to injure one another will be changed
in their dispositions, and will desire to shew kindness. In short, the
fruit of true repentance will be made evident, for they who formerly
distressed each other in mutual wars will lend mutual aid. And this
opinion will agree very well with those words of the Prophet with which
they stand connected. Yet I do not set aside another interpretation
which is almost universally adopted, namely, “They who formerly
worshipped other gods will henceforth acknowledge one God, and will
assent to the same confession of faith.” I leave every one to adopt that
interpretation which he thinks best. If the latter interpretation be
preferred, the Prophet makes brotherly love to flow from godliness,
 <span id="fr_54"></span>[55](#fn_54) as from its source.

<span id="viii.i-p219"></span><span id="viii.i-p219.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p220"></span>**24.** *In that day shall Israel.* Isaiah
concludes the promise which he had briefly glanced at, that the
Egyptians and Assyrians, as well as Israel, shall be *blessed*. Formerly
the grace of God was in some measure confined to Israel, because with
that nation only had the Lord entered into covenant. The Lord had
stretched out “his cord” over Jacob, (<span
id="viii.i-p220.1"></span>[De
32:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#009)<span id="viii.i-p220.1"></span>,)
as Moses speaks;  <span id="fr_55"></span>[56](#fn_55) and David says,

<span id="viii.i-p222"></span>“He hath not done so to any nation, and
hath not made known to them his judgments.” (<span
id="viii.i-p222.1"></span>[Ps
147:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#020)<span
id="viii.i-p222.1"></span>.)

<span id="viii.i-p223"></span>In a word, the blessing of God dwelt
solely in Judea, but he says that it will be shared with the Egyptians
and Assyrians, under whose name he includes also the rest of the
nations. He does not mention them for the purpose of shewing respect,
but because they were the constant enemies of God, and appeared to be
more estranged from him and farther removed from the hope of favor than
all others. Accordingly, though he had formerly adopted none but the
children of Abraham, he now wished to be called, without distinction,
“The father of all nations.” (<span id="viii.i-p223.1"></span>[Ge
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#007)<span id="viii.i-p223.1"></span>;
<span id="viii.i-p223.2"></span>[Exod.
19:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#006)<span id="viii.i-p223.2"></span>;
<span id="viii.i-p223.3"></span>[Deut.
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#006), [Deut.
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#002)<span id="viii.i-p223.3"></span>.)

<span id="viii.i-p224"></span>*Israel shall be the third blessing.* Some
render it, *Israel shall be the third*  <span
id="fr_56"></span>[57](#fn_56) I do not approve of that rendering; for
the adjective being in the feminine gender, ought to be construed with
the noun <span id="viii.i-p225.1"></span>ברכה, (*berachah*,) *blessing*,
and *blessing* means here a form or pattern of blessing.

<span id="viii.i-p226"></span><span id="viii.i-p226.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p227"></span>**25.** *Because the Lord of hosts will
bless him.*  <span id="fr_57"></span>[58](#fn_57) He assigns a reason,
and explains the former statement; for he shews that, through the
undeserved goodness of God, the Assyrians and Egyptians shall be
admitted to fellowship with the chosen people of God. As if he had said,
“Though these titles belonged exclusively to Israel, they shall likewise
be conferred on other nations, which the Lord hath adopted to be his
own.” There is a mutual relation between God and his people, so that
they who are called by his mouth “a holy people,” (<span
id="viii.i-p228.1"></span>[Ex
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#006)<span id="viii.i-p228.1"></span>,)
may justly, in return, call him their God. Yet this designation is
bestowed indiscriminately on Egyptians and Assyrians.

<span id="viii.i-p229"></span>*Blessed be Egypt my people, and Assyria
the work of my hands.* Though the Prophet intended to describe foreign
nations as associated with the Jews who had belonged to God’s household,
yet he employs most appropriate marks to describe the degrees. By
calling the Egyptians “the people of God,” he means that they will share
in the honor which God deigned to bestow in a peculiar manner on the
Jews alone. When he calls Assyrians *the work of his hands*, he
distinguishes them by the title peculiar to his Church. We have
elsewhere remarked  <span id="fr_58"></span>[59](#fn_58) that the Church
is called “the workmanship” (<span id="viii.i-p230.1"></span>τὸ ποίημα)
of God, (<span id="viii.i-p230.2"></span>[Eph
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#010)<span id="viii.i-p230.2"></span>,)
because by the spirit of regeneration believers are created anew, so as
to bear the image of God. Thus, he means that we are “the work of God’s
hands,” not so far as we are created to be men, but so far as they who
are separated from the world, and become new creatures, are created anew
to a new life. Hence we acknowledge that in “newness of life” nothing
ought to be claimed as our own, for we are wholly “the work of God.”

<span id="viii.i-p231"></span>*And Israel my inheritance.* When he comes
to *Israel*, he invests him with his prerogative, which is, that he is
*the inheritance of God,* so that among the new brethren he still holds
the rank and honor of the first-born. The word *inheritance* suggests
the idea of some kind of superiority; and indeed that covenant which the
Lord first made with them, bestowed on them the privilege which cannot
be made void by their ingratitude; for “the gifts and calling of God are
without repentance,” as Paul declares, (<span
id="viii.i-p231.1"></span>[Ro
11:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#029)<span
id="viii.i-p231.1"></span>,) who shews that in the house of God they are
the first-born. (<span id="viii.i-p231.2"></span>[Eph
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#012)<span id="viii.i-p231.2"></span>.)
Although therefore the grace of God is now more widely spread, yet they
still hold the highest rank, not by their own merit, but by the firmness
of the promises.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_25"></span>[26](cc14007.htm#fr_25) <span
id="viii.i-p61.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p62"></span> <span id="viii.i-p62.1"></span>Καὶ νομὸς
ἐπὶ νομόν. The reader will observe the distinction between the
*paroxytone* <span id="viii.i-p62.2"></span>νόμος, *a law,* and the
*oxytone* <span id="viii.i-p62.3"></span>νομός, a *field* or a
*dwelling;* for it is the latter that is employed by Herodotus to denote
a *district* or province. Herod. 2:164. — *Ed.*

<span id="viii.i-p63"></span> FT284 “And the spirit of Egypt shall fail.
Heb. *shall be emptied.*” — Eng. Ver.

<span id="viii.i-p64"></span> FT285 “And the Egyptians will I give over,
*or, shut up.*” — Eng. Ver. “And I will shut up Egypt in the hand of
cruel lords.” — *Stock.*

<span id="viii.i-p65"></span> FT286 “A fierce king.” — Eng. Ver.

<span id="viii.i-p66"></span> FT287 See vol. 1 p. 266

<span id="viii.i-p67"></span> FT288 “*Embanked canals.* <span
id="viii.i-p67.1"></span>Rivi aggerum, as the Vulgate has it. The canals
by which the waters of the Nile were distributed were fortified by
mounds or banks. <span id="viii.i-p67.2"></span>מצור, (*mātzōr,*) which
word Rosenmüller vainly endeavors to shew to be another name for Egypt
or Mizraim.” — *Stock.*

<span id="viii.i-p68"></span> FT289 See vol. 1 p. 492

<span id="viii.i-p69"></span> FT290 “And ashamed (disappointed or
confounded) are the workers of combed (or hatchelled) flax, and the
weavers of white (stuffs.) The older writers supposed the class of
persons here described to be the manufacturers of nets for fishing, and
took <span id="viii.i-p69.1"></span>הורי, (*hōrai,*) in the sense of
perforated open work or net-work. The moderns understand the verse as
having reference to the working of flax and manufacture of linen. Knobel
supposes <span id="viii.i-p69.2"></span>הורי, (*hōrai,*) to mean
*cotton,* as being white by nature, and before it is wrought. Some of
the older writers identified <span id="viii.i-p69.3"></span>שריקות,
(*sĕrīkōth*,) with <span id="viii.i-p69.4"></span>*sericum,* the Latin
word for silk. Calvin supposes an allusion in the last clause to the
diaphanous garments of luxurious women.” — *Professor Alexander.*

<span id="viii.i-p70"></span> FT291 Our author is puzzled about this
word. In his version he follows the old rendering, “all that make a
net,” but his marginal reading is “all that make gain,” and to the
latter he adheres in his commentary. Bishops Lowth and Stock render it,
“all that make a gain,” and Professor Alexander, “all laborers for
hire.” — *Ed.*

<span id="viii.i-p71"></span> FT292 <span id="viii.i-p71.1"></span>קרם,
(*kĕdĕm,*) has two meanings, “antiquity” and “the east;” and accordingly
Bishop Stock renders this clause, “the son of the kings of the east,”
adding the following note: — “*Kings* *of the east.* A synonyme for
*wise men,* <span id="viii.i-p71.2"></span>μάγοι ἀπὸ ἀνατολῶν, the
quarter of the world where the arts of divination originated, and to
whose sovereigns Egyptian sages pretended kindred. Hence the magi, that
came to worship Christ, are often denominated *the three kings.*” —
*Ed.*

<span id="viii.i-p72"></span> FT293 “Zoan, the Tanis of the Greeks, was
one of the most ancient cities of Lower Egypt, (<span
id="viii.i-p72.1"></span>[Nu
13:22](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#022)<span id="viii.i-p72.1"></span>,)
and a royal residence. The name is of Egyptian origin, and signifies low
situation. *Noph* is the Memphis of the Greek geographers, called Moph,
(<span id="viii.i-p72.2"></span>[Ho
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#006)<span id="viii.i-p72.2"></span>.)
It was one of the chief cities of ancient Egypt, the royal seat of
Psammetichus.” — *Alexander.*

<span id="viii.i-p73"></span> FT294 “The stay (Heb., corners) of the
tribes thereof.” — Eng. Ver.

<span id="viii.i-p74"></span> FT295 Instead of <span
id="viii.i-p74.1"></span>פנת, (*pinnăth,*) the construct singular,
Grotius, Lowth, and others, prefer the conjectural reading, <span
id="viii.i-p74.2"></span>פנות (*pinnōth,*) *corners.* But Rosenmüller
removes the difficulty of the Syntax by remarking, that <span
id="viii.i-p74.3"></span>פנה, (*pinnāh,*) a collective noun, and
agreeably to the frequent usage of the Hebrew tongue, fitly agrees with
a plural verb; and he quotes <span id="viii.i-p74.4"></span>[2Sa
19:41](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#041)<span id="viii.i-p74.4"></span>,
as a parallel instance. — *Ed.*

<span id="viii.i-p75"></span> FT296 Professor Alexander prefers the
literal rendering, “from before the shaking of the hand,” and thus
explains the passage: “<span id="viii.i-p75.1"></span>מפני, (*mippĕnē*,)
may be rendered, *on account of*, which idea is certainly included, but
the true force of the original expression is best retained by a literal
translation. <span id="viii.i-p75.2"></span>תנופת יד, (*tĕnūphăth yăd*,)
is not the act of beckoning for the enemy, but that of threatening or
preparing to strike. The reference is not to the slaughter of
Sennacherib’s army, but more generally to the indications of Divine
displeasure.”

<span id="viii.i-p76"></span> FT297 The only passage which occurs to my
remembrance as likely to be in the author’s eye is, “And thou shalt
become an astonishment, a proverb and a bye-word, among all the nations
whither the Lord shall lead thee.” (<span id="viii.i-p76.1"></span>[De
28:37](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#037)<span id="viii.i-p76.1"></span>.)
— *Ed.*

<span id="viii.i-p77"></span> FT298 *Heliopolis* is a Greek word, and
signifies “the city of the sun.” It is the name of a famous city of
Lower Egypt, in which there was a temple dedicated to the sun. — *Ed.*

<span id="viii.i-p78"></span> FT299 “*Pillar*.” — Eng. Ver.

<span id="viii.i-p79"></span> FT300 The name “Philomētor,” which means
“loving his mother,” was ironically given to him on account of his known
hatred of his mother Cleopatra. — *Ed*

<span id="viii.i-p80"></span> FT301 “<span id="viii.i-p80.1"></span>Sous
ceste pedagogie de la Loy.”

<span id="viii.i-p81"></span> FT302 “<span id="viii.i-p81.1"></span>Les
signes et sacramens.”

<span id="viii.i-p82"></span> FT303 Of one clause in this verse,
rendered by our translators “and a great one,” Calvin takes no notice.
Rosenmüller considers <span id="viii.i-p82.1"></span>רב (*rāb*) to be
the participle Kal of <span id="viii.i-p82.2"></span>רוב, (*rūb*,) and
assigns to Cocceius the honor of having discovered that the punctuation,
which the Masoretic annotators have set aside, in the parallel passage
of Deuteronomy, as a peculiarity for which they could not account, was
the key to the true interpretation. Almost all the commentators,
Cocceius excepted, render <span id="viii.i-p82.3"></span>רב (*rāb*) “a
great one,” some of them supposing that Ptolemy the Great, the son of
Lagus, and others that Alexander the Great, was meant. But Cocceius was
the first to perceive that the signification “Great” does not agree with
the context, and has justly remarked that the word <span
id="viii.i-p82.4"></span>רב (*rāb*) with a Kametz, ought not to be
confounded with <span id="viii.i-p82.5"></span>רב (*rāb*,) with a
Pathach, but that its meaning should be sought from the verb <span
id="viii.i-p82.6"></span>רוב (*rūb*) or <span
id="viii.i-p82.7"></span>ריב (*rīb*,) “to contend, to argue, to defend
one’s cause in a court of justice;” and he quotes a parallel passage, in
which Moses, while he blesses Judah, speaking of God, says, <span
id="viii.i-p82.8"></span>ידיו רב לו (*yādaiv rāb lō*) “his hands shall
be his protector.” (<span id="viii.i-p82.9"></span>[De
33:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#007)<span id="viii.i-p82.9"></span>.)
See Robertson’s Clavis Pentateuchi, p. 561. The ancients appear to have
taken a similar view. The Septuagint renders it thus. <span
id="viii.i-p82.10"></span>Καὶ ἀποστελεῖ αὐτοῖς ἄνθρωπον ὃς σώσει αὐτοὺς,
κρίνων σώσει αὐτούς. The Chaldee and Syriac render it, “a deliverer and
a judge,” and Jerome’s rendering is, <span
id="viii.i-p82.11"></span>*propuqnatorem*, “a defender or champion”.
Rosenmüller Scholia. “A Savior and a vindicator”. Lowth. “An advocate”.
Stock. “The explanation of <span id="viii.i-p82.12"></span>רב, (*rab*)
as a participle,” says Professor Alexander, “is found in all the ancient
versions, and is adopted by most modern writers.” — *Ed.*

<span id="viii.i-p83"></span> FT304 The words of the Apostle are, “How
shall they call on him in whom they have not *believed?*” But Calvin’s
remark, which immediately follows, vindicates the appropriateness,
though not the verbal accuracy, of the quotation. — *Ed.*

<span id="viii.i-p84"></span> FT305 “<span id="viii.i-p84.1"></span>La
doctrine de salut;” “The doctrine of salvation.”

<span id="viii.i-p85"></span> FT306 “<span id="viii.i-p85.1"></span>Ce
sera un preparatif pour les amener à repentance;” — “It will be a
preparation to lead them to repentance.”

<span id="viii.i-p86"></span> FT307 “<span
id="viii.i-p86.1"></span>Pourvenu que notre repentance ne soit
hypocritique;” — “Provided that our repentance be not hypocritical.”

<span id="viii.i-p87"></span> FT308 “<span id="viii.i-p87.1"></span>D’où
viennent les chastimens, si non de nos pechez? S’ils sont pardonnez,
aussi le sont les chastimens meritez a cause d’iceux.“ — “Whence come
chastisements but from our sins? If they are remitted, so are also the
chastisements deserved on account of them.”

<span id="viii.i-p88"></span> FT309 See vol. 1 p. 101

<span id="viii.i-p89"></span> FT310 This is the Author’s version. See p.
48

<span id="viii.i-p90"></span> FT311 The particle <span
id="viii.i-p90.1"></span>את (ĕ*th*) does not decide the question, for it
may either be the sign of the accusative case, or a preposition
signifying *with*. Professor Alexander adopts the latter view, and
argues powerfully in favor of the rendering, “they shall serve God,” in
which he concurs with Lowth, “And the Egyptian shall worship with the
Assyrian,” and with Stock, “And Egypt shall serve \[God\] with Assyria.”
— *Ed.*

<span id="viii.i-p91"></span> FT312 “<span id="viii.i-p91.1"></span>De
la crainte de Dieu,” — “from the fear of God.”

<span id="viii.i-p92"></span> FT313 “Jacob is the lot (Heb. cord) of his
inheritance.” — Eng. Ver.

<span id="viii.i-p93"></span> FT314 “The meaning obviously is,” says
Professor Alexander, “that Israel should be one of three, or a party to
a triple union.” By an analagous idiom of the Greek language, Peter
calls Noah <span id="viii.i-p93.1"></span>ὄγδοον, “the eighth,” that is,
“one of eight persons.” (<span id="viii.i-p93.2"></span>[2Pe
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#005)<span id="viii.i-p93.2"></span>.)
From classical writers other instances might be given, such as <span
id="viii.i-p93.3"></span>εἰς οἰκίαν δωδέκατος “he went to his house the
twelfth,” or, “one of twelve,” that is, “along with eleven other
persons.” — *Ed.*

<span id="viii.i-p94"></span> FT315 “Whom the Lord of hosts shall
bless.” — Eng. Ver.

<span id="viii.i-p95"></span> FT316 Our Author perhaps refers to his
expository remarks on <span id="viii.i-p95.1"></span>[Eph
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#010)<span id="viii.i-p95.1"></span>,
<span id="viii.i-p95.2"></span>[Isa
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#007)<span id="viii.i-p95.2"></span>,
<span id="viii.i-p95.3"></span>[Isa
64:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#007)<span id="viii.i-p95.3"></span>,
See p. 26

<span id="fn_26"></span>[27](cc14007.htm#fr_26) <span
id="viii.i-p97.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p98"></span>

<span id="fn_27"></span>[28](cc14007.htm#fr_27) <span
id="viii.i-p102.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p103"></span>

<span id="fn_28"></span>[29](cc14007.htm#fr_28) <span
id="viii.i-p104.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p105"></span>

<span id="fn_29"></span>[30](cc14007.htm#fr_29) <span
id="viii.i-p105.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p106"></span>

<span id="fn_30"></span>[31](cc14007.htm#fr_30) <span
id="viii.i-p110.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p111"></span>

<span id="fn_31"></span>[32](cc14007.htm#fr_31) <span
id="viii.i-p116.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p117"></span>

<span id="fn_32"></span>[33](cc14007.htm#fr_32) <span
id="viii.i-p121.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p122"></span>

<span id="fn_33"></span>[34](cc14007.htm#fr_33) <span
id="viii.i-p124.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p125"></span>

<span id="fn_34"></span>[35](cc14007.htm#fr_34) <span
id="viii.i-p133.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p134"></span>

<span id="fn_35"></span>[36](cc14007.htm#fr_35) <span
id="viii.i-p145.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p146"></span>

<span id="fn_36"></span>[37](cc14007.htm#fr_36) <span
id="viii.i-p147.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p148"></span>

<span id="fn_37"></span>[38](cc14007.htm#fr_37) <span
id="viii.i-p148.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p149"></span>

<span id="fn_38"></span>[39](cc14007.htm#fr_38) <span
id="viii.i-p161.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p162"></span>

<span id="fn_39"></span>[40](cc14007.htm#fr_39) <span
id="viii.i-p164.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p165"></span>

<span id="fn_40"></span>[41](cc14007.htm#fr_40) <span
id="viii.i-p169.5"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p170"></span>

<span id="fn_41"></span>[42](cc14007.htm#fr_41) <span
id="viii.i-p178.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p179"></span>

<span id="fn_42"></span>[43](cc14007.htm#fr_42) <span
id="viii.i-p180.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p181"></span>

<span id="fn_43"></span>[44](cc14007.htm#fr_43) <span
id="viii.i-p183.4"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p184"></span>

<span id="fn_44"></span>[45](cc14007.htm#fr_44) <span
id="viii.i-p184.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p185"></span>

<span id="fn_45"></span>[46](cc14007.htm#fr_45) <span
id="viii.i-p190.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p191"></span>

<span id="fn_46"></span>[47](cc14007.htm#fr_46) <span
id="viii.i-p193.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p194"></span>

<span id="fn_47"></span>[48](cc14007.htm#fr_47) <span
id="viii.i-p198.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p199"></span>

<span id="fn_48"></span>[49](cc14007.htm#fr_48) <span
id="viii.i-p204.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p205"></span>

<span id="fn_49"></span>[50](cc14007.htm#fr_49) <span
id="viii.i-p206.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p207"></span>

<span id="fn_50"></span>[51](cc14007.htm#fr_50) <span
id="viii.i-p208.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p209"></span>

<span id="fn_51"></span>[52](cc14007.htm#fr_51) <span
id="viii.i-p213.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p214"></span>

<span id="fn_52"></span>[53](cc14007.htm#fr_52) <span
id="viii.i-p215.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p216"></span>

<span id="fn_53"></span>[54](cc14007.htm#fr_53) <span
id="viii.i-p216.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p217"></span>

<span id="fn_54"></span>[55](cc14007.htm#fr_54) <span
id="viii.i-p217.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p218"></span>

<span id="fn_55"></span>[56](cc14007.htm#fr_55) <span
id="viii.i-p220.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p221"></span>

<span id="fn_56"></span>[57](cc14007.htm#fr_56) <span
id="viii.i-p224.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p225"></span>

<span id="fn_57"></span>[58](cc14007.htm#fr_57) <span
id="viii.i-p227.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p228"></span>

<span id="fn_58"></span>[59](cc14007.htm#fr_58) <span
id="viii.i-p229.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p230"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 20](cc14008)
