[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc14013)  [Next](cc14015) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 14: Isaiah, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv"></span>

<span id="xv-p1"></span>CHAPTER 26

<span id="xv.i"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p1"></span>Isaiah Chapter 26:1-21

<span id="xv.i-p2"></span>**1**. In that day shall this song be sung in
the land of Judah; We have a strong city: salvation will *God* appoint
*for* walls and bulwarks.

<span id="xv.i-p3"></span>**1**. In die illa cantabitur canticum in
terra Iuda: Urbs fortitudinis nobis; salutem posuit muros et vallum.

<span id="xv.i-p4"></span>**2**. Open ye the gates, that the righteous
nation which keepeth the truth may enter in.

<span id="xv.i-p5"></span>**2**. Aperite portas, et ingredietur gens
justa, custodiens veritates.

<span id="xv.i-p6"></span>**3**. Thou wilt keep *him* in perfect peace,
*whose* mind *is* stayed *on thee*; because he trusteth in thee.

<span id="xv.i-p7"></span>**3**. Cogitatio fixa: custodies pacem, pacem;
quoniam in te confisum est.

<span id="xv.i-p8"></span>**4**. Trust ye in the Lord for ever: for in
the Lord Jehovah *is* everlasting strength.

<span id="xv.i-p9"></span>**4**. Sperate in Iehova in perpetuum; quia in
Iah Iehova fortitudo seculorum.

<span id="xv.i-p10"></span>**5**. For he bringeth down them that dwell
on high; the lofty city, he layeth it low: he layeth it low, *even* to
the ground; he bringeth it *even* to the dust.

<span id="xv.i-p11"></span>**5**. Nam incurvabit incolas sublimitatis,
civitatem exaltatam humiliabit; humiliabit, inquam, eam ad terram,
deducet ad pulverem.

<span id="xv.i-p12"></span>**6**. The foot shall tread it down, *even*
the feet of the poor, *and* the steps of the needy.

<span id="xv.i-p13"></span>**6**. Calcabit eam pes; pedes pauperis,
gressus inopum.

<span id="xv.i-p14"></span>**7**. The way of the just *is* uprightness:
thou, most upright, dost weigh the path of the just.

<span id="xv.i-p15"></span>**7**. Semita justi rectitudines; rectam viam
justi æquabis, (*vel, tu, qui rectus es, viam justi æquabis.*)

<span id="xv.i-p16"></span>**8**. Yea, in the way of thy judgments, O
Lord, have we waited for thee; the desire of *our* soul *is* to thy
name, and to the remembrance of thee.

<span id="xv.i-p17"></span>**8**. Etiam in via judiciorum tuorum,
Iehova, speravimus in te, ad nomen tuum, et memoriam tui desiderium
animæ.

<span id="xv.i-p18"></span>**9**. With my soul have I desired thee in
the night; yea, with my spirit within me will I seek thee early: for
when thy judgments *are* in the earth, the inhabitants of the world will
learn righteousness.

<span id="xv.i-p19"></span>**9**. Anima mea desideravit te per noctem;
quin et spiritu meo intra me te mane (*vel, sedulo*) quæram; nam ex quo
fuerint judicia tua in terra, justitiam discent incolæ terræ.

<span id="xv.i-p20"></span>**10**. Let favour be shewed to the wicked,
*yet* will he not learn righteousness: in the land of uprightness will
he deal unjustly, and will not behold the majesty of the Lord.

<span id="xv.i-p21"></span>**10**. Impius gratiam obtinebit, nec discet
justitiam; in terra rectorum operum perverse aget, nec videbit
magnificentiam Iehovæ.

<span id="xv.i-p22"></span>**11**. Lord, *when* thy hand is lifted up,
they will not see: *but* they shall see, and be ashamed for *their* envy
at the people; yea, the fire of thine enemies shall devour them.

<span id="xv.i-p23"></span>**11**. Iehova, utcunque exaltata fuerit
manus tua, non videbunt; videbunt et pudefient æmulatione populi; quin
et ignis hostium tuorum vorabit eos.

<span id="xv.i-p24"></span>**12**. Lord, thou wilt ordain peace for us:
for thou also hast wrought all our works in us.

<span id="xv.i-p25"></span>**12**. Iehova, ordinabis nobis pacem; nam et
omnia opera nostra operatus es nobis.

<span id="xv.i-p26"></span>**13**. O Lord our God, *other* lords besides
thee have had dominion over us; *but* by thee only will we make mention
of thy name.

<span id="xv.i-p27"></span>**13**. Iehova Deus noster, subjugaverunt nos
domini præter te; tantum in te recordabimur nominis tui.

<span id="xv.i-p28"></span>**14** *They are* dead, they shall not live;
*they are* deceased, they shall not rise: therefore hast thou visited
and destroyed them, and made all their memory to perish.

<span id="xv.i-p29"></span>**14**. Mortui non vivent; occisi non
resurgent; propterea visitasti, et exterminasti eos; et perdidisti omnem
memoriam eorum.

<span id="xv.i-p30"></span>**15**. Thou hast increased the nation, O
Lord, thou hast increased the nation: thou art glorified: thou hadst
removed *it* far *unto* all the ends of the earth.

<span id="xv.i-p31"></span>**15**. Addidisti genti, Iehova; addidisti
genti; glorificatus es; dilatasti omnes fines terræ.

<span id="xv.i-p32"></span>**16**. Lord, in trouble have they visited
thee; they poured out a prayer *when* thy chastening *was* upon them.

<span id="xv.i-p33"></span>**16**. Iehova, in tribulatione visitaverunt
te, effuderunt precationem, dum castigatio tua super eos.

<span id="xv.i-p34"></span>**17**. Like as a woman with child, *that*
draweth near the time of her delivery, is in pain, *and* crieth out in
her pangs; so have we been in thy sight, O Lord.

<span id="xv.i-p35"></span>**17**. Sicut prægnans, quæ ad partum
propinquat, dolet, clamat in doloribus suis; sic nos fuimus a facie tua,
Iehova.

<span id="xv.i-p36"></span>**18**. We have been with child, we have been
in pain, we have as it were brought forth wind; we have not wrought any
deliverance in the earth, neither have the inhabitants of the world
fallen.

<span id="xv.i-p37"></span>**18**. Parturivimus, doluimus, ac si
peperissemus ventum, salus non est facta terræ, et non ceciderunt incolæ
orbis.

<span id="xv.i-p38"></span>**19**. Thy dead *men* shall live, *together
with* my dead body shall they arise. Awake and sing, ye that dwell in
dust: for thy dew *is as* the dew of herbs, and the earth shall cast out
the dead.

<span id="xv.i-p39"></span>**19**. Vivent mortui tui, cadaver meum
resurgent. Evigilate, et cantate, incolæ pulveris. Quoniam ros herbarum
ros tuus; et terra mortuos ejiciet, (*vel, terram Gigantum prosternes;
vel, terra Gigantes cadere faciet.*)

<span id="xv.i-p40"></span>**20**. Come, my people, enter thou into thy
chambers, and shut thy doors about thee: hide thyself as it were for a
little moment, until the indignation be overpast.

<span id="xv.i-p41"></span>**20**. Veni, popule mi, intra in cubicula
tua; claude ostia post te: lateas paululum ad momentum, donec transeat
indignatio.

<span id="xv.i-p42"></span>**21**. For, behold, the Lord cometh out of
his place to punish the inhabitants of the earth for their iniquity: the
earth also shall disclose her blood, and shall no more cover her slain.

<span id="xv.i-p43"></span>**21**. Nam ecce Iehova egreditur e loco suo,
ut visitet iniquitatem habitatoris terræ contra eum. Et discooperiet
terra sanguines suos, et non teget amplius super occisis suis.

<span id="xv.i-p44"></span> 

<span id="xv.i-p45"></span><span id="xv.i-p45.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p46"></span>**1.** *In that day shall a song be sung.*
Here the Prophet begins again to shew that, after the return of the
people from captivity, they will be defended by God’s power and
guardianship, and that under his protection Jerusalem will be as safe as
if she had been surrounded by bulwarks, ramparts, a ditch, and a double
wall, so that no enemy could find entrance.

<span id="xv.i-p47"></span>It is proper to observe the time when “this
song was sung.” The Prophet had foretold the calamity that would befall
the Church, which was not yet so near at hand, but happened a short time
after his death. When the people were led into captivity, they would
undoubtedly have despaired, if they had not been encouraged by such
promises. That the Jews might cherish a hope that they would be
delivered, and might behold life in the midst of death, the Prophet
composed for them this song, even before the calamity occurred, that
they might be better prepared for enduring it, and might hope for better
things. I do not think that it was composed solely that, when they had
been delivered, they might give thanks to God, but that even during
their captivity, though they were like dead men, (<span
id="xv.i-p47.1"></span>[Eze 37:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#001)<span
id="xv.i-p47.1"></span>,) they might strengthen their hearts with this
confidence, and might also train up their children in this expectation,
and hand down these promises, as it were, to posterity.

<span id="xv.i-p48"></span>We have formerly  <span
id="fr_153"></span>[154](#fn_153) seen the reason why these and other
promises were put by Isaiah into the form of verse. It was, that, having
been frequently sung, they might make a deeper impression on their
memory. Though they mourned in Babylon, and were almost overwhelmed with
sorrow, (hence these sounds, (<span id="xv.i-p83.1"></span>[Ps
137:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#004)<span id="xv.i-p83.1"></span>,)
“How can we sing the Lord’s song in a foreign land?”) yet they must have
hoped that at a future period, when they should have returned to Judea,
they would give thanks to the Lord and sing his praises; and therefore
the Prophet shews to them at a distance the day of deliverance, that
they may take courage from the expectation of it.

<span id="xv.i-p84"></span>*We have a city of strength.* By these words
a full restoration of Jerusalem and of the people is promised, because
God will not only deliver the captives and gather those that are
scattered, but will also preserve them safe, after having brought them
back to their country. But not long afterwards believers saw that
Jerusalem was destroyed, (<span id="xv.i-p84.1"></span>[2Ki
25:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#009)<span id="xv.i-p84.1"></span>,)
and the Temple thrown down, (<span id="xv.i-p84.2"></span>[2Ch
36:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#019)<span id="xv.i-p84.2"></span>,)
and after their return nothing could meet their eye but hideous ruins;
and all this Isaiah had previously foretold. It was therefore necessary
that they should behold from the lofty watch-tower of faith this
restoration of Jerusalem.

<span id="xv.i-p85"></span>*He hath made salvation to be walls and a
bulwark.* He now defines what will be “the strength of the city;” for
the “salvation” of God will supply the place of a “wall,” towers,
ditches, and mounds. As if he had said, “Let other cities rely on their
fortifications, God alone will be to us instead of all bulwarks.” Some
allege that the words may be read, “He hath set a wall and bulwark for
salvation;” and I do not set aside that rendering. But as a more
valuable doctrine is contained in the Prophet’s words, when nothing is
supplied, it serves no good purpose to go far for a forced
interpretation; especially since the true and natural interpretation
readily presents itself to the mind, which is, that God’s protection is
more valuable than all ditches and walls. In like manner, it is also
said in the psalm, “Thy mercy is better than life,” (<span
id="xv.i-p85.1"></span>[Ps 63:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#003)<span
id="xv.i-p85.1"></span>;) for as David there boasts of enjoying, under
God’s shadow, greater safety and freedom from care than if he had been
fortified by every kind of earthly defense, so Isaiah here says, that
there will be good reason for laying aside fear, when God shall have
undertaken to guard his people. Now, since this promise extends to the
whole course of redemption, we ought to believe that at the present day
God is still the guardian of his Church, and therefore, that his power
is of more avail than if it had been defended by every kind of military
force. Accordingly, if we wish to dwell in safety, we must remain in the
Church. Though we have no outward defences, yet let us learn to be
satisfied with the Lord’s protection, and with his sure salvation, which
is better than all bulwarks.

<span id="xv.i-p86"></span><span id="xv.i-p86.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p87"></span>**2.** *Open ye the gates.* This “song” was
undoubtedly despised by many, when it was published by Isaiah; for
during his life, the inhabitants of Jerusalem were wicked and ungodly,
and the number of good men was exceedingly small. But after his death,
when they had been punished for their wickedness, it was in some measure
perceived that this prediction had not been uttered in vain. So long as
wicked men enjoy prosperity, they have no fear, and do not imagine that
they can be brought low. Thus the Jews thought that they would never be
driven out of Judea, and carried into captivity, and hoped that they
would continue to dwell there. It was therefore necessary to take away
from them every pretense for being haughty and insolent; and such is the
import of the Prophet’s words:

<span id="xv.i-p88"></span>*And a righteous nation, which keepeth the
truth, shall enter in.* “The inhabitants of the restored city shall be
unlike the former; for they will maintain righteousness and truth. But
at that time this promise also might appear to have failed of its
accomplishment; for when they had been driven out of the country and led
into captivity, no consolation remained. Accordingly, when the Temple
had been destroyed, the city sacked, and all order and government
overthrown and destroyed, they might have objected, “Where are those
‘gates’ which he bids us ‘open?’ Where are the people who shall
‘enter?’” Yet we see that these things were fulfilled, and that nothing
was ever foretold which the Lord did not accomplish. We ought,
therefore, to keep before our minds those ancient histories, that we may
be fortified by their example, and, amidst the deepest adversity to
which the Church is reduced, may hope that the Lord will yet raise her
up again.

<span id="xv.i-p89"></span>When the Prophet calls the nation “righteous
and truthful,” he not only, as I mentioned a little before, describes
the persons to whom this promise relates, but shews the fruit of the
chastisement; for when its pollution shall have been washed away, the
holiness and righteousness of the Church shall shine more brightly. At
that time wicked men were the majority, good men were very few, and were
overpowered by the multitude of those who were of an opposite character.
It was therefore necessary that that multitude, which had no fear of
God, and no religion, should be taken away, that God might gather his
remnant. Thus, it was a compensation for the destruction, that
Jerusalem, which had been polluted by the wickedness of her citizens,
again was actually devoted to God; for it would not have been enough to
regain prosperity, if newness of life had not shone forth in holiness
and righteousness.

<span id="xv.i-p90"></span>Now, as the Prophet foretells the grace of
God, so he also exhorts the redeemed people to maintain uprightness of
life. In short, he threatens that these promises will be of no avail to
hypocrites, and that the gates of the city will not be opened for them,
but only for the righteous and holy. It is certain that the Church was
always like a barn, (<span id="xv.i-p90.1"></span>[Mt
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#012)<span id="xv.i-p90.1"></span>,) in
which the chaff is mingled with the wheat, or rather, the wheat is
overpowered by the chaff; but when the Jews had been brought back into
their country, the Church was unquestionably purer than before. Those
who returned must have been animated by a good disposition, to undertake
a journey so long, and beset by so many annoyances, embarrassments, and
dangers; and many others chose rather to remain in captivity than to
return, thinking that to dwell in Babylon was a safer and more peaceful
condition than to return to Judea. Such persons must have had a seed of
piety, which led them to take possession of those promises which were
granted to the fathers. Now, though the Church even at that time was
stained by many imperfections, still this description was comparatively
true; for a large portion of the filth had been swept away, and those
who remained had profited in some degree under God’s chastisements.

<span id="xv.i-p91"></span>*A righteous nation, which keepeth the
truth.* Some distinguish these terms in this manner, “A nation
*righteous* before God, and *upright* before men.” But I take the
meaning to be more simple; that, after having called the nation
“righteous,” he shews in what righteousness consists; that is, where
there is uprightness of heart, which has nothing feigned or
hypocritical, for nothing is more opposite to righteousness than
hypocrisy. And though no man ever existed who advanced so far that he
could receive the commendation of being perfectly righteous, yet the
children of God, who with their whole heart aim at this “truth,” may be
said to be keepers of it. But perhaps it will rather be thought that, by
a figure of speech, one part is taken for the whole, to describe what is
true righteousness; that is, when all deceit and all wicked practices
have been laid aside, and men act towards each other with sincerity and
truth.

<span id="xv.i-p92"></span>If any man wish to make use of this passage
for upholding the merits of men, the answer is easy; for the Prophet
does not here describe the cause of salvation, or what men are by
nature, but what God makes them by his grace, and what kind of persons
he wishes to be members of his Church. Out of wolves he makes sheep, as
we have formerly seen.  <span id="fr_154"></span>[155](#fn_154) So long
as we live here, we are always at a great distance from perfection, and
are in continual progress towards it; but the Lord judges of us
according to that which he has begun in us, and, having once led us into
the way of righteousness, reckons us to be righteous. As soon as he
begins to check and reform our hypocrisy, he at once calls us true and
upright.

<span id="xv.i-p94"></span><span id="xv.i-p94.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p95"></span>**3.** *The thought is fixed; thou wilt keep
peace, peace.*  <span id="fr_155"></span>[156](#fn_155) As the Hebrew
word <span id="xv.i-p96.1"></span>יצר (*Yĕtzĕr*) signifies both
“imagination” or “creature,” and “thought,” some render it, “By a
settled foundation thou wilt keep peace;” as if the Prophet meant, that
when men, amidst the convulsions of the world, continue to rest firmly
on God, they will always be safe. Others render it, “For the fixed
thought thou wilt keep peace;” which amounts to nearly the same thing,
that they who have fixed their minds on God alone will at length be
happy; for in no other way does God promise that he will be the guardian
of his people than when they rely on his grace with settled thoughts,
and without change or wavering. Since, however, the sign of the dative
case is not added, but the Prophet in a concise manner of expression
says, “Fixed or steadfast thought,” let my readers judge if it be not
more appropriate to view it as referring to God, so as to make the
meaning to be, that the peace of the Church is founded on his eternal
and unchangeable purpose; for, in order to prevent godly minds from
continual wavering, it is of the highest importance to look to the
heavenly decree.

<span id="xv.i-p97"></span>It is undoubtedly true that we ought
constantly to hope in God, that we may perceive his continual
faithfulness in defending us; and believers are always enjoined not to
be driven about by any doubt, or uncertainty, or wavering, but firmly to
rely on God alone. Yet the meaning which is more easily obtained from
this passage, and comes more naturally from the words of the Prophet,
is, that it is a fixed and unchangeable decree of God, that all who hope
in him shall enjoy eternal peace; for if *fixed thought* means the
certainty and steadfastness of the godly, it would be superfluous to
assign the reason, which is —

<span id="xv.i-p98"></span>*Because he hath trusted in thee.* In short,
both modes of expression would have been harsh, that “continual peace is
prepared for imagination,” or “for thought.” But it is perfectly
appropriate to say that, when we trust in God, he never disappoints our
hope, because he has determined to guard us for ever. Hence it follows,
that, since the safety of the Church does not depend on the state of the
world, it is not moved or shaken by the various changes which happen
daily; but that, having been founded on the purpose of God, it stands
with steady and unshakable firmness, so that it can never fall.

<span id="xv.i-p99"></span>There is also, I think, an implied contrast
between God’s fixed thought and our wandering imaginations; for at
almost every moment there springs up something new which drives our
thoughts hither and thither, and there is no change, however slight,
that does not produce some doubt. We ought therefore to hold this
principle, that we do wrong if we judge of God’s unshaken purpose by our
fickle imaginations; as we shall elsewhere see,

<span id="xv.i-p100"></span>“As far as the heavens are from the earth,
so far are my thoughts from your thoughts, O house of Israel.” (<span
id="xv.i-p100.1"></span>[Isa 55:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#009)<span
id="xv.i-p100.1"></span>.)

<span id="xv.i-p101"></span>We ought therefore above all to hold it
certain, that our salvation is not liable to change; because the purpose
of God is unchangeable.

<span id="xv.i-p102"></span>*Thou wilt keep peace, peace.* What has now
been stated explains the reason of the repetition of the word *peace*;
for it denotes uninterrupted continuance for ever. By the word *peace* I
understand not only serenity of mind, but every kind of happiness; as if
he had said, that the grace of God alone can enable us to live
prosperously and happily.

<span id="xv.i-p103"></span><span id="xv.i-p103.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p104"></span>**4.** *Trust ye in Jehovah for ever.* As to
the words, some read in the second clause, “Trust in God, the strong
Jehovah of ages;” but as <span id="xv.i-p104.1"></span>צור (*tzūr*) is
not always an adjective, but signifies *strength*, I reject that meaning
as forced, besides that it has little relation to the subject, as will
immediately appear. There is also little ground for the ingenuity of
those who infer from this passage the divinity of Christ, as if the
Prophet said, that “Jehovah is in Jah;” for the twofold name of God is
given for the express purpose of magnifying his power.

<span id="xv.i-p105"></span>He now exhorts the people to rest safely on
God, and therefore, after the preceding doctrine, there is now room for
exhortation. Besides, it would have been vain to say that our peace is
in the hand of God, and that he is our faithful guardian, if we had not
been taught and instructed on this subject, and at the same time urged
by exhortations. Yet he exhorts us not only to earnest hope, but to
perseverance; and this discourse applies properly to believers, who have
already learned what it is to trust in the Lord, and who need to be
strengthened, because they are still weak, and may often fall, in
consequence of the various motives to distrust with which they are
called to struggle. He therefore does not enjoin them merely to trust in
the Lord, but to remain steadfastly in trust and confidence to the end.

<span id="xv.i-p106"></span>*For in Jah Jehovah is the strength of
ages.*  <span id="fr_156"></span>[157](#fn_156) We ought to attend to
the reason which is here assigned, namely, that as the power of God,
which is the object of faith, is perpetual, so faith ought to be
extended so as to be equally perpetual. When the Prophet speaks of the
strength and power of God, he does not mean power which is unemployed,
but power active and energetic, which is actually exerted on us, and
which conducts to the end what he had begun. And this doctrine has a
wider application, for it bids us truly believe that we ought to
contemplate the nature of God; for, as soon as we turn aside from
beholding it, nothing is seen but what is fleeting, and then we
immediately faint. Thus ought faith to rise above the world by continual
advances; for neither the truth, nor the justice, nor the goodness of
God, is temporary and fading, but God continues always to be like
himself.

<span id="xv.i-p108"></span><span id="xv.i-p108.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p109"></span>**5.** *For he will bring down the
inhabitants of loftiness.*  <span id="fr_157"></span>[158](#fn_157) He
now explains more fully what is that power of God of which he spoke. It
is that which we ourselves feel, and which is exerted for our benefit.
The two clauses are therefore closely connected, that “the proud are
laid low by the power of God,” and that “the lowly and despised are
placed in their room;” for it would not have yielded full consolation to
tell us, in the first place, that “the proud will be laid low,” if he
had not likewise added, that “the lowly will be exalted,” so as to hold
dominion over the proud. We therefore acknowledge, that in our own
experience God works powerfully for our salvation, and this yields to us
a ground of hope.

<span id="xv.i-p111"></span>Under the word *loftiness* he includes not
only bulwarks and fortifications of every kind, (for the ancients were
wont to build their cities in lofty places,) but also wealth and
magnificence. He therefore means, that no defense can prevent God from
casting down the wicked, and laying them low. Towers and bulwarks,
indeed, are not displeasing to God; but as it rarely happens that they
who are strong and powerful are not proud, so *loftiness* frequently
denotes *pride*. Unquestionably he speaks of the wicked, who have
abundance of arms, forces, and money, and imagine that they are
protected against God himself. He likewise comforts the Jews, as we have
formerly said,  <span id="fr_158"></span>[159](#fn_158) because the
invincible power of Babylon might have terrified them and thrown them
into despair, if the Lord had not supported them by this promise: “You
have no reason for being terrified at the greatness or strength of
Babylon; for she will quickly fall, and will not stand before the power
of the Lord.”

<span id="xv.i-p113"></span><span id="xv.i-p113.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p114"></span>**7.** *Straightnesses are the way of the
righteous man.* He does not praise the righteousness of the godly, as
some have falsely supposed, but shews that, through the blessing of God,
they are prosperous and successful during the whole course of their
life. Having only stated briefly in the beginning of the verse, that
“their ways are plain and smooth,” he explains more fully in the second
clause, ascribing it to the grace of God that in an open plain, as it
were, the righteous proceed in their course, till they reach the goal.

<span id="xv.i-p115"></span>*Thou wilt weigh the straight path of the
righteous.* The word *weigh* contains a metaphor, that God, by applying
a balance, as it were, brings to an equal measure those things which in
themselves were unequal. The Hebrew word <span
id="xv.i-p115.1"></span>ישר (*yāshār*) is ambiguous, for it may refer
either to God or to the path. Accordingly some render it, *Thou, who art
upright, will direct the path of the righteous*;  <span
id="fr_159"></span>[160](#fn_159) and in other passages God is called
*upright*. (<span id="xv.i-p116.1"></span>[De
32:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#004)<span id="xv.i-p116.1"></span>;
<span id="xv.i-p116.2"></span>[Ps
25:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#008)<span id="xv.i-p116.2"></span>.)
There would also be propriety in the allusion, that the *straightness*
of which he spoke proceed from God, for he alone is *straight* or
*upright*. But the other version appears to be more natural.  <span
id="fr_160"></span>[161](#fn_160)

<span id="xv.i-p118"></span>He promises in general, that God will take
care of the righteous, so as to lead them, as it were, by his hand. When
the wicked prosper and the righteous are oppressed, everything in this
world appears to be moved by chance; and although Scripture frequently
declares and affirms that God takes care of them, (<span
id="xv.i-p118.1"></span>[Ps 37:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#005)<span
id="xv.i-p118.1"></span>; <span id="xv.i-p118.2"></span>[1Pe
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#007)<span id="xv.i-p118.2"></span>,)
yet we can scarcely remain steadfast, but waver, when everything that
happens to them is unfavourable. Yet it is true that the ways of the
righteous are made plain by God’s balance, however rough and uneven they
may appear to be; and not only so, but he has committed them to the
guardianship of his angels, “lest they should be injured, or dash their
foot against a stone.” (<span id="xv.i-p118.3"></span>[Ps
91:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#011)<span id="xv.i-p118.3"></span>.)
But for this, they would easily fall or give way through exhaustion, and
would hardly ever make way amidst so many thorns and briers, steep
roads, intricate windings, and rough places, did not the Lord lead out
and deliver them.

<span id="xv.i-p119"></span>Let us therefore learn to commit ourselves
to God, and to follow him as our leader, and we shall be guided in
safety. Though snares and artifices, the stratagems of the devil and
wicked men, and innumerable dangers, may surround us, we shall always be
enabled to escape. We shall feel what the Prophet says here, that our
ways, even amidst deep chasms, are made plain, so that there is no
obstacle to hinder our progress. And, indeed, experience shews, that if
we are not led by God’s guidance, we shall not be able to push our way
through rugged roads; for so great is our weakness that we shall
scarcely advance a single step without stumbling at the smallest stone
that comes in our way. Satan and wicked men not only entangle and delay
us by many perplexities, and not only present to us slight difficulties,
but cause us to encounter sometimes high mounds and sometimes deep pits,
which even the whole world would be unable to avoid.

<span id="xv.i-p120"></span>It is therefore proper for us to acknowledge
how much we need heavenly direction, and to confess with Jeremiah, “I
know, O Lord, that the way of man is not in himself; and it is not in
man that walketh to direct his steps.” (<span
id="xv.i-p120.1"></span>[Jer
10:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#023)<span id="xv.i-p120.1"></span>.)
Let us not be puffed up with vain confidence, as if the result were
placed in our own power. Let us not boast, as James warns us, that “we
shall do this or that.” (<span id="xv.i-p120.2"></span>[Jas
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#015)<span id="xv.i-p120.2"></span>.)
Such is the manner of rash men, who act as if they could do everything
at their own pleasure; while it is not in our power, as Solomon tells
us, to direct our tongue so as to give a proper answer. (<span
id="xv.i-p120.3"></span>[Pr 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#001)<span
id="xv.i-p120.3"></span>.) In vain, therefore, do men form plans, and
deliberate, and decide about their ways, if God do not stretch out his
hand. But he holds it out to the righteous, and takes peculiar care of
them; for, while the providence of God extends to all, and while he
supplies the wants of young ravens (<span id="xv.i-p120.4"></span>[Ps
147:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#009)<span id="xv.i-p120.4"></span>)
and sparrows, (<span id="xv.i-p120.5"></span>[Mt
10:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#029)<span id="xv.i-p120.5"></span>,)
and of the smallest animals, yet he has a fatherly kindness towards the
godly, and delivers them out of dangers and difficulties.

<span id="xv.i-p121"></span><span id="xv.i-p121.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p122"></span>**8.** *Yea, in the way of thy judgments.*
This verse contains a very beautiful doctrine, without which it might
have been thought that the former statements were without foundation.
Since he said that God will be our guide during the whole of life, so
that we shall neither wander nor stumble, and while, on the other hand,
we are pressed by so many straits, we might conclude that those promises
have not been actually fulfilled. Accordingly, when he tries our
patience, we ought to strive, and yet to trust in him. Here the Prophet
gives us this instruction, that, though our eyes are not gratified by an
easy and delightful path, and though the road is not made smooth under
our feet, but we must toil through many hard passages, still there is
room for hope and patience.

<span id="xv.i-p123"></span>By *the way of judgments* he means
adversity, and the word *judgment* often has this meaning in Scripture.
But here is a mark which distinguishes the godly from hypocrites; for in
prosperity hypocrites bless God, and speak highly of him; but in
adversity they murmur, and curse God himself, and plainly shew that they
had no confidence in him, and thus judge of God according as their
prosperity lasts. The godly, on the other hand, when they are tried by
afflictions and calamities, are more and more excited to place
confidence.  <span id="fr_161"></span>[162](#fn_161)

<span id="xv.i-p125"></span>The particle <span
id="xv.i-p125.1"></span>אף, (ă*ph*,) *Even*, is inserted for the sake of
emphasis, as if the Prophet had said, that believers are earnest in the
worship of God, not only so long as he treats them with gentleness, but
that, if he deal harshly with them, still they do not faint, because
they are supported by hope. It is therefore the true test of sincere
godliness, when not only while God bestows his kindness upon us, but
while he withdraws his face, and afflicts us, and gives every sign of
severity and displeasure, we place our hope and confidence in him. Let
us learn to apply this doctrine to our own use, whenever we are hard
pressed by the calamities of the present life; and let us not cease to
trust in him, even when our affairs are in the most desperate condition.
 <span id="fr_162"></span>[163](#fn_162) “Though He slay me,” says Job,
“I will trust in Him;” and David says that: “though he walk amidst the
shadow of death, he will trust and not be afraid, because he knows that
God is with him.” (<span id="xv.i-p126.1"></span>[Job
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#015)<span id="xv.i-p126.1"></span>;
<span id="xv.i-p126.2"></span>[Ps
23:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#004)<span id="xv.i-p126.2"></span>.)

<span id="xv.i-p127"></span>*To thy name.* The Prophet aims at shewing
what is the source of that uwearied earnestness which prevents the godly
from sinking under the greatest calamities. It is because they are free
from wicked desires and from excessive solicitude, and in their
aspirations boldly rise to God. For, in consequence of our disorderly
passions and cares holding us bound, as it were, to the earth, our
hearts either wander astray, or sink into indolence, so that they do not
freely rise to God; and as the essence of God is hidden from us, this
makes us more sluggish in seeking him. From his hidden and
incomprehensible essence, therefore, the Prophet draws our attention to
the name of God, as if he enjoined us to rest satisfied with that
manifestation of it which is found in the word; because there God
declares to us, as far as is necessary, his justice, wisdom, and
goodness, that is, himself.

<span id="xv.i-p128"></span>*And to the remembrance of thee.* It is not
without good reason also that he has added the word *remembrance*; for
it means that the first perception or thought is not enough, but that
continual meditation is enjoined; because without its aid all the light
of doctrine would immediately vanish away. And indeed the true and
sincere knowledge of God inflames us to desire him, and not only so, but
also prompts us to desire to make progress, whenever the “remembrance”
of it occurs to our minds. The knowledge of God, therefore, comes first;
and next, we must be employed in frequent “remembrance;” for it is not
enough that we have once obtained knowledge, if love and desire do not
grow through constant meditation. Hence, also, we perceive that the
knowledge of God is not a dead imagination.

<span id="xv.i-p129"></span><span id="xv.i-p129.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p130"></span>**9.** *My soul hath desired thee.* This is
a stronger expression of the former statement; for, having previously
spoken in the person of believers, he had said that the desire of their
soul was towards God. He now adds, with regard to himself, *My soul hath
desired*; as if he had said, “I have all the faculties of my soul
directed towards seeking thy name.” The word <span
id="xv.i-p130.1"></span>נפש (*nēphĕsh*) frequently denotes the vital
*Soul*; but as the Prophet here employs two words, I distinguish them so
as to make <span id="xv.i-p130.2"></span>נפש (*nephesh*) mean the desire
or will, and <span id="xv.i-p130.3"></span>רוח (*rūăch*) the
intellectual parts; for we know that these are the chief parts of the
human soul, namely, the Understanding and the Will, both of which God
justly claims for himself. Such is also the import of that passage,
“Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy mind,
and with all thy strength.” (<span id="xv.i-p130.4"></span>[De
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#005)<span id="xv.i-p130.4"></span>;
<span id="xv.i-p130.5"></span>[Mt
22:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#037)<span id="xv.i-p130.5"></span>.)
The Prophet therefore shews, that all the faculties of his soul are
directed to this point, to seek God and embrace him.

<span id="xv.i-p131"></span>Others take <span
id="xv.i-p131.1"></span>רוח, (*rūăch*,) *the Spirit*, to mean the
regenerated part; and so by <span id="xv.i-p131.2"></span>נפש
(*nĕphĕsh*) they understand the natural soul, and by <span
id="xv.i-p131.3"></span>רוח, (*rūăch*,) *the Spirit*, they understand
the grace of God, which is supernatural. But this cannot be admitted;
for the sensual man (<span id="xv.i-p131.4"></span>ψυχικός) never seeks
God; and we perceive how strongly we are opposed by our feelings when we
rise to God, and with what difficulty we conquer that aversion. It is
unnecessary, therefore, to refute this interpretation, for it is
directly contrary to Scripture; and from many similar passages it is
sufficiently plain that the Spirit and Soul mean the understanding and
the heart.

<span id="xv.i-p132"></span>*In the night.* By *the night* Scripture
often means adversity, which is compared to darkness and gloominess. But
I interpret it somewhat differently, as if the Prophet had said, “There
is no time so improper or unreasonable that I may not call upon thee or
pray to thee.” That interpretation differs little from the former, but
is rather more general; for night is supposed to be set apart for rest,
and at that time all the desires and labors of men  <span
id="fr_163"></span>[164](#fn_163) cease; and, in short, there is little
difference between a sleeping and a dead man. He says, therefore, that
at the time which is devoted to rest and repose he rises to seek God, so
that no occasion turns him aside; — not that those who are asleep have
any active thought, but that sleep itself, if we turn to God, is a part
of our course; and although we slumber and are silent, still we praise
him by hope and confidence.

<span id="xv.i-p134"></span>*In the morning*  <span
id="fr_164"></span>[165](#fn_164) *will I seek thee.* By *the night* the
Prophet does not literally mean *sleep*; and this is perfectly evident
from the present clause, in which *night* is contrasted with *morning*,
which denotes continuance.

<span id="xv.i-p136"></span>*The inhabitants of the earth will learn
righteousness.* We must observe the reason assigned, when he says that
“the inhabitants of the earth learn righteousness from the judgments of
God,” meaning that by chastisements men are taught to fear God.  <span
id="fr_165"></span>[166](#fn_165) In prosperity they forget him, and
their eyes are as it were blinded by fatness; they grow wanton and
petulant, and do not submit to be under authority; and therefore the
Lord restrains their insolence, and teaches them to obey. In short, the
Prophet confesses that he and others were trained, by God’s
chastisements, to yield submission to his authority, and to intrust
themselves to his guardianship; because if God do not, with uplifted
arm, claim his right to rule, no man of his own accord yields obedience.

<span id="xv.i-p138"></span><span id="xv.i-p138.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p139"></span>**10.** *The wicked man will obtain favour.*
 <span id="fr_166"></span>[167](#fn_166) Isaiah contrasts this statement
with the former. He had said that the godly, even when they are
afflicted, or see others afflicted, still rely on the love of God, and
trust in him. But now he declares, on the other hand, that the wicked
cannot be brought in any way to love God, though he endeavor, by every
sort of kindness, to draw and gain them over; and that, whatever aspect
the Lord assume towards them, they do not become better.

<span id="xv.i-p141"></span>This verse appears, at first view, to
contradict the former, in which the Prophet said, that the justice of
God is acknowledged in the earth, when he executes his judgments, and
shews that he is the Judge, and punishes the transgressions of men;
while he says here that the wicked cannot in any way be led or persuaded
to worship God, and that they are so far from being made better by the
chastisements, that even acts of kindness make them worse. The good
effect of chastisements certainly does not appear in all; for wicked men
do not at all profit by them, as we see in Pharaoh, whom chastisements
and scourges rendered more obstinate. (<span id="xv.i-p141.1"></span>[Ex
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#013)<span id="xv.i-p141.1"></span>.)
But although he spoke indiscriminately about “the inhabitants of the
earth,” yet he strictly included none but God’s elect, with whom indeed
even some hypocrites share the profit that is gained; for sometimes,
though reluctantly, they are moved by reverence for God, and are
restrained by the dread of punishments.  <span
id="fr_167"></span>[168](#fn_167) But as the Prophet here describes
sincere repentance, by “the inhabitants of the earth” he means only the
children of God.

<span id="xv.i-p143"></span>Some view it as a question, “Shall favor be
shewn to the wicked?” or, “Why should the wicked man obtain favor?” as
if the Prophet insinuated that they do not deserve that God should deal
gently with them. But I choose rather to explain it thus, “Whatever may
be the acts of kindness by which God draws the wicked, they will never
learn to act uprightly.” The Prophet therefore has limited the statement
made in the former verse.

<span id="xv.i-p144"></span>*In the land of upright actions he will deal
unjustly.* This is added in order to shew more strongly the baseness of
this ingratitude. It was a sufficiently heinous offense that they abused
the acts of God’s kindness, and by means of them became more rebellious;
but it is their crowning wickedness, that “they deal wickedly in the
land” which the Lord had consecrated to himself. What he now says
relates to Judea, but may be extended also to other countries in which
God is now worshipped; but at that time there was no other country on
which Isaiah could bestow that title, for in no other was there any
knowledge of God. (<span id="xv.i-p144.1"></span>[Ps
76:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#002)<span id="xv.i-p144.1"></span>.)

<span id="xv.i-p145"></span>Thus he calls Judea “the land of upright
actions.” I give this interpretation, because, since the Prophet employs
<span id="xv.i-p145.1"></span>נכחות (*nekōchōth*) in the feminine
gender, the word *upright* cannot apply to men.  <span
id="fr_168"></span>[169](#fn_168) He therefore bestows this title,
because the law was there in full force, (<span
id="xv.i-p146.1"></span>[Ps. 76:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#002)<span id="xv.i-p146.1"></span>.) and
that nation had been peculiarly chosen by God; and it was added, as I
have already said, in order to exhibit more strongly the ingratitude of
the nation. Some extend it indiscriminately to the whole world, because,
wherever we live, God supports us on the condition of our maintaining
uprightness. This is too far-fetched; but, since God has now spread
abroad his kingdom in every direction, wheresoever men call on his name,
that is “the land of upright actions;”  <span
id="fr_169"></span>[170](#fn_169) so that we are worthy of double
condemnation, if, after having been stimulated by benefits so numerous
and so great, we do not testify our gratitude by the practice of
godliness and by good works.

<span id="xv.i-p148"></span>When he adds, that the reprobate *will not
behold the majesty of the Lord,* this does not in any degree palliate,
but rather doubles their criminality; because it is base and shameful
indolence not to observe the glory of God which is openly manifested
before our eyes. The wicked are thus rendered the more inexcusable,
because, how numerous soever may be the methods by which the Lord makes
known his name, still they are blind amidst the clearest light. There is
never any lack of testimonies by which the Lord openly manifests his
majesty and glory, but, as we have formerly seen,  <span
id="fr_170"></span>[171](#fn_170) few consider them. God manifests his
glory not only by the ordinary works of nature, but likewise by some
astonishing miracles and demonstrations, by means of which he gives us
abundant instruction about his goodness, wisdom, and justice. Wicked men
shut their eyes, and do not observe them, though in trifling matters
they are very clear-sighted; and the Prophet now censures them severely
for this wickedness.

<span id="xv.i-p150"></span>Others think that it is a threatening
against the reprobate, *they shall not behold the majesty of the Lord,*
as if they did not deserve to obtain this view of the works of God.
Though this is true, yet, as this clause is closely connected with the
former, the Prophet continues to censure the indolence of those who do
not direct their minds to the works of God, but, on the contrary, become
stupid. On this account, we ought to think it the less wonderful that so
few repent, though very many demonstrations of the righteousness of God
are openly made; for infidelity is always blind to behold the works of
God.

<span id="xv.i-p151"></span><span id="xv.i-p151.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p152"></span>**11.** *O Jehovah, though thy hand is
lifted up.* This is an explanation of the former statement; for he
brings forward nothing that is new, but shews more clearly what he had
formerly stated in a few words. He had already said that the wicked
“will not behold the majesty of the Lord;” and now he explains that
“majesty” to be that which is visible in the works of God. He does not
send us to that hidden majesty which is concealed from us, but leads us
to the works, which he denotes figuratively (<span
id="xv.i-p152.1"></span>μετωνυμικῶς)  <span
id="fr_171"></span>[172](#fn_171) by the *hand*. Here he again censures
the wicked, and shews that they cannot be excused on the plea of
ignorance; for, though they perceive nothing, still the hand of God is
openly visible; and it is nothing but their blind ingratitude, or rather
their voluntary indolence, that hinders them from perceiving it. Some
might plead ignorance, and allege that they did not see these works; but
the Prophet says that God’s hand is “lifted up,” and not merely exerted,
so that it is not only visible to a few persons, but shines
conspicuously.

<span id="xv.i-p154"></span>*They shall see and be ashamed.* He shews
plainly that this “beholding” is different from that of which he
formerly spoke, when he said that the wicked “do not see the glory of
the Lord;” for they do see, but do not observe or take any notice of it;
but at length “they shall see,” but too late, and to their great hurt.
After having long abused the patience of God, and proved that they were
obstinate and rebellious, they will at length be constrained to
acknowledge the judgments of God. Thus Cain, (<span
id="xv.i-p154.1"></span>[Gen. 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#014)<span id="xv.i-p154.1"></span>,)
Esau, (<span id="xv.i-p154.2"></span>[Ge
27:38](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#038)<span id="xv.i-p154.2"></span>,)
and others like them, who too late repented of their crimes, (<span
id="xv.i-p154.3"></span>[Heb
12:17](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#017)<span id="xv.i-p154.3"></span>,)
though they fled from the face of God, yet were constrained to see that
he was their Judge. Thus, in those who despise him, God frequently
produces a feeling of remorse, that he may display his power; but such
knowledge is of no avail to them.

<span id="xv.i-p155"></span>In this manner, therefore, the Prophet
threatens wicked men, after having accused them of blindness, in order
to shew that they have no plea of ignorance; and he forewarns them that
the time will come when they shall know with whom they have to do, and
that they will then feel that they ought not to despise that heavenly
name which they now treat as fabulous, and scorn. They shut their eyes,
and act without restraint, and make us a laughing-stock, and do not
think that God will be their Judge, but rather turn into ridicule our
distresses and afflictions. Thus they look down on us as from a lofty
place, and grow more and more hardened; but at length they will
understand that the true worshippers of God have not lost their labor.

<span id="xv.i-p156"></span>*And shall be ashamed.* In order to shew
that this beholding of the glory of God is not only of no advantage, but
hurtful to them, he says that they shall behold with *shame* the
blessing of God towards believers, in which they will have no share.

<span id="xv.i-p157"></span>*Through their envy of the people.* This
tends to shew more strongly the severity of the punishment, that not
only will they burn with “envy,” when they shall see that the children
of God have been delivered from those distresses, and have been exalted
to glory, but there will likewise be added another evil, that they will
be consumed by the fire of the enemy. By “the envy of the people,”
therefore, is here meant the indignation which wicked men feel when they
compare the lot of godly men with their own.

<span id="xv.i-p158"></span>*Yea, the fire of thine enemies shall devour
them.* By *the fire* *of the enemies*, he means that “fire” with which
God consumes his “enemies.” He employs the word “fire” to denote God’s
vengeance; for here it must not be taken for visible “fire” with which
we are burned, nor even for the thunderbolt alone, but is a metaphorical
expression for dreadful anguish, as we find that in many other passages
Scripture denotes by this term, God’s severest vengeance. (<span
id="xv.i-p158.1"></span>[Deut. 32:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#022),
[Job 20:26](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#026), [Job
22:20](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#020)<span id="xv.i-p158.1"></span>.)
No language indeed can sufficiently express this anguish. Yet I do not
object to the suggestion, that the Prophet alludes to the destruction of
Sodom and Gomorrah. (<span id="xv.i-p158.2"></span>[Ge
19:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#024)<span id="xv.i-p158.2"></span>.)

<span id="xv.i-p159"></span><span id="xv.i-p159.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p160"></span>**12.** *O Jehovah, thou wilt ordain peace
for us.* This statement tends to the consolation of the godly, as if he
had said, “We shall see what will be the end of the wicked; for thou
wilt prevent them from sharing with thy children, and wilt take them
away as enemies by fire, but we shall be happy.” The Hebrew verb <span
id="xv.i-p160.1"></span>שפת, (*shāphăth*,) which signifies “to ordain,”
has the same import as the word “establish;” as if he had said, “Thou
wilt prepare peace for us in uninterrupted succession:” for the wicked
also enjoy peace, but not of long duration; but our peace is fixed on
the Lord, and has a firm foundation, and never comes to an end. By the
word *peace* he means perfect happiness. Hence infer, that the children
of God alone, who rest on him, are happy; for the life of the wicked, to
whatever extent it may abound in pleasures and luxuries, when everything
proceeds to their wish, is most miserable. There is therefore no solid
foundation for peace but in God’s fatherly love.

<span id="xv.i-p161"></span>*All our works.* By *works* he means all the
blessings which the Lord bestows on those who believe in him; as if he
had said, “Transactions, business, actions,” and everything included in
the French phrase <span id="xv.i-p161.1"></span>*nos affaires*, or in
the corresponding English phrase *our* *affairs*. Accordingly, those who
have quoted this passage for the purpose of overturning free-will have
not understood the Prophet’s meaning. It is undoubtedly true that God
alone does what is good in us, and that all the good actions which men
perform are from his Spirit. But here the Prophet merely shews that we
have obtained from the hand of God all the good things which we enjoy;
and hence he infers that his kindness will not cease till we shall have
obtained perfect happiness. Now, since God is the author of all good
things, we ought chiefly to consider those which hold the first and
highest place; for if we ought to acknowledge that we have received from
God those things by which we support this life, much more those which
belong to the salvation of the soul. If, therefore, we ought to
acknowledge his kindness in small matters, how much more ought we to
acknowledge it in matters of the greatest importance and value? But
there is no reason why we should bring forward this passage against the
Papists; for they might easily evade it, and we have a great number of
other passages exceedingly conclusive.

<span id="xv.i-p162"></span>In this passage, therefore, the Prophet
appears to exhort the godly to testify their gratitude; for he bids them
declare the acts of God’s kindness, so as to acknowledge that they are
indebted to him for everything which they possess; and this contains a
profitable doctrine, namely, that from past events and benefits
received, the godly reason even as to God’s future kindness, and infer
that he will also take care of them for the future. Having therefore
experienced God’s kindness, let us also learn to hope for the future;
and since he hath shewn himself to be so kind and bountiful, let us
steadfastly fix our hearts in the hope of future assistance.

<span id="xv.i-p163"></span>This example has been followed by all the
saints, and in this way they have strengthened their faith. Thus David
says, “Thou wilt not despise the work of thy hands.” (<span
id="xv.i-p163.1"></span>[Ps 138:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#008)<span
id="xv.i-p163.1"></span>.) Paul says, “He who hath begun in us a good
work will perform it.” (<span id="xv.i-p163.2"></span>[Php
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#006)<span id="xv.i-p163.2"></span>.)
Jacob also says, “I am less than the compassions and the truth which
thou hast shewn to thy servant; but thou saidst, I will surely do thee
good.” (<span id="xv.i-p163.3"></span>[Gen.
32:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#010),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#012)<span id="xv.i-p163.3"></span>.)
God is not like men, to be capable of being wearied by doing good, or
exhausted by giving largely; and therefore the more numerous the
benefits with which he has loaded us, so much the more ought our faith
to be strengthened and increased.

<span id="xv.i-p164"></span><span id="xv.i-p164.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p165"></span>**13.** *O Lord our God.* This verse
contains a complaint of the saints, that they were oppressed by the
tyranny of the wicked. This song was composed in order to refresh the
hearts of believers, who were to be cruelly banished from that land
which was a figure of eternal happiness, that, having been deprived of
sacrifices and holy assemblies, and almost of every consolation, crushed
by the heavy yoke of the Babylonians, banished from their country,
loaded with reproach and sore afflictions, they might direct their
groanings to God, in order to seek relief. He speaks, therefore, in the
name of believers, who to outward appearance had been rejected by God,
and yet did not cease to testify that they were the people of God, and
to put their trust in him.

<span id="xv.i-p166"></span>*Other lords besides thee have had dominion
over us.* Not without cause do they complain that they are placed under
a different dominion from that of God, for he had received them under
his sole guardianship. Hence it follows that, if they had not been
estranged from him, they would not have endured so hard a lot as to be
exposed to the tyranny and caprice of enemies. It may be thought that
the government of all princes is “besides God,” or different from that
of God, even though they govern in his name. But the Prophet does not
speak of those who govern for our benefit, but of those who are opposed
to true worship and to holy doctrine. David was indeed a ruler who
exercised dominion separate from that of God, but at the same time he
was a genuine servant of God for the general advantage of the whole
people; and therefore he maintained the true religion, which those
rulers wished altogether to overthrow. Most justly did it befall the
Jews, that, in consequence of having refused to obey God, who treated
them with the greatest kindness, they were subjected to the tyranny of
wicked men.

<span id="xv.i-p167"></span>There is an implied contrast between God and
the pious kings who governed the people in his name and by his
authority, and the tyrants who oppressed them by governing with most
unjust laws. This will be made more evident by a similar passage in
Ezekiel, “I gave them,” says God, “good laws, by which they might live;
but because they did not execute my judgments, and despised my statutes,
and profaned my Sabbaths, and cast their eyes upon the idols of their
fathers, for this reason I gave them statutes that were not good, and
judgments by which they could not live.” (<span
id="xv.i-p167.1"></span>[Ezek. 20:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#011),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#024),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#025)<span id="xv.i-p167.1"></span>.)
Since they might formerly, through the blessing of God, have been
prosperous and happy, if they had obeyed his word, the prophet Ezekiel
threatens that they will be subjected to tyrants who will compel them to
obey their cruel enactments, and that without profit or reward. Isaiah
now deplores a similar calamity. “When the Lord ruled over us, we could
not be satisfied with our lot, and now we are compelled to endure severe
tyranny, and suffer the just punishment of our wickedness.” The same
complaint may be made by believers who live under the Papacy, or who in
any way are compelled, by unjust laws, to observe superstition; for they
are subject to a government which is “besides God,” or different from
that of God, and endure bondage worse than barbarous, which not only
fetters their bodies, but conducts their souls to torture and slaughter.

<span id="xv.i-p168"></span>*In thee only.* This clause appears to be
contrasted with the former to this effect, “Although irreligious men
wish to withdraw from thy dominion, yet we will continue under it; for
we are fully convinced that we are thine.” But we may draw from it more
abundant instruction, that, although the feeling of the flesh pronounces
that those who are cruelly oppressed by enemies have been forsaken by
God, and laid open to be a prey, yet the Jews do not cease to boast in
God when they do not perceive that he is near them; for the mere
remembrance of his name supports them, and gently cherishes their hope.
There is thus a very emphatic contrast between “the remembrance of the
name of God” and the immediate experience of his grace; for steadfastly
to embrace God, even though he is absent, is a proof of uncommon
excellence.

<span id="xv.i-p169"></span>Others render it, *In thee and in thy name*;
but the word *and* is not in the passage. There is here exhibited to us
consolation, which is great and highly necessary in these times, when
the base ingratitude of men, by shaking off the yoke of God, has brought
down upon itself a most cruel tyranny; and we need not wonder if we
already see it abound in many places in which men call on the name of
God. Yet the godly ought not to faint on this account, provided that
they support themselves by this consolation, that God never entirely
forsakes those who find abundant consolation in the remembrance of his
name. But at the same time it is necessary to testify this faith, so as
to choose to die a thousand times rather than depart from God by
profaning his name; for when any one goes astray through the fear of
men, it is certain that he never has truly tasted the sweetness of the
name of God. So long, therefore, as we freely enjoy the word, let us be
diligently employed in it, so that, when necessity shall demand it, we
may be armed, and that it may not appear that we have indulged at our
ease in idle speculation.

<span id="xv.i-p170"></span><span id="xv.i-p170.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p171"></span>**14.** *The dead shall not live.*  <span
id="fr_172"></span>[173](#fn_172) The Prophet again speaks of the
unhappy end of the wicked, whose prosperity often agitates and vexes us,
as we read in the Psalms of David. (<span id="xv.i-p172.1"></span>[Ps.
37:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#001), [Ps.
73:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#003),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#017)<span id="xv.i-p172.1"></span>.)
That our eyes may not be dazzled by the present appearances of things,
he foretells that their end will be very miserable. Others interpret
this passage as relating to believers, who appear to die without any
hope of a resurrection; but unquestionably he speaks of the reprobate,
and this will be still more evident from an opposite statement which he
makes at the nineteenth verse. There is a contrast between the
resurrection of good men and wicked men,  <span
id="fr_173"></span>[174](#fn_173) between whom there would be little
difference, were it not evident that the latter are sentenced to eternal
death, and that the former will receive a blessed and everlasting life:
and not only does eternal death await the wicked, but all the sufferings
which they endure in this world are the commencement of everlasting
destruction; for they cannot be soothed by any consolation, and they
feel that God is their enemy.

<span id="xv.i-p174"></span>*The slain shall not rise again.*  <span
id="fr_174"></span>[175](#fn_174) The word which we render *slain* is
rendered by others *giants*;  <span id="fr_175"></span>[176](#fn_175)
but as in many passages of Scripture <span id="xv.i-p176.1"></span>רפאים
 <span id="fr_176"></span>[177](#fn_176) (*rĕphāīm*) denotes *slain*, so
also in this passage it will be more appropriate, for otherwise there
would be no contrast. (<span id="xv.i-p177.1"></span>[Ps.
88:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#011), [Prov.
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#018), [Prov.
9:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#018), [Prov.
21:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro021.htm#016)<span id="xv.i-p177.1"></span>.)

<span id="xv.i-p178"></span>*Therefore hast thou visited and destroyed
them.* This is added for the sake of explanation; for it assigns the
reason why the reprobate perish without hope, namely, because it is the
purpose of God to destroy them. In the wrath of God they have nothing to
look for but death and ruin.

<span id="xv.i-p179"></span><span id="xv.i-p179.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p180"></span>**15.** *Thou hast added to the nation.*
This verse is explained in various ways. Some think that the Prophet
here declares that the godly are not merely oppressed by one kind of
affliction, but are plunged, as it were, into the lowest misery, and
that they see no end of their distresses. Others explain it simply to
mean, “O Lord, thou hast bestowed on thy nation various blessings,” and
think that the Prophet mentions the blessings which God bestowed on his
people in various ways, as if he had said, “The people have experienced,
not only in one instance, but in innumerable ways, the Lord’s kindness
and bounty.”

<span id="xv.i-p181"></span>But when I attend to what follows, *Thou
hast enlarged*, that is, “Thou hast extended thy kingdom, which formerly
was confined within narrow limits,” I choose rather to view the two
statements as closely connected; for the latter clause is an
interpretation of the former. Besides, it agrees well with what follows,
that *God is glorified*; for we know that in nothing does the glory of
God shine more conspicuously than in the increase of the Church. It is
as if he had said, “Thou hadst formerly a small people, but thou hast
multiplied and increased it;” for the Gentiles were admitted and joined
to the Jews on condition that they should be united into one people.
Thus the Lord added a vast multitude, for the children of Abraham were
called out of all nations.

<span id="xv.i-p182"></span>We must therefore supply, not “Thou hast
added blessings,” but “Thou hast added a greater number;” and the
meaning is, “O Lord, thou wast not satisfied with that small number, and
hast gathered for thyself out of all nations an innumerable people.”
This relates to the kingdom of Christ, which has been spread through the
whole world by the preaching of the gospel; and in this passage the
Prophet speaks highly of this wide extension, and expresses it by the
phrase, *Thou hast enlarged*. This mode of expression is not at variance
with the ordinary way of speaking, when an enlargement of a kingdom or
of territories is expressed. And yet the Prophet does not mean that the
land was enlarged, but that, by spreading the worship of God on all
sides, mutual intercourse produced larger space and greater freedom of
habitation; for contentions had the effect of narrowing it.  <span
id="fr_177"></span>[178](#fn_177) We have here a promise of the calling
of the Gentiles, which must have greatly comforted godly men during that
banishment and miserable dispersion of the Church, so that, although
they saw it to be amazingly weakened and diminished, still they were
convinced that it would be increased in such a manner that not only
would they become innumerable, but foreign and distant nations would be
added to them.

<span id="xv.i-p184"></span><span id="xv.i-p184.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p185"></span>**16.** *O Jehovah, in tribulation they have
visited thee.* This might be explained as relating to hypocrites, who
never flee to God but when they have been constrained by distresses and
afflictions. But since the Lord instructs believers also by
chastisements, as the Prophet formerly shewed, (<span
id="xv.i-p185.1"></span>[Isa. 26:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#009)<span id="xv.i-p185.1"></span>,) I
choose rather to refer it simply to them, that not only they may know
that God has justly punished them, but that the bitterness of the
afflictions may likewise be sweetened by the good result of the
chastisement, and that they may be better instructed in the fear of the
Lord, and may profit more and more every day. Isaiah therefore speaks in
the person of the Church, that whenever godly men read this statement,
they might acknowledge that amidst their distresses and afflictions they
were nearer to God than when they enjoyed prosperity, by means of which
almost always (such is the depravity of our nature) we become
excessively proud and insolent. On this account we must be curbed and
tamed by chastisements; and this thought will soften the harshness of
punishments, and make us less ready to shrink from them if we think that
they are profitable to us.

<span id="xv.i-p186"></span>*They poured out a prayer.* The Hebrew word
<span id="xv.i-p186.1"></span>לחש (*lăchăsh*)  <span
id="fr_178"></span>[179](#fn_178) signifies a *muttering*. This word
therefore must not be taken for a prayer pronounced in words,  <span
id="fr_179"></span>[180](#fn_179) but for that which indicates that the
heart is wrung with sore pains, as those who are tortured by extreme
anguish can hardly speak or express the feelings of their hearts. It
therefore denotes, that calling upon God which is sincere and free from
all hypocrisy; such as men will aim at when in sore affliction they
utter groans as expressive of intense pain. In prosperity men speak with
open mouths; but when they are cast down by adversity, they hardly
venture to mutter, and express their feelings with the heart rather than
with the tongue. Hence arise those unutterable groans of which Paul
speaks. (<span id="xv.i-p188.1"></span>[Ro
8:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#026)<span id="xv.i-p188.1"></span>.)
It is in reference to the godly, therefore, that Paul makes this
declaration, and to them must this doctrine be limited; for wicked men,
although some lamentations are extorted from them by pain, become more
hardened and more and more obstinate and rebellious.

<span id="xv.i-p189"></span><span id="xv.i-p189.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p190"></span>**17.** *As a woman with child.* Here two
things ought chiefly to be remarked. First, he compares believers to
women in labor, who, we know, endure exquisite pain; and, accordingly,
he says that their anguish breaks out into loud and violent cries. Hence
we infer that the Prophet does not only speak of that sorrow which
arises from outward distresses and annoyances, but rather describes that
dreadful anguish by which the hearts of the godly are sorely and
dreadfully tormented, when they perceive that God is angry with them,
and when their consciences reprove them. There is no bodily pain so
acute that it can be compared to that anguish, and this is plainly
expressed by the phrase *in thy* *sight*

<span id="xv.i-p191"></span><span id="xv.i-p191.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p192"></span>**18.** *We have as it were brought forth
wind.* The second thing to be remarked is, that he goes beyond the limit
of the metaphor; for when there is no end to their distresses, the
condition of the godly is worse than that of women in labor, who, as
soon as they are free from their pains, break out into joy at the sight
of what they have brought forth, (<span id="xv.i-p192.1"></span>[Joh
16:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#021)<span id="xv.i-p192.1"></span>,)
and forget all their sorrows. The godly, on the other hand, he tells us,
are continually bringing forth; for new troubles and anxieties
constantly await them, and when they think that the birth is at hand,
they bring forth nothing but anguish. That is what he means by *wind,*
 <span id="fr_180"></span>[181](#fn_180) namely, that there is no
removal or abatement of pain; and immediately afterwards he thus
explains it, *Salvations have not been wrought for the land,*  <span
id="fr_181"></span>[182](#fn_181) that is, we have not beheld any
deliverance.

<span id="xv.i-p195"></span>*And the inhabitants of the world have not
fallen.* <span id="xv.i-p195.1"></span>יפלו ובל (ū*băl yĭppĕlū*,) that
is, *have not fallen*; for <span id="xv.i-p195.2"></span>נפל (*nāphăl*)
signifies “to fall.” Others explain it “to dwell.” If we take it in that
sense, the meaning will be, “The Jews shall not dwell,” that is, they
shall not return to their own land; the inhabitants who possess it shall
not perish. But if we follow the ordinary interpretation, we must view
it as referring to the wicked. “The inhabitants of the world annoy us
and do not fall; everything goes on prosperously with them.”

<span id="xv.i-p196"></span>So long as the wicked flourish, the children
of God must be unhappy, and become like women in labor; and this
condition must be quietly endured by us, if we wish to have a place in
the Church of God. It is, indeed, the common lot of all to endure
numerous and endless afflictions; and hence comes the old proverb, “It
is happy not to be born, or, when born, immediately to depart out of
life.” But we see that the godly are visited with sore anguish and very
heavy afflictions beyond others; for in this manner God wishes to try
their faith, that, after having laid aside their desires and forsaken
the world, they may serve him. Since, therefore, the Lord has a peculiar
care of them, he must chastise them, while he permits wicked men to
indulge in unbounded licentiousness.

<span id="xv.i-p197"></span>Here we are also reminded that we must
endure not merely one or another calamity, and must not imagine that,
when we have endured some afflictions, there are none in reserve for us;
for we ought always to be prepared to endure new ones. When God begins
to chastise his people, he does not immediately cease. We shall “bring
forth wind” when we think that the birth is at hand; other calamities
will break out, and we shall be continually attacked by additional
sorrows. We must therefore maintain this warfare so long as it shall
please God to employ us in it. Accordingly, we shall follow the ordinary
interpretation, *have not* *fallen*; for, as the Lord cheers his people,
when he manifests to them his salvation and punishes the wicked, so he
gives them occasion to groan, so long as they behold their enemies
placed in a lofty position and exercising high authority. And if the
Lord in this manner tried his Church in former times, we need not wonder
that we experience the same thing in the present day.

<span id="xv.i-p198"></span>By *the inhabitants of the world* he means
heathens and irreligious men; for he contrasts the rest of the world
with Judea, which he formerly called, by way of eminence, (<span
id="xv.i-p198.1"></span>κατ ᾿ ἐξοχὴν,) *the land*, and mentions its
inhabitants apart.

<span id="xv.i-p199"></span><span id="xv.i-p199.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p200"></span>**19.** *Thy dead men shall live.* Isaiah
continues the same consolation, and addresses his discourse to God, thus
shewing that there is nothing better for us than to bring our thoughts
to meet in God, whenever we must struggle with temptations; for there is
nothing more dangerous than to wander in our thoughts, and to give way
to them, since they can do nothing else than toss us up and down and
drive us into error. Nothing therefore is safer for us than to betake
ourselves to God, on whom alone our hearts can rest; for otherwise we
shall meet with many things that tend to shake our faith. The general
meaning is, that as God guards believers, though they are like “dead
men,” yet they “shall live” amidst death itself, or shall rise again
after their decease.

<span id="xv.i-p201"></span>But it may be asked, of what time does
Isaiah speak? For many interpret this passage as relating to the last
resurrection. The Jews refer it to Messiah’s kingdom, but they are
mistaken in thinking that it is immediately fulfilled by the Messiah’s
first coming. Christians are also mistaken in limiting it to the last
judgment; for the Prophet includes the whole reign of Christ from the
beginning to the end, since the hope of living, as we shall immediately
see, goes beyond this world. Now, in order to understand more fully the
whole of the Prophet’s meaning, we ought first to consider that life is
promised, not indiscriminately, but only to “God’s dead men;” and he
speaks of believers who die in the Lord, and whom he protects by his
power. We know that “God is the God of the living, and not of the dead.”
(<span id="xv.i-p201.1"></span>[Mt
22:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#032)<span id="xv.i-p201.1"></span>.)
Accordingly, if we are God’s people, we shall undoubtedly live; but in
the meantime we must differ in no respect from dead men, for “our life
is hidden,” (<span id="xv.i-p201.2"></span>[Col
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#003)<span id="xv.i-p201.2"></span>,)
and we do not yet see those things for which we hope. (<span
id="xv.i-p201.3"></span>[Rom. 8:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#023),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#024)<span id="xv.i-p201.3"></span>.)

<span id="xv.i-p202"></span>So then he speaks simply of the dead, that
is, of the condition of believers, who lie in the shadow of death on
account of various afflictions which they must continually endure. Hence
it is evident, that this must not be limited to the last resurrection;
for, on the contrary, we say that the reprobate, even while they live,
are dead, because they do not taste God’s fatherly kindness, in which
life consists, and therefore perish in their brutal stupidity. But
believers, by fleeing to God, obtain life in the midst of afflictions,
and even in death itself; but because they have in prospect that day of
the resurrection, they are not said literally to live till that day when
they shall be free from all pain and corruption, and shall obtain
perfect life; and, indeed, Paul justly argues, that it would be a
subversion of order, were they to enjoy life till the appearance of
Christ, who is the source of their life. (<span
id="xv.i-p202.1"></span>[Col. 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#004)<span id="xv.i-p202.1"></span>.)

<span id="xv.i-p203"></span>Thus we have said that Isaiah includes the
whole reign of Christ; for, although we begin to receive the fruit of
this consolation when we are admitted into the Church, yet we shall not
enjoy it fully till that last day of the resurrection is come, when all
things shall be most completely restored; and on this account also it is
called “the day of restitution.” (<span id="xv.i-p203.1"></span>[Ac
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#021)<span id="xv.i-p203.1"></span>.)
The only remedy for soothing the grief of the godly is, to cast their
eyes on the result, by which God distinguishes them from the reprobate.
As death naturally destroys all the children of Adam, so all the
miseries to which they are liable are forerunners of death, and
therefore their life is nothing else than mortality. But because the
curse of God, through the kindness of Christ, is abolished, both in the
beginning and in the end of death, all who are engrafted into Christ are
justly said to live in dying; for to them all that is evil is the
instrument of good. (<span id="xv.i-p203.2"></span>[Ro
8:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#028)<span id="xv.i-p203.2"></span>.)
Hence it follows, that out of the depths of death they always come forth
conquerors till they are perfectly united to their Head; and therefore,
in order that we may be reckoned among “God’s dead men,” whose life he
faithfully guards, we must rise above nature. This is more fully
expressed by the word <span id="xv.i-p203.3"></span>נבלה, (*nĕbēlāh*,)
or *dead body*

<span id="xv.i-p204"></span>*My dead body, they shall arise.* As if he
had said, “The long-continued putrefaction, by which they appear to be
consumed, will not hinder the power of God from causing them to rise
again entire.” So far as relates to the phrase, some render it, “With my
dead body.” Others explain it, “Who are my dead body.” Others supply the
particle of comparison, “Like as my dead body;” but as the meaning is
most fully brought out if, without adding or changing anything, we take
up simply what the words mean, I choose to view them as standing in
immediate connection. At least, this word is inserted for the express
purpose that the Prophet may join himself to the whole Church, and thus
may reckon himself in the number of “God’s dead men” in the hope of the
resurrection.  <span id="fr_182"></span>[183](#fn_182)

<span id="xv.i-p206"></span>As to his mentioning himself in particular,
he does so for the sake of more fully confirming this doctrine; for thus
he testifies his sincerity, and shews that this confession is the result
of faith, according to that saying, “I believed, therefore I spake.”
(<span id="xv.i-p206.1"></span>[Ps
116:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#010)<span id="xv.i-p206.1"></span>;
<span id="xv.i-p206.2"></span>[2Co
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#013)<span id="xv.i-p206.2"></span>.)
But for this, irreligious men might discourse concerning the mercy of
God and eternal life, though they had no sincere belief of them; for
even Balaam knew that he spoke what was true, and yet he derived no
benefit from his predictions. (<span id="xv.i-p206.3"></span>[Num.
23:19](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#019), [Num.
24:13](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#013)<span id="xv.i-p206.3"></span>.)
Very differently does the Prophet speak in this passage; for he
professes to belong to the number of those who shall obtain life, and
then declares that he willingly endures all the troubles and calamities
by which the Lord humbles and slays him, and that he chooses rather to
endure them than to flourish along with the wicked. In this manner he
testifies, that he does not speak of things unknown, or in which he has
no concern, but of those things which he has learned by actual
experience; and shews that his confidence is so great that he willingly
ranks himself in the number of those “dead bodies” which, he firmly
believes, will be restored to life, and therefore chooses to be a dead
body, and to be so reckoned, provided that he be accounted a member of
the Church, rather than to enjoy life in a state of separation from the
Church.

<span id="xv.i-p207"></span>This gives greater force to his doctrine,
and he contrasts it with the statement which he formerly made (verse 14)
about wicked men, *they shall not live*; for the hope of rising again is
taken from them. If it be objected, that resurrection will be common not
only to believers but also to the reprobate, the answer is easy; for
Isaiah does not speak merely of the resurrection, but of the happiness
which believers will enjoy. Wicked men will indeed rise again, but it
will be to eternal destruction; and therefore the resurrection will
bring ruin to them, while it will bring salvation and glory to
believers.

<span id="xv.i-p208"></span>*Awake and sing, ye inhabitants of the
dust.* He gives the name, *inhabitants of the dust*, to believers, who
are humbled under the cross and afflictions, and who even during their
life keep death constantly before their eyes. It is true that they enjoy
God’s blessings in this life;  <span id="fr_183"></span>[184](#fn_183)
but by this metaphor Isaiah declares that their condition is miserable,
because they bear the image of death; for “the outward man” must be
subdued and weakened, till it utterly decay, “that the inward man may be
renewed.” (<span id="xv.i-p209.1"></span>[2Co
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#016)<span id="xv.i-p209.1"></span>.)
We must therefore be willing to be humbled, and to lie down in the dust,
if we wish to share in this consolation.

<span id="xv.i-p210"></span>Accordingly, he bids the dead men “awake and
sing,” which appears to be very inconsistent with their condition; for
among them there is nothing but mournful silence. (<span
id="xv.i-p210.1"></span>[Ps. 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#005), [Ps.
88:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#011)<span id="xv.i-p210.1"></span>.)
He thus draws a clear distinction between God’s elect, whom the
corruption of the grave and the “habitation in the dust” will not
deprive of that heavenly vigor by which they shall rise again, and the
reprobate, who, separated from God the source of life, and from Christ,
fade away even while they live, till they are wholly swallowed up by
death.

<span id="xv.i-p211"></span>*For thy dew is the dew of herbs.*  <span
id="fr_184"></span>[185](#fn_184) He now promises “the dew of herbs,”
and thus illustrates this doctrine by an elegant and appropriate
comparison. We know that *herbs*, and especially those of the meadows,
are dried up in winter, so that they appear to be wholly dead, and, to
outward appearance, no other judgment could be formed respecting them;
yet the roots are concealed beneath, which, when they have imbibed the
*dew* at the return of spring, put forth their vigor, so that *herbs*
which formerly were dry and withered, grow green again. In this manner
will the nation regain its former vigor after having been plentifully
watered with the *dew* of the grace of God, though formerly it appeared
to be altogether withered and decayed.

<span id="xv.i-p213"></span>Such comparisons, drawn from well-known
objects, have great influence in producing conviction. If “herbs”
watered by “dew” revive, why shall not we also revive when watered by
the grace of God? Why shall not our bodies, though dead and rotten,
revive? Does not God take more care of us than of herbs? And is not the
power of the Spirit greater than that of “dew?” Paul employs a similar
argument in writing to the Corinthians, when he treats of the
resurrection; but as he applies his comparison to a different purpose, I
think it better to leave it for the present, lest we should confound the
two passages. It is enough if we understand the plain meaning of the
Prophet.

<span id="xv.i-p214"></span>*And the earth shall cast out the dead.*
Others render the clause in the second person, “Thou wilt lay low the
land of giants,”  <span id="fr_185"></span>[186](#fn_185) or “Thou wilt
lay low the giants on the earth.” I do not disapprove of this
interpretation, for the words admit of that meaning; but the former
appears to agree better with the scope of the passage, though it makes
little difference as to the substance of the doctrine. These words must
relate to that consolation of which we have formerly spoken.

<span id="xv.i-p216"></span><span id="xv.i-p216.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p217"></span>**20.** *Come, my people.* In this verse he
exhorts the children of God to exercise patience, to shut themselves up,
and to bear with moderation their troubles and afflictions, and to stand
unmoved in opposition to the fierce tempests which seemed likely to
overwhelm them. This exhortation was highly necessary; for the
lamentable state to which the nation was afterwards reduced was, to
outward appearance, very inconsistent with that promise. The Prophet,
therefore, when the people are distressed and know not where to go,
takes them, as it were, by the hand, and conducts them to some retired
spot, where they may hide themselves in safety till the storms and
tempests are abated. When he calls them “his own people,” he speaks in
the name of God, and not in his own.

<span id="xv.i-p218"></span>*Enter into thy chamber.* By *chamber* he
means calmness and composure of mind, by which we encourage and
strengthen our hearts with firm belief, and calmly wait for the Lord, as
Habakkuk, after having foretold the calamities which were about to fall
on the Jews, says that he will go up “to his watch-tower,” that is, to a
place of safety, in which he may patiently and silently await the
result. (<span id="xv.i-p218.1"></span>[Hab
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#001)<span id="xv.i-p218.1"></span>.)
Isaiah gives a similar injunction in this passage, that the godly, when
they see that they are attacked by various storms which they are unable
to resist, should shut themselves up in a “chamber,” or some place of
retirement.

<span id="xv.i-p219"></span>*Shut thy doors behind thee.* As it would
not be enough that we should once be fortified against the fierce
attacks of tempests, he bids us also “shut the doors.” This relates to
steadfastness; as if he enjoined us to take good heed not to leave any
chink open for the devil; for he will easily break through and penetrate
into our hearts, if the smallest entrance be allowed him.

<span id="xv.i-p220"></span>*Hide thyself for a little moment.* When he
bids them “hide” or “conceal” themselves, he means that it will be a
very safe refuge for believers, if they are courageous and patiently
wait for the Lord; for though we must boldly and valiantly maintain the
contest, yet since the power of God is displayed in our weakness, (<span
id="xv.i-p220.1"></span>[2Co 12:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#009)<span
id="xv.i-p220.1"></span>,) there is nothing better for us than to take
refuge, with all humility, under God’s wings, that they who tremble may
be placed by him in perfect safety.

<span id="xv.i-p221"></span>Again, because we are naturally rash, and
hurried away by impatience, when we do not see that the Lord’s
assistance is immediate, on this account he says that these storms are
“momentary.”  <span id="fr_186"></span>[187](#fn_186) True, we must
continually struggle with afflictions, and, so long as we live, must not
hope to see an end of them; and, consequently, the afflictions are, in
our opinion, of very long duration. But if we compare them with that
eternity, in which we shall possess immortal joys, it will be but “a
very little moment.” In like manner, Paul also shews that the light and
momentary afflictions which we endure in this life, ought not to be
compared to that weight of eternal glory which we expect to receive.
(<span id="xv.i-p222.1"></span>[2Co
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#017)<span id="xv.i-p222.1"></span>;
<span id="xv.i-p222.2"></span>[Ro
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#018)<span id="xv.i-p222.2"></span>.)

<span id="xv.i-p223"></span>*Till the indignation pass over.* By adding
this he intends to remove all doubt from believers, as if he promised
that they would quickly be delivered. I interpret “indignation” as
meaning simply the affliction which proceeds from the Lord’s anger.
Others refer it to enemies; and I do not object to that interpretation,
but prefer the former; for we see that the prophets earnestly teach that
no evil happens to us that does not come from the hand of God, who does
not inflict them on us without good reason, but when he has been
provoked by our iniquities and transgressions. (<span
id="xv.i-p223.1"></span>[Am 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#006)<span
id="xv.i-p223.1"></span>.) We are thus reminded that God’s wrath against
the Church will not last always, but that, like storms and tempests, it
will come to an end, and on this account believers endure it more
patiently. Hence it is said elsewhere, (<span
id="xv.i-p223.2"></span>[Mic 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#009)<span
id="xv.i-p223.2"></span>,) “I will bear the Lord’s wrath;” for they know
that he chastises them for their salvation. He introduces the Lord
speaking, as I mentioned a little before, that his exhortation may have
greater authority.

<span id="xv.i-p224"></span><span id="xv.i-p224.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p225"></span>**21.** *For, behold, Jehovah cometh out of
his place.* It is a very grievous temptation to the godly, when they see
that the wicked exercise their rage without being punished, and that God
does not restrain them; for they look upon themselves as forsaken by
him. Isaiah therefore meets this temptation, and shews that the Lord,
though he keep himself out of view for a time, will in due season gird
himself for yielding assistance, and for revenging the injuries which
his people have received.

<span id="xv.i-p226"></span>By the word *cometh out*, he describes God
stretching out his hand to his people in such a manner as if it had
formerly been concealed, because the saints did not perceive his aid.
For this reason he says, that the Lord “cometh out,” and that he appears
in public to yield assistance and exercise judgment, as if he had
formerly dwelt like a private person at home. But perhaps there is an
allusion to the sanctuary; and this mode of expression occurs frequently
in the prophets. (<span id="xv.i-p226.1"></span>[Mic
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#003)<span id="xv.i-p226.1"></span>;
<span id="xv.i-p226.2"></span>[Hab
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#013)<span id="xv.i-p226.2"></span>;
<span id="xv.i-p226.3"></span>[Zec
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#003)<span id="xv.i-p226.3"></span>.)
Though heathen nations despised the ark of the covenant which was laid
up in a place little renowned, yet believers knew, by communications of
power and grace which they quickly obtained, that it was not in vain or
to no purpose that they called on God in that holy place. Yet this
principle always holds good, that, though unbelievers ridicule the
temple as some mean hut, still God will “come forth” from it at his own
time, that the whole world may know that he is the protector of his
people

<span id="xv.i-p227"></span>This meaning is more appropriate than if we
were to interpret God’s *place* to mean heaven, from which he “cometh
forth;” for Isaiah intended to express something more. When the prophets
mention heaven, they exhibit to us the majesty and glory of God; but
here he refers to our senses, that is, when we see that God, who
formerly appeared to remain concealed and to be at rest, gives us
assistance. He employs the demonstrative particle <span
id="xv.i-p227.1"></span>הנה, (*hinnēh*,) *behold*, and the participle of
the present tense <span id="xv.i-p227.2"></span>יצא, (*yōtzē*,) *coming
forth*, in order to express certainty, and that believers may not be
displeased at bridling their feelings till his coming.

<span id="xv.i-p228"></span>*To visit the iniquity.* This is to the same
purport with what goes before; for it would have been inconsistent with
the nature of God, who is the judge of the world, to allow the wicked
freely to indulge in sin without being punished. The word *visit*
contains a well-known metaphor; because, so long as God delays or
suspends his judgments, we think that he sees nothing, or that he has
turned away his eyes. There is emphasis, also, in the phrase <span
id="xv.i-p228.1"></span>עליו, (*gnālāiv*,) *upon him*; as it is
frequently said that the wicked are taken in “the snares which they have
laid,” (<span id="xv.i-p228.2"></span>[Ps
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#016)<span id="xv.i-p228.2"></span>,)
or “in the pit which they have digged.” (<span
id="xv.i-p228.3"></span>[Ps 57:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#006)<span
id="xv.i-p228.3"></span>.) The meaning therefore is, that all the
injuries inflicted will fall on the heads of those who were the authors
of them.

<span id="xv.i-p229"></span>*The earth also shall disclose her blood.*
 <span id="fr_187"></span>[188](#fn_187) This also is highly emphatic.
When innocent blood is shed and trodden under foot by wicked men, the
earth drinks it up, and as it were receives it into her bosom; and, in
the meantime, the death of the godly appears to be forgotten, and to be
blotted out for ever from remembrance, so that it shall never come to be
beheld even by God himself. Men indeed think so, but God makes a widely
different declaration; for he declares, that those murderers will one
day be “disclosed” and brought into judgment.

<span id="xv.i-p231"></span>On this account he calls it “the blood, or
bloods, of the earth,” which the earth has drunk up; and in like manner
it is said, that “the earth opened her mouth” when the blood of Abel was
shed. (<span id="xv.i-p231.1"></span>[Ge
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#011)<span id="xv.i-p231.1"></span>.)
In that passage the Lord represents in strong terms the aggravation of
that guilt, by saying, that the earth was polluted with that blood, and
therefore he shews how “precious in his sight is the death of the
saints,” (<span id="xv.i-p231.2"></span>[Ps
116:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#015)<span id="xv.i-p231.2"></span>,)
how great is the care which he takes of them, and that at length he will
not permit their death to pass unpunished. The earth itself will take up
arms to avenge the murders and cruelties which the godly have endured
from tyrants and enemies of the truth; and not a drop of blood has been
shed of which they will not have to render an account. We ought
therefore to call to remembrance this consolation, and to keep it
constantly before our eyes, when the wicked slay, mock, and ridicule us,
and inflict upon us every kind of outrage and cruelty. God will at
length make known that the cry of innocent blood has not been uttered in
vain; for he never can forget his own people. (<span
id="xv.i-p231.3"></span>[Lu 18:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#007)<span
id="xv.i-p231.3"></span>.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_153"></span>[154](cc14014.htm#fr_153) <span
id="xv.i-p48.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p49"></span> See vol. 1 p. 162.

<span id="xv.i-p50"></span> FT412 See Calvin on Isaiah, vol. 1 p. 384

<span id="xv.i-p51"></span> FT413 “Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace
(Heb. peace, peace) whose mind (or, thought, or, imagination) is stayed
on thee.” — Eng. Ver.

<span id="xv.i-p52"></span> FT414 “For in the Lord Jehovah is (Heb. the
Rock of ages) everlasting strength.” — Eng. Ver.

<span id="xv.i-p53"></span> FT415 “For he bringeth down them that dwell
on high.” — Eng. Ver.

<span id="xv.i-p54"></span> FT416 See *Commentary on Isaiah,* vol. 1 p.
407

<span id="xv.i-p55"></span> FT417 It will be observed, that this accords
very nearly with our English version. — *Ed*

<span id="xv.i-p56"></span> FT418 Bishop Stock’s rendering is, “The road
of the just is the direct road; rightly the path of the just dost thou
make even;” and he makes the following annotations: — “*The direct road*
to happiness, the object of all human pursuit. ‘Rightly,’ or with
reason, ‘the path of the just dost thou make even,’ smooth before him,
till he reaches his journey’s end. ‘The straight road is the short one,’
says the divine as well as the geometrician.” — *Ed*

<span id="xv.i-p57"></span> FT419 “<span id="xv.i-p57.1"></span>A se
fier en Dieu;” — “To trust in God.”

<span id="xv.i-p58"></span> FT420 “<span id="xv.i-p58.1"></span>Encor
que les choses soyent du tout hors d’espoir;” — “Even when matters are
altogether beyond hope.”

<span id="xv.i-p59"></span> FT421 “<span id="xv.i-p59.1"></span>Tous les
desirs et travaux des hommes.”

<span id="xv.i-p60"></span> FT422 “Early.” — (Eng. Ver.) In the marginal
reading of the Author’s version, he renders it “earnestly.” — *Ed*

<span id="xv.i-p61"></span> FT423 “<span id="xv.i-p61.1"></span>Que les
hommes sont enseignez à eraindre Dieu par les verges dont il les
frappe;” — “That men are taught to fear God by the scourges with which
he strikes them.”

<span id="xv.i-p62"></span> FT424 “Let favour be shewed to the wicked.”
— Eng. Ver.

<span id="xv.i-p63"></span> FT425 “<span id="xv.i-p63.1"></span>Et se
retiennent en bride de crainte qu’ils ont d’estre fouettez;” — “And are
kept in check through fear of being chastised.”

<span id="xv.i-p64"></span> FT426 Accordingly, our English version,
instead of “upright actions,” uses the term “uprightness,” which
corresponds to the Author’s French version, “<span
id="xv.i-p64.1"></span>la terre de droiture,” “the land of uprightness.”
— *Ed*

<span id="xv.i-p65"></span> FT427 “<span id="xv.i-p65.1"></span>La terre
de droiture;” — “The land of uprightness.”

<span id="xv.i-p66"></span> FT428 The Author refers to his exposition of
<span id="xv.i-p66.1"></span>[Isaiah
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#012)<span id="xv.i-p66.1"></span>. See
*Commentary on Isaiah,* vol. 1 p. 176

<span id="xv.i-p67"></span> FT429 <span
id="xv.i-p67.1"></span>Μετωνυμία, or *metonymy*, denotes that figure of
rhetoric by which one word is exchanged for another on account of a
connection of idea, such as, “Moses and the prophets,” for their works,
or, as in this passage, the “hand” for the works performed by it. — *Ed*

<span id="xv.i-p68"></span> FT430 “(They are) dead, they shall not
live.” — Eng. Ver.

<span id="xv.i-p69"></span> FT431 “<span id="xv.i-p69.1"></span>Des
fideles et des infideles;” — “Of believers and unbelievers.”

<span id="xv.i-p70"></span> FT432 “(They are) deceased, they shall not
rise.” — Eng. Ver.

<span id="xv.i-p71"></span> FT433 Professor Alexander renders <span
id="xv.i-p71.2"></span>רפאים (*rĕphāīm*) *ghosts* and remarks, “It is
here a poetical equivalent to <span id="xv.i-p71.3"></span>מתים
(*mēthīm*,) and may be variously rendered shades, shadows, spirits, or
the like. The common version (*deceased*) leaves too entirely out of
view the figurative character of the expression. *Giants*, on the
contrary, is too strong, and could only be employed in this connection
in the sense of gigantic shades, or shadows.”

<span id="xv.i-p72"></span> FT434 As if the reading had been not
*rĕphāīm*, but *rōphĕīm*, the Seventy render it <span
id="xv.i-p72.1"></span>ἰατροὶ οὐ μὴ ἀναστήσουσι, “*physicians* shall not
rise again.” — *Ed*

<span id="xv.i-p73"></span> FT435 “<span
id="xv.i-p73.1"></span>Faisoyent que la demeurance estiot plus estroite
et moins libre;” — “Made habitation to be narrower and less free.”

<span id="xv.i-p74"></span> FT436 “<span id="xv.i-p74.1"></span>Que nous
avons traduit Prière;” — “Which we have translated Prayer.”

<span id="xv.i-p75"></span> FT437 “<span id="xv.i-p75.1"></span>Pour une
prière articulee;” — “For an articulated prayer.”

<span id="xv.i-p76"></span> FT438 “An obvious phrase for inanity. See
below, <span id="xv.i-p76.2"></span>[Isaiah
33:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#011)<span id="xv.i-p76.2"></span>
They who think of a female disorder, termed *empneumatosis*, should
remember that it is an uncommon disorder, and that metaphors are not
drawn from objects or events of rare occurrence.” — *Stock*

<span id="xv.i-p77"></span> FT439 “We have not wrought any deliverance
in the earth.” — Eng. Ver.

<span id="xv.i-p78"></span> FT440 “<span id="xv.i-p78.1"></span>Esperant
avoir part de leur resurrection;” — “Hoping to share in their
resurrection.”

<span id="xv.i-p79"></span> FT441 “<span id="xv.i-p79.1"></span>En ceste
vie.”

<span id="xv.i-p80"></span> FT442 Bishop Lowth’s rendering is, “For thy
dew is as the dew of the dawn.” Bishop Stock follows him very closely:
“For as the dew of day-light is thy dew,” and remarks: — “*A dew of
rays*, that is, as I conceive, a dew able to abide the solar rays, or a
*steady dew*, in oppostion ‘to the early dew that passeth away’ of <span
id="xv.i-p80.1"></span>[Hos. 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#004),
[Hos. 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#003)<span
id="xv.i-p80.1"></span>; which the Prophet there parallels with ‘the
morning cloud.’ The comparison of Isaiah intimates that the refreshing
of Israel should not be transient, but lasting.” Professor Alexander,
with his usual learning and judgment, produces a formidable array of
conflicting authorities, but vindicates the usual rendering. “There
are,” he says, “two interpretations of <span
id="xv.i-p80.2"></span>ארות, (ō*rōth*,) both ancient, and supported by
high modern authorities. The first gives the word the usual sense of
<span id="xv.i-p80.3"></span>איר, (ō*r*,) *light*; the other, that of
*plants*, which it has in <span id="xv.i-p80.4"></span>[2Ki
4:39](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#039)<span id="xv.i-p80.4"></span>. To
the former it may be objected, that it leaves the plural form
unexplained, that it arbitrarily makes *light* mean *life*, and that it
departs from the acknowledged meaning of <span
id="xv.i-p80.5"></span>ארות (ō*rōth*) in the only other place where it
occurs. The second interpretation, on the other hand, assumes but one
sense of the word, allows the plural form its proper force, and supposes
an obvious and natural allusion to the influence of dew upon the growth
of plants. In either case, the reference to the dew is intended to
illustrate the vivifying power of God.” — *Ed*

<span id="xv.i-p81"></span> FT443 As to the interpretation of <span
id="xv.i-p81.1"></span>רפאים (*rĕphāīm*) by *giants*, See page 231, note
3

<span id="xv.i-p82"></span> FT444 “<span id="xv.i-p82.1"></span>Que ces
tourbillons et orages passent, et sont de petite duree;” — “That these
whirlwinds and storms pass away, and are of short duration.”

<span id="xv.i-p83"></span> FT445 “Her blood (Heb. bloods).” — Eng. Ver.

<span id="fn_154"></span>[155](cc14014.htm#fr_154) <span
id="xv.i-p92.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p93"></span>

<span id="fn_155"></span>[156](cc14014.htm#fr_155) <span
id="xv.i-p95.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p96"></span>

<span id="fn_156"></span>[157](cc14014.htm#fr_156) <span
id="xv.i-p106.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p107"></span>

<span id="fn_157"></span>[158](cc14014.htm#fr_157) <span
id="xv.i-p109.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p110"></span>

<span id="fn_158"></span>[159](cc14014.htm#fr_158) <span
id="xv.i-p111.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p112"></span>

<span id="fn_159"></span>[160](cc14014.htm#fr_159) <span
id="xv.i-p115.2"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p116"></span>

<span id="fn_160"></span>[161](cc14014.htm#fr_160) <span
id="xv.i-p116.3"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p117"></span>

<span id="fn_161"></span>[162](cc14014.htm#fr_161) <span
id="xv.i-p123.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p124"></span>

<span id="fn_162"></span>[163](cc14014.htm#fr_162) <span
id="xv.i-p125.2"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p126"></span>

<span id="fn_163"></span>[164](cc14014.htm#fr_163) <span
id="xv.i-p132.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p133"></span>

<span id="fn_164"></span>[165](cc14014.htm#fr_164) <span
id="xv.i-p134.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p135"></span>

<span id="fn_165"></span>[166](cc14014.htm#fr_165) <span
id="xv.i-p136.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p137"></span>

<span id="fn_166"></span>[167](cc14014.htm#fr_166) <span
id="xv.i-p139.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p140"></span>

<span id="fn_167"></span>[168](cc14014.htm#fr_167) <span
id="xv.i-p141.2"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p142"></span>

<span id="fn_168"></span>[169](cc14014.htm#fr_168) <span
id="xv.i-p145.2"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p146"></span>

<span id="fn_169"></span>[170](cc14014.htm#fr_169) <span
id="xv.i-p146.2"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p147"></span>

<span id="fn_170"></span>[171](cc14014.htm#fr_170) <span
id="xv.i-p148.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p149"></span>

<span id="fn_171"></span>[172](cc14014.htm#fr_171) <span
id="xv.i-p152.2"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p153"></span>

<span id="fn_172"></span>[173](cc14014.htm#fr_172) <span
id="xv.i-p171.2"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p172"></span>

<span id="fn_173"></span>[174](cc14014.htm#fr_173) <span
id="xv.i-p172.2"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p173"></span>

<span id="fn_174"></span>[175](cc14014.htm#fr_174) <span
id="xv.i-p174.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p175"></span>

<span id="fn_175"></span>[176](cc14014.htm#fr_175) <span
id="xv.i-p175.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p176"></span>

<span id="fn_176"></span>[177](cc14014.htm#fr_176) <span
id="xv.i-p176.2"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p177"></span>

<span id="fn_177"></span>[178](cc14014.htm#fr_177) <span
id="xv.i-p182.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p183"></span>

<span id="fn_178"></span>[179](cc14014.htm#fr_178) <span
id="xv.i-p186.2"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p187"></span>

<span id="fn_179"></span>[180](cc14014.htm#fr_179) <span
id="xv.i-p187.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p188"></span>

<span id="fn_180"></span>[181](cc14014.htm#fr_180) <span
id="xv.i-p192.2"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p193"></span>

<span id="fn_181"></span>[182](cc14014.htm#fr_181) <span
id="xv.i-p193.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p194"></span>

<span id="fn_182"></span>[183](cc14014.htm#fr_182) <span
id="xv.i-p204.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p205"></span>

<span id="fn_183"></span>[184](cc14014.htm#fr_183) <span
id="xv.i-p208.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p209"></span>

<span id="fn_184"></span>[185](cc14014.htm#fr_184) <span
id="xv.i-p211.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p212"></span>

<span id="fn_185"></span>[186](cc14014.htm#fr_185) <span
id="xv.i-p214.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p215"></span>

<span id="fn_186"></span>[187](cc14014.htm#fr_186) <span
id="xv.i-p221.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p222"></span>

<span id="fn_187"></span>[188](cc14014.htm#fr_187) <span
id="xv.i-p229.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p230"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 27](cc14015)
