[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc14002)  [Next](cc14004) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 14: Isaiah, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv"></span>

<span id="iv-p1"></span>EPISTOLARY DEDICATION

<span id="iv-p2"></span>BY

<span id="iv-p3"></span>NICOLAS DES GALLARS

<span id="iv-p4"></span>TO HIS ANCIENT FRIEND,

<span id="iv-p5"></span>JOHN CRISPIN

<span id="iv-p6"></span>Whenever I call to remembrance, my dear Crispin,
(as I cannot but often do,) that eminent and godly pastor of the Church,
John Calvin, I have a feeling of deep grief, and at the same time of
joy. For when I bring before my mind the candour and uprightness of that
man, his kind disposition towards me, and the pleasant and intimate
friendship which I enjoyed with him for sixteen years, it is impossible
that I should not be deeply affected by the loss of such a friend, or, I
ought rather to say, of such a parent. Nor is it only on my own account
that I grieve, but rather on account of the whole Church, which has been
deprived of so great a man, and has thus sustained a heavy loss by his
death.

<span id="iv-p7"></span>What labors, what watchings and solicitudes he
endured, with what faithfulness and wisdom he attended to the interests
of all, with what frankness and courtesy he received those who visited
him, how ready and clear were his replies to those who consulted him
even on the weightiest matters, how learnedly, both in private and in
public, he solved the difficult and perplexing questions which were
proposed to him, with what gentleness he comforted the afflicted and
cheered those who were faint and sorrowful, with what firmness he
resisted adversaries, and with what energy he was wont to restrain the
haughty and obstinate, with what strength of mind he bore adversity,
what moderation he exercised in prosperity, and, in short, with what
ability and cheerfulness he performed all the duties of a true and
faithful servant of God, I certainly cannot find words to express! Lest
any one should think that the ardor of my regard for him prompts me to
make these statements, let him consider the actual facts, which truly
exceed the power both of speech and of thought. Besides the writings and
records which convey a stupendous testimony of his virtues, many things
were done and many were spoken by him which cannot be made known to all,
as they are known to those who were present when he did or uttered them.

<span id="iv-p8"></span>When I recall those remarkable events, my grief
is alleviated; and the advantage which is derived from them, and which
is shared with me by so many godly men, gives me consolation. My joy is
of such a nature, and is so steady and full, that it swallows up all my
sorrow and lamentation however great. And on this ground also do I
congratulate you, my dear Crispin, that you not only peruse with the
highest delight the works and writings of that man whom you ardently
loved, but labor to impart them to others. Those treasures of wisdom are
thus enlarged, and return with high interest to those from whom they
come. You thus cause the regret for the loss of so great a man to be
alleviated, and the grief produced by his lamented and early death to be
diminished.

<span id="iv-p9"></span>For the third time, after having been wrought
and polished on your anvil, this book now comes forth, which I may truly
call a treasure, because it contains vast riches of heavenly grace, and
opens up the path to what is greater. Whoever shall give to it a
cheerful and labourious perusal, let him know with certainty that he
will not return empty; for he will gather what shall be advantageous
with regard not only to this Prophet but to all the other Prophets, and
to the whole of Scripture, and if he attend to the directions which are
scattered throughout the book, he will undoubtedly possess a strong
light for beholding and enjoying those things which were hidden and
concealed from many. By frequently applying your hand, therefore, to
this work, you not only gratify me, who first sent it forth after long
and severe toil, but you gratify all those who have perused or even
tasted the work. You might have sufficiently perceived and actually
known this from the numerous copies which have been already circulated.

<span id="iv-p10"></span>I have not been disappointed in the expectation
which I at that time formed, when during the whole period of four years,
with unwearied toil, having first heard the public Sermons and
afterwards the private Lectures, but employing my own judgment and
style, I returned home and committed these things to writing. And
whenever I recollect that period, during which this Church, which
formerly was small and feeble, received wonderful accessions, I cannot
but feel the utmost joy. You also may well remember what was its
condition when, banished from your native country, you first came
hither; and likewise what large additions had been made to it when you
brought your family, and settled down permanently here for the express
purpose of assisting the efforts of the godly by your skill and
industry.

<span id="iv-p11"></span>These things I take pleasure in relating, in
order that, by calling to remembrance what you have experienced, I may
quicken your zeal, and may stimulate you to perform those things which
you have undertaken, and of which it will be impossible for you ever to
repent, and may give a fresh impulse even to your cheerful and willing
exertions. Proceed then, my dear Crispin, in assisting by your diligence
the efforts of those who are devoted to Sacred Literature, and labor not
only to promote this work, but also to publish others. You see that many
things, though useful in the highest degree, are passed by and almost
neglected by those who aim at immediate gain rather than at public
usefulness.

<span id="iv-p12"></span>The smaller Treatises of this Author were
edited by me fifteen years ago; and although since that time he wrote
many other Treatises, yet no one put his hand to that work, so as to
bring out a uniform edition, (I speak of the Latin copies,) either of
those or of others which were afterwards added. I therefore earnestly
and repeatedly urge my request, that you will take charge of those
works, and also of others with which you are well acquainted, and that
you will not allow any of the writings of so great a man to be lost;
and, in short, that you will grant the request made to you by godly and
studious persons, and that you will fulfill and go beyond those
expectations respecting you which you have already excited. May God
favor your undertakings, and make you prosperous and happy!

<span id="iv-p13"></span>Geneva, *January* 1, 1570

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Gallars' Preface to the Second Edition](cc14004)
