[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc14009)  [Next](cc14011) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 14: Isaiah, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xi"></span>

<span id="xi-p1"></span>CHAPTER 22

<span id="xi.i"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p1"></span>Isaiah Chapter 22:1-25

<span id="xi.i-p2"></span>**1**. The burden of the valley of vision.
What aileth thee now, that thou art wholly gone up to the house-tops?

<span id="xi.i-p3"></span>**1**. Onus vallis visionis. Quid tibi hic,
(*vel, nunc?*) quia tu universa conscendisti super tecta?

<span id="xi.i-p4"></span>**2**. Thou that art full of stirs, a
tumultuous city, a joyous city: thy slain *men are* not slain with the
sword, nor dead in battle.

<span id="xi.i-p5"></span>**2**. Strepituum plena, urbs turbulenta,
civitas exultans; interfecti tui non interfecti gladio, et non mortui in
prælio.

<span id="xi.i-p6"></span>**3**. All thy rulers are fled together, they
are bound by the archers: all that are found in thee are bound together,
*which* have fled from far.

<span id="xi.i-p7"></span>**3**. Cuncti principes tui profugerunt parita
ab arcu; vincti sunt. Omnes, inquam, in te reperti vincti sunt pariter,
qui a longinquo fugerunt.

<span id="xi.i-p8"></span>**4**. Therefore said I, Look away from me; I
will weep bitterly, labour not to comfort me, because of the spoiling of
the daughter of my people.

<span id="xi.i-p9"></span>**4**. Propterea dixi, Desistite a me; amarus
ero in fletu meo, ne contendatis me consolari super vastatione filiæ
populi mei.

<span id="xi.i-p10"></span>**5**. For *it is* a day of trouble, and of
treading down, and of perplexity by the Lord God of hosts in the valley
of vision, breaking down the walls, and of crying to the mountains.

<span id="xi.i-p11"></span>**5**. Quoniam dies perturbationis, et
conculcationis, et anxietatis Domino Iehovæ exercituum in valle
visionis, diruenti urbem, et clamor ad montem.

<span id="xi.i-p12"></span>**6**. And Elam bare the quiver with chariots
of men *and* horsemen, and Kir uncovered the shield.

<span id="xi.i-p13"></span>**6**. Atqui Elam portans pharetram in curru
hominis, equitum, inquam, et Ceir nudans clypeum.

<span id="xi.i-p14"></span>**7**. And it shall come to pass, *that* thy
choicest valleys shall be full of chariots, and the horsemen shall set
themselves in array at the gate.

<span id="xi.i-p15"></span>**7**. Et fuit ut electio vallium tuarum
repleta sit curribus, et equites instruendo instruerent ad portam.

<span id="xi.i-p16"></span>**8**. And he discovered the covering of
Judah, and thou didst look in that day to the armour of the house of the
forest.

<span id="xi.i-p17"></span>**8**. Et transtulit operimentum Iuda; et
respexisti in die illa ad armaturam domus saltus.

<span id="xi.i-p18"></span>**9**. Ye have seen also the breaches of the
city of David, that they are many; and ye gathered together the waters
of the lower pool:

<span id="xi.i-p19"></span>**9**. Et interruptiones civitatis David
vidistis, quæ multæ erant; et collegistis aquas piscinæ inferioris.

<span id="xi.i-p20"></span>**10**. And ye have numbered the houses of
Jerusalem, and the houses have ye broken down to fortify the wall.

<span id="xi.i-p21"></span>**10**. Et domos Ierusalem numerastis; et
domos diruistis ad muniendum murum.

<span id="xi.i-p22"></span>**11**. Ye made also a ditch between the two
walls for the water of the old pool: but ye have not looked unto the
maker thereof, neither had respect unto him that fashioned it long ago.

<span id="xi.i-p23"></span>**11**. Fossam quoque fecistis inter muros,
aquis piscinæ veteris, et non respexistis ad fictorum ejus, et opificem
ejus ab antiquo (*vel, eminus*) non vidistis.

<span id="xi.i-p24"></span>**12**. And in that day did the Lord God of
hosts call to weeping, and to mourning, and to baldness, and to girding
with sackcloth:

<span id="xi.i-p25"></span>**12**. Porro vocavit Dominus Iehova
exercituum in die isto ad fletum et lamentum, ad calvitium et cincturam
sacci.

<span id="xi.i-p26"></span>**13**. And behold joy and gladness, slaying
oxen and killing sheep, eating flesh and drinking wine: let us eat and
drink, for to-morrow we shall die.

<span id="xi.i-p27"></span>**13**. Et ecce gaudium et lætitia, occidere
bovem, mactare ovem, edere carnes, et bibere vinum, comedere, inquam, et
bibere; quia cras moriemur.

<span id="xi.i-p28"></span>**14**. And it was revealed in mine ears by
the Lord of hosts, Surely this iniquity shall not be purged from you
till ye die, saith the Lord God of hosts.

<span id="xi.i-p29"></span>**14**. Id revelatum est auribus Iehovæ
exercituum, Si remittetur vobis hæc iniquitas, donec moriamini, dicit
Dominus Iehova exercituum.

<span id="xi.i-p30"></span>**15**. Thus saith the Lord God of hosts, Go,
get thee unto this treasurer, *even* unto Shebna, which *is* over the
house, *and say,*

<span id="xi.i-p31"></span>**15**. Sic dicit Dominus Iehova exercituum,
Vade, ingredere ad fautorem istum, ad Sabna præfectum domus.

<span id="xi.i-p32"></span>**16**. What hast thou here, and whom hast
thou here, that thou hast hewed thee out a sepulchre here, *as* he that
heweth him out a sepulchre on high, *and* that graveth an habitation for
himself in a rock?

<span id="xi.i-p33"></span>**16**. Quid tibi hic? et quis tibi hic? quod
tibi hic excideris sepulchrum, sicut qui in excelso excidit sepulchrum
suum, aut qui in rupe sculpit habitaculum sibi.

<span id="xi.i-p34"></span>**17**. Behold, the Lord will carry thee away
with a mighty captivity, and will surely cover thee.

<span id="xi.i-p35"></span>**17**. Ecce Iehova traducet te traductione
insigni, et operiendo operiet te.

<span id="xi.i-p36"></span>**18**. He will surely violently turn and
toss thee *like* a ball into a large country: there shalt thou die, and
there the chariots of thy glory *shall be* the shame of thy lord's
house.

<span id="xi.i-p37"></span>**18**. Convolvendo volvet te convolutione,
quasi globam in terram longinquam manibus; ibi morieris; et ibi currus
gloriæ tuæ ignominia domus domini tui.

<span id="xi.i-p38"></span>**19**. And I will drive thee from thy
station, and from thy state shall he pull thee down.

<span id="xi.i-p39"></span>**19**. Et propulsabo te de statione tua, et
de sede tua te expellet.

<span id="xi.i-p40"></span>**20**. And it shall come to pass in that
day, that I will call my servant Eliakim the son of Hilkiah;

<span id="xi.i-p41"></span>**20**. Et erit in die illa: vocabo servum
meum Eliakim, filium Helciæ.

<span id="xi.i-p42"></span>**21**. And I will clothe him with thy robe,
and strengthen him with thy girdle, and I will commit thy government
into his hand; and he shall be a father to the inhabitants of Jerusalem,
and to the house of Judah.

<span id="xi.i-p43"></span>**21**. Et induam eum vestibus tuis, et
balteo tuo roborabo eum; et potestatem tuam tradam in manum ejus, et
erit pater incolæ Ierusalem et domi Iuda.

<span id="xi.i-p44"></span>**22**. And the key of the house of David
will I lay upon his shoulder: so he shall open, and none shall shut; and
he shall shut, and none shall open.

<span id="xi.i-p45"></span>**22**. Et ponem clavem domus David super
humerum ejus; aperiet, et nemo claudet; claudet, et nemo aperiet.

<span id="xi.i-p46"></span>**23**. And I will fasten him *as* a nail in
a sure place; and he shall be for a glorious throne to his father's
house.

<span id="xi.i-p47"></span>**23**. Et figam eum veluti clavum in loco
fideli; eritque in solium gloriæ domui patris sui.

<span id="xi.i-p48"></span>**24**. And they shall hang upon him all the
glory of his father's house, the offspring and the issue, all vessels of
small quantity, from the vessels of cups, even to all the vessels of
flagons.

<span id="xi.i-p49"></span>**24**. Et suspendent ab eo omnem gloriam
domus patris sui, nepotes et pronepotes, omnia vasa minora, a vasis
craterarum ad cuncta vasa melodiarum.

<span id="xi.i-p50"></span>**25**. In that day, saith the Lord of hosts,
shall the nail *that is* fastened in the sure place be removed, and be
cut down, and fall; and the burden that *was* upon it shall be cut off:
for the Lord hath spoken *it*

<span id="xi.i-p51"></span>**25**. In die illa, dicit Iehova exercituum,
recedet clavus fixus in loco fideli, frangetur et cadet, et dissipabitur
onus quod fuit super ipsum; quia Iehova loquutus est.

<span id="xi.i-p52"></span> 

<span id="xi.i-p53"></span><span id="xi.i-p53.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p54"></span>**1.** *The burden of the valley of vision.*
Isaiah again prophesies against Judea, which he calls *the valley of
vision*. He gives this appellation to the whole of Judea rather than to
Jerusalem, of which he afterwards speaks; but now in the preface he
includes the whole of Judea. He appropriately calls it a “valley,” for
it was surrounded on all sides by mountains. It is a harsher view of the
metaphor, which is adopted by some, that Jerusalem is called “a valley,”
because it was thrown down from its loftiness. The reason why he adds
the words, *of* *vision*, is plain enough. The Lord enlightened the
whole of Judea by his word; the prophets were continually employed in
it, and that was the reason why they called them *seers*. (<span
id="xi.i-p54.1"></span>[1Sa 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#009)<span
id="xi.i-p54.1"></span>.) There is also an implied contrast here, for
valleys have less light than open plains, because the height of the
mountains intercepts the light of the sun. Now, this valley, he tells
us, is more highly enlightened than those countries which were exposed
on all sides to the sun. It was by the extraordinary goodness of God
that this happened; for he means, that it was enlightened, not by the
rays of the sun, but by the word of God.

<span id="xi.i-p55"></span>Besides, the Prophet unquestionably intended
to beat down that foolish confidence with which the Jews were puffed up,
because God had distinguished them above others by remarkable gifts.
They abused his word and prophecies, as if by means of them they had
been protected against all danger, though they were disobedient and
rebellious against God. He therefore declares that visions will not
prevent God from punishing their ingratitude; and he even aggravates
their guilt by this mark of ingratitude, that amidst such splendor of
heavenly doctrine they still continued to stumble like the blind.

<span id="xi.i-p56"></span>*What hast thou here? or, What hast thou
now?* He now addresses Jerusalem; not that this defeat affects Jerusalem
alone, but because the whole country thought it safe to take refuge
under the shadow of the sanctuary which then existed, and to lead the
Jews to reflect, since this befell a fortified city, what would become
of other cities which had no means of defense. He asks in astonishment,
“What does it mean that every person leaves his house and flies to the
house-top for the purpose of saving his life?” Among the Jews the form
of house-tops was different from what is now customary with us, and
hence arose that saying of Christ,

<span id="xi.i-p57"></span>“What you have heard in the ear proclaim on
the housetops.” (<span id="xi.i-p57.1"></span>[Mt
10:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#027)<span id="xi.i-p57.1"></span>.)

<span id="xi.i-p58"></span>When the inhabitants of Jerusalem fled to the
house-tops, they left their houses open to be a prey to enemies, and
this was a proof that they were exceedingly afraid. It is likewise
possible that they went up to the house-tops for the purpose of throwing
down javelins and other weapons against the enemies, whose arrival not
only terrified them, but made them flee in consternation, and yet they
did not escape danger.

<span id="xi.i-p59"></span><span id="xi.i-p59.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p60"></span>**2.** *Thou that art full of noises.* He
means that it was exceedingly populous; for where great multitudes of
people are brought together, noise abounds; and therefore, amidst so
crowded a population, there was less cause of fear. In order to make the
representation still more striking, Isaiah has therefore added this
circumstance, that instead of being, as they ought to have been, walls
and bulwarks to defend the city, when there was no scarcity of men, they
ignominiously turned their backs on the enemies, and fled to the tops of
their houses. By these words he urges the Jews more strongly to consider
the judgment of God; for when such overwhelming fear has seized the
hearts of men, it is certain that God has struck them with trembling; as
if he had said, “How comes it that you have not greater firmness to
resist? It is because God pursues and chases you.”

<span id="xi.i-p61"></span>These statements are taken from the writings
of Moses, from which, as we have frequently remarked, the prophets
borrow their instructions, but with this difference, that what Moses
spoke in general terms they apply to the matter in hand.

<span id="xi.i-p62"></span>“The Lord shall cause thee to be smitten
before thine enemies; thou shalt go out one way against them, and shalt
flee seven ways before them. The Lord shall smite thee with madness, and
blindness, and astonishment of heart.”  
(<span id="xi.i-p62.2"></span>[Deut.
28:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#025),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#028)<span id="xi.i-p62.2"></span>.)

<span id="xi.i-p63"></span>He reproaches the Jews for their distressed
condition, and with good reason; for it was proper to press the
accusation more closely home, that they might learn to ascribe to their
sins and transgressions all the afflictions and sufferings that they
endured. The Lord had promised that he would continually assist them;
and when they are now left destitute, let them acknowledge that they do
not deserve such assistance, and that God has cast them off on account
of their rebelliousness. The Lord does not deceive or make false
promises, but by their own fault those wretched persons have shut
themselves out from his aid and favor; and this is still more strongly
expressed by the question, *What hast thou here?* It means that God gave
practical evidence that Jerusalem had been deprived of her protector and
guardian; for this mode of expression denotes something strange and
extraordinary.

<span id="xi.i-p64"></span>*Thy slain men are not slain by the sword.*
To exhibit still more clearly the vengeance of God, he affirms that they
who were slain there did not die bravely in battle. Thus he shews that
all that they wanted was manly courage; for a timid and cowardly heart
was a sure proof that they had all been forsaken by the Lord, by whose
assistance they would have bravely and manfully resisted. He therefore
does not mean that the defeat would be accompanied by shame and
disgrace, but ascribes it to the wrath of God that they had not courage
to resist; and unquestionably by this circumstance he beats down their
foolish pride.

<span id="xi.i-p65"></span><span id="xi.i-p65.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p66"></span>**3.** *All thy rulers are fled together.*
This verse has been interpreted in various ways. The fact is abundantly
plain, but there is some difficulty about the words. As <span
id="xi.i-p66.1"></span>מ (*mem*) signifies *before* and *more than*,
some explain <span id="xi.i-p66.2"></span>מרחוק (*mĕrāchōk*)  <span
id="fr_76"></span>[77](#fn_76) to mean, “They fled before others, though
they were situated in the most distant parts of the country, and were in
greater danger.” Others render it, “Although they were at a great
distance from Jerusalem, still they did not cease to flee like men who
are seized with terror, and never stop in their flight, because they
continually think that the enemy is at their heels.”

<span id="xi.i-p91"></span>But a more natural interpretation appears to
me to be. *They have fled from afar;* that is, “they who have resorted
to Jerusalem as a safe retreat will be seized by enemies and
vanquished;” for Jerusalem might be regarded as the general protection
of the whole of Judea, and therefore, when a war broke out, the
inhabitants rushed to it from every quarter. While they looked upon
their habitation in Jerusalem as safe, they were taken prisoners. Others
suppose it to refer to the siege of Sennacherib. (<span
id="xi.i-p91.1"></span>[2Ki 18:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#013)<span
id="xi.i-p91.1"></span>; <span id="xi.i-p91.2"></span>[2Ch
32:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#001)<span id="xi.i-p91.2"></span>.)
But I cannot be persuaded to expound the passage in this manner, for he
speaks of the destruction of Jerusalem. When it was besieged by
Sennacherib, the Lord immediately delivered it; none were taken or made
prisoners, and there was no slaughter of men. These events therefore
happened long after the death of the Prophet, and sacred history relates
them, and informs us that in that destruction even the rulers betook
themselves to flight; but they derived no advantage from their flight,
nor did Jerusalem afford them any defense, for they fell into the hands
of their enemies.

<span id="xi.i-p92"></span>When he expressly mentions the *rulers*, this
shews more strongly the shamefulness of the transaction, for they ought
to have been the first to expose their persons for the safety of the
people. They might be viewed as the shields which ought to have guarded
and defended the common people. So long as Jerusalem kept its ground and
was in a prosperous condition, these statements might be thought
incredible, for it was a very strong and powerfully fortified city. But
they chiefly boasted of the protection of God, for they thought that in
some way God was bound to his “Temple;” and their pride swelled them
with the confident hope that, though all should be leagued against it,
no power and no armies could bring it down. (<span
id="xi.i-p92.1"></span>[Jer 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#004)<span
id="xi.i-p92.1"></span>.) This prophecy might therefore be thought very
strange, that they would have no courage, that they would betake
themselves to flight, and that even in that manner they could not
escape.

<span id="xi.i-p93"></span><span id="xi.i-p93.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p94"></span>**4.** *Therefore I said.* Here the Prophet,
in order to affect more deeply the hearts of the Jews, assumes the
character of a mourner, and not only so, but bitterly bewails the
distressed condition of the Church of God. This passage must not be
explained in the same manner as some former passages, in which he
described the grief and sorrow of foreign nations; but he speaks of the
fallen condition of the Church of which he is a member, and therefore he
sincerely bewails it, and invites others by his example to join in the
lamentation. What has befallen the Church ought to affect us in the same
manner as if it had befallen each of us individually; for otherwise what
would become of that passage? “The zeal of thy house hath eaten me up.”
(<span id="xi.i-p94.1"></span>[Ps
69:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#009)<span id="xi.i-p94.1"></span>.)

<span id="xi.i-p95"></span>*I will be bitter in my weeping.*  <span
id="fr_77"></span>[78](#fn_77) He does not mourn in secret, or without
witnesses; first, because he wishes, as I have already said, to excite
others by his example to lamentation, and not to lamentation only, but
much more to repentance, that they may ward off the dreadful judgment of
God against them, which was close at hand, and henceforth may refrain
from provoking his displeasure; and secondly, because it was proper that
the herald of God’s wrath should actually make evident that what he
utters is not mockery.

<span id="xi.i-p97"></span>*Because of the spoiling of the daughter of
my people.* That he expresses the feelings of his own heart may be
inferred from what he now declares, that he is bitterly grieved “on
account of the daughter of his people.” Being one of the family of
Abraham, he thought that this distress affected his own condition, and
intimates that he has good grounds for lamentation. By a customary mode
of expression he calls the assembly of his people a *daughter*. Hence it
ought to be observed, that whenever the Church is afflicted, the example
of the Prophet ought to move us to be touched (<span
id="xi.i-p97.1"></span>συμπαθείᾳ) with compassion, if we are not harder
than iron; for we are altogether unworthy of being reckoned in the
number of the children of God, and added to the holy Church, if we do
not dedicate ourselves, and all that we have, to the Church, in such a
manner that we are not separate from it in any respect. Thus, when in
the present day the Church is afflicted by so many and so various
calamities, and innumerable souls are perishing, which Christ redeemed
with his own blood, we must be barbarous and savage if we are not
touched with any grief. And especially the ministers of the word ought
to be moved by this feeling of grief, because, being appointed to keep
watch and to look at a distance, they ought also to groan when they
perceive the tokens of approaching ruin.

<span id="xi.i-p98"></span>The circumstance of his weeping publicly
tended, as we have said, to soften the hearts of the people; for he had
to deal with obstinate men, who could not easily be induced to lament.
There is a passage that closely resembles it in Jeremiah, who bewails
the miserable and wasted condition of the people, and says, that through
grief “his heart fainteth,”  <span id="fr_78"></span>[79](#fn_78) (<span
id="xi.i-p99.1"></span>[Jer 4:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#031)<span
id="xi.i-p99.1"></span>;) and in another passage, “O that my head were
full of waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might bewail
the slain of my people!” (<span id="xi.i-p99.2"></span>[Jer
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#001)<span id="xi.i-p99.2"></span>.)
When the prophets saw that they labored in vain to subdue the obstinacy
of the people, they could not avoid being altogether overwhelmed by
grief and sorrow. They therefore endeavored, by their moving addresses,
to soften hard hearts, that they might bend them, if it were at all
possible, and bring them back to the right path.

<span id="xi.i-p100"></span><span id="xi.i-p100.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p101"></span>**5.** *It is a day of trouble.* He again
declares that the Lord is the author of this calamity, and that the Jews
may not gaze around in all directions, or wonder that their enemies
prevail against them, he pronounces that they are fighting against God.
Though this doctrine is frequently taught in Scripture, still it is not
superfluous, and cannot be so earnestly inculcated as not to be
forgotten when we come to practice. The consequence is, that we are not
humbled in the presence of our Judge, and that we direct our eyes to
outward remedies rather than to God, who alone could cure our
distresses. He employs the word *day*, as is usual in Scripture, to
signify an appointed time; for when God winks at the transgressions of
men, he appears to make some abatement of the claims of his rank, which,
however, he may be said to receive back again at the proper and
appointed time.

<span id="xi.i-p102"></span>*In the valley of vision.* It is not without
good reason that he again calls it “the valley of vision,” for the Jews
believed that they would be protected against every calamitous event,
because the Lord shone on them by the word. But having ungratefully
rejected his instruction, they vainly trusted that it would be of avail
to them; and indeed the Lord punishes the unbelief of men, not only out
of the Church, but within the Church itself; and not only so, but he
begins his chastisement at the Church, so that we must not abuse the
gifts of God, or vainly glory in his name. (<span
id="xi.i-p102.1"></span>[1Pe 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#017)<span
id="xi.i-p102.1"></span>.)

<span id="xi.i-p103"></span>*And crying to the mountain.*  <span
id="fr_79"></span>[80](#fn_79) This may refer either to God or to the
Babylonians, or even to the exiles themselves. Conquerors raise a cry
for the sake of increasing terror, and the vanquished either utter what
is fitted to awaken compassion, or give vent to their grief by
lamentation. The singular number may be taken for the plural, or rather
it denotes that part of the city in which the temple was situated. Both
meanings will agree well with the context, and it makes little
difference whether we say that the enemies cried to Mount Zion, in order
to encourage each other, or that, while they were destroying and
plundering the city, a cry was heard in the neighboring mountains, or
that the citizens themselves caused their lamentations to resound to the
mountains which surrounded the plain of Judea.  <span
id="fr_80"></span>[81](#fn_80)

<span id="xi.i-p106"></span><span id="xi.i-p106.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p107"></span>**6.** *But Elam carrying the quiver.* Here
commentators think that the discourse proceeds without any interruption,
and that he makes known to the Jews the same judgment which he formerly
proclaimed. But when I examine the whole matter more closely, I am
constrained to differ from them. I think that the Prophet reproaches the
Jews for their obstinacy and rebellion, because, though the Lord had
chastised them, they did not repent, and that he relates the history of
a past transaction, in order to remind them how utterly they had failed
to derive advantage from the Lord’s chastisements. Such then is the
manner in which these statements ought to be separated from what came
before. First, he foretold those things which would come on the Jews,
and now he shews how justly they are punished, and how richly they
deserve those sharp chastisements which the Lord inflicts on them; for
the Lord had formerly called them to repentance, not only by words, but
by deeds, and yet no reformation of life followed, though their riches
were exhausted, and the kingdom weakened, but they obstinately persisted
in their wickedness. Nothing therefore remained but that the Lord should
miserably destroy them, since they were obstinate and refractory.

<span id="xi.i-p108"></span>The copulative <span
id="xi.i-p108.1"></span>ו (*vau*) I have translated *But*, which is the
meaning that it frequently bears. Those who think that the Prophet
threatens for a future period, preserve its ordinary meaning, as if the
Prophet, after having mentioned God, named the executioners of his
vengeance. But I have already given the exposition which I prefer, and
the context will make it still more clear, that I had good reasons for
being of that opinion.

<span id="xi.i-p109"></span>When he speaks of the “Elamites” and the
“Cyrenaeans,” this applies better, I think, to the Assyrians than to the
Babylonians; for although those nations had never make war against the
Jews by troops under their own command, yet it is probable that they
were in the pay of the Assyrian king, and that they formed part of his
army while he was besieging Jerusalem. We have already remarked that,
taking a part for the whole, by the “Elamites” are meant the eastern
nations.

<span id="xi.i-p110"></span>*And* *Kir* *making* *bare* *the* *shield*
 <span id="fr_81"></span>[82](#fn_81) By *Kir* he undoubtedly means the
inhabitants of Cyrenaica.  <span id="fr_82"></span>[83](#fn_82) Because
they were (<span id="xi.i-p112.1"></span>πελτασταὶ) shieldsmen, he says
that they “laid bare the shield;” for when they enter the field of
battle, they draw the shields out of their sheaths.

<span id="xi.i-p113"></span><span id="xi.i-p113.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p114"></span>**7.** *And the choice of the valleys*
 <span id="fr_83"></span>[84](#fn_83) *was full of chariots.* I do not
find fault with the translation given by some interpreters, “in a
chariot of horsemen,” but I have chosen rather to translate literally
the words of the Prophet; for I think that he means “a military
chariot.” At that time they made use of two kinds of chariots, one for
carrying baggage, and another for the field of battle. Here he means
those chariots in which the horsemen rode.

<span id="xi.i-p116"></span>Had it been a threatening, it would have
been proper to translate it in the future tense, “And it shall be;” but
as the words which immediately follow are in the past tense, and as
there is reason to believe that the Prophet is relating events which
have already taken place, I have not hesitated to make this beginning
agree with what follows. “The choice of the valleys” means “the choicest
valleys.” He reminds the Jews of those straits to which they were
reduced when the enemies were at their gates. They ought at that time to
have sought help from God; but those wretched people became more
strongly alienated from God, and more shamefully manifested their
rebellion, which shewed them to be men utterly abandoned, and therefore
he reproaches them with this hardened obstinacy.

<span id="xi.i-p117"></span><span id="xi.i-p117.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p118"></span>**8.** *And he took away the covering of
Judah.* He shews in what distress of mind the Jews were when they were
so closely besieged. Some refer this verb to God, and others to the
enemy; but I rather think it ought to be taken indefinitely, for by a
mode of expression frequently used in the Hebrew language, “he took
away,” means that “the covering of Judah was taken away.” By the word
*covering* almost all think that either the Temple or God himself is
meant, in whose name the Jews falsely boasted. But I interpret it more
simply as denoting the armory, in which, as a secret place, they kept
the instruments of war. He calls it a “covering,” because they were not
exposed to public view, but were concealed in a more sacred place. In
short, he describes what commonly happens in a season of great alarm,
because at such a time men run to arms, and the instruments of war,
which had been formerly concealed, are brought forward.

<span id="xi.i-p119"></span>*And thou didst look in that day to the
armory of the house of the forest.* This latter clause agrees with what
has been remarked, that they sought out, on such an occasion, every
place which contained the means of arming themselves for a case of
extreme urgency, the instruments of war having lain long concealed
during peace. Sacred history informs us, that this “house of the forest”
was built by Solomon, in order to contain the armory of the whole
kingdom.  <span id="fr_84"></span>[85](#fn_84) (<span
id="xi.i-p120.1"></span>[1Ki 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1007.htm#002)<span
id="xi.i-p120.1"></span>.) The change of person, *thou didst look*, does
not obscure the meaning, but rather confirms what I have already
remarked, that the Prophet relates how eagerly the Jews at that time
made every preparation for defending the city.

<span id="xi.i-p121"></span><span id="xi.i-p121.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p122"></span>**9.** *And you have seen the breaches.* He
proceeds with his narrative, for during prosperity and peace no one
cares about bulwarks or instruments of war. It is necessity alone that
arouses men and makes them active; peace and quietness make us indolent
and cowardly. So long as they thought that they were far from danger,
they disregarded the breaches of the wall; but when a report of war
arose, they began to be anxious about them, and to make arrangements for
preventing the entrance of the enemy.

<span id="xi.i-p123"></span>*Of the city of David.* By “the city of
David,” he means the interior part of the city; for, like many other
cities which we see, the city was divided into two parts. The whole of
Jerusalem was surrounded by walls and ramparts; but the interior part
was more strongly fortified, and was called “the city of David.” The
Temple was afterwards fortified, in consequence of which the city might
be said to consist of three parts. Isaiah means that the Jews had nearly
despaired as to the safety of the whole city, when they withdrew to the
inmost and best fortified part of it; and indeed it is evident from
sacred history, that everything was in a desperate condition. Hence also
we may infer, that the prophecies were not collected in a regular order,
and that those who drew them up in one volume paid no attention to the
arrangement of dates.

<span id="xi.i-p124"></span>*The waters of the lower pool.* He adds,
that water was collected for necessary purposes, that the besieged might
not be in want of it, and that the pool served for cisterns.

<span id="xi.i-p125"></span><span id="xi.i-p125.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p126"></span>**10.** *And you numbered the houses of
Jerusalem.* He means that the city was closely examined on all sides,
that there might not be a house or building which was not defended.
Others think that the houses were numbered, that they might have a
supply of watchmen. But the former interpretation is preferable, and is
confirmed by what the Prophet afterwards adds, that the houses were
thrown down for the purpose of rebuilding the walls of the city. This is
commonly neglected in the time of peace, and the houses of private
individuals are often built on the very walls, and, on that account,
must be thrown down in the time of war, to supply the means of fighting
and of repelling the enemy, and also lest, by means of houses so near
the wall, secret communications with the enemy should be maintained.

<span id="xi.i-p127"></span><span id="xi.i-p127.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p128"></span>**11.** *You made also a ditch.* The first
clause of this verse relates to the former subjects; for he means that
they were reduced to the last necessity, and that the great approaching
danger struck them with terror, so that they adopted every method in
their power for defending themselves against the enemy.

<span id="xi.i-p129"></span>*And you have not looked to its maker.* This
second clause reproves them for carelessness, because they had given
their whole attention to earthly assistance, and had neglected that
which is of the greatest importance. Instead of resorting first of all
to God, as they ought to have done, they forgot and despised him, and
directed their attention to ramparts, and ditches, and walls, and other
preparations of war; but their highest defense was in God. What I said
at first is now more evident, that the Prophet does not foretell the
destruction of the Jews, but declares what they have experienced, in
order to shew how justly the Lord was angry with them, because they
could not be amended or reformed by any chastisement. The alarming
dangers to which they were exposed ought to have warned them against
their impiety and contempt of God; but those dangers have made them
still more obstinate. Though there is hardly any person so obstinate as
not to be induced by adversity, and especially by imminent dangers, to
bethink himself, and to consider if they have justly befallen him, if he
has offended God and provoked his wrath against himself; yet the Prophet
says, that there was not one of the Jews who remembered God in the midst
of such distresses, and that therefore God justly ceased to take any
concern about them.

<span id="xi.i-p130"></span>Hence infer that it is a token of extreme
and desperate wickedness, when men, after having received chastisements
or afflictions, are not made better. We ought, first, to follow God and
to render to him cheerful obedience; and secondly, when we have been
practically warned and chastised, we ought to repent. And if stripes do
us no good, what remains but that the Lord shall increase and double the
strokes, and cause us to feel them heavier and heavier till we are
hurled down to destruction? For it is vain to apply remedies to a
desperate and incurable disease. This doctrine is highly applicable to
our own times, in which so many strokes and afflictions urge us to
repentance. Since there is no repentance, what remains but that the Lord
shall try to the very utmost what can be done until he destroy us
altogether?

<span id="xi.i-p131"></span>*To its maker.* By these words he indirectly
acknowledges that God does not blame our eagerness to repel the enemy
and to guard against dangers; but that he blames the vain confidence
which we place in outward defences. We ought to have begun with God; and
when we disregard him, and resort to swords and spears, to bulwarks and
fortifications, our excessive eagerness is justly condemned as treason.
Let us therefore learn to flee to God in imminent dangers, and to betake
ourselves, with our whole heart, to the sure refuge of his name. (<span
id="xi.i-p131.1"></span>[Pr 18:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#010)<span
id="xi.i-p131.1"></span>.) When this has been done, it will be lawful
for us to use the remedies which he puts into our hand; but all will end
in our ruin if we do not first commit our safety to his protection.

<span id="xi.i-p132"></span>He calls God the *maker* and *fashioner* of
Jerusalem, because there he had his dwelling, and wished that men should
call upon him. (<span id="xi.i-p132.2"></span>[1Ki
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#003)<span id="xi.i-p132.2"></span>.) As
Jerusalem was a lively image of the Church, this title belongs also to
us, for in a peculiar manner God is called the Builder of the Church.
(<span id="xi.i-p132.3"></span>[Ps.
132:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#014)<span id="xi.i-p132.3"></span>.)
Though this may relate to the creation of the whole world, yet the
second creation, by which he raises up from death, (<span
id="xi.i-p132.4"></span>[Eph 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#001)<span
id="xi.i-p132.4"></span>,) regenerates, and sanctifies us, (<span
id="xi.i-p132.5"></span>[Ps 110:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#003)<span
id="xi.i-p132.5"></span>,) is peculiar to the elect, the rest have no
share in it. This title does not express a sudden but a continual act,
for the Church was not at once created that it might afterwards be
forsaken, but the Lord preserves and defends it to the last. “Thou wilt
not despise the work of thy hands,” says the Psalmist. (<span
id="xi.i-p132.6"></span>[Ps 138:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#008)<span
id="xi.i-p132.6"></span>.) And Paul says,

<span id="xi.i-p133"></span>“He who hath begun a good work in you will
perform it till the day of Christ.” (<span id="xi.i-p133.1"></span>[Php
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#006)<span id="xi.i-p133.1"></span>.)

<span id="xi.i-p134"></span>This title contains astonishing consolation,
for if God is the maker, we have no reason to fear if we depend on his
power and goodness. But we cannot *look to* him unless we are endued
with true humility and confidence, so that, being divested of all
haughtiness and reduced to nothing, we ascribe the glory to him alone.
This cannot be, unless we can also trust that our salvation is in his
hand, and are fully convinced that we shall never perish, even though we
be surrounded by a thousand deaths. It was an aggravation of their
baseness, that the Lord’s election of that city, which had been
established by so many proofs, could not arouse the Jews to rely on the
protection of God. As if he had said, What madness is it to think of
defending the city when you despise him who made it!

<span id="xi.i-p135"></span>*From a distance,* or *long ago*. The Hebrew
word denotes either distance of place or length of time. If we refer it
to place, the meaning will be, that the Jews are doubly ungrateful,
because they have not beheld the Lord even at a distance. Here it ought
to be observed, that we ought to look to God not only when he is near,
but also when he appears to be at a very great distance from us. Now, we
think that he is absent, when we do not perceive his present aid, and
when he does not instantly supply our wants. In short, he shews what is
the nature of true hope; for it is a carnal and gross looking at God,
when we do not perceive his providence unless by visible favor, since we
ought to ascend above the heavens themselves. Strictly and truly, no
doubt, the Lord is always present, but he is said to be distant and
absent with respect to us. This must be understood therefore to refer to
our senses, and not to the fact itself; and therefore, although he
appear to be at a distance during those calamities which the Church
endures, still we ought to elevate our minds towards him, and arouse our
hearts, and shake off our indolence, that we may call on him.

<span id="xi.i-p136"></span>But the other meaning is equally admissible,
that they did not look to God who created his Church, not yesterday or
lately, but long ago, and who had proved himself to be her Maker during
many ages. He is therefore called the ancient Maker of his Church,
because if the Jews will apply their thoughts and careful search to the
long succession of ages, they will perceive that he is the perpetual
preserver of his workmanship; and this makes their ingratitude the less
excusable.

<span id="xi.i-p137"></span><span id="xi.i-p137.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p138"></span>**12.** *And the Lord of hosts called.* The
wicked obstinacy of the people is exhibited by the Prophet with
additional aggravations. What left them altogether without excuse was
the fact, that while they were exposed to so great dangers, they
despised the godly remonstrances of the prophets, and rejected the grace
of God, when he wished to heal and restore them. It is a proof of
consummate depravity, when men have so completely laid aside all feeling
that they fearlessly despise both instruction and chastisements, and
obstinately “kick against the pricks,” (<span
id="xi.i-p138.1"></span>[Ac 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#005)<span
id="xi.i-p138.1"></span>,) and this makes it evident that they have been
“given over to a reprobate mind.” (<span id="xi.i-p138.2"></span>[Ro
1:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#028)<span id="xi.i-p138.2"></span>.)

<span id="xi.i-p139"></span>When he says, that “the Lord called” them,
this may be explained in two ways; for although the Lord does not speak,
still he calls loudly enough by stripes and chastisements. Let it be
supposed that we are destitute of all Scripture, of prophets, teachers,
and advisers, still he instructs us by distresses and afflictions, so
that we may state, in a few words, that every chastisement is a *call*
to repentance. But, unquestionably, the Prophet intended to express
something more, namely, that in despising godly warnings, they did not
scruple to treat with scorn God’s fatherly invitation.

<span id="xi.i-p140"></span>*In that day.* There is great weight also in
mentioning *the day* of affliction, when danger threatened them, for
they were admonished at the same time by the word and by strokes. The
signs of God’s anger were visible, the prophets uttered incessant cries,
and still they became no better.

<span id="xi.i-p141"></span>*To baldness and girding with sackcloth.*
When he mentions *sackcloth* and *baldness*,  <span
id="fr_85"></span>[86](#fn_85) he employs the signs themselves to
describe repentance; for repentance does not consist in sackcloth or
haircloth,  <span id="fr_86"></span>[87](#fn_86) or anything outward,
but has its place in the heart. Those who sincerely repent are
displeased with themselves, hate sin, and are affected with such a deep
feeling of grief, that they abhor themselves and their past life; but as
this cannot be done without, at the same time, making itself known by
confession before men, on this account he describes the outward signs by
which we give evidence of our conversion. Now, these things were at that
time cast away among the Jews, when they made public declarations of
repentance. The Prophet therefore means that they were called to
repentance, to humble themselves before God, and to exhibit the
evidences of repentance before men. Of themselves, indeed, the signs
would not be sufficient, for repentance begins at the heart; and Joel
gives warning to that effect,

<span id="xi.i-p144"></span>“Rend your hearts, and not your garments.”
(<span id="xi.i-p144.1"></span>[Joe
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#013)<span id="xi.i-p144.1"></span>.)

<span id="xi.i-p145"></span>Not that he wished signs to be laid aside,
but he shewed that they are not sufficient, and that of themselves they
are not acceptable to God.

<span id="xi.i-p146"></span>Hence infer what is our duty, when the
tokens of God’s anger are visible to us. We ought to declare publicly
our repentance, not only before God, but also before men. The outward
ceremonies, indeed, are of little consequence, and we are not commanded
to wear sackcloth or to pull out our hair; but we must practice honestly
and sincerely what is actually meant by these signs, disapprobation and
confession of our guilt, humility of the heart, and reformation of the
life. If we do not confess that we are guilty, and that we deserve
punishment, we shall not return to a state of favor with God. In short,
as culprits allow their beards to grow, and wear tattered clothes, in
order to affect the hearts of the judges, so we ought to betake
ourselves as suppliants to the mercy of God, and make a public
declaration of our repentance.

<span id="xi.i-p147"></span>But here we ought also to observe the
usefulness of outward signs of repentance; for they serve as spurs to
prompt us more to know and abhor sin. In this way, so far as they are
spurs, they may be called causes of repentance; and so far as they are
evidences, they may be called effects. They are causes, because the
marks of our guilt, which we carry about us, excite us the more to
acknowledge ourselves to be sinners and guilty; and they are effects,
because, if they were not preceded by repentance, we would never be
induced to perform them sincerely.

<span id="xi.i-p148"></span><span id="xi.i-p148.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p149"></span>**13.** *And, behold, joy and gladness.* The
Prophet does not here find fault with *joy* viewed in itself; for we see
that Paul exhorts the godly to true joy, the “joy” which is “in the
Lord,” (<span id="xi.i-p149.1"></span>[Php
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#004)<span id="xi.i-p149.1"></span>;)
but now he censures the joy which is opposite to that sadness which
commonly springs from repentance, of which Paul also speaks. (<span
id="xi.i-p149.2"></span>[2Co 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#010)<span
id="xi.i-p149.2"></span>.) No man can be under the influence of
repentance and of a sincere feeling of the wrath of God, without being
led, by the grief which accompanies it, willingly to afflict himself.
The joy which is opposite to this grief is therefore sinful, because it
proceeds from brutish indifference, and is justly blamed, since the Lord
curses it. (<span id="xi.i-p149.3"></span>[Lu
6:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#025)<span id="xi.i-p149.3"></span>.)

<span id="xi.i-p150"></span>*Slaying oxen and killing sheep.* From what
has been said, it is easy to see the reason why he censures them for
“slaying oxen and killing sheep.” These things are not in themselves
sinful, and are not displeasing to God; but as fasting is a part of a
solemn declaration of repentance, which we make before men, so to slay
cattle for feasting, when we ought to fast, is a proof of obstinacy and
contempt of God; for in this way men despise God’s threatenings, and
encourage themselves in their crimes.

<span id="xi.i-p151"></span>Such is the statement which Isaiah intended
to make in general terms. But it is absurd in the Papists to think of
drawing from it an approbation of abstinence from eating flesh. Why do
they not also include what the Apostle adds about wine? They are so far
from abstaining from the use of wine, that they freely indulge in
drinking it, as a compensation for the want of flesh. But let us pass
over these absurdities. Isaiah does not absolutely condemn the use of
flesh or the drinking of wine, but he condemns the luxury and wantonness
by which men are hardened in such a manner that they obstinately set
aside God’s threatenings, and treat as false all that the prophets tell
them.

<span id="xi.i-p152"></span>This ought to be carefully observed, for we
do not always wear sackcloth and ashes; but we cannot have true
repentance without making it manifest by the fruits which it must
unavoidably produce. In short, as he had described repentance by its
signs, so he marks out obstinacy by its signs; for as by fasting and
other outward acts we testify our repentance, so by feasting and luxury
we give proofs of an obstinate heart, and thus provoke more the wrath of
God, in a similar manner to what we read about the days of Noah. (<span
id="xi.i-p152.1"></span>[Ge 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#005)<span
id="xi.i-p152.1"></span>; <span id="xi.i-p152.2"></span>[Matt.
24:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#038),
[39](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#039)<span id="xi.i-p152.2"></span>;
<span id="xi.i-p152.3"></span>[Lu
17:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#027)<span id="xi.i-p152.3"></span>.)
After having described intemperance and luxury in general terms, he
particularly mentions eating and drinking, in which the Jews indulged to
such an extent as if they had been able, in some measure, to combat the
wrath of God, and to obliterate the remembrance of his threatening.

<span id="xi.i-p153"></span>*For to-morrow we shall die.* This clause
shews plainly enough why the Prophet complained so loudly about eating
flesh and drinking wine. It was because all the threatenings uttered by
the prophets were turned by them into a subject of jesting and laughter.
It is supposed that Paul quotes this passage, when, in writing to the
Corinthians, he uses nearly the same words. (<span
id="xi.i-p153.1"></span>[1Co
15:32](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#032)<span id="xi.i-p153.1"></span>.)
But I am of a different opinion; for he quotes the opinion of the
Epicureans, who lived for the passing day, and gave themselves no
concern about eternal life, and therefore thought that they should
follow their natural disposition, and enjoy pleasures as long as life
lasted. Isaiah, on the other hand, relates here the speeches of wicked
men, who obstinately ridiculed the threatenings of the prophets, and
could not patiently endure to be told about chastisements, banishment,
slaughter, and ruin. They employed the words of the prophets, and in the
midst of their feasting and revelry, turned them into ridicule, saying,
in a boasting strain, “*To-morrow we shall die*. If the prophets tell us
that our destruction is at hand, let us pass the present day, at least,
in cheerfulness and mirth.”

<span id="xi.i-p154"></span>Thus, obstinate minds cannot be struck with
any terror, but, on the contrary, mock at God and the prophets, and give
themselves up more freely to licentiousness. It certainly was frightful
madness when, through indignation and wrath, they quoted with bitter
irony the words which not only ought to have affected their minds, but
ought to have shaken heaven and earth. Would that there were not
instances of the same kind in the present day! For whenever God
threatens, the greater part of men either vomit out their bitterness, or
sneeringly ridicule everything that has proceeded from God’s holy mouth.

<span id="xi.i-p155"></span><span id="xi.i-p155.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p156"></span>**14.** *This is revealed.*  <span
id="fr_87"></span>[88](#fn_87) As if he had said, “Do you think that you
can escape punishment for your wantonness, when God calls you to
repentance?” It might be thought that here the Prophet says nothing that
is new; for undoubtedly all things are known to God. But he adds this
for the purpose of shaking off the indolence of men, who never would
rise so fiercely against God, if they did not think that they could
deceive him; for whosoever knows that God is his witness, must also
acknowledge that God is his judge. Hence it follows that wicked men, in
their wantonness, rob God of his power; and therefore it is not without
reason that they are summoned to his tribunal, that they may know that
they must render an account to him.

<span id="xi.i-p158"></span>*If this iniquity shall be forgiven you till
you die.* He adds a dreadful threatening, that this wickedness shall
never be forgiven. In the Hebrew language, the conditional particle,
*if*, contains a denial, as if the Lord had said, “Do not think that I
am true, or that I have any divine perfections, *if* I do not take
vengeance on so great wickedness.” The reason why the Jews, in their
oaths, reserve something which is not expressed, is to accustom us to
deeper reverence in this matter; for we entreat God to be our Judge and
avenger if we speak falsely, and therefore we ought to restrain
ourselves, so as not to make oaths at random. Here Isaiah states
generally, that nothing is so displeasing to God as impenitence, by
which, as Paul says, (<span id="xi.i-p158.1"></span>[Ro
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#005)<span id="xi.i-p158.1"></span>,) we
“heap up for ourselves the treasures of God’s wrath,” and shut out all
hope of pardon.

<span id="xi.i-p159"></span><span id="xi.i-p159.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p160"></span>**15.** *Thus saith the Lord.* This is a
special prediction against a single individual; for, having spoken of
the whole nation, he turns to Shebna, whom he will afterwards mention.
(<span id="xi.i-p160.1"></span>[Isa
37:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#002)<span id="xi.i-p160.1"></span>.)
To this person the Prophet gives two titles, that of “scribe” or
“chancellor,” and that of “steward of the house,” for while in this
passage he calls him “steward,” in the thirty-seventh chapter he calls
him “scribe.” This has led some to think that, at the time of this
prediction, he had resigned his office as steward, and that Eliakim was
put in his room. But this is uncertain, though the words of the Prophet,
in reference to Shebna himself, lead us to conclude that he cherished
wicked envy, which led him to attempt to degrade Eliakim from his rank.
Nor is it improbable that this prediction was uttered, when
Sennacherib’s army was discomfited, and Jerusalem was saved in a
miraculous manner. (<span id="xi.i-p160.2"></span>[2Ki
19:35](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#035)<span id="xi.i-p160.2"></span>;
<span id="xi.i-p160.3"></span>[Isa
37:36](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#036)<span id="xi.i-p160.3"></span>.)
During the interval, many things might have happened which are now
unknown to us; and it is not improbable that this treacherous scoundrel,
having obtained the highest authority, made an unjust use of it to the
injury of Eliakim. It is evident, from the history of the Book of Kings,
that Shebna was a “scribe” or “secretary,” and one of high rank, such as
we now call chancellor.

<span id="xi.i-p161"></span>There is greater difficulty about the word
<span id="xi.i-p161.1"></span>סכן, (*sōchēn*.) Some think that it means
“treasurer,” because <span id="xi.i-p161.2"></span>סכן (*sāchăn*)
signifies *to store up*; but, as he elsewhere calls him “chancellor,” I
think it is not probable that he was treasurer. Besides, the Prophet
shews plainly enough that his office as governor was such as allowed
others to have scarcely any share of authority along with him. Such a
rank could not belong to a treasurer, and therefore I think that the
Prophet means something else. As <span id="xi.i-p161.3"></span>סכן
(*sāchăn*) sometimes signifies “to abet,” and “to foment,” <span
id="xi.i-p161.4"></span>סכן (*sōchēn*) may here mean “an abettor,” or,
as we commonly say, “an accomplice.” It is certain that this Shebna had
communications with the enemy, and was a cunning and deceitful person;
for he cherished a concealed friendship with the Egyptians and
Assyrians, and held treacherous communications with them, so as to
provide for his own safety in any event that might arise, and to
maintain his authority.

<span id="xi.i-p162"></span>Others think that <span
id="xi.i-p162.1"></span>סכן (*sōchēn*) is a word denoting the country to
which he belonged, and that he was called a Sochnite from the city of
which he was a native; for he is said to have been an Egyptian. I
certainly do not reject that opinion, but I prefer the former; for he
*abetted* both sides, and thought that, by his cunning, he would be
preserved, even though everything should be turned upside down.

<span id="xi.i-p163"></span>The particle <span
id="xi.i-p163.1"></span>הזה, (*hăzzēh*,) *this*, is evidently added in
contempt. It is as if he had said, “*That* cunning man, ready for all
shifts, (<span id="xi.i-p163.2"></span>πανοῧργος,) who abets various
parties, who curries favor on all sides.” In this sense <span
id="xi.i-p163.3"></span>סכן (*sōchēn*) is used (<span
id="xi.i-p163.4"></span>[1Ki 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#002)<span
id="xi.i-p163.4"></span>) when it relates to a maid who was about to be
brought to the aged king in order to *cherish* him. Yet, if it be
thought preferable to understand it as meaning a hurtful and injurious
person, I do not object, for the word signifies also “to impoverish.”

<span id="xi.i-p164"></span><span id="xi.i-p164.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p165"></span>**16.** *What hast thou here?* Shebna had
built a sepulcher at Jerusalem, as if he were to live there continually,
and to die there. The Prophet therefore asks why he built a splendid and
costly sepulcher in a lofty and conspicuous place, as is commonly done
by those who wish to perpetuate the memory of their name in the world.
He appears to glance at the ambition of a foreigner and a stranger in
longing to be so magnificently buried out of his country, and yet
eagerly joining with enemies for the destruction of Judea. What could
have been more foolish than to erect a monument in that country for
whose ruin he was plotting? And therefore he adds —

<span id="xi.i-p166"></span><span id="xi.i-p166.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p167"></span>**17.** *Behold, the Lord will carry thee
away.* As if he had said, “Thou shalt be cast out of that place into a
distant country, where thou shalt die ignominiously.” <span
id="xi.i-p167.1"></span>גבר (*gĕbĕr*) is commonly translated as in the
genitive case; that is, “with the casting out of a man thou shalt be
cast out.” Again, <span id="xi.i-p167.2"></span>גבר (*gĕbĕr*) denotes
not an ordinary man, but a strong and brave man, and thus it comes to
mean, “with a mighty and powerful casting out.” Others render it in the
vocative case, “O man!” as if he were addressing Shebna in mockery, “O
illustrious man, who so proudly vauntest of thy greatness, who thinkest
that thou art some hero!” But the former reading will be more
appropriate. Yet here also commentators disagree; for, besides the
exposition which I have mentioned, another is brought forward, that
*men* will be carried to a greater distance than women. But I rather
think that he alludes to the pride of Shebna, who had built so splendid
a sepulcher, in order that his memory, like that of some distinguished
man, might be handed down to posterity. “Thou wishest to be renowned
after thy death: I will ennoble thee in a different manner. By a
remarkable transportation will I remove thee to a foreign and distant
country, where thou shalt be buried in an extraordinary manner.”

<span id="xi.i-p168"></span>First, on the word <span
id="xi.i-p168.1"></span>סכן (*sōchēn*) it is proper to remark how much
God is displeased with a false and deceitful heart; for there is nothing
which God more earnestly recommends to us than simplicity. He is called
a ruler, because, being placed above others, he was likely to be dazzled
by the luster of his present greatness, as happens to those who, elated
and puffed up by their success, dread no adversity, as if they had been
placed beyond the reach of all danger. The Lord threatens that he will
be the judge of such persons. Here it also deserves notice, that Isaiah
could not, without making himself the object of strong dislike, utter
this prediction, especially when addressed to a man of such an elevated
station and so haughty; and yet he must not refuse this office, but must
approach and threaten this man, as God had commanded him.

<span id="xi.i-p169"></span>As to the *sepulcher*, we know that
solicitude about burying the dead is not wholly condemned; for although
“the want of burial,” as one remarks, “is of little importance, yet the
desire of being buried is natural to man, and ought not to be entirely
disregarded.” He does not blame him, therefore, for wishing to be
buried, but for his ambition in building a tomb, by which he shewed his
eagerness to obtain vain and empty renown. But there is another
circumstance connected with Shebna that must be observed; for, having
wished to deliver the city into the hands of the Assyrians by treachery,
he thought that he would reign permanently. He hoped that the Assyrians,
if they were successful, would bestow on him the government of the
kingdom as the reward of his treachery, and that, if they were defeated,
he would permanently retain his rank and authority.

<span id="xi.i-p170"></span>But this will appear more clearly from the
words themselves, *What hast thou here?* He was a foreigner, and as such
he could honestly become united to the people of God; but, being a
traitor and a foreigner, he had no right to that city or country which
the Lord had specially assigned to his own people. Isaiah therefore
asks, “Of what country art thou? Though thou hast no connection with the
people of God by blood or relationship, dost thou wish not only to reign
in this country during thy life, but to procure for thyself a settled
abode in it after thou art dead? Wilt thou betray us to the Assyrians,
and drive out the actual possessors, that thou, who art a foreigner,
mayest enjoy that country, of which not even an inch belongs to thee?”

<span id="xi.i-p171"></span>Hence infer that God is highly displeased
with that ambition by which men endeavor to obtain undying renown in the
world, instead of being satisfied with those honors which they enjoy
during their life. They wish to be applauded after death, and in some
measure to live in the mouth of men; and although death sets aside
everything, they foolishly hope that their name will last through all
ages. But God punishes their haughtiness and presumption, and causes
those things which they wished to be the records of their glory to
become their disgrace and shame. Either their memory is abhorred, so
that men cannot see or hear anything connected with them without utter
loathing, or he does not even permit them to be laid in their graves,
but sends them to gibbets and to ravens, of which we read many instances
in history, (<span id="xi.i-p171.1"></span>[Es
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/est007.htm#010)<span id="xi.i-p171.1"></span>,)
and we have seen not a few in our own times.

<span id="xi.i-p172"></span>Whenever I read this passage, I am forcibly
reminded of a similar instance, resembling it indeed more closely than
any other, that of Thomas More, who held the same office as Shebna; for
it is well known that he was Lord Chancellor to the king of England.
Having been a very bitter enemy of the gospel, and having persecuted
good men by fire and sword, he wished that on this account his
reputation should be extensive, and his wickedness and cruelty
permanently recorded. He therefore ordered the praises of his virtue to
be inscribed on a tomb which he had caused to be built with great cost
and splendor, and sent his epitaph, which he had drawn up, to Basle, to
Erasmus, along with a palfrey which he gave him as a present, to get it
printed. He was so desirous of renown, that he wished to obtain during
his life the reputation and praises which he hoped to enjoy after his
death. Among other applauses the most conspicuous was, that he had been
a very great persecutor of the Lutherans, that is, of the godly.  <span
id="fr_88"></span>[89](#fn_88) What happened? He was accused of treason,
condemned, and beheaded; and thus he had a gibbet for his tomb. Do we
ask more manifest judgments of God, by which he punishes the pride, the
unbounded eagerness for renown, and the blasphemous vaunting, of wicked
men? In this inveterate enemy of the people of God, not less than in
Shebna, we ought undoubtedly to acknowledge and adore God’s overruling
providence.

<span id="xi.i-p174"></span>Another circumstance worthy of notice is,
that this Shebna was a foreigner. Thus, all the tyrants and enemies of
the people of God, though they be foreigners, would wish to cast out the
actual lords of the soil, that they alone might possess the land; but at
length the Lord drives them out, and strips them of all possession, so
that they do not even continue to have a tomb.  <span
id="fr_89"></span>[90](#fn_89) There are innumerable instances in
history. True, this does not always happen; but the instances which the
Lord holds out to us, ought to lead our thoughts farther to consider his
judgments against tyrants and wicked men, who wished to be applauded and
celebrated, but are distinguished by some remarkable kind of death, so
that their infamy becomes universally known. Thus, the renown of that
sepulcher which Shebna had built is indirectly contrasted with the
ignominy which quickly followed it.

<span id="xi.i-p176"></span><span id="xi.i-p176.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p177"></span>**18.** *Turning he will turn thee.*  <span
id="fr_90"></span>[91](#fn_90) Isaiah continues the same discourse, in
which he ridiculed the pride of Shebna, who had bestowed so much cost on
building a sepulcher. This statement is connected with the first clause
of the former verse; for, as he formerly said “He will remove thee by an
extraordinary removal,” so he now says, “He will toss thee as a ball
into an open plain.” By this comparison he means that nothing will
prevent the Lord from casting him out into a distant country, though he
thinks that his power is firmly established; and since he had been so
careful about his sepulcher, and had given orders about it, as if he had
been certain as to his death, Isaiah declares that he will not die in
Jerusalem, but in a foreign country, to which he shall be banished.

<span id="xi.i-p179"></span>*The chariot of thy glory.* Under the word
*chariot* he includes all the fame and rank of Shebna; as if he had said
that disgrace would be his reputation among foreigners. Thus, the Lord
ridicules the mad ambition of those who look at nothing but the world,
and who judge of their happiness by the glory of fading and transitory
objects.

<span id="xi.i-p180"></span>*The shame of thy lord’s house.* He calls it
“the shame of” the royal “house,” either because he had polluted that
holy place which might be regarded as the sanctuary of the Lord, or
because Hezekiah had judged ill in elevating him to that station. That
the mask of his high rank might not screen him from this prediction, the
Prophet expressly states, that the office which he holds aggravates his
guilt and renders him more detestable. Let princes, therefore, if they
do not wish to expose themselves and their houses to reproaches, learn
to act with judgment in appointing men to hold office.

<span id="xi.i-p181"></span><span id="xi.i-p181.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p182"></span>**19.** *And I will cast thee out.* He says
nothing new, but concludes the former prediction. Though in the next
verse he will again mention Shebna, yet now he gives a brief summary of
what has been already said. Shebna thought that he had a fixed abode in
Jerusalem, so that, whatever might happen, he thought that he could not
be driven or removed from it. But the Lord threatens that he will cast
him out, and will banish him to a distant country. Thus, the Lord
frequently overturns the thoughts of the wicked, (<span
id="xi.i-p182.1"></span>[Ps 33:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#010)<span
id="xi.i-p182.1"></span>,) who, relying on their cunning and dexterity,
toss about public affairs according to their own pleasure. The change of
person shews that the Prophet speaks sometimes in his own name, and
sometimes in the name of God.

<span id="xi.i-p183"></span><span id="xi.i-p183.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p184"></span>**20.** *And it shall come to pass in that
day.* It is uncertain at what time Eliakim was substituted in the room
of Shebna; for we shall see, in the thirty-seventh chapter, that Eliakim
was steward of the king’s house when Shebna was chancellor. Whether or
not any change took place during the interval cannot with certainty be
affirmed; yet it is probable, as I lately hinted, that through the
stratagems of this wicked man, Eliakim was afterwards driven from his
office, and that Shebna, after having triumphed, was punished for his
frauds which had been detected, and, having been driven or banished from
Judea, fled to the Assyrians, and there received the reward of his
treachery. In like manner does it frequently happen to traitors, who,
when they cannot fulfill their engagements, are hated and abhorred by
those whom they have deceived; for, having been bold and rash in
promising, they must be discovered to be false and treacherous.

<span id="xi.i-p185"></span>The Jews allege that at last he was torn in
pieces on account of his treachery, but no history supports that
statement. Leaving that matter doubtful, it is certain that he was cast
out or banished, and that he ended his days in a foreign country, and
not at Jerusalem. It is probable that, after his banishment, Eliakim was
again placed in his room.

<span id="xi.i-p186"></span>*I will call.* It is certain that all
princes and magistrates are called by the Lord, even though they be
wicked and ungodly; for “all authority is from God,” as Paul affirms.
(<span id="xi.i-p186.1"></span>[Ro
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#001)<span id="xi.i-p186.1"></span>.)
But here the Prophet speaks of a peculiar *calling*, by which the Lord
manifests his goodness towards his people, when he appoints such persons
to be his servants, that it may be known that God governs by them; and
they, on the other hand, are well aware of the purpose for which they
have been appointed by God, and faithfully discharge the office assigned
to them. Shebna had indeed been *called* for a time, but it was that he
might be God’s scourge; for nothing was farther from his thoughts than
to obey God. Eliakim was a different kind of person; for he acknowledged
himself to be a servant of God, and obeyed the holy calling.

<span id="xi.i-p187"></span>*I will call,* means, therefore, “I will
give a sign to my servant, that he may know that it is I who have raised
him to that honorable rank.” There is in this case a peculiar relation
between the master and the servant, which does not apply to ungodly men
when they obey their own inclination and wicked passions; but this man
acknowledged the Lord and sincerely obeyed him. Lastly, this mark
distinguishes the true servant of God from a wicked and hypocritical
person, who had risen to honor by wicked practices.

<span id="xi.i-p188"></span><span id="xi.i-p188.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p189"></span>**21.** *And I will clothe him.* He now
explains more fully what he had briefly noticed in the former verse,
that it was only by the purpose of God that Shebna was deposed, in order
that Eliakim might succeed him. It is true, indeed, that all the changes
that happen in the world are directed by the providence of God; for he
“girds kings with a girdle,” as we are told in the book of Job, “and
ungirds them, according to his pleasure.” (<span
id="xi.i-p189.1"></span>[Job
12:18](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#018)<span id="xi.i-p189.1"></span>.)
A witty saying was at one time current about the Roman emperors, “that
they were theatrical kings;” because, as players, who perform their
parts in the theater, no sooner have laid aside the rank of a king, than
they presently become poor mechanics; so the emperors, after having been
thrown down from their lofty station, were speedily hurried to a
disgraceful punishment. And yet it is certain that those insurrections
did not take place by chance, or merely through the designs of men, or
by military forces, but by the purpose of God, which directed the whole.
But the Prophet declares, that there is this peculiarity in the case of
Shebna, that his deposition will be a clear proof of the vengeance of
God, and that the restoration of Eliakim will be regarded as a lawful
form of government.

<span id="xi.i-p190"></span>*With thy robes and with thy girdle.* By the
*robes* and *girdle* are meant the badges of the magistrates’ office.
The *girdle* was an emblem of royalty, and the chief magistrates
undoubtedly wore it as an honorable distinction. At Rome, also, the
prætors wore this badge. Job says, that God ungirds kings when he
deprives them of their royal rank. (<span id="xi.i-p190.2"></span>[Job
12:18](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#018)<span id="xi.i-p190.2"></span>.)
These things were foretold by the Prophet, that all might not only see
clearly in this instance the providence of God, and acknowledge his
purpose, but might perceive that this wicked man, who had raised himself
improperly and by unlawful methods, was justly deposed.

<span id="xi.i-p191"></span>*He shall be Father.* Wicked magistrates are
indeed appointed by God, but it is in his anger, and because we do not
deserve to be placed under his government. He gives a loose rein to
tyrants and wicked men, in order to punish our ingratitude, as if he had
forsaken or ceased to govern us. But when good magistrates rule, we see
God, as it were, near us, and governing us by means of those whom he
hath appointed. The Prophet means that Eliakim will perform the part of
a father, because he has been endued with the Spirit of God. At the same
time he reminds all godly persons that they will have good reasons for
wishing the government of Eliakim, because it tends to the general
advantage of the Church.

<span id="xi.i-p192"></span>By the appellation *father*, he shews what
is the duty of a good magistrate. The same thing has been taught by
heathen writers, that “a good king holds the place of a father;” and
when they wished to flatter those who crushed the commonwealth by the
exercise of tyranny, nature suggested to them to call the tyrants by the
honorable title of “fathers of their country.” In like manner,
philosophers, when they say that a family is the picture of a kingdom,
shew that a king ought to hold the place of a father. This is also
proved by the ancient titles given to kings, such as “Abimelech,” (<span
id="xi.i-p192.1"></span>[Gen. 20:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#002),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#008)<span id="xi.i-p192.1"></span>,)
that is, “my father the king,” and others of the same kind, which shew
that royal authority cannot be separated from the feelings of a father.
Those who wish to be regarded as lawful princes, and to prove that they
are God’s servants, must therefore shew that they are fathers to their
people.

<span id="xi.i-p193"></span><span id="xi.i-p193.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p194"></span>**22.** *And the key of the house of David.*
 <span id="fr_91"></span>[92](#fn_91) This expression is metaphorical,
and we need not spend much time, as some do, in drawing from it an
allegorical meaning; for it is taken from an ordinary custom of men. The
keys of the house are delivered to those who are appointed to be
stewards, that they may have the full power of opening and shutting
according to their own pleasure. By “the house of David” is meant “the
royal house.” This mode of expression was customary among the people,
because it had been promised to David that his kingdom would be for
ever. (<span id="xi.i-p195.1"></span>[2Sa
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#013)<span id="xi.i-p195.1"></span>;
<span id="xi.i-p195.2"></span>[Ps.
132:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#012)<span id="xi.i-p195.2"></span>.)
That is the reason why the kingdom was commonly called “the house of
David.”

<span id="xi.i-p196"></span>*The key* is put in the singular number for
*keys*. Though “keys” are usually carried in the hands, yet he says that
they are laid on the shoulders,  <span id="fr_92"></span>[93](#fn_92)
because he is describing an important charge. Yet nothing more is meant
than that the charge and the whole government of the house are committed
to him, that he may regulate everything according to his pleasure; and
we know that the delivering of keys is commonly regarded as a token of
possession.

<span id="xi.i-p198"></span>Some commentators have viewed this passage
as referring to Christ, but improperly; for the Prophet draws a
comparison between two men, Shebna and Eliakim. Shebna shall be deprived
of his office, and Eliakim shall succeed him. What has this to do with
Christ? For Eliakim was not a type of Christ, and the Prophet does not
here describe any hidden mystery, but borrows a comparison from the
ordinary practice of men, as if the keys were delivered to one who has
been appointed to be steward, as has been already said. For the same
reason Christ calls the office of teaching the word, (<span
id="xi.i-p198.1"></span>[Mt 16:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#019)<span
id="xi.i-p198.1"></span>,) “the keys of the kingdom of heaven;” so that
it is idle and foolish to spend much time in endeavoring to find a
hidden reason, when the matter is plain, and needs no ingenuity. The
reason is, that ministers, by the preaching of the word, open the
entrance into heaven, and lead to Christ, who alone is “the way.” (<span
id="xi.i-p198.2"></span>[Joh 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#006)<span
id="xi.i-p198.2"></span>.) By *the keys*, therefore, he means here the
government of the king’s house, because the principal charge of it would
be delivered to Eliakim at the proper time.

<span id="xi.i-p199"></span><span id="xi.i-p199.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p200"></span>**23.** *And I will fasten him as a nail in
a sure place.* The particle of comparison must here be supplied, and
therefore I have inserted in the text the word *as*. By <span
id="xi.i-p200.1"></span>נאמן, (*nĕĕmān*,) *faithful*, he means what is
“firm and sure.” The original idea of the word is “truth;” for where
“truth” is, there firmness and certainty are found;  <span
id="fr_93"></span>[94](#fn_93) and therefore Hebrew writers employ the
word “truth” to denote what is firm and certain. Isaiah employs an
elegant metaphor, from which godly magistrates, who are few in number,
ought to draw large consolation. They may conclude that not only has God
raised them to that honorable rank, but they are confirmed and
established, as if they had been *fixed* by his hand. And indeed, where
the fear of the Lord dwells, there the stability, and power, and
authority of kings, as Solomon says, are established by justice and
judgment. (<span id="xi.i-p201.1"></span>[Prov.
16:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#012), [Prov.
25:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#005), [Prov.
29:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#014)<span id="xi.i-p201.1"></span>.)

<span id="xi.i-p202"></span>This consolation ought to be of advantage to
princes, not only that they may meet all danger courageously, but
likewise that they may firmly and resolutely proceed in their office,
and not turn aside on any account, or shrink from any danger. But there
are very few who can actually relish this doctrine. Almost all are like
Jeroboam, (<span id="xi.i-p202.1"></span>[1Ki
12:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#028)<span id="xi.i-p202.1"></span>,)
and think that religion should yield to them, and, so far as they
imagine, that it will be of service to them, follow it, or rather bend
and change it for their own convenience. Their last thought is about God
and religion; and we need not wonder if they are always in doubt about
their own affairs, and are scarcely ever at rest; for they do not direct
their thoughts to him from whom all authority proceeds. (<span
id="xi.i-p202.2"></span>[Ro 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#001)<span
id="xi.i-p202.2"></span>.) Hence springs treachery, hence springs
cruelty, covetousness, violence, and frauds and wrongs of every kind, in
which the princes of the present day indulge with less restraint and
with greater impudence than all others. Yet there are some in whom we
see what is here said of Eliakim. The Lord guards and upholds them, and
blesses that regard to equity and justice which he had bestowed upon
them. If the Lord permits even tyrants for a time, because they have
some appearance of regular government, what shall happen when a prince
shall endeavor, to the utmost of his power, to defend justice and
judgment, and the true worship of God? Will he not be still more
confirmed and established by him who is the continual guardian of
righteousness?

<span id="xi.i-p203"></span><span id="xi.i-p203.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p204"></span>**24.** *And they shall hang upon him.* It
is as if he had said that Eliakim would be fully qualified for
discharging his duties, and would not be indolent in his office. Hence
we infer that God does not exalt princes to honor, in order that they
may live in indolence or gratify their own passions. The office of a
prince is very labourious, if he discharges it properly, and if he do
not copy the unmeaning countenances of those who imagine that they have
been raised to that honor, that they may live in splendor and may freely
indulge in every kind of luxury. If a prince wish to discharge his
office in a proper manner, he must endure much toil. It must not be
thought that the comparison of a *nail* is inapplicable to princely
government, since it denotes an office full of activity and cares; and
we know that metaphors do not apply at all points, but we ought to
observe the purpose for which they are introduced.

<span id="xi.i-p205"></span>*All the glory of his father’s house,*
 <span id="fr_94"></span>[95](#fn_94) *the grandchildren and
great-grandchildren.*  <span id="fr_95"></span>[96](#fn_95) The
expression, “his father’s house,” leaves no room to doubt that Eliakim
was of royal blood; and therefore by his successors I understand not
only those who were nearly related to him, but the whole family of
David. He will have the charge of all that shall be in the king’s house.
By adding *grandchildren*, he likewise shews that this princely
government will be of long duration, that it will not only last during
the life of one individual, but will also extend to his successors.
 <span id="fr_96"></span>[97](#fn_96) For good princes are useful not
only to their own age, but also to posterity, to whom they leave good
laws, salutary regulations, and the traces of good government; so that
their successors, even though they be wicked men, are ashamed to give
themselves up all at once to abandoned wickedness, and, even against
their will, are compelled through shame to retain something that is
good. He shews that this will be the case with Eliakim, whose government
will be so righteous that even posterity shall reap advantage from it.

<span id="xi.i-p209"></span>*The smaller vessels.*  <span
id="fr_97"></span>[98](#fn_97) Metaphorically it denotes that there will
be uniform justice, or equal laws, as the phrase is; and it is as if he
had said, “He will not only support the nobles, but will likewise attend
to the interests of the lowest rank.” The more rarely this is found in a
prince, so much higher praise does he deserve than if he favored none
but the rich and powerful; for these can guard and protect themselves,
but the poor and feeble lie open as a prey to the attacks of others, and
there is hardly any one that pleads their cause.

<span id="xi.i-p211"></span>*To all vessels of music.*  <span
id="fr_98"></span>[99](#fn_98) By *vessels* the Hebrew writers denote
instruments of all kinds, and the meaning is very extensive. When he
speaks of *musical*  <span id="fr_99"></span>[100](#fn_99) vessels, he
follows out what he had said in a single word; for it serves to explain
the word <span id="xi.i-p213.1"></span>קטן, (*kātān*,) *little*; as if
he had said that there would be nothing so small, or minute, or
insignificant, that he would not take charge of it.

<span id="xi.i-p214"></span><span id="xi.i-p214.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p215"></span>**25.** *In that day.* It might be thought
that this is inconsistent with what he had formerly said; but he no
longer speaks of Eliakim, for he returns to Shebna, who was about to be
cast down from his rank, as Isaiah had said. But for this, it might have
been thought that there was no way by which Eliakim could arrive at that
honor, but by the deposition of Shebna, who had arranged his matters so
well, that no person thought it possible that he could be driven from
his position. Yet though he has fortified himself by many defences, and
thinks that he is at a great distance from all danger, still he shall be
deprived of his office, and Eliakim shall be placed in his room.

<span id="xi.i-p216"></span>*In a sure place.* When he calls it “a sure
place,” this must be understood with respect to men; for men judge that
what is defended on all sides will be of long duration; but God casts it
down with the smallest breath. It was only by way of concession that he
called it “a sure place.” Hence it ought to be inferred how foolishly
men boast, and rely on their greatness, when they have been exalted to a
high rank of honor; for in a very short time they may be cast down and
deprived of all honor.

<span id="xi.i-p217"></span>*And the burden that was upon it shall be
cut off.* When wicked men are ruined, all who relied on their authority
must also be ruined; and indeed it is in the highest degree reasonable
that they who were united by the same bond of crimes, and who aided this
wicked man as far as lay in their power, should share in the same
punishment. It is difficult for those who place themselves under the
protection of wicked men, and employ all their influence in behalf of
them, not to be also partakers of their crimes; and if they were
guiltless of crime, (which seldom, or rather, we may say, never
happens,) still they are justly punished on this ground, that they have
placed their trust on them as a very sure defense, and have depended
wholly on their will and authority.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_76"></span>[77](cc14010.htm#fr_76) <span
id="xi.i-p66.3"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p67"></span> Rendered in the English version, “from
afar.”

<span id="xi.i-p68"></span> FT335 “I will weep bitterly. (Heb. I will be
bitter in weeping.)” — Eng. Ver.

<span id="xi.i-p69"></span> FT336 “My soul is wearied because of
murderers.” — Eng. Ver. See our Author’s view of that passage in his
Commentary on Jeremiah, vol. 1 p. 249

<span id="xi.i-p70"></span> FT337 “To the mountains.” — Eng. Ver.

<span id="xi.i-p71"></span> FT338 “<span id="xi.i-p71.1"></span>La
plaine du Jordain;” — “The plain of the Jordan.”

<span id="xi.i-p72"></span> FT339 “And Kir uncovered (Heb. made naked)
the shield.” — Eng. Ver.

<span id="xi.i-p73"></span> FT340 “Kir is now agreed to be identical
with <span id="xi.i-p73.1"></span>Κύρος, the name of a river rising in
the Caucasus, and emptying into the Caspian Sea, from which Georgia
(Girgistan) is supposed to derive its name. Kir was subject to Assyria
in the time of Isaiah, as appears from the fact that it was one of the
regions to which the exiles of the ten tribes were transported. It may
here be put for Media, as Elam is for Persia.” — *Alexander*

<span id="xi.i-p74"></span> FT341 “Thy choicest valleys, (Heb. the
choice of thy valleys.)” — Eng. Ver.

<span id="xi.i-p75"></span> FT342 “The name of ‘the house of the forest’
was given to it, because it was constructed of ‘cedars’ taken from the
forest of Lebanon, and because it rested on four rows of fifteen large
pillars of cedar. When the inhabitants of Jerusalem heard of the
invasion by the Assyrian army, they looked to this armory to draw from
it arms for defending the city.” — *Rosenmüller*. “It was built by
Solomon within the city as a cool retreat; and here he laid up his
choicest armory. <span id="xi.i-p75.1"></span>[1 Kings
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1007.htm#002), [1 Kings
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#017)<span id="xi.i-p75.1"></span>.
See <span id="xi.i-p75.2"></span>[Ne
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#019)<span id="xi.i-p75.2"></span>.” —
*Stock*

<span id="xi.i-p76"></span> FT343 “<span id="xi.i-p76.1"></span>Le sac
et l’arrachement des cheveux;” — “Sackcloth and pulling out the hair.”

<span id="xi.i-p77"></span> FT344 “<span id="xi.i-p77.1"></span>En sac
ou cendre;” — “In sackcloth or ashes.”

<span id="xi.i-p78"></span> FT345 Rosenmüller, who is followed in this
instance by Stock and Alexander, renders this clause, “Jehovah was
revealed in my ears,” remarking that <span id="xi.i-p78.1"></span>נגלה
(*niglah*) must here be taken for a reflective verb, and quoting as
parallel passages, <span id="xi.i-p78.2"></span>[1 Sam.
2:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#027), [1 Sam.
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#021)<span id="xi.i-p78.2"></span>, in
the former of which instead of the literal rendering, “Revealing was I
revealed?” our translators say, “Did I plainly appear?” while in the
latter they make <span id="xi.i-p78.3"></span>נגלה (*niglah*) a
reflective verb, “The Lord revealed himself.” — *Ed*

<span id="xi.i-p79"></span> FT346 “<span id="xi.i-p79.1"></span>C’est à
dire, des enfans de Dieu;” — “That is, of the children of God.”

<span id="xi.i-p80"></span> FT347 “<span
id="xi.i-p80.1"></span>Tellement qu’ils n’ont pas mesme un pied de terre
pour estre interrez;” — “So that they have not even a foot of earth for
a grave.”

<span id="xi.i-p81"></span> FT348 “He will surely violently turn.” —
Eng. Ver.

<span id="xi.i-p82"></span> FT349 “As the robe and the baldric,
mentioned in the preceding verse, were the ensigns of power and
authority, so likewise was the key the mark of office, either sacred or
civil.” — *Lowth*

<span id="xi.i-p83"></span> FT350 “To comprehend how the key could be
borne on the shoulder, it will be necessary to say somewhat of the form
of it; but, without entering into a long disquisition, and a great deal
of obscure learning, concerning the locks and keys of the ancients, it
will be sufficient to observe, that one sort of keys, and that probably
the most ancient, was of considerable magnitude, and, as to the shape,
very much bent and crooked. Homer, Odyss. 21:6, describes the key of
Ulysses’s store-house as <span id="xi.i-p83.1"></span>εὐκαμπὴς, of a
large curvature; which Eustathius explains by saying it was <span
id="xi.i-p83.2"></span>δρεπανοειδὴς, in shape like a reap-hook. The
curve part was introduced into the key-hole, and, being properly
directed by the handle, took hold of the bolts within, and moved them
from their places. We may easily collect from this account, that such a
key would lie very well upon the shoulder; that it must be of some
considerable size and weight, and could hardly be commodiously carried
otherwise. Ulysses’s key was of brass, and the handle of ivory; but this
was a royal key; the more common ones were probably of wood.” — *Lowth*

<span id="xi.i-p84"></span> FT351 “<span id="xi.i-p84.1"></span>Ce mot
est deduit de verité, laquelle est tousjours accompagnee de fermeté et
asseurance;” — “This word is derived from truth, which is always
accompanied by firmness and certainty.”

<span id="xi.i-p85"></span> FT352 “In ancient times, and in the eastern
countries, as the way of life, so the houses were much more simple than
ours at present. They had not that quantity and variety of furniture,
nor those accommodations of all sorts with which we abound. It was
convenient and even necessary for them, and it made an essential part in
the building of a house, to furnish the inside of the several apartments
with sets of spikes, nails, or large pegs, upon which to dispose of, and
hang up, the several moveables and utensils in common use, and proper to
the apartment. These spikes they worked into the walls at the first
erection of them — the walls being of such materials that they could not
bear their being driven in afterwards; and they were contrived so as to
strengthen the walls, by binding the parts together, as well as to serve
for convenience. Sir John Chardin’s account of this matter is this,
‘They do not drive with a hammer the nails that are put into the eastern
walls; the walls are too hard, being of brick; or if they are of clay,
too mouldering; but they fix them in the brick-work as they are
building. They are large nails with square heads like dice, well-made,
the ends being so bent as to make them cramp-irons. They commonly place
them at the windows and doors, in order to hang upon them, when they
like, veils and curtains.’ (Harmer, Obser. 1 p. 191.) And we may add,
that they were put in other places too, in order to hang up other things
of various kinds; as it appears from this place of Isaiah, and from
<span id="xi.i-p85.1"></span>[Eze
15:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze015.htm#003)<span id="xi.i-p85.1"></span>, who
speaks of a pin, or nail, to hang any vessel thereon.” — *Lowth*

<span id="xi.i-p86"></span> FT353 “The offspring and the issue.” — Eng.
Ver.

<span id="xi.i-p87"></span> FT354 “<span id="xi.i-p87.1"></span>Mais
s’estendra jusqu’ a ceux qui viendront long temps apres;” “But will
extend to those who shall live long afterwards.”

<span id="xi.i-p88"></span> FT355 “Here follow the names of utensils
hung up in an eastern house, concerning which we must needs be
uncertain. The meaning of the whole figure is, Eliakim shall be the
support of all ranks in the state, of the meanest people as well as the
highest.” — *Stock*

<span id="xi.i-p89"></span> FT356 “Even to all the vessels of flagons,
(or, instruments of violins.)” — Eng. Ver.

<span id="xi.i-p90"></span> FT357 “The old interpretation of <span
id="xi.i-p90.1"></span>נבלים (*nĕbūlīm*) as denoting musical
instruments,” says Professor Alexander, “though justified by usage, is
forbidden by the context.”

<span id="fn_77"></span>[78](cc14010.htm#fr_77) <span
id="xi.i-p95.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p96"></span>

<span id="fn_78"></span>[79](cc14010.htm#fr_78) <span
id="xi.i-p98.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p99"></span>

<span id="fn_79"></span>[80](cc14010.htm#fr_79) <span
id="xi.i-p103.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p104"></span>

<span id="fn_80"></span>[81](cc14010.htm#fr_80) <span
id="xi.i-p104.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p105"></span>

<span id="fn_81"></span>[82](cc14010.htm#fr_81) <span
id="xi.i-p110.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p111"></span>

<span id="fn_82"></span>[83](cc14010.htm#fr_82) <span
id="xi.i-p111.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p112"></span>

<span id="fn_83"></span>[84](cc14010.htm#fr_83) <span
id="xi.i-p114.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p115"></span>

<span id="fn_84"></span>[85](cc14010.htm#fr_84) <span
id="xi.i-p119.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p120"></span>

<span id="fn_85"></span>[86](cc14010.htm#fr_85) <span
id="xi.i-p141.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p142"></span>

<span id="fn_86"></span>[87](cc14010.htm#fr_86) <span
id="xi.i-p142.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p143"></span>

<span id="fn_87"></span>[88](cc14010.htm#fr_87) <span
id="xi.i-p156.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p157"></span>

<span id="fn_88"></span>[89](cc14010.htm#fr_88) <span
id="xi.i-p172.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p173"></span>

<span id="fn_89"></span>[90](cc14010.htm#fr_89) <span
id="xi.i-p174.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p175"></span>

<span id="fn_90"></span>[91](cc14010.htm#fr_90) <span
id="xi.i-p177.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p178"></span>

<span id="fn_91"></span>[92](cc14010.htm#fr_91) <span
id="xi.i-p194.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p195"></span>

<span id="fn_92"></span>[93](cc14010.htm#fr_92) <span
id="xi.i-p196.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p197"></span>

<span id="fn_93"></span>[94](cc14010.htm#fr_93) <span
id="xi.i-p200.2"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p201"></span>

<span id="fn_94"></span>[95](cc14010.htm#fr_94) <span
id="xi.i-p205.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p206"></span>

<span id="fn_95"></span>[96](cc14010.htm#fr_95) <span
id="xi.i-p206.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p207"></span>

<span id="fn_96"></span>[97](cc14010.htm#fr_96) <span
id="xi.i-p207.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p208"></span>

<span id="fn_97"></span>[98](cc14010.htm#fr_97) <span
id="xi.i-p209.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p210"></span>

<span id="fn_98"></span>[99](cc14010.htm#fr_98) <span
id="xi.i-p211.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p212"></span>

<span id="fn_99"></span>[100](cc14010.htm#fr_99) <span
id="xi.i-p212.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p213"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 23](cc14011)
