[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc14017)  [Next](cc14019) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 14: Isaiah, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xix"></span>

<span id="xix-p1"></span>CHAPTER 30

<span id="xix.i"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p1"></span><span id="xix.i-p1.1"></span>[Isaiah
30:1-33](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#001)<span id="xix.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p2"></span>**1.** Woe to the rebellious children, saith
the Lord, that take counsel, but not of me; and that cover with a
covering, but not of my Spirit, that they may add sin to sin:

<span id="xix.i-p3"></span>**1.** Væ filiis contumacibus, (*vel*,
*perversis*) dicit Iehova, ut capiant consilium, et non ex me; ut
operiant arcanum. (*vel*, *fundant* *fusionem*,) et non ex spiritu meo;
ut peccatum addant peccato.

<span id="xix.i-p4"></span>**2.** That walk to go down into Egyst, and
have not asked at my mouth; to strengthen themselves in the strength of
Pharaoh, and to trust in the shadow of Egypt!

<span id="xix.i-p5"></span>**2.** Proficiscuntur ut descendant in
Ægyptum, et os meum non interrogaverunt, roborantes se robore Pharaonis,
et sperantes in umbra Ægypti.

<span id="xix.i-p6"></span>**3.** Therefore shall the strength of
Pharaoh be your shame, and the trust in the shadow of Egypt *your*
confusion.

<span id="xix.i-p7"></span>**3.** Erit autem vobis fortitudo Pharaonis
in pudorem, et fiducia in umbra Ægypti in ignominiam.

<span id="xix.i-p8"></span>**4.** For his princes were at Zoan, and his
ambassadors came to Hanes.

<span id="xix.i-p9"></span>**4.** Fuerunt enim principes ejus in Zoan et
legati ejus in Hanes venerunt.

<span id="xix.i-p10"></span>**5.** They were all ashamed of a people
*that* could not profit them, nor be an help nor profit, but a shame,
and also a reproach.

<span id="xix.i-p11"></span>**5.** Omnes pudefient in populo qui eis non
proderit, neque auxilio erit, neque commodum afferet; sed erit in
pudorem, atque etiam in opprobrium.

<span id="xix.i-p12"></span>**6.** The burden of the beasts of the
south: into the land of trouble and anguish, from whence *come* the
young and old lion, the viper and fiery flying serpent, they will carry
their riches upon the shoulders of young asses, and their treasures upon
the bunches of camels, to a people *that* shall not profit *them*

<span id="xix.i-p13"></span>**6.** Onus jumentorum Austri. In terra
afflictionis et angustiæ, leo, et leo major ab illis, vipera et prester
volans, dum portabunt super humerum pullorum divitias suas, et super
gibbos camelorum thesauros suos ad populum qui non proderit.

<span id="xix.i-p14"></span>**7.** For the Egyptians shall help in vain,
and to no purpose: therefore have I cried concerning this, Their
strength *is* to sit still.

<span id="xix.i-p15"></span>**7.** Certe Ægyptii vanitas, et frustra
auxiliabuntur. Propterea clamavi ad illam: Robur illorum quiescere.

<span id="xix.i-p16"></span>**8.** Now go, write it before them in a
table, and note it in a book, that it may be for the time to come for
ever and ever;

<span id="xix.i-p17"></span>**8.** Nunc vade, et scribe hanc visionem in
tabula coram ipsis, et in libro insculpe eam; ut sit in diem novissimum,
in perpetuum usque in secula.

<span id="xix.i-p18"></span>**9.** That this *is* a rebellious people,
lying children, children *that* will not hear the law of the Lord:

<span id="xix.i-p19"></span>**9.** Quod populus hic rebellis sit, filii
mendaces, filii qui recusant audire legem Iohivæ.

<span id="xix.i-p20"></span>**10.** Which say to the seers, See not; and
to the prophets, Prophesy not unto us right things, speak unto us smooth
things, prophesy deceits:

<span id="xix.i-p21"></span>**10.** Qui dicunt videntibus, ne videatis,
et prospicientibus, ne prospiciatis nobis recta; loquimini nobis
blanditias, videte errores.

<span id="xix.i-p22"></span>**11.** Get you out of the way, turn aside
out of the path, cause the Holy One of Israel to cease from before us.

<span id="xix.i-p23"></span>**11.** Recedite a via, declinate a semita;
facite ut a facie nostra facessat Sanctus Israel.

<span id="xix.i-p24"></span>**12.** Wherefore thus saith the Holy One of
Israel, Because ye despise this word, and trust in oppression and
perverseness, and stay thereon:

<span id="xix.i-p25"></span>**12.** Propterea sic dicit Sanctus Israel:
quia respuistis verbum hoc, et confisi estis in violentia et pravitate,
et innixi estis in eam;

<span id="xix.i-p26"></span>**13.** Therefore this iniquity shall be to
you as a breach ready to fall, swelling out in a high wall, whose
breaking cometh suddenly at an instant.

<span id="xix.i-p27"></span>**13.** Ideo erit vobis iniquitas hæc quasi
ruptura cadens, tumor in alto muro, cujus repente et subito venit
fractura.

<span id="xix.i-p28"></span>**14.** And he shall break it as the
breaking of the potter’s vessel that is broken in pieces; he shall not
spare: so that there shall not be found in the bursting of it a sherd to
take fire from the hearth, or to take water *withal* out of the pit.

<span id="xix.i-p29"></span>**14.** Et contritio ejus quasi contritio
vasis figulorum, quod absque misericordia comminuitur; nec in ejus
fractura invenitur testa adignem e foco ferendum, vel aquam e puteo
hauriendum.

<span id="xix.i-p30"></span>**15.** For thus saith the Lord God, the
Holy One of Israel, In returning and rest shall ye be saved; in
quietness and in confidence shall be your strength; and ye would not.

<span id="xix.i-p31"></span>**15.** Quoniam sic dixit Dominus Iehova
Sanctus Israel: In requie et quiete salvi eritis; in tranquillitate et
fiducia erit fortitudo vestra, sed noluistis.

<span id="xix.i-p32"></span>**16.** But ye said, No; for we will flee
upon horses; therefore shall ye flee: and, We will ride upon the swift;
therefore shall they that pursue you be swift.

<span id="xix.i-p33"></span>**16.** Et dixistis, Non, sed equis
effugiemus; propterea fugietis; super celerem conscendemus; propterea
celeriores erunt qui vos persequentur.

<span id="xix.i-p34"></span>**17.** One thousand *shall flee* at the
rebuke of one; at the rebuke of five shall ye flee: till ye be left as a
beacon upon the top of a mountain, and as an ensign on an hill.

<span id="xix.i-p35"></span>**17.** Mille unus a facie increpationis
unius a facie increpationis quinque fugietis, donec relicti fueritis
sicut malus navis in vertice montis, et sicut vexillum in colle.

<span id="xix.i-p36"></span>**18.** And therefore will the Lord wait,
that he may be gracious unto you; and therefore will he be exalted, that
he may have mercy upon you: for the Lord *is* a God of judgement:
blessed *are* all they that wait for him.

<span id="xix.i-p37"></span>**18.** Propterea expectabit vos Iehova, ut
misereatur vestri; et propterea exaltabitur, ut propitius sit vobis;
quia Deus judicii Iehova. Beati omnes qui expectant eum.

<span id="xix.i-p38"></span>**19.** For the people shall dwell in Zion
at Jerusalem; thou shalt weep no more: he will be very gracious unto
thee at the voice of thy cry; when he shall hear it, he will answer
thee.

<span id="xix.i-p39"></span>**19.** Certe populus in Sion habitabit in
Ierusalem; flendo non flebis; miserendo miserebitur tui; ad vocem
clamoris tui, simulac audierit, respondebit tibi.

<span id="xix.i-p40"></span>**20.** And *though* the Lord give you the
bread of adversity, and the water of affliction, yet shall not thy
teachers be removed into a corner any more, but thine eyes shall see thy
teachers:

<span id="xix.i-p41"></span>**20.** Ubi dederit vobis Dominus panem
angoris et aquam afflictionis, non arcebitur pluvia tua, et oculi tui
videbunt pluviam tuam.

<span id="xix.i-p42"></span>**21.** And thine ears shall hear a word
behind thee, saying, This *is* the way, walk ye in it, when ye turn to
the right hand, and when ye turn to the left.

<span id="xix.i-p43"></span>**21.** Tum aures tuæ audient verbum a tergo
tuo, dicendo: Hæc via, ambulate in ea, sive ad dextram sive ad sinistram
eatis.

<span id="xix.i-p44"></span>**22.** Ye shall defile also the covering of
thy graven images of silver, and the ornament of thy molten images of
gold: thou shalt cast them away as a menstruous cloth; thou shalt say
unto it, Get thee hence.

<span id="xix.i-p45"></span>**22.** Tum profanabitis tectorium
sculptilium argenti tui, et operimentum conflatilis auri tui,
separabisque ea tanquam pannum menstruo infectum, dices qui illi:
Egredere (*vel*, *Apage*.)

<span id="xix.i-p46"></span>**23.** Then shall he give the rain of thy
seed, that thou shalt sow the ground withal; and bread of the increase
of the earth, and it shall be fat and plenteous: in that day shall thy
cattle feed in large pastures.

<span id="xix.i-p47"></span>**23.** Tum dabit pluviam semini tuo, cum
seminaveris terram, et panem proventus terræ; et erit uber et pinguis,
et pascentur pecora tua in die illo in amplis pascuis.

<span id="xix.i-p48"></span>**24.** The oxen likewise, and the young
asses that ear the ground, shall eat clean provender, which hath been
winnowed with the shovel and with the fan.

<span id="xix.i-p49"></span>**24.** Boves etiam tui, et pulli asinorum
colentes terram, pabulum purum comedent, quod in pala ventilatum erit et
in vanno.

<span id="xix.i-p50"></span>**25.** And there shal be upon every high
mountain, and upon every high hill, rivers *and* streams of waters in
the day of the great slaughter, when the towers fall.

<span id="xix.i-p51"></span>**25.** Et accidet, ut super omnem montem
excelsum, et super omnem collem elevatum, sint rivi, rivi aquarum in die
cædis magnæ cum turres corruerint.

<span id="xix.i-p52"></span>**26.** Moreover, the light of the moon
shall be as the light of the sun, and the light of the sun shall be
seven-fold, as the light of seven days in the day that the Lord bindeth
up the breach of his people, and healeth the stroke of their wound.

<span id="xix.i-p53"></span>**26.** Et erit lux lunæ sicut lux solis, et
lux solis septuplo major, quasi lux septem dierum, in die qui
alligaverit Iehova fracturam populi sui, et perfossionem plagæ ejus
sanaverit.

<span id="xix.i-p54"></span>**27.** Behold, the name of the Lord cometh
from far, burning *with* his anger, and the burden *thereof* is heavy:
his lips are full of indignation, and his tongue as a devouring fire:

<span id="xix.i-p55"></span>**27.** Ecce nomen Iehovæ venit e loco
remoto; ardens facies ejus, et grave onus; labia ejus plena sunt
indignatione; et lingua ejus quasi ignis devorans.

<span id="xix.i-p56"></span>**28.** And his breath, as an overflowing
stream, shall reach to the midst of the neck, to sift the nations with
the sieve of vanity: and *there shall be* a bridle in the jaws of the
people, causing *them* to err.

<span id="xix.i-p57"></span>**28.** Et spiritus ejus quasi torrens
inundans, usque ad collum dividet; ad ventilandas gentes in cribro
inutili, et frænum errare faciens in maxillis populorum.

<span id="xix.i-p58"></span>**29.** Ye shall have a song, as in the
night, *when* a holy solemnity is kept; and gladness of heart, as when
one goeth with a pipe to come into the mountain of the Lord, to the
mighty One of Israel.

<span id="xix.i-p59"></span>**29.** Canticum erit vobis, quemadmodum in
nocte dum celebratur dies festus, et lætitia cordis quasi ejus qui ad
tibiam incedit, ut veniat ad montem Iehovæ, ad Fortem Israelis.

<span id="xix.i-p60"></span>**30.** And the Lord shall cause his
glorious voice to be heard, and shall shew the lighting down of his arm,
with the indignation of *his* anger, and *with* the flame of a devouring
fire, *with* scattering, and tempest, and hailstones.

<span id="xix.i-p61"></span>**30.** Et audiri faciet Iehova potentiam
vocis suæ, et descensionem brachii sui videri faciet, cum furore vultus
et flamma ignis vorantis, dissipatione, inundatione, et lapide
grandinis.

<span id="xix.i-p62"></span>**31.** For through the voice of the Lord
shall the Assyrian be beaten down, *which* smote with a rod.

<span id="xix.i-p63"></span>**31.** Sane a voce Iehovæ conteretur Assur,
qui virga percussit.

<span id="xix.i-p64"></span>**32.** And *in* every place where the
grounded staff shall pass, which the Lord shall lay upon him, *it* shall
be with tabrets and harps: and in battles of shaking will he fight with
it.

<span id="xix.i-p65"></span>**32.** Et erit in omni transitu baculus
fundatus, quam infliget Iehova super eum cum tympanis, et citharis, et
præliis elevationis pugnabit contra eam.

<span id="xix.i-p66"></span>**33.** For Tophet *is* ordained of old;
yea, for the king it is prepared: he heath made *it* deep *and* large;
the pile thereof *is* fire and much wood; the breath of the Lord, like a
stream of brimstone, doth kindle it.

<span id="xix.i-p67"></span>**33.** Quoniam ordinata est ab hesterno
Tophet: etiam Regi præparata est: quam in profundum posuit et dilatavit.
Pyra ejus ignis, et ligna multa; flatus Iehovæ quasi torrens sulphuris
succendit eam.

<span id="xix.i-p68"></span> 

<span id="xix.i-p69"></span><span id="xix.i-p69.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p70"></span>**1.** *Woe to the rebellious children.* The
Prophet exclaims against the Jews, because, when they were unable to
bear the burden, when they were hard pressed by the Assyrians and other
enemies, they fled to Egypt for help. This reproof might appear to be
excessively severe, were we merely to consider that weak and miserable
men, especially when they are unjustly oppressed, have a right to ask
assistance even from wicked persons; for it is a principle implanted in
us by nature, that all human beings should willingly, and of their own
accord, endeavour to assist each other. But when we come to the very
sources, we shall find that no ordinary or inconsiderable guilt had been
contracted by the people.

<span id="xix.i-p71"></span>First, it is no light offense, but wicked
obstinacy, to disregard and even despise God’s government, and follow
their own inclinations. But God had strictly forbidden them to enter
into any alliance or league with the Egyptians. (<span
id="xix.i-p71.1"></span>[Ex 13:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#017)<span
id="xix.i-p71.1"></span>; <span id="xix.i-p71.2"></span>[De
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#016)<span id="xix.i-p71.2"></span>.)
There were chiefly two causes of this prohibition. One was general, and
related to alliances and leagues with other nations; for God did not
wish that his people should be corrupted by the superstitions of the
Gentiles. (<span id="xix.i-p71.3"></span>[Exod.
23:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#032), [Exod.
34:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#015)<span id="xix.i-p71.3"></span>;
<span id="xix.i-p71.4"></span>[De
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#002)<span id="xix.i-p71.4"></span>.) We
are gradually infected, I know not how, by the vices of those with whom
we have intercourse and familiarity; and as we are more prone by nature
to copy vices than virtues, we easily become accustomed to corruptions,
and, in short, the infection rapidly spreads from one person to another.
This has happened to our own country, France, in consequence of having
intercourse with many nations, which leads her too eagerly to imitate
their vices, and has covered her with frightful pollution. This
immoderate desire of forming alliances unlocked Asia to the Mahometans,
and next laid Europe open to them; and though they still retain their
moderation in eating and drinking, all that has been subdued by their
arms has contracted nothing but filth and debasement. This is what we
Frenchmen have also derived from our intercourse with other nations.

<span id="xix.i-p72"></span>The second reason was special and peculiar
to this nation; for, since the Lord had delivered the Jews out of Egypt,
and commanded them to remember so remarkable a benefit, he forbade them
to have any intercourse with the Egyptians. And if they had entered into
an alliance with the Egyptians, the remembrance of that benefit might
easily have been obliterated; for they would not have been at liberty to
celebrate it in such a manner as had been commanded. (<span
id="xix.i-p72.2"></span>[Exod. 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#003),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#008),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#014)<span id="xix.i-p72.2"></span>.) It
was excessively base to disregard the glory of God for the purpose of
cultivating friendship with an irreligious and wicked nation. Since God
intended also to testify to his people that he alone was more than
sufficient to secure their safety, they ought to have valued that
promise so highly as to exclude themselves willingly from other
assistance. It was a very heinous crime to endeavour to gain the favour
of heathen nations on all sides, and to deprive God of the honour due to
him; for if they had been satisfied with having God’s protection alone,
they would not have been in such haste to run down to Egypt. Their noisy
eagerness convicted them of infidelity.

<span id="xix.i-p73"></span>Yet I have no doubt that the Prophet
directed his indignation against that sacrilege, because, by laboring
earnestly to obtain the assistance of the nations around them, they
withheld from God the praise of almighty power. Hence also the Spirit
elsewhere compares that ardor to the extravagances of love, and even to
licentious courses. (<span id="xix.i-p73.1"></span>[Jer
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#008)<span id="xix.i-p73.1"></span>.)
Ezekiel shews that, by joining the Egyptians, they acted as if a woman,
shamefully transgressing the bounds of decency, not only ran furiously
after adulterers, but even desired to associate with horses and asses.
(<span id="xix.i-p73.2"></span>[Eze
16:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#026)<span id="xix.i-p73.2"></span>.)
And yet here he does not absolutely condemn all leagues that are made
with idolaters, but has especially in view that prohibition by which the
law forbade them to enter into alliance with the Egyptians. It is
chiefly on account of the prohibition that he kindles into such rage;
for it was not without pouring grievous contempt on God that they ran
trembling into Egypt. For this reason he calls them <span
id="xix.i-p73.3"></span>סוררים, (*sōrĕrīm*,) *obstinate* and
*rebellious*. We have explained this word at the first chapter.  <span
id="fr_283"></span>[284](#fn_283) It denotes men of hardened wickedness,
who knowingly and willingly revolt from God, or whose obstinacy renders
them objects of disgust, so that no integrity or sincerity is left in
them. At first he reproves that vice on this ground, that they neglected
the word of God, and were devoted to their own counsels.

<span id="xix.i-p98"></span>*That they may cover the secret.* The words
<span id="xix.i-p98.1"></span>לנסך מסכה, (*lĭnsōch măssēchāh*,) are
explained by some commentators to mean, “to pour out the pouring out.”
Though this is not at variance with the Prophet’s meaning, yet it is
more correctly, in my opinion, translated by others, “that they may
cover a covering.” I have followed that version, because the words
relate to counsels held secretly and by stealth, by which they cunningly
endeavored to deceive the prophets, and, as it were, to escape from the
eyes of God. Another rendering, “that they may hide themselves by a
covering,” is absurd; for although it was for the sake of protection
that they sought the Egyptians, yet he rather alludes to that craftiness
of which I have spoken. Both expositions amount to the same thing.
 <span id="fr_284"></span>[285](#fn_284)

<span id="xix.i-p100"></span>By three modes of expression he makes
nearly the same statement; that they “cover their counsels,” that is,
keep them apart from God; that they do not ask at “the mouth of the
Lord;” and that they do not suffer themselves to be governed by “his
Spirit.” They who are guided by their own views turn aside to cunning
contrivances, that they may conceal their unbelief and rebellion; and
because they have resolved not to obey the word of God, neither do they
ask his Spirit. Hence arises that miserable and shameful result.
Wretchedly and ruinously must those deliberations and purposes end, over
which the Lord does not preside. There is no wisdom that is not obtained
from “his mouth;” and if we “ask at his mouth,” that is, if we consult
his word, we shall also be guided by his Spirit, from whom all prudence
and wisdom proceeds.

<span id="xix.i-p101"></span>Let it be observed that two things are here
connected, the word and the Spirit of God, in opposition to fanatics,
who aim at oracles and hidden revelations without the word; for they
wish to come to God, while they neglect and forsake the word, and thus
they do nothing else than attempt, as the saying is, to fly without
wings. First of all, let it be held as a settled principle, that
whatever we undertake or attempt, without the word of God, must be
improper and wicked, because we ought to depend wholly on his mouth. And
indeed, if we remember what feebleness of understanding, or rather, what
lack of understanding, is found in all mankind, we shall acknowledge
that they are excessively foolish who claim for themselves so much
wisdom, that they do not even deign to ask at the mouth of God.

<span id="xix.i-p102"></span>If it be objected, that the Scriptures do
not contain everything, and that they do not give special answers on
those points of which we are in doubt, I reply, that everything that
relates to the guidance of our life is contained in them abundantly. If,
therefore, we have resolved to allow ourselves to be directed by the
word of God, and always seek in it the rule of life, God will never
suffer us to remain in doubt, but in all transactions and difficulties
will point out to us the conclusion. Sometimes, perhaps, we shall have
to wait long, but at length the Lord will rescue and deliver us, if we
are ready to obey him. Although, therefore, we are careful and diligent
in the use of means, as they are called, yet we ought always to attend
to this consideration, not to undertake anything but what we know to be
pleasing and acceptable to God.

<span id="xix.i-p103"></span>The Prophet condemns the presumption of
those who attempt unlawful methods, and think that they will succeed in
them, when they labor, right or wrong, to secure their safety, as if it
could be done contrary to the will of God. It is certain that this
proceeds from unbelief and distrust, because they do not think that God
alone is able to protect them, unless they call in foreign though
forbidden assistance. Hence come unlawful leagues, hence come tricks and
cheating, by which men fully believe that their affairs will be letter
conducted than if they acted towards each other with candour and
fairness. There are innumerable instances of this unbelief in every
department of human life; for men think that they will be undone, if
they are satisfied with the blessing of God, and transact all their
affairs with truth and uprightness. But we ought to consider that we are
forsaken, rejected, and cursed by God, whenever we have recourse to
forbidden methods and unlawful ways. In all our undertakings,
deliberations, and attempts, therefore, we ought to be regulated by the
will of God. We ought always to consider what he forbids or commands, so
as to be fully disposed to obey his laws, and to submit ourselves to be
guided by his Spirit, otherwise our rashness will succeed very ill.

<span id="xix.i-p104"></span>*That they may add sin to sin.* The Prophet
says this, because the Jews, by those useless defences which they
supposed to fortify them strongly, did nothing else than stumble again
on the same stone, and double their criminality, which already was very
great. Our guilt is increased, and becomes far heavier, when we
endeavor, by unlawful methods, to escape the wrath of God. But we ought
especially to consider this expression as applicable to the Jews,
because, after having brought the Assyrians into Judea, (for they had
called them to their assistance against Israel and Syria,) they wished
to drive them out by the help of the Egyptians. (<span
id="xix.i-p104.1"></span>[2 Kings
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#007), [2 Kings
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#004), [2 Kings
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#021)<span id="xix.i-p104.1"></span>.)
The Jews were hard pressed by the Assyrians, and were justly punished
for their unbelief, because they resorted to men, and not to God, for
aid; and we see that this happened to many nations who called the Turk
to their assistance. So far were the Jews from repenting of their
conduct, and acknowledging that they had been justly punished, that they
even added evil to evil, as if crime could be washed out by crime. On
this account they are more severely threatened; for they who persevere
in their wickedness, and rush with furious eagerness against God, and do
not allow themselves to be brought back to the right path by any
warnings or chastisements, deserve to be more sharply and heavily
punished.

<span id="xix.i-p105"></span><span id="xix.i-p105.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p106"></span>**2.** *They walk that they may go down
into Egypt.* The reason why the Prophet condemns this “going down” has
been already explained;  <span id="fr_285"></span>[286](#fn_285) but as
their guilt was aggravated by open and heinous obstinacy, he again
repeats that they did this without asking at the mouth of God, and even
in the face of his prohibition.

<span id="xix.i-p108"></span>*Strengthening themselves with the strength
of Pharaoh.* He again draws their attention to the source of the evil,
when he says that it was done for the purpose of acquiring strength,
because they placed confidence in the forces of the Egyptians. Hence
arose that lawless desire of entering into a league. In this way they
shewed that they cared little about the power of God, and did not
greatly trust in him; and they openly displayed their unbelief.

<span id="xix.i-p109"></span>It might be objected, that men are the
servants of God, and that it is lawful for any one to make use of their
services, whenever they are needed. I reply, that while we make use of
the labors and services of men, it ought to be in such a manner as to
depend on God alone. But there was another reason peculiar to the Jews,
for they knew that God had forbidden them to call the Egyptians to their
assistance, and, by doing so, they withheld from God all that they
ascribed to Pharaoh and to his forces. Thus it is not without good
reason that Isaiah contrasts Pharaoh with God; for the creatures are
opposed to God, and enter, as it were, into contest with him when they
rise up against God, or whenever men abuse them, or place their hearts
and confidence in them, or desire them more than is lawful.

<span id="xix.i-p110"></span><span id="xix.i-p110.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p111"></span>**3.** *But to you shall the strength of
Pharaoh be shame.* He now shews what shall be the end of the wicked, who
despise God and his word, and follow those schemes which are most
agreeable to their own views. All that they undertake shall tend to
their ruin. He threatens not only that they shall be disappointed of
their hope, but also that they are seeking with great toil, destruction
and ruin, from which they will gain nothing but sorrow and disgrace. To
all wicked men it must unavoidably happen that, although for a time they
appear to gain their object, and though everything succeeds to their
wish, yet in the end all shall be ruinous to them. It is the just reward
of their rashness, when they go beyond the limits of the word; for
nothing that has been acquired by wicked and unlawful methods can be of
advantage to any person.

<span id="xix.i-p112"></span>By way of admission he calls it “the
strength of Pharaoh,” as if he had said, “You think that you gain much
protection from Pharaoh, but it will yield you reproach and disgrace.
*The shadow of Egypt*, by which you hoped to be covered, will make you
blush for shame.” Accordingly, both expressions, “shame” and “disgrace,”
have the same meaning; and as <span id="xix.i-p112.1"></span>חרפה,
(*chĕrpāh*,)  <span id="fr_286"></span>[287](#fn_286) *reproach*, is a
stronger expression than “shame,” it is afterwards added for the purpose
of bringing out the meaning more fully.

<span id="xix.i-p114"></span><span id="xix.i-p114.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p115"></span>**4.** *For his princes were in Zoan.* The
Prophet not only says that the aid of the Egyptians was sought, and that
they were invited to assist, but expresses something more, namely, that
the Jews obtained it with great labor and expense. They had to perform
long and painful journeys, to endure much toil, and to expend vast sums
of money, in order to arrive, loaded with presents, at the most distant
cities of Egypt, which are here named by the Prophet. On this embassy
were sent, not persons of mean or ordinary rank, but “princes” and
nobles; and therefore the censure was more severe, because they
slavishly solicited an alliance with Egypt, and wandered like suppliants
through various countries. It is proper also to bear in mind the
contrast which we have already pointed out. They did not need to go far
to seek God; they did not need to endure much toil, or spend large sums
of money, in calling on him. He invited them by his promise, “This is my
rest,” and assured them that in that place they would not call upon him
in vain. (<span id="xix.i-p115.1"></span>[Ps
132:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#014)<span id="xix.i-p115.1"></span>;
<span id="xix.i-p115.2"></span>[Isa
28:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#012)<span id="xix.i-p115.2"></span>.)
But those wretched persons despised God, and chose rather to torment
themselves, and to run to the very ends of the world, than to receive
the assistance which was offered to them.

<span id="xix.i-p116"></span><span id="xix.i-p116.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p117"></span>**5.** *They shall all be ashamed.* He
confirms the former statement; for it was very difficult to convince
ungodly men that all that they undertook without the word of God would
be ruinous to them. In order to punish them more severely, God sometimes
bestows on them prosperity, that they may be more and more deceived, and
may throw themselves down headlong; for by the righteous judgment of God
it is brought about, that Satan draws them by these allurements, and
drives them into his nets. Yet the final result is, that not only are
they deprived of the assistance which they expected, but they are
likewise severely punished both for their presumption and for their
unbelief.

<span id="xix.i-p118"></span>*Of a people that will not profit them.* He
threatens not only that the Egyptians will prove false, as wicked men
often forsake at the utmost need, or even treacherously ruin, those whom
they have fed with empty promises, but that even though they endeavor to
the utmost to fulfill the promises which they have made, still they will
be of no use. Whatever may be the earnestness with which men endeavor to
help us, yet, as events are in the hand of God, they will “profit
nothing” without his blessing. It was difficult to believe when the
Prophet spoke, that a nation so powerful could yield no assistance; but
we ought always to hold it as a principle fully settled, that all the
advantage that dazzles us in the world will vanish away, except in so
far as God is gracious and kind, and makes it sure for our advantage.

<span id="xix.i-p119"></span><span id="xix.i-p119.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p120"></span>**6.** *The burden of the beasts of the
south.* After having spoken loudly against the consultations of the Jews
about asking assistance from the Egyptians, he ridicules the enormous
cost and the prodigious inconveniences which they endured on that
account; for at so high a price did they purchase their destruction; and
he threatens the same curse as formerly, because unhappily they acted in
opposition to the word of God. He mentions “the south,” because they
journeyed through a southern region, Egypt being situated to “the south”
of Judea. He therefore calls them “beasts of burden” on account of the
journey, and addresses them in order to pour contempt on men, because it
was in vain to speak to them, and they were deaf to all exhortations.
Accordingly, he threatens that the effect of this prediction shall reach
the very “beasts of burden,” though men do not understand it.

<span id="xix.i-p121"></span>*In the land of trouble and distress.* The
people having proudly disregarded the threatenings, the Prophet
seasonably turns to the horses and camels; and declares that, although
they are void of reason, yet they shall perceive that God hath not
spoken in vain, and that, though the people imagined that there was
uninterrupted prosperity in Egypt, it would be a land of anguish and
affliction even to the brute animals. The journey was labourious and
difficult, and yet they shrunk from no exertion in order to satisfy
their mad desire; and to such a pitch of madness was their ardor
carried, that they were not discouraged by the tediousness of the
journey.

<span id="xix.i-p122"></span>*The young lion and the strong lion.* In
addition to the inconveniences already mentioned, Isaiah threatens the
special vengeance of God, that they shall encounter “lions” and beasts
of prey. There was nothing new or uncommon in this to persons who
traveled from Judea into Egypt; but here he threatens something
extraordinary and more dangerous. In addition to the inconveniences and
toils, and to the sums of money which they shall expend, God will also
send disastrous occurrences, and at length they shall be miserably
ruined.

<span id="xix.i-p123"></span>This doctrine ought to be applied to us,
who are chargeable with a fault exceedingly similar; for in dangers we
fly to unlawful remedies, and think that they will profit us, though God
disapproves of them. We must therefore experience the same result and
fall into the same dangers, if we do not restrain our unbelief and
wickedness by the word of God. We ought also to observe and guard
against that madness which hurries us along to spare no expense and to
shrink from no toil, while we obey with excessive ardor our foolish
desire and wish. We had abundant experience of this in Popery, when we
were held captives by it, running about in all directions, and wearying
ourselves with long and toilsome pilgrimages to various saints; yet the
greatest possible annoyances were reckoned by us to be light and
trivial. But now, when we are commanded to obey God and to endure “the
light yoke” of Christ, (<span id="xix.i-p123.1"></span>[Mt
11:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#030)<span id="xix.i-p123.1"></span>,)
we find that we cannot endure it.

<span id="xix.i-p124"></span><span id="xix.i-p124.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p125"></span>**7.** *Surely the Egyptians are vanity.*
 <span id="fr_287"></span>[288](#fn_287) This verse contains the
explanation of the former statement; for he repeats and threatens the
same thing, that the Egyptians, after having worn out the Jews by
various annoyances and by prodigious expense, will be of no service to
them. “The strength of Egypt” will do them no good, even though he be
earnest in assisting them, and employ all his forces. Thus shall the
Jews be disappointed of their hope, and deceive themselves to their
great vexation. The particle <span id="xix.i-p126.1"></span>ו (ū)
signifies here either *for* or *surely*, as I have translated it.

<span id="xix.i-p127"></span>*Therefore have I cried to her.* He now
shews that the Jews have no excuse for fleeing with such haste into
Egypt, and that they are willingly foolish and unworthy of any pardon,
because they do not repent when they are warned. When he says that he
“cried” to Jerusalem, I consider this to refer to God himself, who
complains that his distinct warnings and instructions produced no
effect, and that his exhortation to them *to sit still* was not without
foundation, but was intended to meet the troubles and calamities which
he foresaw. Whence came that restlessness, but because they refused to
believe the words of the Lord? In a word, he shews that it is mere
obstinacy that drives them to flee into Egypt; for by “sitting still”
they might provide for their safety.

<span id="xix.i-p128"></span>By the word “cry” he means that he not only
warned them by words, but likewise chastised them; and this makes it
evident that their obstinacy and rebellion were greater. “To sit still”
means here “to remain and to stay at home,” though he will afterwards
shew (<span id="xix.i-p128.1"></span>[Isa
30:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#015)<span id="xix.i-p128.1"></span>)
that they ought to have peaceable dispositions. The cause of their alarm
and impassioned exertions was, that they were terrified and struck with
dismay, and did not think that God’s protection was sufficient, if they
had not also the Egyptians on their side. Thus, they who do not give
sufficient honor to God have their hearts agitated by unbelief, so that
they tremble and never find peace.

<span id="xix.i-p129"></span><span id="xix.i-p129.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p130"></span>**8.** *Now go, and write this vision on a
tablet.* After having convicted the Jews of manifest unbelief, he means
that it should be attested and sealed by permanent records, that
posterity may know how obstinate and rebellious that nation was, and how
justly the Lord punished them. We have said that it was customary with
the prophets to draw up an abridgment of their discourses and attach it
to the gates of the temple, and that, after having allowed full time to
all to see and read it, the ministers took it down, and preserved it
among the records of the temple; and thus the book of the prophets was
collected and compiled.  <span id="fr_288"></span>[289](#fn_288) But
when any prediction was remarkable and peculiarly worthy of being
remembered, then the Lord commanded that it should be written in larger
characters, that the people might be induced to read it, and to examine
it more attentively. (<span id="xix.i-p131.1"></span>[Isa
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#001)<span id="xix.i-p131.1"></span>;
<span id="xix.i-p131.2"></span>[Hab
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#002)<span id="xix.i-p131.2"></span>.)
The Lord now commands that this should be done, in order to intimate
that this was no ordinary affair, that the whole ought to be carefully
written, and deserved the closest attention, and that it ought not only
to be read, but to be engraven on the remembrance of men in such a
manner that no lapse of time can efface it.

<span id="xix.i-p132"></span>Yet there can be no doubt that Isaiah, by
this prediction, drew upon himself the intense hatred of all ranks,
because he intended to expose and hold them up for abhorrence, not only
among the men of his own age, but also among posterity. There is nothing
which men resent more strongly than to have their crimes made publicly
known and fastened on the remembrance of men; they reckon it ignominious
and disgraceful, and abhor it above all things. But the Prophet must
obey God, though he should become the object of men’s hatred, and though
his life should be in imminent danger. Here we ought to observe his
steadfastness in dreading nothing, that he might obey God and fulfill
his calling. He despised hatred, dislike, commotions, threatenings,
false alarms, and immediate dangers, that he might boldly and fearlessly
discharge the duties of his office. Copying his example, we ought to do
this, if we wish to hear and follow God who calls us.

<span id="xix.i-p133"></span>*Before them.* <span
id="xix.i-p133.1"></span>אתם (ĭ*ttām*) is translated by some, “with
them,” but it is better to translate it “before them,” or, “in their
sight;” for it was proper that he should openly irritate the Jews, to
whom he presented this prediction written “on a tablet.” Hence we ought
to infer, that wicked men, though they cannot bear reproof and are
filled with rage, ought nevertheless to be reproved sharply and openly;
and that threatenings and reproofs, though they be of no advantage to
them, will yet serve for an example to others, when those men shall be
stamped with perpetual infamy. In them will be fulfilled what is written
elsewhere,

<span id="xix.i-p134"></span>“The sin of Judah is written with a pen of
iron, and with the point of a diamond engraven on their hearts.” (<span
id="xix.i-p134.1"></span>[Jer
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#001)<span id="xix.i-p134.1"></span>.)

<span id="xix.i-p135"></span>They must not think that they have escaped,
when they have despised the prophets and shut their ears against them;
for their wickedness shall be manifest to men and to angels. But as they
never repent willingly or are ashamed of their crimes, God commands that
a record of their shame shall be prepared, that it may be placed
continually before the eyes of men. As victories and illustrious actions
were commonly engraved on tables of brass, so God commands that the
disgrace which the Jews brought upon themselves by their transgressions,
shall be inscribed on public tablets.

<span id="xix.i-p136"></span>*That it may be till the last day.* It was
very extraordinary, as I remarked a little before, that the Prophet was
charged by a solemn injunction to pronounce infamy on his countrymen.
For this reason he adds “till the last day,” either that they may be
held up to abhorrence through an uninterrupted succession of ages, or
because, at the appearance of the Judge, the crimes of the wicked shall
be fully laid open when he shall “ascend his judgment seat, and the
books shall be opened;” for those things which formerly were hidden and
wrapped in darkness will then be revealed. (<span
id="xix.i-p136.1"></span>[Dan. 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#010),
[Rev. 20:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#012)<span
id="xix.i-p136.1"></span>.)

<span id="xix.i-p137"></span>Here it ought to be carefully observed,
that prophecies were not written merely for the men of a single age, but
that their children and all posterity ought to be instructed by them,
that they may know that they ought not to imitate their fathers.

<span id="xix.i-p138"></span>“Harden not your hearts as your fathers
did.” (<span id="xix.i-p138.1"></span>[Ps
95:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#008)<span id="xix.i-p138.1"></span>.)

<span id="xix.i-p139"></span>What Paul affirms as to the whole of
Scripture is applicable to prophecy, that it

<span id="xix.i-p140"></span>“is profitable for warning, for
consolation, and for instruction,” (<span id="xix.i-p140.1"></span>[2Ti
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#016)<span id="xix.i-p140.1"></span>;)

<span id="xix.i-p141"></span>and this is proper and necessary in every
age. We must therefore reject the fancies of fanatics and wicked men,
who say that this doctrine was adapted to those times, but affirm that
it is not adapted to our times. Away with such blasphemies from the ears
of the godly; for, when Isaiah died, his doctrine must flourish and
yield fruit.

<span id="xix.i-p142"></span><span id="xix.i-p142.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p143"></span>**9.** *For this is a rebellious people.*
The word *for* or *because* points to the explanation of what has been
already said; for the Prophet explains what the Lord intends to declare
to posterity, namely, that the perverseness of this nation is desperate,
because they cannot submit to be restrained by any doctrine. That the
honorable appellation of the “people” wounded to the quick the hearts
both of the ordinary ranks and of the nobles, may be inferred from their
loud vaunting; for they boasted that they were the holy and elect seed
of Abraham; as if God’s adoption had been a veil to cover the grossest
crimes. But God commands that their crimes shall nevertheless be brought
to light and openly proclaimed.

<span id="xix.i-p144"></span>*Who refuse to hear the law of Jehovah.* By
accusing them of this, he points out the source of all evils, namely,
contempt of the word, which discovers their wickedness and their
contempt of God himself; for it is idle to pretend that they worship
God, when they are disobedient to his word. Isaiah likewise aggravates
their guilt, by saying that they reject the remedy which doctrine offers
for curing their diseases. On this account he calls them not only
“rebellious,” and untameable or abandoned, but *liars* or treacherous
persons; for they who refuse to obey the word of God, openly revolt from
him, as if they could not endure his authority; and at the same time,
they shew that they are given up to vanity and the delusions of Satan,
so that they take no pleasure in sincerity.

<span id="xix.i-p145"></span><span id="xix.i-p145.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p146"></span>**10.** *Who say to the seers, See not.* He
now describes more clearly, and shews, as it were, to the life, the
contempt of God and obstinacy which he formerly mentioned; for wicked
men not only pour ridicule on doctrine, but furiously drive it away, and
would even wish to have it utterly crushed and buried. This is what
Isaiah intended to express. Not only do they turn away their ears, and
eyes, and all their senses, from doctrine, but they would even wish that
it were destroyed and taken out of the way; for wickedness is invariably
attended by such rage as would lead them to wish the destruction of that
which they cannot endure. The power and efficacy of the word wounds and
enrages them to such a degree, that they give vent to their fierceness
and cruelty like wild and savage beasts. They would gladly escape, but
whether they will or not, they are constrained to hear God speaking, and
to tremble at his majesty. This bitterness is followed by hatred of the
prophets, snares, alarms, persecutions, banishment, tortures, and
deaths, by which they think that they can overturn and root out both the
doctrine and the teachers; for men are more desirous to have dreams and
fabulous tales told them than to be faithfully instructed.

<span id="xix.i-p147"></span>*See not, prophesy not to us right things.*
The Prophet does not relate the words of wicked men, as if they openly
made use of these words, but he describes the state of the fact and
their actual dispositions; for he had not to do with men who were such
fools as to make an intentional discovery of their wickedness. They were
singularly cunning hypocrites, who boasted of worshipping God, and
complained that they were unjustly reproached by the prophets. Isaiah
tears off the mask by which they concealed themselves, and discovers
what they are, because they refused to give place to the truth; for
whence came the murmurs against the prophets, but because they could not
bear to hear God speaking?

<span id="xix.i-p148"></span>The prophets were called *seers*, because
the Lord revealed to them what would afterwards be made known to others.
They were stationed, as it were, in a lofty place, that they might
behold from on high, and as if from “a watch-tower,” (<span
id="xix.i-p148.1"></span>[Hab 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#001)<span
id="xix.i-p148.1"></span>,) the prosperous or adverse events which were
approaching. The people wished that nothing of an adverse nature should
be told them; and therefore they hated the prophets, because, while they
censured and sharply reproved the vices of the people, they at the same
time were witnesses of the approaching judgment of God. Such is the
import of those words, “Do not see, do not prophesy right things.” Not
that they spoke in this manner, as we have already said, but because
such was the state of their feelings, and because they desired that the
prophets should speak with mildness, and could not patiently bear the
sharpness of their reproofs. Not one of them was so impudent as to say
that he wished to be deceived, and that he abhorred the truth; for they
declared that they sought it with the greatest eagerness, as all our
adversaries boast of doing at the present day; but they denied that what
Isaiah and the other prophets told them was the word of God. In like
manner they plainly told Jeremiah that he was “a liar,” (<span
id="xix.i-p148.2"></span>[Jer
43:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer043.htm#002)<span id="xix.i-p148.2"></span>,)
and threatened him more insolently,

<span id="xix.i-p149"></span>“Thou shalt not prophesy in the name of the
Lord,  
lest thou die by our hand.” (<span id="xix.i-p149.2"></span>[Jer
11:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#021)<span id="xix.i-p149.2"></span>.)

<span id="xix.i-p150"></span>To them the truth was intolerable; and when
they departed from it, they could find nothing but falsehood, and thus
they willingly chose to be deceived and to have falsehood told them.

<span id="xix.i-p151"></span>*Speak to us smooth things.* When he says
that they desire “smooth things,”  <span
id="fr_289"></span>[290](#fn_289) he points out the very source; for
they were ready to receive flatterers with unbounded applause, and would
willingly have allowed their ears to be tickled in the name of God. And
this is the reason why the world is not only liable to be carried away
by delusions, but earnestly desires them; for almost all wish to have
their vices treated with forbearance and encouragement. But it is
impossible that the servants of God, when they endeavor faithfully to
discharge their duty, should be chargeable with being severe reprovers;
and hence it follows that it is an idle and childish evasion, when
wicked men pretend that they would willingly be God’s disciples,
provided that he were not rigorous. It is as if they bargained that, for
their sake, he should change his nature and deny himself; as Micah also
says, that no prophets were acceptable to the Jews, but such as
“prophesied of wine and strong drink.” (<span
id="xix.i-p152.1"></span>[Mic
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#011)<span id="xix.i-p152.1"></span>.)

<span id="xix.i-p153"></span><span id="xix.i-p153.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p154"></span>**11.** *Depart from the way.* The amount
of what is stated is, that when the prophets are set aside, the Lord is
also rejected and set aside, and no regard is paid to him. Wicked men
pretend the contrary, for they are ashamed to acknowledge so great
wickedness. But they gain nothing by it; for God wishes that we should
listen to him by means of those to whom he gave injunctions to declare
his will to us, and to administer the doctrine of the word. If therefore
it is our duty to listen to God, if we are bound to pay him any homage,
we ought to shew it by embracing his word, as it is contained in the
writings of the prophets and evangelists. This ought to be carefully
observed in commendation of the word; for they who set it aside act as
if they denied that he is God.

<span id="xix.i-p155"></span>*Cause the Holy One of Israel to depart.*
Here he again points out the cause of so great wickedness, which doubles
their guilt; namely, that God does not spare or flatter their vices, but
acts the part of a good and skillful physician. Men desire to be
flattered, and cannot patiently endure that God should threaten them.
Hence it comes that men hate and reject the word. Hence proceeds the
furious attack on the prophets, whose reproofs and threatenings they
cannot endure; for there is no reason why men should revolt from the
government of God, but because they take delight in what is wrong and
crooked, and abhor the right way. Appropriately, therefore, does the
Prophet join these two things, dislike of heavenly doctrine and hatred
of uprightness.

<span id="xix.i-p156"></span><span id="xix.i-p156.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p157"></span>**12.** *Because you have disdained this
word.* He next declares the punishment of ungodliness, threatening that
they shall not pass unpunished for refusing to hear God speaking; and he
expresses their contempt more strongly by the word “disdain.” He calls
it “this word,” making use of the demonstrative; for men would willingly
contrive some word adapted to their manner of life, but refuse to listen
to God when he speaks.

<span id="xix.i-p158"></span>*And trusted in violence and wickedness.*
God’s gentle invitation, and his exhortation to quiet rest, are here
contrasted with their disorderly pursuits. The Hebrew word <span
id="xix.i-p158.1"></span>עשק (*gnōshĕk*) denotes “robbery,” and “seizing
property which belongs to another.” Others render it “ill-gotten
wealth.” Those who render it “calumny,” do not sufficiently express the
Prophet’s meaning. For my own part, I do not view it as referring to
riches gained by unlawful methods, but rather to that rebelliousness in
which that nation insolently indulged.

<span id="xix.i-p159"></span>The word “wickedness,”  <span
id="fr_290"></span>[291](#fn_290) which is added, ought not to be
limited to decisions of courts of law; for, in my opinion, it has a more
extensive signification; and by these two words he intended to express
the presumption of wicked men, by which they fiercely and wantonly rose
up against God, because they always dared to follow their own lawless
desires, and to do what was forbidden. And as the poets feign that the
giants made war with God,  <span id="fr_291"></span>[292](#fn_291) so
those men resisted God’s threatenings, and thought that they would
speedily overcome his power by their fierceness and presumption.

<span id="xix.i-p162"></span><span id="xix.i-p162.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p163"></span>**13.** *Therefore shall your iniquity be
like a breach falling.* This is a threatening of punishment, and Isaiah
expresses it by a very appropriate metaphor. He compares wicked men to a
wall that is rent, or that bulges out. As the “swelling out” of a wall
threatens the ruin of it, because it cannot stand unless all the parts
of it adhere closely to each other, so the haughtiness and insolence of
wicked men are a sign and very sure proof of their approaching ruin;
because the more they are puffed up and swelled without any solid value,
 <span id="fr_292"></span>[293](#fn_292) the more readily do they throw
themselves down headlong, and it is impossible for them not to fall
speedily by their own weight. “Rise up,” says he, “and act insolently
against God; he will quickly put down your presumption and insolence,
for it is but an empty swelling.” Hence we learn that nothing is better
for us than to submit wholly to God, and to keep charge of all our
senses, so as to remain chained and bound by his authority; for they who
raise themselves by shaking off all humility, destroy themselves by
collecting much wind. For a time, indeed, the Lord permits wicked men to
swell and utter their big words, that at length, by their “swelling” and
idle boasting, they may bring upon themselves ruin and destruction.

<span id="xix.i-p165"></span><span id="xix.i-p165.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p166"></span>**14.** *And the breaking of it shall be.*
When a wall has fallen, some traces of the ruin are still to be seen,
and the stones of it may be applied to use, and to some extent the wall
may even be rebuilt. But here the Prophet threatens that they who are
puffed up with obstinacy against God shall perish in such a manner that
they cannot be restored, and all that is left of them shall be utterly
useless. Accordingly, he employs the metaphor of a potter’s vessel, the
broken fragments of which cannot be repaired or put together. These
threatenings ought to make a deep impression upon us, that we may
embrace with reverence the word of God, when we learn that punishments
so severe are prepared for those who despise it; for the Prophet
threatens that they shall be utterly destroyed and ruined, and takes
away all hope of their being restored. Nor is the threatening
groundless; for we see how they that despise God, when they have been
twice and three times cast down, still do not cease to raise their
crests; for nothing is more difficult than to root out the false
confidence from their hearts.  <span id="fr_293"></span>[294](#fn_293)

<span id="xix.i-p168"></span><span id="xix.i-p168.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p169"></span>**15.** *For thus saith the Lord.* Here he
describes one kind of contempt of God; for when warnings are addressed
to hypocrites in general terms, they commonly produce little effect. In
addition to the general doctrine, therefore, the prophets specify
particular instances, which they specially accommodate to the conduct of
those with whom they have to do, so as always to aim at a definite
object. They might have wrangled and urged, “Why do you accuse us of so
great impiety, as if we rejected the word of the Lord?” He therefore
brings forward this class, in order to strike their consciences and cut
short their idle sophistry. “Was it not the word of the Lord, In hope
and silence shall be your strength? why did you not rely on God? why did
you raise a commotion?” Thus the Prophet holds them to be convicted, so
that they cannot cavil without the grossest impudence, or, if they do
so, will derive no advantage.

<span id="xix.i-p170"></span>*The Holy One of Israel.* He makes use of
this appellation, in order to reproach them the more for their
ingratitude, that they may know how great protection they would have
found in God: for God wished to be their protector and guardian. When
they had forsaken him, their distrust carried them away to solicit the
aid of the Egyptians, which was very great and intolerable wickedness.
This title contains a bitter complaint, that they shut out God from
entering, when he drew near to them.

<span id="xix.i-p171"></span>*In rest and quietness shall you be safe.*
Some render <span id="xix.i-p171.1"></span>שובה (*shūbāh*) “repentance.”
Others render it “rest,”  <span id="fr_294"></span>[295](#fn_294) and I
am more disposed to adopt that rendering; for I think that the Prophet
intended frequently to impress upon the people, that the Lord demands
more from them than to rely fully upon him. Nor is the repetition of the
statement by two words superfluous; for he expressly intended to bring
together the words “rest and quietness,” in order to reprove the people
the more sharply for their distrust and unbelief.

<span id="xix.i-p173"></span>This verse consists of two clauses, a
command and a promise. He enjoins the people to be of a quiet
disposition, and next promises that their salvation shall be certain.
The people do not believe this promise, and consequently they do not
obey the command; for how would they render obedience to God, whom they
do not believe, and on whose promises they do not rely? We need not
wonder, therefore, that they do not enjoy peace and repose; for these
cannot exist without faith, and faith cannot exist without the promises,
and as soon as the promises have been embraced, souls that were restless
and uneasy are made calm. Thus, unbelief alone produces that uneasiness;
and therefore the Prophet justly reproves it, and shews that it is the
source of the whole evil.

<span id="xix.i-p174"></span>Though our condition be not entirely the
same with that of the Jews, yet God commands us to wait for his
assistance with quiet dispositions, not to murmur, or be troubled or
perplexed, or to distrust his promises. This doctrine must belong
equally to all believers; for the whole object of Satan’s contrivances
is to distress them, and to cast them down from their condition. In like
manner had Moses long before addressed them,

<span id="xix.i-p175"></span>“You shall be silent, and the Lord will
fight for you.” (<span id="xix.i-p175.1"></span>[Ex
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#014)<span id="xix.i-p175.1"></span>.)

<span id="xix.i-p176"></span>Not that he wished them to sleep or to be
idle, but he enjoined them to have this peace in their hearts. If we
have it, we shall feel that it yields us sufficient protection; and if
not, we shall be punished for our levity and rashness.

<span id="xix.i-p177"></span><span id="xix.i-p177.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p178"></span>**16.** *We will flee on horses; therefore
shall you flee.* He shews how they refused to wait calmly for the
salvation of the Lord; for they chose rather to “flee” to the Egyptians.
This is a very beautiful instance of (<span
id="xix.i-p178.1"></span>ἀντανάκλασις) throwing back an expression, by
which he causes their words, so full of confidence, to recoil on
themselves. In the first of these clauses, “to flee” means “to escape,”
and in the second it means “to take flight.” The Jews said that it would
be better for them, if they adopted timely measures for guarding against
the danger which was close at hand, and consequently, that they would
best provide for their safety by calling in the aid of the Egyptians.
“You shall certainly flee,” says Isaiah, “not to find a place of refuge,
but to turn your back and to be pursued by horses swifter than yours.”

<span id="xix.i-p179"></span>We now perceive more clearly what is the
fault which Isaiah describes. By the distinct reply, *No*, he shews how
obstinately they refused to comply with the advice which was given to
them by the prophets, and chose rather to provide for their safety in
another manner. Thus, by despising God, they gave a preference to a
groundless appearance of safety, which they had allowed themselves to
imagine. We ought, therefore, to turn away our minds from looking at
present appearances and outward assistance, that they may be wholly
fixed on God; for it is only when we are destitute of outward aid that
we rely fully on him. It is lawful for us to use the things of this
world for our assistance, but we altogether abuse them by our wickedness
in forsaking God.

<span id="xix.i-p180"></span>It is proper also to observe how unhappy is
the end of those who rely more on outward aids than on God; for
everything must be unsuccessful and contrary to their expectation; as we
see that these men, in their attempts to find safety, are constrained to
undertake a flight which is highly disgraceful, and from which they
obtain no advantage. At first there is some appearance of prosperity;
but the only effect is, that the change of condition makes the final
result more bitter and distressing. And yet Isaiah does not affirm that
they will receive no assistance from Egypt, but forewarns them that the
Lord will find new methods of thwarting that assistance, so that they
will not be able to escape his hand; for, although all men agree
together, yet they will not succeed in opposition to God and to his
purposes.

<span id="xix.i-p181"></span><span id="xix.i-p181.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p182"></span>**17.** *A thousand, as one, shall flee at
the rebuke of one.* Because the Jews, on account of their vast numbers,
relied on their forces, as men are wont to do when they possess any
power, therefore the Prophet threatens that all the protection which
they have at home will be of no more avail to them than foreign aid,
because the Lord will break and take away their courage, so that they
shall not be able to make use of their forces. For what avail arms and a
vast multitude of men? What avail fortresses and bulwarks, when men’s
hearts fail and are dismayed? It is therefore impossible for us to be
strong and powerful, unless the Lord strengthen and uphold us by his
Spirit. This statement occurs frequently in the law, that when they
should revolt from God, a vast number of them would be put to flight by
a very small number of enemies. But there is this difference between the
law and the prophets, that the prophets apply to a particular subject
what Moses announced in general terms, as we have formerly explained.
 <span id="fr_295"></span>[296](#fn_295)

<span id="xix.i-p184"></span>Here two observations must be made. First,
we shall have just as much courage as the Lord shall give us; for we
immediately lose heart, if he do not support us by his power. Secondly,
it is the result of the righteous vengeance of God, that we are
terrified by men, when he could not prevail upon us to fear him; that,
when we have despised God’s word and warnings, we fall down in terror at
the words and threatenings of men. But we must also add, thirdly, God
needs not extensive preparations to chastise us; for, if he lift up but
a finger against us, we are undone. A small and feeble army will be
sufficient to destroy us, even though we be well prepared, and have
great numbers on our side. Next, he threatens that there will be no end
to these calamities till they have been reduced to the last extremity,
and until, amidst the frightful desolation of the earth, but few tokens
of God’s compassion are left.

<span id="xix.i-p185"></span>*As the mast of a ship on the top of a
mountain.* This may be explained in two ways. Some consider the metaphor
to be taken from trees which have been cut down; for, when a forest is
cut down, lofty trees are left which may be of use for building ships.
But <span id="xix.i-p185.1"></span>הר, (*hār*,) “a mountain,” probably
denotes also a rock or promontory, against which ships are dashed, and
to which they adhere, and on which a “mast,” the emblem of shipwreck, is
afterwards seen.  <span id="fr_296"></span>[297](#fn_296)

<span id="xix.i-p187"></span>*As a banner on a hill.* Another metaphor
is now added, borrowed from trophies erected to commemorate the defeat
of enemies. In short, the Prophet declares that they will be so few that
all that remains shall be an indication of very great ruin. As if he had
said, “This great multitude which you now have dazzles your eyes; but
there will be such ruin and decrease that you shall no longer have the
face of a people.” We are thus reminded how humbly and modestly we ought
to conduct ourselves, even though we have great wealth and numerous
forces; for if our mind be puffed up, God will speedily beat down our
pride, and render us more feeble and cowardly than women and children,
so that we shall not be able to bear the sight even of a single enemy,
and all our strength shall melt away like snow.

<span id="xix.i-p188"></span><span id="xix.i-p188.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p189"></span>**18.** *Therefore will Jehovah wait.* The
Prophet now adds consolation; for hitherto he threatened to such an
extent that almost all the godly might be thrown into despair. He
intended therefore to soothe their minds, and encourage them to hope for
better things, that they might embrace the mercy of God in the midst of
those miseries, and might thus nourish their souls by his word. He
contrasts this “waiting” with the excessive haste against which he spoke
loudly at the beginning of the chapter, where he reproved the people for
noisy haste, and condemned them for unbelief; but now, on the contrary,
he reproaches them by saying that the Lord will not render like for like
in consequence of the contempt with which they have treated him, and
will not in that manner hasten to punish them. Others explain it, “He
commands you to wait,” or “he will cause you to wait.” But the meaning
which I have brought forward appears to me to be more appropriate.

<span id="xix.i-p190"></span>*For Jehovah is a God of judgment.* To make
the former statement more plain, we must lay down this principle, that
God exercises moderation in inflicting punishment, because he is
inclined to mercy. This is what he means by the word “judgment;” for it
denotes not only punishment, but also the moderation which is exercised
in chastening. In like manner, Jeremiah says,

<span id="xix.i-p191"></span>“Chasten me, O Lord, but in judgment,  
not in thy wrath, lest thou crush me.” (<span
id="xix.i-p191.2"></span>[Jer
10:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#024)<span id="xix.i-p191.2"></span>.)

<span id="xix.i-p192"></span>And again, I will not consume thee, but
will chastise thee in judgment.  <span id="fr_297"></span>[298](#fn_297)
(<span id="xix.i-p193.1"></span>[Jer
30:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#011)<span id="xix.i-p193.1"></span>.)
“Judgment” is thus contrasted with severity, when the Lord observes a
limit in punishing believers, that he may not ruin those whose salvation
he always promotes; and, accordingly, as Habakkuk says, “in the midst of
wrath he remembers his mercy.” (<span id="xix.i-p193.2"></span>[Hab
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#002)<span id="xix.i-p193.2"></span>.)
He is not like us, therefore; he does not act with bustling or hurry,
otherwise at every moment we must perish, but he calmly waits. Nor is it
a slight confirmation of this when he adds, that God gives a proof of
his glory by pardoning his people.

<span id="xix.i-p194"></span>*And therefore will he be exalted, that he
may be gracious to you.* Others translate the words, “till he be
gracious to you;” but I think that the former translation is more
appropriate, and it agrees better with the meaning of the particle <span
id="xix.i-p194.1"></span>ל (*lamed*.) The Lord appears to lie still or
to sleep, so long as he permits his Church to be assailed by the
outrages of wicked men; and the customary language of Scripture is to
say that he sits, or lies unemployed, when he does not defend his
Church. It might be thought that he lay still when he gave loose reins
to the Chaldeans to oppress the Jews; and therefore the Prophet says,
that the Lord will arise and ascend his judgment-seat. Why? “That he may
be gracious to you.”

<span id="xix.i-p195"></span>*Blessed are all that wait for him.* This
is an inference from the former statement, in which he called Jehovah “a
God of judgment.” While he thus restrains himself, he draws from it an
exhortation to patience and “waiting,” and makes use of a part of the
same verb, “wait,” which he had formerly used. They were chargeable with
distrust, and were distressed by strange uneasiness and restlessness of
mind; for they were fearfully harassed by their unbelief, so that they
could not “wait” for God calmly. To cure this vice, he enjoins them to
“wait,” that is, to hope. Now, hope is nothing else than steadfastness
of faith, that is, when we wait calmly till the Lord fulfil what he has
promised. When he says that they who shall patiently “wait” for him will
be “blessed,” he declares, on the other hand, that they who allow
themselves to be hurried away by impatience, and do not repent of their
crimes and their wickedness, are wretched and miserable, and will at
length perish; for without hope in God there can be no salvation or
happiness.

<span id="xix.i-p196"></span><span id="xix.i-p196.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p197"></span>**19.** *Surely the people in Zion shall
dwell in Jerusalem.* He confirms the former statement, that the people
will indeed be afflicted, but will at length return to “Zion.” Now, this
might be thought incredible after the desolation of the city and of the
whole country, for it seemed as if the whole nation had perished; yet
Isaiah promises that the Church shall be preserved. He begins with Mount
“Zion,” on which the temple was built, and says that there men will
henceforth call on the Lord. He likewise adds, “in Jerusalem,” by which
he means that the Church shall be enlarged and increased, and that all
that had formerly been laid waste shall be restored. Yet he intimates
that “Jerusalem” shall again be populous, because God had chosen it to
be his sanctuary.

<span id="xix.i-p198"></span>*Weeping thou shalt not weep.*  <span
id="fr_298"></span>[299](#fn_298) The meaning is, that this mourning
shall not be perpetual. The Church, that is, all believers, while they
were in this wretched and distressed condition, must have been
exceedingly sorrowful; but he says that those tears shall come to an
end. To the same purport is it said by the Psalmist, “They who sow in
tears shall reap in joy.” (<span id="xix.i-p199.1"></span>[Ps
126:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa126.htm#005)<span id="xix.i-p199.1"></span>.)
The Lord permits us indeed to be afflicted with great anguish; but at
length he cheers us, and gives us reason for gladness, when he restores
his Church; for that is the true joy of believers. Besides, as it is
difficult to taste any consolation when the mind is overwhelmed by a
conviction of God’s vengeance, he holds out a ground of consolation in
the mercy of God, because, when he is appeased, there is no reason to
dread that joy and peace shall not immediately return. But, as the
Prophet Habakkuk says in the passage already quoted, “in his wrath the
Lord remembers mercy;” and he never punishes believers with such
severity as not to restrain and moderate his strokes, and put a limit to
his chastisements. (<span id="xix.i-p199.2"></span>[Hab
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#002)<span id="xix.i-p199.2"></span>.)

<span id="xix.i-p200"></span>*At the voice of thy cry.* The Prophet
points out the manner of obtaining pardon, in order to arouse believers
to pray earnestly, and to supplicate with earnest groanings; for if
there be no repentance, if we do not ask pardon from God, we are
altogether unworthy of his mercy. If, therefore, we wish that the Church
should be gathered together, and rescued from destruction by a kind of
resurrection, let us cry to God to listen to our sighs and groanings;
and if there be no sorrow of heart that excites us to prayer, we have no
right to expect any alleviation.

<span id="xix.i-p201"></span>*He will answer thee.* This means nothing
else than that he will give evidence of his kindness and aid; for the
Lord “answers,” not by word, but by deed. Yet let us not think that he
will instantly comply with our wishes, which are often hasty and
unseasonable. He will undoubtedly assist us when the proper time
arrives, so that we shall know that he had in view our salvation.

<span id="xix.i-p202"></span><span id="xix.i-p202.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p203"></span>**20.** *When the Lord shall have given
you.* He continues the same subject, and strengthens believers, that
they may not faint; for patience springs from the hope of a more
prosperous issue. Accordingly, he prepares them for enduring future
chastisement, for the wrath of God will press hard on them for a time;
but he immediately promises that a joyful issue awaits them, when they
shall have endured those calamities and distresses; for God will
restrain his severity. Thus, I consider <span id="xix.i-p203.1"></span>ו
(*vau*) to mean “When” or “After;” as if he had said, “*When* you shall
have endured those troubles, then will the Lord bless you; for he will
change your condition for the better.”

<span id="xix.i-p204"></span>*Thy rain shall no longer be restrained.*
 <span id="fr_299"></span>[300](#fn_299) The word <span
id="xix.i-p205.1"></span>מורה (*mōrĕh*) is viewed by some commentators
as meaning “a teacher.” But this does not agree with the context; for,
although the chief fruit of our reconciliation to God is to have
faithful “teachers,” yet, as the ignorant multitude was more deeply
affected by the want of food, Isaiah accommodates his language to their
ignorance, and gives them a taste of God’s fatherly kindness under the
emblem of abundance of food.

<span id="xix.i-p206"></span>By the words “bread” and “water,” he means
extreme want and scarcity of all things, and therefore he calls it
“bread of anguish and water of affliction.”  <span
id="fr_300"></span>[301](#fn_300) Instead of this famine, he says that
he will send them plenty and abundance. This is what he means by the
word *rain*; for he describes the cause instead of the effect, as if he
had said, “The earth shall yield fruit in abundance.” This had a literal
and special reference to a country, the fertility of which depended
entirely on heaven; for it was not watered by rivers or fountains, but
by rains.

<span id="xix.i-p208"></span>“The land whither ye go to possess it,”
says Moses, “is a land of hills and valleys, and drinketh water of the
rain of heaven.” (<span id="xix.i-p208.1"></span>[De
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#011)<span id="xix.i-p208.1"></span>.)

<span id="xix.i-p209"></span>He declares that the fruits of the earth,
which the Lord took away or diminished by barrenness, will return;
because, in consequence of the copious “rains,”  <span
id="fr_301"></span>[302](#fn_301) there will be large and abundant
produce. Thus, when the Lord shall punish us, let us comfort our hearts
with these statements and promises.

<span id="xix.i-p211"></span><span id="xix.i-p211.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p212"></span>**21.** *Then shall thine ears hear.* It
was indeed no despicable promise which he made of an abundant produce of
the fruits of the earth, but the chief ground of gladness and joy is,
when God restores to us pure and sound doctrine; for no scarcity of
wheat ought to terrify and alarm us so much as a scarcity of the word;
and indeed, in proportion as the soul is more excellent than the body,
so much the more ought we to dread this kind of famine, as another
prophet also reminds us. (<span id="xix.i-p212.1"></span>[Am
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#011)<span id="xix.i-p212.1"></span>.)
Isaiah promises this to the Jews as the most valuable of all blessings,
that they shall be fed with the word, by the want of which they had
formerly been heavily afflicted. The false prophets also boast of the
word, and in a more haughty and disdainful manner than godly teachers:
they wish to be reckoned and declared to be the best guides; but they
lead men into error, and at length plunge them into destruction. But the
word which points out the right path comes from God alone, though it
would be of little service to us, if he did not also promise that he
would give us ears; for otherwise he would speak to the deaf, and we
should hear nothing but a confused sound.

<span id="xix.i-p213"></span>*A word behind thee.* These words must be
extended so far as to mean that he will not permit what he speaks to us
to be useless, but will inwardly move our understandings and hearts, so
as to train them to true obedience; for by nature we are not willing to
learn, and must be altogether formed anew by his Spirit. The word *hear*
is very emphatic. He compares God to a schoolmaster, who places the
children before his eyes, that he may more effectually train and direct
them; by which he expresses the wonderful affection and care manifested
towards us by God, who does not reckon it enough to go before us, but
also “with his eye upon us gives us direction.” (<span
id="xix.i-p213.1"></span>[Ps 32:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#008)<span
id="xix.i-p213.1"></span>.) But the Prophet declares that they who
follow God as their guide will be in no danger of going astray.

<span id="xix.i-p214"></span>*Walk ye in it.* This is an exhortation to
cheerful progress, so that their journey may not be retarded, as
frequently happens, by any uncertainty. What he adds, about *the right
hand* and *the left*, might be thought absurd; for when Moses pointed
out to the people the way in which they should walk, he at the same time
charged them “not to turn aside to the right hand or to the left.”
(<span id="xix.i-p214.1"></span>[Deut.
5:32](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#032), [Deut.
17:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#020)<span id="xix.i-p214.1"></span>.)
The road is straight and we ought not to seek any departures from it.

<span id="xix.i-p215"></span>What then does the Prophet mean? I reply,
he uses the words “Right” and “Left” in a different sense; for he means
by them every kind of transactions which we must undertake to perform.
These are various, as there are also various modes of living; and every
person meets with difficulties of many kinds, and is under the necessity
of deliberating about them. By the “right and left hand,” therefore, he
means all the actions of human life, whatever they are, so that, in all
that we undertake, we may have God for our guide, and may always
regulate our transactions by his authority, whether we must go “to the
right hand or to the left.” And hence we derive very great consolation,
that the Lord will favor our undertakings, and will direct our steps, to
whatever hand we turn, provided only that we do not turn aside from the
path which he points out to us.

<span id="xix.i-p216"></span><span id="xix.i-p216.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p217"></span>**22.** *Then shall you profane the
covering.* This shews that the heavenly direction will not be without
effect; for they will bid adieu to their errors, and devote their minds
to the pure worship of God; and the Prophet expressly mentions the
outward profession of true godliness, by which they will openly proclaim
that they have renounced idolatry. For, since statues and images are
instruments of idolatry and superstition, they who are truly converted
to God detest and abhor them, and, as far as lies in their power,
profane them as we read that Jehu did, who profaned the altars of Baal,
and turned his temple into a common sewer. (<span
id="xix.i-p217.1"></span>[2Ki
10:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#027)<span id="xix.i-p217.1"></span>.)
The example given by him and by others of the same class ought to be
followed by godly princes and magistrates, if they wish to give a
genuine proof of their repentance; for, although repentance is seated in
the heart, and has God for a witness, it is shewn by its fruits. Isaiah
has mentioned one class of them instead of the whole; for in general he
shews that the proof of true repentance is, when men make it appear that
they hold in abhorrence everything that is opposed to the worship of
God. When he says that the idols are profaned, he does not mean that
they were formerly sacred; for how could anything be sacred that
dishonors God, and defiles men by its pollution? But, as men falsely
imagine that they possess some sacredness, that is the reason why he
says that they are “profaned,” and that they ought to be despised and
rejected as things of no value and altogether unclean.

<span id="xix.i-p218"></span>*The covering*  <span
id="fr_302"></span>[303](#fn_302) *of the graven images of thy silver.*
When he speaks of the “silver” and “gold” of the graven images, he means
that no loss or damage prevents believers from abhorring the worship of
idols. Such considerations restrain many from casting away idols
altogether, because they see that “gold” or “silver” or something else
is lost, and they choose rather to keep their idols than to sustain the
smallest loss. Covetousness holds them in its net, so that they are more
willing to sin of their own accord, and to pollute themselves with these
abominations, than to lose this or that. But we ought to prefer the
worship of God to everything else, to set little value on gold, to cast
away pearls, and to loathe everything that is accounted precious, rather
than defile ourselves with such crimes. In short, nothing can be so
valuable that it ought not to be despised and reckoned worthless by us,
when it comes into competition with overturning the kingdom of Satan and
restoring the worship of God. In this manner we actually shew whether
the love of God and of religion dwells in our hearts, when a sincere
abhorrence of our wicked ignorance drives us to throw away all that is
polluted.

<span id="xix.i-p220"></span><span id="xix.i-p220.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p221"></span>**23.** *Then will he give rain to thy
seed.* From the fruit he again shews how desirable it is to be converted
to God; for the fruit of repentance is, that he receives converted
persons into favor, and bestows his blessing on them, so that they are
in want of nothing, but, on the contrary, are loaded with every kind of
blessings. As troubles and distresses proceed from the wrath of God,
whom we provoke by our crimes, so, when he is pacified, everything goes
on prosperously with us, and we obtain every sort of kindness, as the
Law more fully testifies. (<span id="xix.i-p221.1"></span>[Le
26:3-13](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#003)<span
id="xix.i-p221.1"></span>; <span id="xix.i-p221.2"></span>[De
28:3-14](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#003)<span
id="xix.i-p221.2"></span>.) A little before, he had spoken of “rain,”
from which they were led to expect an abundant supply of food; but
because he had not observed order in beginning with earthly and fading
blessings, he therefore now adds to doctrine, which is spiritual
nourishment, those things which belong to the use of this corruptible
life; for, although godliness has the promise of the present life as
well as “of that which is to come,” (<span id="xix.i-p221.3"></span>[1Ti
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#008)<span id="xix.i-p221.3"></span>,)
yet first of all it aims at heaven. (<span id="xix.i-p221.4"></span>[Mt
6:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#033)<span id="xix.i-p221.4"></span>.)

<span id="xix.i-p222"></span>Hence also let us learn that it is in vain
for men to toil in cultivating their fields, if the Lord do not send
rain from heaven. Our labors must be watered by him, and he must “give
the increase;” otherwise they will be of no service. Yet we must not
expect rain but from the blessing of God; and if we receive abundant
produce, we ought to give to him the glory. Hence learn also that we
shall be in want of nothing, and shall obtain very abundant fruits of
our labors, if we are converted to God, and that it is our own fault
that we often suffer poverty and want, because by our wickedness we
drive away from us the blessing of God. Let us not therefore ascribe
barrenness and famine to any other causes than to our own fault; for it
is impossible that there should be so great a multitude of men as to be
incapable of deriving support and nourishment from the earth; but by our
iniquities and transgressions we shut the bosom of the earth, which
would otherwise be laid open to us, and would abundantly yield fruits of
every description, that we might lead a prosperous and happy life.

<span id="xix.i-p223"></span>*And thy cattle shall feed.* What he now
adds about the “cattle” tends greatly to magnify the grace of God; for
if his kindness overflows even on the dumb cattle, (<span
id="xix.i-p223.1"></span>[Ps 36:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#006)<span
id="xix.i-p223.1"></span>,) how much more on men whom “he created after
his image.” (<span id="xix.i-p223.2"></span>[Ge
1:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#027)<span id="xix.i-p223.2"></span>.)
But we need not wonder if brute beasts, which were created for the use
of men, suffer hunger along with their masters, and that they have a
share in the bestowal of favor when God is reconciled to men.

<span id="xix.i-p224"></span><span id="xix.i-p224.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p225"></span>**24.** *Thine oxen also.* When he promises
that the oxen and the asses shall eat abundant and clean provender, this
is a repetition and confirmation of what was stated in the preceding
verse. This passage is taken from the Law, (<span
id="xix.i-p225.1"></span>[De
28:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#011)<span id="xix.i-p225.1"></span>,)
and is gladly and frequently quoted by the prophets, in order that we
may learn to discern in the sickness and death of cattle the indignation
of God, and to desire more earnestly to be reconciled to him, that our
houses may be filled with his goodness.

<span id="xix.i-p226"></span><span id="xix.i-p226.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p227"></span>**25.** *And it shall come to pass.* When
the prophets describe the kingdom of Christ, they commonly draw
metaphors from the ordinary life of men; for the true happiness of the
children of God cannot be described in any other way than by holding out
an image of those things which fall under our bodily senses, and from
which men form their ideas of a happy and prosperous condition. It
amounts therefore to this, that they who obey God, and submit to Christ
as their king, shall be blessed. Now, we must not judge of this
happiness from abundance and plenty of outward blessings, of which
believers often endure scarcity, and yet do not on that account cease to
be blessed. But those expressions are allegorical, and are accommodated
by the Prophet to our ignorance, that we may know, by means of those
things which are perceived by our senses, those blessings which have so
great and surpassing excellence that our minds cannot comprehend them.

<span id="xix.i-p228"></span>*And on every high hill there shall be
streams.* When he says that “on the mountains” there shall be “streams
and rivulets,” he gives a still more striking view of that plenty and
abundance with which the Lord will enrich his people. Water is not
plentiful on the peaks of the mountains, which are exceedingly dry; the
valleys are indeed well moistened, and abound in water; but it is very
uncommon for water to flow abundantly on the tops of the mountains. Yet
the Lord promises that it shall be so, though it appear to be
impossible; but by this mode of expression he foretells that, under the
reign of Christ, we shall be happy in every respect, and that there will
be no place in which there shall not be an abundant supply of blessings
of every description; that nothing will be so barren as not to be
rendered fruitful by his kindness, so that everywhere we may be happy.
This is what we should actually experience, if we were fully under the
authority of Christ. We should plainly see his blessing on all sides, if
we sincerely and honestly obeyed him; everything would go on to our
wish; and the whole world and everything in it would contribute to our
comfort; but, because we are very far from yielding that obedience, we
have only a slight taste of those blessings, and enjoy them so far as we
have advanced in newness of life.

<span id="xix.i-p229"></span>*By the day of slaughter,* is denoted
another mark of the divine favor, that God will keep his people safe and
sound against the violence of enemies; and in this way the Prophet gives
credibility to the former prediction; for otherwise it would have been
difficult to believe that captives and exiles would enjoy such
prosperity. Here he speaks therefore of the slaughter of the wicked; as
if he had said, “The Lord will not only do you good, but will also drive
out your enemies.” It is generally thought that the Prophet now speaks
of the defeat which befell the wicked king Sennacherib when he besieged
Jerusalem. (<span id="xix.i-p229.1"></span>[2Ki
19:35](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#035)<span id="xix.i-p229.1"></span>;
<span id="xix.i-p229.2"></span>[Isa
37:36](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#036)<span id="xix.i-p229.2"></span>.)
But when I examine it more closely, I am more disposed to view this
passage as referring to the destruction of Babylon; for although a vast
multitude of persons was slain, when Sennacherib was shamefully put to
flight, yet still the people were not delivered. This reminds us that we
ought not to despair, even though our enemies be very numerous, and have
abundance of garrisons, troops, and fortifications; for the Lord can
easily put them to flight and defend his Church. Let us not be terrified
at their power or rage, or be discouraged because we are few in number;
for neither their troops, nor their bulwarks, nor their rage and
insolence, will hinder them from falling into the hands of God.

<span id="xix.i-p230"></span><span id="xix.i-p230.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p231"></span>**26.** *And the light of the moon shall
be.* The Prophet was not satisfied with describing an ordinary state of
prosperity, without adding something extraordinary; for he says that the
Lord will go beyond the course of nature in this kindness and
liberality. It never happened that the brightness of “the sun” was
increased, unless when “the sun” stood still in the days of Joshua, in
order to give time for pursuing the enemies, (<span
id="xix.i-p231.1"></span>[Josh. 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#013)<span id="xix.i-p231.1"></span>,)
and when, for the sake of Hezekiah, the dial went backward. (<span
id="xix.i-p231.2"></span>[2Ki
20:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#011)<span id="xix.i-p231.2"></span>;
<span id="xix.i-p231.3"></span>[Isa
38:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#008)<span id="xix.i-p231.3"></span>.)
But on this occasion nothing is said about those miracles.  <span
id="fr_303"></span>[304](#fn_303) Besides, the Prophet does not speak
about prolonging the course of “the sun” above our horizon, but about
increasing its brightness *sevenfold*. He shews what will be the
condition of the godly under the reign of Christ; for in other respects
the Lord

<span id="xix.i-p233"></span>“maketh his sun to shine on the bad as well
as on the good.” (<span id="xix.i-p233.1"></span>[Mt
5:45](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#045)<span id="xix.i-p233.1"></span>.)

<span id="xix.i-p234"></span>But here he speaks of happiness in which
ungodly men can have no share. There is one kind of liberality which is
bestowed indiscriminately on all, and another kind which is peculiar to
believers alone; as it is said, “Great is the abundance of thy goodness
which thou hast laid up for them that fear thee.” (<span
id="xix.i-p234.1"></span>[Ps
31:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#019)<span id="xix.i-p234.1"></span>.)
Isaiah speaks of this special favor,  <span
id="fr_304"></span>[305](#fn_304) and, in order to describe it, borrows
metaphors from well-known objects. Accordingly, he declares that God
will enlighten believers with so great brightness that, if “seven” suns
were brought together, their brightness would be far inferior to this.

<span id="xix.i-p236"></span>*When the Lord shall have bound up the
breach of his people.* That the weight of afflictions, by which the
people were soon afterwards overwhelmed, might not hinder them from
believing this statement, he likewise adds another promise, that the
Lord will be like a physician to heal their wounds. Hence it follows,
that the people must be chastened, and, in some measure, prepared for
repentance by wounds, and must even be crushed and bruised in such a
manner as to be reduced almost to nothing.

<span id="xix.i-p237"></span>*And healed the stroke of their wound.*
What he now adds about a “stroke,” is intended to shew that this
bruising will not be slight; for it resembles a body beaten and wounded
by many strokes. If therefore we shall be ready at any time to think
that the Lord deals harshly with us, let us call to remembrance those
predictions, that the Lord will “bind up our wounds,” which otherwise
might appear to be mortal. And if any one ask why the Lord chastises his
people so severely, I reply, that it produces no good effect on us when
he treats us mildly; our vices are deeply rooted, and adhere to our very
marrow, and cannot be separated but by a razor which has a sharp and
keen edge.

<span id="xix.i-p238"></span><span id="xix.i-p238.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p239"></span>**27.** *Behold the name of the Lord
cometh.* He threatens the destruction of the Assyrians, who were at that
time the chief enemies of the Church. From almost all their neighbors,
indeed, the Jews received annoyance; but as the Assyrians were greatly
superior to others in wealth and power, so the prophets, when they speak
of enemies, mention them almost exclusively, and afterwards the
Babylonians, who obtained the monarchy; though, as we have already seen,
they frequently, by a figure of speech in which a part is taken for the
whole, include the Chaldeans under the name of Assyrians. By “the name
of God” he unquestionably means God himself; but he makes use of this
circumlocution, because the Assyrians and other nations worshipped gods
made of gold and silver, and held up the Jews to ridicule, because they
did not worship him under any image, or statue, or resemblance; as one
who wrote against them says that “they worship the bright clouds and the
deity of the sky.”  <span id="fr_305"></span>[306](#fn_305) Thus wicked
and ungodly men always judge of God according to outward appearances;
while the prophets, on the other hand, remind believers of “the name of
God.” “That God who revealed himself to you by his name, whom you do not
feel, whom you do not see, will take vengeance on your insults.”

<span id="xix.i-p241"></span>*From afar.* He adds this as if he granted
what was said by them; for ungodly men, when they do not perceive the
hand of God, think that he is at a great distance, and mock at the
confidence of believers as groundless. Accordingly, the Prophet,
adapting his language to the views of unbelievers, shews that God, whom
they thought to be at a great distance, will come, or rather, has
already come, and is at hand. This is what he means by the particle
<span id="xix.i-p241.1"></span>הנה, (*hĭnnĕh*,) *behold*, which he
contrasts with the word <span id="xix.i-p241.2"></span>ממרהק,
(*mĭmmĕrhŏk*,) “from afar,” directing believers, in this manner, to rise
above all obstructions, that by their hope they may arrive at that
assistance which he promised.

<span id="xix.i-p242"></span>*His face burneth.* In order to shew that
the celebration of the name of God in Judea is not vain or groundless,
the Prophet describes the power of God, that is, the power which he will
employ in driving out the enemies of the Church, as dreadful. When he
addresses those who believe in him, in order to encourage them to the
exercise of faith, he shews himself to be kind, gentle, patient, slow to
anger, and merciful; but to the ungodly he holds out nothing but fear
and terror. (<span id="xix.i-p242.1"></span>[Ex
34:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#006)<span id="xix.i-p242.1"></span>.)
And as the ungodly are terrified when God is mentioned, so believers,
drawn by a conviction of his goodness, rely on him, and are not
distressed by such fears. This shews us that we ought continually to
persevere in the fear of God, that we may not find God to be what he is
here described by the Prophet.

<span id="xix.i-p243"></span>*His burden is heavy.*  <span
id="fr_306"></span>[307](#fn_306) That is, the Lord will bring with him
dreadful calamities, which the ungodly will not be able to endure; for
by “burdens” he means the punishments which are inflicted on the
ungodly. He expresses the same thing by the words *lips* and *tongue*.
But why did he speak of them rather than of the hands? It is, because
ungodly men mock at all the threatenings which are uttered by the word
of God, and treat as fabulous all that is declared by the prophets. To
their own cost, therefore, they shall learn that the sound which
proceedeth from the sacred name of God is not without meaning, and is
not idle thunder intended merely to strike the ears, but shall at length
know by experience what is the power of that word which they despised.

<span id="xix.i-p245"></span><span id="xix.i-p245.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p246"></span>**28.** *And his Spirit.*  <span
id="fr_307"></span>[308](#fn_307) He proceeds with that threatening
which he had begun to utter, namely, that the Church will indeed be
chastised, but yet that the Assyrians shall utterly perish; for he says
that they will be plunged into the deep by the “Spirit” of God, or
rather, that the “Spirit” himself is like a deep torrent which shall
swallow them up. Others translate <span id="xix.i-p255.1"></span>רוה,
 <span id="fr_308"></span>[309](#fn_308) *(rūăch*,) by “blowing,” and
think that the allusion is to a storm or violent wind.

<span id="xix.i-p257"></span>*And with a useless sieve.* The next
metaphor employed is that of a “sieve,” which is very frequent in
Scripture (<span id="xix.i-p257.1"></span>[Mt
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#012)<span id="xix.i-p257.1"></span>.)
He says that he will shake the Assyrians with a sieve, in order to
thrash and scatter them; and therefore he calls it “the sieve of
vanity,” that is, a useless sieve,  <span
id="fr_309"></span>[310](#fn_309) intended not to preserve, but to
destroy; for, in another sense, the Lord is wont to “sift” his own
people also, so as to gather them like good grain into the barn.

<span id="xix.i-p259"></span>*And a bridle causing to err.*  <span
id="fr_310"></span>[311](#fn_310) The third metaphor is that of a
“bridle,” by which the Lord continually restrains the pride and
rebelliousness of wicked men, and, in a word, shews that he is their
Judge. True, indeed, the Lord commonly restrains and subdues his own
people by a “bridle,” but it is in order to bring them to obedience;
while, on the other hand, he restrains wicked men in such a manner as to
cast them down headlong to destruction. This is what he means by the
phrase “causing to err.” As furious horses are driven about in all
directions by their riders, and, the more they kick are more violently
struck and beaten; so the ungodly, when they are kept back, rush eagerly
in the opposite direction, as it is beautifully described by David.
(<span id="xix.i-p260.1"></span>[Ps
32:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#009)<span id="xix.i-p260.1"></span>.)

<span id="xix.i-p261"></span>The object of these metaphors is to shew
that we must not sport with the Lord; for, although he appear for a time
to act differently, we shall at length know by experience the truth of
what the Prophet says, that his “breath” alone will be like a torrent to
cast down the wicked, that they may be suddenly overwhelmed. Next, when
he gives warning that the nations shall be winnowed with “a useless
sieve,” we ought to fear lest the Lord, if he find in us nothing but
chaff, throw us on the dunghill. Lastly, we must observe the difference
that exists between the children of God and the reprobate; for the Lord
chastises both, but in different ways — the children of God, that they
may be purified and preserved — and the reprobate, that they may be cast
down headlong and destroyed.

<span id="xix.i-p262"></span><span id="xix.i-p262.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p263"></span>**29.** *And you shall have a song as in
the night.* Here he declares that all the punishments which he
threatened against the Assyrians shall tend to the advantage of the
Church, because the Lord punishes the outrages committed against his
people not less severely than if they had been committed against
himself. In this way he testifies his infinite love and kindness towards
his own people, when he deigns to take up arms on their behalf. Hence we
ought to conclude, that all the threatenings which are found in any part
of Scripture tend to the consolation of believers.

<span id="xix.i-p264"></span>*When a festival is kept.* He says that
this “song” will be sacred, and compares it to a “holy solemnity,” in
order to excite believers to thankfulness, and to shew that their joy
should be directed to God; for it is not enough to rejoice, unless our
joy look straight towards God, and unless we keep him alone always in
our view; otherwise our joy will be fruitless and irreligious, and will
not promote our salvation, or be acceptable to God. He calls it “a song
*of the night*,” because the Jews began the day at sunset, and, as soon
as the evening came, celebrated the festival.

<span id="xix.i-p265"></span>*To the mountain.* He explains more fully
of what nature this joy shall be. They shall not dance, as irreligious
men do, but shall raise and fix their eyes on God, whom they acknowledge
to be the author of every blessing. By “the mountain” he means the
temple which was built “on the mountain.” He calls God *The Mighty One
of Israel*, because it was by his assistance that they had been redeemed
and preserved; and hence he reminds them that in future they will not be
safe in any other way than by placing their hope in God alone. And
indeed, when we cherish any conviction of our own strength, we rob God
of this title, which is truly and sincerely bestowed on him by none but
the lowly and humble, who have laid aside all confidence in their own
strength.

<span id="xix.i-p266"></span><span id="xix.i-p266.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p267"></span>**30.** *And Jehovah shall cause to be
heard.* He confirms what he formerly said about the judgment of God on
the Assyrians, and he describes it figuratively, as is very customary
both with himself and with the other prophets. When God delays, and does
not immediately punish the wicked, we think that he is either asleep or
not powerful, and are distracted by doubt and uncertainty. And if we
behold some of his judgments, yet such is our natural stupidity, or
rather our ingratitude, that we keep before us those masks which hinder
us from perceiving the glory of God; for we ascribe it to fortune, or to
the plans and contrivances and strength of men, and never, unless when
we are compelled, acknowledge that we owe anything to God.

<span id="xix.i-p268"></span>*The power of his voice.*  <span
id="fr_311"></span>[312](#fn_311) For the reasons now stated, the
Prophet was not satisfied with having once foretold the vengeance of God
against the Assyrians; but he likewise describes it in a lively manner,
and repeats it with great earnestness. He declares that the destruction
shall be such that men will be constrained to hear “the voice of God;”
that is, to acknowledge his judgment, and to confess that this calamity
hath proceeded from him, as if he had spoken openly. The matter,
therefore, may be thus summed up. The event will be so manifest, that
there shall be no one who does not understand that this calamity
proceeded from “the mouth,” that is, from the decree of God.

<span id="xix.i-p270"></span>*And the descent of his arm shall he cause
to be seen.* He begins with “the voice of God,” that we may know that he
directs by his authority everything that is done on the earth. Yet at
the same time he applauds the power of his doctrine, on which it was
necessary that his people should rely, in order that the effect might be
openly displayed at the proper time. But as the work quickly follows the
decree and “voice of God,” he adds “the descent of his arm.” These two
things ought always to be joined together; for we ought not to imagine
that God is like men, or that he suddenly undertakes anything, and then
leaves it defective or incomplete. Whatever he has decreed he likewise
executes, and his hand can never be separated from his mouth. On the
other hand, he executes nothing at random, but all must have been
previously decreed, so that all the punishments which he inflicts are so
many displays of righteous judgment.

<span id="xix.i-p271"></span>*With deluge and hailstone.* That vengeance
is illustrated, in the conclusion of the verse, by figures, in order
that its terrific character may lead the Jews more cheerfully to raise
their faith on high; for it was highly consolatory to them to know that,
though they were heavily afflicted, a far more dreadful judgment would
soon fall on their enemies. And yet we must not dream, as the Rabbins
do, that the Assyrians were struck by a thunderbolt, for their
conjecture is excessively frivolous. On the contrary, the Prophet
follows the ordinary custom, and, by means of these comparisons,
describes the judgment of God, which our prodigious dulness makes us
excessively slow to comprehend. Conflagrations, thunderbolts,
inundations, and deluges, are somewhat unusual and monstrous events, and
thus produce a stronger impression on our own minds. For this reason,
the prophets draw a comparison from them, that men may perceive the
dreadful and avenging hand of God against the wicked.

<span id="xix.i-p272"></span><span id="xix.i-p272.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p273"></span>**31.** *Surely by the voice of Jehovah.*
He added this for two reasons; first, to shew why the Assyrian must be
bruised; for, since he was cruel and savage to others, it is proper that

<span id="xix.i-p274"></span>“the same measure which he meted should be
measured to him again.” (<span id="xix.i-p274.1"></span>[Mt
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#002)<span id="xix.i-p274.1"></span>.)

<span id="xix.i-p275"></span>This is the ordinary judgment of God
against tyrants, as the Prophet says in a subsequent passage of this
book,

<span id="xix.i-p276"></span>“Woe to thee that spoilest, for thou shalt
be spoiled.” (<span id="xix.i-p276.1"></span>[Isa
33:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#001)<span id="xix.i-p276.1"></span>.)

<span id="xix.i-p277"></span>The second reason is, because the power of
the Assyrian king appeared to be so great that he could not fall.
Although, therefore, he was fortified on every hand, not only to defend
himself, but also to attack others, yet the Prophet says, that “by the
voice of God” alone he shall be bruised. Hence we learn how groundless
is the confidence of wicked men, who rely on their garrisons and arms,
and presumptuously despise God, as if they had not been liable to his
judgment. But in order to destroy them, the Lord will have no need of
any other arms than his own “voice;” for by the slightest expression of
his will he will lay them low. Nor can it be doubted that the Prophet
intends to withdraw the minds of believers from earthly means, that they
may not inquire how it shall be done, but may be satisfied with the bare
promise of God, who is fully able to execute his word as soon as it has
gone forth from him.

<span id="xix.i-p278"></span><span id="xix.i-p278.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p279"></span>**32.** *And there shall be in every
passage*. He means that the Assyrians will in vain try every method of
escaping from the hand of God; for wherever they go, whether they
attempt to go forward or to turn back, the hand of God shall pursue
them. As to the phrase, *fastened* *staff*,  <span
id="fr_312"></span>[313](#fn_312) I readily adopt the opinion of those
who think that the metaphor is taken from those on whom have been
inflicted strokes so heavy, that the marks of the instrument of
punishment remain, as if a rod or staff were “fastened” in the wound. It
will perhaps be thought preferable to interpret it to mean, that the
wound is “fastened”  <span id="fr_313"></span>[314](#fn_313) on the
Assyrian, as a foundation is fixed in the earth; for what is not
“fastened” may be moved out of its place and carried away. But he shews
that that wound is so deeply fixed that it cannot be shaken off or
removed. In like manner, the weight of God’s wrath lies on the
reprobate, and holds them weighed down to the end. To shew that there is
no hope of being able to derive advantage from a change of place, he
says *everywhere*, thus declaring that there shall be no retreat. The
clause ought to be thus arranged, “wherever the staff shall pass, there
it will stick firmly.”

<span id="xix.i-p282"></span>*With tabrets and harps.* He means that the
issue of the battle will not be doubtful, as when the combatants meet on
equal terms; for he says that the victory will be certain; because, as
soon as God determines to go forth to fight, he already holds the
victory in his hand. “Tabrets and harps,” hands spread out and lifted
up, are expressive of the joy of conquerors, when they shout aloud and
chant the song of victory.

<span id="xix.i-p283"></span>*Shall fight against her.* The feminine
pronoun <span id="xix.i-p283.1"></span>בה (*bāhh*) is viewed by some
commentators as referring to the army; but the Prophet undoubtedly
intended to express something higher, namely, the head of the army, that
is, Babylon, as contrasted with Jerusalem, which also he formerly
denoted by a similar pronoun.

<span id="xix.i-p284"></span>From these statements we ought to infer,
that the wicked shall at length be destroyed, though they appear to have
many means of escape; for wherever they turn, whatever road they take,
the “staff” of the Lord shall pursue them, and shall ever remain
“fastened” to their back; they shall never escape his hand or get quit
of their wounds. We, too, are chastened by the hand of God, but the
wounds do not always last; our pains are soothed and abated, and “our
grief is turned into joy.” (<span id="xix.i-p284.1"></span>[Joh
16:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#020)<span id="xix.i-p284.1"></span>.)
Besides, God carries on war against the reprobate in such a manner that
they cannot resist him, or gain anything by their attempts. He joins
battle with them, indeed, but it is as a conqueror; he even allows them
to obtain some advantages, but represses their insolence whenever he
thinks proper. If, therefore, we fight under his banner, let us
entertain no doubt of obtaining the victory; for, when we have him as
our leader, we shall be safe from all danger, and shall undoubtedly come
off conquerors.

<span id="xix.i-p285"></span><span id="xix.i-p285.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p286"></span>**33.** *For Tophet is ordained.* The
Prophet goes on to threaten the vengeance of God, and says that not only
a temporary calamity, but also everlasting destruction awaits the
wicked; for hell is prepared for them, and not merely for persons of
ordinary rank, but likewise for the king himself and the nobles. By
“Tophet” he unquestionably means Hell; not that we must fancy to
ourselves some place in which the wicked are shut up, as in a prison,
after their death, in order to endure the torments which they deserve;
but it denotes their miserable condition and excruciating torments. In
the book of Kings, it denotes that place where the Jews sacrificed their
children to the idol Moloch. (<span id="xix.i-p286.1"></span>[2Ki
23:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#010)<span id="xix.i-p286.1"></span>.)
It is also mentioned by Jeremiah, (<span id="xix.i-p286.2"></span>[Jer
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#006)<span id="xix.i-p286.2"></span>;)
and that place was destroyed and profaned by Josiah on account of the
detestable superstition committed in it. (<span
id="xix.i-p286.3"></span>[2Ki
23:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#010)<span id="xix.i-p286.3"></span>.)
The prophets, I have no doubt, intended to give the name of this place
to the punishments and torments of the wicked, in order that the bare
mention of it might excite horror in godly persons, and that idolatry
might be universally regarded with greater abhorrence. The word
“Gehenna”  <span id="fr_314"></span>[315](#fn_314) has the same
etymology; for “the Valley of Hinnom” was a name given to Hell (Gehenna)
on account of the abominable sacrilege practiced in it.

<span id="xix.i-p288"></span>*Since yesterday.*  <span
id="fr_315"></span>[316](#fn_315) When we see that all goes well with
the wicked, and that they have everything to their wish, we think that
they will pass unpunished. For this reason the Prophet, on the contrary,
exclaims: “Since yesterday, that is, of old since the beginning of the
world, the Lord hath determined what punishments he shall inflict on
them.” Though this decree is still hidden from us, yet it must be
certain, and cannot fail. Let us not, therefore, judge of the lot of the
wicked according to outward appearances; let us wait for the Lord, who
in due time will execute his righteous judgment. Yet let us not be rash,
or think that God hath forgotten to take vengeance; for he had
determined what he should do before it could enter into our mind; nor
can we so speedily desire the destruction of the wicked as not to have
our thoughts and desires anticipated long before by the Lord, for from
the beginning he determined to inflict on them punishments and torments.
Some think that it is a parallel passage to that of the Apostle, “Christ
yesterday, to-day, and for ever.” (<span id="xix.i-p289.1"></span>[Heb
13:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#008)<span id="xix.i-p289.1"></span>.)
But I consider “yesterday” to be here used simply as contrasted with our
thoughts, that we may not think that we possess so much wisdom as to be
capable of anticipating God: for there is nothing sudden in his
purposes, but all were long ago settled and determined by him. He speaks
of the punishments of the life to come, as I have already said, that is,
of the punishments which the wicked shall endure, in addition to the
distresses which they suffer in this life. On this subject it is strange
that the Sadducees (<span id="xix.i-p289.2"></span>[Mt
22:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#023)<span id="xix.i-p289.2"></span>;
<span id="xix.i-p289.3"></span>[Ac
23:8](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#008)<span id="xix.i-p289.3"></span>)
were so dull and stupid as to confine rewards and punishments within the
limits of this life, as if the judgment of God did not extend beyond
this world; for the modes of expression which immediately follow would
not apply to temporal punishments, and the very name “Tophet,” taken
metaphorically, could denote nothing else than God’s highest curse.

<span id="xix.i-p290"></span>*Yea, for the king it is prepared.* He
shews that not even “kings,” who are supposed to be entitled, on account
of their majesty and power, to enjoy some peculiar privilege, are
exempted from this punishment. Their greatness dazzles the eyes of men,
but will yield them no defense, so as to prevent the Lord from punishing
them as they deserve.

<span id="xix.i-p291"></span>He says that the slaughter of them will be
*in a deep place,* that we may know that they cannot escape or be
rescued from it; and he calls hell *broad*, that we may know that
however numerous they may be, though they all conspire together, they
shall likewise perish; for the Lord will not be exhausted by punishing,
and he will have a place so large as to contain all his enemies.

<span id="xix.i-p292"></span>*The pile of it is fire.* He speaks
metaphorically concerning the destruction of the reprobate, which
otherwise we cannot sufficiently comprehend, in the same manner as we do
not understand the blessed and immortal life, unless it be shadowed out
by some figures adapted to our capacity. Hence it is evident how foolish
and absurd the sophists are, who enter into subtle arguments about the
nature and quality of that fire, and torture themselves by giving
various explanations of it. Such gross imaginations must be banished,
since we know that the Prophet speaks figuratively; and in another
passage (<span id="xix.i-p292.2"></span>[Isa
66:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#024)<span id="xix.i-p292.2"></span>)
we shall see that “fire” and the “worm” are joined together.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_283"></span>[284](cc14018.htm#fr_283) <span
id="xix.i-p73.4"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p74"></span> See *Commentary on Isaiah*, vol. 1 p. 75.

<span id="xix.i-p75"></span> FT541 The phrase <span
id="xix.i-p75.1"></span>לנסך מסכה (*lĭnsōch măssēchāh*) has been
variously explained. The Peshito makes it mean to pour out libations,
probably with reference to some ancient mode of ratifying covenants, and
the Septuagint accordingly translates it <span
id="xix.i-p75.2"></span>ἐποιήσατε συνθή᾿κας, ‘you made covenants.’
Cocceius applies it to the casting of molten images, (<span
id="xix.i-p75.3"></span>ad fundendum fusile,) De Dieu to the molding of
designs or plots. Kimchi and Calvin derive the words from the root to
*cover*, and suppose the idea here expressed to be that of concealment.
Ewald follows J. D. Michaelis in making the phrase mean to *weave a
web*, which agrees well with the context, and is favored by the similar
use of the same verb and noun in <span id="xix.i-p75.4"></span>[Isa
25:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#007)<span id="xix.i-p75.4"></span>.
Knobel’s objection, that this figure is suited only to a case of
treachery, has no force, as the act of seeking foreign aid was
treasonable under the theocracy, and the design appears to have been
formed and executed secretly. (Compare <span
id="xix.i-p75.5"></span>[Isa
29:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#015)<span id="xix.i-p75.5"></span>,
where the reference may be to the same transaction.)” — *Alexander*

<span id="xix.i-p76"></span> FT542 See page 345

<span id="xix.i-p77"></span> FT543 The allusion is to the concluding
clause of <span id="xix.i-p77.1"></span>[Isa
30:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#005)<span id="xix.i-p77.1"></span>.” —
*Ed*

<span id="xix.i-p78"></span> FT544 “For the Egyptians shall help in
vain.” — Eng. Ver.

<span id="xix.i-p79"></span> FT545 See *Commentary on Isaiah*, vol. 1 p.
32

<span id="xix.i-p80"></span> FT546 “<span id="xix.i-p80.1"></span>Disant
qu’ils demandent d’estre flattez;” — “When he says that they ask to be
flattered.”

<span id="xix.i-p81"></span> FT547 <span id="xix.i-p81.1"></span>נלוז
(*nālōz*) seems to denote perverseness or moral obliquity in general. It
is rendered in a strong idiomatic form by Hitzig, (<span
id="xix.i-p81.2"></span>verschmitztheit, craftiness,) and Ewald, (<span
id="xix.i-p81.3"></span>querwege, crossway.) — *Alexander*. Luther’s
term, (<span id="xix.i-p81.4"></span>muthwillen, wantonness,) conveys
the same general idea. — *Ed*

<span id="xix.i-p82"></span> FT548 See *Commentary on John’s Gospel*,
vol. 1 p. 223 note 1.

<span id="xix.i-p83"></span> FT549 “<span id="xix.i-p83.1"></span>Estans
pleins de vent;” — “Being full of wind.”

<span id="xix.i-p84"></span> FT550 Here the Author departs from his
usual manner, by omitting all mention of the concluding and highly
expressive clause of the verse. “For <span id="xix.i-p84.1"></span>גבה,
(*gĕbĕh*,) the English version has ‘pit,’ Lowth, ‘cistern,’ and most
other writers ‘well;’ but in <span id="xix.i-p84.2"></span>[Eze
47:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze047.htm#011)<span id="xix.i-p84.2"></span>,
it denotes a ‘marsh’ or ‘pool.’ Ewald supposes a particular allusion to
the breaking of a poor man’s earthen pitcher, an idea which had been
suggested long before by Gill: ‘as poor people are wont to do, to take
fire from the hearth, and water out of a well in a piece of broken
pitcher.’” — *Alexander*. All must admit, that when one cannot find a
“sherd” fit for the meanest purpose, the vessel is broken in pieces. —
*Ed*

<span id="xix.i-p85"></span> FT551 Jarchi says, that in this passage
<span id="xix.i-p85.1"></span>שובה (*shūbāh*) “signifies rest and
quietness,” and adduces as a parallel passage one in which the word is
commonly viewed as the imperative of <span id="xix.i-p85.2"></span>שוב,
(*shūb*,) with He paragogic. “Give rest, O Lord, to the many thousands
of Israel.” (<span id="xix.i-p85.3"></span>[Nu
10:36](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#036)<span id="xix.i-p85.3"></span>.)
Breithaupt supports that interpretation, and derives the word from <span
id="xix.i-p85.4"></span>ישב, (*yāshăb*,) “to sit, to rest.” — *Ed*

<span id="xix.i-p86"></span> FT552 See *Commentary on Isaiah*, vol. 1 p.
29

<span id="xix.i-p87"></span> FT553 “<span id="xix.i-p87.1"></span>תרן
(*tōrĕn*) is taken as the name of a tree by Augusti (Tannenbaum, the
fir-tree) and Rosenmüller, (pinus, the pine-tree,) by Gesenius and Ewald
as a signal or a signal-pole. In the only two cases where it occurs
elsewhere, it has the specific meaning of a *mast*. The allusion may be
simply to the similar appearance of a lofty and solitary tree, or the
common idea may be that of a flag-staff, which might be found in either
situation. The word ‘Beacon,’ here employed by Gataker and Barnes, is
consistent neither with the Hebrew nor the English usage.” — *Alexander*

<span id="xix.i-p88"></span> FT554 The latter quotation may appear to be
inaccurate, for in the English version it runs thus, “I will correct
thee in measure;” but Calvin adheres closely to the Hebrew original,
which employs in both passages the word <span
id="xix.i-p88.1"></span>משפט (*mĭsphāt*) “*judgment*.” — *Ed*

<span id="xix.i-p89"></span> Ft555 “Thou shalt weep no more.” — Eng.
Ver.

<span id="xix.i-p90"></span> FT556 “Yet shall not thy teachers be
removed.” — Eng. Ver.

<span id="xix.i-p91"></span> FT557 “Though ye find yourselves reduced to
extremities usual in long sieges, though ye be stinted to a short
allowance of ‘bread and water,’ and are forced to undergo a great many
other inconveniences, yet use not my prophets ill, make them not to run
into corners to hide themselves from the violence of an impatient
multitude; but be glad to see them among you, and let their examples
encourage you to bear up handsomely under the short afflictions which
shall then be upon you. This is the plain meaning of the words, without
running to the whimsical expositions of some who by ‘Panis Angustiæ,’ as
the Vulgate renders <span id="xix.i-p91.1"></span>לחם צר (*lĕchĕm
tzār*,) make the prophet mean the compendious doctrine of the gospel, or
Christ himself, or the eucharist, and like dreams.” — *Samuel White*

<span id="xix.i-p92"></span> FT558 “Kimchi’s explanation of the word
(<span id="xix.i-p92.1"></span>מורה, *mōrĕh*, or rather <span
id="xix.i-p92.2"></span>מורים, *mōrīm*,) as meaning the early rain,
(which sense it has in <span id="xix.i-p92.3"></span>[Joe
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#023)<span id="xix.i-p92.3"></span>,
and perhaps also in <span id="xix.i-p92.4"></span>[Ps
84:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#006)<span id="xix.i-p92.4"></span>,)
has been retained only by Calvin and Lowth. The great majority of
writers adhere not only to the sense of ‘teacher,’ but to the plural
import of the form, (<span id="xix.i-p92.5"></span>מורים with 2 Sing.
Affix.,) and understand the word as a designation or description of the
prophets, with particular reference, as some suppose, to their
reappearance after a period of severe persecution or oppression.” —
*Alexander*

<span id="xix.i-p93"></span> FT559 “The ephods of your molten images, —
short cassocks, without sleeves, with which the heathens adorned their
idols.” — *Stock*. Cicero tells a story about Dionysius, who found in
the temple of Jupiter Olympius a golden cloak of great weight, with
which the statue of Jupiter had been ornamented by Gelo out of the
spoils of the Carthaginians, and, after making the witty observation
that it was too heavy for summer and too cold for winter, carried it
off, and threw around the statue a woolen mantle, which, he said, was
adapted to every season of the year. (Cic. de Nat. Deor. l. iii.) — *Ed*

<span id="xix.i-p94"></span> FT560 “<span id="xix.i-p94.1"></span>De
his.” “<span id="xix.i-p94.2"></span>De ces miracles-là.”

<span id="xix.i-p95"></span> FT561 “<span id="xix.i-p95.1"></span>Isaie
parle de ceste faveur speciale.”

<span id="xix.i-p96"></span> FT562 “<span id="xix.i-p96.1"></span>Qui
puras nubes, et cœli numen adorant.”

<span id="xix.i-p97"></span> FT563 “And the burden thereof (or, And the
grievousness of flame) shall be heavy.” — Eng. Ver. “And heavy the
column of flame.” — *Stock*. “And the burning is heavy: for so ought we
to translate <span id="xix.i-p97.1"></span>משאה, (*măssāāh*,) in the
same sense as in <span id="xix.i-p97.2"></span>[Jud
20:40](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#040)<span id="xix.i-p97.2"></span>,
and in other passages, from <span id="xix.i-p97.3"></span>נשא, (*nāsā*,)
‘to lift up,’ because flame and smoke naturally ascend.” — *Rosenmüller*

<span id="fn_284"></span>[285](cc14018.htm#fr_284) <span
id="xix.i-p98.2"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p99"></span>

<span id="fn_285"></span>[286](cc14018.htm#fr_285) <span
id="xix.i-p106.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p107"></span>

<span id="fn_286"></span>[287](cc14018.htm#fr_286) <span
id="xix.i-p112.2"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p113"></span>

<span id="fn_287"></span>[288](cc14018.htm#fr_287) <span
id="xix.i-p125.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p126"></span>

<span id="fn_288"></span>[289](cc14018.htm#fr_288) <span
id="xix.i-p130.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p131"></span>

<span id="fn_289"></span>[290](cc14018.htm#fr_289) <span
id="xix.i-p151.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p152"></span>

<span id="fn_290"></span>[291](cc14018.htm#fr_290) <span
id="xix.i-p159.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p160"></span>

<span id="fn_291"></span>[292](cc14018.htm#fr_291) <span
id="xix.i-p160.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p161"></span>

<span id="fn_292"></span>[293](cc14018.htm#fr_292) <span
id="xix.i-p163.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p164"></span>

<span id="fn_293"></span>[294](cc14018.htm#fr_293) <span
id="xix.i-p166.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p167"></span>

<span id="fn_294"></span>[295](cc14018.htm#fr_294) <span
id="xix.i-p171.2"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p172"></span>

<span id="fn_295"></span>[296](cc14018.htm#fr_295) <span
id="xix.i-p182.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p183"></span>

<span id="fn_296"></span>[297](cc14018.htm#fr_296) <span
id="xix.i-p185.2"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p186"></span>

<span id="fn_297"></span>[298](cc14018.htm#fr_297) <span
id="xix.i-p192.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p193"></span>

<span id="fn_298"></span>[299](cc14018.htm#fr_298) <span
id="xix.i-p198.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p199"></span>

<span id="fn_299"></span>[300](cc14018.htm#fr_299) <span
id="xix.i-p204.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p205"></span>

<span id="fn_300"></span>[301](cc14018.htm#fr_300) <span
id="xix.i-p206.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p207"></span>

<span id="fn_301"></span>[302](cc14018.htm#fr_301) <span
id="xix.i-p209.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p210"></span>

<span id="fn_302"></span>[303](cc14018.htm#fr_302) <span
id="xix.i-p218.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p219"></span>

<span id="fn_303"></span>[304](cc14018.htm#fr_303) <span
id="xix.i-p231.4"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p232"></span>

<span id="fn_304"></span>[305](cc14018.htm#fr_304) <span
id="xix.i-p234.2"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p235"></span>

<span id="fn_305"></span>[306](cc14018.htm#fr_305) <span
id="xix.i-p239.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p240"></span>

<span id="fn_306"></span>[307](cc14018.htm#fr_306) <span
id="xix.i-p243.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p244"></span>

<span id="fn_307"></span>[308](cc14018.htm#fr_307) <span
id="xix.i-p246.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p247"></span> “And his breath.” — Eng. Ver.

<span id="xix.i-p248"></span> FT565 “Grotius renders <span
id="xix.i-p248.1"></span>רוח (*rūăch*) *anger*, Luther and the English
version *breath*; but there is no sufficient reason for excluding an
allusion to the Holy Spirit as a personal agent.” — *Alexander*

<span id="xix.i-p249"></span> FT566 “The sieve of emptiness. A sieve
full of holes, that suffers both corn and chaff to pass together to the
ground. So shall Jehovah make no distinction among the enemies of
Israel.” — *Stock*

<span id="xix.i-p250"></span> FT567 “And a misleading bridle.” —
*Alexander*

<span id="xix.i-p251"></span> FT568 “His glorious voice. (Heb. The glory
of his voice.)” — Eng. Ver. “The majesty of his voice.” — *Stock*

<span id="xix.i-p252"></span> FT569 Calvin’s phrase, <span
id="xix.i-p252.1"></span>baculus fundatas, is followed by almost all the
Latin interpreters, including Vitringa, and appears to have suggested
the rendering, grounded staff, which is given in our common version, and
has been followed by other translators. Almost all the commentators
treat <span id="xix.i-p252.2"></span>מוסדה (*mūsādāh*) as the particple
Hophal of <span id="xix.i-p252.3"></span>יסד (*yāsăd*); but there are
strong reasons for viewing it as an abstract noun, for Rosenmüller has
justly remarked that <span id="xix.i-p252.4"></span>מטה (*măttēh*,) with
Tzere instead of Segol, is in the construct state. Availing himself, as
it would seem, of this suggestion, Professor Alexander very felicitously
renders it “the rod of doom.” “The common version, grounded staff,” says
he, “is almost unintelligible. It is now very generally agreed that
<span id="xix.i-p252.5"></span>מוסדה (*mūsādāh*) denotes the divine
determination or decree, and that the whole phrase means the rod
appointed by him, or, to put it in a form at once exact and poetical,
the rod of destiny or doom.” Diodati’s Italian version gives “<span
id="xix.i-p252.6"></span>Ed ogni passagio della verga ferma,” “and every
passage of the firm staff.” — *Ed*

<span id="xix.i-p253"></span> FT570 “<span id="xix.i-p253.1"></span>Que
la playe a esté attachee au dos de l’Assyrien;” — “That the wound has
been fastened to the back of the Assyrian.”

<span id="xix.i-p254"></span> FT571 <span id="xix.i-p254.1"></span>גיא
הנום, (*gēhĭnnōm*,) “the Valley of Hinnom.”

<span id="xix.i-p255"></span> FT572 “Of old.” — Eng. Ver.

<span id="fn_308"></span>[309](cc14018.htm#fr_308) <span
id="xix.i-p255.2"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p256"></span>

<span id="fn_309"></span>[310](cc14018.htm#fr_309) <span
id="xix.i-p257.2"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p258"></span>

<span id="fn_310"></span>[311](cc14018.htm#fr_310) <span
id="xix.i-p259.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p260"></span>

<span id="fn_311"></span>[312](cc14018.htm#fr_311) <span
id="xix.i-p268.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p269"></span>

<span id="fn_312"></span>[313](cc14018.htm#fr_312) <span
id="xix.i-p279.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p280"></span>

<span id="fn_313"></span>[314](cc14018.htm#fr_313) <span
id="xix.i-p280.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p281"></span>

<span id="fn_314"></span>[315](cc14018.htm#fr_314) <span
id="xix.i-p286.4"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p287"></span>

<span id="fn_315"></span>[316](cc14018.htm#fr_315) <span
id="xix.i-p288.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p289"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 31](cc14019)
