[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc14001)  [Next](cc14003) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 14: Isaiah, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii"></span>

<span id="iii-p1"></span>PREFATORY ADVERTISEMENT

<span id="iii-p2"></span>BY

<span id="iii-p3"></span>NICOLAS DES GALLARS

<span id="iii-p4"></span>TO THE READERS

<span id="iii-p5"></span>Though in collecting these Commentaries I was
astonished, first, at the labor and difficulty, and next at the various
opinions of men, yet I thought, Christian Readers, that I must not
refuse to labor or shrink from anything, provided that I can be of any
service. With respect to the difficulties, I quickly surmounted them,
through the clear method of instruction which the Author has been
accustomed to employ, as may be seen in his writings, but still more in
his speaking. And if some obscure passages, of which there are many in
that Prophet, made me pause, it was not because I had not the benefit of
his judgment and advice in clearly explaining and revising the whole;
for, in consequence of the familiar and daily intercourse which I had
with him, those intricacies which might have retarded or perplexed me
were easily disentangled and removed. Besides, at any hour when one
could go by stealth, that is, when he had any relaxation from the
weighty affairs which almost overwhelmed him, I read to him all that I
had written, in order that, if he could not closely examine the whole,
he might at least add, or take away, or give me directions, as far as
was necessary. All this he did carefully, though hardly ever did I read
to him two or three verses when he was not immediately called away,
either by persons who wanted his advice, or by his friends. Yet
reviewing these things with all the fidelity and diligence that I could,
I still returned, and frequently put questions to him.

<span id="iii-p6"></span>As to my labor, it was partly relieved by some
expository remarks which I had collected from his own mouth, while he
was preaching; for it is now four years and more since he explained that
Prophet to us, in a highly profitable manner, in public Discourses,
before giving us the interpretation in the school. At that time,
recording not only the faithful exhortations which relate to the
correction of vices, to the condition of that age, and to the
restoration of the purity of doctrine and of the Church, but also the
exact interpretations on which he dwelt largely, in order to draw from
them a solid doctrine to be applied to the use of the people, when I
returned to the house, I wrote them down in Latin, so far as I
remembered and had leisure. That was of great use to me in collecting
these Commentaries; not that I put into them everything that I then
wrote, or in the same order and method, but so far as I already
understood the sentiments, and had been habituated, by some practice, to
that mode of interpretation, I had not so much trouble as if I had come
quite raw and ill-prepared to that way of writing.

<span id="iii-p7"></span>So far as relates to the judgments of men, who
must have very various opinions about this labor of mine, I soon foresaw
that there would be many of them who would take no great pleasure in
that which cost me pain, because they would have preferred to have this
written by the Author himself instead of being collected and arranged by
me. And indeed I am very much of their opinion; for the whole would have
been sent forth by him in a more complete and finished state. But as he
was employed in preparing other works, the advantage of which is so
evident that it is unnecessary for me to proclaim it; and as he was
harassed by so much business that he scarcely had leisure to read, it
would hardly have been possible for him to put his hand to that work.

<span id="iii-p8"></span>Accordingly, having been for a long time
attached to that Prophet, and wishing clearer expositions of many
passages, and now enjoying them, I thought that I would do what was good
and profitable, if, while I promoted my own benefit, I had regard also
to others whose desire might not be less than mine, and whose minds,
even supposing that they had not so strong a desire, might be aroused by
reading this Commentary, and might receive from it an increase of
knowledge. In order, therefore, that you, believing Reader, might enjoy
along with me the explanation of that Prophet, I suddenly undertook this
labor, lest if we waited longer for these Commentaries, they might be
taken from us by some injury or calamity in these wretched times. For we
see every day what snares are laid by Satan for the Church, which is
newly born, and for her faithful teachers. We meet with treachery in
some, from whom we had expected better things; in others we find
fickleness and lightness, and others are blinded by the glimmering of
this age. There are very few of them who, in defense of the kingdom of
Christ, oppose the tyrannical laws of Antichrist.

<span id="iii-p9"></span>Let us therefore welcome those who, through the
unspeakable mercy of God, are left to us; or rather let us welcome the
gifts which God has given them, that hereafter, as far as we shall have
opportunity, we may provide for the Church. While we can enjoy their
doctrine, let us seize it eagerly as the armor fitted for repelling our
enemies; for there is great reason to believe that the Lord will take
vengeance on the malice of men by such punishments as they deserve, and
will deprive us of the excellent gifts with which in the present day he
has adorned his Church. Many have great gifts of tongues, while others
excel in interpretations, and undoubtedly they have strong claims on our
attention; but this gift of prophecy, which surpasses all others, and to
which we ought to be especially devoted, is generally despised. Hence it
arises that many persons are more addicted to ostentation than eager to
promote the salvation of the Church, and take more pleasure in vaunting
before the people than in edifying the Church of Christ. St. Paul,
already perceiving in his time that imminent danger, said,

<span id="iii-p10"></span>“Desire to pursue spiritual gifts, but still
more that you may prophesy.”  
(<span id="iii-p10.2"></span>[1Co
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#001)<span id="iii-p10.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii-p11"></span>For in the Christian Church the most important
point, and that which we ought above all things to desire, is that the
hidden meanings and divine mysteries of Scripture may be explained to us
with some advantage. If that is wanting, the rest must gradually be
thrown down, as we have found it to be in past ages, to the great injury
of the whole Church.

<span id="iii-p12"></span>We must therefore devote ourselves to this
gift above all others, for fear of abusing those passages of Scripture
which have been turned to a wrong purpose, or of being ourselves guilty
of torturing those passages to a meaning which is foreign to them. And
especially we must throw ourselves on the doctrine of the prophets; for
they who are faithfully employed in them open up a road for easily going
higher, and lay a firm and solid foundation for salvation. Now, if that
exercise was ever necessary, it is at the present time, when we must
make war not only against Papists or Jews, but against dreadful monsters
which, concealed under the appearance of men, endeavor to overturn all
religion and humanity.

<span id="iii-p13"></span>Among all the prophets Isaiah justly holds the
chief place, because he gives very clear testimonies concerning Christ,
and places before our eyes the state and condition of his Church, that
is, of his kingdom, as the reading will alone clearly shew, so that it
will be unnecessary for me to make a long preface. He who shall have
understood him well will be abundantly prepared for reading the other
Prophets. The perusal of these Commentaries will enable you better to
understand how well adapted the doctrine of Isaiah is to the present
time; and if you are diligent and attentive, I am not afraid that you
will think that I have labored in vain.

<span id="iii-p14"></span>Yet if you compared this work with the Sermons
which the Author preached on that Prophet, you might well exclaim, as
Æschines did with regard to Demosthenes, “What would you have thought if
you had heard him speak it?” He adjusted his sentences so admirably,
touched the hearts of his hearers, explained every thing by familiar and
obvious examples, and treated his subjects in so popular a manner, that
he seemed actually to place it before their eyes. Very frequently, too,
an opportunity presented itself of discoursing on some passage, when it
would have been impossible purposely to select out of the whole
Scripture a passage better adapted to the place, the persons, and the
occasion; so that all were astonished at it, and clearly understood that
it had not been directed by the wisdom of a man, but by the Spirit of
God; and the advantage which afterwards resulted from it fully verified
that conclusion.

<span id="iii-p15"></span>If these Sermons can ever be published, (which
I should earnestly desire,) you will know these things better, though
the truth of what has been said cannot be so clearly perceived by any as
by those who have seen them with their eyes. Here you have the
substance, however, both of the Sermons and of the Lessons, from which I
shall reckon myself to have derived great benefit, if you partake of it
as you ought. It was my study, it was the object which I proposed to
myself, not to have any favor from men, but to be of advantage to
believers; and, so far as my conscience bears me witness, I see not why
I ought to dread the judgment of men. I hold it to be certain that they
who shall carefully weigh the whole will judge of me with candour; and
that, if there be any fault or omission in what I have done, they will
cheerfully lay in the balance the benefit which they shall have derived
from the work.

<span id="iii-p16"></span>Geneva, *December* 27, l551

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Gallars' Dedication to the First Edition](cc14003)
