[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tge03.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE REVELATION OF ST. JOHN THE DIVINE,

### CHAPTER XXI.

And I saw a new heaven and a new earth: for the first heaven and the
first earth were passed away; and there was no more sea.

2 And I John saw the holy city, new Jerusalem, coming down from God out
of heaven, prepared as a bride adorned for her husband.

3 And I heard a great voice out of heaven saying, Behold, the tabernacle
of God *is* with men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be his
people, and God himself shall be with them *and be* their God.

4 And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes; and there shall be
no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any
more pain: for the former things are passed away.

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

5 And he that sat upon the throne said, Behold, I make all things new.
And he said unto me, Write; for these words are true and faithful.

6 And he said unto me, It is done. I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning
and the end. I will give unto him that is athirst of the fountain of the
water of life freely.

7 He that overcometh shall inherit all things; and I will be his God,
and he shall be my son.

8 But the fearful and unbelieving, and the abominable, and murderers,
and whoremongers, and sorcerers, and idolators, and all liars, shall
have their part in the lake which burneth with fire and brimstone; which
is the second death.

9 And there came unto me one of the seven angels which had the seven
vials full of the seven last plagues, and talked with me, saying, Come
hither, I will show thee the bride, the Lamb's wife.

10 And he carried me away in the spirit to a great and high mountain,
and showed me that great city, the holy Jerusalem, descending out of
heaven from God.

11 Having the glory of God: and her light *was* like unto a stone most
precious, even like a jasper stone, clear as crystal;

12 And had a wall great and high, *and* had twelve gates, and at the
gates twelve angels, and names written thereon, which are *the names* of
the twelve tribes of the children of Israel:

13 On the east three gates; on the north three gates; on the south three
gates; and on the west three gates.

14 And the wall of that city had twelve foundations, and in them the
names of the twelve apostles of the Lamb.

15 And he that talked with me had a golden reed to measure the city, and
the gates thereof, and the wall thereof.

16 And the city lieth foursquare, and the length is as large as the
breadth: and he measured the city with the reed, twelve thousand
furlongs. The length and the breadth and the height of it are equal.

17 And he measured the wall thereof, an hundred and forty *and* four
cubits, *according to* the measure of a man, that is, of the angel.

18 And the building of the wall of it was *of* jasper: and the city was
pure gold, like unto clear glass.

19 And the foundation of the wall of the city *were* garnished with all
manner of precious stones. The first foundation was

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

jasper; the second, sapphire; the third, a chalcedony; the fourth, an
emerald.

20 The fifth, sardonyx; the sixth, sardius; the seventh, chrysolite; the
eight, beryl; the ninth, a topaz; the tenth, a chrysoprasus; the
eleventh, a jacinth; the twelfth, an amethyst.

21 And the twelve gates *were* twelve pearls; every several gate was of
one pearl: and the street of the city *was* pure gold, as it were
transparent glass.

22 And I saw no temple therein: for the Lord God Almighty and the Lamb
are the temple of it.

23 And the city had no need of the sun, neither of the moon, to shine in
it: for the glory of God did lighten it, and the Lamb is the light
thereof.

24 And the nations of them which are saved shall walk in the light of
it: and the kings of the earth do bring their glory and honour into it.

25 And the gates of it shall not be shut at all by day: for there shall
be no night there.

26 And they shall bring the glory and honour of the nations into it.

27 And there shall in no wise enter into it any thing that defileth,
neither *whatsoever* worketh abomination, or maketh a lie: but they
which are written in the Lamb's book of life.

### CHAPTER XXII.

And he shewed me a pure river of water of life, clear as crystal,
proceeding out of the throne of God and of the Lamb.

2 In the midst of the street of it, and on either side of the river,
*was there* the tree of life, which bare twelve *manner of* fruits,
*and* yielded her the fruit every month: and the leaves of the tree
*were* for the healing of the nations.

3 And there shall be no more curse: but the throne of God and of the
Lamb shall be in it; and his servants shall serve them:

4 And they shall see his face: and his name *shall* be in their
foreheads.

5 And there shall be no light there; and they need no candle neither
light of the sun; for the Lord God giveth them light: and they shall
reign for ever and ever.

6 And he said unto me, These sayings *are* faithful and true: and the
Lord God of the holy prophets sent his angel to show unto his servants
the things which must shortly be done.

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

7 Behold I come quickly: blessed *is* he that keepeth the sayings of the
prophecy of this book.

8 And I John saw these things, and heard *them*. And when I had heard
and seen, I fell down to worship before the feet of the angel which
shewed me these things.

9 Then saith he unto me, See *thou do it* not: for I am thy
fellowservant, and of thy brethren the prophets, and of them which keep
the sayings of this book: worship God.

10 And he saith unto me, Seal not the sayings of the prophecy of this
book: for the time is at hand.

11 He that is unjust, let him be unjust still: and he which is filthy
let him be filthy still: and he is that is righteous, let him be
righteous still: and he that is holy, let him be holy still.

12 And, behold I come quickly; and my reward *is* with me to give every
man according as his work shall be.

13 1 am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, the first and the
last.

14 Blessed *are* they that do his commandments, that they may have right
to the tree of life, and may enter in through the gates in the city.

15 For without *are* dogs, and sorcerers, and whoremongers, and
murderers, and idolaters, and whosoever loveth and maketh a lie.

16 I Jesus have sent mine angel to testify unto you these things in the
churches. I am the root and the offspring of David, *and* the bright and
morning star.

17 And the Spirit and the bride say, Come. And let him that heareth say,
Come. And let him that is athirst come. And whosoever will, let him take
of the water of life freely.

18 For I testify unto every man that heareth the words of the prophecy
of this book, If any man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto
him the plagues that are written in this book.

19 And if any man shall take away from the words of the book of this
prophecy, God shall take away his part out of the book of life, and out
of the holy city, and *from* the things which are written in this book.

20 He which testifieth these things saith, Surely I come quickly. Amen.
Even so, come, Lord Jesus.

21 The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen.

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

India, according to the Vedas, entertained a respect for woman amounting
almost to worship.

### MAXIMS FROM THE SACRED BOOKS OF INDIA.

"He who despises woman despises his mother."

"Who is cursed by a woman is cursed by God."

"The tears of a woman call down the fire of Heaven on those who make
them flow."

"Evil to him who laughs at woman's sufferings: God shall laugh at his
prayers."

"It was at the prayer of a woman that the Creator pardoned Man: cursed
be he who forgets it."

"Who shall forget the sufferings of his mother at his birth shall be
reborn in the body of an owl during three successive transmigrations."

"There is no crime more odious than to persecute woman.'

"When women are honoured the Divinities are content; but when they are
not honoured all undertakings fail."

"The households cursed by women to whom they have not rendered the
homage due them find themselves weighed down with ruin, and destroyed,
as if they had been struck by some secret power."

"The infinite and the boundless can alone comprehend the. boundless and
the infinite, God only can comprehend God."

As the body is strengthened by muscles, the Soul is fortified by
virtue."

"The wrongs we inflict upon others follow as like our shadow."

"It is time to appreciate all things it their true Value."

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Let us repeat that story from Sufi: "There was a man, who for seven
years, did every act of charity, and at the end of seven years he
mounted the steps to the gate of Heaven and knocked. A voice cried, 'Who
is there'?' 'Thy servant, O Lord,' and the gate was shut. Seven other
years he did every other good work, and again mounted the three steps to
Heaven and knocked. The voice cried, 'Who is there I?' He answered, 'Thy
slave, O God,' and the gates were shut. Seven other years he did every
good deed and again mounted the steps, to Heaven, and the voice said,
'Who is there?' He replied, 'Thyself, O God,' and the gates wide open
flew."

And why?

Because, as the scripture saith,--"*The good that is done in the earth,
Thou, Lord, doest it*."
