[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tge01)  [Next](tge03.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

# THE FIRST BOOK OF MOSES, CALLED GENESIS.

### CHAPTER II.

THUS the heavens and the earth were finished, and all the host of them.

2 And on the seventh day God ended his work which he had made; and he
rested on the seventh day from all his work which he had made.

3 And God blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it; because that in it
he had rested from all his work which God created and made.

4 ¶ These *are* the generations of the heavens and of the earth when
they were created, in the day that the LORD God made the earth and the
heavens,

5 And every plant of the field before it was in the earth and every herb
of the field before it grew; for the LORD God had not caused it to rain
upon the earth, and *there was* not a man to till the ground.

6 But there went up a mist from the earth, and watered the, whole face
of the ground.

7 And the LORD God formed man of the dust *of* the ground, and breathed
into his nostrils the breath of life; and man became a living soul.

8 ¶ And the LORD God planted a garden eastward in Eden; and there he put
the man whom he had formed.

9 And out of the ground made the LORD God to grow every tree that is
pleasant to the sight, and good for food; the tree of life also in the
midst of the garden, and the tree of knowledge of good and evil.

10 And a river went out of Eden to water the garden; and from thence it
was parted, and became into four heads.

11 The name of the first *is* Pison: that *is* it which compasseth the
whole land of Havilah, where *there is* gold;

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

12 And the gold of that land *is* good: there *is* bdellium and the onyx
stone.

13 And the name of the second river *is* Gihon: the same *is* it that
compasseth the whole land of Ethiopia.

14 And the name of the third river *is* Hiddekel: that *is* it which
goeth toward the east of Assyria. And the fourth river is Euphrates.

15 And the LORD God took the man, and put him into the garden of Eden to
dress it and to keep it.

16 And the LORD God commanded the man, saying, Of every tree of the
garden thou mayest freely eat:

17 But of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt not eat
of it: for in the day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die.

18 ¶ And the LORD God said, *It is* not good that the man should be
alone; I will make him an help meet for him.

19 And out of the ground the LORD God formed every beast of the field,
and every fowl of the air; and brought *them* unto Adam to see what be
would call them; and whatsoever Adam called every living creature, that
*was* the name thereof.

20 And Adam gave names to all cattle, and to the fowl of the air, and to
every beast of the field; but for Adam there was not found an help meet
for him.

21 And the LORD God caused a deep sleep to fall upon Adam, and he slept:
and he took one of his ribs, and closed up the flesh instead thereof:

22 And the rib, which the LORD God had taken from man, made he a woman,
and brought her unto the man.

23 And Adam said, This *is* now bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh:
she shall be called Woman, because she was taken out of Man.

24 Therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother, and shall
cleave unto his wife: and they shall be one flesh.

25 And they were both naked, the man and his wife, and were not ashamed.

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

### CHAPTER III.

Now the serpent was more subtle than any beast of the field which the
LORD God had made. And he said unto the woman, Yea, hath God said, Ye
shall not eat of every tree of the garden?

2 And the woman said unto the serpent: We may eat of the fruit of the
trees of the garden:

3 But of the fruit of the tree which *is* in the midst of the garden,
God bath said, Ye shall not eat of it, neither shall ye touch it, lest
ye die:

4 And the serpent said unto the woman, Ye shall not surely die:

5 For God doth know that in the day ye eat thereof, then your eyes shall
be opened, and ye shall be as gods, knowing good and evil.

6 And when the woman saw that the tree *was* good for food, and that it
*was* pleasant to the eyes, and a tree to be desired to make *one* wise,
she took of the fruit thereof, and did eat; and gave also unto her
husband with her, and he did eat.

7 And the eyes of them both were opened, and they knew that they *were*
naked: and they sewed fig leaves together, and made them selves aprons.

8 And they heard the voice of the LORD God walking in the garden in the
cool of the day: and Adam and his wife hid themselves from the presence
of the LORD God amongst the trees of the garden.

9 And the LORD God called unto Adam, and said unto him Where *art* thou?

10 And he said, I heard thy voice in the garden, and I was afraid,
because I *was* naked; and I hid myself.

11 And he said, Who told thee that thou *wast* naked? Hast thon eaten of
the tree, whereof I commanded thee that thou shouldest not eat?

12 And the man said, The woman whom thou gavest *to be* with me, she
gave me of the tree, and I did eat.

13 And the LORD God said unto the woman, What *is* this *that* thou hast
done? And the woman said, The serpent beguiled me, and I did eat.

14 And the LORD God said unto the serpent, Because thou has done this,
thou *art* cursed above all cattle, and above every

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

beast of the field: upon thy belly shalt thou go, and dust shalt thou
eat all the, thy life:

15 And I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy
seed and her seed; it shall bruise thy head, and thou shalt bruise his
heel.

16 Unto the woman he said, I will greatly multiply thy sorrow and thy
conception; in sorrow thou shalt bring forth children; and thy desire
*shall be* to thy husband, and he shall rule over thee.

17 And unto Adam he said, Because thou hast hearkened unto the voice of
thy wife, and hast eaten of the tree, of which I commanded thee, saying,
Thou shalt not eat of it: cursed *is* the ground for thy sake; in sorrow
shalt thou eat *of* it all the days of thy life;

18 Thorns also and thistles shall it bring forth to thee; and thou shalt
eat the herb of the field:

19 In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread, till thou return unto
the ground; for out of it wast thou taken: for dust thou *art*, and unto
dust shalt thou return.

20 And Adam called his wife's name Eve; because she was the mother of
all living.

21 Unto Adam also, and to his wife, did the LORD God make coats of
skins, and clothed them.

22 ¶ And the LORD God said, Behold, the man is become as one of us, to
know good and evil: and now, lest he put forth his hand, and take also
of the tree of life, and eat, and live for ever;

23 Therefore the LORD God sent him forth from the garden of Eden, to
till the ground from whence he was taken.

24 So he drove out the man; and he placed at the cast of the garden of
Eden cherubims, and a flaming sword which turned every way, to keep the
way of the tree of life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Garden of Eden](tge03.md)
