[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tot02)  [Next](tot04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417977574/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Tilak of Tibet Reveals Life's Purpose*, by Ann Hackett \[1944\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

# TILAK OF TIBET

<span id="page_x">p. x</span> <span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

### I

### TILAK'S BIRTH AND BOYHOOD

In the peaceful Kashmir Valley, a son was born to a poor fruit grower
and his wife. The June morning that the infant, Tilak, opened his eyes,
was full of prophecy and deeper purpose. The year 950 A. D. proved
eventful for India, China and Tibet.

When a soul, carrying a message, again becomes encompassed in a fleshy
garment, the tidings are passed from flower to tree and to waving grass.
These silent sentinels of hidden things sent forth added perfume to the
Valley of Kashmir.

The mountain birds winged from great heights and dropped to the warm
land below. Their flight was a portent. The wild animals in the woods
became quiet. The wild life, reclining on shaded banks, seemed with
half-closed eyes to peer across quiet pools, as though wrapped with
expectancy.

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

Standing by the sleeping babe was a Buddhist Priest. He had come to
bless the infant boy, and in the sleeping presence of the tiny mortal
found himself blessed.

On the exposed palm of the child a cross could be seen, under the
forefinger, and on the right hand.

The Buddhist Priest spread the word far and wide that a Teacher had
taken birth among mortal men.

The baby grew to boyhood. He seemed to draw his very sustenance from the
forming things. His boyish fingers sensed the secret hidden in the buds
of fairest flowers. His feet pressed the earth as though to reveal a
path long hidden. The soft south wind clung to his tunic and veritably
it seemed to sail, carrying him to uncharted seas.

The dark and serious eyes of the youth absorbed all that passed before
him, retaining what he saw in the recesses of a growing understanding.
He seemed to know that life's panorama is retained in no other way.

To Tilak the rivers and quiet pools were the tears of lives past. That
which apparently decays was to him but a preparation for greater beauty.

Tilak lived not on the surface of things, but ever sought to peer
beneath the mirror.

Day to Tilak became the dream; night the living.

As a pupil he taught more than he was taught.

His sandals often graced the tiled floor of the Temple. Often would he
sit in front of raised altar.

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> As the rays of the
rising sun slanted through Temple window and brightened his yellow
mantle, his body appeared as though carved from finest substance. It was
then his soul was seeking heavenly news.

The animals that roam in the forest of ignorance became as vapor to
Tilak. Lust, hatred, anger and fear, knew him not. These animals of
baser moments found no place within him to dwell. It is only that which
is welcome that remains. Lust, hate, anger and fear ever leave by the
same gate through which they enter. They ever shun friendliness, and at
its approach hurriedly depart. Man is friendly to that he knows, and
when man is friendly he does not hate.

Tilak's heart had taught him that anything that must be carried in the
earthly hand perishes quickly, and leaves but the dust of its former
shape. Memory alone retains the shape. Why seek those things that
perish?

It was thus that Tilak approached his Teacher.

In the open garden, behind his father's simple cottage, the Teacher
came.

It was evening. A wayward bird sought its nest. The mountain appeared as
a purple sentinel. The closing flowers sighed as they relaxed in
slumber, sending forth the evening's essence. Cautiously the moon peered
over rocky crag, and then as though satisfied slipped quickly to
midheaven.

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

"I have come, Tilak," said the Teacher.

"I am ready," replied Tilak.

Side by side Teacher and pupil walked out of the garden and onto the
highway that led to the mountain.

 

As though by prearrangement with that long past Tilak became the Keeper
of the Chamber of the Great Potential.

The Chamber of the Great Potential was spherical. It had been carved out
of the mountainside, and represented earthly life.

As every human being is an equal distance from all that is good and
beneficent, so with the earthly planet; all points are equal to the
heavens.

Within his cavern Chamber Tilak worked and found his being.

Daily he tended the fires of higher resolve; night brought him
recompense.

 

#### THE FINER BODY AND THE PHYSICAL BODY

Sitting before a table in the Chamber of the Great Potential, Tilak
wrote on parchment leaves:

All individuals living in earthly conditions have two bodies: the
temporary physical body that is used during

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

earthly life, and the permanent finer body that is used after physical
death; and that is used before physical birth. The physical body is
limited in power, the finer body is unlimited in power.

The physical body is a counterpart of the finer body. The powers used in
the physical body are but the powers of the finer body greatly reduced
in potency.

For long periods the individual places all dependence upon the physical
body, and the conditions surrounding it. Ultimately the individual
believes that he can control many physical conditions. When he
apparently is successful he is pleased, and when he apparently is not
successful he is displeased.

It is not until the individual learns that the physical plane is but the
plane of effects that the individual seeks the cause for these effects.

The search for the cause gradually pushes the individual's activities
into the higher parts of his being.

Untrained physical senses often mislead the individual. The physical
senses report their findings to the mind. The mind, after analyzing the
various findings, endeavors to establish definite mental
concepts—concepts that will contain a degree of permanency. Thus the
mind often seeks guidance and listens to moral promptings.

When an individual is living entirely an earthly life clairvoyance and
clairaudience would serve him but

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

little. It is only when the individual attempts to solve the enigmas of
existence that more subtle powers are needed.

Communication of mind with mind is always operative. Seldom, however, is
the sender or recipient of a message aware of what is taking place. Such
an awareness requires rigid training.

All the powers of the finer body can be used by the individual while the
individual is still physically clothed.

Everything in the physical life is gauged by time. Physical time is
gauged by the movement of the earth on its axis, and the movement of the
earth around the sun. Earthly events seem to follow one another by a
natural sequence.

The finer body depends not upon earthly time. It transcends such time,
and can cognize earthly events that have been, and earthly events that
are to come.

In earthly life the individual is a dependent. All objects in earth life
on which the individual places dependence are ever mutable and changing.
The individual possesses nothing in earth life. Even the particles of
the physical body that the individual uses he possesses not. How can the
individual claim possession of any earthly object when such object was
in the earthly state before the individual's physical birth? To use and
leave is the law of the physical life.

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

#### TENDENCIES

Every physical life requires adjustments.

Every individual brings to a physical life definite tendencies. These
tendencies prompt many of the earthly actions. These Tendencies are the
individual's heritage. All individuals have group tendencies, as well as
individualistic tendencies. The group tendencies are shared with all
other individuals. These group tendencies are the prompting to worship,
the desire for play, and the search for love. The specific
individualistic tendencies are those that draw an individual to a given
work, occupation or profession. These individualistic tendencies are
independent of environment or heredity.

During a physical life an individual is called upon to make decisions.
These decisions regulate conduct and the association with other
individuals. A choice between two actions is often determined by
tendency. Thus an individual's earthly life is determined in great part
by his tendencies. Following tendency is not always the better way.

A tendency is built up through a series of physical lives, and is
constructed of those things that the individual found satisfactory in
the search for a wider understanding. Tendencies are gradually changed
when the individual finds that they do not serve that more elevated
condition sought.

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

It is only when the individual assumes full responsibility for all
thoughts, feelings and acts that the individual realizes definite laws
are operating in physical conditions.

When an individual takes birth in physical life everything appears to be
waiting; the physical body, its construction, coloring and outline, the
individual's parents, the early environment; in fact, everything appears
waiting and prepared for him.

All these things found at physical birth cannot be changed by the
individual. The individual cannot add height to his physical body, nor
change the coloring of hair or skin; the parents cannot be changed, nor
the early environment. As these things are determined, they are
determined for the benefit of the individual.

During the longest physical life the individual meets but few other
individuals, therefore those individuals that enter his earthly life
have a purpose there and are the individual's teachers.

As the earthly life does not contain enough to satisfy a growing mind,
the mind will ultimately turn from objective life and will seek a fuller
state of being elsewhere. It is the inability of the earthly life to
absorb all of the powers of mind that brings dissatisfaction; for
nothing can bring peace to the mind that is impermanent.

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

#### SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS

Whatever an individual thinks, feels or does becomes part of the
individual's self-consciousness. If an individual thinks and feels
poorly, can the self-consciousness be contented? As every individual
moves and has his being in self-consciousness it behooves all
individuals to elevate the self-consciousness as quickly as possible. No
other individual can, in any degree, change the self-consciousness of
another individual. The individual's self-consciousness must live from
and of itself. If self-consciousness lives poorly, it will be poor and
extremely limited.

*THERE IS NO POWER IN THE ENTIRE UNIVERSE THAT CAN CHANGE OR MODIFY
SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS BUT ITSELF*.

Whatever disturbs self-consciousness, self-consciousness has so
permitted to disturb. What are some of the things self-consciousness
seeks? Kindness, charity and understanding are three of them. How can
self-consciousness obtain these things? By one way only—*BY USING THEM*.
Self-consciousness often through its grosser vehicle, the physical body,
tries every other method first. All other methods fail, and always will
fail. What self-consciousness uses It Is while it so uses.

There is nothing in the universe that functions mysteriously. Everything
functions according to Just

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

and Beneficent Law. If a thing appears mysterious it is because
self-consciousness wants it to appear so. Many individuals apparently
thrive in the shallow pool of mystery. The lethargic state of mystery
cannot long hold the individual. The individual's subtle, finer body
will protest.

 

#### MAGIC

All natural life is magic, for natural life, as a mirror, reflects a
finer life. Magic means mirror. Everyone in daily life uses magic. An
individual's understanding of earthly events and conditions is his
magic.

If the individual's interpretation of earthly things is from his finer
body, if an individual has the realization that the earthly body is but
a reflection of the finer body, the individual is using a higher form of
magic. In using such a higher form of magic the individual often
accomplishes things that appear to others as miraculous. Every human
being is endowed with an earthly body and a finer body. His use of these
bodies determines his magical powers.

Tilak's meditation closed with these thoughts: "'Wherever an individual
finds himself is where the individual should be. Around the individual
lies his work. In his work will be found his inspiration. Inspiration
will lead to impersonal service for others. To

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

point the better way of life to others is a great work. It is the final
earthly aim of all.

"First to prepare, then to receive, and then to share. It is only that
which is shared that expands and grows. Innumerable earthly lives are
required for the preparation; many more earthly lives for the reception;
and added earthly lives for the giving. This is the Great
Trinity—Preparing, Receiving, and Giving. To this trinity all lives
should be dedicated."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II. A Past Life](tot04)
