[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tot07)  [Next](tot09.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417977574/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Tilak of Tibet Reveals Life's Purpose*, by Ann Hackett \[1944\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

### VI

### THE INVALID

One night a woman visited Tilak in the Chamber of the Great Potential.
When she entered the Chamber her step appeared uncertain.

"I have come," she; said to Tilak, "for your advice.

I have been drawn here several times before, while my I earthly body was
sleeping, but did not have enough strength to complete the journey until
tonight."

"I will help you, friend," said Tilak gently.

"Since a child," the woman began, "I have not had the use of my legs. I
cannot walk a step. For over thirty years I have been in a wheel-chair
and have had to be lifted about as a baby. Why am I so punished?"

Tilak, who had been studying the woman's aura, replied: "What so often
in earthly life appears as a punishment is a preparation for a future
work in the world. Every great and useful work requires patience. When
patience becomes the modifier of unruly faculties, the individual then
has a clearer understanding of many things that before were dormant or
covered. One of the greatest aids to patience is bodily impairment.

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> When an individual
is deprived for a life of the use of arms or legs, such deprivation is a
great test of patience. There are other tests, such as bedridden
individuals, and individuals with one or more impaired senses, or any
bodily disruption that makes an individual physically dependent upon
others. Seldom is an individual visited with any of these bodily
impairments unless the individual is being prepared for an important
work at a later period. In the coming physical life, or lives, all that
contributed to the individual's preparation for a great service is
forgotten. The individual then is only happy that he is qualified to
perform well a service."

The woman's face brightened appreciably. She nodded affirmatively, as
she said: "Everything then serves a purpose. If I only could remember
what you have told me when I awaken in my earthly body!"

"I will help you to remember, friend."

"You can do that!" eagerly asked the woman.

"I can, friend. I will visit you during your sleeping period and during
your waking period. I will fuse your waking and sleeping memories."

"You give me courage to continue with patience in my impaired physical
body."

Unseen, Tilak visited the woman deprived of locomotion. Tilak fused the
woman's waking and sleeping memories. After many such visits from Tilak
the woman awoke one morning with the thought: "I am

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

in this wheel-chair to develop patience; then I will be ready to serve
wherever I am permitted; to serve those who will need what I have to
give."

The woman's family and friends noticed that the woman's outlook had
changed. Self-pity, and her former questionings of a cruel fate,
disappeared. Now the woman was cheerful. Her face had softened. Soon
people were bringing to the woman their problems. She gave them all
encouragement. The many who came to her, and who saw her patience and
cheerfulness, went away with a firm determination to meet their problems
with the same spirit. Thus the woman rendered a service, even while
preparing for a greater service.

 

#### THE SELECTIVE POWER

Tilak wrote on parchment leaf:

During the waking period, in earthly existence, the individual uses
continually the selective power. All individuals have decided and
definite preferences. These preferences apply to every physical object,
and to every other individual. That which prompts selection varies in
all individuals.

Some individuals are prompted by physical gain, and thus turn the
selective power to that end, selecting only those things that will
contribute to earthly gain. Other individuals are prompted by earthly
power, and

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

they use the selective faculty toward that end. It is what prompts the
selective power that gives value to the individual's acts.

What is it that passes judgment on events, conditions, and other
individuals? It cannot be the senses, nor the faculties, for they but
report their findings. To what do the senses and faculties report their
findings? *TO THE INDIVIDUAL SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS*.

For long periods the individual's self-consciousness consists
principally of the findings of the senses and the faculties. The
judgment passed on these findings determines the condition of the
self-consciousness. Self-consciousness implies self-awareness.
Self-awareness is not physical body awareness, or faculty awareness; it
is much greater than these. What is often called self-consciousness is
but body consciousness. The individual is much more than body
consciousness. The individual is greater than anything he uses, for
everything the individual uses reports its findings to him. It is when
these findings are presented to self-consciousness that judgment is
passed. How often does the individual realize that he is passing
judgment? The individual more often than not accepts the findings of the
physical body and the faculties as they are presented to him.

During the physical life the senses continually demand attention; the
senses constantly . interrupt

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

faculty action. If the mental faculty wishes to dwell upon something
that is independent of sense impression the senses become restive.

The mind, or mental faculty, whose chief function is thinking, is
probably the most difficult faculty to direct and control. When the
mental faculty is brought into action it is so eager to express itself
that thoughts pour into the mind from every direction; the thoughts pour
in so fast that the individual has difficulty in making proper
selections. It is at this point that training is necessary. The training
is long and arduous. Under training the individual is required to select
a thought and its related thoughts, and to give no attention to other
thoughts that may pour into the mind's field. When this can be
accomplished in a degree the individual can follow the thought selected
to a completeness not to be accomplished in any other way.

If the thought selected is home, only the thoughts related to home are
permitted to enter the mental field. Then the individual will have a
greater and wider concept of home than he had before. The wider the
concept the more interesting the subject becomes; the greater the
interest the better the understanding.

What pertains to thought also applies to feeling. Feelings are closely
related to the imagination. Feeling, as thought, should be trained.

The method for training feeling is similar to the method for training
thought. The individual selects a

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

feeling and related feelings. When this can be accomplished without
other feelings interrupting, the feeling selected by the individual
expands and reveals much that was hidden before. This adds beauty to the
feeling. Higher feelings and thoughts are never concerned with what
might be, but only with what is.

All peculiar mannerisms are emotionally formed. Few individuals can sit
down quietly without moving their hands or fingering some part of their
body. This indicates pent-up emotions; pent-up emotions are chaotic
uncontrolled feelings. The faculties of thinking and feeling are related
to vanity. The less ability an individual has the more vanity. A vain
individual often uses his vanity in attempting to cover up an individual
defect from himself. However, when the individual begins to train his
thinking and his feeling, and brings thought and feeling under the
control of his self-consciousness, vanity flees.

The first work of self-consciousness is to control everything it uses.
If any faculty, or the sense 'life, or anything else other than
self-consciousness, directs, the individual is permitting himself to
become lost to himself. During all physical lives, and the lives between
physical lives, self-consciousness is the individual's highest power.
The self-consciousness should never be surrendered to anything but
itself. Earthly life is a condition wherein the self-consciousness can
learn in degree its own great magnitude. That self-consciousness

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

can absorb everything in physical life shows that it is superior to
physical life, for that which absorbs is always superior to that which
is absorbed. Should any individual be satisfied that he is only
self-conscious of his body and his thoughts and feelings? Should not the
individual extend his self-consciousness to fields infinitely greater
than the earthly life? Is there anything in earthly life that
self-consciousness would like to have with it always? It is the lack of
balance between the faculties and sense life that leads to varied
opinions. Opinions are often grounded in confusion. Often the faculties
and the senses return different reports on the same things to the
self-consciousness. How can this condition be remedied? By training the
senses and faculties so that they will report accurately to the
self-consciousness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VII. The Lane of Birth](tot09.md)
