[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tot03)  [Next](tot05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417977574/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Tilak of Tibet Reveals Life's Purpose*, by Ann Hackett \[1944\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

### II

### A PAST LIFE

High in the Himalayas Tilak found the Flower of Hidden Delight. Lovingly
he plucked the flowers and wrapped them in the soft folds of a silken
cloth. Many flowers Tilak gathered.

Sitting in the Chamber of the Great Potential Tilak pressed the Flower
of Hidden Delight. Drop by drop a delicate liquid fell into the
expectant vial. The liquid was as odorless as spring water. Only to heat
would it deliver its sacred fragrance.

Tilak knelt before an altar. Three drops of the sacred essence fell upon
a heated incense cone. The Chamber became filled as with the fragrance
of a thousand flowers.

Tilak knelt as a suppliant. As his eager nostrils inhaled the delicate
aroma his head seemed to expand until it became as a planet in space. He
heard strange and sweet sounds; the rustling of silken leaves, the
falling of silvern water, the songs of birds unknown.

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Before his vision
burst a scene, a city. The sun appeared to brighten gilded roofs and
stately spires. In the streets below leisurely moved the populace. The
hum of many voices reached his ear—and then the clear notes of a
maiden's voice, distinct and separated from the hum. She spoke in a
tongue unknown to him, yet her words he knew: "Benza," he breathed.

"Comi, you have gone," came back the voice of the young maiden.

Then the picture with its gilded roofs and lofty spires vanished.

When Tilak regained consciousness he was lying prone on the floor in
front of the altar. Beside him was the small vial containing the juices
of the sacred Flower of Hidden Delight.

Tilak quickly recalled his vision. He knew that he had witnessed a scene
in a former life. Fragmentary though the vision had been it was not
without its message.

Tilak must prepare more; must be ready for a greater vision. He must
receive the contents of many past lives, for in them is rooted the
future—the future of the world.

Unbreakable hidden threads connect each with all, and all with each. He
who raises himself brings additional light to a darkened globe.

Seek the Great Potential. Make actual that which is not actual, that the
lives of all become benefit thereby.

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

#### AN ANCIENT MELODY

Tilak was polishing a long slender stone. The stone reflected his
efforts. Hidden within this slender stone for thousands of centuries had
been sweet sound—sound waiting but a caressing touch that it assume
proper shape—and then the gentlest tap that the sound be released.

When the slender stone had reached a perfect length and circumference,
under the ministering hands of Tilak, it was gently laid beside other
polished stones, on a bed of softest cloth.

Tilak nodded. His work was complete. He counted the long delicately
polished stones—eighty. With greatest care he threaded them on a long
piece of tufted grass. He fastened one end of the grass to a chamber
post. The other end he attached to a pole with a solid base that he had
carefully prepared. With a wand, made of sandalwood, in either hand, he
softly tapped on one stone and then on another.

The Chamber echoed to sweet sound. Tilak stopped and stood straight
before the polished stones, strung on the tufted grass—and then, as
though directed, his hands moved with assurance from one stone to
another. Often two stones would be contacted simultaneously by the
sandalwood wands. Melody glided throughout

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

the Chamber. Harmonies, as though springing from a primal seed—world
forming harmonies—world enlightening harmonies—moved freely into space,
released as something freed from a confinement of ages.

The walls of the Chamber became transparent, as did the very mountain
which encompassed the Chamber of the Great Potential.

As on a clear day, and at great altitude, Tilak saw a distant horizon
that seemed to approach him as he gazed. When the horizon reached his
very presence he saw before him a struggling people. He alone remained
at peace. All before him were madly rushing hither and thither seeking
the things the land produced, striving to make them personal
possessions, to hold against all others; trampling under foot many that
stood in their way; strained faces, unhappy faces, dissatisfied faces.
All they needed was about them, but they saw it not; ever reaching, as
they were, with stiffened hands, for that which crumbles as they grasp
it. This mass of human beings was bringing to pass an eclipse of reason,
when reason would appear to stand still, numbed by greed.

The delicate sandalwood wands slipped from Tilak's fingers. The sweet
sounds retreated to their stone encasements. The Chamber became opaque.
Tilak knelt before the Majesty of Law.

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

#### THE SPRING OF ANCIENT WATER

Again Tilak scaled the Abode of Snow. In his hand he carried branch of
tree. Stripped of the twigs and foliage it appeared as a staff.

Now and then Tilak would stop and push the branch through the snow.
Tilak was seeking a hidden spring—the Spring of Ancient Water. Toward
sundown he discovered that for which he sought.

Cutting away the snow and ice he opened a cavity, and saw running clear
water. He filled the carefully prepared skin that was slung across his
shoulder. Then Tilak slowly descended to his mountain Chamber.

In a prepared earthen bowl he poured the spring water of the mountain.
Before him he placed the bowl and gazed steadily into the water.

The water became as a clear lake, and then it disappeared. In its place
Tilak saw shifting continents—land disappearing beneath the water, and
land rising as though from a watery grave.

The scene changed. Fertile lands appeared; many people were working in
the fields gathering a harvest, singing as they worked.

Again the scene changed. Before him appeared a throne room. Seated on
the throne was a king. He was called William. The king rose and
addressed his nobles. He told them that on the morrow they would embark
for Angloland.

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

The king was William the Conqueror. The peaceful farms, the happy
people, were to be attacked by the Norman ruler.

The picture changed. The Norman king led his men across a narrow channel
of water and attacked Angloland. For three days and nights, on a plain,
men fought. The simple peace-loving Anglo farmers were subjugated.

The picture faded. Tilak found himself gazing into a bowl of clear
water, from the Spring of Ancient Water.

 

#### THE MENTOR APPEARS

A delicate gray cloud, tinged with pink, appeared before Tilak in the
Chamber of the Great Potential.

The cloud took shape. It was the Teacher, Tilak's Mentor. Tilak bowed
and received his Teacher's blessing.

Then the Teacher spoke: "I received your call." Again Tilak bowed.

"Soon, my neophyte, you will travel in the many spaces. You will lay
aside your earthly covering. It is' an impediment to your travels.
Through a cord of purest light your earthly covering will be joined to
your finer vehicle. When you are ready, come to me."

As the Teacher was blessing Tilak, the Teacher became as a pale gray
cloud, tinged with pink. The cloud disappeared. Tilak was alone.

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

#### USING THE FINER BODY

Tilak was reclining on a wooden cot. The Chamber was dark and still. His
body assumed an unusual lightness. As he rose the room became
illuminated as at midday. Tilak turned and viewed his earthly covering,
which was lying so quietly on the wooden cot. Around his physical body
Tilak could see a light. As he gazed the light became multicolored. It
was the aura of his physical body. Joined to the earthly covering by a
silver ray was the garment Tilak stood in.

Tilak glanced around the Chamber. The walls of his cavern retreat had
disappeared; in their place was blue space.

"I will seek my Teacher." Thus thought Tilak. As he thought he traveled
far, and stood before his Mentor.

"I was waiting," greeted his Teacher. "Come, we will join the others."

As he placed his hand on Tilak's shoulder they moved swiftly through
space, leaving the great Himalayan mountains far behind.

In a field, heavy with sweet-smelling flowers, Tilak and his Teacher met
the Assembly.

Tilak was surprised when he discovered that he knew them all; that he
called them all by name. As Tilak mingled with these Great Ones, sweet
music reached his ear; a music that reached his ascending being.

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

A great Teacher addressed the Assembly: "He who is dependent draws that
to him on which he places dependence. He who is independent opens the
gate of his own soul and dwells therein. That which is transitory will
ever be transitory. That which is transitory must be transitory to be at
all. That which is permanent is ever permanent. The permanent knows the
transitory, but the transitory knows not the permanent. Both are
eternal. The permanent is thyself freed from all entanglement. Only he
who is free can point the way to others. This is thy work."

The great Teacher left their midst.

Tilak sat up on his wooden cot. The Chamber was dark and still. He had
returned to his earthly covering, bringing a message.

*WHEN THE MIND IS STILL THE HEART SPEAKS*.

"Why playeth thou with sand, when I offer thee the universe?" sayeth the
sacred script.

 

#### THE MONEYLENDER

The morrow found Tilak high on the mountain. He was clad in a woolen
tunic. The ice cold wind blew round him, but touched him not. The fluid
of his nerves generated heat. The nerves passed the heat to the vessels
that carried the blood and regulated all physical cells. Bodily
temperature rises and falls with

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

the emotions. All forces that move through the body, move to balance.
Only man unbalances.

On a high point of the mountain, Tilak met a man.

"Help me," the man pleaded, "I am lost."

"Who are you, friend?" asked Tilak.

"I am Robra, the moneylender. I died last night."

"What do you seek, friend?"

"Peace. My soul torments me. At my bier I saw those I had robbed. They
cursed me, and I ran up the mountain for safety."

"You will be alone on the mountain," advised Tilak. "You are here. I
will go with you."

"Where?" questioned Tilak.

"I care not. I cannot face those people below with hate in their eyes."

"Did you rob them?" asked Tilak.

"I loaned them silver and gold. I made them pay for the loans. Should
they not pay?"

"You asked much of them for a loan?"

"All I could get," admitted the moneylender.

"You must return that which does not belong to you, friend."

"I can't! I am dead! " wailed the man.

"Should you remain dead to that which is just?" softly asked Tilak.

"What is just? Everybody cheats everybody else. I just did what others
were doing. How can that be

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

wrong?—And I hate them!" loudly exclaimed the moneylender.

"It is human nature, friend, to hate those whom we have injured."

"Where am I to go?" questioned the disconsolate Robra.

"Ere long you will be drawn to that which is nearest to yourself. If
that self is hatred and greed, these will confront you, taking form and
shape that belongs to them."

Tilak walked a way with the moneylender. Soon Tilak discovered that his
companion was no longer by his side—the moneylender had slipped down the
mountain.

 

#### THE MOTHER OF THE EMPEROR

Again Tilak reclined on his wooden cot. Again he stepped free from his
earthly covering.

Moving quickly in his finer body Tilak reached the palace of the Emperor
of India. Before the bronze gates of the palace were many guards. They
saw him not. He passed through the vast courtyard. The trickling
fountains reflected the rays of the moon, and the jetting water seemed
to assume fairy shapes. The dew on the closed lotus flowers in the
nearby pond glistened as a thousand gems. The fragrance of the night was
everywhere.

Again Tilak passed vigilant guards, as he entered

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

the massive carved doors of the palace. The great hall was stifling. He
turned into the banquet room. Although the room was dim, everything was
distinct to Tilak. On a cushioned divan slept the Emperor. His turban,
heavy with jewels, had slipped from his head. His embroidered garment
was in disarray. The heavy strings of pearls around his neck seemed to
pull as though attempting to get away. The golden sandals had carelessly
dropped to the floor. The Emperor was in a drunken slumber.

Around him, on the floor, slept dancing girls exhausted by the night's
revel. Semi-nude, they revealed youthful forms—budding breasts rising
and falling with the breathing of the sleeper; breasts that later would
become full bowls and contain nourishment for babe. Many jeweled girdles
had slipped aside revealing maidenhood.

Tilak pondered. Lust is contrary to beauty. On the pyre of baser
passions man had placed young womanhood; man had become a slave to all
that incites—the slave to woman, when he should have been her protector.

Through the banquet room moved shapes; shapes of desires and lust
released from inactive and exhausted bodies. These forms were grotesque.
Some appeared as gigantic horntoads, others as reptiles with the legs of
animals. These shapes crawled over the sleeping forms, and seemed to
receive sustenance from

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

the poisons being cast off by the human beings over which they hovered.

Tilak walked down the long room and stood over a sleeping girl, a maid
of twelve. Even in sleep a smile hovered over her face. Her silver
anklets clasped slender ankles and seemed so large above tiny feet.

Tilak raised both arms over the sleeping child and breathed the word,
"Come!"

The sleeping youth stirred not, but from the sleeping physical body
there issued the finer radiant form. A pink tunic dropped from shoulder
to knee.

Tilak and the young maiden in the finer radiant form glided away. Ere
long Tilak and his youthful companion descended onto the Meadow of Sweet
Content. While Tilak gazed upon the child she wove chains of flowers.
She wove a wreath for his head.

"I am Petal," she smiled.

Tilak knew that she was to become the mother of the next Emperor of
India; knew that she would temper the ruler's colder nature with a finer
feeling; knew that her flower-stained fingers would add perfume to the
Emperor's life.

"Who are you?" queried the child, as she continued picking flowers.

"I am Tilak."

The child laughed merrily: "What a funny name! Where are you from?"

"Tibet."

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

"High in the mountains! I have heard. I danced last night for the
Emperor. I became tired. I fell asleep. This," pointing toward the
meadow, "must be a dream."

"Dreams are real, Petal."

"Then why do we wake up?"

"That the dream be made complete. Your life in the palace should be
hedged by dreams."

"I never met you before."

"Yes, Petal, long ago. I will tell you. Follow with me the slender
thread that leads into the mysterious past where we were all nurtured."

The child sat on the grassy bank. Her expectant eyes shone. She crossed
her slender hands in her lap. Her feet appeared as brown leaves that had
been dropped softly by a weary tree.

"Within us, Petal, is a Light. It is the brightest Light in all the
world. The Light becomes fire when we approach the earth domain. Fire,
Petal, ever seeks to draw everything unto itself. We often hide our fire
and withhold our heat from a cold, cold world. Far, far in the past, you
were a maid, Petal, even as now. A youth entered your life. As the youth
approached you, the heat within you leaped up, and sent out glowing
rays. Some call those rays love. To your union with the youth came a
child—a boy. He will come again, Petal. Then you gave the boy what you
could; now you can give him much more. I watched you then;

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I watch you now.
Through all our earthly lives, young Petal, there ever moves with us
those of just affinity. Your son approaches across the field." As he
spoke the child glanced quickly across the open space.

Moving toward them came a man, straight and strong. Youth was upon his
cheek, in his hand a scroll.

The young man stood before Tilak and bowed, saying, "The Teacher." Then
he turned and took Petal in his arms. She clung to him, as does apple to
limb, as by a natural affinity, held by invisible ties; such ties ever
strengthen; such ties build paths to heightless altitude.

As Tilak raised his arms in blessing, he said: "We will meet again."

Tilak stirred on his wooden cot. His physical eyes opened. The Chamber
was dark and still.

In a distant city, in the palace of the Emperor, the child, Petal,
opened sleepy eyes. The child felt strong arms around her. As she sat up
the arms slipped away.

 

#### A WOMAN'S FAITH

The sable robe of night was drawn across the heavens, punctured by many
shining stars, as Tilak moved noiselessly to a distant land.

In an isolated strip of woods Tilak entered a small crudely built cabin.
Seated at the table was a woman. Her thin white hair streaked pale brow.
For years this woman had lived alone.

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

She raised her head and saw Tilak.

"You have come for me! Am I to drop this old physical frame?"

Tilak's glance was a benediction. "I have come to visit you. A place is
being prepared, built by your faith unshaken. Before you lies expansion.
When last we met in that part of eternity reserved for service and
preparation, upon your brow was laid the garland of expectancy; an
expectancy that brings to pass that which is your chosen work. In a
continent sparsely inhabited will come pioneers. You will be one of
them, lending courage, shaping the destiny of a nation. You will be
called Priscilla."

The old woman nodded: "I will be Priscilla, the, pioneer."

When she turned she was alone.

 

#### NATURE'S FINER FORCES

Tilak sat before the altar in the Chamber of the Great Potential.
Raising his eyes to the darkness, he saw inscribed, in letters of light,
brightening the Chamber as at noonday: *HE WHO LEAVES ALL FINDS ALL*.
Upon his ear fell a chorus of many voices, singing paeans of praise to
the Majesty of Light. The letters of light fell away. The altar became
transparent. Before his quiet vision appeared a scene. Tilak saw the
elements in uniform procession form

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

and reform, blending, as they did so, one into the other. In the soil he
saw planted seed being embraced by fertile earth. The seed stirred and
sent forth a tender shoot. Eagerly the earth held and protected the
shoot. Then the seed sent upward fine tendrils. The earth gave way that
the tendrils reach the sun and air. Both root and tendril thrived,
nourished by the brown earth which contained that needed for their
growth and being. The particles in the air supported the growing twig.
The wind lulled it to sleep at nightfall. Ere long a tree appeared—and
then a forest. Not a harsh note anywhere.

To the trees came nesting birds; at the roots the crickets made a home.
All was content to be.

Then came man. Through a clearing man entered the forest primeval. The
trees, his servants, had been waiting these thousand years; waiting to
protect him from the warring elements of the storm.

Man built himself a home of logs. Man gathered the fruit of the trees.
Man also gathered the nuts and ate thereof. From the cut wood he built
his bed, table and chair.

The birds in the tree-tops eyed uneasily the intruder. The crickets dug
deeper under the roots of tree.

Man uses, and man abuses his humblest servants.

Nothing is without life. Life but moves slower through some things than
through others.

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

#### THE COMMANDER OF FIGHTING MEN

Into the Chamber walked a man. He was powerfully built. At his side hung
a long curved scimitar. As he walked his muscles rippled through his
light garment. In his hand he carried a metal headdress.

He greeted Tilak in a harsh voice: "Kneel vassal! I am the great
commander of many fighting men!"

Tilak moved not.

"I will cut you down!" thundered the commander, reaching, as he spoke,
for his scimitar.

"Lay aside your weapon, friend. You need it not."

"Who are you?" exploded the giant.

"I called you from the field of battle when you were killed."

"Ho, ho!" uproariously laughed the commander. "I dead! Who could kill a
great man like me!"

"You took a quick way for body severance—a battlefield. Your rugged body
was pierced with a hundred arrows. It is on the field of strife."

The big man shook himself and examined his huge chest: "Not a wound!"

"Follow me, friend."

Together they glided to the field of battle. They stood between the
fighting armies. Thousands of poisoned arrows and sharpened spears
passed through them.

The commander drew his scimitar and shouted to his legions: "To the
enemy!"

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

Shouting again, he leaped forward and struck viciously with his
scimitar, right and left. No man fell at his blows. He dropped his
weapon to his side, and walked back, puzzled, to his fighting men.

On the ground he saw a huge body full of arrows. The body had fallen
face downward upon a shield. He looked more closely—then stepped back.

"By the thunder! It is myself! I am dead, yet I live."

Tilak joined him, saying, "It is not given unto man to kill. If a man
deprives another of his earthly covering the man must return and serve
that one. It is the desire to kill that must be slain, commander of
fighting men."

"If I fight not, what am Ito do?"

"The cycle of necessity will draw you back again to physical birth. You
must seek a different exit, friend, or the cycle will return you, time
and time again."

"I will return now!"

"You have cast a mold into which you will be poured. If it pleases you
not, you can remold. The hour is set for your emergence again in earthly
life. The hour you have chosen by your violence. It will not be changed.
The Law will be fulfilled within you. On other battlefields we shall
meet."

When the giant stooped again to examine his arrow-filled body Tilak left
the battlefield.

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

#### A RICH YOUNG MAN

On a silken couch lay a young man dying. Beside the couch stood his
weeping parents and the doctor.

"My son has everything to live for," wept the mother.

The physician felt the pulse of the sick man. He shook his head. The
pulse was feeble. He knew not the ailment.

Through the door of the richly furnished chamber moved Tilak. Those in
the room saw him not. He moved to the side of the silken couch. He
called the young man by name.

Slowly the finer body disentangled itself from its grosser vehicle, and
the young man stood before Tilak questioningly.

"Why do you wish to die?" asked Tilak.

The young man sighed: "I have nothing to live for. My parents heap upon
me rich gifts. I want them not. I love the daughter of a peasant. She I
cannot wed. My parents forbid it—She, the daughter of a peasant! I will
wed no other! I will die!"

Tilak led the young man from the dwelling of marble; led him to the
humble quarters of the city; led him into another sick room. On a straw
pallet lay a sick youth ravaged by want; ill-nourished, unkempt. Beside
him stood his mother, gaunt and fearful. No doctor appeared in this
simple room. Tears ran down the sunken cheeks of the woman. Sobs choked
her. She

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

could not secure the medicine and food needed for her ill son. The
people of the town had refused her request for aid.

"Look upon that mother and son, youth. They need but the crumbs from
your table of plenty. Would you die and leave your work unfinished?
Could you expect to find happiness with any maid that lives, if the
pincer of self squeezes your soul? Return to your home! Arise in the
morning and bring food and succor to this woman and her suffering son!
Thus will you find that which you seek. It will reach you in no other
way."

The following morning the rich man's son left silken couch—well. Quickly
he journeyed to the poorer part of town, carrying delicacies to the poor
woman and her son. The gaunt woman blessed him and kissed his hand. The
rich man's son wept tears of humanity.

 

#### THE JUDGE

A prisoner stood in a barred iron box facing the judge, facing the
courtroom. His accusers, powerful landowners, had found favor with the
court. The landowners had given perjured testimony. They sought the
prisoner's life. His death and disgrace would add more land to their
vast holdings.

The judge turned a deaf ear to the prisoner's plea. The prisoner was
defenseless. This the judge knew. A

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

bag of gold had been surreptitiously placed beneath the bench on which
the judge sat, hidden from view by the garment he wore.

To the prisoner he thundered: "At the rising sun, in a fortnight, you
will be executed. You have committed a heinous crime against our great
land. You have stolen deeds and destroyed them."

When the prisoner protested the captors dropped the steel blinds around
the cage wherein he stood.

That night the judge dreamed. In the dream he was lost in a thick
forest. Before him was a faint ray of light. As he tried to reach the
light the wind howled about him. The wind gained in fury, cracking the
trees at their roots. As the falling trees would crush the life of the
frightened man he awoke.

The next night the same dream recurred. The judge could not eat. He
sought counsel of the wise men of the land. They helped him not.

For a week the judge dreamed of falling, crushing trees. "An ill omen!"
he groaned. Weight slipped from his frame. He became weak. What was he
to do?

Fear brings strange visitors. When darkness appeared the judge imagined
he heard whisperings, accusing voices. He slept with lights in his
room—candles that flickered out at sunrise.

On the ninth day his household became alarmed: "The judge is going mad,"
they said.

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

The judge was lying awake. He heard the distant chimes—Two o'clock. One
by one the candles went out.

The door of the bedchamber opened quietly. A figure entered the room.
The judge trembled. His throat became dry. Fear pulled at his heart. Who
was this intruder!

The figure stood at the foot of the bed and pushed aside the canopy
curtains. It was Tilak.

"The light around you," gasped the judge, "is the light I see in the
forest of my dreams."

"Foolish man are you, trying to hide your action from your very self. It
is this self that rebukes you in dream."

"What have I done?"

"The crashing trees are your ill deeds. They would seek to squeeze all
that is good out of you. You have judged men. It is yourself that you
must judge—before it is too late."

"What have I done?" whined the judge.

"Cradled your conscience in gold. The gold is cutting into your very
brain."

"I have taken only that which is mine," defended the jurist.

"You have sold a life."

"Sold a life!" repeated the judge, sitting upright in bed.

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

"Four days hence, at sunrise, a young man dies. He has committed no
offense against the land. This you know. Release him, or the trees of
the forest will crush you, and you will go mad."

The judge jumped out of bed and lit the candles. He was alone. He
reached in the drawer and drew out a paper. This he signed, and then
affixed his seal—a paper freeing the prisoner that was to die four days
hence at sunrise. The judge returned to bed and slept. That night he did
not dream.

 

#### BEFORE BIRTH

In the higher spaces Tilak mingled with the people of the City of
Everlasting. He entered a white and glistening Temple. Within were
gathered radiant men and women.

As Tilak entered a beautiful young woman approached him. Her eyes were
clear and soft. Her face was carved by good deeds. Her voice was low.
Harsh words never passed the curved lips.

"Across the spaces arms reach to me—a mother's arms. I am needed."

Tilak's glistening robe reflected her intent.

"The universal whisper reaches your waiting ear. Again, blessed Idion,
you will join the mortals far below."

Then Tilak and Idion descended to the earth below.

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Before a wide
fireplace sat a sweet-faced woman knitting baby clothes. Her nimble
fingers paused as she gazed into the glowing logs. As she gazed she
tried to visualize her expectant baby. Through her body ran delicate
tremulations. She pressed the unfinished garment to her heart.

Beside her stood Idion, caressing the woman's hair with slender hand.
The hands that held the knitting dropped into the woman's lap, and the
woman dropped into a peaceful sleep. As she slept a smile hovered over
her delicate features.

Idion drew her hand slowly across the little garment. She could feel the
love that had been woven there. She leaned over and kissed the cheek of
the sleeping woman—the young woman with golden hair who was to be her
mother.

*SYMPATHY IS THE EMBRACE OF SOUL*.

 

#### THE ANCIENT VASE

In the high Himalayas Tilak removed a vase from its icy bed. On the vase
were strange inscriptions. Long past this high point in the Himalayas
had been a valley wherein a people had dwelt. The vase had adorned the
altar of their Temple.

In his Chamber Tilak studied the inscription. As he did so he was
carried back to the valley, to the Temple, to the altar on which the
vase had rested in quiet splendor.

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

As Tilak's fingers slipped over the surface of the vase there welled up
within him a feeling of sacred things. The vase had these million years
past represented the receptive part of life—nature—feminine. In the vase
so long ago had been placed prayers written on parchment leaves. The
parchment leaves had passed. The prayers and their fulfillment alone
remained.

"Oh, Sacred One, deliver us thy children," issued from the opening of
the vase.

Tilak placed the vase upon his little altar. Into the vase he dropped
his written script:

"May I be worthy of the Sacred Trust."

Again there issued from the opening of the vase soft words: "Cover thine
enemies with cherry blossoms, that the fragrance soften their hearts."

Tilak knelt in prayer.

 

#### THE MENTOR SPEAKS

The Teacher again visited Tilak in the Chamber of the Great Potential.

"Tilak," said the Teacher, "ancient causes have run their course in
present effects. New causes are forming. It is with these that we will
work. In the world's year 1914 many nations will be at war. These
nations will fight and destroy for four years. This fighting will not
exhaust the tendency remaining in multitudes to take

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

by force that which they covet. Short-lived physical man thinks that
when he departs from a physical life, whatever be the cause of the
departure, that such conditions cease for him. Man has been grossly
misled. His ignorance has placed him in chains. He has become a slave to
greed, to custom, and to race. We must prepare for his emergence from
chains. In thy preparation, Tilak, quickly permit that to pass which if
repeated would not give joy. Man husbands that which destroys him. Mind
is free. When body drags mind as a kite the mind cannot use its power.
All physical actions however complex are numbered. This the thinking
mind knows. When the mind permits itself to be drawn through an endless
repetition of physical events it is encompassed by a narrow sphere. It
has never been given, Tilak, that we can reach all. We can but stand by
ready to respond to a cry in the night of a soul. When a soul cries out
it has become fallow soil, and then we can plant a seed."

With that the Teacher departed.

 

#### A LARGE CITY

Tilak sat in his Chamber amidst the hush of Destiny. Before him appeared
the city Benares. As though in perfect freedom the people moved within
the city, apparently guided by their whims and desires.

In the market place were the dealers in merchandise

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

and food. Dealer cheated dealer, only looking askance that he not be
caught in such transaction. Women with absent husbands stole out
furtively to meet their lovers. The husband, in a distant city, amused
himself with chance companion. Princes plotted the overthrow of ruler.
Healthy beggars infested the streets. Fear filled the coffers of the
Temple. In back lanes robbers waylaid wealthy merchant. Drilling
soldiers cursed their officers.

Joined to every person was an invisible thread, stronger than iron band.
These threads reached into an unseen and unknown land. They crossed and
recrossed one another until they formed a web enmeshing the city and all
that dwelt therein.

A pull of this slender invisible thread and an individual was drawn
toward destructive action. The individual's action was known, but its
source remained unknown to the individual. How few sought to break the
hidden thread and stand free! The populace had sold themselves into
slavery. Any unexpected event was called an accident. Oft repeated was
the statement: "If I had taken the other road, this would not have
happened."

Should man expect a beautiful future, if so much of his present must be
so carefully hidden? Should man expect a quiet mind, when he fills his
life with a disregard for all that is good? Can man gather roses from
thistles? Could any individual, however holy,

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

approach any one in the city and direct his course? How few individuals
will give up those things they want for those things they need.
Suffering only comes from seeking out that which contributes not to
greater understanding.

Tilak could not approach anyone who was not seeking the good. Goodness
is not in time. If time were required to obtain goodness it would never
be obtained. Time but contains those things that apparently oppose
goodness.

*MAN'S TENDENCIES ARE HIS HERITAGE*. What man's tendencies are, is what
man is becoming to be.

 

#### AN EARTHLY PRIEST

Through the Chamber door came a priest. Tilak greeted him.

"My son," said the priest, "I have lost my way. Will you direct me?"

"What do you wish to find, friend?"

"Heaven," replied the priest.

"Which heaven, friend?"

The stern visage of the priest relaxed somewhat, as he said: "The Heaven
of the Saints."

"You are a Saint?"

"I am," admitted the priest.

"When did you die?"

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

"A week ago."

"And you have not found Heaven! "

"I lost my way. I saw your light and came here."

"Sainthood, friend, is beautiful."

"It has been a struggle. Earthly temptations nearly drove me to the
mouth of Hell."

"You conquered them?"

"All but one—I hated my brother."

"He was a wicked man?"

"He robbed the church and would not relent. I prayed for him. He laughed
at my prayers. He called me an old fool. Me, a holy man! It was
blasphemous."

"There is no hate in any heaven, friend."

"My goodness will overcome that. I gave money to the poor. I baptized
many babies. I visited the sick."

"How much of you, friend, was in your work?" "All of me."

"Did you do these things for a reward?"

"For Heaven!" exclaimed the priest.

"You did not like to do them, friend?"

"I did them, and now I am ready for heaven," firmly replied the priest.

"I will lead you part way—after that you must journey on alone."

"Alone!"

"You will find others, friend, that have done things solely to secure a
place in heaven. They will understand you and you them."

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

Tilak moved with the priest through space. As they were entering a city
Tilak stopped and said: "I will leave you here, friend. Just follow the
road and you will find your destination."

"This can't be Heaven!" exclaimed the priest, "It is too much like the
city I left when I died."

"Cities change, wherever they are, as we do, friend." Tilak watched the
priest as he trudged toward the city.

 

#### THE VOICE OF QUIET

In the Chamber of the Great Potential Tilak lit his oilless lamp. Tilak
had brought the lamp from the Temple of the Living Flame. By balancing
the requisite forces the lamp could reduce light to a form of heat and
light. As long as these forces remained balanced the lamp would burn.

On the table beside the flickering lamp Tilak laid a knife. On the
handle of the knife was inscribed in Tibetan characters the word
Severance.

Before the table Tilak sat in meditation. At first thoughts poured
through his mind. Tilak selected from the teeming guests of the mind one
thought, "Let all be quiet." Holding this thought Tilak dismissed all
other thoughts that were not related to quiet. Soon his whole being
became at rest, and as he thought, "let there be quiet," the thought
assumed

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

predominance. It drew into the mind of Tilak thoughts related to quiet.
Around him was a great stillness. Tilak waited.

The Voice of Quiet spoke to him.

"In restless activity, in useless movement, in every disturbing
condition, I am at low point. Without my eternal sameness nothing could
be. I am the interval between every movement of every act. The act is
seen, and I remain unknown. I am the source to which all return. Nothing
soothes the soul but me. I am Quiet. I am voiceless and spaceless, yet I
move through all things. When hard-pressed turn but to me. I am ever
waiting."

*MUSIC IS THE INTERVAL OF INHARMONY*. It is this musical interval that
can dispel all thoughts that tread upon and crush peace. Sweet music
awakens elevated thoughts, and always and ever removes those thoughts
that disturb the mind's peace.

Tilak rose from his meditation. As he stood in the middle of the Chamber
he intercepted a message. The message was coming from a female mountain
bird, and was being sent to its mate. The message said: "I have fallen
on the mountainside. My wing is broken."

Tilak left his Chamber and walked through the ice and snow. He found the
wounded bird and gently carried it back with him, under his woolen
garment, to the Chamber of the Great Potential. Tilak bound the wing of
the wounded bird and gave of it to eat. Then

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

he opened the door of the Chamber to admit the male bird whose wings had
been flapping on the casement. The male bird flew around the Chamber,
and then dropped down to the side of its wounded mate.

 

#### AN APPLICANT

Tilak walked down the mountainside to a village two miles below. This
journey was in response to a prayer of a younger pilgrim.

Reaching the village Tilak walked between a row of stone and
mud-plastered cottages. Stopping before the door of one of the smaller
cottages he gently knocked.

A youth admitted him; a youth of fourteen years. As Tilak entered the
small room he asked, "You wish to join the Brotherhood?"

The boy's eyes brightened: "It is my fervent wish." Gently Tilak said:
"The way is hard. Feet long rooted in clay are not easily removed."

"I would begin."

Tilak closed his eyes as he studied the boy's aura. He found therein
enthusiasm and hope. Tilak looked further. From the aura he drew the
parts that had surrounded former bodies. These parts had been covered
and carefully hidden by the aura of the present body. The older auras
showed appetites suppressed, desires smothered—the attempt to gain the
heights

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

by suppression, the attempt to negatively buy that which was a natural
birthright of all men.

"My young friend," said Tilak gravely, "ere you enter the Brotherhood
you must become part of human life and return that which belongs there.
There is no other way that this can be accomplished. What we draw, young
friend, from life we return to life. We render unto the ever changing
that which is ever changing. Every particle of the body must be crystal
white, so that in these tiny spheres all may be reflected. When this has
been accomplished, and you have used that which you want to use, we will
be waiting. It is not the using, young friend, but the wanting to use
that keeps thee from us."

At the door Tilak turned and said: "We will meet again."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III. The Great Preparation](tot05)
