[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tot09)  [Next](tot11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417977574/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Tilak of Tibet Reveals Life's Purpose*, by Ann Hackett \[1944\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

### VIII

### AFTER PHYSICAL DEATH

Tilak was drawn to a meeting between an individual who had just left an
earthly body and an individual who was dwelling just beyond earthly
conditions. The individual who was living just beyond the earthly
condition had left physical earth life several years before.

Although Tilak stood near, he was not visible to the two individuals as
they talked.

The individual that had just left an earthly physical covering was
greeted by the other individual: "You have come to dwell with us?"

"I was drawn here. I expected to find those that had been dear to me on
earth below; friends that had passed on before I did."

The dweller in the city just beyond earthly conditions shook his head:
"No, they will not be here. No one living in our city ever dwelt on the
earth—What is the earth like?"

The questioned individual looked about him. The buildings and homes
appeared familiar—very familiar.

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> They were possibly
more uniform, and seemed to glisten as though constructed of highly
polished marble, but resembled the buildings and homes found in the
cities of earth: "You surprise me, indeed. I had long believed that when
I died I would meet many that I had known; many that died before I did."

"Died!" exclaimed the other individual.

"Yes," said the recent earth dweller, "the dropping of the physical
body."

"What a strange place the earth must be, if you have to throw off your
body! Here we continue indefinitely. Our bodies change—they get
brighter, and then we are able to apprehend more of the things about
us."

"I think I will like it all right," said the earth individual.

"Of course you will! But tell me, how did you ever happen to land on the
earth?"

"I do not remember," said the recent earth dweller—"My parents told me
they had looked forward to my coming."

"Parents!"

"Yes—a mother and a father,"—smiling, "They are very essential to earth
life."

"Interesting place, undoubtedly, but strange. I do not believe I would
like to live in a place where your body could be snatched from you. Is
this taking of body a prearranged plan?"

"It must be," observed the earth individual. "When

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

mine was taken I did not even know it. I went to bed one night, fell
asleep—and here I am!"

"Extraordinary! We do have a condition here we call sleep, but no one to
my knowledge ever lost his body in that state."

The earth individual glanced around again: "When I first arrived here I
had a review of my life while in the physical body." His face became
serious: "There were many things done that should have been left undone,
and many things undone that should have been done—too bad we can't do
certain things over again."

"If you will walk with me," suggested the dweller in the city just
beyond earthly conditions, "I will show you some of our interesting
buildings and present you to some of the people that dwell in our city."

As the two men walked toward a wide city square Tilak followed them.

The two individuals stood in the center of the square. The dweller of
the city pointed out the prominent buildings: "That building directly in
front of us is the Temple of Music. To the left of the Temple is the
Auditorium."

The earth individual interrupted him, exclaiming: "It all comes back to
me! I lived here before! I lived not far from the Temple of Music!" As
he spoke he hurried down an avenue past the Temple of Music. His
companion followed him. The recent earth

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

dweller stopped before a commodious house. It was constructed of many
colored blocks. In front of the house was a garden filled with flowers.
A window in the adjoining house was raised. A woman appeared at the
window. Seeing the earth individual, she said: "I watched your garden
while you were away. At times it seemed as though you had been away a
long period, and at other times it seemed as though you had but left a
short period before—Did you have a pleasant journey?"

"In a way—but I am glad to be back."

"I will be right down," advised the woman, as she closed the purple
glass window.

The dweller of the city just beyond earthly conditions said: "Now that
you have found friends, I will return to my home—however, I would like
to talk with you again about that strange place, the earth."

"Call any time," invited the recent earth dweller. "I am going to
continue my studies. I was always interested in particle movement and
particle formation."

"I have a friend studying the same thing. You will probably meet him at
the Academy."

As the dweller of the city, just beyond earthly conditions, moved away,
the woman next door joined the recent earth inhabitant. Her first words
were: "Where have you been? I am all curiosity. You will find everything
in your home just as you left it."

"I went to the earth," advised the recent earth dweller.

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

"For research purposes?" queried the woman.

"I guess that was it—but of a different nature, entirely different."

"I remember so well when the Light Bearers called for you. What is the
earth, is it one of the bright lights we can see in the heavens?"

The man shook his head, sadly: "No, not too bright. As near as I can
tell you, it is below here—for after I died I seemed to ascend."

"A strange thing happened after you left," said the woman—"Several of
your neighbors were called away—they went to the earth, too."

"You have never been there?" asked the man.

"No," replied the woman, "I am studying music. Most of those that have
been called away were studying at the Academy."

"There are many on earth that study music," advised the man.

Incredulously, the woman asked: "Did they come from here?"

"I do not know, but I feel sure that many of them did not. The earth is
full of the strangest people. Everybody rushes about, apparently doing
something—yet very little is accomplished. When I was a boy—."

"A boy!"

"Yes, about this height." As he spoke he held his hand three feet from
the ground.

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

"You were that size on the earth!" The woman's eyes opened widely.

"Only for a short time—I grew up, then I was the size I am now."

"What an unusual place the earth is!"

"It is," agreed the man—"But as I was saying—when I was a boy I remember
there was much talk and much planning about the bettering of conditions
for everybody—yet, when I died, seventy-six years later, I did not see
that anything was better for anybody; in fact, I would say that
conditions were worse."

"What did you do on earth?" queried the woman.

"Worked in the cattle yards. When I died I owned thousands of cattle."

"Cattle!"

"Cows," explained the man.

"Cows!" repeated the woman.

"Animals that give milk and that are used for food."

"Did you make the cows?"

"No, they started long before I went to earth."

"A strange condition you went into," observed the woman—"What else did
you do?"

"Married and had children. In a way, I enjoyed the amusements and sports
on the earth—a third of my time I spent in sleep."

"The earth would be no place for me!" exclaimed the woman.

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

"I do not think so either," agreed the man, "since you have never been
there."

"And I do not want to go! " indignantly replied the woman.

A short time afterward, Tilak again visited the city just beyond earthly
conditions. The previous earth dweller had accustomed himself to his new
surroundings. Tilak watched him as he carefully tended the garden of the
woman who lived next door. The woman had been called to earth life. The
previous earth dweller, after completing the gardening, went to the
Academy. Tilak followed. At the Academy the previous earth dweller met
his friend, who said to him: "Do you remember the man you met when you
returned to our city?"

"Of course I do!"

"Well, he has been called away. The Light Bearers came for him this
morning."

"Where did he go?" questioned the previous earth dweller.

"To the earth," replied his friend.

The former earth inhabitant smiled: "I will meet them both when they
return and find out how they liked their visit to physical conditions."

When the man and woman did return from the earth condition the previous
earth dweller had forgotten there was such a place as the physical
earth.

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

Tilak read what he had written on the parchment sheets: The physical
body is the individual's presentation in earth life. The finer body, the
higher counterpart of the physical body, is the individual's
presentation in the condition following earthly life. Seldom does the
individual realize while living in earthly conditions that he has a
finer body, the counterpart of his physical garment. This is due in part
to his giving an almost undivided waking attention to his physical body.
The individual in the physical body receives promptings that he realizes
have not come from his earthly surroundings.

During earth life few individuals formulate, or even attempt to
formulate, a definite idea of their life after physical death. When they
do formulate such an idea it is hazy as to the after-life location,
method of living, and association. An individual functioning in the
finer body, in the condition that precedes physical birth and follows
physical death, has difficulty in formulating an idea of life in earth
conditions.

This state of being is brought to pass by the individual whose
self-conscious attention is drawn almost entirely to the conditions the
individual is moving through.

 

#### THE OLD WOMAN

Tilak saw an old woman walking up a mountain path. She was leaning
heavily upon a staff. Tilak could

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

see that the woman had left her earthly body. Even after the transition
the woman placed dependence upon a staff and tottered as she walked.
Seeing Tilak in her path, she said: "I am an old woman. My body is
weary." This woman was still living with the body she had left; she was
still placing dependence upon the garment that had served her so long.

"You have climbed far up the steep mountainside unaided?"

"Yes, yes," sighed the woman—"Ever since a girl I lived in the valley
below. Every day I looked up to the great white-covered mountain peaks.
I always wanted to climb the mountain. Last night I fell asleep. When I
awoke I felt refreshed and stronger than I had in years. This morning I
took the narrow road that led up the mountain. All day long I have
walked, with the assistance of my stick."

"A human," said Tilak, "is likened unto a grapevine; each year presents
rich fruit. In youth the human vine is heavy laden with luscious fruit.
Each year fruit is taken from the vine. The juices of the fruit remain
sweet, or turn sour. Year after year fruit is plucked from the vine.
Some fruit yields sweetness, and some fruit yields that which is sour,
tinged with bitterness. The fruit on the human vine is rich in portent.
Thus are the years that stand before us—the unused years. It is in our
treatment of these fruitful years whether the essence remains sweet or
turns bitter. If we press

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

gently the hand of another in friendship joy results; but if we attempt
to crush those around us life turns sour and leaves a residue of
bitterness."

As Tilak was speaking the staff dropped from the woman's hand and
slipped over the mountainside, falling in the deep chasm below. The
woman stood erect. Her eyes took on a luster.

Tilak's words had stirred something within her, something that in late
years had been bitter. Now her sweeter years were pushing aside the sour
years. Her very body was undergoing a change.

"I know, I know!" she exclaimed—"In the valley below I left my earthly
covering. In ascending the mountain I was trying to carry with me that
which belongs to the earth alone. I had looked too long and too often
through narrow window, shutting out the beauty that was all around me. I
never felt old. Even when bodily limbs responded slowly in performing
their functions, within I was young. Too often I listened to the body's
prompting, which said, 'You are getting old and feeble.' How could that
be, when deep within I could build truer and better than before?"

Gently Tilak said: "The body goes with us but a short way. It can only
encompass but a short part of that which we are becoming. The body would
accompany us, but the particles move too slowly—then we seek other
coverings that can better serve our awakening."

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

The old woman that had confronted Tilak now appeared as a maid. Her
voice was youthful, as she said: "What I could not carry on toward
completion through my earthly body, I carried on toward completion
through my mind."

"It is so," agreed Tilak—"But few of our higher promptings can find an
outlet through our earthly vehicle. Those that do are so partial that
they contribute but little to the soul's aspirations. If our earthly
body accomplishments have been but few, should we grieve and condemn our
destiny? In the greater scales, it is only that which prompted the act
that is weighed—weighed together with that which the mind fervently
desires to accomplish. The earth, which has but a definite cubic
content, cannot reflect the greater magnitude, whose vastness reduces
the earth to a grain of sand. When an individual depends upon bodily
accomplishment for happiness, he becomes a dependent and a slave to the
body."

When the last words left the lips of Tilak the woman vanished. That
which had held her slipped away, and she soared to the garden of her
strongest leaning.

Tilak entered his Chamber, breathing a prayer: "Mighty are the Laws, and
Just."

 

#### DREAMS

In the Chamber of the Great Potential Tilak carefully

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

studied and weighed the sleeping and waking periods in the physical life
of an individual.

Between the sleeping and waking states dreams begin. Dreams draw
materials for their presentation from the waking and the sleeping
states. Although the dream state begins between the sleeping and waking
states, the state of dreams does not remain at this point, for there are
dreams that are independent of earthly time and place. A dream can be a
dramatist, an educator, a mentor, a symbolist, or a prophet. Those
dreams that take place between the sleeping and waking states are often
confused. In this state apparently unrelated material is often put
together forming a strange picture. Such dreams usually take place just
after the individual falls asleep, or just before the individual
awakens. These dreams depend, in great part, upon the daily physical
activities, thoughts and feelings of the individual.

An individual can plan his activities in daily life so that these
activities will be more effective. So likewise can the individual plan
activities for his sleep state, which activities will appear in the form
of dreams. The individual has neglected the power to direct dreams, and
accepts dreams as they come. When an individual does direct the sleep
state and discovers that dreams follow planned direction, as do planned
physical activities, dreams lose their unreality. It is

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

because the individual has not directed his dreams that they appear
unreal and meaningless.

The individual willingly spends many years in preparing for a chosen
profession because, by careful preparation, the individual expects
satisfying results. If the individual would prepare as willingly and as
carefully for the sleep and dream state, the individual would recover
unrealized powers. The utilization of the sleep and dream states could
reach the point where the individual would spend but little time during
his entire earthly life without a self-conscious realization of life's
purpose.

During the individual's waking hours the individual contemplates the
past and looks forward to the future with expectancy. The individual
does the same thing during the earthly state called sleep. During the
sleep state the individual's contemplation of the past and expectancy of
the future appears in dreams. The individual will dream of conditions
past and conditions yet to come. Memory is operative during the sleep
state, as it is during the waking physical state. Whether waking or
sleeping, life has compensations for the individual self-consciousness.

 

#### GENERATION

Tilak stood before the altar in the Chamber of the Great Potential. He
was awaiting a visitor. The expected visitor soon stood before Tilak—a
beautiful

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

girl, with luxurious golden hair and soft brown eyes.

The girl addressed Tilak: "I am to take physical birth, yet I am
perplexed. The man who is to be my father calls to me. The woman who is
to become my mother calls not. The woman does not want to become a
mother. Why should this be?"

"We will visit your future parents," said Tilak softly. Tilak and the
young girl glided quickly to a large city. Noiselessly they entered a
rich dwelling. Voices could be heard—a man and a woman were talking.
Tilak and the girl drew nearer to the voices.

Standing near the center of a luxuriously furnished room was an
attractive woman. The woman was young and vital. Before the woman stood
her husband, a man of forty. The man was pleading: "My dear, I do so
want a child. I want to hear childish prattle in this great house, I
want to feel the touch of baby hands."

"Why should I sacrifice my beauty for your present whim? If I give birth
to a child my social activities will be curtailed."

"It is not a whim, darling," continued the man—"I would not for the
world ask you to make a sacrifice—a child would bring happiness to you,
also."

"We will talk about this later," said the woman—"Tonight I am attending
an important social function—Are you coming?"

"No," replied the man—his tone was sad.

Tilak and the girl followed the woman to the social

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

function. Many handsome men were present. The woman danced often.

Tilak studied the woman's aura. The brown of selfishness became tipped
with light red. As the woman danced the red deepened into the red of
passion.

The girl standing with Tilak became very quiet. Her aura coalesced with
the aura of the dancing woman. Then the young girl's aura became as a
cone, whose point touched the woman's womb.

Tilak spoke softly to the girl: "The woman will become your mother."

The woman had been faithful to her husband; she had resisted the
temptations that are found in the propinquity of social life. The woman
had used means to prevent the birth of a child. Such means are always
futile, when under Destiny a woman is to become a mother.

That night the woman conceived.

Nearly nine months later Tilak received another visit from the beautiful
young girl. Modestly, the girl said: "Tomorrow I take physical birth."

"And the Law will be fulfilled," Tilak said quietly.

"I want you to be present at my physical birth."

"I will be present, young friend."

The girl bowed in thankfulness. Tilak blessed the girl, saying: "You
will bring happiness to those in physical conditions."

A seven pound baby girl was born to the woman.

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The baby was
placed at the woman's breast. The woman glanced down at the tiny mortal
on her arm and smiled happily.

#### CHARACTER IS THE ONLY HERITAGE

Tilak had written on parchment leaves: Many individuals in earth life
believe the father and mother are largely responsible for the birth of a
child. The same individuals believe that when a child is born it enters
earth life for the first time; that it is the first time the incoming
individual has had self-consciousness. These individuals also believe it
is possible to prevent the birth of a child. Many individuals believe
that after the birth of a child heredity and environment play a most
important part in the success or failure of the child's life.

The parents that believe they have brought to life, for the first time,
a human soul, also believe that at physical death the soul they have
brought to life, for the first time, will go somewhere after physical
death. If these beliefs were true, physical life would be full of
injustice, and would be without purpose. Destiny works to a purpose, and
it is ever constant and exact.

If heredity shaped an individual's qualities and abilities, all members
of a family would have equal or similar qualities and abilities. In
three generations of a family can be found a preacher, a banker, a
robber,

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

a musician, and a waster. If physical environment determined human
characteristics and conduct, all individuals living in a good physical
environment would have good characteristics and good conduct. Those
living in a good environment have characteristics that differ greatly.
One individual will be generous and kind, another mean and avaricious, a
third vain and foolish, and a fourth a murderer.

What do the parents really do? The parents present a physical particle
covering for an individual that, under a just Destiny, is to again move
in earthly life. The form, in the mother's womb, the infant form, is not
furnished by either mother or father. The form is focused by the
incoming individual's finer form—the finer form used before physical
birth. The physical particles but cover the focused finer form. After
physical birth the particles receive nourishment from other physical
particles, called food. The physical particles covering the infant form
multiply, and gradually cover the finer form that is joined to the
physical covering by a silver ray or cord. The increasing physical
particles continue until the physical form corresponds to the focusing
finer form of the incoming individual.

What does the incoming individual bring to earth life? Everything but
the physical particles that cover the finer form. The first physical
particles are all that the parents contribute to the incoming
individual.

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

What has drawn the incoming individual to a given mother and father? The
opportunity to again be placed in earthly life where the individual can
accomplish most according to the individual's character and tendencies.
Often there have been previous associations with the parents and the
incoming individual. All physical lives contribute to the individual's
understanding, and prepare the individual for greater service.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IX. The Eternal Self-Consciousness](tot11.md)
