[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hoo79)  [Next](hoo81) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### LXXV.

### TO THE MUSES.

###### The FUMIGATION from FRANKINCENSE.

Daughters of Jove, dire-sounding and divine,  <span
id="fr_122"></span>[1](#fn_122)  
Renown'd Pierian, sweetly speaking Nine;

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

To those whose breasts your sacred furies fire  
Much-form'd, the objects of supreme desire:

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

Sources of blameless virtue to mankind, 5  
Who form to excellence the youthful mind;

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

Who nurse the soul, and give her to descry  
The paths of right with Reason's steady eye.

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

Commanding queens who lead to sacred light  
The intellect refin'd from Error's night; 10

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

And to mankind each holy rite disclose,  
For mystic knowledge from your nature flows.

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

Clio, and Erato, who charms the sight,  
With thee Euterpe minist'ring delight:

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

Thalia flourishing, Polymina fam'd, 15  
Melpomene from skill in music nam'd:

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

Terpischore, Urania heav'nly bright,  
With thee <span id="fr_123"></span>[\*](#fn_123) who gav'st me to behold
the light.  
Come, venerable, various, pow'rs divine,  
With fav'ring aspect on your mystics shine; 20  
Bring glorious, ardent, lovely, fam'd desire,  
And warm my bosom with your sacred fire.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_122"></span>[205:1](hoo80.htm#fr_122) Ver. i.\] *Daughters
of Jove*. Proclus, in some manuscript commentary, cited by Gyraldus, in
Syntag. de Musis. p.534. says that the Muses are called the daughters of
Jove and Mnemosyne, because to those who desire to posses disciplines
and sciences, intellect and the power of memory are necessary <span
id="page_106">p. 106</span> as the first requisites: the latter of which
the Greeks call μνημονικὸσ, the former νοητικὸσ. But as the best
explanation of the nature of the Muses is given by Proclus, in his
Commentary or, Plato's Republic, p. 399. accompanied with all that
philosophical elegance and subtilty which he possessed in so remarkable
a degree, I persuade myself the following Paraphrase on his discourse
concerning the different kinds of poets, will be highly acceptable to
the liberal reader; and that its great excellence will amply compensate
for its length.

"In the first place then, there are three poetic forms corresponding to
the three different powers of the soul, Intellect, Reason, and Opinion.
These we shall explain according to the opinion of Plato; and produce
from Homer examples of each. The first kind of poetry then, is similar
to intellect. But intellect is the best, most perfect, and most divine
power of the soul: it is the most similar to a divine life, in the
contemplation of which it is wholly employed, and is swallowed up as it
were in the essence of divinity; so that it enkindles its own light from
the splendor of the Gods, and conjoins its own most simple essence with
supernatural unity. In like manner the most excellent kind of poetry,
gives beatitude to the soul, from divinity, and places it among the
Gods; participating by an ineffable union with the participated deities,
and conjoining that which is filled with good, with its replenishing
source. Hence it abstracts the soul from all material connections,
illuminates it with celestial light, inflames it with a divine fire; and
compels the whole inferior constitution of the soul, to be obedient to
intellect alone. Indeed, a Fury of this kind is more excellent than any
temperance; since it furnishes the soul with such a symmetry and
proportion of divinity, that the very words bursting forth as its last
effects, appear to be adorned with the beautiful bands of measure and
number. For as prophetic <span id="page_207">p. 207</span> fury arises
from truth, and the amatorial from beauty; so the poetic proceeds from
divine symmetry, by means of which it most intimately unites the poets
with the Gods. Plato, in the Phædrus, speaking of this Fury, says that
it is an occupation of the Muses; and a Fury sent from above on tender
and untouched souls. That its employment is to **fufcitate** and inspire
the poet, according to odes and the other kinds of poetry but its end,
the instruction of posterity by celebrating the infinite deeds of
antiquity. From these words it is plain, that Plato, in the first place,
ascribes divinity to this kind of poetry, as being derived from the
Muses; who fill as well intelligible as sensible works with paternal
harmony, and ellegant motion. But he calls it an occupation, because the
whole illustrated soul, resigns itself to the present effect of
illuminating divinity: and a Fury, because it relinquishes its own
proper ingenuity, and is carried according to the vigorous impulse of a
superior power. Again, in the second place he describes the habit of the
soul thus occupied: for, he say, it ought to be tender and untouched;
not rigid, hard, and filled with many and various opinions, foreign from
inspiring divinity: but it should be soft and tender, that it may easily
admit divine inspiration; and untouched, that it may be sincere and
empty of all other concerns. In the third place, he adds its common
employment; that it is perfected by the afflatus of the Muses, and by
the soul properly disposed for its reception. Indeed **fafcitation** is
an elevation of the soul, an operation but little depraved, and a
vigorous conversion to the deity, from a lapse into the whirls of
generation. But an afflatus is a divine motion, and an unwearied musical
dance towards the inspiring deity. Lastly, he testifies that human
concerns spoken from a divine mouth, become more perfect, illustrious,
and more convenient for the delivery of true doctrine to the hearers,
Not that this kind of poetry is accommodated <span id="page_208">p.
208</span> to juvenile tuition, but is the most convenient of all for
the instruction of those who are perfect in politic discipline, and who
earnestly desire the mystical tradition of divine concerns. On this
account, Plato deservedly prefers it to all human arts. But he who (as
he writes in the same place) approaches to the poetic gates, without the
Fury of the Muses, trusting that he may become a good poet by a certain
art, will be himself empty, as well as his poetry, in respect of that
which proceeds from Fury; before whose presence, the poetry vanishes
which is dictated by prudence alone." Thus far from the Phædrus.

Again, not dissimilar to these, are the words of Socrates in the Iö. For
when the rhapsodist affirms, that he abounds with a copiousness of
discourse on Homer, but not upon the other poets, Socrates ascribes the
cause of this to his being moved by divine force, and not by art. For
unless he was peculiarly inclined to Homer by a divine instinct, he
would he equally as copious on all other poets as upon Homer. But the
first mover says he is a God or a Muse, that is a divine cause; from
thence the poet is excited, and from him again the rhapsodist. Hence
poetic Fury is a medium between a divine principle and the rhapsodist,
moving, and at the same time moved, and distributing supernal gifts to
inferiors, by a certain latent consent; by means of which, these degrees
cohere among themselves in the same manner as many iron rings depending
from a magnet, each of which communicates in gradation, its alluring and
attractive power to the other. So in the poetic chain, it is requisite
there should be something divine, which, through proper mediums, may
connect the last to the first monad. This Fury Homer, as well as Plato,
calls at one time in the plural number Muses, and at another time in the
singular number a Muse: in the first case, having respect to the
multitude of the <span id="page_209">p. 209</span> chain of the Muses;
but in the second to the coherent union of all things, which is inserted
from the first cause in inferior natures. For indeed poetry subsists in
a secret and uniform manner in the first mover, and afterwards in poets
excited by that unity, like the revolution of a thread from its bottom
clew εἴνειλεγμένως, but in the rhapsodist's, according to the lowest and
ministrant degree. And thus much it is sufficient for the present to
have alledged from Plato's Iö. He who desires more, must consult that
dialogue, where he will find many things commending this first and
divine kind of Poets.

We shall farther add the testimony of the Athenian guest and of Timæus.
For he exhorts us to follow poets seized with the Fury of Apollo, such
being the sons of the Gods, and knowing in the best manner the concerns
of their progenitors, although they deliver them without the assistance
of arguments and demonstrations. And Plato, in the third book of his
Laws, thus writes: "This genus of poets is divine, it is agitated by the
Gods, composes sacred hymns, and every where embraces Truth attended
with the Graces and Muses." To which may be added, that in the first
Alcibiades, he says, the nature of poetry is ænigmatical, and is not
manifest to every understanding.

Indeed, you will find in Homer all kinds of poetry; but he has less of
imagination and imitation, and excels in the first, concerning which we
are now discoursing. For, inspired by the Muses and full of fury, he
proposes mystical senses of divinity; such as concerning demiurgical
unity, the triple division of the universe, the chains of Vulcan, and
the connection of Jupiter with Juno. But Homer speaking of Demodocus
(under whose person he wishes to signify himself, and on this account
reports he was blind) says that he was a divine bard, loved by the Muses
and their leader Apollo.

And thus much for the first kind of poets and poetry, according to
Proclus; among which it is evident these Hymns must be ranked; as all
sacred poetical composition belongs to this highest order. He then
proceeds to the second kind of poetry, which the Greeks call διάνοια, or
rational, as follows. Reason then is inferior to in dignity and power,
yet it follows intellect as the leader of its energies, between which,
and opinion, it is the connecting medium. And as soul by intellect is
conjoined with the divinities; so by the assistance of reason it is
converted into itself. Hence it revolves the multitude of arguments,
considers the various differences of forms, collects intellect and the
intelligent into one; and imitates in its operations an intelligible
essence. But since prudence is the employment of reason, we attribute to
it the second kind of poetry, which is a medium between the preceding,
and the third which we shall next explain. This rational poetry,
understands the essences of things, and is freely conversant about what
is honest and good, as well in words as in actions, which are likewise
the object of its contemplation. It produces every particular invested
with elegant numbers and rythms; proposes moral sentences, the best
counsels, intelligible moderation, and every virtue. Besides this, it
teaches the circuits of the soul, its immortality and various powers;
explains to mortals many names of an incorporeal nature, and produces
many probable Dogmata respecting corporeal substance. The Athenian guest
(in Plato, lib. i. De Legibus) testifies, that the poetry of Theognis is
of this kind, which, because it teaches and commends every virtue, is
justly to be preferred to the poetry of Tyrtæus, which exhorts to
fortitude alone. But Homer represents this species of poetry, when he
describes the life of the soul, the different essences of her parts, the
difference between the image and the usurping soul, the variety
subsisting <span id="page_211">p. 211</span> in nature, the order of the
elements of the universe, civil offices, and the like. But Homer
himself, appears to have made Phemius the lyrist skilled in this kind of
poetry, where Penelope says to him, lib. i.

"Alluring arts thou know'st, and what of old  
"Of Gods and heroes, sacred bards have told."

After the two superior kinds of poetry, that inspired by Fury, and the
rational; it remains to speak of the imitative. This last kind of
poetry, then, is far distant from the excellence of the others; since it
employs imaginations, opinions, and the irrational senses; from whence
it contracts many vices, especially in that part of it, which is called
phantastic. For it greatly raises moderate affection, disturbs the
hearers, and, together with words, various harmonies, and numbers,
changes the affections of the soul. It shadows over the nature of things
not such as they are, but such as they appear to vulgar inspection; and
explains them not according to an exact knowledge, but from a delusive
imagination. Besides this, it proposes as its end the delight of its
auditors; and particularly regards that part of the soul, which is
obnoxious to the passions of joy and grief. But it is subdivided into
two other kinds, one of which is conjectural or assimilatory, and the
other phantastic. The latter of these represents only the apparent
imitation and similitude, not that which is true; and considers its end
accomplished, if it produces in the hearers pleasure and delight,
belonging to the phantasy alone. But the other does not so much study
the gratification of the popular ear, as a proper imitation, that it may
express the things themselves, and exhibit to the eyes an exquisite
image of that, concerning which it treats, and may as near as possible,
express the exemplars which it imitates. But Plato himself, under the
person of the Eleatean guest <span id="page_212">p. 212</span> (in
Sophista) describes the differences of each of these as follows. "I now
appear to discern two species of imitation, one conjectural, or the art
of assimilating, whose business is to fabricate an image emulous of its
exemplar, as far as pertains to length, breadth, depth, and convenient
colours. Theæt. Do not those who imitate something, perform this to the
utmost of their ability? Guest. Not those who fashion or paint any great
work. For if they bestowed on the resemblances the true commensuration
of beautiful things, the superior members would appear less than is
proper, and the inferior larger: because the one is beheld by us at a
distance, the other near at hand. Theæt. Intirely so. Guest. Hence
artists neglecting truth, do not accommodate to resemblances such
commensurations as are really beautiful, but only such as appear so."
From these words it is plain that Plato distinguishes each kind of
imitation, not only in painting and statuary, but also in poetry; which
he compares with those imitative arts. Again, the Athenian guest speaks
separately of the conjectural kind, where he treats of that music which
does not propose to itself pleasure, but a true and most similar
imitation of its exemplar, as in the second book of Laws. Indeed,
Socrates speaks of the phantastic kind in the tenth book of the
Republic, comparing it to a picture which does not represent the works
of nature, but of artists; and these not such as they are, but such as
they appear, not imitating their reality, but only their phantastic
representation. He likewise demonstrates that this kind of poetry is
phantastic and is in the third degree from truth. But each kind of
imitation is found in Homer. For he is then to be esteemed phantastic
when he affirms any thing according to vulgar opinion; such as when
ascribing the rising and setting of the sun, not from true situations,
but from such as appear so to the senses, which are deceived by distance
of place, But where he preserves <span id="page_213">p. 213</span> types
of imitation convenient to persons and things, as when he imitates
heroes fighting, consulting, and speaking, framing deeds and discourses
adapted to the life and pursuits of each, he ought to be called a
conjectural poet. And of this kind perhaps is the lyrist of
Clytemnestra, who so learnedly imitated examples of temperance by right
opinion, that Clytemnestra was free from fault, while he resided with
her. But it is lawful to call the musician Thamyris, phantastic, who,
instead of the ancient and simple music, endeavoured to introduce one
more pleasant, diversified in many ways, and calculated to please the
senses and the vulgar. Hence he is feigned to have contended with the
Muses themselves, by whom, having raised their anger, he was blinded;
not that in reality the Muses are affected with anger, but because he
was incapable of the true, simple, and ancient music; and laboured only
to move the affectons and imagination, not following right opinion, or
the science of imitation.

<span id="fn_123"></span>[213:\*](hoo80.htm#fr_123) Calliope.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: LXXVI: To Mnemosyne, or the Goddess of Memory](hoo81)
