[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Masonry](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mom05)  [Next](mom07.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0517331942/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002J9HH2O/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Meaning of Masonry*, by W.L. Wilmshurst, \[1922\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

### Chapter IV.

### THE HOLY ROYAL ARCH OF JERUSALEM.

FREEMASONRY, under the English Constitution, reaches its climax and
conclusion in the Order of the Holy Royal Arch. There exists a variety
of other degrees ramifying from the main stem of the Masonic system
which either elaborate side-points of its doctrine or re-express its
teachings in alternative symbolism. These, while of greater or less
merit and interest, are beyond our present consideration, and, indeed,
are superfluities tending rather to diffuse the student's attention than
to deepen his insight into the central purpose of the Craft. The taking
of additional higher degrees may be indulged in almost indefinitely, but
to what purpose if the initial ones, which contain all that is necessary
for the understanding of the subject, remain imperfectly assimilated? It
is a fallacy to suppose that the multiplying of degrees will result in
the discovery of important arcane secrets which one has failed to find
in the rites of the Craft and the Royal Arch. The higher degrees indeed
illustrate truths of much interest and often set forth with impressive
ceremonial beauty, the appreciation of which will be the greater after
and not before the meaning of the preliminary ones has been thoroughly
absorbed; whilst the pursuit of "secrets" is certain to prove illusory,
for the only secrets worth the name or the finding are those
incommunicable ones which discover themselves within the personal
consciousness of the

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

seeker who is in earnest to translate ceremonial representation into
facts of spiritual experience.

It was accordingly a sound instinct that prompted those who settled the
present constitution of the Order to exclude these supplementary
refinements and to declare that "Masonry consists of the three Craft
Degrees and the Holy Royal Arch and no more," for within that compass is
exhibited, or at least outlined, the entire process of human
regeneration; so that after the Royal Arch there really remains nothing
more to be said, although what has been said is of course capable of
elaboration. The completeness of regeneration theoretically postulated
in those four stages is marked, it should be observed, by the very
significant expression used in connection with a Royal Arch Chapter,
which is interpreted as meaning "My people having obtained mercy," which
in its further analysis signifies that all the parts and faculties
("people") of the candidate's organism have at last, and as the result
of his previous discipline and ordeals, become sublimated and integrated
in a new quality and higher order of life than that previously enjoyed
in virtue of his merely temporal nature. In a word, he has become
regenerated. He has achieved the miracle of "squaring the circle"—a
metaphorical expression for regeneration, as shall be explained
presently.

Although but an expansion and completion of the Third Degree, of which
at one time it formed part, there were good reasons for detaching the
Royal Arch portion from what now forms the Degree of Master Mason. The
two parts in combination

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

made an inconveniently long rite, whilst a change in the symbolic
appointments and officers of the temple of initiation was necessary, as
the ceremony proceeded, to give appropriate spectacular representation
to the further points calling for expression. Despite this
re-arrangement the Royal Arch is the natural conclusion and fulfilment
of the Third Degree. The latter inculcates the necessity of mystical
death and dramatizes the process of such death and revival therefrom
into newness of life. The Royal Arch carries the process a stage
farther, by showing its fulfilment in the "exaltation" or apotheosis of
him who has undergone it. The Master Mason's Degree might be said to be
represented in the terms of Christian theology by the formula "He
suffered and was buried and rose again," whilst the equivalent of the
exaltation ceremony is "He ascended into heaven."

The Royal Arch Degree seeks to express that new and intensified life to
which the candidate can be raised and the exalted degree of
consciousness that comes with it. From being conscious merely as a
natural man and in the natural restricted way common to every one born
into this world, he becomes exalted (whilst still in his natural flesh)
to consciousness in a supernatural and illimitable way. As has been said
in previous papers, the purpose of all initiation is to lift human
consciousness from lower to higher levels by quickening the latent
spiritual potentialities in man to their full extent through appropriate
discipline. No higher level of attainment is possible than that in which
the human merges in the Divine consciousness and knows as

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> God knows. And
that being the level of which tit Order of the Royal Arch treats
ceremonially, it follows that Masonry as a sacramental system reaches
its climax and conclusion in that Order.

As has also been already shown, to attain that level involves as its
essential prerequisite the total abnegation, renouncement and renovation
of one's original nature, the surrender of one's natural desires
tendencies and preconceptions, and the abandonment and nullifying of
one's natural self-will, by such a habitual discipline and self-denial
and gradual but vigorous opposition to all these as will cause them
gradually to atrophy and die down. "He that loveth his life shall lose
it, and he that hateth his life in this world shall keep it unto life
eternal. Except a corn of wheat fall into the ground and die, it abideth
alone; but if it die it bringeth forth much fruit." As with a seed of
wheat, so with man. If he persists in clinging to the present natural
life he knows, if he refuses to recognize that a higher quality of life
is here and now possible to him, or is unwilling to make the necessary
effort to attain it, he "abideth alone," gets nowhere, and only
frustrates his own spiritual evolution. But if he is willing to "die" in
the sense indicated, if he will so re-orientate his will and silence his
natural energies and desires as to give the Vital and Immortal Principle
within him the chance to assert itself and supersede them, then from the
disintegrated material of his old nature that germ of true life will
spring into growth in him and bear much fruit, and by the
stepping-stones of initiation he will rise from his dead sell to higher
things than he can otherwise experience.

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

This necessity of self-dying—not, we repeat, the physical death of the
body but a mystical death-in-life of everything except the body—is the
first and fundamental fact to be grasped before one may hope to realize
or even to understand the mystery of the Royal Arch Degree. "*Mors janua
vitae*"; death to self is the portal to true life. There is no other
way. It is the unescapable law and condition of the soul's progress.

But since it is a process involving a "most serious trial of fortitude
and fidelity" and a grapple with oneself from which the timorous and
self-diffident may well shrink, the Mystery-systems have always
exhibited an example for the instruction, encouragement and emulation of
those prepared to make the attempt and the necessary sacrifice. To
hearten them to the task the Initiatory Colleges have held up a
prototype in the person of some great soul who has already trodden the
same path and emerged triumphant therefrom. It matters nothing whether
the prototype be one whose historic actuality and identity can be
demonstrated, or whether he can be regarded only as legendary or
mythical; the point being not to teach a merely historical fact, but to
enforce a spiritual principle. In Egypt the prototype was Osiris, who
was slain by his malignant brother Typhon, but whose mangled limbs were
collected in a coffer from which he emerged reintegrated and divinized.
In Greece the prototype was Bacchus, who was torn to pieces by the
Titans. Baldur in Scandinavia and Mithra in Græco-Roman Europe were
similar prototypes. In Masonry the prototype is Hiram Abiff, who met his
death as

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

the result of a conspiracy by a crowd of workmen of whom there were
three principal ruffians. In the Christian and chief of all systems,
since it comprehends and re-expresses all the others, the greatest of
the Exemplars died at the hands of the mob, headed also by three chief
ruffians, Judas, Caiaphas and Pilate. If in Masonry the mystical death
is dramatized more realistically than the resurrection that follows upon
it, that resurrection is nevertheless shown in the "raising" of the
candidate to the rank of Master Mason and his "reunion with the
companions of former toils," implying the reintegration and resumption
of all his old faculties and powers in a sublimated state, just as the
limbs of the risen Osiris were said to reunite into a new whole and as
the Christian Master withdrew His mutilated body from the tomb and
reassumed it, transmuted into one of supernatural substance and
splendour.

We have, therefore, now to consider how the Royal Arch Degree exhibits
the attainment of a new order of life. But it may be as well to say in
advance that for those unhabituated to looking beyond surface-values and
material meanings the exposition about to be given, dealing as it will
with the profound spiritual truths and advanced psychological experience
allegorized by the external ceremonial, is likely to present some
difficulty of comprehension and acceptance. The Royal Arch, however,
would not be the Supreme Degree it is did it not move upon a supremely
high level of thought and instruction. It was not compiled to
accommodate the elementary intelligence theoretically characterizing the
philosophically untrained neophyte. It presupposes that

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

its candidate has passed through a long, strenuous period of
purification and mental discipline, in the course of which his
understanding has become very considerably widened and deepened, whilst
his fidelity to the high inward Light which has conducted him safely so
far, has induced in him a humility and docility fitting him for what
still awaits him—the attainment of that Wisdom which is concealed from
this world's wise and prudent, but is revealed unto babes. It is a rite
of initiation dealing less with his gross corporeal nature and his
ordinary temporal mentality (which have been the subject of purification
in the earlier degrees) than with the higher reaches and possibilities
of his understanding and consciousness. As it is, what can be said here
can at best be but a partial and incomplete exposition of a theme
calling rather for disciplined imagination and reverent reflection than
for reasoned argument. Certain things must perforce be omitted from
explanation entirely, whilst others are mentioned with diffidence and at
the risk of their being misunderstood or rejected by such as do not yet
realize that in these matters "the letter killeth, the spirit vivifieth"
and that "spiritual truths must be spiritually discerned."

Before interpreting the Ceremony itself it is desirable first to
indicate four noteworthy features connected with this Supreme Order and
distinctifying it from the three grades leading to it. In speaking even
of these incidentals the before-mentioned difficulties of both
exposition and apprehension will already make themselves felt.

First, no one can be received into a Chapter without first having
attained Master Mason's rank.

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

Second, the circular symbol of the Grand Geometrician, which in the
Second Degree shone high above in the ceiling of the Temple, and in the
Third Degree had moved downwards and burned as a glimmering ray in the
East to guide the candidate's feet into the way of peace, has now
descended completely to the chequer-work floor, where it rests as the
centre and cubical focus of the entire organism and bears the Sacred and
Ineffable Name, as also those of Solomon and the two Hirams.

Third, the constitution of the Assembly is no longer one of seven
officers, but of nine, who are grouped in three triads about the Central
Sacred Symbol.

Fourth, the Assembly, regarded as a unity, is no longer designated a
Lodge, but a Chapter.

The first of these points—that none but a Master Mason can enter the
Royal Arch—has already been accounted for. It is not feasible, nor is it
within the law governing the process of spiritual evolution, for any who
has not experienced the stage of mystical death to have experience of
that which lies beyond that death. As an unborn physical infant can know
nothing of this world, in which nevertheless it exists, until actually
initiated into it by birth, so the embryonic spiritual child cannot be
born into conscious function upon the plane of the Spirit until it has
become entirely detached from the enfolding carnal matrix and tendencies
to which it has been habituated. The second and third points can be
considered together. The re-arrangement of the factors constituting the
ceremonial temple are symbolic of a structural re-arrangement which has
occurred in the

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

candidate's own psychical organization. This has undergone a
repolarization as the result of the descent into it of that high central
Light which at first but shone as it were in his "heavens," afar off and
above him, illumining the dormer-window of his natural intelligence.
Consider deeply what this change implies. The Day-star from on high has
now visited him; the fontal source of all consciousness has descended
into the very chequer-work material of his transient physical organism,
not merely permeating it temporarily with light, but taking root and
becoming grafted there substantially and permanently. In theological
language, God has become man, and man has become divinized, in virtue of
this descent and union. In Masonic terms, the Vital and Immortal
Principle resident in the candidate has at last superseded his temporal
life-principle and established him upon a new centre of incorruptible
life. Now, and perhaps only now, becomes thoroughly appreciable the
necessity for the earlier purifications, discipline, self-crucifixion
and death of all the lower nature. How could the purity of the Divine
Essence tabernacle in the coarse body of the sensualist? How could the
Eternal Wisdom unfold its treasures in a mind benighted or caring for
nothing but base metals and material pursuits? How could the Universal
Will co-operate with and function through the man whose petty personal
will blocks its channel, antagonizing it at every turn with his selfish
preferences and disordered desires? A Master Mason, then, in the full
sense of the term, is no longer an ordinary man, but a divinized man;
one

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

in whom the Universal and the personal consciousness have come into
union. Obviously the quality of life and consciousness of such an one
must differ vastly from that of other men. His whole being is
differently qualitated and geared upon another centre. That new centre
is described as the Grand Geometrician of man's personal universe,
inasmuch as its action upon the organism of whoever surrenders himself
to its influence causes a redisposition of functional and conscious
faculty. The knowledge of this fact was with the wise ancients the true
and original science of Geometry (literally "earth-measuring";
determining the occult potentialities of the human earth or temporal
organism under spiritual stresses). "God geometrizes" wrote Plato, with
intimate knowledge of the subject. Many of the Euclidean and Pythagorean
theorems, now regarded merely as mathematical demonstrations, were
originally expressions, veiled in mathematical glyphs, of the esoteric
science of soul-building or true Masonry. The well-known 47th
Proposition of the First Book of Euclid is an example of this and in
consequence has come (though few modern Masons could explain why) to be
inscribed upon the Past Master's official jewel. Again, the squaring of
the circle—that problem which has baffled so many modern
mathematicians—is an occult expression signifying that Deity, symbolized
by the all-containing circle, has attained form and manifestation in a
"square" or human soul. It expresses the mystery of the Incarnation,
accomplished within the personal soul.

Under the stress then of the Geometrizing

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Principle now
found symbolically integrated within the candidate's temporal organism,
a re-distribution of his component powers has become effected. His
repolarized condition is symbolized by an equilateral triangle with a
point at its centre, and such a triangle will be found, worked in gold,
upon the sash worn by the Companions of the Order. The significance of
this triangle is that the tripartite aspects of him who wears it (that
is, the spiritual, psychical and physical parts of him) now stand
equalized and equilibrated around their common Life-Principle at the
centre, fitted and equipped for Its purpose. Yet each of these three
divisions, though in itself unitary, is philosophically triadic in
composition when subjected to intellectual analysis. "Every monad is the
parent of a triad" is another maxim of the Ancients, who anticipated the
modern Hegelian proposition of metaphysics that thesis, antithesis and
synthesis are the essential ingredients of a given truth. Hence it comes
about that the three aspects of each of the three sides of our
equilateral triangle are ceremonially personified by the nine officers
of the Chapter—three in the East representing the spiritual side, three
in the West figuring the soul or psychical side, and three subordinate
links connecting these other two. (These will be further and more
conveniently treated of later when the symbolic nature of the officers
is dealt with).

The fourth point to be noticed was the change of designation from
"Lodge" to "Chapter." The word "Chapter" derives from *Caput*, head. The
reason for the change of name lies, however, much

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

deeper than in the fact that the Royal Arch stands at the head or summit
of the Craft. It has reference in a twofold way to the capitular rank
and consciousness of the Arch Mason himself. In virtue of his headship
or supremacy over his material nature he has passed beyond mere
Craftwork and governing the Lodge of his lower nature, which he has now
made the docile instrument and servant of his spiritual self. Henceforth
his energies are employed primarily upon the spiritual plane. The "head"
of the material organism of man is the spirit of man, and this spirit
consciously conjoined with the Universal Spirit is Deity's supreme
instrument and vehicle in the temporal world. Such a man's physical
organism and brain have become sublimated and keyed up to a condition
and an efficiency immensely in advance of average humanity.
Physiological processes are involved which cannot be discussed here,
beyond saying that in such a man the entire nervous system contributes
to charge certain ganglia and light up certain brain-centres in a way of
which the ordinary mind knows nothing. The nervous system provides the
storage-batteries and conductive medium of the Spirit's energies just as
telegraph wires are the media for transmitting electrical energy. But
the true Master Mason, in virtue of his mastership, knows how to control
and apply those energies. They culminate and come to self-consciousness
in his head, in his intelligence. And in this respect we may refer to a
very heavily veiled Scriptural testimony, the import of which goes quite
unperceived to the uninstructed reader. The Gospels record that the
Passion of the Great

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Exemplar and
Master concluded "at the place called Golgotha in the Hebrew tongue;
that is, the place of a skull"; that is to say it terminated in the head
or seat of intelligence and in a mystery of the spiritual consciousness.
The same truth is also testified to, though again under veils of
symbolic phrasing, in the reference to the sprig of acacia planted at
the head of the grave of the Masonic Grand Master and prototype, Hiram
Abiff. The grave is the candidate's soul; the sprig of acacia typifies
the latent *akasa* (to use an Eastern term) or divine germ planted in
that soil and waiting to become quickened into activity in his
intelligence, the "head" of that plane. When that sprig of acacia blooms
at the head of his soul's sepulchre, he will understand at one and the
same moment the mystery of Golgotha, the mystery of the death of Hiram,
and the meaning of the Royal Arch ceremony of exaltation. It is a
mystery of spiritual consciousness, the efflorescence of the mind in
God, the opening up of the human intelligence in conscious association
with the Universal and Omniscient Mind. It is for this reason that the
cranium or skull is given prominence in the Master Mason's Degree.

With this premised we proceed to considering the Ceremony of Exaltation.

#### THE CEREMONY OF EXALTATION

Again the candidate is in a state of darkness. But the reason of this
darkness differs entirely from that which existed at the Entered
Apprentice stage. Then he was but an ignorant beginner upon the quest,
making his first irregular benighted efforts

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

towards the light. Now, he has long passed beyond that stage; he comes
with all the qualifications and equipment of a Master Mason. Long ago he
found the light he first sought, and for long he has been directing his
steps and nourishing his growth by its rays. And more; after all this
intimacy with it he has known it recede from him and disappear in the
great ordeal of dereliction of the Third Degree, when, in the "dark
night of the soul" and utter helplessness of all his powers, he learned
how strength could be perfected out of weakness by the potent efficacy
of the Vital and Immortal Principle within him, in whose presence the
darkness and the light are both alike. His present initial deprivation
of light is the darkness of the Third Degree carried over into this
further experience. It betokens rather a momentary failure to adjust his
perception to the new quality of life he is now entering upon, just as a
new-born child is unable at first to coordinate its sight to objects
before it. For a while, but only for a brief while, the candidate feels
himself in darkness; but he is really blinded rather by excess of light
than by lack of it.

In this condition he undertakes the opening out of a certain place which
he proceeds to enter and explore, keeping touch meanwhile with his
companions by a cord or life-line. The symbolism of all this is
singularly rich in allusion to certain interior processes of
introspection well defined in the experience of the contemplative
mystics and well attested in their records. The place entered
emblematizes once again the material and psychical organism, a dense
compact of material particles

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

coating the more tenuous interior spirit of man as a shell surrounds the
contents of an egg. "Roll away the stone," it will be recalled, was the
first injunction of the Master at the raising of Lazarus. This
obstruction removed, the psychical organism becomes detached from the
physical and the mind is free to become introverted and work
exploratively upon its own ground, to search the contents of its own
unplumbed depths, to probe deeper and deeper into itself, eradicating
defects and removing rubble, pushing in and in by the energy of a
persistent will, yet retaining contact the while with the outer physical
nature by a subtle filament or life-line which prevents their entire
separation. The position is the same as when the body sleeps whilst the
mind is dreaming and vividly active, save that in dreams the will is not
functioning as a consciously directive instrument as is hypothetically
the case with one who, having attained Mastership, has all his faculties
under volition and control. Yet all this interior work, so rapidly
summarized and symbolically enacted in the Ceremony, is not the work of
a day nor the casual task of a weakling. The ancients referred to it as
the twelve labours of Hercules, whilst its arduousness is further
graphically described by the initiate poet Virgil in the sixth Æneid and
by more recent illuminates. Nor, even when its nature is fully
apprehended, is it a work to be lightly undertaken. Throughout the
Ceremony the utmost humility is enjoined upon the candidate as the
essential qualification for entering upon this process of
self-exploration, He is bidden to draw nigh to the Centre, but to halt

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

and make obeisance at three several stages, at each of which he is told
he is approaching more nearly to that central Essence, that holy ground
of his being upon which only the humble can walk, that "earth" which
only the meek shall inherit.

It is in this state that the introverted mind, groping for its own
foundation and centre, reaches at length the bedrock of its being. As
the symbolic ceremony exhibits the grasping of an emblem embodying the
Word of Life, so literally and in fact the questing mind, in coming upon
the Vital and Immortal Principle animating it, "lays hold on Eternal
Life." It discovers the Lost Word, the divine root of its being, from
which it has hitherto been so long dissociated. It fails to realize the
fact at first, for "the Light shineth in darkness and the darkness
comprehendeth it not." Presently that darkness will disappear; when "the
day (the new consciousness) dawns and the shadows (the old mentality)
flee away."

Therefore it is that this work of the introverted mind and the discovery
it makes, are exhibited as taking place darkly and amid subterranean
gloom. There remains, therefore, one concluding psychological process—to
extrovert that knowledge and bring it forward into formalized
brain-consciousness, so that what the spirit and the soul already know
interiorly the outer mind may also know exteriorly. Subjective awareness
does not become knowledge until it has been cerebrated and passed
through the alembic of the brain and the logical understanding. When it
has so passed through and become formalized, a reciprocal and reflex
action between the inner

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

and outer natures is set up resulting in the illumination of the whole.
This extroversion of subjective perceptions is symbolically achieved by
the return of the candidate from the subterranean depths to the surface
and there rejoining his former companion-sojourners and effecting a
unification of all his component parts.

It is then that the Mystery is consummated. The Great Light breaks. The
Vital and Immortal Principle comes to self-consciousness in him. The
Glory of the Lord is revealed to and in him, and all his flesh sees it.

So far as it is possible for symbolic ceremonial to portray it this
consummation is represented by the restoration to light and the
revelation that then meets the candidate's gaze. His condition differs
now from any that has preceded it. It is not merely one of illumination
by the Supernal Light. It is one of identification *with* It. He and It
have become one, as a white-hot iron is indistinguishable from the
furnace-flame engulfing it. At the outset of his Masonic quest the
predominant wish of his heart was Light. The impulse was not his own; it
was that of the Light Itself—the primal Light of light, the Divine
Substantial Word—seeking self-development in him. Consciousness is that
Light become self-perceptive by polarization within an efficient
physiological organism. Man provides the only organism adapted to the
attainment of that self-perception; but only when that organism is
purified and prepared sufficiently for the achievement. In the Royal
Arch that achievement is hypothetically effected.

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

The condition attained by the illumined candidate is the equivalent of
what in Christian theology is known as Beatific Vision and in the East
as *Samadhi*. It is also spoken of as universal or cosmic consciousness,
since the percipient, transcending all sense of personal
individualization, time and space, is co-conscious with all that is. He
has entered the bliss and peace surpassing that temporal understanding
which is limited to perceiving the discords, antinomies and contrasts
characterizing finite existence; he has risen to that exalted state
where all these find their resolution in the blissful concord of the
Eternal. He is in conscious sympathy and identity of feeling with all
that lives and feels, in virtue of that universal charity and limitless
love which is the corollary of perceiving the unity of all in the Being
of Deity, and which at the outset of his progress he was told was the
summit of the Mason's profession. He sees too that there is a universe
within as well as without him; that he himself microcosmically sums up
and contains all that manifested to his temporal intelligence as the
vast spacial universe around him. He is himself conscious of being the
measure of the universe; he realizes that the earth, the heavens, and
all their contents, are externalizations, projected images, of
corresponding realities present within himself. As the perfected head of
creation, he beholds how he sums up in himself all the lower forms of
life through which his organism has passed to attain to that perfection.
The four symbolic standards exhibiting the lion, ox, man and eagle are a
very ancient glyph, declaring among other

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

things the story of the soul's evolution and its progress from the
passional wild-beast stage to one which, while still sensuous and
animal, is docile and disciplined for service, and thence to the stage
of human rationality, which at length culminates in upward-soaring
spirituality. Similarly the displayed banners of the twelve Israelitish
tribes are again but figures of their prototypes, the twelve zodiacal
sections of those heavens which could not exist or be discernible to the
outward eye were they not also the phenomenalized aspect of a reality
cognizable by the inward eye; whilst, gathered beneath these emblems,
are those who represent the tribes of no terrestrial nation, but are the
"tribes of God," the heavenly hierarchies that constitute an archetypal
canopy or holy royal arch above the visible creation and that mediate to
it the effluences of that all-embracing triune Spirit of Power, Wisdom
and Love in which the entire composite structure lives, moves and has
its being.

"In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth, and the earth
was without form and void, and darkness was upon the face of the deep.
And God said, Let there be light, and there was light." With these words
begins the Sacred Script which is the sacramental token of that Living
Word by whom all things were made, and are still in the making, and
whose life is the light of men. The candidate who recovers that lost
Word, in the sense of regaining vital organic integration into it, and
who, therefore, is one with its Life and its Light, is able to verify
this old creation-story in its personal application to himself. He
stands in the presence

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

of his own "earth"—the stone vault or dense matrix out of which his
finer being has emerged—and of his own "heavens" or ethereal body of
substantialized radiance which (as the iridescent sash of the Order is
meant to denote) now covers him with light as with a garment. He is able
to discern that it was himself who at first was "without form and void"
and who in virtue of that *Fiat Lux!* has at last become transformed
from chaos and unconsciousness into a form so perfect and lucid as to
become a co-conscious vehicle of Divine Wisdom itself.

With this symbolic attainment of Beatific Vision at the restoration to
light, the effective part of the Royal Arch Ceremony as an initiatory
rite concludes. What follows upon it is anti-climax and allegorical
exposition of a similar nature to the traditional history in the Master
Mason's Degree. This takes the form of a mythos or dramatic narrative by
the three sojourners, describing their release from captivity in
Babylon, their return to Jerusalem under an impulse to assist in
rebuilding the destroyed national temple, their work among its ruins and
the discovery of an ancient and apparently important archive, The
perspicacious mind will not fail to perceive in this historical or
quasi-historical narrative an allegory of the spiritual process which
has been going on within the candidate himself. It is he, as it is every
human soul, that has been in Babylonian bondage, in captivity to the
Babel-confusion of mundane existence, the tyranny of material interests,
and the chaos of his own disordered nature. It is he who, in revolt from
these, has in reflective

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

moments "sat down and wept by the waters of Babylon"—the transient flux
of temporal things—and "remembered Zion," in a yearning for inward
freedom and permanent peace of heart. It is he who finds the temple of
his old natural self worthless and in ruins, and realizes that upon its
site he must rebuild another and worthier one. From within himself comes
the urge of the inward Lord (*Kurios*) which (under the mask of *Cyrus*
the king) bids him forthwith depart from his captivity and go up to his
true native-land and re-erect the Lord's house. It is himself who
discovers among the rubble of his old self the plans and the material
for the new structure. And ultimately when that new structure is
completed and, when from natural man he has become reorganized into
spiritual man, it is he who is able to perceive the wonders of his own
constitution, to behold his own "earth" and his own "heavens" now fused
into a unity to which both his material and his spiritual nature were
necessary contributors.

The constitution of the Chapter as first revealed to the candidate is,
therefore, a symbol of his perfected organism. He sees that it is
polarized East and West; the East occupied by the three Principals,
signifying his spiritual pole; the West, occupied by the three
Sojourners, his psychic and materialized pole; each triad being the
reflex of the other, yet each triad being an organic unity in itself.
St. John testifies to this (and the ceremonial rite is made conformable
to the teaching of that great Initiate) when he writes: "There are three
that bear record in heaven, and these three are one.

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> And there are
three that bear witness in earth, and these three agree in one." The
meaning of this metaphysical assertion is that, just as a ray of white
light splits up (as in the rainbow) into three primary colours which
still remain organically united, so both the self-knowing Spirit in man
and his psychical nature, although monadic essentially, are
prismatically dissociable into a trinity. The Spirit in man in its
triple aspects is, therefore, appropriately typified by the three
Principals. They represent the three high attributes of the
Spirit—Holiness, Royal Supremacy, Functional Power—referred to in the
title of the Order; Holy-Royal-Arch. The middle and neutral term of
these three must be considered as differentiating itself into a passive
and an active, or a negative and a positive aspect; although all three
act conjointly and as one (as is in fact the case with the three
Principals of a Chapter). These three aspects of monadic Spirit are
personified as Haggai (passive), Joshua (active), with Zerubabel as the
middle term from which the other two issue and into which they merge.
For the central Majesty is in one of its aspects silent and withdrawn
and in the other functionally active and compulsive.

So too, with the triad of Sojourners at the other pole. They represent
the unitary human Ego or personality also in its threefold aspects. They
are the incarnated antitype or physicalized reflex of man's archetypal
unincarnated and overshadowing Spirit. Hence they are designated
Sojourners, as being but transient consociated pilgrims or wayfarers
upon a plane of impermanence, in contrast with the enduring life of the
deathless spirit whose

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

projection upon this lower world they are. Psychologically, human
personality is distributed into a passive negative subconsciousness and
an active positive intelligence, linked together by a central
co-ordinating principle, the combined three constituting man's unitary
individuality. My Ego with its central and directive power of will is my
principal sojourner; my subconsciousness with its passive intuitional
capacity, and my practical intelligence with its active and connecting
powers of thought and understanding, are my assistant sojourners. Let me
see to it that, like their symbolic representatives, they are kept
clothed in white and so able to reflect and react to their
correspondences in the eastern or spiritual pole of my being.

The nexus or connecting medium between man's spiritual and bodily poles
is represented by a third triad impersonated by the two Scribes and the
Janitor. The more important of these scribes is attached to the East
pole and is as it were its emissary towards the West; the other is
associated with the Western pole and his activities are directed
Eastwards; whilst the Door-keeper is the point of contact with the world
without. In one of their many significances they typify the middle term
between Spirit and Matter—the astral medium or psychic bridge, in virtue
of which contact between them is possible.

Heavily veiled beneath the sacramentalism of a council of the Jewish
Sanhedrim, the Royal Arch Ceremony therefore exhibits in a most graphic
manner the psychologic *rationale* of the final stage of regeneration.
To the literalist, unacquainted

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

with the fact that, in both Sacred Writ and the teaching of the
Mysteries, surface appearances are always intended to be transposed into
spiritual values and that quasi-historic characters are meant to be
impersonations of philosophic facts or principles, some difficulty may
be felt on being asked to translate the quasi-historicity of the
ceremonial text into the spiritualized interpretation here offered. The
education and enlightenment of the understanding is, however, one of the
deliberate intentions of Initiatory Rites, and until the mind is able to
rise above merely material facts and habituate itself to functioning in
the truer realm of ideas which materialize into facts and make facts
possible, there is small chance of its profiting from Rites like those
of Masonry, which are of wholly negligible value but for the spiritual
force and vitalizing energy of their inherent ideas. It may, therefore,
be both helpful and a corroboration of what has been said if we
scrutinize the Hebrew names of a Chapter's officers; what they yield
upon analysis will demonstrate that those officers impersonate ideas
rather than represent persons.

1\. "*Zerubabel, prince of the people*." The name literally means "a
sprouting forth from Babel, or from among the people." "Babel" and
"people" are two forms of expressing the same idea and the English word
is almost identical with the Hebrew one. Society as a whole, the
multitude, "the people" ("*bebeloi*," as it is in Greek), at all times
of the world's history constitutes a Babel of confused aims and
interests. But there are always individuals intellectually or
spiritually in advance of the crowd

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

and whose ideas, teachings or example shoot ahead of it, and to such
leaders the name Zerubabel would apply. But this illustration does not
express the deeper sense in which the word must be construed, which is
one of *personal* application. The individual is himself a mob, a chaos,
a multitude of confused desires, thoughts, passions, until these are
brought into discipline. But, present even amidst these and sprouting up
from among them, the ordinary man is conscious of a higher and spiritual
element in him, which he may cultivate or disregard, but which in his
best moments flames up above his lower disordered nature, convinces him
of the errors of his ways, and entices him to live from that higher
level. That loftier element is expressed by the word "Zerubabel"; it is
the apex and focus point of his spirituality as distinguished from his
ordinary carnal intelligence; the summit of all his faculties, the
"prince" of his "people." Those same faculties or "people" are referred
to in the word meaning "My people having obtained mercy" (or become
regenerate), and in the text "The people that sat in darkness have seen
a great light."

2\. "*Haggai the Prophet*." As has been shown before, the spiritual
principle differentiates into a passive and an active aspect. "Haggai"
represents the passive aspect and signifies at once the blissful and
self-contemplative nature of the spirit. It is called "the prophet"
because of the power of insight and omniscience characterizing that
which transcends the sense of time and abides eternally, and because it
projects into the lower intelligence intuitions, foreglimpses and
intimations of a

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

prophetic nature. From the same word is derived the Greek word "hagios,"
holy.

3\. "*Joshua, the son of Josedek, the high priest*," personifies the
active executive aspect of spirit. Literally Joshua means the "divine
saviour," and Josedek "divine righteousness," whilst the "high priest"
connotes a mediatorial factor between man and Deity. The title in its
entirety therefore intimates that the human spirit or divine principle
in man functions intermediately between Deity and man's lower nature to
promote the latter's salvation and perfection. We have previously shown
how the Master Mason must be his own high priest and "walk upon" the
chequered floor-work of his elementary nature by learning to trample
upon it. Thus the Three Principals form a unity figuring man's spiritual
pole in its triple aspects; they represent the summit of his being as it
lives on the plane of the Spirit—holy, royal, supreme—blissful because
in a state of holiness or wholeness; royal because a son of the King of
all; powerful because of its power to subdue, transmute and redeem all
that is below its own purity and perfection.

4 & 5. *Ezra* and *Nehemiah*. In the great Mystery-system of Egypt,
which long anteceded the Hebrew system, the regenerate candidate, who
had achieved the highest possible measure of self-transmutation of his
lower nature, was accorded the title of Osiris. It was the equivalent of
attaining Christhood. The nature of the perfectioning process and the
rituals in connection therewith are, thanks to certain modern scholars,
available to us and are recommended to the student who desires to know
how arduous and real

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

that process was and the extremely high degree of regeneration aimed at.
In Hebrew the title Osiris became changed into Azarias (and sometimes
Zeruiah) and still further corrupted into Esdras and Ezra, the name of
the senior Scribe of the Royal Arch. To understand the significance of
the two Scribes Ezra and Nehemiah it is necessary to recall that, in the
Biblical account of the return from Babylonian captivity, these two were
leading men. Transposing this historicized narrative into its spiritual
implication, Ezra and Nehemiah personify two distinct stages of the
mystical progress made by the candidate who essays to renounce the Babel
of his lower nature and, by reorganizing himself, regain his native
spiritual home and condition. "Nehemiah" (whose place in the Chapter is
in the South West) is a figure of a certain measure of that
reorganization and return. Like his Biblical prototype, he symbolizes
the candidate engaged in rebuilding the wall of Jerusalem, and occupied
in the great work of self-reconstruction, from which he will not be
beguiled into coming down by the appeals and blandishments of the outer
world. "Ezra" (whose position is in the North East) indicates a much
more advanced measure of progress from West to East. The discerning
student who will peruse the Biblical books of Nehemiah and Ezra
(including the Apocryphal books of Esdras) in this light, and with this
key to their true purport, will not fail to profit by the instruction
they will yield. Hence too they are called "scribes"; both of them are
recorders of, and testifiers to, distinct but representative experiences
encountered in the inner

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

man at different stages of the "great work" of self-integration and
journeying from a Babylon condition to the spiritual Jerusalem.

 

Here we bring to an end our examination of the true meaning and purpose
of the Royal Arch Ceremony. Dealing as it does with a supreme human
experience which none can fully appreciate without undergoing it, it is
the greatest and most momentous rite in Masonry, and no one who studies
it comprehendingly and in its sacramental significance will withhold
admiration either for the profound knowledge and insight of the now
unidentifiable mystic and initiate who conceived it or for the skill
with which he compiled it and cast his knowledge into dramatic
expression. The pity of it is that those who practise the rite make no
effort to penetrate its meaning and are content with the unenlightened
perfunctory performance of a ritual which even exoterically is
singularly striking, beautiful and suggestive. The least reflection upon
it must suggest that Masonry is here dealing with the building-work of
no outward structure, but with the re-erection of the fallen, disordered
temple of the human soul; and that even assuming that it but
memorialized some long past historic events, those events can have no
vital bearing upon the life, character or conduct of anyone to-day and
would not justify the existence of an elaborate secret Order to
perpetuate them. But if those events and this rite be symbolic of
something deeper and something personal; if they sacramentalize truths
perpetually valid and capable of present realization

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

in those who ceremonially re-enact them, then they call for fuller and
more serious attention than is usually accorded. Moreover, if the Royal
Arch be the symbolic representation of a supreme experience attained and
attainable only in sanctity and by the regenerate, it follows that the
Craft Degrees leading up to and qualifying for it will take on a much
deeper sense than they commonly receive and must be regarded as solemn
instructions in the requisite preparation for that regenerate condition.
The Craft work is unfinished without the attainment forthshadowed in the
Royal Arch. That attainment in turn is impossible without the discipline
of the preliminary labours, the purification of mind and desire, and
that crucifixion unto death of the self-will which constitute the tests
of merit qualifying for entrance to that Jerusalem which has no
geographical site and which is called the "City of Peace" because it
implies conscious rest of the soul in God. For many, the suggestion that
the attainment of such a condition is possible or thinkable whilst we
are still here in the flesh may be surprising or even incredible. But
such doubt is unwarranted, and the Masonic doctrine negates it. As has
been already shown to the contrary, that doctrine postulates not the
absence but the possession of the material organism as a necessary
factor in advancing the evolution of the human spirit; that organism is
the vessel in which our base metal has to be transmuted into gold; it is
the fulcrum furnishing the resistance requisite for the spirit's
energizing into unfoldment and self-consciousness. Physical death is
therefore not an advancement of, but an

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

interference with, the work of regeneration. "The night cometh when no
man can work," and when the soul merely passes from labour to
refreshment until recalled to labour once more at the task of
self-conquest. It is but figurative of that necessary dying to self
which implies the voluntary decreasing assertiveness of our temporal
nature to permit of a corresponding ascendancy of the spiritual.

But if in the hands of its present exponents Masonry is now rather a
dead letter than a living effectual Initiatory Rite capable of
quickening the spirituality of its candidates, it still remains for the
earnest and perspicuous aspirant to the deeper verities an instructive
economy of the science of self-gnosis and regeneration. For such these
papers are written, that they may both learn something of the original
design of the Order and educate their imagination in the principles of
that science. And to such, in conclusion, may be commended that
Temple-hymn of the Hebrew Initiates, which of all the Psalms of David
refers with most pointed reference to the subject-matter of the supreme
Order of the Holy Royal Arch of Jerusalem and the personal attainment of
the blessed and perfected condition which that title implies:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"I was glad when they said unto me, let us go up
into the house of the Lord;  
 Our feet shall stand within thy gates, O Jerusalem.  
 Jerusalem is builded as a city that is compact together;  
 Thither the tribes go up, the tribes of the Lord. . . .  
 For there are set thrones of judgment, the thrones of the house of
David.  
 Pray for the peace of Jerusalem! they shall prosper that love it. <span
id="page_168">p. 168</span>  
 Peace is within her walls and plenteousness within her palaces.  
 For my brethren and companions’ sake I will say,  
 Peace be within thee. (*Psalm CXXII*.)</span>

</div>

In those few lines is sketched all that is implied in the symbolic
spectacle that greets the eyes of the Royal Arch Mason at the supreme
moment of his restoration to light. Exalted into and become identified
with the supreme bliss, peace and self-consciousness of the
All-Pervasive and Omniscient Spirit, he sees how he has "gone up" out of
the Babylon of his old complex and disordered nature and upon its ruins
has built for himself an ethereal body of glory, a "house of the Lord."
He sees how this ecstatic condition and this new-made celestial body are
the sublimated products of his former self and its temporal organism. He
sees how each separate part and faculty of that old nature, or as it
were each of the zodiacal divisions of his own microcosm, has
contributed its purified essence to form a new organism, "a new heaven
and a new earth"; and how these essences, like twelve diversified
tribes, have assembled convergently and finally coalesced and become
fused into a unity or new whole, "a city that is compact together." And
it is this "city," this blessed condition, which mystically is called
"Jerusalem," within whose walls is the peace which passeth understanding
and whose palaces reveal to the enfranchised soul the unfailing
plenteousness and fecundity of the indissoluble trinity of Wisdom and
Love and Power from which man and the universe have issued and into
which they are destined to return.

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

The antithesis of this "heavenly city" is the confused Babylon city of
this world, of which it is written to all captives therein, "Come out of
her, My people, that ye be not partakers of her sins and that ye receive
not of her plagues!" (*Rev*. xviii. 4). And, in a word, the Royal Arch
Ceremony sacramentally portrays the last phase of the mystical journey
of the exiled soul from Babylon to Jerusalem as it escapes from its
captivity to this lower world and, "passing the veils" of matter and
form, breaks through the bondage of corruption into the world of the
formless Spirit and realizes the glorious liberty of the children of
God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. Freemasonry in Relation to the Ancient
Mysteries](mom07.md)
