[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](abr00)  [Next](abr02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

<div style="text-align: center;">

<span id="026_219">The Infallibility of God's Viceroys</span>  

<div style="text-align: left;">

<span id="026_219">It is mentioned that after giving the glad tidings
for the God's friend that he will become a viceroy and a messenger and a
prophet, he wished that this would be also in his descendants and asked
that from God, so The Wise said to him:</span> <span id="002_124">My
covenant includeth not wrong-doers(Al-Baqarah:124). As reported from
Al-Sâdiq (PUH): God took Abraham as a slave before He takes him as a
prophet, and took him as a prophet before He takes him as a messenger,
and then took him as a messenger before He takes him as a Friend, and He
took him as a friend before He makes him a leader, so He gathered for
him all of that He said unto him:</span> <span id="002_124">Lo! I have
appointed thee a leader for mankind(Al-Baqarah:124). Then he said (PUH):
and because it was so great as seen by Abraham (PUH) he said
"</span><span id="002_124">And of my offspring"(Al-Baqarah:124), so then
God answered him back by saying:</span> <span id="002_124">My covenant
includeth not wrong-doers(Al-Baqarah:124), and the complete holy phrase
from the chapter of Al-Baqarah, God said:</span> <span id="002_124">And
(remember) when his Lord tried Abraham with (His) commands, and he
fulfilled them, He said: Lo! I have appointed thee a leader for mankind.
(Abraham) said: And of my offspring (will there be leaders) ? He said:
My covenant includeth not wrong-doers(Al-Baqarah:124) and this holy
phrase assures that giving the commandments of God is done only for the
infallible and the purified  faithful people, and although this holy
phrase points out that the wrong-doer and the disbeliever do not take
such a high place (to take the covenant) even though if it was just a
period of his life, but it is also understood from it that he and his
ancestors must be purified and infallible as well, so whoever becomes
and enemy for God for some time in his life can not be a prophet or a
viceroy of a prophet, and from this we move to the point of saying that
his fathers and ancestors are infallible and purified and faithful, and
we don't say that a prophet or a messenger or someone that takes their
place that he is born from a pagan ancestor or father or being born of a
sin, or he would be cursed for this and would be mocked of that because
it is a bad character, and God, the Exalted, does not allow bad
characters for His messengers to His creation, or it would be said that
a son of a pagan or a son of unknown father was sent to us, and they say
that disbelieving is a devil, but does a devil give birth except for a
devil? and what a colocynth would yield except a colocynth? and God is
able to give to His creation only a purified leader from purified
ancestors until the end of the chain to Adam that was created by His
hands as a holy and a purified creature and guided him, so how come He
allows that a messenger or a viceroy that was appointed by His
appointment to be a son of a pagan or that he himself was pagan and an
idol worshipper even if it was for some time, but highness is only for
God</span> <span id="063_008">and His messenger and for the believers.
And if you are in a doubt of the rule of the mind about this matter for
some soul sickness then we have, and thanks for God, what makes us
confident and what makes us even more sure than before, from speeches
and talks reported from the prophet (PUH) and his Household (PUT) as
they report them from their grandfather the chosen prophet and the owner
of the holy quran and it is the ultimate prove.  
It is mentioned and reported from them (PUT) that the prophet (PUH)
said: I've became to existance from purified ancestors and purified
wombs..etc, in a long speech that was some of it and with the same
meaning comes a lot from the infallible Household members. And in
Ziyârat Wâriþ \[a ritual or a calling famous with this name, it
resembles a visit to the shrine of some holy viceroy not necessarily
going to his shrine, might be close to the meaning of seeking a bless
from a saint\] for Al-Husain ben \`Ali (PUT) and also others in the same
way that are approved to be issued from infallible Imams, in those
ritual it is announced that their fathers are purified, and the
infallible Imam from Al-Husain descendants calls for the grandfather of
Al-Husain (PUT) by saying: I testify that you were a light (halo) in the
purified ancestry and the purified wombs, never touched by paganism and
its uncleanliness and never wore its darkest garments...etc, and if you
looked into the famous Ziyârat Al-Jami\`ah \[another ritual or visit\] 
which isensured to be issued by Al-Hâdi (PUH) and if you meditated in
its text then you would surely recognize the meaning and know that their
fathers are like them, purified. You got also Al-Sâheefah Al-Sajjâdiyah
\[a book's name which has many rituals and was founded by \`Ali ben
Al-Husain (PUH)\] which will guide you through to the truth, so from
their prayers, callings and their speeches you can get the absolute
truth about this matter, and if you still got doubt about all of that
then you have Nahj Al-Balaghah \[book's name\] which collects some of
the speeches for the prince of believers (\`Ali ben Abi-Tâlib) (PUH) you
will get from it the truth as well, and it is that all of the ancestors
of all the prophets and messengers are purified and also their viceroys
as well, who are appointed by a commandment and not by voting \[the
author here points out to the main difference between the Shiite creed
and the Sunnite creed, where Shiite believe in a viceroy after each
prophet appointed by God, but the Sunnite believe that the prophet did
not mention anything about a viceroy before his death and so the
caliphate or the viceroy after his death should be taken by voting and
this is what happened, neglecting the right of \`Ali ben Abi-Tâlib (PUH)
in being a viceroy and a caliphate after the death of the prophet
(PUH)\]  
And for God's saying:</span> <span id="009_028">The idolaters only are
unclean(Al-Tawbah:28), then none of their ancestor can be one of them.
For this Shiites agree that the father of Abraham (PUH) was a muslim,
and so the tidings that oppose this is not something to take or work
with. But the father of Abraham is Terah and Azar was his uncle, and the
uncle can be called a father as mentioned before and he used to take
care of him and he (Abraham) was in his (Azar) house as it is apparent
from the holy phrases, and many clues were been given for this matter so
we have no doubt about that, and may God help us.  
  
</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Birth of Abraham (PUH)](abr02)

</div>

</div>
