[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](abr09)  [Next](abr11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

<div style="text-align: center;">

<span id="029_026"></span><span id="029_026">The Trial of Abraham (PUH)
to Slay His Son Ishmael (PUH)  
</span>

<div style="text-align: left;">

<span id="029_026">In the chapter of Al-Sâffât there are some phrases
that talk about Abraham (PUH) and his prays to his Lord and his requests
for guidance and the faithful descendants. Then God answered his calls
and prays and gave him what he desired and gave him a faithful servant
(son) but He put him under the test to show people how sincere he is to
his Creator, the Exalted said:</span> <span id="037_101">So We gave him
tidings of a gentle son.</span> <span id="037_102">And when (his son)
was old enough to walk with him, (Abraham) said: O my dear son, I have
seen in a dream that I must sacrifice thee. So look, what thinkest thou
? He said: O my father! Do that which thou art commanded. Allah willing,
thou shalt find me of the steadfast (Al-Sâffât:101-102). So the gentle
son had nothing but to obey with happiness and sincere desire the
commandments of God, and His messenger.  
We have no doubt that everything a prophet, a messenger, or a viceroy
would do or avoid is decided by God, and his deeds are done only by what
is allowed and what gives benefits, however people liked it or not.
Then, the duties that are assigned by God for people are not transfered
except by prophets of human beings, and so for this infallibility is
granted for them. We've pointed out before that a prophet or a messenger
and their voiceroys must be described with the highest of manners and so
they should not be asked or opposed for what they are doing. For this,
Ishmael did not refuse or deny what his father asked him for his manners
and infallibility and he knew what would happen and said to his
father:</span> <span id="037_102">O my father! Do that which thou art
commanded. Allah willing, thou shalt find me of the steadfast.When
Abraham was about to do what he was commanded, and Ishmael had no
opposition, and God knows their faith and their belief, and God then
told them that it was His command to do so as to test them and gave them
a ransom, and the Exalted said:</span> <span id="037_104">We called unto
him: O Abraham!</span> <span id="037_105">Thou hast already fulfilled
the vision. Lo! thus do We reward the good.</span><span id="037_106">Lo!
that verily was a clear test.</span><span id="037_107">Then We ransomed
him with a tremendous victim(Al-Sâffât:104-107).  
Scholars differed in the one that had been ransomed for , some said it
is Isaac ben Abraham, and this opinion is favored by many muslim
scholars, while Imamite scholars agreed that  the one ransomed for was 
Ishmael ben Abraham (PUT). Al-Mas\`udi said: people  argued about who
was to be ransomed for , some said he is Isaac and others say he is
Ishmael , and if the commandments took place in the land of Hijâz, then
Ishmael is the one because Isaac did not go to Hijâz before, but if the
commandment took place in  the lands of Shem, then Isaac is the one,
because Ishmael did not go the lands of Shem after getting out of it. We
say that tidings from the Household (PUT) been reported that their
grandfather the prophet (PUH) said: I am the son of the two ransomed
for, and they interpret this saying by saying that these two are his
father \`Abdullah ben \`Abd Al-Muttalib, and his grand grandfather
Ishmael (PUH), and they mentioned other things about their details.  
Maybe the source of such debate is that  quran did not mention the name
of the one that was ransomed for, but it is obvious for  anyone that
meditated in the holy phrases from the chapter of Al-Sâffât that he is
Ishmael (PUH) by clues that are so clear and no way to interpret them,
go through  their order and you will get the exact situation. After
telling the story of the event and God's rewards to Abraham by
saying:</span> <span id="037_111">Lo! he is one of Our believing
slaves(Al-Sâffât:111), then after that comes the happy tidings to
Abraham from God about Isaac and letting him to be a faithful prophet
later on, so God said:</span> <span id="037_112">And we gave him tidings
of the birth of Isaac, a prophet of the righteous.</span> <span
id="037_113">And We blessed him and Isaac. And of their seed are some
who do good, and some who plainly wrong themselves</span><span
id="037_112">(Al-Sâffât:112-113). Then the tidings about Isaac came
after telling the story of the dream of Abraham, and this is a great
clue for that the son meniotned is not Isaac, because telling the name
of Isaac gives an obvious clue that Isaac and the one that was ransomed
for are different apparently.  
 Saying "And we gave him tidings of the birth of Isaac" and it is
connected by "and" to the person in the previous story, then for sure it
is not Isaac and it is Ishmael without a doubt. Abdul Wahâb in his tales
said: The main character in this story for jews in Torah is Isaac, then
he said: and I think that the name of Isaac was put in(by them) between
the lines of the story for they are cautious and careful to make their
grandfather is the one that gave his life for God since his childhood,
then he said: and my clue that the one who sacrified himself for God is
Ishmael is derived from Torah itself when it comes to mention that the
child is the only child for Abraham that he has no one else except him
and it is a clue for Abraham's ultimate faith in God, so much that he
gave his only child to sacrify with, but if we considered Isaac we see
that he was never alone because he was born and Ishmael was fourteen
years old as it is mentioned in Torah itself also and Ishmael stayed
until the death of his father and he was near him when he died and
buried him. We say that this is a strong prove and the truth is what had
been said (by Abdul-Wahâb) and he has many correct opinions.  
They say that when he was to be sacrified with, he was thirteen years
old and it is the age of an adult, and he had became able to do what his
father can do and he had to help him and work for God and worship Him,
and he reached the ultimate level of thought and sense, so this is why
he obeyed the commandment of God with his father. When his father laid
him on the ground on his side to slay him and God knew how sincere they
are, and both of them decided to and showed the deed in public, and when
they reached the level of doing, God showed the secret for what they
were commanded to do so, and that He did not desire the deed itself but
it is a test and thus God gave the ransom, so God said "</span><span
id="037_107">Then We ransomed him with a tremendous victim" and they say
it was a great ram, and as reported by Ibn \`Abbâs, it is the same ram
that God accepted from Abel, and for saying "tremendous victim" it is
because it (the ram) grazed in paradise for fourty years. From the
interparetations of \`Ali ben Ibrâhim in a long speech attributed to
Al-Sâdiq (PUH) which included that when Ishmael gave hisself to be
sacrified with and when Abraham wanted to slay him, and old man came and
said: O Abraham, what do you want from this boy? He answered: I want to
slay him, so he said: O God, a boy that never did wrong to God, so said
Abraham: God ordered me to do so, so he answered: God denies this but it
is something from Satan, then said Abraham: woe unto you! The One who
made me reach this high level ordered me to do so, then the old man
said: O Abraham you are a great man and people follow you and if you
killed your son now they will follow you by killing their children, but
he did not answer him and he asked his son about slaying him, and when
all surrended to the commandments of God, the boy said: O father, tie me
and cover my face, so then said Abraham: O son, the tie and the slay? No
I sweat that I will not do them to you, then he laid him and put the
knife over his neck and lifted his head to the sky and ran the knife
over his neck, but Gabriel flipped the knife and pulled the great ram
and made him in the place of the boy, then he (Abraham) was called from
the side of the mosque "</span><span id="037_105">Thou hast already
fulfilled the vision. Lo! thus do We reward the good."  
It is mentioned also that he said to his father: slay me while i am
prostrating so you won't see my face and have mercy on me, it is also
mentioned that he said: tie me tightly father so I won't become nervous
and keep your clothes away from me so that my blood shall not reach them
and then my mother would see it and sharpen your knife and run it fast
on my neck to make it easier for me because death is hard, then Abraham
said: What a help you are for God's commandment. In some tidings it is
included that God inspired unto Abraham and He knows what is in the mind
afore: what creation is beloved to you more than anything else? He
answered: Your beloved Muhammad, for You did not create a creation that
is more beloved to me than him, so god said then: is he beloved more
than yourself? So said Abraham: he is beloved more than myself, then God
said: are his children beloved to you more than your own children? He
said: his children are, so God said then: is killing his children by
their enemies more hurtful to your heart or killing your own son for My
commandments? He answered: It is killing his children bytheir enemies
that is more hurtful to my heart, then God said: O Abraham, there will
be a group that claim to be followers for Muhammad, they will kill
Al-Husain after him for no rights and they will slay him as for slaying
a ram and thus they will deserve My anger, then Abraham got shocked and
so sad and started crying. There are many tales and speeches about this
matter but we did not come to mention them for it might be so boring.  
There are also some tidings that mention the prophets' stops in Karbala
before the massacre and their passing through the location of death of
Al-Husain ben \`Ali and the son of Fâtima the daughter of the prophet
(PUT), and their crying for him after telling them about his trouble and
the massacre by Gabriel (PUH). Such tidings were told by Gabriel to
every messenger and prophet since the time of Adam (PUH) until the time
of Jesus ben Mary (PUH) and all of them used to cry and have pains for
it. \[some lines come here but add nothing to the matter and complicated
somehow to translate\].  
  
</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: A Completion With The Ancestry of The Prophet (PUH)](abr11)

</div>

</div>
