[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](abr10)  [Next](isa00) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

<div style="text-align: center;">

<span id="037_105">A Completion With The Ancestry of The Prophet (PUH)  
</span>

<div style="text-align: left;">

<span id="037_105">We've pointed out before that it is true what the
prophet said about hisself "I am the son of the two whom ransomed for"
and it is interpreted by trustful companions for the prophet (PUH) and
by his Household (PUT) that it points out to his fathers \`Abdullah ben
\`Bd Al-Muttalib and Ishmael ben Abraham (PUT), and one of the tidings
about this matter is what is attributed to Al-Ridhâ (PUH) after asking
him about this saying, he said: meaning he (the prophet) is the son of
Ishmael ben Abraham and \`Abdullah ben \`Abd Al-Muttalib, and for
Ishmael he is the son that was mentioned in quran, and when he was about
to be slain God sent a ransom for him which iwas a great ram, grey in
color, \[some describtion here I could not understand\] and used to live
before that in paradise for forty years and it did not get out of a
female, and everything that is sacrified with in Minâ until this very
day \[in pilgrimage\] is for Ishmael until the doomsday. \[another
describtion follow which I can not understand fully\].  
  
Then after that he (PUH) mentioned the story of \`Abdullah ben \`Abd
Al-Muttalib (PUH)..etc. So, no doubt that Ishmael ben Abraham is a
father for the prophet (PUH) and his Household (PUT), and if Ishmael was
slain then all of this holy tree (chain) would have been lost, and they
are the secret of existance  and the reason for finding this creation,
No doubt that the prophet (PUH) and his Household (PUT) after him are
the leaders of this creation and better than prophets and messengers
before them and the rest of angels that are close to God, so peace unto
them and God's blessings as well. The great historian and owner of Muruj
Al-Ðahab, Al-Mas\`udi, mentioned the ancestry for the prophet (PUH) that
is connected to Ishmael ben Abraham (PUH) when he started talking about
his conditions concerning his birth, sending as a prophet, his traveling
to Medina and his death, and he said: He is Muhammad ben \`Abdullah ben
\`Abd Al-Muttalib ben Hâshim ben \`Abd Manâf ben Qosay ben Kilâb ben
Morrah ben Lu'ay ben Ghâlib ben Fahr ben Mâlik ben Al-Nadhor, ben
Kanânah ben Khozaymah ben Modrakah ben Aliâs ben Modhar ben Nizâr ben
Mo\`ad ben \`Adnân ben Od ben Adad ben Nahor ben Ya\`ur ben Ya\`rub ben
Yashjob ben Nâbit (Nabioth) ben Ishmael ben Abraham ben Terah. Then he
continued counting his fathers until reaching Shem ben Noah and then
reaching Seth ben Adam (PUT) and we've mentioned that Ishmael had twelve
sons as mentioned in Torah and Torah mentioned their names and mentioned
that all of them were tribal heads.  
What is mentioned about the ancestry of \`Adnân is agreeable by all and
some tidings about its rightness been told, but the names coming after
\`Adnân are controversial, and for this they (the Household) mentioned
that their grandfather the prophet (PUH) used to name his fathers until
\`Adnân then he stops and says: lied the ancestry foretellers. There is
no doubt that the prophet and his Household (PUT) know better their
ancestors and for this they emphasized on their connection with Ishmael
ben Abraham, but because of the many differences in the spelling of many
names that fall between the two names of the grandfathers (Ishmael and
\`Adnân) and because of the hardness of same names they usually stop the
chain, and it is reported to them that they ordered not to say their
ancestry up to Ishmael (PUH), and this is true as witnessed for there is
another chain mentioned in books which has different names and length as
well. \[then comes lines about the second chain, which emphasizes only
on the different names\].  
  
\[A whole paragraph here that just emphasizes that telling the ancestry
of the prophet (PUH) should be ended up at \`Adnân because of the
hardness of names and the different length been told for chains. Not
translated because of time consuming matter for nothing new\]  
  
What made me talk about such a matter before its time is the excessive
need for it, and we've mentioned that Ishmael (PUH) had twelve sons, and
it is known that the prophet (PUH) is connected  to him, and we would
like to know by which descendants he is connected to Ishmael , and from
the previous discussions we see that one form says that his gradnfather
is Þâbit and three other forms agree that his grandfather was Faydar ben
Ishmael ben Abraham (PUT), and both of the forms are not exactly
mentioned in Torah, but the second one which is Faydar is close somehow
to the spelling of Qaydâr and maybe this is the truth, but maybe some
letters change or added because of the long time period since that time
and because of many people carried such tidings or it might be just
because of printing mistakes.  
But Al-Mas\`udi in Muruj Al-Ðahab, when he came to mention the
conditions of Ishmael ben Abraham (PUH), he mentioned a quite useful
sentence for this occasion, so he said:  Then Ishamel took care of the
House after the death of his father Abraham, and God made him a prophet
and send him to the giants (?) and to the tribes of Yemen and he tried
to ban them from worshipping idols but only few did follow him, and
Ishmael had twelve children and they are: Fâ'iþ, Qaydâr, Erbel, Meem,
Masma\`, Duma, Dawâm, Meeshâ, Hadâd, Heem, Qaturâ and Mâsh \[compare
with the list mentioned in the 9th section, this list mentioned here is
more closer to the one in Torah\]. The commandment of Abraham was
transformed to Ishmael after his death \[meaning: Ishmael was the
viceroy of his father\], and Ishmael transfered it to his brother Isaac,
and some said to his son Qaydâr ben Ishmael. Ishmael was one hundred and
thirty seven years old when he died and been buried in the Holy Mosque
in the position that was kept for the black stone, and the House
conditions were took care of by Fâ'iþ ben Ishmael (PUH) and did as his
father used to do, and even some say that he was the viceroy of his
father Ishmael (PUH). I say, maybe most of them depend on what is
mentioned in Torah because it was the first, and if it was right as it
is was revealed on the heart of Moses ben Amram (PUH) then why not
following it since it is clearly and good clue, and an investigation
about it and about its people later on if God desired so, and to God be
the words of thanks and prays over His beloved the Chosen and his
Household, and over the rest of prophets and messengers.  
  
</span>

</div>

</div>

<span id="037_105"></span>

<span style="font-family: times new roman;"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaac ben Abraham (PUT)](isa00)
