[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](adam00)  [Next](adam02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  
(Subjects from different sources with agreement in contents)

Adam was named as Adam because he was created from the skin of the earth
(Arabic: Adeem) and from Al-Sadooq: that the fourth ground (or earth)
was called Adeem and from it Adam was created and that's why he was
called Adam, and the mother of human beings Eve (Arabic: Hawâ') was
called like this because she was made from the living (Arabic: living =
Hay) and that is Adam (PUH). And from Al-Sâdiq (PUH): that God created
Adam from clay and created Eve from Adam, and so the work of men is on
land (earth, ground) and the work of women is in men. It was told that
when Adam was created and God placed the soul in his body He made him
stand between His hands then Adam sneezed and praised the God by saying:
Praise be to the God. then God said: O Adam, you praised me, and I swear
by my Highness, if it was but to make two slaves at the end of time, I
wouldn't have created you. Then Adam said: O Lord, by their endearment
and their values to You, what are their names? So God said: O Adam, look
to the Throne. So Adam took a look and found two lines made of light.
The first line was: No God but Allah, Muhammad the prophet of mercy and
'Ali is the key of paradise. The second line was: I decided to bear
mercy for these who be victorious to them and follow their path, and
torture these who oppose them.  
The trustworthy 'Ali ben Ibrâhim had told from Abi Jafar Al-Bâqir (PUH)
in telling the meaning of God's saying "And verily We made a covenant of
old with Adam, but he forgot, and We found no constancy in him"
(Taha:115) he said: God made a covenant with him in Muhammad and the
Imam's after him (PUT), but he left that out and he never thought they
were (Muhammad and the Imam's PUT) in such high place and value, and the
"Them of Constancy" (meaning: Noah, Abraham, Moses, Jesus, and Muhammad)
are called like that because God made a covenant with them in Muhammad
and the viceroys after him and in Al-Qâ'im (PUT) and gathered their
constancies in admitting their (Muhammad and his viceroys PUT) rights
and virtues. And from Abi 'Abdullah Al-Sâdiq (PUH) that he said: the
sons of Adam (PUH) gathered in a house and had an argument about who's
better, Adam or the close Angels. Some of them said that our father Adam
is better and others said the close Angels are, and few others said the
carriers of the Throne. While they were like that, "Gift of God" Seth
(Also: Sheth PUH) entered and they told him the story, so he got back to
his father Adam (PUH) and told him the story of the fighting men and
they asked him (asked Seth) but he didn't have an answer for this, then
said Adam: O son, I've stood between the hands of God may praise be to
him, then I looked into a line on the door of the Throne that was
written on it: By the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful.
Muhammad and the descendants of Muhammad are the best of what Allah
started.  
From Al-'Ayyashi from Amr ben Abi Miqdâm from his father that he said: I
asked Aba Jafar Al-Bâqir (PUH) from what thing did God made Eve (PUH)?
he said (Al-Bâqir PUH): and what thing do they say about this creation?
I said: they say from one of Adam's (PUH) ribs, then he said (PUH): they
lied. Is God unable to create her except out of Adam's rib? Then I said:
O may I be a ransom to you son of the prophet of God, of what thing did
God create her? He said (PUH): my father told me from his fathers that
the prophet of God (PUH) said: God, may praise be to Him, held a clay
and mixed it with his right hand, and both of His hands are right, so He
created out of it Adam and part of it was left untouched so He created
Eve out of it (Al-Sayed Ne'mato-Allah Al-Jaza'eri said: this Hadith or
speech is trustworthy and believed in among our comrades and partners.
Meaning what had been told by Al-'Ayyashi..etc) and this speech has what
supports it and there is no doubt among us about its contents and
anything oppose it would oppose the rules and laws of what God made what
we are in now, and so the claim of creating Eve out of his (Adam) rib is
something strange and weird instead of creating her out of the remaining
of his (Adam) clay as it was told by them (meaning them the Holy family
of Muhammad PUT) many times.  
About the story of creating Eve out of the rib, and that is the little
left rib, is carried by explaining according to the pictorial match for
these who believe it and there are other taken paths and God only
knows.And it is probable that God created Adam and Eve without a mother
and father and created Jesus (PUH) without a father to let know that He
is able to create anything anyhow, and His laws in nature used to be
creating any creation out of a father and a mother except these
mentioned before. And it is told that the Angels (PUT) when they felt
about their mistake and got sorrowful for their arguing with God about
the creation of Adam (PUH) and saying "Wilt thou place therein one who
will do harm therein and will shed blood" and they knew that they made a
mistake and regretted and got to the Throne praising and asking for
pardon for what they did, and this was a reason to put up a house in the
fourth heaven at the edge of the Throne and was called Ad-Dhirâh, then
after that He put up a house in the earth's sky and Called it Al-Bayt
Al-Ma'moor (The Great House) at the edge of Ad-Dhirâh, and Put up on
earth Al-Bayt Al-'Ateeq (The Old House, or Holy House) at the edge of
Al-Bayt Al-Ma'moor. Then after He ordered his slave Adam (PUH) to go
around it and so he did, so He had mercy upon him and that spread out
among his sons until the doomsday. And it was told that Adam (PUH)
visited the Holy House for a thousand times on his feet, for seven
hundreds Hijjas (pilgrimages) and three hundreds 'Omras ('Omrah = A
visit not in the pilgrimage time)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Angels prostration for Adam PUH](adam02)
