[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](adam12)  [Next](adam14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  
(The marriage of Adam and Eve)

What was mentioned about the marriage of Adam and Eve from the Household
members (PUT) is that when God created Adam (PUH) from sand and breathed
in him from His Spirit and Made the Angels prostrate before him, he got
asleep,  and while he was sleeping God created Eve as He did create Adam
(PUH) from a mud of the same type of the mud of Adam or from the remains
of his mud, and Made her stuck to his side in a position between his
hips, and that to make woman belonging to man. When God founded the soul
into her she moved and Adam got awake for her movement, and she was
called to move away from him, and when Adam looked at her he saw a
pretty creation that looks like him but she was a female, and talked to
her and she spoke with his language, then he said to her: who are you?
So she said: a creation made by God as you can see. Then Adam talked to
his Lord and said: O Lord, who is this creation who I got amused for
being with and looking at? Then said God, the Exalted: this is My slave,
Eve, would you like her to be with you for your amusement and talk with
you and be under your command? So Adam said: Yes O Lord, and thanks and
praise be to You as long as I live. Then God did say: ask for her
engagement from Me, for she is My slave and she is the one for lust too.
And God dropped the lust over him(Adam), and he did say: O Lord, I ask
for her engagement for myself, what would make You satisfy? Then God did
say: My satisfaction would be to teach her My faith. Then Adam (PUH) did
say: that would be for You O Lord, as long as You want it. Then God did
say: I wanted so, and she is your wife for what I have asked you to do,
so take her to your side. So then Adam (PUH) accepted that and been
satisfied, then Adam did say: come to me, then she said: but you have to
come to me, then God ordered Adam to go to her and so he did, and if it
wasn't that women would go by themselves to men to make engagements, and
this is the story of the marriage of Adam and Eve.  
It is famous in the public that Eve was created from the left rib of
Adam, and this was denied by members of the Household (PUT), it was been
told that when Al-Imam Al-Sâdiq (PUH) was asked about this matter and
the questioner showed that is it famous in the public that Eve was
created from the left rib of Adam, so then Al-Sâdiq (PUH) did say:
praise be to God and Exalted He shall be above all what they say, who
says that God did not have the ability to create a wife for Adam but
from his rib and make a way for who talks in ill manner to say that Adam
got married to himself as long she is made from his rib, not for these
people did God judge between them and us. From Al-Imam Al-Razi \[famous
medicine and science man and some say he was a Shiite and got his
teachings and wisdom from the Imams of the Household PUT, and God only
Knows\] in his interpretation for God's saying "O mankind! Be careful of
your duty to your Lord Who created you from a single soul and from it
created its mate"(Al-Nesâ': 1) : what is meant by this mate is Eve, and
about the creation of Eve from Adam there are two sayings, the first:
and it is the most common, that when God created Adam, made him sleep
then Created Eve from one of his left ribs, so when he got awake and saw
her, he got inclined to her because she was made from one of his parts.
This saying was supported by the saying of the prophet (PUH): the woman
is made of a rib, so whenever you want to make it straight it would be
broken and if you left it bent, you would enjoy it. This is what they
said and God only knows, for supporting their believe and claims. The
second saying: and it is the choice of Abi Muslim Al-Asfahâni: what is
meant by God's saying "and from it created its mate" meaning from its
type and it is like God's saying "He created for you helpmeets from
yourselves"(Al-Rum: 21) and like His saying "by sending unto them a
messenger of their own"(Al-Imran: 164)  
And there are explanations and opinions and discoveries made and born by
the ideas of philosophists and it was not the first flask to be broken
in Islam, for there are so many inventors and makers, and God did say
"follow not that whereof thou hast no knowledge"(Al-Esrâ',Bani Isrâ'il:
36) and "Assuredly conjecture can by no means take the place of
truth"(Yunus: 36) and "Hath Allah permitted you, or do ye invent a lie
concerning Allah?"(Yunus: 59) and "Ask the followers of the Remembrance
if ye know not!"(Al-Nahl: 43)  
The truth is what was said by the members of the Household (PUT), and
they know better. And it is necessary to remember that what is agreed on
by logic and as transfered by speech that God, the Exalted, Is able to
Create anything anyhow He likes, and when He created Adam (PUH) from
sand, He was able to Create Eve also from sand, and as long it is that
way for what purpose He , the Exalted, would create her out from one of
his (PUH) ribs but to be against what the Household do say, and what was
said by the Household is what goes along with the good thinking and
would be accepted by the straight mind, and if the creation of Eve from
his ribs, after his existence and the completeness of his creation and
being breathed in and making the Angels prostrate before him as they
claim, that would require getting his rib out after falling asleep to
create Eve in something appears more like a surgery as done by the
physicians these days like cutting and pulling out stones and opening
the abdomen, after putting under the chloroform and it is something that
would make the bereaved mother laugh, and if they meant by all that that
she was created from the remains of his mud and his sand and not his rib
after his creation, then it is as said by the Household of Muhammad the
Chosen, and so no difference, but why do they say his left rib? maybe
they meant from the his sand remains and God knows better and it is all
up to Him and no power except by Him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The marriage of the children of Adam PUH](adam14)
