[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](adam07)  [Next](adam09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  
(What is the tree that was prohibited for Adam PUH)

Tales and speeches had differed about of what type is it and what is it.
Some said it is wheat and some said it is vine and grape while others
said it is camphor and still others said it is the fig. It is said also
that it is the tree of good and evil and it was said it is the tree of
eternity that the Angels used to eat from, and more had been said. From
M'ânee Al-Akhbâr \[seems a book name\] in its basing to Al-Harawee said:
I said to Al-Ridhâ (PUH): O son of prophet of God, tell me about the
tree that Adam and Eve ate from, what was it? because many people differ
in its nature, some say it is wheat, some say it is grape and some say
it is tree of the envy, then he said (PUH): all of that is right, then I
said: then what is the meaning of all these different opinions? then he
said (PUH): O Abâ As-Silt \[=Al-Harawee\], the tree of paradise carries
types, so it was wheat carrying grapes and it is not like the trees of
our life, and when God honoured him and Reminded him of the prostrating
of Angels before him and Letting him into the paradise, he (Adam) said
to himself: did God created a human better than me? and God knew what
was between him and himself and so Called him and told him: O Adam, left
up your head and look to the leg of the Throne, so then Adam left up his
head and looked into the leg of the Throne and found there it was
written on it: No other God but Allah, Muhammad is the prophet of Allah,
'Ali ben Abi Tâlib is the Appointed from God and his wife Fâtima is the
mistress of all women, and Al-Hasan and Al-Husain are the masters of
paradise's young people, so said Adam: O Lord, who are they? then said
His Highness: they are from your descendants, and they are better than
you and than the rest of my creation, and for them only I did create
you, and Created paradise and hell, and heavens with earth, so be aware
not to envy them and wish for their place and so demon would take
control over you, so then he got something in hisself about them and
then did the demon control over him until he ate from the tree that he
was prohibited from, and took control over Eve for her thoughts of envy
about Fâtima (PUH) until she ate from the tree like Adam did, and so God
put them out from His side down to earth.  
And in contents of the tale as it is with other tales, the word "wish
for their place" points out that the meaning is "glee" and not "envy" in
its real meaning, because glee like wishing for their place, and envy is
wishing for their obsolescence, because envying is a sin and points out
to a lame character and the glee is totally against that, and it is
impossible for the father of human beings and prophets and messenger,
and the one whom Angels did prostrate before by God's commandment and
whom God Had created with His Hands and Inhabited in paradise then  had
been chosen by God and Made him a prophet, it is impossible for him to
be an envious one, and from this point we believe that the prohibition
from eating from that tree was a prohibition for the purity and not for
a taboo, and it was mentioned before something about the protection of
prophets against doing sins and there is more to do about that to come
to you by God's well, and the meaning of the tree of envy is that eating
from it was because of envy, and if it was the envy it would not have
been eaten.  
And it is mentioned that if it wasn't Adam's (PUH) guilt, no faithful
would have done any guilt ever, and if it wasn't that God relented
toward Adam, there would not have been any repentance for any guilty
ever, and from Al-Sâdiq (PUH) that he was asked that how come the
inheritance of man is as much as twice of that of females so he said
(PUH): that is because the number of fruits that Adam and Eve ate were
eighteen, twelve were eaten by Adam and six were eaten by Eve and so the
inheritance is made up as mentioned before.  
It had been told that when Adam was down from paradise a black mole
appeared in his face from the top of it til its feet and so long was his
sadness and crying for this, then came Gabriel (PUH) and said to him:
why crying Adam? so he (Adam) said: for this mole that occured in me, so
then he (Gabriel) told him: get up and pray, it is time for the first
prayer, so Adam did that and the mole shrinked to his chest, then he
(Gabriel) came again at the time of the second prayer and said to him:
get up Adam and pray this is the time for the second prayer and so he
did and the mole shrinked to his navel, and then came again at the time
of the third prayer and said to him: get up Adam and pray this is the
time for the third prayer and so he did and the mole shrinked to his
knee, then he came at the time of the fourth prayer and said to him: get
up Adam and pray this is the time for the fourth prayer and so he did
and the mole shrinked to his legs, then he came at the time of the fifth
prayer and Adam did the same and the mole was out of him and he thanked
God for this a lot, then Gabriel did say to him: O Adam, your sons in
this prayer are like you in this mole, and who would pray from your sons
each day and night five prayers he would be out of his sins as you got
out of this mole.  
And also in a speech that when Adam (PUH) got down on earth he got a
beard as black as coal, so he held it with his hand and said: O Lord,
what is this? and He answered him: this is the beard, I made it as an
ornamet for you and your male descendants until the doomsday. And it was
mentioned before that the inhabitation of Adam and Eve in paradise was
for seven hours until they got out of it, and that God breathed in Adam
with His Spirit after the sunset of Friday and then Created Eve after
him, then Commanded the Angels to prostrate before him and Made him
inhabit His paradise since then, and the Imam (PUH) swore \[not
mentioned which Imam is it\] that they did not stay more than these
hours on that day until they did what was prohibited then God got them
out after sunset and didn't stay in it (Paradise) and they were moved to
the yards of paradise until it was the morning and their loins appeared
then their Lord said to them: Did not I prohibited you from that tree,
so Adam got ashamed and shy of his Lord and said: O our Lord, we did
wrong to ourselves and made a confession of our sins, O may You forgive
us, then did God say: get down from My heavens to earth for no sinners
would be in My paradise nor My heavens.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Place of falling of Adam and Eve](adam09)
