[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](adam06)  [Next](adam08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  
(The reason for getting Adam down from paradise to earth)

From Mos'adah ben Sadaqah from Al-Sâdiq (PUH) from the prophet (PUH)
that Moses the son of Amram \[Arabic: Musa ben Imrân\] (PUH) asked his
Lord to let him see Adam (PUH) and so He answered him and made him see
Adam, and then Moses did say: O Father! you are the one that God created
with His own hands and made you live in His paradise and prohibited you
from one tree so you couldn't be patient enough til you fell on earth
because of it, and couldn't you control yourself away from it and so
Iblis seduced you and you followed him and so you are the one that got
us out of paradise because of your sin. Then did say Adam (PUH): O son
take it easy on your father for the matter of this tree. O son my foe
approached by trick and plot, so he swore to me by God that his opinion
is a good advice and he said to me: O Adam I am sad for you, so I said
to him: and how is that? he said: I enjoyed being with you and you will
be out of what you are in now to what you hate, I asked him: and what to
do? he said to me: here is what to do, do you want me to guide you to
the tree of eternity and an endless reign so you can eat from it with
your wife and then you shall both be in paradise with me for eternity,
and he swore to me by God  and he was a liar that he has the truthful
advice, and O Moses I never thought that someone would swear by God and
he is a liar, so I trusted his oath and this is my excuse, so tell me
son, do you find out from what had been revealed to you from God that my
sin was noted before I get created, then Moses said to him: before a
long time. Then said the prophet (Muhammad PUH): and so did Adam
overcame Moses in the argument.  
From Al-Sâdiq (PUH) also: when Adam was put out of paradise, Gabriel
(PUH) came down to him and said: O Adam, didn't God create you with His
hands and Breathed into you of His Spirit and made the Angels prostrate
before you, and Got you Eve as a wife and Made you inhabit paradise and
Prohibited you directly from eating from that tree but you made the sin?
Then Adam (PUH) said: Iblis did swear to me by God, and I never thought
that someone from God's creation would swear by Him falsely! And what is
understood from the previous conversation between Moses and Adam (PUT)
that the sin was something meant to be and predestinated long ago before
Adam's creation and from the world of atom \[It is believed that
everything exists in this life including people existed before becoming
alive or born in a world or a dimension where they were just atoms\], at
the time of creating the spirits before his (Adam) existence by two
thousands years, and it is a case which was a battle field for several
opinions and many people got doomed for their mis-interpretations and
not understanding the truth in it, and it is a case of God's judgement
and what He Has predestined for His creation before his existence.  
And the solution for this case for us in general is: God founded in this
human the power that could aid him in doing what God appointed to him
and Made him able to do, and Left him the selection and Gave him the
mind and brain with which he can differentiate between what's wrong and
whats true, and what would make God satisfied or dissatisfied. After the
knowledge and looking into the path of these faithful to God and their
viceroys and every allowed path that leads to it (?), that God knows
whatever he chooses or does from wether it be a sin or obeying for His
commandments, for He knows the ends of workings and deeds that are done
by His slaves and no incidents would happen without His knowledgement
before his (the human) existence, by his well or bad chose, and He His
Highness the one that knows the the guilt of Adam whatever would be
acted by him and whatever he would choose, as it is the case with all
His creations and slaves, so from Him may praise be to Him the powers
and destinies in doings and not-doings, and the selection is made for
these of responsibilities by mind, heart and reality, and He is the one
who Knows the ends and what  these of responsibilities might choose for
themselves, if it was good it is good, and if it an evil it is an evil,
and there is no forcing for the slave, but it is something in between,
because the force and power is from His Highness, and the full choice
for these of responsibilities, and God knows what might the slave choose
for himself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: What is the tree that was porhibited for Adam PUH](adam08)
