[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](adam03)  [Next](adam05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  
(The inhabitation of Adam in paradise)

The Prince of Believers (PUH) said in Al-Nahj: Then God made Adam
inhabit a place of much grace and made it a safe place for him, and
warned him of Iblis and his hostility, and so his foe envied him (Adam)
for his place of inhabitation and his company of the faithful, so then
he (Adam) paid for what was so sure with his doubt, and for the power
with his weakness, and exchanged hilarity with fear, and pride with
regret, then God Relented toward him and Gave him the words of His mercy
and Promised him that he would be back to his paradise, and Got him down
to the place of troubles and breeding. What is apparent from this speech
of the Prince of Believers (PUH) and from lot of tales and Holy phrases
about the subject of Adam's paradise that God made him inhabt, that it
is the paradise that God promised for His faithful after life for their
deeds, or even as a gift for these of faith in His prophets and Holy
Books, and so his saying (PUH) about the place of inhabitation and the
company of the faithful, do appoint out to the paradise after life and
not the gardens of this life, and it is apparent for these who got a
cautious hearts and a well mind, and then meditate in his saying (PUH)
about getting back to his (Adam) paradise and getting him down to the
place of troubles and breeding.  
And there is no need to explain and interpret more than that and saying
the opposition of what had been said in the speech, and the more
opposition that might be made against it, then it is an ignorance and
perversity that are not needed.  
It is told from some tales and speeches that the inhbaitation of Adam
and Eve (PUT) in paradise lasted for seven hours as measured in this
life's days, and so their out was in the same day that they got in and
if they did obey the commandments of their Lord, they would have been
lasted for more time and never got out of it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How was it correct to prostrate before Adam by angels and he's
just a creation](adam05)
