[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](adam08)  [Next](adam10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  
(The place of falling of Adam and Eve when they got down from paradise)

What is famous from the Household (PUT) that Adam (PUH) fell down on
Al-Safâ and Eve on Al-Marwah \[Al-Safâ and Al-Marwah are two hills in
Mecca and people go in between them seven times in pilgrimage season\],
and what is famous for the most of Muslims is that Adam (PUH) fell down
on a mount called Sarandeeb \[Notice: Sarandeeb is the old Arabic name
for Ceylon, Sri Lanka now\] and it is called Nud also, and Eve did fall
in Jeddah, and some people suggested that this is the truth and their
fall on Al-Safâ and Al-Marwah was after they got into Mecca. From Hayât
Al-Hayawân for Al-Domayri \[hayât al-hayawân means the life of animals
and seems it is a book's name\] he said: Ka'b Al-Ahbâr did say \[Ka'b
Al-Ahbâr was a nickname for the chief priest of jews\]: God revealed the
snake in Asbahân \[maybe he means Asfahân in Iran?\] and Iblis in Jeddah
and Eve in 'Arafah \[a mount around Mecca\] and Adam in Sarandeeb and it
is in the higher region of China in the sea of India \[this description
is somehow close to modern day Sri Lanka\], and it is a high place where
seamen can see it from a distance of days and it bears the footprint of
Adam (PUH) in stones, and this mount is seen each night as a lightning
without clouds, and it rains in everyday to wash the foot steps of Adam
(PUH), and it is told that Rubies are found in this mount and also
Diamonds with Aloeswood (Agar wood, Oud, Ood).  
In tales, that when Adam (PUH) came to Mecca from India by a commandment
from God, every step he would take there would be a prosperity of land
in its place, and everything in between was just a desert, all along the
way until he reached Mecca, and when he reached Mecca he went around the
Holy place.  
It had been told also that when God got Adam down, He got down with him
one hundred and twenty rods and branches that got every seed for every
type of grains, and that he died on Friday, in the sixth of April in the
same hour that he was created in, and he was nine hundred and thirty
years old, and it had been said also that he died after he got forty
thousands of his sons, grandsons and grand grandsons.  
And from Abi Jafar Al-Bâqir (PUH) that he said: God the Exalted one
Inspired to Adam: O Adam, I would collect all goodness for you in four
words, one for Me, one for you, one between Me and you, and one between
you and people. The one for Me is that you worship Me and no one else,
and the one for you is that I will reward you for your deeds as much as
you need, and the one between Me and you is that you have to pray and
praise Me and I will answer you, and the one between you and people is
that you have to love for people what you love for yourself.  
Some tidings mentioned that God revealed a book written in Syriac made
of tweny one pages, and it is the first book ever to be revealed on
human beings, and in it there was one thousand thousand \[a million\]
tongues, no people with one of these tongues would understand the other
without education, and Adam has the knowledge in every tongue and can
speak it better than its native speakers, and contained also the clues
of God and His worshippings, judgements, rules and laws..etc  
from Ibn 'Abbâs that he said: When God created Adam, and Breathed in him
from His Spirit, he sneezed and God inspired him to thank Him so he
said: Praise be to Allah, Lord of the Worlds, so his Lord said to him:
mercy of your Lord be upon you. And when God made Angels prostrate
before him, he got exclaimed and said: O Lord, You created a creation
that is beloved to You more than me? but God didn't answer him, then he
asked again, and God didn't answer, then he asked for the third time but
god didn't answer him, then God did say: Yes, and for them only I did
create you, then he said: O Lord let me see them, then God ordered the
Angels of the veils to left off the veils, and when they did and Adam
looked, he found out five ghosts in front of the Throne, then he said: O
Lord who are they? then God did say: O Adam, this is my prophet
Muhammad, and this is 'Ali the Prince of Believers, the cousin of my
prophet and his viceroy, and this is Fâtima the daughter of my prophet,
and these two are Al-Hasan and Al-Husain the sons of 'Ali and sons of my
prophet, then He said: and they are your descendants, so Adam got happy
for this. And when he did the sin he said: O Lord I ask You by Muhammad
and 'Ali and Al-Hasan and Al-Husain to relent toward me, and so God
relented toward him by them, and this is what is meant by God's saying
"Then Adam received from his Lord words (of revelation), and He relented
toward him" (Al-Baqarah: 37). When Adam got down on earth, he made a
ring and carved on it: Muhammad is the prophet of God and 'Ali is the
Prince of Believers. It is mentioned also that Adam was called "Abi
Muhammad" \[meaning: father of Muhammad, it is a common Arabic way also
to call men by the names of their elder males children as: Aba Nasir,
meaning father of Nasir and so on. Aba could be Abu and Abi and this is
subject to change according to the grammar of the Arabic language\]  
The mention of Muhammad, 'Ali, Fâtima, Al-Hasan and Al-Husain (PUT) is
repeated, and viewing them by Adam (PUH) is repeated also, once upon the
leg of the Throne, once on the door of the Throne and once in front of
the Throne and so on. They are mentioned once by the Holy name of God,
the Exalted, one time and another without It, and all of this would not
be a reason for confusion and it would be fine to consider all of that
is correct to show their virtues and how they are different from the
others and so people would not have to argue about it with God, and so
everyone would die and live with its knowledgement and Allah is no
oppressor of (His) bondmen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Crying of Adam for paradise](adam10)
