[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enoc00)  [Next](noa00) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Some of what was mentioned in the books of Enoch PUH

From Ibn Tawoos he said: It was mentioned in the books of Enoch these
sentences and they are: Like if death had come to you and your moaning
and your sweating have increased, and your lips shrinked and your tongue
became broken and your spittle became dry and whiteness became over your
eyes blackness, and your mouth started to foam and your whole body
started to shake, and you became to treat the death with its agony, its
bitterness, and its shrieking, and you've been called and you can't hear
anything, then your soul came out and you've became a dead body among
your relatives. There is a lesson in you for others, so think in the
meanings of death, whatever became upon others will become upon you no
way out, and every life however it is long is short because whatever
will come is close by at a certain time. So, meditate in the meanings of
death you who die, and know you human being that death is harder than
what becomes before it and easier than what becomes after it from
troubles and disasters of the doomsday,..etc. And it was engraved on his
ring: Patience is of faith, by God the victory will come. And it was
engraved on the area that he wore: The festivals are in keeping the
duties, and the laws are of the completeness of religion, and the
completeness of religion is the completeness of manhood. And over the
area that he wore at the time of praying over the dead: The happy one
who looks at himself, intercession to his God, his good deeds.  
They mentioned that he had sermons and morals, and every band took it
out with its own tongue, and ran as useful proverbs and symbols, and
from that was his saying that was traced back to him (PUH): No one will
be able to thank God for His gifts as giving His creatures. And also:
Whoever wanted to reach the wisdom and the good of deeds, so let him
leave the tool of ignorance and the bad deeds. As you see the craftsman
that knows all the crafts so when he wants to sew he took its own tool
and leave the tool of carpentry, so the love of the life and the
after-life do never come into one heart together. And also: The goodness
of life is sorrow and its badness is a regret. Meaning that let go of
good deeds in life is a sorrow and doing bad deeds is a regret. And also
from him: If you called for God the Exalted make your determination
clear and pure and also fasting and prayers, so do and never swear and
you are liers and don't attack God with rights \[meaning here swearing
or promising with lies\], and don't make liers swear for you and so
you'll become partners for them in their sin, and avoid ill gains and
follow your kings and your elders and make your mouths full of thanks to
God, and the life of souls is wisdom and don't envy people for their
luck for they will enjoy it for a little, and whoever exceeded
satisfaction will never be satisfied, and so along of what was mentioned
by Abdul-Wahâb Al-Najjâr in his stories.  
It is mentioned from the book of "Tareekh Al-'Olamâ'" (History of
wisemen) that a group of wisemen claimed that all the wisdoms that
appeared before the Flood was traced back to Enoch that the hebrews call
"Khanookh" the prophet the son of Jared ben Mahalaleel ben Cainan ben
Enosh ben Seth ben Adam, and he is Edrees (Enoch) the prophet (PUH), and
then they traced back to him matters and incidents and works that God
did not suppose to him and most of them are like legends and what crazy
people would do or silly ones that were slaves for life and ego took
over them, and they never stop doing the bad deeds, and God forbid that
His prophets commit such deeds, but they are assigned to the highest of
matters and the best and wisest of conditions for mind and wisemen
because they are the resources and they are the leaders of the creations
and the guardians of the Creator over His religion and creed, the
commanders of goodness and the prohibiters of badness, so they are the
tongue and examples of truth and the looking eyes of reality and the
hearing ear that express about God the Exalted and they don't speak out
of their desires, but it is an inspiration that is inspired which One of
mighty powers taught them.  
It is mentioned from Enoch PUH the wise sayings and advices and calls
and one of them his call that is read in the dawns of the month of
fasting (Ramadhân) that contains forty names for God, as much as the
days of Repentance (?), and it begins with: O praise be to You no God
exists but You, O Lord of everything and its hire \[seems a part of a
famous praising\]. And after mentioning the forty names comes the great
call that has no other match, and it is imploring to God with His forty
names, and asking for safety away from punishments of life and
after-life, and it is without any doubt an infallible tongue and an
inspired and closed one chosen by God for His commandments and for
telling people about Him. \[then comes a typical ending for the subject
which I believe no need to mention here\].  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sheikh of messengers, Noah PUH](noa00)
