[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](geo00) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Khâlid ben Sinân Al-\`Absi

He was in the period of time between the Messiah and Muhammad ben
\`Abdullah (PUH), and he is Khâlid ben Sinân ben \`Atab ben \`Abs, and
the prophet (PUH) mentioned him and said: he was a prophet that was lost
by his people. They say that a fire showed up among the Arabs and they
were amazed for it and it was moving, and they almost turned to magii,
and then Khâlid ben Sinân took a stick and put it over the fire and
said: the beginning of everyone of religion shall be ended to God, and
then he said: I shall go inside it and it is burning and I shall go out
of it without a harm, and so he did and extinguished it, and when it was
the time of his death, he said to his brothers: if I died and buried,
then shall come a group of wild asses and in front of it there will be
an ass with a cut off leg and it shall knock my grave with its hoof, so
when you see this then dig my grave and I shall come out for you and I
shall tell you about the future and what shall happen, and when he died
and they buried him, they saw what he said and when they wanted to dig
him out and some of them hated that and said: we are afraid that other
tribes shall talk about us for digging a grave of a dead man, so they
left him, and his daughter then came to the prophet (PUH) and she heard
him saying: Say: He is Allah, the One!(Al-Ikhlâs:1), and she said: my
father used to say this, as it is narrated in Muruj Al-Ðahab for
Al-Mas'udi. As attributed to Al-Sâdiq (PUH) that he said: while the
prophet (PUH) was sitting, there came a woman and so he (PUH) welcomed
her and let her sit beside him and then he said: the daughter of a
prophet that was lost by his people, he is Khâlid ben Sinân who called
them to worship God but they didn't believe in him, and there was a fire
that was called fire of Al-Hadþân that used to come and eat some of them
and it had a certain time to occur, so Khâlid said to them: if I turned
away its harm, would you all believe in me? They said: yes, and then it
came about and he received it with his own clothes and he kept it away,
and then he followed it until it went inside its cave and he went inside
with it and they sat at the step of the cave and they thought he will
never go out and he said then: the tribe of \`Abs claimed that I shall
never go out, and then he said to them: shall you believe in me? and
they answered: no! He then said: then I'm going to die in that day of so
and so and when I die then bury me and then shall come a group of wild
asses lead by a wild ass that is missing one leg and it shall stop over
my grave, and if you saw that then dig my grave and ask me forever you
want, and so when he died they buried him and then came the group of the
wild asses and they wanted to dig his grave and then some of them said:
you didn't believe in him when he was alive how shall then you believe
in him after his death, and if you did so and dag his grave that would
be a shame for you so leave him alone, and so they did.  
In that period of time there were others that it was said that they are
prophets and some said that they were faithful believers and one of them
was Handhalah ben Safwân and he was a descendant of Ishmael ben Abraham
(PUT) and God sent him to the dwellers of Ar-Rass \[please check the
chapter of Al-Furqân:38\] and they were descendants of Ishmael ben
Abraham (PUT) and they were made of two tribes, one was called Idmân and
the other Yâmin and that was in Yemen, and Handhalah did what he was
commanded with by God and they killed him and then they were invaded by
Nebuchadnezzar, and they say that these holy phrases were revealed
telling their story: And, when they felt Our might, behold them fleeing
from it! (But it was said unto them): Flee not, but return to that
(existence) which emasculated you and to your dwellings, that ye may be
questioned. They cried: Alas for us! we were wrong-doers. And this their
crying ceased not till We made them as reaped corn,
extinct(Al-Anbiyâ':12-15).  
Some of them also Habeeb Al-Najjâr, and he used to live in Antakya
(Antoioch), and there was in it a tyrant king that used to worship the
idols, so two of the Messiah's apostles went to him and they called him
back to God and to work with His obedience so he put them in jail and
beat them and then God supported them with a third man as it was
mentioned in Quran in the chapter of Ya Sin, and people differed about
the identity of the third one and lot of them thought that he is Peter
who was one of the Messiah's apostles, and some said that he is Paul,
and the other two were Tuma (Thomas) and Peter. Talking about them would
be so long and of no use and we've pointed out about their story in
God's saying: When We sent unto them twain, and they denied them both,
so We reinforced them with a third(Ya Sin:14), and they had a great
affair with the king for what they showed of miracles and they said that
they used to cure the blind and the leper and resurrect the dead by the
permission of God, and then Peter and Paul were crucified and put upside
down in a roman city. As for Habeeb Al-Najjâr he was well-known for his
sincerity and faithfulness for God and known for his work by the laws of
the prophet and their books and he did many services that God shall
thank him for, and in some interpretations and history books it is
mentioned that he was a fighter for God and was trusted by all the
believers, and talking about him would need special explaining.  
In that same period also, there was Waþþâb Al-Sanâ, and he was from the
tribe of \`Abd-Qays, and he was a believer in the religion of the
Messiah, Jesus the son of Mary, before the appearance of the prophet
Muhammad (PUH), and also there was As\`ad Abu-Karb Al-Himyary, and he
was a believer and believed in the prophet (PUH) before he (the prophet)
is sent, and he said about him:

**I testify that Ahmad \*\*\* is a prophet from Allah the Creator**  
**and if my age is expanded to his time \*\*\* I shall be a minister for
him and a cousin**  
**and shall force everyone on \*\*\* this earth to obey him from Arabs
and foreigners**

and he was the first one to cover the Holy House (Ka\`bah).  
There was also Qis ben Sâ\`idah, and he was the son of Iyâd ben Nizâr
ben Mu\`ad ben \`Adnân (PUH), and he was a wiseman and well-known among
the Arabs and he was their physician, and he believed in the
resurrection and he was the one that said: who lived died and who died
shall come and everything coming shall be coming, and Arabs mentioned
many proverbs telling his wisdom. It is mentioned that a group of people
from the tribe of Iyâd came to the prophet (PUH) and he asked them about
him and they said he is dead, so he (PUH) said: may the mercy of God be
upon him. It is narrated by the prophet (PUH): it is like I am looking
at him in the market of \`Ukkâdh \[a famous market for Arabs of ancient
where poets used to compete\] riding a red camel of his and he is
saying: O people gather together and listen and understand, who lived
died and who died shall come  and everything coming shall be coming, and
then, in the skies there are news to be told and in the earth there are
sermons to be taken, and stars that are revolving and seas that are
boiling and an uplifted roof and a road that was made, and I swear by
God truely, that there is a religion for God that is better than this
one you are believing in, why do I see them going and never coming back?
are they satisfied with their staying and settled down or they were left
and slept? many roads and different deeds, and then he (the prophet PUH)
said a poem:

**In the old days \*\*\* we have sermons**  
**when I saw incomes \*\*\* for death that have no resources**  
**and I saw my people to them \*\*\* their first and last are going**  
**past is not to be back \*\*\* and none of the old shall remain**  
**then I knew that \*\*\* I shall be where the others were**

Al-Mas'udi said in Muruj Al-Ðahab: then said the prophet of God (PUH):
may God has mercy upon Qism how I wish that God resurrect him in a
nation. And he (Qis) had many poems and sermons and tidings with the
caesar of the romans about medicine and education and many topics of
wisdom. To obtain his conditions and stories that would need a whole new
book alone, may God have mercy upon him.  
In that period also there was Zayd ben \`Amr ben Nufail and he was the
cousin of \`Umar ben Al-Khattâb \[the second caliphate for Sunni
muslims\] and this Zayd didn't worship the idols and used to mock at
them, and then his uncle Al-Khattâb attacked him and used to harm him
and he made the silly people of Mecca hurt him, so then he lived in a
cave in Hirâ' and used to get into Mecca by secret and then he travelled
to the lands of Canaan to look after the religion and then a king of the
Ghassanides \[Ghassanides: rulers of the lands of Ghassân who were under
the rules of the romans and their main capital was in Damascus\]
poisoned him in Damascus.  
Also in the time between the Messiah (PUH) and the prophet (PUH) there
was Umayyah ben Abi Al-Silt Al-Þaqafi, and he was a poet and a wiseman
and used to trade in the lands of Canaan and he read many books and he
was sure that there will be a prophet that shell be sent from the Arabs,
and used to say poems describing the skies and earth and the sun with
the moon and the angels and mentioning the prophets and the resurrection
and paradise with hell and sanctify God and some of what he said was:

**Thanks be to God who has no companions \*\*\* who never said it then
he wronged himself**

and he described the people of paradise by saying:

**No gossip and no bad in it \*\*\* and whatever they say is there for
them**

and he had many poems describing the doomsday and the judgement and its
fears and the fear of God and he told about his belief and his faith
about God and some of what he said about that:

**Doomsday is a great day \*\*\* the young shall be old for long
time**  
**Wish I was when it happened for me \*\*\* that I was on mountains
taking care of sheeps**  
**Every living however long it was \*\*\* shall then some day of short
go away**

and so on with his beautiful describtions that points out how faithful
he was and how good he was in fighting his own soul and his own devil,
and Al-Mas'udi in Muruj Al-Ðahab talked about him for so long, check it
out.  
Some of them was also Waraqah ben Nofal ben Asad ben \`Abdul-\`Uzzâ ben
Qusay and he was the cousin of Khadeejah bent Khuwaylid, the wife of the
prophet (PUH) and he read the books and asked for the wisdom and left
away the worshipping of idols and he brought the happy tidings to
Khadeejah about the prophet (PUH) and that he shall be the prophet of
this nation and he shall be hurt and disbelieved in, and he met with the
prophet (PUH) and said to him: O son of my brother, be firm with what
you are doing, I swear by who has the soul of Waraqah in His hand, you
are the prophet of this nation and they shall hurt you and disbelieve
you and drive you out and fight against you, but if I lived to that day
I shall bring victory to God, and he praised the prophet (PUH) and said:
he forigves and never answer back for a sin, and keep the anger whenever
being cursed or mad at.  
Some of them also was \`Addâs, the servant of \`Utbah ben Abi Rubay\`ah
and he was in Nineveh, and also Abu Qis Surmah ben Abi Anas from the
tribe of Al-Najjâr, and he turned to be a priest and left the idols and
he built a mosque (temple) that no poluted nor a woman with period would
get into, and he said: I worship the God of Abraham, and when the
prophet (PUH) went to Medina, he turned into Islam and he was a faithful
muslim. Some of them also was Abu \`Âmir Al-Awsi and he was the father
of Abu-Handhalah, the one washed by the angels, and he turned into a
priest before Islam, and when the prophet (PUH) came to Medina he had
with him a long story as said by Al-Mas'udi, and then he went out with
fifty servants of his and died among the christians in the lands of
Canaan.  
In that period also there was \`Abdullah ben Jahsh Al-Asadi and he was
from the tribe of Asad ben Khuzaymah, and with him was Um Habeebah the
daughter of Abi Sufyân ben Harb before that the prophet (PUH) marries
her, and he read many books and was inclined to christianity, and when
the prophet (PUH) was sent, he immigrated to Abyssinia with others that
immigrated to there with his wife Habeebah, and then he left Islam and
turned into christianity and he died in Abyssinia, and there is a long
story about him.  
In that period of time also there was Buhayrah the priest, and he was a
believer that followed the religion of the Messiah, Jesus the son of
Mary (PUT), and the christians used to call him Jerjees and he was from
the tribe of \`Abd Al-Qays, and when the prophet (PUH) went out with his
uncle Abi Tâlib to the lands of Canaan in a trade, and he was twelve
years old that time, they passed by Buhyrah while he was in his home and
he knew the prophet (PUH) by his describtions and by signs that he had
in his book such as the cloud that used to make a shade for him wherever
he sits, and when they approached him he got down to them and hosted
them and made some food for them and he looked at the ring of prophecy
between his (the prophet's) shoulders so then he put his hand on him and
he believed in him, and then Buhayrah told his companions about his
story and what shall he be and then asked his uncle Abu Tâlib to get
back with him as soon as possible and to be aware from the people of the
Scripture, and when the prophet (PUH) got back to Mecca from that trip,
he told the people about what happened between him and the priest and
about the signs of his prophecy. That was something of what was there in
the time between the Messiah (PUH) and the prophet (PUH) and peace be
upon all of the prophets.  
In that time period there were lot of people and might be millions of
them, but the purpose is to mention in general who was close to God or
the prophets and we've mentioned just a few of them to point out that
there were lot of believers and faithful people and to point out that
God never leaves earth without goodness and so people won't have
something to oppose God with but He has all the clues over all the
people.  
What we've mentioned is some of what we've found and some of what
Al-Mas'udi copied and what we missed is even greater and the
knowledgement of it is only known by Him, who knows His servants and His
lands the best and He knows everything. This is in general the
completeness of the talk about the conditions of the prophets and the
messangers that were mentioned in Quran directly or by signs and some of
them were not mentioned in Quran but they had great effects and the laws
assured their existance as being the proves of God for all the people
and they tell about Him so that people won't have any excuse, and God
said: We never punish until we have sent a messenger(Al-Isrâ':15), and
also said God: and there is not a nation but a warner hath passed among
them(Fâtir:24). And all religions and all thinkers agreed upon this
concept without any doubt.  
Then the main poles of the prophets and their masters are: Adam, Noah,
Abraham, Moses, David, Jesus and Muhammad (PUT). Those of Will of them
are five and they are: Noah, Abraham, Moses, Jesus and Muhammad (PUT).
The total of the prophets are numbered as one hundred and twenty four
thousand, and the messangers of them were three hundred and thirteen
messangers, some of them for the public and some of them were for
privates. Some narrations mentioned some prophets without identifying
them with a describtion or an ancestry or a name or even a surname and
without mentioning their times or their places and we shall mention some
of them and the details are known to God.  
Some of them were mentioned by Al-Sayid Al-Jazâ'iri in his book about
the tales of the prophets, and of that was something about the prophet
of the magii, so we say and God is the Helper: it is mentioned that the
prince of believers (PUH) was over the pulpit and he said: ask me before
you lose me, and then stood up Al-Ash\`aþ ben Qays Al-Kindi and said to
him: O prince of believers, how do you take taxes from the magii and
they have no scripture (book) \[in Islam, only people of the Scriptures
who believed in revealed religions like jews and christians used to pay
taxes in exchange of protection\] and no prophet was sent to them? He
answered him: they had O Ash\`aþ, and God revealed for them a book and a
prophet and they had a king that got drunk one night and he called his
daughter to his bed, and in the morning, his people heard about it and
gathered at his door and they said to him: O king, you've poluted our
religion and destroyed it so get out for us and let's apply the law over
you, he then said to them: gather together and listen to me and I might
have a way out of it, otherwise you shall do what you want, and so they
gathered together and he said to them: did you know that God didn't
create someone beloved to Him more than Adam and Eve? They said: you are
right O king, then he said to them: didn't he (Adam) make his daughters
to marry his sons and vice versa? They said: you are right, this is the
religion and they agreed on it, so God then erased their wisdom from
their chest and lifted the book away from them and they are the
disbelievers and shall go into hell without judgement, and the
hypocrites are even worse than them. Then said Al-Ash\`aþ: by God I
never heard an answer like this, and by God I shall never do it again.  
Also it is in the tidings about the heretic who asked Al-Sâdiq (PUH)
about the magii and whether God sent a prophet for them or not and the
Imam said in his answer: no nation remained without a warner, and then
he asked: tell me about the magii, were they closer to the rightness or
Arabs were closer? He answered him: Arabs were closer to the rightness,
because before Islam, Arabs were closer to the path of Abraham more than
the magii, and the magii disbelieved in all the prophets and neglected
their books and the clues in them and never applied something of what
was mentioned in them, and the king of the magii in the early days
killed three hundred prophets and the magii never wash themselves after
polution while Arabs used to wash themselves after polution which was
something from the laws of Abraham, and the magii used not to circumcise
their children which was something of the laws of the prophets and the
first one to do so was Abraham (PUH), and the magii didn't use to wash
their dead people while Arabs did all of the previous, and the magii
used to drop their dead people into the deserts while Arabs used to put
them in graves, and the magii used to marry the mothers and the
daughters and the sisters while that was prohibited for the Arabs, and
the magii denied the Holy House and called it the house of Satan while
Arabs used to have pilgrimage towards it and used to say it is the House
of our Lord, and Arabs believed in Torah and the Gospel and used to
nagotiate with the people of the Scriptures and deal with them and so
Arabs in all situations were closer to the rightful religion more than
the magii, and they (the magii) said about marrying the sisters and
claimed that this was the way at the time of Adam so then what is their
excuse for marrying the daughters and the mothers and that was
prohibited by Adam, Noah, Moses and Jesus and the rest of the prophets
and messangers, and in a narration attributed to the prophet (PUH) that
he said that the magii had a prophet but they killed him and they had a
book but they burned it and so on.  
Some of the unknown prophets also was what was mentioned by the prince
of believers (PUH) by the way of the prophet (PUH) that he said: a
prophet that God sent to some people, remained among them for forty
years but none did believe in him, and they had a festival and gathered
in a church (temple) for them, so the prophet followed them and said to
them: believe in God who created you and founded you and who has all of
your matters, so they said to him: if you are truely a prophet then pray
to God to reveal for us food according to the color of our clothes, and
their clothes were yellow, so he brought a dry piece of wood and he
prayed to God to feed them with what they asked, and God answered his
pray and the wood turned green by the Will of God and bore fruit and
that was the fruit of the apricot, so they ate and whoever was willing
to believe in that prophet, his fruit would turn to be sweet and whoever
willed not to believe, the fruit would turn out bitter.  
And some of them were mentioned by Al-Ridhâ (PUH) when he said: God
inspired to a prophet that when he wakes up in the morning, then he
shall eat the first thing he see in his way and the second thing he
shall meet he shall keep as a secret and the third thing he shall meet
he should accept, and the fouth thing he shall meet he shouldn't dispair
it, and for the fifth thing he should run away from. He said: and when
it was the morning time, he saw a great black mountain so he stood and
said: God ordered me to eat this, and he remained in his place baffled,
and then he said: my Lord wouldn't order me with something I can't do,
so he walked to it and with each step it got smaller and smaller and
when he reached it, it was so small, so he took it and ate it and found
out that it was the most tasteful thing he ever ate, and he went in his
way and then saw a bowl made of gold and he said: God ordered me to keep
it as a secret, so he dag a hole and buried it and went away and when he
looked back he saw it again and then he said: I did what my Lord
commanded me, and he went along. Then he saw a bird that was chased by a
hawk and the bird revolved around him and he said: my Lord ordered me to
accept him, so he opened his sleeve and the bird went inside, and the
hawk said to him then: you took my prey and I was chasing it for days,
and the prophet said then: my Lord ordered me not to put this one to
dispair, so he slew the bird and cut off its thigh and threw it for the
hawk and went away. Then in his way he saw a rotted meat with warms on
it and he said: God ordered me to run away from this, and so he did.
Then he went to sleep and in his dream he saw like someone saying to
him: you did what you was ordered with so do you know what was it and
what is the secret? and he answered: no, so he was told: as for the
mountain, it is the anger, for if a man was angry he wouldn't see his
level and wouldn't see himself or know it, but when he knows all of that
and his anger is calmed down then the end of his matter would be like
the tasteful thing you ate. As for the golden bowl, it is the good deed,
for if a man tried to hide it and keep it as a secret God shall then
show it to all to make it as an ornament for His servant with the
rewards. As for the bird it is the man who comes to you with an advice
so accept him and accept his advice, and as for the hawk it is the man
that needs you for something so don't dispair him. As for the rotted
meat, it is the slander so run away from it.  
It is mentioned also that God inspired to one of the prophets of the
Israelites: if you like to be with Me in the Holy Fields later on, then
you should be in this life alone as a stranger and sad and away from the
people like a lonely bird that sleeps alone at night time afraid of all
other birds and only has joy with God. They say also that a prophet of
the Israelites passed by a dead man who had some of his body under a
wall and the other part was outside and it was eaten and torn apart by
beasts and dogs, then he went along and got into a city and saw there a
great man that was dead and put over a luxurious bed, so he said: O
Lord, I testify that You are just and never wrong, and that was Your
slave and never disbelieved in You and died in that way and this is Your
slave that never believed in You and You made him die in that way? Then
God answered him: O My servant, it is as you said, I am just and never
wrong, that was My servant and he had a sin so I made him die in that
way so when he meets Me he shall be pure of sins, and this is My slave
that had done a good deed before so I made him die like this so that he
would meet Me and he has no rights to be given from Me.  
As attributed to Al-Ridhâ (PUH): God inspired to a prophet: if I was
obeyed I shall be satisfied, and if I was satisfied I shall bless and My
bless has no end, and if My commands were refused I shall be angry and
if I am angry I shall damn, and My damnation would reach the seventh
generation. It is also narrated that a prophet complained to God about
his weakness, so he was told: cook meat with milk for they help the
body, and a prophet complained to God about his weakness, so He ordered
him to eat the mash, and a prophet complained to God about the absence
of descendants, so He ordered him to eat eggs with meat, and a prophet
complained to God about the harshness of the heart and the absence of
tears, so God inspired to him to eat lentils, and so he did and his
heart turned soft and his tears were easy to fall, and a prophet
complained to God about the sadness so He ordered him to eat grapes, and
they say that God never sent a prophet unless accompanied by the smell
of the quince and it is mentioned that perfumes were included in the
laws of the prophets. They say also that some people asked their prophet
to pray to God to take off the death from them and so God did, and they
reproduced and their homes were so narrow for them because of their
large numbers and one man would have to feed his father and his
grandfather and his mother and his grand grandfather with his son and
his grandson and his grand grandson so they got busy and were not able
to do some work, so they got back to their prophet and asked him to pray
to God to let them back to their normal state and so he did. They say
that once a man said to Al-Sâdiq (PUH): I hate to pray in their mosques
(and it might not be the people of Scripture) so then Al-Sâdiq (PUH)
said: don't hate so, because no single mosque was built unless it was
over a grave of a prophet or a viceroy that was killed and that spot got
some of his blood and so God loved to mention His name in that spot, so
pray there and do your duties and whatever you missed (of prayers).  
It is narrated that there are seventy prophets that are buried between
Al-Rokn Al-Yamâni \[a place in Mecca near by Kaaba\] and the place of
the Black Stone \[a stone placed in Kaaba, check the story of Adam\].
And as narrated by \[name not mentioned\] (PUH): God inspired to a
prophet at the time of one of the tyrants: go to this tyrant and say to
him: God used you only to cut off the voices of the wronged for they
didn't leave their darkness and they are disbelievers. They also say
that God inspired to one of the prophets: there is a man named so and
so, go and tell him that he has three fulfilled wishes and so he did,
and when he told him he told his wife about it and she insisted on him
to make one wish for herself and he accepted that, then she said to him:
ask your God then to make me the prettiest woman in this time and so he
prayed and her wish was fulfilled and her news spreaded and all the
kings and the rich young people desired her and she then hated her
husband and started to hurt him while he was trying to take care of her
and it went so severe on him so he prayed to God to turn her into a dog
and so she turned to a dog and then her children gathered together and
cried and said: people are mocking at us because our mother is in the
shape of a dog, and they asked their father to let their mother be in
her original shape and so he did and she turned to her original shape,
and so the three wishes were wasted. This, if you just meditated in what
we've mentioned before, you would find the sermons in it and such thing
are not so far away to be issued by people like them (the prophets) may
peace be upon them and God is the Bringer of success and the Guider to
the straight path.

This is the last thing we would like to mention about the conditions of
the prophets that Quran mentioned them and some others except of the
master of the prophets and the end of the messangers, the chosen one and
the guider and the beloved of God the Lord of the worlds, so prays and
peace shall be upon him and upon his Household, and we have the will to
write about him by God's Will even though it may partly and also about
his Household the purified and the chosen ones, may peace be upon them
and him, and that if and only if God wanted us to do so and from Him
comes the success and upon Him we shall depend.  
Finished of preparing it to be printed out in the first of Rabee\`
Al-Awwal \[third month of the islamic calendar\] in the year 1391 Hijri,
which coincides with 26/4/1971 A.D.  
   
   
 
