[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](eja02)  [Next](geo01) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Prophet Jerjees (Georgeous) (PUH)

As attributed to Ibn \`Abbâs he said that God sent Jerjees (PUH) to a
king in the lands of Canaan that was called Ðu-Ðânah who used to worship
an idol, and he advised him and guided him to worship God and forbid him
to worship the idols and said to him: the creations should not worship
except of God and don't pray except to Him, so then the king said: from
where are you? and he answered: from the Romans and live in Palestine,
and then he ordered to capture him and then he ordered to brush his body
with iron brushes until the meat of his body fell down and then
sprankled the vinegar over him and rubbed his body with harsh tools and
then ironed his body just to let him die by torture, but since he didn't
die he then put long wedges in his head and made his brain go out like a
liquid but he didn't die and then he put a large rock over his abdomen.
When night came over an angel came down to him and said: O Jerjees, God
says to you be patient and be glad and don't be afraid or God is with
you and He shall make a relief for you and they shall kill you for four
times and during all of that God shall remove the sense of pain from you
and this is destined for you and He knows the ends. Then the king wiped
him over his back and his abdomen and then got him back to the jail, and
then the king wrote (a letter) to the magicians to send him the best of
them so they sent him a magician who used everything he can of magic
over him (Jerjees) but nothing did happen to him and then he brought a
poison and made him drink it and Jerjees said: by the name of God that
lies of the wicked and the magic of the magicians shall be astrayed by
His truth, and nothing happened to him, and then said the magician: if I
made the people of the earth to drink this poison then their powers
would be gone and their eyes would go blind, and then said the magician
to Jerjees (PUH): then you are the bright light and the shining lamp and
the obvious truth and I testify that your God is true and everything
else is false and I believed in Him and believed in His prophets and to
Him I shall repent, and then the king killed him. Then he got Jerjees
back to the jail and tortured him severely and he didn't die and then he
torn him apart and threw him into a well and he died there. Then the
king gathered with his folks for some food and drinks, and then the
universe changed and it went dark and a black cloud came with lightning
and thunder and the earth started to shake and they thought that this is
their end, and God then ordered Michael (PUH) and he went to the head of
the well and said: stand up O Jerjees by the permission of God and by
His Will the One who created you, and then Jerjees stood up alive again
and Michael got him out of the well and he said to him: be patient and
be glad and then Jerjees went to the king and he said to him: God
resurrected me and sent me to you to be a clue for you, and then stood
the head officer and said: I believed in your God, the One who
resurrected you after your death and I testify that He is the truth and
everything else is false, and four thousand people followed him and all
believed and followed Jerjees, and the king killed them all by the sword
and then he ordered to bring a board made of copper and he fired under
it until it went red and he made Jerjees to lie on it and then he
ordered to bring lead and it was melted down and poured into his mouth
and then he struck his eyes and his head with wedges and when he saw
that this didn't kill him, he sat the fire under him until he died and
ordered to throw his ashes to the wind.  
In brief about what remained of his conditions is that God resurrected
him by His Will and then sent him to the king while he was sitting with
lot of his folks. Then one of the king's folks said: we have fourteen
pulpits and food between our hands that is made of many plants some of
them give fruit and some others don't, so ask your God to give each tree
a life and to plant in each of them its own leaves and fruit and if He
did that I shall believe in you, and then Jerjees put his knees on the
floor and prayed to God and yet before leaving his place, every branch
bore its fruit and when they saw that they had no way but to believe in
him. When the king saw that he ordered to put him between two wedges and
then a saw was put over his head and he was sawn into two halves and
then he put them in a great cauldron and cooked his meat, and the earth
went dark and God sent Isrâfeel (Raphael ?) and he shouted and made the
people fall down over their faces and God resurrected him again and sent
him again to the damned king and when people saw him they got amazed,
and the king said: if I left this magician my people shall be doomed,
and all of them then gathered together and wanted to kill him by the
sword and then said Jerjees: don't be in a hurry to kill me, and then
said: O Lord, if I died then idols shall be worshipped and I ask You to
make my name among the people as an example of patience for those who
reach You for every adversity and trouble, and then they knocked down
his neck with the sword and he died, and they were out of town that time
so after that they went inside it in a hurry and all of them were
doomed.  
Al-Mas'udi said: of those who were in the period of time after the
Messiah, there was Jerjees (PUH) and he met some apostles and God sent
him to a king in Mosul \[in Iraq\] and he called him to worship God but
he killed him and God resurrected him and sent him back to him again and
he killed him, and God resurrected him and in the third time he ordered
that he shall be sawn and then burned and spreaded his ashes in Tigris
and then God destroyed the king and all of his kingdom of those who
followed him. This is as it was narrated by the people of Scripture who
believed in Islam, and the truth is that God knows the truth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Khâlid ben Sinân Al-\`Absi](geo01)
