[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](grp01)  [Next](grp03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Ishmael, Other Than The Son of Abraham (PUT)

It is mentioned that he is other than the son of Abraham, the friend of
God (PUH) but it is possibly the son of Ezekiel the prophet was
mentioned before, the one who resurrected the dead people by the
permission of God and the owner of the bright miracles and the one whose
prays are answered and hard working for God, and as attributed to
Al-Sâdiq (PUH) that he said: Ishmael that God said about him in His holy
book: And make mention in the Scripture of Ishmael. Lo! he was a keeper
of his promise, and he was a messenger (of Allah), a prophet(Mariam:54),
he was not Ishmael the son of Abraham but he was a prophet that God sent
to his people and they took him and skinned his head and his face, so
then an angel came to him and said: God the Almighty sent me to you so
order me with whatever you want, so then he answered: this is to be done
to me like it will be done with Al-Husain ben \`Ali (PUT), and in other
narrations he said "like it will be done to the prophets." As reported
by Al-Kâfi from Al-Sâdiq (PUH) he said: he was called "keeper of his
promise" because he promised a man in a place so he waited for him there
for one year, and so God called him "keeper of his promise" and then the
man came to him after that and Ishmael said to him: I am still waiting
for you.  
As attributed to Al-Ridhâ (PUH) he said what has the meaning in general:
he had promised someone with a certain promise and waited for him for
one year and he is Ishmael ben Ezekiel, and God praised him again by
saying: He enjoined upon his people worship and almsgiving, and was
acceptable in the sight of his Lord(Mariam:55). In a narration
attributed to Zayd Al-\`Ajli from Al-Sâdiq (PUH) and it is a long one
about someone that asked him (PUH) about Ishmael the keeper of his
promise, he answered: he is Ishmael ben Ezekiel the prophet, the one
that was sent to his people but they disbelieved in him and killed him
and skinned his face, so then God had the wrath upon them and He sent
down Satâtâ'eel, the angel of torture, and he said to him (Ishmael): O
Ishmael, I am the angel of torture and directed by the Lord of Exaltness
to you to torture your folks as you like, and then Ishmael said: no need
for that O Satâtâ'eel, then God inspired to him: what do you need O
Ishmael? Then Ishmael said: O Lord, You had the covenant for Yourself
for being a God, and for Muhammad to be a prophet, and for his viceroys
to be leaders and You told Your creatures about what will happen to
Al-Husain ben \`Ali after the prophet, and You promised Al-Husain that
he will be back into life again to take revenge for what had been done
to him, so my need to You O Lord is to let me back into life again to
take revenge from those who did that to me as You would turn Al-Husain
back into life again, and God then promised Ishmael ben Ezekiel to do
that, and he will be back with Al-Husain ben \`Ali (PUT).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Elias (Elijah) and Alyasa\` (Elisha) (PUT)](grp03)
