[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jes05)  [Next](jes07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Uplift of Jesus The Son of Mary Into Heaven

In a long narration telling the details of the situations of the
Messiah, Jesus the son of Mary (PUH), and in it: God sent Jesus the son
of Mary and put in him the light and the wisdom and all the
knowledgements of the prophets before him and revealed for him the
gospel and sent him to Jerusalem, to the Israelites, to call them back
to the faith of God, and he remained among them for thirty three years
until the jews asked for him and they claimed that they killed him, and
God wouldn't let them have any control of that but He confused them:
they slew him not nor crucified him, but it appeared so unto
them(Al-Nisâ':157).  
As attributed to Al-Bâqir (PUH) he said: when it was the same night as
that when Joshua ben Nun was killed, that is when Jesus the son of Mary
was uplifted into heaven and it is the same night that the prince of
believers (PUH) was killed as well and at that night no single stone was
uplifted from the face of earth unless there was lot of blood underneath
it, and it was the same at the night of the death of Al-Husain ben \`Ali
(PUH). In a narration attributed to him (PUH) also: Jesus (PUH) at the
night of his uplift promised his companions and told them what will
happen with him, and they gathered around him and they were twelve men
and he gave them his advices and made them understand what he wants from
them and warned them against the assault of their enemy until he said to
them: God shall uplift me in this hour and shall protect me against the
jews, so who shall take my shadow and be in my place and shall be
crucified and be with me in my place? Then one young man stood up and
said: me O Spirit of God, and he said to him: it is you then, and then
Jesus said to them: after me you will be divided into three groups, two
of you lied and shall be delivered to hell, and one shall be saved and
that is the one who follow Sham\`un Al-Safâ (Simon) which is true, and
then Jesus was uplifted from the corner of the house and they were
looking at him, and then said the Imam: then the jews came asking for
Jesus the son of Mary at that night as he told them and they took the
young man that carried the shadow of Jesus (PUH) and he was killed and
crucified, and as attributed to Al-Sâdiq (PUH) that he said: Jesus the
son of Mary (PUH) was uplifted and he was dressing wools that Mary made,
and when he became into heavens he was called: O Jesus the son of Mary,
drop off yourself the ornaments of life.  
As attributed to Al-Ridhâ (PUH): there was nothing like the matter of
Jesus the son of Mary (PUH) among the prophets, because he was uplifted
alive from earth and then his soul was taken between heaven and earth
and then uplifted to heaven and his soul returned back to him and this
is God's saying: O Jesus! Lo! I am gathering thee and causing thee to
ascend unto Me(Al-\`Imrân:55), and there is another narration was told
about his uplifting into heaven and in the interpretation of the
previous holy phrase there were many interpretations been told, and as
attributed to Ibn-\`Abbâs: "I am gathering thee" means as of the death
time, and in some narrations it is mentioned that he died for three
hours and then his soul got back to him, and in another interpretation
it is said that it means "I shall uplift you alive and remain alive and
then you shall come back to earth and die there."  
This is supported by a narration been told by the prophet (PUH) and
Jesus (PUH) didn't die and he shall be back before the doomsday and die
after he is revealed from heaven to earth. Some said that "I am
gathering thee and causing thee to ascend unto Me" means "I shall ascend
you without a death," and some said that it means "I shall gather you
when you sleep and ascend you while you're sleeping" as it is mentioned
by God's saying (in another holy phrase): He it is Who gathereth you at
night(Al-An\`âm:60)... and so on of many interpretations, so the best of
those is what is in the middle and this is what is the most famous for
us and whoever would meditate about it shall find that this is the truth
and only God knows. For God's saying: There is not one of the People of
the Scripture but will believe in him before his death(Al-Nisâ':159),
Al-Hajjâj ben Yousef Al-Þaqafi \[a ruler of Baghdad that was a famous
for his blood-thirst and killing people with and without a reason\]
asked some scholars about its meaning and said: I pass by a jew or a
christian who is to be beheaded and look at him but I don't find him
moving his lips until he dies, then the scholar answered: it is not as
you had interpreted it, and then he said: then how it is interpreted?
Then he (the scholar) answered: Jesus the son of Mary shall be revealed
before the doomsday from heaven to this life and so no single creed of
jews and christians and others would remain unless all would believe in
him before their death and he shall pray behind Al-Mahdi (PUH), and then
Al-Hajjâj asked: woe to you, from where you had all of that? He said to
him: Muhammad ben \`Ali ben Al-Husain ben \`Ali ben Abi Tâlib (Al-Bâqir)
(PUT) told me about it, and then he said to the scholar: by God you got
it from a clean water spring. And thanks shall be for God and the most
beautiful of compliments.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Injeel (Gospel) is A Heavenly Revealed Book](jes07)
