[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jj08)  [Next](qar00) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Lot of Sermons in The Josephite Virtues

Since his youth, Joseph faced many problems, his father loved him and
that caused him the great trouble of his life, and her aunt loved him
and he was with her by a permission from his father, and when his father
wanted to take him back she made him wear her girdle and claimed that he
stole it, and the law at that time was to enslave the thief, and she
searched him and took it out from under his clothes and he did not know
that it was there, and so apparently he was like a slave for her, then
she hugged him and asked to be with her for more time. The extreme love
of his father to him was a reason for the envy of his brothers which
made them take him away from his father and scared him with terror acts
and then they took his shirt and threw him in the well. He saw many sad
events at one time, and when the caravan came and took him out of the
well and took him as to sell him, they sold him to the noble of Egypt
Al-Rayyân ben Al-Waleed for few coins, and they sold him in a cheap
price.  
These situations of humilation and weakness make the hair of the body
stand, then Joseph was a slave for the noble for a while until his place
was raisen for the noble, and it was known how Joseph has many
characteristics that made him preferred more than anyone else like his
wisdom as well as his beauty, and so he was appointed as the chief of
the servants in the house of the noble, and he had the complete control
of them for he was sincere and wise and also honorable. Zalikhâ the wife
of the noble loved him and things started to oppose him and he got back
to a trouble that was greater than before, and Zalikhâ started to ask
for the evil-act and flirt with him and he did not even look at her
until it became so hard on her and she started to lose her senses and do
not estimate the consequences, and because she was his lady and the wife
of his master she started to call him to her and he refused and she
insisted but he refused as well, and she caught his shirt but he ran
away and caught the principles of virtues and faith, and been cautious
for the shame and whatever that breaks the laws of his faith and also
cautious for preserving his master, the one who made hospitality towards
him and made him like a son, so how come he face such gifts with such
evil attitude, and this is something that he was never educated for, nor
his family did, but Zalikhâ is not listening to any advice, and all of
that would tell how Joseph had such a faithful soul and a pure one and a
strong will that blocks every evil although he is a young man that got
such high places for his master with many riches that he used to enjoy
and with him his lady that was the prettiest woman at her time. Joseph
(PUH) was tested for what was going on with him and he was extremely
patient catching up with his virtues and kept hisself away from what his
soul hate, and he was a true example for God's saying: and the patient
in tribulation and adversity and time of stress. Such are they who are
sincere. Such are the Allah-fearing(Al-Baqarah:177).  
Joseph (PUH) gave an extreme example for all the people about many types
of patience, and he was not afraid but he made everything for his Lord
to do and kept being patient, and been patient for the transgression of
his brothers and taking his shirt by them and also for throwing him in
the well, he kept being patient for selling him as a slave with the
cheapest price, he kept being patient and kept his anger although he had
been in troubles and been put in jail with the criminals while he is a
leader for faithful people, but he promised to be patient, then he got
out of the jail and God made him rule the land and made people under his
command all over Egypt. As some historians said: The of death has
between his lips either the good life or death, and his (Joseph)
brothers came to him and they are to take revenge of them for what they
did to him, and they came to buy some food with their hardness, but he
did not face their evil with a similar manner, but he forgave and kept
patient.  
When they said: Is it indeed thou who art Joseph? He said: I am Joseph
and this is my brother. God hath shown us favour. Lo! he who wardeth off
(evil) and endureth (findeth favour); for lo! God loseth not the wages
of the kindly. Then they showed their regret and admitted their sin
saying: By God, verily God hath preferred thee above us, and we were
indeed sinful, and he forgave them for their transgression and said to
them: Have no fear this day! May God forgive you, and He is the Most
Merciful of those who show mercy. How beautiful forgiveness and how
complete virtue it is dropping with passion, and how beautiful sermons
and benefits and honorable manners: and he unto whom wisdom is given, he
truly hath received abundant good. But none remember except men of
understanding(Al-Baqarah:269).  
Some of those who talk about the conditions of prophets said: while
Joseph was with his father, honored and beloved, suddenly he became at
the hands of his brothers and their transgression and then they threw
him into the well without regret. In that condition, he then smells the
scent of freedom but as a slave, and then he moved to a slavery that
almost seemed like freedom when he became the chief of servants in his
master's house.Then while he is in such high condition that many free
people would envy him for, he then founded himself suddenly in jail for
no crime he did, and there he turned to be a religious missionary
calling people to worship God and blocking people from worshipping other
gods and religions, and then he came to interpret the hidden things, and
then he became the one who interpreted the dream of the king which was
an alert for him for dry years after fertile ones all over the lands,
and then he became the principle over the granaries on the lands and the
king made him closer to him and shared the rule with him and made a
living for the Egyptian kingdom and the near by lands, and in that
condition he only missed the view of his parents, and suddenly then his
brothers were trapped within his trap and so he tricked them a beautiful
trick with seriousness, and tricked them all over to bring his brother
from his own mother, and then they brought all his family together, and
in all conditions he was always holding the virtues and beautiful
manners.  
No story is as beautiful as the story of Joseph with its sermons, and
not every reader can understand its core, but it is as God said: In
their history verily there is a lesson for men of
understanding(Yousof:111). Joseph depended on God for every trouble and
problem he faced, when the Egyptian women when they saw Joseph and been
captivated by his beauty after the blamed the wife of the noble, and
when the wife of the noble warned him saying: but if he do not my behest
he verily shall be imprisoned, and verily shall be of those brought
low(Yousof:32), he take refuge in God and said: O my Lord! Prison is
more dear than that unto which they urge me, and if Thou fend not off
their wiles from me I shall incline unto them and become of the
foolish(Yousof:33), and so God then released him from their wiles and he
went to the prison and it is the best of the two troubles for Joseph for
he chose it by praying to God, and when he was to be released from the
jail he denied going out but after proving his innocence, so he sent a
messanger to the king asking him about the reason for keeping him in
prison and asking him to re-investigate about the reasons for putting
him into the jail, so when the king did that and his innocence showed
up, he accepted then going out of the jail with honor.  
Then when his father with his wife and his children came to him while he
was sitting on the throne and the crown upon his head, when they saw
him, they fell prostrating before him to thank God for this great gift,
and then Joseph said to his father: O my father! This is the
interpretation of my dream of old. My Lord hath made it true, and He
hath shown me kindness, since He took me out of the prison and made me
the master of the lands stores and granaries and I have the command in
my hand, and hath brought you from the desert after Satan had made
strife between me and my brethren. Lo! my Lord is tender unto whom He
will. He is the Knower, the Wise. After facing the big troubles that
might make the stone melt down, such as the transgression of his brother
and throwing him into the well, alone there by day and night, how his
condition might be that time, and after selling him by the caravan as a
slave in Egypt to a disbeliever tyrant, and after his trouble with the
wife of the noble and her wiles, and after that long time in prison,
after all of that happened and he is still holding the virtues and honor
with dignity and kept on praying to God.  
These are brilliant situations and great virtues that bring pride for
everyone that has a relation to him, and this is the right target for
the faithful people for this is the honor and faith, so sanctified is
Who made him special for all of that. His release from the jail and
ruling the lands and the arrival of his brothers seeking his help
without knowing him and tricking them and the arrival of his father
after being blind for him and his brother Benjamin, and his cure by
throwing the shirt of Joseph on him, and then the prostration of his
father and mother and his brothers for him, all of that passed in the
imagination of Joseph and he announced the gifts of God and thanked Him
for His gifts as well as His troubles, and said: O my Lord! Thou hast
given me (something) of sovereignty and hast taught me (something) of
the interpretation of events - Creator of the heavens and the earth!
Thou art my Protecting Guardian in the world and the Hereafter. Make me
to die muslim (unto Thee), and join me to the righteous(Yousof:101).  
This story is a rich source for people who want to get the righteous
manners and its effect into the souls of the faithful is not hidden, and
it is a subject to be studied deeply by psychology, and the psychologist
will not be exaggerating if he made a book about psychology and manners
all from the chapter of Yousof (Joseph).  
This is the last thing we did like to mention about this great man, and
thanks be to God at the beginning and at the end, and peace be upon the
best of his creation, Muhammad the chosen and his Household the
virtuous, and upon the best of his companions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Some Conditions of Ðul-Qarnain](qar00)
