[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mos22)  [Next](mos24) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Story of The Cow

What is mentioned about the interpretations of the holy phrases
concerning this story as attributed to the Household (PUT) is that the
cow was for a kid of the Israelites and he was good to his father, and
it is mentioned that he had a desired commodity so some people came
asking for his commodity while it was in his house which was locked and
the key was under the head of his father who was sleeping that time so
he hated to wake up his father, so when his father woke up and knew the
story he blamed him and the kid's answer was: I hated to wake you up and
disturb your sleeping, so his father said with happiness for his kid's
goodness: I made this cow for you to compensate you for what you lost
from not selling your commodity, and then he thanked God for the
goodness of his kid towards him and said blessings for his cow, and in
that while there was another event taking place which was a great one
and that is there was a murdered man of the Israelites that his killer
was not known and to know his killer is not something possible except by
a miracle for there were no signs or clues, and to kill someone was
something extremely horrible for them, and God's will desired that the
dead man should be stroke with a part of the cow that would be slain and
then God will resurrect him to tell his killer, and God desired that the
cow is the one mentioned before.  
They say about the reason for the murder is that there was a woman of
the Israelites with extreme beauty, and she was engaged to a good man of
the Israelites and a scholar and she accepted him, and then his cousin
who was an evil-doer knew about it so he went to ask her for engagement
but she refused him, and so then he envied his cousin because she had
accepted him instead of him, so he watched for his cousin and got ready
for him and then killed him by chance and carried his body to Moses and
said to him: O prophet of God, this is my cousin and he was killed, he
(Moses) asked him: who killed him? He answered: I do not know, and
killing someone among the Israelites was something extremely horrible as
we mentioned before, and so Moses saw it something terrifying to see a
killed man, and then the Israelites gathered together with him and asked
him: what do you think O prophet of God? Then Moses ordered them by a
commandment from God to slay a cow, and it was supposed that cow in
special to show the killer of the man, so when they gathered and cried
to Moses he said to them: Lo! Allah commandeth you that ye sacrifice a
cow(Al-Baqarah:67), they said: are you mocking at us? we brought to you
a dead man and you say that we should slay a cow to take a piece of a
dead thing and strike with it a dead man so one of the two deads are
resurrected, how come? He said to them then: God forbid that I should be
among the foolish! How shall I deny the command of God and He commands
me and I am His prophet? Then he said: is not the water of a man is a
dead semen and also that of a woman and when both meet God creates out
of them both a living human? are not your seeds that you plant in your
lands go rotting and dead and God then make them alive with His will and
let out of them these good ears and also these beautiful trees? And
after this speech they were convinced and amazed and accepted what he
desired of them and then they said to him: pray to your Lord to explain
for us what kind is she? He answered: Verily she is a cow neither with
calf nor immature; (she is) between the two conditions, and then they
said to him: pray to your Lord to explain for us her color, he answered:
He says verily she is a yellow cow. Bright is her colour, gladdening
beholders, they said: Pray for us unto thy Lord that He make clear to us
what (cow) she is. Lo! cows are much alike to us; and Lo! if God wills,
we may be led aright, he said then: Verily she is a cow unyoked; she
plougheth not the soil nor watereth the tilth; whole and without mark.  
It is said then that they did not find any cow with such describtion
except of that cow that was owned by the kid so they asked to buy it
from him and so he asked for a price that was as much as her skin could
behold of gold, so they went back to Moses and told him about what
happened and he said to them: buy her with that price and you must slay
that one in special, and so they did and they slain her and said to him:
what shall you command us with O prophet of God, so then God inspired to
him to let them strike some part of her and strike the dead with it and
so they took her tail and stroke the dead with it and said to the dead:
who killed you O man? He then said: my cousin killed me who carried me
to Moses the prophet of God, and thus when the truth showed up and the
killer was known by the clue that could not be denied because it is a
truthful testimony that God made it as He makes the non-living things
speak to show the truth by the hands of His prophet, and so the man was
killed as a punishment and the people got rid of a great anarchy that
they never did see before, and that is God's saying: And We said: Smite
him with some of it. Thus Allah bringeth the dead to life and showeth
you His portents so that ye may understand(Al-Baqarah:73).  
In another narration it is that there was an old man among the
Israelites who had riches and fortune, and he did not have anyone to
inherit him except of one son, so then the kid's cousins killed him for
they were greedy for the money of his father, and after killing him they
threw his body at the gate of the town far away from their place to make
the charge far away from themselves, and then they came asking for
revenge for his blood, so God then ordered them to slay a cow and strike
him with some of her so he will be resurrected and tell them who is the
killer, and in a speech it is said that if they just took any cow then
it would be enough for them but they made it long by asking so much
questions so God then made it harder for them by telling more
charactersitics for this cow. They say that the kid said to Moses: O
prophet of God, how shall I keep these riches and how shall I be aware
against an enemy that would take them and an envier that would envy me
for it? He answered him: say upon them what you used to say before you
have them for the One who gave it to you with your true belief before
shall keep them for you then after, and his (the kid's) deed was that he
used to say the pray for the prophet Muhammad and his Household (PUT),
and he kept on saying it so that any envier would try to envy the kid
God would keep him away from the kid's money.  
In the interpretation of the prince of believers (PUH) that he said: the
dead man who was resurrected asked God then after by Muhammad and his
Household (PUT) to stay in this life and enjoy life with his cousin (he
wanted to marry) and defeat his enemies and be given fortunes in
abundance, so God gave him that life with his full senses, so he enjoyed
the life with his cousin and never departed from one another and they
died together and had been in paradise together as gifted couples..etc,
and in a copy for the interpretation of Al-\`Askari (PUH): the folks of
the cow who bought it and asked for revenge and lost lot of money to buy
her went to Moses crying and said: we are sent poor again and the rest
of the tribe and we made astray for our doubts, so Moses then guided
them to ask God by the prophet (PUH) and his Household (PUT), so when
they did that with pure hearts and true faith, God then inspired to
Moses: let their chiefs go to ruined house of that man (a man among
them) and let them dig in that specific location and get out whatever
money is there and they will find there ten thousand dinars (coins), so
they will gain again whatever they lost after buying the cow so that
their conditions would get back to what it was before buying the cow,
and then they shall divide the surplus of the money among them and it
was five thousand dinars according to the amount of money that each one
of them had paid.  
As a result their riches increased and been rich because they asked God
by the prophet and his Household and they thought that they are better
than all the nations, and God said: Then, even after that, your hearts
were hardened and became as rocks, or worse than rocks, for hardness.
For indeed there are rocks from out which rivers gush, and indeed there
are rocks which split asunder so that water floweth from them. And
indeed there are rocks which fall down for the fear of Allah. Allah is
not unaware of what ye do(Al-Baqarah:74). So, their hearts were hardened
and were out of mercy and goodness after they were full of passion and
faith and that was when they saw the miracles by the bless of the
existance of Moses and the light of prophecy and the virtue of
mentioning the name of Muhammad and his Household (PUT) and believing in
them and in their secret that is within every prophet and messanger, so
peace of God upon them all.  
Some people of philosophy said some good opinions about this matter and
that is the case of the cow and telling the story in Quran was to show
how much the Israelites were stubborn and harsh and slow to obey the
commandments of God, and the purpose was not to show the conditions of
the story and the regulations involved and not to show the wisdom of
ordering them to slay a cow, but the purpose was to show us some of
their harshness and their bad conditions and habits and it had no
connection to any other stories before or after it, and the one after it
is: And (remember) when ye slew a man and disagreed concerning it and
Allah brought forth that which ye were hiding(Al-Baqarah:72), and this
is mentioned to show a special way in treating a problem that the
Israelites never thought of or anyone else would think of and that is
giving a law to know the murderer, then he (the narrator) explained what
he claimed by saying: what I understood from the first story is that the
Israelites had an incident that they were buffled about it and that is
there was a killed a man and his killer is now known and lot of people
were under the charge, and they went to Moses and he answered them that
God orders you to slay a cow, so they were amazed for his request and
said: do you mock at us? Then he explained the event in details and he
(Moses) wanted to apply the law over whoever is the doner by admitting
or by clues, and since he had nothing of that for they were so stubborn
he ordered them to buy the cow and they slain her and stroke his body
(the dead) with some of her flesh, so God resurrected him and he told
who is the killer and he was punished (the killer), then he (the
narrator) said: and the second story which is about God's saying: And
(remember) when ye slew a man and disagreed concerning it and Allah
brought forth that which ye were hiding(Al-Baqarah:72), it was about a
man who was found dead in his home or his place or died in a battle
between two groups of people and his killer was not known and no one
admitted his crime and the killer could not be found and everyone is
charging the other for killing him, so then he (Moses) started to do
what was mentioned before to give a way to know by reason the killer and
that God wants to give the judges and rulers a way to know the killer
among the charged persons, and this opinion is supported according to
him by God's saying: And (remember) when ye slew a man and disagreed
concerning it..etc(Al-Baqarah:72), as if God wants to let out of their
hearts and souls what they kept a secret by signs of changes in the
person himself like getting yellow or nervous or by his movements and
the change of his looks or by his happiness and sadness and crying.  
The direct is to strike the charged man with the leg of the dead man or
with his hand as to make a contact with the body so might be there some
changes that would make him admit his crime or at least to be of strong
doubt about him so that he would be put in prison until he admits his
crime and to tell about his companions in the crime, or he might show a
sign like shaking and by this he shall be known as he is the killer
indeed and no one else. The he (the narrator) said: this thing is
because of the nature of the psychological habits and the inner mind of
the human being, then he (the narrator) began to give examples from
tales and stories that were so long and there are many analyses and
philosophies and practical means that are done by men of investigations
and rulers..etc, and the benefit differs by the person and his
intellegence.  
If killing was for revenge for honor then the reaction would be a
combination of happiness and fear and otherwise it would be something
opposite to this and so on. He (the narrator) brought the clue about the
independence of the two stories (the cow and the dead man) in the two
holy phrases by saying: if we looked into the previous stories that God
did mention in this chapter (Al-Baqarah), and all of them are related to
the Israelites, we would find that each one of them is independent to
the one before and to the one after and starting with "and when" so God
did say: And (remember) when We did deliver you from Pharaoh's
folk(Al-A\`râf:141), And when We brought you through the sea and rescued
you(Al-Baqarah:50), And when We did appoint for Moses forty
nights(Al-Baqarah:51), And when We gave unto Moses the
Scripture(Al-Baqarah:53), And when Moses said unto his people: O my
people! Ye have wronged yourselves(Al-Baqarah:54), And when ye said: O
Moses! We will not believe in thee till we see Allah
plainly(Al-Baqarah:55), And when We said: Go into this
township(Al-Baqarah:58), And when Moses asked for water for his
people(Al-Baqarah:60), And when ye said: O Moses! We are weary of one
kind of food(Al-Baqarah:61), And (remember, O Children of Israel) when
We made a covenant with you and caused the mount to tower above
you(Al-Baqarah:63), And when Moses said unto his people: Lo! Allah
commandeth you that ye sacrifice a cow(Al-Baqarah:67), And (remember)
when ye slew a man and disagreed concerning it(Al-Baqarah:72), then he
(the narrator) said: this continuous style that did not change makes the
matter of the killing and the disagreement about it is something
independent of the other stories before..etc. This is the end of what
Abdul-Wahâb Al-Najjâr did say in his tales.  
So we say you did fine and good with what you learned about the last
holy phrase: And (remember) when ye slew a man and disagreed concerning
it(Al-Baqarah:72), and it is an acceptable manipulation and conclusion
that people of art see as the right thing, and we do not see any
prohibition in looking for benefits from the holy phrases of the Quran
and most of the knowledgement is taken from Quran, and all the groups of
muslims take what they see as a creed for themselves from Quran, and it
is mentioned that Quran has boundries and there boundries over the
boundries, and it has seventy seven layers of secrets and it has the
strangest and the weirdest, and there are phrases that has no similar in
it and others are similar to each other, and the interpretations for
both types is not known except by God and those who are into the deepest
of knowledge.  
But it is apparent that those who are into the deepest of knowledge are
those who Quran was revealed upon and in their houses and they are the
prophet (PUH) who was sent with it to all the creations of thought, and
also his viceroys and the leaders after him and God appointed them to
save the religion and he is the prince of believers, \`Ali ben Abi Tâlib
(PUH) and he is the one that had the place of the prince of believers
and it is only called for him, but it is used to denote others because
of the sutbborness, and also whoever came after him of his infallibe
children, and the first of them is Al-Hasan, and the last of them is the
awaited viceroy and the son of Al-\`Askari (PUH) may peace be upon them
all. God did say: And whatsoever the messenger giveth you, take it. And
whatsoever he forbiddeth, abstain (from it)(Al-Hashr:7), so the
dependence after the prophet (PUH) must be upon them (the viceroys) to
save the regulations of the islamic religion and to solve its problems,
and they are the people of Quran and the people of the prophecy, and the
people of the house knows better what is inside, and peace for him who
follows the path of guidance and feared the punishments of God, and God
is the One that shall take care of us.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Moses Choosing Seventy Men For God's Appointed Tryst](mos24)
