[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mos20)  [Next](mos22) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Worshipping The Calf

They say that when Moses went away from the Israelites to the
appointment of his Lord to reveal the Torah and he made his brother
Aaron a leader upon them and he promised them of a book from God, so he
went along to what he promised and he appointed for them thirty days of
absence so he went away and did not get back as he promised but he
delayed that for forty complete days, and they said that Moses ran away
and lied to us and they wanted to kill Aaron and did not accept any
excuse from him, and then the Satan came to them in a shape of a man and
said to them that Moses ran away from you and will never be back so
gather your gold so that I shall make for you a god to worship, and the
Samarian was one of the first people to cross the sea with Moses and he
saw Gabriel (PUH) riding a creature that was like a horse and it was
called Ramakah, and whenever it puts its hoof on the ground that spot
would move, so the Samarian took a look at it and he was one of the best
companions for Moses, so he took some of that sand that was under the
hoof of Gabriel's riding creature to make it as a bless for him and he
wrapped it and used to make pride of it over all the Israelites and it
moving (the sand), so when the Satan came and made the calf for them out
of gold he said to the Samarian: give me the sand that is with you, so
he brought it to him and the Satan threw it inside the calf, and when
the sand was thrown inside it turned out to be moving and had a sound
and had hair on it, so when the Israelites saw him and heard its sounds
they prostrated before it and they were seventy thousand of the
Israelites, and then Aaron said to them: O folks it is a lie and your
Lord is God so follow me and obey my command, but they said: we will
keep on it until Moses is back.  
Then they wanted to kill Aaron but he got out and stayed away from them
until the appointment of forty days of Moses was over, and when it was
the tenth day of Ðul-Hijjah, God revealed on Moses the tablets that
contained what they need of regulations and laws and sermons, then God
inspired to Moses (PUH): He said: Lo! We have tried thy folk in thine
absence, and As-Samiri hath misled them(TaHa:85), so Moses then said: O
Lord, the calf is made by the Samarian but what about the sounds? He,
the Exalted, said then: from Me O Moses, when I saw them neglecting Me
and worshipping a calf I decided to increase their ignorance, meaning as
a test for them. Then Moses went back unto his folk, angry and sad. He
said: O my people! Hath not your Lord promised you a fair promise? Did
the time appointed then appear too long for you, or did ye wish that
wrath from your Lord should come upon you, that ye broke tryst with
me?(TaHa:86), then he threw the tablets from his hands into the ground
and he took the beard of his brother Aaron and took his head pulling him
towards himself and said to him: O Aaron! What held thee back when thou
didst see them gone astray, That thou followedst me not? Hast thou then
disobeyed my order?(TaHa:92-93), and then he (Aaron) answered: O son of
my mother! Clutch not my beard nor my head! I feared lest thou shouldst
say: Thou hast caused division among the Children of Israel, and hast
not waited for my word(TaHa:94).  
Then the Israelites said to him: We broke not tryst with thee of our own
will(TaHa:87) (meaning not by our choice but the Samarian proposed so
for us and if we were to be left with our own will we wouldn't do so),
but we were laden with burdens of ornaments of the folk(TaHa:87),
meaning their gold, and then we did put inside it the sand that the
Samarian brought and he did make for them a calf with the sound of cows,
so Moses then said to him: And what hast thou to say, O
Samiri?(TaHa:95), he answered: I perceived what they perceive not, so I
seized a handful from the footsteps of the messenger, and then threw it
in. Thus my soul commended to me(TaHa:96), then Moses took the calf out
and burned it with fire and threw it into the sea, and he banished the
Samarian out of that land and warned him not to see him again or to make
contact with any of the Israelites, and he said to him: Then go! and lo!
in this life it is for thee to say: Touch me not!(TaHa:97), as long as
you are alive and the same goes for those on your way and your
descendants as well and it is the mark of difference between you and
others, and they say that Moses wanted to kill the Samarian but God
inspired to him not to kill him for he is a generous man, and they say
his name was Musâ-Rakân \[Musâ = Moses\] and he was born out of the
frame of marriage, and they say also that his descendants did not vanish
and still there are some of them in Egypt and the lands of Shem and they
worship the calf but they keep it as a secret among themselves and call
themselves muslims, and their describtion in general is the same of that
of the Samarian for at that time they did not touch anyone and no one
touches them.  
Then Moses spoke to him and said: Now look upon thy god of which thou
hast remained a votary. Verily we will burn it and will scatter its dust
over the sea, Your Lord is only Allah, than Whom there is no other
lord(TaHa:97-98), and it is mentioned also that God ordered Moses to
order the people not to stay with him or sit with him or eat with him to
leave him alone, and it is said to him (the Samarian): do not touch us
and we shall not touch you as long as you live, and they say that he
went wandering in the wilderness with beasts and lions and never touch
anyone and no one touched him and that was God's punishment for him in
this life, and when he used to meet someone he would say: no touching!
meaning do not touch me or be closer to me and that went along in his
descendants as well, and it is said that their remains are still saying
this upto this very day, and if someone else other than them would touch
one of them then both would be sick with fever at the same time as it is
said.  
And As-Samiri (the Samarian) is named after Sâmir or Shâmir and it is
the guradian as it was used at their time in both languages Hebrew and
Arabic as it had been said and investigated about it, and Abdul-Wahâb
Al-Najjâr said: if someone said that the man tricked the Israelites and
took their gold and bought a calf as one of those worshipped in Egypt
and brought it to them and then said to them whatever he had said and
they did accept that from him and they thought that the calf is their
god and the god of Moses and kept on worshipping it, all of that would
not be far away from the meaning of Quran, then he said which is
something I do believe in, the Samarian might had tricked them by taking
their gold and throwing it into the fire to make them think that their
gold was made into a calf and then he took all the gold for himself as
any impostor would do, and he said also that I see that the story of the
Samarian with Gabriel is not true and there were no Gabriel came down
riding a horse-like creature nor the Samarian took some of the sands
from under the hoof of that creature..etc, and all of that as you can
see are just some imaginations and the truth is what was brought by the
narrations of the Household of the path of truth, and it is testified by
the Quran and its symbols with its interpretations that was brought by
the Household (PUT): and the people of the house knows better what is
inside, read with me may the mercy of God be upon you and complete
whatever I left for you, God did say telling the story:  so I seized a
handful from the footsteps of the messenger, and then threw it in. Thus
my soul commended to me(TaHa:96), and it is mentioned before what was
the meaning of this phrase, and they say that the punishment of the
Samarian in this life was a physical punishment and that is he feels the
pain whenever someone touches him and whenever he meets someone and he
was afraid that he would be touches he would say: no touch! And in the
after-life God will take care of him, and as for the ones who worshipped
the calf from the Israelites their punishment was that God would not
accept their repentance unless they kill each other.  
As mentioned by \`Ilm Al-Hudâ Al-Sayid Al-Murtadhâ about God's saying:
and he seized his brother by the head, dragging him toward
him..etc(Al-A\`râf:50), he said: Aaron did not do something that
deserves to do such a thing with him like seizing his head or his beard,
and the apology of Moses then after is not a deed of silly people and
not a deed of wisemen full of wisdom, and in general what brought such a
conflict into the being is that in what God did say of Moses' deeds with
his brother anything that points out to a sin done any of them, for
Moses came with anger to his people for what they did after him and
horrified by their deed although he did not stay away from them except
of some days not a year nor some months but they did do the worst of
things and the most silliest deed and the most shameful work, and they
changed worshipping the Exalted One, with the worshipping of a created
animal, so he took the head of his brother and pulled it towards him as
when someone does when he is amazed for something horrible and might
bite on his lips or on his finger or even pulls his own beard, and
because Aaron is his partner in this matter and every good or bad would
strike one of them would strike the other as well, for this he did with
him what a man would do with himself and he (Aaron) is himself (Moses)
and that is not an insult for Aaron and does not point out to a sin of
Aaron and does not put down his dignity and does not affect the place of
prophercy, and also traditions do change by time and by nations, and we
might see something as a bad thing but for some people it is a pretty
thing, so then Aaron said: Thou hast caused division among the Children
of Israel..etc(TaHa:94) and in another location: Son of my mother! Lo!
the folk did judge me weak and almost killed me(Al-A\`râf:150), and that
was an answer from him to deny this deed, meaning do not be angry or mad
or sorry, and maybe all of that was said and done by an agreement
between the two of them as to show the nation how great is their deed
and make them scared.  
Anyhow, it must be taken as it is although it sounds that it is not an
approperiate thing to do as for what mentioned before and assured before
that prophets are infallible, and it is said that when Moses got back to
his people and they had worshipped the calf he said to them: O folks,
you did a wrong deed to yourselves by worshipping the calf so repent
towards your Lord and kill yourselves, so they said to him: how shall we
kill ourselves? Then Moses said to them: go to Jerusalem and everyone of
you holding a knife or an iron bar or a sword and when I come upon the
rostrum of the Israelites then you shall be cautious and no one of you
shall know the other and kill each other, and then they gathered and
they were seventy thousand men of those who worshipped the calf and they
went to Jerusalem and when Moses prayed with them and he went upon the
rostrum, they started to kill each other until ten thousand men of them
were killed and more were injured, and then Gabriel came down by God's
commandment and said: O Moses stop the killing for God did forgive them,
and so did Moses order them and told them that God did forgive them and
God did say then: That will be best for you with your Creator and He
will relent toward you. Lo! He is the Relenting, the
Merciful(Al-Baqarah:54) \[this previous story might not be accurate
since it should have happened in Sinai during the Exodus after that God
avoided the Israelites to get into the holy lands for forty years, this
is what I, the translator, believe\].  
we've pointed out before that God lifted up the mountain beside them and
made it like upon their heads and they thought that it will fall down on
them and that was when Moses brought them the Torah and most of them
denied accepting it for they had harsh hearts and so far away from being
bounded by religious regulations, and because as it was said before that
the Israelites had quite small souls for they got used to the
humiliation under the Egyptians' rule, so they do not accept a law
except by force, and for this their hearts were melted down into their
chests and fear filled their souls when they were ordered to fight the
giants and they are not good for wars or to be used, and when they were
ordered to go to the holy lands they said to Moses: So go thou and thy
Lord and fight! We will sit here(Al-Mâ'idah:24), and then Moses said
complaining to God about the Israelites: My Lord! I have control of none
but myself and my brother, so distinguish between us and the wrong-doing
folk(Al-Mâ'idah:25)...so the mountain was raised upon the Israelites as
we pointed out so that they thought it is falling on them, and Moses
then ordered them to take the regulations that he brought to them with
strength and stop complaining about it and to keep it with all their
strength and to bear what they are given and to remember whatever was in
these regulations of sayings and workings. If they did what is required
of them then they will face the goodness and avoid the evil and the bad
deeds, but they went away from the covenant after they had made it and
so God did say in the chapter of Al-A\`râf: And when We shook the Mount
above them as it were a covering, and they supposed that it was going to
fall upon them (and We said): Hold fast that which We have given you,
and remember that which is therein, that ye may ward off
(evil)(Al-A\`râf:171) and then He said: Then, even after that, ye turned
away, and if it had not been for the grace of Allah and His mercy ye had
been among the losers(Al-Baqarah:64). \[then comes some phrases
explaining the meaning of the Arabic word mentioned about the action of
the mount, but contributes nothing to the story\]. Everyone knew that
when they accepted what Moses brought and believed in it the mount was
raised away from them, because looking at miracles makes the faith much
stronger and moves the feelings inside oneself and for this he (Moses)
talked to them when they saw such miracles and said: Hold fast that
which We have given you..etc(Al-A\`râf:171).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Qârun (Korah) and What He Was Given and His End](mos22)
