[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sal01)  [Next](abr00) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Land of Sâlih's (PUH) People

We've pointed out previously their living places although there is some
controversy that had not been under discussion, so after tracing back
we've found out that it lies between Shâm (modern Syria and
surroundings) and Hijâz (in KSA) in a place called Al-Hijr. God said:
Though ye hew out dwellings in the mountain, being
skilful?(Al-Sho\`arâ':149), and from Ibn-\`Abbâs as reported in
interpreting the meanings of this holy phrase: they used to build
castles in every position and hew houses in the mountains to be their
dwellings places in winter so it is better and warmer, and Þemud was in
Wâdi Al-Qurâ \[= Valley of Villages\] between Medina and Shâm, and A'ad
was in Yemen, and the ages of Þemud's people used to range between one
thousand years and three hundred years. And in His saying: Ye choose
castles in the plains(Al-A\`râf:74), meaning that they used to build the
castles in the plains, and it is said that they used to make it there to
take a rest in them. Abdul-Wahâb Al-Najjâr \[another person that has
also a book about prophets\] said in his stories: Their homes were in
Al-Hijr and it is between Hijâz and Shâm in Wâdi Al-Qurâ and they are
apparent still til this very day, and some of my friends visited it and
got into the king's home and it was a house with some rooms and has a
large hall and carved into stone, and the place of their dwellings is
known today as Faj Al-Nâqah \[= The Hole of The She-Camel\].  
Al-Mas'udi said: Their remains are still obvious in the way as you come
back from Shâm, and Al-Hijr of Þemud is in the southern-east part of the
land of Midian and it is near the bay of Aqabah. And in the speech of
Sâlih (PUH) as been told by the Holy Book: And remember how He made you
viceroys after A'ad and gave you station in the earth. Ye choose castles
in the plains and hew the mountains into dwellings(Al-A\`râf:74) and
this is a point to denote the origin of Þemud and their time and that
they are the remains of A'ad, and this is as said by some historians.
The people of Hadramawt claim that the lands of Þemud were part of A'ad
colonies, so Abdul-Wahâb Al-Najjâr said: This is closer to the logic and
doesn't conflict with what was said before, and also he reported some
speeches and tidings in this section from european orientalists and also
copied from the book of Jorji Zedân (Al-\`Arab Qabl Al-Islâm) \[=Arabs
before Islam\] and also from so many others discussing Þemud and the
origin of Þemud and their time, and he mentioned his point of view about
all of that in a long speech that we don't need to mention here after
stating the holy phrase that discusses their situation and after what
was traced from the Prophet and his Household (PUT), and we've explained
as much as possible for those who has an attentive ears and an awakened
heart.  
Then in the speech about the prophets and messengers and their
situations with their people, Quran ordered them one by one by names and
moves from one before to the one after, and it is a clue for their time
and place order, as understood by logic, look into the chapters of
Al-A\`râf, Hud, Al-Anbiyâ', Al-Mu'minun, Al-Sho\`arâ', Al-Qasas,
Fossilat, and the others, you will see them mostly moving from one known
story to another one the same as in the story of Noah to the story of
Hud, and the story of Sâlih to the story of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob
(PUT). It is for sure that their prophecy is proved according to the
time order that Quran provided as to mention Jacob after Isaac and he is
after Abraham, and also Solomon after David, and Jesus after Moses, and
it is after Abraham and after Noah and after Adam, and their end is the
prophet Muhammad and his Household (PUT). \[here comes some lines that I
couldn't translate easily. They bear much philosophical terms I guess
plus they add nothing to the subject\].

Some scholars mentioned about this matter that deserves to be mentioned
here which is comparing \`Ali ben Abi Tâlib, the prince of believers
(PUH), with the She-Camel of Sâlih, because there are some speeches
(Hadiths) that had been proved and traced back to the prophet (PUH), and
also it is mentioned a comparison between Al-Zahrâ' \[meaning Fâtima,
the daughter of the prophet\] with her (the she-camel) for some reasons.
As traced back from the prophet (PUH) that he said to \`Ali (PUH): The
most unblessed in this life is the one who killed the she-camel of Sâlih
and the one who will strike you on the head O \`Ali until the blood of
your head dye your beard. For many times it is reported from him (PUH)
\[meaning \`Ali ben Abi Tâlib\] that he compared his killer with the
killer of the she-camel of Sâlih, and it is mentioned that some
historians wrote papers and explained in length the possible reasons for
such comparison. Some scholars said: whoever meditates through it will
see the similarities, and that is \`Ali (PUH) was a miracle shown by God
through the prophet Muhammad (PUH) and he said (\`Ali PUH): And what
miracle is greater than me?. Al-Fâdhil Al-Mo\`tazali Ibn Abi Al-Hadeed
\[person's name\] in his interpretations: The history of this life is
known and checked for the time after the flood until this very day, and
never reached us in this period of time any tidings about any man from
Arabs, Persians, Turks, Indians, Romans or any others, that has such
bravery or even being close to him (\`Ali PUH) in any character of
completeness.  
The owner of the book called "Al-\`Adasiyât" \[?\] mentioned that:
Gabriel (PUH) said to the prophet (PUH): God sent \`Ali with the
prophets in secret, and sent him with you in public. His birth (\`Ali
PUH) was in the Holy Kaaba, which is the rock of God's shrine, as the
she-camel got out from a rock and this had never happened for any
prophet or a viceroy of a prophet, and he (PUH) used to give the wisdom
and knowledge for people as the she-camel used to give the people, and
the reason for his killing is the same as this for killing the she-camel
if anyone did meditate in both cases, and it is a long story, and after
his killing they killed his son, Al-Husain (PUH), as they (people of
Sâlih) killed the weanling of the she-camel, and so on with such
similarities, and this is all what we could mention in explaining the
situation of Sâlih (PUH) with his people, and may God help us.  
 

<span style="font-family: times new roman;"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Abraham The God's Friend (PUH)](abr00)
