##### The Secret Doctrine by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol. 1

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 460

<span id="DDE_LINK20">\[\[This page continued from</span> [previous
section](sd1-2-13)\]\]

#### § XIV. THE FOUR ELEMENTS.

**M**ETAPHYSICALLY and esoterically there is but One **E**LEMENT in
nature, and at the root of it is the Deity; and the so-called *seven*
elements, of which five have already manifested and asserted their
existence, are the garment, *the veil*, *of that deity;* direct from the
essence whereof comes **M**AN, whether physically, psychically, mentally
or spiritually considered. Four elements only are generally spoken of in
later antiquity, five admitted only in philosophy. For the body of ether
is not fully manifested yet, and its noumenon is still "the Omnipotent
Father -- AEther, the synthesis of the rest." But what are these
"**E**LEMENTS" whose compound bodies have now been discovered by
Chemistry and Physics to contain numberless sub-elements, even the sixty
or seventy of which no longer embrace the whole number suspected. (Vide
*Addenda*, §§ **XI.** and **XII**., quotations from Mr. Crookes'
Lectures.) Let us follow their evolution from the *historical*
beginnings, at any rate.

The four Elements were fully characterized by Plato when he said that
they were *that* "which *composes* and *decomposes* the *compound
bodies.*"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 461 ON THE ELEMENTS.

Hence Cosmolatry was never, even in its worst aspect, the fetishism
which adores or worships the passive external form and matter of any
object, but looked ever to the *noumenon* therein. Fire, Air, Water,
Earth, were but the visible garb, the symbols of the informing,
invisible Souls or Spirits -- the Cosmic gods to whom worship was
offered by the ignorant, and simple, respectful recognition by the
wiser. In their turn the *phenomenal* subdivisions of the noumenal
Elements were informed by the Elementals, so called, the "Nature
Spirits" of lower grades.

In the *Theogony* of Mochus, we find Ether first, and then the air; the
two principles from which Ulom the *intelligible* (\[\[*noetos*\]\]) God
(the visible universe of matter) is born.\*

In the Orphic hymns, the Eros-Phanes evolves from the Spiritual Egg,
which the AEthereal winds impregnate, Wind being "the Spirit of God,"
who is said to move in AEther, "brooding over the chaos" -- the Divine
"Idea." In the Hindu *Katakopanisad*, Purusha, the Divine Spirit,
already stands before the original matter, from whose union springs the
great Soul of the World, "Maha = Atma, Brahm, the Spirit of Life;"\*\*
these latter appellations being again identical with the Universal Soul,
or *Anima Mundi*, the Astral Light of the Theurgists and Kabalists,
being its last and lowest division."

The \[\[*stoicheia*\]\] (Elements) of Plato and Aristotle, were thus the
*incorporeal principles* attached to the four great divisions of our
Cosmic World, and it is with justice that Creuzer defines those
primitive beliefs . . . *as a species of magism*, *a psychic paganism*,
and a *deification of potencies*; a spiritualization which placed the
believers in a close community with these potencies," (Book IX, p. 850).
So close, indeed, that the hierarchies of those potencies or Forces have
been classified on a graduated scale of seven from the ponderable to the
imponderable. They are Septenary, -- not as an artificial aid to
facilitate their comprehension -- but in their real *Cosmic* gradation,
from their chemical (or physical) to their purely spiritual composition.
*Gods* -- with the ignorant masses -- gods independent and supreme;
daemons with the fanatics, who, intellectual as they often may be, are
unable to understand the Spirit of the philosophical sentence, *in
pluribus unum.* With the hermetic philosopher they are FORCES
*relatively* "*blind*," or "*intelligent*," according to which of the
principles in them he deals with. It required long millenniums before
they found themselves, in our cultured age, finally degraded into simple
chemical elements.

At any rate, good Christians, and especially the Biblical Protestants,

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Movers: "Phoinizer," 282.

\*\* Weber: "Akad. Vorles," 213, 214, etc.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 462 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

ought to show more reverence for the four Elements, if they would show
any for Moses. For the Bible manifests the consideration and mystic
significance in which they were held by the Hebrew Lawgiver, on every
page of the Pentateuch. The tent which contained the Holy of Holies "
was a Cosmic Symbol, sacred, in one of its meanings, to the Elements,
the four cardinal points, and **E**THER. Josephus shows it built in
white, the colour of Ether. And this explains also why, in the Egyptian
and the Hebrew temples -- according to Clemens Alexandrinus -- a
gigantic curtain, supported by five pillars, separated the *sanctum
sanctorum* (now represented by the altar in Christian churches) wherein
the priests alone were permitted to enter, from the part accessible to
the profane. By its *four* colours the curtain symbolized the four
principal Elements, and signified the knowledge of the divine that the
*five* senses of men can enable man to acquire with the help of the
*four* Elements. (See *Stromata* I., v. § 6).

In Cory's *Ancient Fragments*, one of the "Chaldean Oracles" expresses
ideas about the elements and Ether in language singularly like that of
the *Unseen Universe*, written by two eminent scientists of our day.

> It states that "from ether have come all things, and to it all will
> return; that the images of all things are indelibly impressed upon it;
> and that it is the store-house of the germs or of the remains of all
> visible forms, and even ideas. It appears as if this case strangely
> corroborates our assertion that whatever discoveries may be made in
> our days will be found to have been anticipated by many thousand years
> by our 'simple-minded ancestors.' " -- (*Isis Unveiled.*)

Whence came the four elements and the *malachim* of the Hebrews? They
have been made to merge, by a theological sleight-of-hand on the part of
the Rabbins and the later Fathers of the Church into Jehovah, but their
origin is identical with that of the Cosmic gods of all other nations.
Their symbols, whether born on the shores of the Oxus, on the burning
sands of Upper Egypt, or in the wild forests, weird and glacial, which
cover the slopes and peaks of the sacred snowy mountains of Thessaly, or
again, in the *pampas* of America, their symbols, we repeat, when traced
to their source, are ever one and the same. Whether Egyptian or
Pelasgian, Aryan or Semitic, the *genius loci*, the local god, embraced
in its unity all nature; but not especially the four elements any more
than one of their creations, such as trees, rivers, mounts or stars. The
*genius loci* -- a very late after-thought of the last sub-races of the
Fifth Root-race, when the primitive and grandiose meaning had become
nearly lost -- was ever the representative in his accumulated titles of
all his colleagues. It was the god of *fire*, symbolised by thunder, as
Jove or Agni; the god of *water*, symbolised by the fluvial bull or some
sacred river or fountain, as Varuna, Neptune, etc.; the god of *air*,
manifesting in the hurricane and tempest, as Vayu and Indra; and the god
or spirit

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 463 THE COSMIC GODS.

of the earth, who appeared in earthquakes, like Pluto, Yama, and so many
others.

These were the Cosmic gods, ever synthesizing all in one, as found in
every cosmogony or mythology. Thus, the Greeks had their Dodonean
Jupiter, who included in himself the four elements and the four cardinal
points, and who was recognized, therefore, in old Rome under the
pantheistic title of *Jupiter Mundus*; and who now, in modern Rome, has
become the *Deus Mundus*, the one mundane god, who is made to swallow
all others in the latest theology -- by the arbitrary decision of his
special ministers.

As gods of Fire, Air, Water, they were *celestial* gods; as gods of the
*lower region*, they were *infernal* deities: the latter adjective
applying simply *to the Earth.* They were "Spirits of the Earth" under
their respective names of Yama, Pluto, Osiris, the "Lord of the lower
kingdom, etc., etc.," and their tellurial character proves it
sufficiently.\* The ancients knew of no worse abode after death than the
*Kamaloka*, the *limbus* on this Earth. If it is argued that the
Dodonean Jupiter was identified with Aidoneus, the king of the
subterranean world, and *Dis*, or the Roman Pluto and the Dionysius
Chthonios, the subterranean, wherein, according to Creuzer (I, vi., ch.
1), oracles were rendered, then it will become the pleasure of the
Occultists to prove that both Aidoneus and Dionysius are the bases of
Adonai, or "Jurbo Adonai," as Jehovah is called in Codex Nazaraeus.
"Thou shalt not worship the Sun, who is named Adonai, whose name is also
*Kadush* and El-El" (*Cod. Naz.*, I, 47; see also Psalm lxxxix., 18),
and also "Lord Bacchus." Baal-Adonis of the *Sods* or Mysteries of the
pre-Babylonian Jews became the Adonai by the Massorah, the
later-vowelled Jehovah. Hence the Roman Catholics are right. All these
Jupiters are of the same family; but Jehovah has to be included therein
to make it complete. Jupiter-*Aerios* or *Pan*, the Jupiter Ammon, and
the Jupiter-Bel-Moloch, are all correlations and one with Yurbo-Adonai,
because they are all one cosmic nature. It is that nature and power
which create the specific terrestrial symbol, and the physical and
material fabric of the latter, which proves the Energy manifesting
through it as *extrinsic.*

For primitive religion was something better than simple pre-occupation
about physical phenomena, as remarked by Schilling; and principles, more
elevated than we modern Sadducees know of, "were hidden under the
transparent veil of such merely natural divinities as thunder,

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* The *Gehenna* of the Bible was a valley near Jerusalem, where the
monotheistic Jews immolated their children to Moloch, if the prophet
Jeremiah is to be believed on his word. The Scandinavian *Hel* or *Hela*
was a frigid region -- again Kamaloka -- and the Egyptian Amenti a place
of purification. (See *Isis Unveiled*, Vol. II., p. 11.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 464 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

the winds, and rain." The ancients knew and could distinguish the
*corporeal* from the *spiritual* elements, in the forces of nature.

The four-fold Jupiter, as the four-faced Brahma -- the aerial, the
fulgurant, the terrestrial, and the marine god -- the lord and master of
the four elements, may stand as a representative for the great Cosmic
gods of every nation. While passing power over the fire to
Hephaistos-Vulcan, over the sea, to Poseidon-Neptune, and over the
Earth, to Pluto-Aidoneus -- the AERIAL Jove was all these; for
**AE**THER, from the first, had pre-eminence over, and was the synthesis
of, all the elements.

Tradition points to a grotto, a vast cave in the deserts of Central
Asia, whereinto light pours through its four seemingly natural apertures
or clefts placed crossways at the four cardinal points of the place.
From noon till an hour before sunset that light streams in, of four
different colours, as averred -- red, blue, orange-gold, and white --
owing to some either natural or artificially prepared conditions of
vegetation and soil. The light converges in the centre around a pillar
of white marble with a globe upon it, which represents our earth. It is
named the "grotto of Zaratushta."

When included under the arts and sciences of the fourth race, the
Atlanteans, the phenomenal manifestation of the four elements, justly
attributed by the believers in Cosmic gods to the intelligent
interference of the latter, assumed a scientific character. The *magic*
of the ancient priests consisted, in those days, in addressing *their
gods in their own language.* "The speech of the men of the earth cannot
reach the Lords. Each must be addressed in the language of his
respective element" -- is a sentence which will be shown pregnant with
meaning. "*The Book of Rules*" cited adds as an explanation of the
nature of that *Element*-language: "It is composed of *sounds*, not
words; of sounds, numbers and figures. He who knows how to blend the
three, will call forth the response of the superintending Power" (the
regent-god of the specific element needed).

Thus this "language" is that of *incantations* or of **M**ANTRAS, as
they are called in India, sound being *the most potent and effectual
magic agent*, *and the first of the keys which opens the door of
communication between Mortals and the Immortals.* He who believes in the
words and teachings of St. Paul, has no right to pick out from the
latter those sentences only that he chooses to accept, to the rejection
of others; and St. Paul teaches most undeniably the existence of cosmic
gods and their presence among us. Paganism preached a dual and
simultaneous evolution: "creation" -- "*spiritualem ac mundanum*," as
the Roman Church has it -- ages before the advent of that Roman Church.
Exoteric phraseology has changed little with respect to divine
hierarchies since the most palmy days of Paganism, or "Idolatry." Names
alone have changed,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 465 A CONFESSION OF SCIENCE.

along with claims which have now become false pretences. For when Plato
put in the mouth of the Highest Principle -- "Father AEther" or Jupiter
-- these words, for instance: "The gods of the gods of whom I am the
*maker* (*opifex*) as I am the father of all their works (*operumque
parens*)"; he knew the spirit of this sentence as fully, we suspect, as
St. Paul did, when saying: "For though there be that are called gods,
whether in heaven or in earth, as there be gods many and lords many," .
. . . etc. (1 Cor. viii. 5.)\* Both knew the sense and the meaning of
what they put forward in such guarded terms.

Says Sir W. Grove, **F.R.S**., speaking of the correlation of forces,
"The ancients when they witnessed a natural phenomenon, removed from
ordinary analogies, and unexplained by any mechanical action known to
them, referred it to a soul, a spiritual or preternatural power. . . .
Air and gases were also at first deemed spiritual, but subsequently they
became invested with a more material character; and the same words
\[\[*pneuma*\]\], spirit, etc., were used to signify the soul or a gas;
the very word gas, from *geist*, a ghost or spirit, affords us an
instance of the gradual transmutation of a spiritual into a physical
conception . . . . . ." (P. 89.) This, the great man of science (in his
preface to the fifth edition of "Correlation of Physical Forces")
considers as the *only* concern of exact science, which has no business
to meddle with the CAUSES. "Cause and effect," he explains, "are
therefore, in their abstract relation to these forces, words solely of
convenience. We are totally unacquainted *with the ultimate generating
power* of each and all of them, and probably shall ever remain so; we
can only ascertain the norma of their actions; we must humbly refer
their causation to one omnipresent influence, and content ourselves with
studying their effects and developing, by experiment, their mutual
relations" (p. xiv.).

This policy once accepted, and the system virtually admitted in the
above-quoted words, namely, the *spirituality* of the "ultimate
generating power," it would be more than illogical to refuse to
recognise this quality which is inherent in the *material elements*, or
rather, in their com-

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* We cannot be taken to task by the Protestants for interpreting the
verse from the *Corinthians* as we do; for, if the translation in the
English Bible is made ambiguous, it is not so in the original texts, and
the Roman Catholic Church accepts the words of the Apostle in their true
sense. For a proof see the *Commentaries on St. Paul*'*s Epistles*, by
St. John Chrysostom "*directly inspired* by the Apostle," and "who wrote
under his dictation," as we are assured by the Marquis de Mirville,
whose works are approved by Rome. And St. Chrysostom says, commenting on
that special verse, "And, though there are (in fact) they who are called
gods . . . . -- for it seems, there are really *several gods* -- withal,
and for all that, the God-*principle* and the Superior God ceasing to
remain essentially *one* and indivisible." . . . Thus spoke the old
Initiates also, knowing that the worship of minor gods could never
affect the "God *Principle*" (See de Mirville, "*Des Esprits*," vol.
ii., 322)*.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 466 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

pounds -- as present in the fire, air, water or earth. The ancients knew
these powers so well, that, while concealing their true nature under
various allegories, for the benefit (or to the detriment) of the
uneducated rabble, they never departed from the multiple object in view,
while inverting them. They contrived to throw a thick veil over the
nucleus of truth concealed by the symbol, but they ever tried to
preserve the latter as a *record* for future generations, sufficiently
transparent to allow their wise men to discern that truth behind the
fabulous form of the glyph or allegory. They are accused of
*superstition* and *credulity*, those ancient sages; and this by those
very nations, which, learned in all the modern arts and sciences,
cultured and wise in their generation, accept to this day as their one
living and infinite God, the anthropomorphic "Jehovah" of the Jews.

What were some of the alleged "superstitions"? Hesiod believed, for
instance, that "the winds were the sons of the giant Typhoeus," who were
chained and unchained at will by AEolus, and the polytheistic Greeks
accepted it along with Hesiod. Why should not they, since the
monotheistic Jews had the same beliefs, with other names for their
*dramatis personae*, and since Christians believe in the same to this
day? The Hesiodic AEolus, Boreas, etc., etc., were named *Kadim*,
*Tzaphon*, *Daren*, *and Ruach Hajan* by the "chosen people" of Israel.
What is, then, the fundamental difference? While the Hellenes were
taught that AEolus tied and untied the winds, the Jews believed as
fervently that their Lord God, "*with smoke coming out of his nostrils
and fire out of his mouth*, *rode upon a cherub and did fly;* and was
seen *upon the wings of the wind*" (*II. Sam.*, *xxii.* 9 *and* 11). The
expressions of the two nations are either both figures of speech, or
both *superstitions.* We think they are neither; but only arise from a
keen sense of oneness with nature, and a perception of the mysterious
and the intelligent behind every natural phenomenon, which the moderns
no longer possess. Nor was it "superstitious" in the Greek pagans to
listen to the oracle of Delphi, when, at the approach of the fleet of
Xerxes, that oracle advised them to "sacrifice to the Winds," if the
same has to be regarded as *Divine* Worship in the Israelites, who
sacrificed as often to the wind and fire -- especially to the latter
element. Do they not say that their "God is a consuming fire" (*Deut.
iv.*, 24), who appeared generally *as* Fire and "encompassed by fire"?
and did not Elijah seek for him (the Lord) in the "great strong wind,
and in the earthquake"? Do not the Christians repeat the same after
them? Do not they, moreover, sacrifice to this day, to the same "*God of
Wind and Water?*" They do; because special prayers for rain, dry
weather, trade-winds and the calming of storms on the seas exist to this
hour in the prayer-books of the three Christian churches; and the
several hundred sects of the Protestant religion

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 467 THE FIGHTING GODS.

offer them to their God upon every threat of calamity? The fact that
they are no more answered by Jehovah, than they were, probably, by
Jupiter *Pluvius*, does not alter the fact of these prayers being
addressed to the Power or Powers supposed to rule over the Elements, or
of these Powers being identical in Paganism and Christianity; or have we
to believe that such prayers are crass idolatry and absurd
"superstition" *only* when addressed by a Pagan to his *idol*, and that
the same superstition is suddenly transformed into *praiseworthy piety*
and *religion* whenever the name of the celestial addressee is changed?
But the tree *is* known by its fruit. And the fruit of the Christian
tree being no better than that of the tree of Paganism, why should the
former command more reverence than the latter.

Thus, when we are told by the Chevalier Drach, a converted Jew, and the
Marquis de Mirville, a Roman Catholic fanatic of the French aristocracy,
that in Hebrew *lightning* is a synonym of *fury*, and is always handled
by an *evil* Spirit; that *Jupiter Fulgur* or *Fulgurans* is also called
by the Christians *oelicius*, and denounced as the *soul of lightning*,
its daemon\*; we have either to apply the same explanation and
definitions to the "Lord God of Israel," under the same circumstances,
or renounce our right of abusing the gods and creeds of other nations.

The foregoing statements emanating as they do from two ardent and
learned Roman Catholics, are, to say the least, *dangerous*, in the
presence of the Bible and its prophets. Indeed, if Jupiter, the "chief
Daemon of the Pagan Greeks," hurled his deadly thunder-bolts and
lightnings at those who excited his wrath, so did the Lord God of
Abraham and Jacob. We find in I. Samuel, that "the Lord thundered from
heaven, and the most High uttered *his* voice, and he sent out arrows
(thunder bolts) and scattered them (Saul's armies) with lightning, and
discomforted them." (*Chap. xxii.* 14, 15.)

The Athenians are accused of having sacrificed to Boreas; and this
"Demon" is charged with having submerged and wrecked 400 ships of the
Persian fleet on the rocks of Mount Pelion, and of having become so
furious "that all the Magi of Xerxes could hardly counteract it by
offering contra-sacrifices to Tethys" \[*Herodotus* "Polym." cxc\]. Very
fortunately, no authenticated instance is on the records of Christian
wars showing a like catastrophe on the same scale happening to one
Christian fleet owing to the "prayers" of its enemy -- another Christian
nation. But this is from no fault of theirs, for each prays as ardently
to Jehovah for the destruction of the other, as the Athenians prayed to
Boreas. Both resorted to a neat little piece of black magic *con amore.*
Such abstinence from divine interference being hardly due to lack of

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Cosmolatry, p. 415.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 468 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

prayers, sent to a *common* Almighty God for mutual destruction, where,
then, shall we draw the line between Pagan and Christian? And who can
doubt that all Protestant England would rejoice and offer thanks to the
Lord, if, during some future war, 400 ships of the hostile fleet were to
be wrecked owing to such holy prayers. What is, then, the difference, we
ask again, between a Jupiter, a Boreas, and a Jehovah? No more than
this: The crime of one's own next-of-kin -- say of one's "father" -- is
always excused and often exalted, whereas the crime of our neighbour's
parent is ever gladly punished by hanging. Yet the crime is the same.

So far the "blessings of Christianity" do not seem to have made any
appreciable advance on the morals of the converted Pagans.

The above is not a defence of Pagan gods, nor is it an attack on the
Christian deity, nor does it mean belief in either. The writer is quite
impartial, and rejects the testimony in favour of either, neither
praying to, believing in, nor dreading any such "personal" and
anthropomorphic God. The parallels are brought forward simply as one
more curious exhibition of the illogical and blind fanaticism of the
civilized theologian. For, so far, there is not a very great difference
between the two beliefs, and there is none in their respective effects
upon *morality*, or spiritual nature. The "light of Christ" shines upon
as hideous features of the animal-man now, as the "light of Lucifer" did
in days of old.

"Those unfortunate heathens in their superstition regard even the
Elements as something that has comprehension! . . . . They still have
faith in their idol Vayu -- the god or, rather, Demon of the Wind and
Air . . . they firmly believe in the efficacy of their prayers, and in
the powers of their Brahmins over the winds and storms. . . . ." (The
Missionary Lavoisier, of Cochin, in the *Journal des Colonies.*) In
reply to this, we may quote from *Luke viii.*, 24: "And he (Jesus) arose
and *rebuked the Wind and the raging of the Water*, *and they ceased and
there was a calm*." And here is another quotation from a prayer book: .
. . "Oh, Virgin of the Sea, blessed Mother and Lady of the Waters, stay
thy waves . . ." etc., etc. (prayer of the Neapolitan and Provencal
sailors, copied textually from that of the Phoenician mariners to their
Virgingoddess Astarte.) The logical and irrepressible conclusion arising
from the parallels brought forward, and the denunciation of the
Missionary is this: The *commands* of the Brahmins to their element-gods
not *remaining* "*ineffectual,*" the power of the Brahmins is thus
placed on a par with that of Jesus. Moreover, Astarte is shown not a
whit weaker in potency than the "Virgin of the Sea" of Christian
sailors. It is not enough to give a dog a bad name, and then hang him;
the dog has to be proven guilty. Boreas and Astarte may be *devils* in
theological

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 469 PRAYER IS OFTEN SORCERY.

fancy, but, as just remarked, the tree has to be judged by its fruit.
And once the Christians are shown as immoral and wicked as the pagans
ever were, what benefit has humanity derived from its change of gods and
idols?

That, however, which God and the Christian Saints are justified in
doing, becomes a crime, if successful, in simple mortals. Sorcery and
incantations are regarded as fables now; yet from the day of the
*Institutes of Justinian* down to the laws against witchcraft of England
and America -- *obsolete* but not repealed to this day -- such
incantations, even when only suspected, were punished as criminal. Why
punish a chimera? And still we read of Constantine, the Emperor,
sentencing to death the philosopher Sopatrus *for unchaining the winds,*
and thus preventing ships loaded with grain from arriving in time to put
an end to famine. Pausanias, when affirming that he saw with his own
eyes "men who by simple *prayers and incantations*" stopped a strong
hail-storm, is derided. This does not prevent modern Christian writers
from advising prayer during storm and danger, and believing in its
efficacy. Hoppo and Stadlein two magicians and sorcerers -- were
sentenced to death for throwing *charms on fruit* and transferring a
harvest *by magic arts* from one field to another, hardly a century ago,
if we can believe Sprenger, the famous writer, who vouches for it: "*Qui
fruges excantassent segetem pellicentes incantando.*"

Let us close by reminding the reader that, without the smallest shadow
of superstition, one may believe in the dual nature of every object on
Earth -- in the spiritual and the material, the visible and the
invisible nature, and that science virtually proves this, while denying
its own demonstration. For if, as Sir William Grove has it, the
electricity we handle is but the *result* of ordinary matter affected by
something *invisible, the* "*ultimate* generating power" of every Force,
the "*one omnipresent influence,*" then it only becomes natural that one
should believe as the ancients did; namely, that every Element is *dual*
in its nature. "ETHEREAL fire is the emanation of the KABIR proper; the
*aerial* is but the union (correlation) of the former with *terrestrial
fire,* and its guidance and application on our earthly plane belongs to
a *Kabir* of a lesser dignity" -- an Elemental, perhaps, as an Occultist
would call it; and the same may be said of every Cosmic Element.

No one will deny that the human being is possessed of various forces:
magnetic, sympathetic, antipathetic, nervous, dynamical, occult,
mechanical, mental -- every kind of force; and that the physical forces
are all biological in their essence, seeing that they intermingle with,
and often merge into, those forces that we have named intellectual and
moral -- the first being the vehicles, so to say, the *upadhi, of* the
second. No one, who does not deny soul in man, would hesitate in

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 470 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

saying that their presence and commingling are the very essence of our
being; that they constitute the *Ego* in man, in fact. These potencies
have their physiological, physical, mechanical, as well as their
nervous, ecstatic, clairaudient, and clairvoyant phenomena, which are
now regarded and recognised as perfectly natural, even by science. Why
should man be the only exception in nature, and why cannot even the
ELEMENTS have their *vehicles,* their "Vahans" in what we call the
PHYSICAL FORCES? And why, above all, should such beliefs be called
"superstition" along with the religions of old?

--------------

<span id="DDE_LINK19">\[\[This page continued in next section\]\]</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next Section](sd1-2-15)

[Contents](sd1-0-co.htm#contents)
