##### *The Secret Doctrine* by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol. 1

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 62 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

#### STANZA III.

COMMENTARY.

1\. **T**HE LAST VIBRATION OF THE SEVENTH ETERNITY THRILLS THROUGH
INFINITUDE (*a*). **T**HE MOTHER SWELLS, EXPANDING FROM WITHIN WITHOUT
LIKE THE BUD OF THE LOTUS (*b*).

(*a*) The seemingly paradoxical use of the sentence "Seventh Eternity,"
thus dividing the indivisible, is sanctified in esoteric philosophy. The
latter divides boundless duration into unconditionally eternal and
universal Time and a conditioned one (*Khandakala*)*.* One is the
abstraction or noumenon of infinite time (Kala); the other its
phenomenon appearing periodically, as the effect of *Mahat* (the
Universal Intelligence limited by Manvantaric duration). With some
schools, Mahat is "the first-born" of Pradhana (undifferentiated
substance, or the periodical aspect of Mulaprakriti, the root of
Nature), which (Pradhana) is called Maya, the Illusion. In this respect,
I believe, esoteric teaching differs from the Vedantin doctrines of both
the Adwaita and the Visishtadwaita schools. For it says that, while
Mulaprakriti, the noumenon, is self-existing and without any origin --
is, in short, parentless, Anupadaka (as one with Brahmam) -- Prakriti,
its phenomenon, is periodical and no better than a phantasm of the
former, so Mahat, with the Occultists, the first-born of Gnana (or
*gnosis*) knowledge, wisdom or the Logos -- is a phantasm reflected from
the Absolute NIRGUNA (Parabrahm, the one reality, "devoid of attributes
and qualities"; see Upanishads); while with some Vedantins Mahat is a
manifestation of Prakriti, or Matter.

(*b*) Therefore, the "last vibration of the Seventh Eternity" was
"fore-ordained" -- by no God in particular, but occurred in virtue of
the eternal and changeless **L**AW which causes the great periods of
Activity and Rest, called so graphically, and at the same time so
poetically, the "Days and Nights of Brahma." The expansion "from within
without" of the Mother, called elsewhere the "Waters of Space,"
"Universal Matrix," etc., does not allude to an expansion from a small
centre or focus, but, without reference to size or limitation or area,
means the development of limitless subjectivity into as limitless
objectivity. "The ever (to us) invisible and immaterial Substance
present in eternity, threw its periodical shadow from its own plane into
the lap

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 63 THE UNIVERSE, A FLITTING SHADOW.

of Maya." It implies that this expansion, not being an increase in size
-- for infinite extension admits of no enlargement -- was a change of
condition. It "expanded like the bud of the Lotus"; for the Lotus plant
exists not only as a miniature embryo in its seed (a physical
characteristic), but its prototype is present in an ideal form in the
Astral Light from "Dawn" to "Night" during the Manvantaric period, like
everything else, as a matter of fact, in this objective Universe; from
man down to mite, from giant trees down to the tiniest blades of grass.

All this, teaches the hidden Science, is but the temporary reflection,
the shadow of the eternal ideal prototype in Divine Thought -- the word
"Eternal," note well again, standing here only in the sense of "AEon,"
as lasting throughout the seemingly interminable, but still limited
cycle of activity, called by us Manvantara. For what is the real
esoteric meaning of Manvantara, or rather a Manu-Antara? It means,
esoterically, "between two Manus," of whom there are fourteen in every
"Day of Brahma," such a "Day" consisting of 1,000 aggregates of four
ages, or 1,000 "Great Ages," Mahayugas. Let us now analyse the word or
name Manu. Orientalists and their Dictionaries tell us that the term
"Manu" is from the root *Man,* "to think"; hence "the thinking man."
But, esoterically, every Manu, as an anthropomorphized patron of his
special cycle (or Round), is but the personified idea of the "Thought
Divine" (as the Hermetic "Pymander"); each of the Manus, therefore,
being the special god, the creator and fashioner of all that appears
during his own respective cycle of being or Manvantara. Fohat runs the
Manus' (or Dhyan-Chohans') errands, and causes the ideal prototypes to
expand from within without -- viz., to cross gradually, on a descending
scale, all the planes from the noumenon to the lowest phenomenon, to
bloom finally on the last into full objectivity -- the acme of illusion,
or the grossest matter.

-------

#### STANZA III. -- *continued.*

2\. **T**HE VIBRATION SWEEPS ALONG, TOUCHING WITH ITS SWIFT WING
(*simultaneously*) THE WHOLE UNIVERSE, AND THE GERM THAT DWELLETH IN
DARKNESS: THE DARKNESS THAT BREATHES (*moves*) OVER THE SLUMBERING
WATERS OF LIFE (*a*).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 64 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

(*a*) The Pythagorean Monad is also said to dwell in solitude and
darkness like the "germ." The idea of the "breath" of Darkness moving
over "the slumbering Waters of life," which is primordial matter with
the latent Spirit in it, recalls the first chapter of Genesis. Its
original is the Brahminical Narayana (the mover on the Waters), who is
the personification of the eternal Breath of the unconscious All (or
Parabrahm) of the Eastern Occultists. The Waters of Life, or Chaos --
the female principle in symbolism -- are the vacuum (to our mental
sight) in which lie the latent Spirit and Matter. This it was that made
Democritus assert, after his instructor Leucippus, that the primordial
principles of all were atoms and a vacuum, in the sense of space, but
not of empty space, as "Nature abhors a vacuum" according to the
Peripatetics, and every ancient philosopher.

In all Cosmogonies "Water" plays the same important part. It is the base
and source of material existence. Scientists, mistaking the word for the
thing, understood by water the definite chemical combination of oxygen
and hydrogen, thus giving a specific meaning to a term used by
Occultists in a generic sense, and which is used in Cosmogony with a
metaphysical and mystical meaning. Ice is not water, neither is steam,
although all three have precisely the same chemical composition.

-------

#### STANZA III. *-- Continued.*

2.\[\[3.\]\] "**D**ARKNESS" RADIATES LIGHT, AND LIGHT DROPS ONE SOLITARY
RAY INTO THE WATERS, INTO THE MOTHER DEEP. **T**HE RAY SHOOTS THROUGH
THE VIRGIN-EGG; THE RAY CAUSES THE ETERNAL EGG TO THRILL, AND DROP THE
NON-ETERNAL (*periodical*) GERM, WHICH CONDENSES INTO THE WORLD EGG
(*a*)*.*

(*a*) The solitary ray dropping into the mother deep may be taken as
meaning Divine Thought or Intelligence, impregnating chaos. This,
however, occurs on the plane of metaphysical abstraction, or rather the
plane whereon that which we call a metaphysical abstraction is a
reality. The Virgin-egg being in one sense abstract Egg-ness, or the
power of becoming developed through fecundation, is eternal and for ever
the same. And just as the fecundation of an egg takes place before it is
dropped; so the non-eternal periodical germ which becomes later in

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 65 NATURE'S SYMBOLS.

symbolism the mundane egg, contains in itself, when it emerges from the
said symbol, "the promise and potency" of all the Universe. Though the
idea *per se* is, of course, an abstraction, a symbolical mode of
expression, it is a symbol truly, as it suggests the idea of infinity as
an endless circle. It brings before the mind's eye the picture of Kosmos
emerging from and in boundless space, a Universe as shoreless in
magnitude if not as endless in its objective manifestation. The simile
of an egg also expresses the fact taught in Occultism that the
primordial form of everything manifested, from atom to globe, from man
to angel, is spheroidal, the sphere having been with all nations the
emblem of eternity and infinity -- a serpent swallowing its tail. To
realize the meaning, however, the sphere must be thought of as seen from
its centre. The field of vision or of thought is like a sphere whose
radii proceed from one's self in every direction, and extend out into
space, opening up boundless vistas all around. It is the symbolical
circle of Pascal and the Kabalists, "whose centre is everywhere and
circumference nowhere," a conception which enters into the compound idea
of this emblem.

The "Mundane Egg" is, perhaps, one of the most universally adopted
symbols, highly suggestive as it is, equally in the spiritual,
physiological, and cosmological sense. Therefore, it is found in every
world-theogony, where it is largely associated with the serpent symbol;
the latter being everywhere, in philosophy as in religious symbolism, an
emblem of eternity, infinitude, regeneration, and rejuvenation, as well
as of wisdom. (See Part II. "Tree and Serpent and Crocodile Worship.")
The mystery of apparent self-generation and evolution through its own
creative power repeating in miniature the process of Cosmic evolution in
the egg, both being due to heat and moisture under the efflux of the
unseen creative spirit, justified fully the selection of this graphic
symbol. The "Virgin Egg" is the microcosmic symbol of the macrocosmic
prototype -- the "Virgin Mother" -- Chaos or the Primeval Deep. The male
Creator (under whatever name) springs forth from the Virgin female, the
immaculate root fructified by the Ray. Who, if versed in astronomy and
natural sciences, can fail to see its suggestiveness? Cosmos as
receptive Nature is an Egg fructified -- yet left immaculate; once
regarded as boundless, it could have no other representation than a
spheroid. The Golden Egg was surrounded by seven natural elements
(ether, fire, air, water), "four ready, three secret." It may be found

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 66 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

stated in Vishnu Purana, where elements are translated "Envelopes" and a
*secret* one is added: "Aham-kara" (see Wilson's Vishnu Purana, Book I.,
p. 40). The original text has no "Aham-kara;" it mentions seven Elements
without specifying the last three (see Part II. on "The Mundane Egg").

-------

#### STANZA III. -- *Continued.*

4\. (*Then*) THE THREE (*triangle*) FALL INTO THE FOUR (*quaternary*)*.*
**T**HE RADIANT ESSENCE BECOMES SEVEN INSIDE, SEVEN OUTSIDE (*a*). THE
LUMINOUS EGG (*Hiranyagarbha*), WHICH IN ITSELF IS THREE (*the triple
hypostases of Brahma*, *or Vishnu*, *the three* "*Avasthas*"), CURDLES
AND SPREADS IN MILK-WHITE CURDS THROUGHOUT THE DEPTHS OF MOTHER, THE
ROOT THAT GROWS IN THE OCEAN OF LIFE (*b*)*.*

The use of geometrical figures and the frequent allusions to figures in
all ancient scriptures (see Puranas, Egyptian papyri, the "Book of the
Dead" and even the Bible) must be explained. In the "Book of Dzyan," as
in the Kabala, there are two kinds of numerals to be studied -- the
figures, often simple blinds, and the Sacred Numbers, the values of
which are all known to the Occultists through Initiation. The former is
but a conventional glyph, the latter is the basic symbol of all. That is
to say, that one is purely physical, the other purely metaphysical, the
two standing in relation to each other as matter stands to spirit -- the
extreme poles of the ONE Substance.

As Balzac, the unconscious Occultist of French literature, says
somewhere, the Number is to Mind the same as it is to matter: "an
incomprehensible agent;" (perhaps so to the profane, never to the
Initiated mind). Number is, as the great writer thought, an Entity, and,
at the same time, a Breath emanating from what he called God and what we
call the ALL; the breath which alone could organize the physical Kosmos,
"where naught obtains its form but through the Deity, which is an effect
of Number." It is instructive to quote Balzac's words upon this subject:
--

> "The smallest as the most immense creations, are they not to be
> distinguished from each other by their quantities, their qualities,
> their dimensions, their forces and attributes, all begotten by the
> **N**UMBER? The infinitude of the Numbers is a fact proven to our
> mind, but of which no proof can be physically

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 67 THE POWER OF NUMBERS.

> given. The mathematician will tell us that the infinitude of the
> numbers exists but is not to be demonstrated. God is a Number endowed
> with motion, which is felt but not demonstrated. *As Unity*, *it
> begins the Numbers*, *with which it has nothing in common*. . . . .
> The existence of the Number depends on Unity, which, without a single
> Number, begets them all. . . . . What! unable either to measure the
> first abstraction yielded to you by the Deity, or to get hold of it,
> you still hope to subject to your measurements the mystery of the
> Secret Sciences which emanate from that Deity? . . . . And what would
> you feel, were I to plunge you into the abysses of **M**OTION, the
> Force which organizes the Number? What would you think, were I to add
> that *Motion* and *Number\** are begotten by the WORD, the Supreme
> Reason of the Seers and Prophets, who, in days of old, sensed the
> mighty Breath of God, a witness to which is the Apocalypse?"

(*b*) "The radiant essence curdled and spread throughout the depths" of
Space. From an astronomical point of view this is easy of explanation:
it is the "milky way," the world-stuff, or primordial matter in its
first form. It is more difficult, however, to explain it in a few words
or even lines, from the standpoint of Occult Science and Symbolism, as
it is the most complicated of glyphs. Herein are enshrined more than a
dozen symbols. To begin with, the whole pantheon of mysterious
objects,\*\* every one of them having some definite Occult meaning,
extracted from the allegorical "churning of the ocean" by the Hindu
gods. Besides *Amrita*, the water of life or immortality, "*Surabhi*"
the "cow of plenty," called "the fountain of milk and curds," was
extracted from this "Sea of Milk." Hence the universal adoration of the
cow and bull, one the productive, the other the generative power in
Nature: symbols connected with both the Solar and the Cosmic deities.
The specific properties, for occult purposes, of the "fourteen precious
things," being explained only at the fourth Initiation, cannot be given
here; but the following may be remarked. In the "Satapatha Brahmana" it
is stated that the churning of the "Ocean of Milk" took place in the
Satya Yug, the first age which immediately followed the "Deluge." As,
however, neither the Rig-Veda nor

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Number, truly; but never **M**OTION. It is *Motion* which begets the
Logos, the Word, in occultism.

\*\* The "Fourteen precious things." The narrative or allegory is found
in the Satapatha Brahmana and others. The Japanese Secret Science of the
Buddhist Mystics, the *Yamabooshi*, has "seven precious things." We will
speak of them, hereafter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 68 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

Manu -- both preceding Vaivasvata's "deluge," that of the bulk of the
Fourth Race -- mention this deluge, it is evident that it is not the
"great" deluge, nor that which carried away Atlantis, nor even the
deluge of Noah, which is meant here. This "churning" relates to a period
before the earth's formation, and is in direct connection with that
other universal legend, the various and contradictory versions of which
culminated in the Christian dogma of the "War in Heaven," and the fall
of the Angels (see Book II., also Revelations chap. xii.). The
Brahmanas, reproached by the Orientalists with their versions on the
same subjects, often clashing with each other, *are pre-eminently occult
works*, hence used purposely as blinds. They were allowed to survive for
public use and property only because they were and are absolutely
unintelligible to the masses. Otherwise they would have disappeared from
circulation as long ago as the days of Akbar.

-------

#### STANZA III. -- *Continued.*

5\. **T**HE ROOT REMAINS, THE LIGHT REMAINS, THE CURDS REMAIN, AND STILL
**O**EAOHOO (*a*) IS ONE (*b*)*.*

(*a*) **O**EAOHOO is rendered *"Father-Mother of the Gods"* in the
Commentaries, or the SIX IN ONE, *or the septenary root from which all
proceeds*. All depends upon the accent given to these seven vowels,
which may be pronounced as *one*, three, or even seven syllables by
adding an *e* after the letter "o." This mystic name is given out,
because without a thorough mastery of the triple pronunciation it
remains for ever ineffectual.

(*b*) This refers to the Non-Separateness of all that lives and has its
being, whether in active or passive state. In one sense, Oeaohoo is the
"Rootless Root of All"; hence, one with Parabrahmam; in another sense it
is a name for the manifested ONE LIFE, the Eternal living Unity. The
"Root" means, as already explained, pure knowledge (Sattva),\*

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* The original for Understanding is *Sattva*, which Sankara (acharya)
renders anta*h*karana. "Refined," he says, "by sacrifices and other
sanctifying operations." In the *Katha,* at p. 148, Sattva is said by
Sankara to mean *buddhi* -- a common use of the word. ("The
**B**HAGAVATGITA with The Sanatsugatiya and The Anugita," trans-
\[\[Footnote continued on next page\]\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 69 THE BLOSSOM OF THE ROOT OF LIFE.

eternal (*Nitya*) unconditioned reality or SAT (*Satya*)*,* whether we
call it Parabrahmam or Mulaprakriti, for these are the two aspects of
the ONE. The "Light" is the same Omnipresent Spiritual Ray, which has
entered and now fecundated the Divine Egg, and calls cosmic matter to
begin its long series of differentiations. The curds are the first
differentiation, and probably refer also to that cosmic matter which is
supposed to be the origin of the "Milky Way" -- the matter we know. This
"matter," which, according to the revelation received from the primeval
Dhyani-Buddhas, is, during the periodical sleep of the Universe, of the
ultimate tenuity conceivable to the eye of the perfect Bodhisatva --
this matter, radical and cool, becomes, at the first reawakening of
cosmic motion, scattered through Space; appearing, when seen from the
Earth, in clusters and lumps, like curds in thin milk. These are the
seeds of the future worlds, the "Star-stuff."

-------

#### STANZA III. -- *Continued.*

6\. **T**HE ROOT OF LIFE WAS IN EVERY DROP OF THE OCEAN OF IMMORTALITY
(*Amrita*)*\** AND THE OCEAN WAS RADIANT LIGHT, WHICH WAS FIRE AND HEAT
AND MOTION. **D**ARKNESS VANISHED AND WAS NO MORE.\*\* **I**T
DISAPPEARED IN ITS OWN ESSENCE, THE BODY OF FIRE AND WATER, OF FATHER
AND MOTHER (*a*).

(*a*) The essence of darkness being absolute light, Darkness is taken as
the appropriate allegorical representation of the condition of the
Universe during Pralaya, or the term of absolute rest, or non-being, as
it appears to our finite minds. The "fire," "heat," and "motion" here
spoken of, are, of course, not the fire, heat, and motion of physical
science, but the underlying abstractions, the noumena, or the soul, of
the essence of these material manifestations -- the "things in
themselves," which, as modern science confesses, entirely elude the
instru-

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\[\[Footnote continued from previous page\]\] lated by Kashinath Trimbak
Telang, M.A.; edited by Max Muller.) Whatever meaning various schools
may give the term, *Sattva* is the name given among Occult students of
the Aryasanga School to the dual Monad or Atma-buddhi, and Atma-buddhi
on this plane corresponds to Parabrahm and Mulaprakriti on the higher
plane.

\* Amrita is "immortality."

\*\* See Commentary No. 1 to this Stanza.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 70 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

ments of the laboratory, and which even the mind cannot grasp, although
it can equally little avoid the conclusion that these underlying
essences of things must exist. Fire and Water, or Father\* and Mother,
may be taken here to mean the divine Ray and Chaos. "Chaos, from this
union with Spirit obtaining sense, shone with pleasure, and thus was
produced the Protogonos (the first-born light)," says a fragment of
Hermas. Damascius calls it Dis in "Theogony" -- "The disposer of all
things." (See Cory's "*Ancient Fragments*," p. 314.)

According to the Rosicrucian tenets, as handled and explained by the
profane for once correctly, if only partially, so "Light and Darkness
are identical in themselves, being only divisible in the human mind";
and according to Robert Fludd, "Darkness adopted illumination in order
to make itself visible" (*On Rosenkranz*)*.* According to the tenets of
Eastern Occultism, **D**ARKNESS is the one true actuality, the basis and
the root of light, without which the latter could never manifest itself,
nor even exist. Light is matter, and **D**ARKNESS pure Spirit. Darkness,
in its radical, metaphysical basis, is subjective and absolute light;
while the latter in all its seeming effulgence and glory, is merely a
mass of shadows, as it can never be eternal, and is simply an illusion,
or Maya.

Even in the mind-baffling and science-harassing Genesis, light is
created out of darkness "and darkness was upon the face of the deep"
(ch. i. v. 2.) -- and not *vice versa.* "In him (in darkness) was life;
and the life *was the light of men*" (John i. 4). A day may come when
the eyes of men will be opened; and then they may comprehend better than
they do now, that verse in the Gospel of John that says "And the light
shineth in darkness; and the darkness comprehendeth it not." They will
see then that the word "darkness" does not apply to man's spiritual
eyesight, but indeed to "Darkness," the absolute, that comprehendeth not
(cannot cognize) transient light, however transcendent to human eyes.
*Demon est Deus inversus.* The devil is now called Darkness by the
Church, whereas, in the Bible he is called the "Son of God" (see Job),
the bright star of the early morning, Lucifer (see Isaiah). There is a
whole philosophy of dogmatic craft in the reason why the first
Archangel, who sprang from the depths of Chaos, was called Lux
(Lucifer), the "Luminous Son of the Morning," or man-

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* See "Kwan-Shai-Yin." The real name from the text cannot be given.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 71 LIGHT EMERGES FROM DARKNESS.

vantaric Dawn. He was transformed by the Church into Lucifer or Satan,
because he is higher and older than Jehovah, and had to be sacrificed to
the new dogma. (See Book II.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### ---------

#### STANZA III. -- *Continued.*

7\. **B**EHOLD, OH **L**ANOO!\*\* THE RADIANT **C**HILD OF THE TWO, THE
UNPARALLELED REFULGENT **G**LORY, **B**RIGHT **S**PACE, **S**ON OF
**D**ARK **S**PACE, WHO EMERGES FROM THE DEPTHS OF THE GREAT **D**ARK
**W**ATERS. **I**T IS **O**EAOHOO, THE **Y**OUNGER, THE \* \* \* (*whom
thou knowest now as* *Kwan-Shai-Yin.* -- *Comment*) (*a*)*.* **H**E
SHINES FORTH AS THE **S**UN. **H**E IS THE BLAZING **D**IVINE **D**RAGON
OF **W**ISDOM. **T**HE **E**KA IS **C**HATUR (*four*)*,* AND **C**HATUR
TAKES TO ITSELF THREE, AND THE UNION PRODUCES THE **S**APTA (*seven*) IN
WHOM ARE THE SEVEN WHICH BECOME THE **T**RIDASA\*\*\* (*the thrice ten*)
THE HOSTS AND THE MULTITUDES (*b*). **B**EHOLD HIM LIFTING THE **V**EIL,
AND UNFURLING IT FROM **E**AST TO **W**EST. **H**E SHUTS OUT THE ABOVE
AND LEAVES THE BELOW TO BE SEEN AS THE GREAT **I**LLUSION. **H**E MARKS
THE PLACES FOR THE SHINING ONES (*stars*) AND TURNS THE UPPER (*space*)
INTO A SHORELESS **S**EA OF **F**IRE, AND THE **O**NE MANIFESTED
(*element*) INTO THE **G**REAT **W**ATERS (*c*).

"Bright Space, son of dark Space," corresponds to the Ray dropped at the
first thrill of the new "Dawn" into the great Cosmic depths, from which
it re-emerges differentiated as Oeaohoo the younger, (the *"*new LIFE"),
to become, to the end of the life-cycle, the germ of all things. He is
"the Incorporeal man who contains in himself the divine Idea," -- the
generator of Light and Life, to use an expression of Philo Judaeus. He
is called the "Blazing Dragon of Wisdom,"

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\*\* Lanoo is a student, a chela who studies practical Esotericism.

\*\*\* "Tri-dasa," or three times ten (30), alludes to the Vedic
deities, in round numbers, or more accurately 33 -- a sacred number.
They are the 12 Adityas, the 8 Vasus, the 11 Rudras, and 2 Aswins -- the
twin sons of the Sun and the Sky. This is the root-number of the Hindu
Pantheon, which enumerates 33 crores or over three hundred millions of
gods and goddesses.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 72 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

because, firstly, he is that which the Greek philosophers called the
Logos, the Verbum of the Thought Divine; and secondly, because in
Esoteric philosophy this first manifestation, being the synthesis or the
aggregate of Universal Wisdom, Oeaohoo, "the Son of the Son," contains
in himself the Seven Creative Hosts (The Sephiroth), and is thus the
essence of manifested Wisdom. "He who bathes in the light of Oeaohoo
will never be deceived by the veil of Maya."

Kwan-Shai-Yin is identical with, and an equivalent of the Sanskrit
*Avalokiteshwara*, and as such he is an androgynous deity, like the
Tetragrammaton and all the Logoi\* of antiquity. It is only by some
sects in China that he is anthropomorphized and represented with female
attributes,\*\* when, under his female aspect, he becomes Kwan-Yin, the
goddess of mercy, called the "Divine Voice."\*\*\* The latter is the
patron deity of Thibet and of the island of Puto in China, where both
deities have a number of monasteries.\*\*\*\* (See Part II.
Kwan-Shai-Yin and Kwan-yin.)

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Hence all the higher gods of antiquity are all "Sons of the Mother"
before they become those of the "Father." The Logoi, like Jupiter or
Zeus, Son of Kronos-Saturn, "Infinite Time" (or Kala), in their origin
were represented as male-female. Zeus is said to be the "beautiful
Virgin," and Venus is made bearded. Apollo is originally bisexual, so is
Brahma-Vach in Manu and the Puranas. Osiris is interchangeable with
Isis, and Horus is of both sexes. Finally St. John's vision in
Revelation, that of the Logos, who is now connected with Jesus -- is
hermaphrodite, for he is described as having female breasts. So is the
Tetragrammaton = Jehovah. But there are two Avalokiteshwaras in
Esotericism; the first and the second *Logos.*

\*\* No religious symbol can escape profanation and even derision in our
days of politics and Science. In Southern India the writer has seen a
converted native making pujah with offerings before a statue of Jesus
clad in woman's clothes and with a ring in his nose. When asking the
meaning of the masquerade we were answered that it was Jesu-Maria
blended in one, and that it was done by the permission of the Padri, as
the zealous convert had no money to purchase two statues or "idols" as
they, very properly, were called by a witness -- another but a
non-converted Hindu. Blasphemous this will appear to a dogmatic
Christian, but the Theosophist and the Occultist must award the palm of
logic to the converted Hindu. The esoteric Christos in the *gnosis* is,
of course, sexless, but in exoteric *theology* he is male and female.

\*\*\* The Gnostic Sophia, "Wisdom" who is "the Mother" of the Ogdoad
(Aditi, in a certain sense, with her eight sons), is the Holy Ghost and
the Creator of all, as in the ancient systems. The "father" is a far
later invention. The earliest manifested Logos was female everywhere --
the mother of the seven planetary powers.

\*\*\*\* See "Chinese Buddhism," by the Rev. J. C. Edkins, who always
gives correct facts, although his conclusions are very frequently
erroneous.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 73 THE DRAGON AND THE LOGOI.

(*b*) "The "Dragon of Wisdom" is the One, the "Eka" (Sanskrit) or Saka.
It is curious that Jehovah's name in Hebrew should also be One, Echod.
"His name is Echod": say the Rabbins. The philologists ought to decide
which of the two is derived from the other -- linguistically and
symbolically: surely, not the Sanskrit? The "One" and the Dragon are
expressions used by the ancients in connection with their respective
Logoi. Jehovah -- esoterically (as Elohim) -- is also the Serpent or
Dragon that tempted Eve, and the "Dragon" is an old glyph for "Astral
Light" (Primordial Principle), "which is the Wisdom of Chaos." Archaic
philosophy, recognizing neither Good nor Evil as a fundamental or
independent power, but starting from the Absolute ALL (Universal
Perfection eternally), traced both through the course of natural
evolution to pure Light condensing gradually into form, hence becoming
Matter or Evil. It was left with the early and ignorant Christian
fathers to degrade the philosophical and highly scientific idea of this
emblem (the Dragon) into the absurd superstition called the "Devil."
They took it from the later Zoroastrians, who saw devils or the Evil in
the Hindu Devas*,* and the word Evil thus became by a double
transmutation D'Evil in every tongue (Diabolos, Diable, Diavolo,
Teufel). But the Pagans have always shown a philosophical discrimination
in their symbols. The primitive symbol of the serpent symbolised divine
Wisdom and Perfection, and had always stood for psychical Regeneration
and Immortality. Hence -- Hermes, calling the serpent the most spiritual
of all beings; Moses, initiated in the wisdom of Hermes, following suit
in Genesis; the Gnostic's Serpent with the seven vowels over its head,
being the emblem of the seven hierarchies of the Septenary or Planetary
Creators. Hence, also, the Hindu serpent Sesha or Ananta, "the
Infinite," a name of Vishnu, whose first Vahan or vehicle on the
primordial waters is this serpent.\* Yet they all made a difference
between the good and the bad Serpent (the Astral Light of

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Like the *logoi* and the Hierarchies of Powers, however, the
"Serpents" have to be distinguished one from the other. Sesha or Ananta,
"the couch of Vishnu," is an allegorical abstraction, symbolizing
infinite Time in Space, which contains the germ and throws off
periodically the efflorescence of this germ, the *manifested* Universe;
whereas, the gnostic *Ophis* contained the same triple symbolism in its
seven vowels as the One, Three and Seven-syllabled *Oeaohoo* of the
Archaic doctrine; *i.e.*, the One Unmanifested Logos, the Second
manifested, the triangle concreting into the Quaternary or
Tetragrammaton, and the rays of the latter on the material plane.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 74 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

the Kabalists) -- between the former, the embodiment of divine Wisdom in
the region of the Spiritual, and the latter, Evil, on the plane of
matter.\* Jesus accepted the serpent as a synonym of Wisdom, and this
formed part of his teaching: "Be ye wise as serpents," he says. "In the
beginning, before Mother became Father-Mother, the fiery Dragon moved in
the infinitudes alone" (*Book of Sarparajni.*) The Aitareya Brahmana
calls the Earth Sarparajni, "the Serpent Queen," and "the Mother of all
that moves." Before our globe became egg-shaped (and the Universe also)
"a long trail of Cosmic dust (or fire mist) moved and writhed like a
serpent in Space." The "Spirit of God moving on Chaos" was symbolized by
every nation in the shape of a fiery serpent breathing fire and light
upon the primordial waters, until it had incubated cosmic matter and
made it assume the annular shape of a serpent with its tail in its mouth
-- which symbolises not only Eternity and Infinitude, but also the
globular shape of all the bodies formed within the Universe from that
fiery mist. The Universe, as well as the Earth and Man, cast off
periodically, serpent-like, their old skins, to assume new ones after a
time of rest. The serpent is, surely, a not less graceful or a more
unpoetical image than the caterpillar and chrysalis from which springs
the butterfly, the Greek emblem of Psyche, the human soul. The "Dragon"
was also the symbol of the Logos with the Egyptians, as with the
Gnostics. In the "Book of Hermes," Pymander, the oldest and the most
spiritual of the Logoi of the Western Continent, appears to Hermes in
the shape of a Fiery Dragon of "Light, Fire, and Flame." Pymander, the
"Thought Divine" personified, says: The Light is me, I am the Nous (the
mind or Manu), I am thy God, and I am far older than the human principle
which escapes from the shadow ("*Darkness*," or the concealed Deity). I
am the germ of thought, the resplendent *Word,* the *Son* of God. All
that thus sees and hears in thee is the *Verbum* of the Master, it is
the Thought (*Mahat*) which is God, the Father.\*\*

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\*The Astral Light, or the AEther, of the ancient pagans (for the name
of Astral Light is quite modern) is Spirit . . . . Matter. Beginning
with the pure spiritual plane, it becomes grosser as it descends until
it becomes the *Maya* or the tempting and deceitful serpent on our
plane.

\*\* By "God, the Father," the seventh principle in Man and Kosmos are
here unmistakeably meant, this principle being inseparable in its Esse
and Nature from the seventh Cosmic principle. In one sense it is the
Logos of the Greeks and the Avalokiteswara of the esoteric Buddhists.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 75 NOUMENAL AND PHENOMENAL LIGHT.

The celestial Ocean, the 'Ether . . . . is the *Breath* of the Father,
the life-giving principle, the *Mother*, the Holy Spirit, for these are
not separated, and their union is LIFE."

Here we find the unmistakeable echo of the Archaic Secret Doctrine, as
now expounded. Only the latter does not place at the head and Evolution
of Life "the Father," who comes third and is the "Son of the Mother,"
but the "Eternal and Ceaseless Breath of the ALL." The *Mahat*
(Understanding, Universal Mind, Thought, etc.), before it manifests
itself as Brahma or Siva, appears as Vishnu, says *Sankhya Sara* (p.
16); hence *Mahat* has several aspects, just as the *logos* has. *Mahat*
is called the Lord, in the *Primary* Creation, and is, in this sense,
Universal Cognition or *Thought Divine*; but, "That Mahat which was
first produced is (afterwards) called *Ego-ism*, when it is born as "I,"
that is said to be the *second* Creation" (*Anugita*, ch. xxvi.). And
the translator (an able and learned Brahmin, not a European Orientalist)
explains in a foot-note (6), "*i.e.*, when Mahat develops into the
feeling of Self-Consciousness -- I -- then it assumes the name of
Egoism," which, translated into our esoteric phraseology, means when
*Mahat* is transformed into the human *Manas* (or even that of the
finite gods), and becomes *Aham*-ship. Why it is called the *Mahat* of
the *Second* creation (or the *ninth*, that of the *Kumara* in *Vishnu
Purana*) will be explained in Book II. The "Sea of Fire" is then the
Super-Astral (*i.e.*, noumenal) Light, the first radiation from the
*Root,* the Mulaprakriti, the undifferentiated Cosmic Substance, which
becomes *Astral* Matter. It is also called the "Fiery Serpent," as above
described. If the student bears in mind that there is but One Universal
Element, which is infinite, unborn, and undying, and that all the rest
-- as in the world of phenomena -- are but so many various
differentiated aspects and transformations (correlations, they are now
called) of that One, from Cosmical down to microcosmical effects, from
super-human down to human and sub-human beings, the totality, in short,
of objective existence -- then the first and chief difficulty will
disappear and Occult Cosmology may be mastered.\* All the Kabalists and
Occultists, Eastern and Western, recognise (*a*)

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* In the Egyptian as in the Indian theogony there was a *concealed*
deity, the ONE, and the creative, androgynous god. Thus *Shoo* is the
god of creation and Osiris is, in his original primary form, the "god
whose name is unknown." (See Mariette's Abydos II., p. 63, and Vol.
III., pp. 413, 414, No. 1122.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 76 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

the identity of "Father-Mother" with primordial *AEther* or *Akasa*,
(Astral Light)\*; and (*b*) its homogeneity before the evolution of the
"Son," cosmically *Fohat,* for it is Cosmic Electricity. "Fohat hardens
and scatters the seven brothers" (Book III. Dzyan); which means that the
primordial Electric Entity -- for the Eastern Occultists insist that
Electricity is an Entity -- electrifies into life, and separates
primordial stuff or pregenetic matter into atoms, themselves the source
of all life and consciousness. "There exists an universal *agent unique*
of all forms and of life, that is called Od,\*\* Ob, and Aour, active
and passive, positive and negative, like day and night: it is the first
light in Creation" (Eliphas Levi's Kabala): --- the first Light of the
primordial Elohim -- the Adam, "male and female" -- or (scientifically)
ELECTRICITY AND LIFE.

(*c*) The ancients represented it by a serpent, for "Fohat hisses as he
glides hither and thither" (in zigzags). The Kabala figures it with the
Hebrew letter Teth ![](sd1-76.gif), whose symbol is the serpent which
played such a prominent part in the Mysteries. Its universal value is
nine, for it is the ninth letter of the alphabet and the ninth door of
the fifty portals or gateways that lead to the concealed mysteries of
being. It is the magical agent *par excellence*, and designates in
Hermetic philosophy "Life infused into primordial matter," the essence
that composes all things, and the spirit that determines their form. But
there are two secret Hermetical operations, one spiritual, the other
material-correlative, and for ever united. "Thou shalt separate the
earth from the fire, the subtile from the solid . . . that which ascends
from earth to heaven and descends again from heaven to earth. It (the
subtile light), is the strong force of every force, for it conquers
every subtile thing and penetrates into every solid. Thus was the world
formed" (*Hermes*)*.*

It was not Zeno alone, the founder of the Stoics, who taught that the

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* See next note.

\*\* Od is the pure life-giving Light, or magnetic fluid; Ob the
messenger of death used by the sorcerers, the nefarious evil fluid; Aour
is the synthesis of the two, Astral Light proper. Can the Philologists
tell why Od -- a term used by Reichenbach to denominate the vital fluid
-- is also a Tibetan word meaning light, brightness, radiancy? It
equally means "Sky" in an occult sense. Whence the root of the word? But
*Akasa* is not quite *Ether*, but far higher than that, as will be
shown.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 77 DEITY IN SPACE AND TIME.

Universe evolves, when its primary substance is transformed from the
state of fire into that of air, then into water, etc. Heracleitus of
Ephesus maintained that the one principle that underlies all phenomena
in Nature is fire. The intelligence that moves the Universe is fire, and
fires is intelligence. And while Anaximenes said the same of air, and
Thales of Miletus (600 years B.C.) of water, the Esoteric Doctrine
reconciles all those philosophers by showing that though each was right
the system of none was complete.

-------

#### STANZA III. -- *Continued.*

8\. **W**HERE WAS THE GERM, AND WHERE WAS NOW DARKNESS? **W**HERE IS THE
SPIRIT OF THE FLAME THAT BURNS IN THY LAMP, OH **L**ANOO? **T**HE GERM
IS THAT, AND THAT IS LIGHT; THE WHITE BRILLIANT SON OF THE DARK HIDDEN
FATHER (*a*).

(*a*) The answer to the first question, suggested by the second, which
is the reply of the teacher to the pupil, contains in a single phrase
one of the most essential truths of occult philosophy. It indicates the
existence of things imperceptible to our physical senses which are of
far greater importance, more real and more permanent, than those that
appeal to these senses themselves. Before the Lanoo can hope to
understand the transcendentally metaphysical problem contained in the
first question he must be able to answer the second, while the very
answer he gives to the second will furnish him with the clue to the
correct reply to the first.

In the Sanscrit Commentary on this Stanza, the terms used for the
concealed and the unrevealed Principle are many. In the earliest MSS. of
Indian literature this Unrevealed, Abstract Deity has no name. It is
called generally "*That*" (*Tad* in Sanskrit), and means all that is,
was, and will be, or that can be so received by the human mind.

Among such appellations, given, of course, only in esoteric philosophy,
as the "Unfathomable Darkness," the "Whirlwind," etc. -- it is also
called the "It of the Kalahansa, the Kala-ham-sa," and even the "Kali
Hamsa," (Black swan). Here the *m* and the *n* are convertible, and

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 78 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

both sound like the nasal French *an* or *am,* or, again, *en* or *em*
(*Ennui*, *Embarras*, etc.) As in the Hebrew Bible, many a mysterious
sacred name in Sanscrit conveys to the profane ear no more than some
ordinary, and often vulgar word, because it is concealed
anagrammatically or otherwise. This word of Hansa or esoterically
"hamsa" is just such a case. Hamsa is equal to a-ham-sa, three words
meaning "I am he" (in English), while divided in still another way it
will read "So-ham," "he (is) I" -- Soham being equal to Sah, "he," and
aham, "I," or "I am he." In this alone is contained the universal
mystery, the doctrine of the identity of man's essence with god-essence,
for him who understands the language of wisdom. Hence the glyph of, and
the allegory about, Kalahansa (or hamsa), and the name given to Brahma
neuter (later on, to the male Brahma) of "Hansa-Vahana," he who uses the
Hansa as his vehicle." The same word may be read "Kalaham-sa" or "I am
I" in the eternity of Time, answering to the Biblical, or rather
Zoroastrian "I am that I am." The same doctrine is found in the Kabala,
as witness the following extract from an unpublished MS. by Mr. S.
Liddell McGregor Mathers, the learned Kabalist: "The three pronouns
![](sd1-78a.gif), Hoa, Atah, Ani; He, Thou, I; are used to symbolize the
ideas of Macroprosopus and Microprosopus in the Hebrew Qabalah. Hoa,
"He," is applied to the hidden and concealed Macroprosopus; Atah,
"Thou," to Microprosopus; and Ani, "I," to the latter when He is
represented as speaking. (See *Lesser Holy Assembly*, 204 *et seq.*) It
is to be noted that each of these names consists of three letters, of
which the letter Aleph ![](sd1-78b.gif), A, forms the conclusion of the
first word Hoa, and the commencement of Atah and Ani, as if it were the
connecting link between them. But ![](sd1-78b.gif) is the symbol of the
Unity and consequently of the unvarying Idea of the Divine operating
through all these. But behind the ![](sd1-78b.gif) in the name Hoa are
the letters ![](sd1-78c.gif) and ![](sd1-78d.gif), the symbols of the
numbers Six and Five, the Male and the Female, the Hexagram and the
Pentagram. And the numbers of these three words, Hoa Atah Ani, are 12,
406, and 61, which are resumed in the key numbers of 3, 10, and 7, by
the Qabalah of the Nine Chambers, which is a form of the exegetical rule
of Temura."

It is useless to attempt to explain the mystery in full. Materialists
and the men of modern Science will never understand it, since, in order

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 79 PRIMEVAL RADIATIONS FROM THE UNITY.

to obtain clear perception of it, one has first of all to admit the
postulate of a universally diffused, omnipresent, eternal Deity in
Nature; secondly, to have fathomed the mystery of electricity in its
true essence; and thirdly, to credit man with being the septenary
symbol, on the terrestrial plane, of the One Great **U**NIT (the Logos),
which is Itself the Seven-vowelled sign, the Breath crystallized into
the **W**ORD.\* He who believes in all this, has also to believe in the
multiple combination of the seven planets of Occultism and of the
Kabala, with the twelve zodiacal signs; to attribute, as we do, to each
planet and to each constellation an influence which, in the words of Ely
Star (a French Occultist), "is proper to it, beneficent or maleficent,
and this, after the planetary Spirit which rules it, who, in his turn,
is capable of influencing men and things which are found in harmony with
him and with which he has any affinity." For these reasons, and since
few believe in the foregoing, all that can now be given is that in both
cases the symbol of Hansa (whether "I," "He," Goose or Swan) is an
important symbol, representing, for instance, Divine Wisdom, Wisdom in
darkness beyond the reach of men. For all exoteric purposes, Hansa, as
every Hindu knows, is a fabulous bird, which, when given milk mixed with
water for its food (in the allegory) separated the two, drinking the
milk and leaving the water; thus showing inherent wisdom -- milk
standing symbolically for spirit, and water for matter.

That this allegory is very ancient and dates from the very earliest
archaic period, is shown by the mention (in Bhagavata Purana) of a
certain caste named "Hamsa" or "Hansa," which was the "one caste" *par
excellence*; when far back in the mists of a forgotten past there was
among the Hindus only "One Veda, One Deity, One Caste." There is also a
range in the Himalayas, described in the old books as being situated
north of Mount Meru, called "Hamsa," and connected with episodes
pertaining to the history of religious mysteries and initiations. As to
the name of Kala-Hansa being the supposed vehicle of Brahma-Prajapati,
in the exoteric texts and translations of the

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* This is again similar to the doctrine of Fichte and German
Pantheists. The former reveres Jesus as the great teacher who inculcated
the unity of the spirit of man with the God-Spirit (the Adwaita
doctrine) or universal Principle. It is difficult to find a single
speculation in Western metaphysics which has not been anticipated by
Archaic Eastern philosophy. From Kant to Herbert Spencer, it is all a
more or less distorted echo of the Dwaita, Adwaita, and Vedantic
doctrines generally.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 80 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

Orientalists, it is quite a mistake. Brahma, the neuter, is called by
them Kala-Hansa and Brahma, the male, Hansa-Vahana, because forsooth
"his vehicle or Vahan is a swan or goose" (vide "the Hindu Classical
Dictionary.") This is a purely exoteric gloss. Esoterically and
logically, if Brahma, the infinite, is all that is described by the
Orientalists, namely, agreeably with the Vedantic texts, an abstract
deity in no way characterised by the description of any human
attributes, and it is still maintained that he or it is called
Kala-Hansa -- then how can it ever become the Vahan of Brahma, the
manifested finite god? It is quite the reverse. The "Swan or goose"
(Hansa) is the symbol of that male or temporary deity, as he, the
emanation of the primordial Ray, is made to serve as a Vahan or vehicle
for that divine Ray, which otherwise could not manifest itself in the
Universe, being, antiphrastically, itself an emanation of "Darkness" --
for our human intellect, at any rate. It is Brahma, then, who is
Kala-Hansa, and the Ray, the Hansa-Vahana.

As to the strange symbol chosen, it is equally suggestive; the true
mystic significance being the idea of a universal matrix, figured by the
primordial waters of the "deep," or the opening for the reception, and
subsequently for the issue, of that one ray (the Logos), which contains
in itself the other seven procreative rays or powers (the logoi or
builders). Hence the choice by the Rosecroix of the aquatic fowl --
whether swan or pelican,\* with seven young ones for a symbol, modified
and adapted to the religion of every country. En-Soph is called the
"Fiery Soul of the Pelican" in the Book of Numbers.\*\* (See Part II.
"The Hidden Deity and its Symbols and Glyphs.") Appearing with every
Manvantara as Narayan, or Swayambhuva (the

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Whether the genus of the bird be *cygnus*, *anser*, or *pelecanus*,
it is no matter, as it is an aquatic bird floating or moving on the
waters like the Spirit, and then issuing from those waters to give birth
to other beings. The true significance of the symbol of the Eighteenth
Degree of the Rose-Croix is precisely this, though poetised later on
into the motherly feeling of the Pelican rending its bosom to feed its
seven little ones with its blood.

\*\* The reason why Moses forbids eating the pelican and swan, classing
the two among the unclean fowls, and permits eating "bald locusts,
beetles, and the grasshopper after his kind" (Leviticus xi. and
Deuteronomy xiv.) is a purely physiological one, and has to do with
mystic symbology only in so far as the word "unclean," like every other
word, ought not to be read and understood literally, as it is esoteric
like all the \[\[Footnote continued on next page\]\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 81 PRIMEVAL DIFFERENTIATIONS.

Self-Existent), and penetrating into the Mundane Egg, it emerges from it
at the end of the divine incubation as Brahma or Prajapati, a progenitor
of the future Universe into which he expands. He is Purusha (spirit),
but he is also Prakriti (matter). Therefore it is only after separating
himself into two halves -- Brahma-vach (the female) and Brahma-Viraj
(the male), that the Prajapati becomes the male Brahma.

-------

#### STANZA III. -- *Continued.*

9\. **L**IGHT IS COLD FLAME, AND FLAME IS FIRE, AND THE FIRE PRODUCES
HEAT, WHICH YIELDS WATER, THE WATER OF LIFE IN THE GREAT MOTHER
(*Chaos*) (*a*)*.*

(*a*) It must be remembered that the words "Light," "Fire," and "Flame"
used in the Stanzas have been adopted by the translators thereof from
the vocabulary of the old "Fire philosophers,"\*\* in order to render
better the meaning of the archaic terms and symbols employed in the
original. Otherwise they would have remained entirely unintelligible to
a European reader. But to a student of the Occult the terms used will be
sufficiently clear.

All these -- "Light," "Flame," "Hot," "Cold," "Fire," "Heat," "Water,"
and the "water of life" are all, on our plane, the progeny; or as a
modern physicist would say, the correlations of ELECTRICITY. Mighty
word, and a still mightier symbol! Sacred generator of a no less sacred
progeny; of fire -- the creator, the preserver and the destroyer; of
light -- the essence of our divine ancestors; of flame -- the Soul of
things. Electricity, the ONE Life at the upper rung of Being, and Astral
Fluid, the Athanor of the Alchemists, at its lowest; GOD and DEVIL, GOOD
and EVIL. . . .

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\[\[Footnote continued from previous page\]\] rest, and may as well mean
"holy" as not. It is a blind, very suggestive in connection with certain
superstitions -- *e.g*., that of the Russian people who will not use the
pigeon for food; not because it is "unclean," but because the "Holy
Ghost" is credited with having appeared under the form of a Dove.

\*\* Not the Mediaeval Alchemists, but the Magi and Fire-Worshippers,
from whom the Rosicrucians or the Philosophers *per ignem*, the
successors of the theurgists borrowed all their ideas concerning Fire,
as a mystic and divine element.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 82 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

Now, why is Light called in the Stanzas "cold flame"? Because in the
order of Cosmic evolution (as taught by the Occultist), the energy that
actuates matter after its first formation into atoms is generated on our
plane by Cosmic heat; and because Kosmos, in the sense of dissociated
matter, was not, before that period. The first primordial matter,
eternal and coeval with Space, "which has neither a beginning nor an
end," is "neither hot nor cold, but is of its own special nature," says
the Commentary (Book II). Heat and cold are relative qualities and
pertain to the realms of the manifested worlds, which all proceed from
the manifested *Hyle*, which, in its absolutely latent aspect, is
referred to as the "cold Virgin," and when awakened to life, as the
"Mother." The ancient Western Cosmogonic myths state that at first there
was but cold mist which was the Father, and the prolific slime (the
Mother, Ilus or Hyle), from which crept forth the Mundane snake-matter,
(*Isis,* vol. i., p. 146). Primordial matter, then, before it emerges
from the plane of the never-manifesting, and awakens to the thrill of
action under the impulse of Fohat, is but "a cool Radiance, colourless,
formless, tasteless, and devoid of every quality and aspect." Even such
are her first-born, the "four sons," who "are One, and become Seven," --
the entities, by whose qualifications and names the ancient Eastern
Occultists called the four of the seven primal "centres of Forces," or
atoms, that develop later into the great Cosmic "Elements," now divided
into the seventy or so sub-elements, known to science. The four primal
natures of the first Dhyan Chohans, are the so-called (for want of
better terms) "Akasic," "Ethereal," "Watery," and "Fiery," answering, in
the terminology of practical occultism, to scientific definitions of
gases, which, to convey a clear idea to both Occultists and laymen, must
be defined as Parahydrogenic,\* Paraoxygenic, Oxyhydrogenic, and Ozonic,
or perhaps Nitr-ozonic; the latter forces or gases (in Occultism,
supersensuous, yet atomic substances) being the most effective and
active when energising on the plane of more grossly differentiated
matter.\*\* These are both electro-positive and electro-negative.

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

*\**\[\[*Para*\]\], "beyond," outside.

\*\* Each of these and many more are probably the missing links of
chemistry. They are known by other names in Alchemy and to the
Occultists who practise in phenomenal powers. It is by combining and
recombining in a certain way (or dissociating) the "Elements" by means
of astral fire that the greatest phenomena are produced.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 83 THE WEB OF BEING.

#### STANZA III. -- *Continued.*

10\. **F**ATHER-**M**OTHER SPIN A WEB WHOSE UPPER END IS FASTENED TO
SPIRIT (*Purusha*)*,* THE LIGHT OF THE ONE DARKNESS, AND THE LOWER ONE
TO MATTER (*Prakriti*) ITS (*the Spirit's*) SHADOWY END; AND THIS WEB IS
THE UNIVERSE SPUN OUT OF THE TWO SUBSTANCES MADE IN ONE, WHICH IS
SWABHAVAT (*a*).

(*a*) In the Mandukya (Mundaka) Upanishad it is written, "As a spider
throws out and retracts its web, as herbs spring up in the ground . . .
so is the Universe derived from the undecaying one" (I. 1. 7). Brahma,
as "the germ of unknown Darkness," is the material from which all
evolves and develops "as the web from the spider, as foam from the
water," etc. This is only graphic and true, if Brahma the "Creator" is,
as a term, derived from the root *brih,* to increase or expand. Brahma
"expands" and becomes the Universe woven out of his own substance.

The same idea has been beautifully expressed by Goethe, who says:

> "Thus at the roaring loom of Time I ply,  
> And weave for God the garment thou see'st Him by."

-------

#### STANZA III. -- *Continued.*

\`. **I**T (*the Web*) EXPANDS WHEN THE BREATH OF FIRE (*the Father*) IS
UPON IT; IT CONTRACTS WHEN THE BREATH OF THE MOTHER (*the root of
Matter*) TOUCHES IT. **T**HEN THE SONS (*the Elements with their
respective Powers*, *or Intelligences*) DISSOCIATE AND SCATTER, TO
RETURN INTO THEIR MOTHER'S BOSOM AT THE END OF THE "GREAT DAY" AND
REBECOME ONE WITH HER (*a*). **W**HEN IT (*the Web*) IS COOLING, IT
BECOMES RADIANT, ITS SONS EXPAND AND CONTRACT THROUGH THEIR OWN SELVES
AND HEARTS; THEY EMBRACE INFINITUDE. (*b*)

The expanding of the Universe under the breath of **F**IRE is very
suggestive in the light of the "Fire mist" period of which modern
science speaks so much, and knows in reality so little.

Great heat breaks up the compound elements and resolves the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 84 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

heavenly bodies into their primeval one element, explains the
commentary. "Once disintegrated into its primal constituent by getting
within the attraction and reach of a focus, or centre of heat (energy),
of which many are carried about to and fro in space, a body, whether
alive or dead, will be vapourised and held in "the bosom of the Mother"
until Fohat, gathering a few of the clusters of Cosmic matter (nebulae)
will, by giving it an impulse, set it in motion anew, develop the
required heat, and then leave it to follow its own new growth.

The expanding and contracting of the Web -- *i.e.,* the world stuff or
atoms -- expresses here the pulsatory movement; for it is the regular
contraction and expansion of the infinite and shoreless Ocean of that
which we may call the noumenon of matter emanated by Swabhavat, which
causes the universal vibration of atoms. But it is also suggestive of
something else. It shows that the ancients were acquainted with that
which is now the puzzle of many scientists and especially of
astronomers: the cause of the first ignition of matter or the
world-stuff, the paradox of the heat produced by the refrigerative
contraction and other such Cosmic riddles. For it points unmistakeably
to a knowledge by the ancients of such phenomena. "There is heat
internal and heat external in every atom," say the manuscript
Commentaries, to which the writer has had access; "the breath of the
Father (or Spirit) and the breath (or heat) of the Mother (matter);" and
they give explanations which show that the modern theory of the
extinction of the solar fires by loss of heat through radiation, is
erroneous. The assumption is false even on the Scientists' own
admission. For as Professor Newcomb points out (Popular Astronomy, pp.
506-508), "by losing heat, a gaseous body contracts, and the heat
generated by the contraction exceeds that which it had to lose in order
to produce the contraction." This paradox, that a body gets hotter as
the shrinking produced by its getting colder is greater, led to long
disputes. The surplus of heat, it was argued, was lost by radiation, and
to assume that the temperature is not lowered *pari* *passu* with a
decrease of volume under a constant pressure, is to set at nought the
law of Charles (Nebular Theory, Winchell). Contraction develops heat, it
is true; but contraction (from cooling) is incapable of developing the
whole amount of heat at any time existing in the mass, or even of
maintaining a body at a constant temperature, etc. Professor Winchell
tries to reconcile the paradox -- only a seeming one in fact, as

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 85 CONSCIOUS ELECTRICITY.

Homer Lanes proved, -- by suggesting "something besides heat." "May it
not be," he asks, "simply a repulsion among the molecules, which varies
according to some law of the distance?" But even this will be found
irreconcileable, unless this "something besides heat" is ticketed
"Causeless Heat," the "Breath of Fire," the all-creative Force Plus
ABSOLUTE INTELLIGENCE, which physical science is not likely to accept.

However it may be, the reading of this Stanza shows it, notwithstanding
its archaic phraseology, to be more scientific than even modern science.

-------

#### STANZA III. -- *Continued.*

12\. **T**HEN **S**VABHAVAT SENDS **F**OHAT TO HARDEN THE ATOMS.
**E**ACH (*of these*) IS A PART OF THE WEB (*Universe*)*.*
**R**EFLECTING THE "**S**ELF-**E**XISTENT **L**ORD" (*Primeval Light*)
LIKE A MIRROR, EACH BECOMES IN TURN A WORLD.\* . . .

"Fohat hardens the atoms"; *i.e.*, by infusing energy into them: he
scatters the atoms or primordial matter. "He scatters himself while
scattering matter into atoms" (**MSS**. Commentaries.)

It is through Fohat that the ideas of the Universal Mind are impressed
upon matter. Some faint idea of the nature of Fohat may be gathered from
the appellation "Cosmic Electricity" sometimes applied to it; but to the
commonly known properties of electricity must, in this case, be added
others, including intelligence. It is of interest to note that modern
science has come to the conclusion, that all cerebration and
brain-activity are attended by electrical phenomena. (*For further
details as to* "*Fohat*" *See Stanza V. and Comments.*")

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* This is said in the sense that the flame from a fire is endless, and
that the lights of the whole Universe could be lit at one simple
rush-light without diminishing its flame.

---------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next Section](sd1-1-05)

[Contents](sd1-0-co.htm#contents)
