##### The Secret Doctrine by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol. 1

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 566 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.<span id="DDE_LINK20"></span>

<span id="DDE_LINK21">\[\[This page continued from</span> [previous
section](sd1-3-10)\]\]

#### XI. ON THE ELEMENTS AND ATOMS.

FROM THE STAND-POINT OF SCIENCE AND THAT OF OCCULTISM.

**W**HEN the Occultist speaks of "Elements," and of human Beings who
lived during those geological ages, the duration of which it is found as
impossible to determine, according to the opinion of one of the best

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 567 METAPHYSICAL CHEMISTRY.

English geologists\*, as the nature of matter, it is because he knows
what he is talking about. When he says "Man" and Elements, he neither
means "man" in his present physiological and anthropological form, nor
the elemental atoms, those hypothetical conceptions, the entitative
abstractions of matter in its highly attenuated state, as existing at
present in scientific minds; nor, again, the compound Elements of
antiquity. In Occultism the word *Element* means "rudiment" in every
case. When we say "Elementary Man," we mean either the proemial,
incipient sketch of man, in its unfinished and undeveloped condition,
hence in that form which now lies latent in physical man during his
life-time, and takes shape only occasionally and under certain
conditions; or that form which for a time survives the material body,
and which is better known as an "Elementary."\*\* With regard to
"Element," when the term is used metaphysically, it means, in
distinction to the mortal, the incipient *divine* man; and, in its
physical usage, inchoate matter in its first undifferentiated condition,
or in the *laya* state, which is the eternal and the *normal* condition
of substance, differentiating only periodically, and is during that
differentiation in an *abnormal* state -- in other words, a transitory
illusion of the senses.

As to the "elemental atoms," so called, the Occultists refer to them by
that name with a meaning analogous to that which is given by the Hindu
to Brahma when he calls him **A**NU, the "Atom." Every elemental *atom*,
in search of which more than one Chemist has followed the path indicated
by the Alchemists, is, in their firm belief (when not *knowledge*), a
SOUL; not necessarily a disembodied soul, but a *jiva*, as the Hindus
call it, a centre of POTENTIAL VITALITY, with latent intelligence in it,
and, in the case of compound Souls -- an intelligent active EXISTENCE,
from the highest to the lowest order, a form composed of more or less
differentiations. It requires a metaphysician -- and an Eastern
metaphysician -- to understand our meaning. All those atom-Souls are
differentiations from the ONE, and in the same relation to it as the
*divine Soul* -- the Buddhi -- to its informing and inseparable Spirit,
or *Atman.*

Modern physics, while borrowing from the ancients their atomic theory,
forgot one point, the most important of the doctrine; hence they got
only the husks and will never be able to get at the kernel. They left
behind, in the adoption of physical atoms, the suggestive fact that

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* In answer to a friend, that eminent geologist writes: . . . ."I can
only say, in reply to your letter, that it is at present, and perhaps
always will be, IMPOSSIBLE to reduce, even approximately, geological
time into years, or even into millenniums." (Signed William Pengelly,
F.R.S.)

\*\* Plato speaking of the irrational, turbulent Elements "composed of
fire, air, water, and earth," means Elementary Daemons. (See *Timaeus.*)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 568 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

from Anaxagoras down to Epicurus, the Roman Lucretius, and finally even
to Galileo, all those Philosophers believed more or less in ANIMATED
atoms, not in invisible specks of so-called "brute" matter. Rotatory
motion was generated in their views, by larger (read, more divine and
pure) atoms forcing downwards other atoms; the lighter ones being thrust
simultaneously upward. The esoteric meaning of this is the ever cyclic
curve downward and upward of differentiated elements through intercyclic
phases of existence, until each reaches again its starting point or
birthplace. The idea was metaphysical as well as physical; the hidden
interpretation embracing "gods" or souls, in the shape of atoms, as the
*causes* of all the *effects* produced on Earth by the *secretions* from
the divine bodies.\* No ancient philosopher, not even the Jewish
Kabalists, ever dissociated Spirit from matter or *vice versa.*
Everything originated in the ONE, and, proceeding from the one, must
finally return to the One. "Light becomes heat, and consolidates into
fiery particles; which, from being ignited, become cold, hard particles,
round and smooth. And this is called *Soul*, imprisoned in its robe of
matter;"\*\* *Atoms* and *Souls* having been synonymous in the language
of the Initiates. The "whirling Souls," *Gilgoolem*, a doctrine in which
so many learned Jews have believed (*See Mackenzie*'*s Royal Masonic
Cyclopaedia*), had no other meaning esoterically. The learned Jewish
Initiates never meant by the "Promised land" Palestine alone, but the
same *Nirvana* as the learned Buddhist and Brahmin do -- the bosom of
the **E**TERNAL **O**NE, symbolized by that of Abraham, and by Palestine
as its substitute on Earth.\*\*\* The passage of the **S**OUL-**A**TOM
"through the Seven Planetary Chambers" had the same metaphysical and
also physical meaning. It had the latter when it was said to *dissolve
into Ether* (*See Isis Unveiled*, Vol. I., p. 297.) Even Epicurus, the
*model Atheist* and materialist, knew and believed so much in the
ancient Wisdom, that he taught that the

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Plato uses the words "*secretions*" of turbulent Elements (Timaeus).

\*\* Valentinus' *Esoteric Treatise on the Doctrine of Gilgul*.

\*\*\* Surely no *educated* Jew ever believed the *literal* sense of
this allegory -- namely, that "the bodies of Jews deposited in foreign
lands contain within them a principle of Soul which cannot rest, until
by a process called the "whirling of the Soul" the immortal particle
reaches once more the sacred Soil of the "Promised land." The meaning is
evident to an occultist. The process was supposed to be accomplished by
a kind of metempsychosis, the psychic spark being conveyed through bird,
beast, fish, and the most minute insect. (*See Royal Masonic Cyclo.
Mackenzie.*) The Allegory relates to *the atoms of the body*, which have
each to pass through every form before all reach the *final* state,
which is the first starting point of the departure of every atom -- its
primitive laya State. But the primitive meaning of *Gilgoolem*, or
"Revolution of Souls," was the idea of the re-incarnating Souls or
*Egos.* "All the Souls go into the *gilgoolah*," into a cyclic or
revolving process; *i.e.*, they all proceed on the cyclic path of
re-births. Some Kabalists interpret this doctrine to mean only a kind of
purgatory for the souls of the wicked. But this is not so.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 569 PANTHEISM VERSUS MATERIALISM.

Soul (entirely distinct from immortal Spirit when the former is
enshrined *latent* in it, as it is in every atomic speck), was composed
of a fine, tender essence, formed from the *smoothest*, *roundest*, *and
finest atoms.*

And this shows that the ancient Initiates, who were followed more or
less closely by all profane antiquity, meant by the term "ATOM," a Soul,
a Genius or Angel, the first-born of the ever-concealed CAUSE of all
causes; and in this sense their teachings become comprehensible. They
claimed, as do their successors, the existence of Gods and Genii, angels
or "demons," not outside, or independent of, the Universal *Plenum*, but
within it. Only this *Plenum*, during the life-cycles, is infinite. They
admitted and taught a good deal of that which modern Science teaches now
--namely, the existence of a primordial "World-stuff or Cosmic
Substance," from which worlds are formed, ever and eternally
homogeneous, except during its periodic existence, when it
differentiates its universal diffusion throughout infinite space; and
the gradual formation of sidereal bodies from it. They taught the
revolution of the Heavens, the Earth's rotation, the Heliocentric
System, and the Atomic Vortices -- Atoms -- in reality Souls and
intelligences. But those "Atomists" were spiritual, most transcendental,
and philosophical Pantheists. It is not they who would have ever
conceived, or dreamt that monstrous contrasted progeny, the nightmare of
our modern civilized Race; namely -- *inanimate* material, self-guiding
atoms, on the one hand, and an extra-Cosmic God on the other.

It may be useful to show what, in the teachings of the old Initiates,
the Monad was, and what its origin.

Modern exact Science, as soon as it began to grow out of its teens,
perceived the great, and, to it, hitherto *esoteric* axiom, that nothing
-- whether in the spiritual, psychic, or physical realm of being --
could come into existence out of nothing. There is no cause in the
manifested universe without its adequate effects, whether in space or
time; nor can there be an effect without its primal cause, which itself
owes its existence to a still higher one -- the final and absolute cause
having to remain to man for ever an incomprehensible **C**AUSELESS
**C**AUSE. But even this is no solution, and must be viewed, if at all,
from the highest philosophical and metaphysical standpoints, otherwise
the problem had better be left unapproached. It is an abstraction, on
the verge of which human reason -- however trained to metaphysical
subtleties -- trembles, threatening to collapse. This may be
demonstrated to any European who would undertake to solve the problem of
existence by the articles of faith of the true Vedantin, for instance.
Let him read and study the sublime teachings on the subject of Soul and
Spirit, of

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 570 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

Sankaracharya (*Viveka Chudamani*)\*, and the reader will realize what
is now said.

While the Christian is taught that the human soul is a breath of God --
being created by him for sempiternal existence, *i.e.*, having a
beginning, *but no end* (and therefore never to be called eternal) --
the Occult teaching says, "*Nothing is created*, *but is only
transformed.* Nothing can manifest itself in this universe -- from a
globe down to a vague, rapid thought -- that was not in the universe
already; everything on the subjective plane is an eternal IS; as
everything on the objective plane is an *ever becoming* -- because
transitory."

The monad -- a truly "indivisible thing," as defined by Good, who did
not give it the sense we now do -- is here rendered as the *Atma* in
conjunction with *Buddhi* and the higher Manas. This trinity is one and
eternal, the latter being absorbed in the former at the termination of
all conditioned and *illusive* life. The monad, then, can be traced
through the course of its pilgrimage and its changes of transitory
vehicles only from the incipient stage of the manifested Universe. In
Pralaya, or the intermediate period between two manvantaras, it loses
its name, as it loses it when the real ONE self of man merges *into
Brahm* in cases of high Samadhi (the *Turiya* state) or final Nirvana;
"when the disciple" in the words of Sankara, "having attained that
primeval consciousness, absolute bliss, of which the nature is truth,
which is without form and action, abandons this illusive body that has
been assumed by the *atma* just as an actor (abandons) the dress (put
on)." For Buddhi (the *Anandamaya sheath*) is but a mirror which
*reflects* absolute bliss; and, moreover, *that reflection* itself is
yet not free from ignorance, and is *not* the Supreme Spirit, being
subject to conditions, being a spiritual modification of Prakriti, and
an effect; *Atma* alone is the one real and eternal substratum of all --
the essence and absolute knowledge -- the *Kshetragna.*\*\* It is called
in the Esoteric philosophy "the One Witness,"

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Translated for the *Theosophist*, by Mohini M. Chatterji as "Crest
Jewel of Wisdom," 1886. (See *Theosophist*, July and August numbers).

\*\* Now that the revised version of the gospels has been published and
the most glaring mistranslations of the old versions are corrected, one
will understand better the words in St. John v., vi., and vii.: "It is
the Spirit that beareth *witness* because the Spirit is the truth." The
words that follow in the mistranslated version about the "three
witnesses," -- hitherto supposed to stand for "the Father, the Word, and
the Holy Ghost" -- show the real meaning of the writer (St. John) very
clearly, thus still more forcibly identifying his teaching in this
respect with that of Sankaracharya. For what can the sentence, "there
are three who bear witness: the Spirit and the *Water* and the *Blood*"
-- mean, if they bear no relation to, or connection with, the more
philosophical statement of the great Vedanta teacher, who, speaking of
the *sheaths* (the *principles* in man) *Jiva*, *Vignanamaya*, etc.,
which *are*, in their physical manifestation, "*water* and *blood*" or
life, adds that *atma* (spirit) alone is what remains after the
\[\[Footnote continued on next page\]\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 571 THE DIAMOND HEART.

and, while it rests in Devachan, is referred to as "the Three Witnesses
to Karma."

*Atma* (our seventh principle) being identical with the universal
Spirit, and man being one with it in his essence, what is then the Monad
proper? It is that homogeneous spark which radiates in millions of rays
from the primeval "Seven;" -- of which seven further on. It is *the*
EMANATING *spark from the* UNCREATED *Ray* -- a mystery. In the
esoteric, and even exoteric Buddhism of the North, Adi Buddha (*Chogi
dangpoi sangye*), the One unknown, without beginning or end, identical
with Parabrahm and Ain-Soph, emits a bright ray from its darkness.

This is the *Logos* (the first), or Vajradhara, the Supreme Buddha (also
called *Dorjechang*)*.* As the Lord of all Mysteries he cannot manifest,
but sends into the world of manifestation his heart -- the "diamond
heart," Vajrasattva (*Dorjesempa*)*.* This is the second *logos* of
creation, from whom emanate the seven (in the exoteric blind the five)
Dhyani Buddhas, called the Anupadaka, "the parentless." These Buddhas
are the primeval monads from the world of *incorporeal being*, the
*Arupa* world, wherein the Intelligences (on that plane only) have
neither shape nor name, in the exoteric system, but have their distinct
seven names in esoteric philosophy. These Dhyani Buddhas emanate, or
create from themselves, by virtue of Dhyana, celestial Selves -- the
*super*-human Bodhisattvas. These incarnating at the beginning of every
human cycle on earth as mortal men, become occasionally, owing to their
personal merit, Bodhisattvas among the Sons of Humanity, after which
they may re-appear as *Manushi* (human) Buddhas. The Anupadaka (or
Dhyani-Buddhas) are thus identical with the Brahminical *Manasaputra*,
"mind-born sons" -- whether of Brahma or either of the other two
Trimurtian Hypostases, hence identical also with the Rishis and
Prajapatis. Thus, a passage is found in *Anugita*, which, read
esoterically, shows plainly, though under another imagery, the same idea
and system. It says: "Whatever entities there are in this world,
moveable or immoveable, they are the very first to be dissolved (at
*pralaya*); and next the developments produced from the elements (from
which the visible Universe is fashioned); and, after these developments
(evolved entities), all the elements. Such is the upperward gradation
among entities. Gods, Men, Gandharvas, Pisachas, Asuras, Rakshasas, all
have been created by Svabhava (Prakriti, or plastic nature), not by
actions, nor by a cause" -- *i.e.*, not by any physical cause.

"These Brahmanas (the Rishi Prajapati?), the creators of the world, are
born here (on earth) again and again. Whatever is produced from

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\[\[Footnote continued from previous page\]\] *subtraction* of the
sheaths and that it is the ONLY *witness*, or synthesized unity. The
less spiritual and philosophical school, solely with an eye to a trinity
made three witnesses out of "one," thus connecting it more with earth
than with heaven.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 572 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

them is dissolved in due time in those very five great elements (the
five, or rather seven, Dhyani Buddhas, also called "Elements" of
Mankind), like billows in the ocean. These great elements are in every
way beyond the elements that make up the world (the gross elements). And
he who is released even from these five elements (the tanmatras)\* goes
to the highest goal." "The Lord Prajapati (Brahma) created all this by
the mind only," *i.e.*, by *Dhyana*, or abstract meditation and mystic
powers like the Dhyani Buddhas (*vide supra*)*.* Evidently then, these
"Brahmanas" are identical with the Bodhisattvas (the terrestrial) of the
heavenly Dhyani Buddhas. Both, as primordial, intelligent "Elements,"
become the *creators* or the *emanators* of the monads destined to
become human in that cycle; after which they evolve themselves, or, so
to say, expand into their own *selves* as Bodhisattvas or Brahmanas, in
heaven and earth, to become at last simple men --"the creators of the
world *are born here*, *on earth again and again*" -- truly. In the
Northern Buddhist system, or the popular exoteric religion, it is taught
that every Buddha, while preaching the good law on earth, manifests
himself simultaneously in three worlds: in the formless, as Dhyani
Buddha, in the World of forms, as a Bodhisattva, and in the world of
desire, the lowest (or our world) as a man. Esoterically the teaching
differs: The divine, purely Adi-Buddhic *monad* manifests as the
universal Buddhi (the *Maha-buddhi* or Mahat in Hindu philosophies) the
spiritual, omniscient and omnipotent root of divine intelligence, the
highest *anima mundi* or the Logos*. This* descends "like a flame
spreading from the eternal Fire, immoveable, without increase or
decrease, ever the same to the end" of the cycle of existence, and
becomes universal life on the Mundane Plane. From this Plane of
*conscious* Life shoot out, like seven fiery tongues, the Sons of Light
(the *logoi* of Life); then the Dhyani-Buddhas of contemplation: the
concrete forms of their formless Fathers -- the Seven Sons of Light,
*still themselves*, to whom may be applied the Brahmanical mystic
phrase: "Thou art 'THAT' -- *Brahm.*" It is from these Dhyani-Buddhas
that emanate their *chhayas* (Shadows) the Bodhisattvas of the celestial
realms, the prototypes of the *super*-terrestrial Bodhisattvas, and of
the terrestrial Buddhas, and finally of men. The "Seven Sons of Light"
are also called "Stars."

The star under which a human Entity is born, says the Occult teaching,
will remain for ever its star, throughout the whole cycle of its
incarnations in one Manvantara. But *this is not his astrological star.*
The latter is concerned and connected with the *personality*, the former
with

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* The Tanmatras are literally the type or rudiment of an element devoid
of qualities; but esoterically, they are the primeval *noumenoi* of that
which becomes in the progress of evolution a Cosmic element in the sense
given to the term in antiquity, not in that of physics. They are the
logoi, the seven emanations or rays of the logos.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 573 THE CREST-JEWEL OF WISDOM.

the INDIVIDUALITY. The "Angel" of that Star, or the Dhyani-Buddha will
be either the guiding or simply the presiding "Angel," so to say, in
every new rebirth of the monad, *which is part of his own essence*,
though his vehicle, man, may remain for ever ignorant of this fact. The
adepts have each their Dhyani-Buddha, their elder "twin Soul," and they
know it, calling it "Father-Soul," and "Father-Fire." It is only at the
last and supreme initiation, however, that they learn it when placed
face to face with the bright "Image." How much has Bulwer Lytton known
of this mystic fact when describing, in one of his highest inspirational
moods, Zanoni face to face with his *Augoeides?*

The *Logos*, or both the unmanifested and the manifested **W**ORD, is
called by the Hindus, Iswara, "the Lord," though the Occultists give it
another name. Iswara, say the Vedantins, is the highest consciousness in
nature. "This highest consciousness," answer the Occultists, "is only a
*synthetic unit* in the world of the manifested Logos -- or on the
*plane of illusion;* for it is the sum total of Dhyan-Chohanic
*consciousnesses.*" "Oh, wise man, remove the conception *that
not*-*Spirit is Spirit*," says Sankaracharya. Atma is *not*-*Spirit* in
its final Parabrahmic state, *Iswara* or *Logos* is Spirit; or, as
Occultism explains, it is a compound unity of manifested living Spirits,
the parent-source and nursery of all the mundane and terrestrial monads,
*plus* their *divine* reflection, which emanate from, and return into,
the Logos, each in the culmination of its time. There are seven chief
groups of such Dhyan Chohans, which groups will be found and recognised
in every religion, for they are the primeval SEVEN Rays. Humanity,
occultism teaches us, is divided into seven distinct groups and their
sub-divisions, mental, spiritual, and physical.\* The monad, then,
viewed as ONE, is above the seventh principle (in Kosmos and man), and
as a triad, it is the direct radiant progeny of the said *compound*
UNIT, not the breath (and special *creation* out of *nihil*) of "God,"
as that unit is called; for such an idea is quite unphilosophical, and
degrades Deity, dragging it down to a finite, attributive condition. As
well expressed by the translator of the "Crest-Jewel of Wisdom" --
though *Iswara* is "God" "unchanged in the profoundest depths of
*pralayas* and in the intensest activity of the *manvantaras*" . . .,
still "*beyond* (him) is

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Hence the seven chief planets, the *spheres* of the indwelling seven
spirits, under each of which is born one of the human groups which is
guided and influenced thereby. There are only seven planets (*specially*
connected with earth), and twelve houses, but the possible combinations
of their aspects are countless. As each planet can stand to each of the
others in twelve different aspects, their combinations must, therefore,
be almost infinite; as infinite, in fact, as the spiritual, psychic,
mental, and physical capacities in the numberless varieties of the
*genus homo*, each of which varieties is born under one of the seven
planets and one of the said countless planetary combinations. See
*Theosophist*, for August, 1886.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 574 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

'**A**TMA,' round whose pavilion is the darkness of eternal **M**AYA."\*
The "triads" born under the same Parent-planet, or rather the
*radiations* of one and the same Planetary Spirit (Dhyani Buddha) are,
in all their after lives and rebirths, sister, or "*twin*-souls," on
this Earth.\*\*

This was known to every high Initiate in every age and in every country:
"I and my Father are one," said Jesus (John x. 30).\*\*\* When He is
made to say, elsewhere (xx. 17): "I ascend to *my* Father and your
Father," it meant that which has just been stated. It was simply to show
that the group of his disciples and followers attracted to Him belonged
to the same Dhyani Buddha, "Star," or "Father," again of the same
planetary realm and division as He did. It is the *knowledge* of this
occult doctrine that found expression in the review of "The Idyll of the
White Lotus," when Mr. T. Subba Row wrote: "Every Buddha meets at his
last initiation all the great adepts who reached Buddhahood during the
preceding ages . . . every class of adepts has its own bond of spiritual
communion which knits them together. . . . . The only possible and
effectual way of entering into such brotherhood . . . . is by bringing
oneself within the influence of the Spiritual light which radiates *from
one*'*s own Logos.* I may further point out here . . . . that such
communion is only possible *between persons whose souls derive their
life and sustenance from the same divine* RAY, and that, as seven
distinct rays radiate from the 'Central Spiritual Sun,' *all adepts and
Dhyan Chohans are divisible into seven classes*, each of which is
guided, controlled, and overshadowed *by one of the seven forms* or
manifestations of the divine Wisdom." ("*Theosophist*," Aug., 1886.)

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* The now universal error of attributing to the ancients the knowledge
of only seven planets, simply because they mentioned no others, is based
on the same general ignorance of their occult doctrines. The question is
not whether they were, or were not, aware of the existence of the later
discovered planets; but whether the reverence paid by them to the four
exoteric and three secret great gods -- the star-angels, had not some
special reason. The writer ventures to say there was such a reason, and
it is this. Had they known of as many planets as we do now (and this
question can hardly be decided at present, either way), they would have
still connected with their religious worship only the seven, because
these seven are directly and specially connected with our earth, or,
using esoteric phraseology, with our septenary ring of spheres. (See
*supra*.)

\*\* It is the same, only still more metaphysical idea, as that of the
Christian Trinity -- "Three in One" -- *i.e.*, the Universal
"over-Spirit," manifesting on the two higher planes, those of Buddhi and
Mahat; and these are the three hypostases, metaphysical, but *never
personal.*

\*\*\* The identity, and at the same time the illusive differentiation
of the *Angel*-Monad and the *Human*-Monad is shown by the following
sentences: "My Father is *greater* than I" (John xiv. 26) ; "Glorify
*your* Father *who is in Heaven*" (Matt. v. 16); "The righteous will
*shine* in the kingdom of *their* Father" (not *our* Father) (Matt.
xiii. 43) "Know ye not ye are *a temple* of God, and that the *Spirit of
God dwelleth* in you? (I Cor. iii. 16); "I *ascend* to my Father," etc.,
etc.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 575 WHAT ARE THE SEVEN PLANETS?

It is then the "Seven Sons of Light" -- called after their planets and
(by the rabble) often identified with them -- namely Saturn, Jupiter,
Mercury, Mars, Venus, and -- *presumably* for the modern critic, who
goes no deeper than the surface of old religions\* -- the Sun and Moon,
which are, according to the Occult teachings, our heavenly Parents, or
"Father," synthetically. Hence, as already remarked, polytheism is
really more philosophical and correct, as to fact and nature, than
anthropomorphic monotheism. Saturn, Jupiter, Mercury, and Venus, the
four exoteric planets, and the three others, which must remain unnamed,
were the heavenly bodies in direct astral and psychic communication with
the Earth, its Guides, and Watchers -- morally and physically; the
visible orbs furnishing our Humanity with its outward and inward
characteristics, and their "Regents" or *Rectors* with our Monads and
spiritual faculties. In order to avoid creating new misconceptions, let
it be stated that among the three *secret* orbs (or star-angels) neither
Uranus nor Neptune entered; not only because they were unknown under
these names to the ancient Sages, but because they, as all other
planets, however many there may be, are the *gods* and guardians of
other septenary chains of globes within our systems.

Nor do the two last discovered great planets depend entirely on the Sun
like the rest of the planets. Otherwise, how explain the fact that
Neptune receives 900 times less light than our Earth, and Uranus 390
times less, and that their satellites show a peculiarity of inverse
rotation found in no other planets of the Solar System. At any rate,
what we say applies to Uranus, though recently the fact begins again to
be disputed.

This subject will, of course, be considered mere vagary by all those who
confuse the universal order of being with their own systems of
classification. Here, however, simple facts from Occult teachings are
stated, to be either accepted or rejected, as the case may be. There are
details which, on account of their great metaphysical abstractions,
*cannot* be entered upon. Hence, we merely state that only seven of our
planets are as intimately related to our globe, as the Sun is to all

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* These are planets accepted for purposes of judicial astrology only.
The astrotheogonical division differed from this one. The Sun, being a
central *star* and no planet, stands in more occult and mysterious
relations with *its* seven planets of *our* globe than is generally
known. The Sun was, therefore, considered the great Father of all the
Seven "Fathers," which accounts for the variations found between *seven*
and *eight* great gods of the Chaldean and other countries. Neither the
earth nor the moon -- its satellite -- nor yet stars, for another reason
-- were anything else than *substitutes for esoteric purposes.* Yet,
even with the Sun and the Moon thrown out of the calculation, the
ancients seem to have known of *seven* planets. How many more are known
to us, so far, if we throw out the Earth and Moon? Seven, and no more:
Seven primary or principal planets, the rest *planetoids* rather than
planets.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 576 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

the bodies subject to him in his system. Of these bodies the poor little
number of *primary* and *secondary* planets known to astronomy, looks
wretched enough, in truth.\* Therefore, it stands to reason that there
are a great number of planets, small and large, that have not been
discovered yet, but of the existence of which ancient astronomers -- all
of them initiated adepts -- must have certainly been aware. But, as
their relation to the gods was sacred, it had to remain arcane, as also
the names of various other planets and stars.

Besides which, even the Roman Catholic theology speaks of "*seventy*
planets that preside over the destinies of the nations of this globe";
and, save the erroneous application, there is more truth in this
tradition than in exact modern astronomy. The seventy planets are
connected with the *seventy* elders of the people of Israel (*Numb.* 11,
16) because the *regents* of these planets are meant, not the orbs
themselves; and the word seventy is a play and a *blind* upon the 7 x 7
of the subdivisions. Each people and nation, as said already, has its
*direct* Watcher, Guardian and Father in Heaven -- a Planetary Spirit.
We are willing to leave their own national God, Jehovah, to the
descendants of Israel, the worshippers of *Sabaoth* or **S**ATURN; for,
indeed, the *monads* of the people chosen by him are his own, and the
Bible has never made a secret of it. Only the text of the English
(Protestant) Bible is, in disagreement, as usual, with those of the
Septuagint and the Vulgate. Thus, while in the former one reads (*in
Deuter.* xxxii., 8 *and* 9) "When the MOST HIGH (not Jehovah) divided to
the nations their inheritance . . . he set the bounds of the people
according to the number of the children of Israel," in the *Septuagint*
the text reads "according *to the number of the Angels*"
(Planet-Angels), which is more concordant with truth and fact. Moreover,
all the texts agree that "the Lord's (Jehovah) *portion* is his people;
Jacob *is* the lot of *his* inheritance" (Deut. xxxii. 9); and this
settles the question. The "Lord" Jehovah took *for his portion* Israel
-- what have other nations to do with that particular *national* Deity?
Let then, the "angel Gabriel" watch over Iran and "Mikael-Jehovah" over
the Hebrews. These are not the gods of other nations, and it is
difficult to see why Christians

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* When one remembers that under the powerful telescope of Sir W.
Herschell, that eminent astronomer, gauging merely that portion of
heaven in the equatorial plane, the approximate centre of which is
occupied by our Earth -- saw pass in one quarter of an hour, 16,000
stars; and applying this calculation to the totality of the "Milky Way"
he found in it no less than 18 (eighteen) millions of **S**UNS -- one
wonders no longer that Laplace, in conversation with Napoleon I. should
have called God a HYPOTHESIS -- perfectly useless to speculate upon for
*exact* physical Science, at any rate. Occult metaphysics and
transcendental philosophy will alone be able to lift the smallest corner
of the impenetrable veil in this direction.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 577 CYCLIC FALL OF THE GODS.

should have selected a god against whose commandments Jesus was the
first one to rise in rebellion.

The Planetary origin of the Monad (Soul) and of its faculties was taught
by the Gnostics. On its way to the Earth, as on its way back from the
Earth, each soul born in, and from, the "Boundless Light,"\* had to pass
through the seven planetary regions both ways. The pure Dhyani and Devas
of the oldest religions had become, in course of time, with the
Zoroastrians, the Seven Daevas, the ministers of Ahriman, "each chained
to his planet" (*see Origen*'*s Copy of the Chart*); with the Brahmins,
the Asuras and some of its Rishis -- good, bad and indifferent; and
among the Egyptian Gnostics it was *Thoth* or (Hermes) who was the chief
of the seven whose names are given by Origen as *Adonai*, genius of the
Sun; *Tao*, of the Moon; *Eloi*, of Jupiter; *Sabao*, of Mars; *Orai*,
of Venus; *Astaphai*, of Mercury; and *Ildabaoth* (Jehovah), of Saturn.
Finally, the *Pistis*-*Sophia*, which the greatest modern authority on
*exoteric* Gnostic beliefs, the late Mr. C. W. King, refers to as "that
precious monument of Gnosticism," -- this old document echoes, while
distorting it to sectarian purposes, the archaic belief of the ages. The
Astral Rulers of the Spheres (the planets) create the monads (the Souls)
from their own substance out of the "tears of their eyes, and the sweat
of their torments," endowing the monads with a spark of the Divine
Light, which is their substance. It will be shown in Book II. why these
"Lords of the Zodiac and Spheres" have been transformed by sectarian
theology into the rebellious angels of the Christians, who took them
from the Seven Devs of the Magi, without understanding the significance
of the allegory. (*Vide Part II.*, "*On the Seven Souls*," *and Section*
xv. *in this Part*, "**G**ODS, **M**ONADS AND **A**TOMS").

As usual, that which *is* and *was* from its beginning divine, pure, and
spiritual in its earliest unity, became, by reason of its
differentiation by the distorted prism of man's conceptions, human and
impure, as reflecting man's own sinful nature. Thus, in time, the planet
Saturn became reviled by the worshippers of other "gods." The nations
born under Saturn -- the Jewish, for instance -- with whom he had become
Jehovah, after having been held as a son of Saturn, or Ilda-Baoth, by
the Ophites, and in the book of Jasher -- were eternally fighting with
those born under Jupiter, Mercury, or any other planet, except
Saturn-Jehovah; genealogies and prophecies notwithstanding, Jesus *the
initiate* (or Jehoshua) -- the type from whom the "historical" Jesus was

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* C. W. King, identifies it with "that *summum bonum* of Oriental
aspiration, the Buddhist Nirvana," perfect repose, the Epicurean
*Indolentia*, which looks flippant enough in its expression, though not
quite untrue.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 578 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

copied -- was not of pure Jewish blood, and thus recognised no Jehovah;
nor did he worship any planetary god beside his own "Father," whom he
knew, and with whom he communed as every high initiate does, "Spirit to
Spirit and Soul to Soul." This can hardly be taken exception to, unless
the critic explains to every one's satisfaction the strange sentences
put in the mouth of Jesus by the author of the Fourth Gospel (*chapter*
viii.) during his disputes with the Pharisees.

"I know ye are Abraham's seed\* . . . I speak the things which I have
seen with *my* Father; and ye do the things which ye heard from *your*
Father. . . . . Ye do the works of *your* Father. . . . . Ye are of your
Father, the Devil. . . . . He was a murderer from the beginning, and
stood not in the truth, because there is no truth in him. When one
speaketh a lie he speaketh of his own; for his father also is a liar and
the father thereof," etc., etc.

That "Father" of the Pharisees was Jehovah, because identical with Cain,
Saturn, Vulcan, etc. -- the planet under which they were born, and the
God whom they worshipped. Evidently there must be an occult meaning
sought in these words and admonitions, however mistranslated, since they
are pronounced by one who threatened with hell-fire anyone who says
simply *raca* (fool) to his brother (*Matthew* v*.*, 22). And evidently,
again, the planets are not merely spheres, twinkling in Space, and made
to shine for no purpose, but the domains of various beings with whom the
profane are so far unacquainted; nevertheless, having a mysterious,
unbroken, and powerful connection with men and globes. Every heavenly
body is the temple of *a* god, and these gods themselves are the temples
of **G**OD, the Unknown "*Not* Spirit." There is nothing profane in the
Universe. All Nature is a consecrated place, as Young says: --

> "Each of these Stars is a religious house." . . . .

Thus can all exoteric religions be shown the falsified copies of the
esoteric teaching. It is the priesthood which has to be held responsible
for the reaction in favour of materialism of our day. It is by
worshiping and enforcing on the masses the worship of the shells --
personified for purposes of allegory -- of pagan ideals, that the latest
exoteric religion has made of Western lands a Pandemonium, in which the
higher classes worship the golden calf, and the lower and ignorant
masses are made to worship an idol with feet of clay.

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Abraham and Saturn are identical in astro-symbology, and he is the
forefather of the Jehovistic Jews.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next Section](sd1-3-12)

[Contents](sd1-0-co.htm#contents)
