##### *The Secret Doctrine* by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol. 1

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 170 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

\[\[This page continued from [previous section](sd1-1-08.md)\]\]

#### ADDITIONAL FACTS AND EXPLANATIONS CONCERNING THE GLOBES AND THE MONADS.

Two statements made in "Esoteric Buddhism" must be noticed and the
author's opinions quoted. On p. 47 (fifth edition) it is said: --

" . . . the spiritual monads . . . do not fully complete their mineral
existence on Globe A, then complete it on Globe B, and so on. They pass
several times round the whole circle as minerals, and then again several
times round as vegetables, and several times as animals. We purposely
refrain for the present from going into figures," etc., etc.

This was a wise course to adopt in view of the great secrecy maintained
with regard to figures and numbers. This reticence is now partially
relinquished; but it would perhaps have been better had the real numbers
concerning Rounds and evolutional gyrations been either entirely
divulged at the time, or as entirely withheld. Mr. Sinnett understood
this difficulty well when saying (p. 140) that: "For reasons which are
not easy for the outsider to divine, the possessors of occult knowledge
are especially reluctant to give out facts relating to Cosmogony, though
it is hard for the uninitiated to understand why they should be
withheld."

That there were such reasons is evident. Nevertheless, it is to this
reticence that most of the confused ideas of some Eastern as well as
Western pupils are due. The difficulties in the way of the acceptance of
the two particular tenets under consideration seemed great, just because
of the absence of any data to go upon. But there it was. For the figures
belonging to the Occult calculations cannot be given -- as the Masters
have many times declared -- outside the circle of pledged chelas, and
not even these can break the rules.

To make things plainer, without touching upon the mathematical aspects
of the doctrine, the teaching given may be expanded and some obscure

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 171 THE MYSTERY OF THE MOON, UNVEILED.

points solved. As the evolution of the Globes and that of the Monads are
so closely interblended, we will make of the two teachings one. In
reference to the Monads, the reader is asked to bear in mind that
Eastern philosophy rejects the Western theological dogma of a
newly-created soul for every baby born, as being as unphilosophical as
it is impossible in the economy of Nature. There must be a limited
number of Monads evolving and growing more and more perfect through
their assimilation of many successive personalities, in every new
Manvantara. This is absolutely necessary in view of the doctrines of
Rebirth, Karma, and the gradual return of the human Monad to its source
-- *absolute* Deity*.* Thus, although the hosts of more or less
progressed Monads are almost incalculable, they are still finite, as is
everything in this Universe of differentiation and finiteness.

As shown in the double diagram of the human "principles" and the
ascending Globes of the world-chains, there is an eternal concatenation
of causes and effects, and a perfect analogy which runs through, and
links together, all the lines of evolution. One begets the other --
globes as personalities. But, let us begin at the beginning.

The general outline of the process by which the successive planetary
chains are formed has just been given. To prevent future misconceptions,
some further details may be offered which will also throw light on the
history of humanity on our own chain, the progeny of that of the Moon.

In the diagrams on p. 172, Fig. 1 represents the "lunar-chain" of seven
planets at the outset of its seventh or last Round; while Fig. 2
represents the "earth-chain" which will be, but is not yet in existence.
The seven Globes of each chain are distinguished in their cyclic order
by the letters A to G, the Globes of the Earth-chain being further
marked by a cross -- + -- the symbol of the Earth.

Now, it must be remembered that the Monads cycling round any septenary
chain are divided into seven classes or hierarchies according to their
respective stages of evolution, consciousness, and merit. Let us follow,
then, the order of their appearance on planet A, in the first Round. The
time-spaces between the appearances of these hierarchies on any one
Globe are so adjusted that when Class 7, the last, appears on Globe A,
Class 1, the first, has just passed on to Globe B, and so on, step by
step, all round the chain.

Again, in the Seventh Round on the Lunar chain, when Class 7, the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 172 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

last, quits Globe A, that Globe, instead of falling asleep, as it had
done in previous Rounds, begins to die (to go into its planetary
pralaya);\* and in dying it transfers successively, as just said, its
"principles," or life-elements and energy, etc., one after the other to
a new "laya-centre," which commences the formation of Globe A of the
Earth Chain. A similar process takes place for each of the Globes of the
"lunar chain" one after the other, each forming a fresh Globe of the
"earth-chain." Our Moon was the fourth Globe of the series, and was

![Diagram 2](sd1-172.gif.md)

on the same plane of perception as our Earth. But Globe A of the lunar
chain is not fully "dead" till the first Monads of the first class have
passed from Globe G or Z, the last of the "lunar chain," into the
Nirvana

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Occultism divides the periods of Rest (Pralaya) into several kinds;
there is the *individual* pralaya of each Globe, as humanity and life
pass on to the next; seven minor Pralayas in each Round; the *planetary*
Pralaya, when seven *Rounds* are completed; the *Solar* Pralaya, when
the whole system is at an end; and finally the Universal Maha -- or
Brahma -- Pralaya at the close of the "Age of Brahma." These are the
three chief *pralayas* or "destruction periods." There are many other
minor ones, but with these we are not concerned at present.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 173 THE EARTH, THE CHILD OF THE MOON.

which awaits them between the two chains; and similarly for all the
other Globes as stated, each giving birth to the corresponding globe of
the "earth-chain."

Further, when Globe A of the new chain is ready, the first class or
Hierarchy of Monads from the Lunar chain incarnate upon it in the lowest
kingdom, and so on successively. The result of this is, that it is only
the first class of Monads which attains the human state of development
during the first Round, since the second class, on each planet, arriving
later, has not time to reach that stage. Thus the Monads of Class 2
reach the incipient human stage only in the Second Round, and so on up
to the middle of the Fourth Round. But at this point -- and on this
Fourth Round in which the human stage will be *fully* developed -- the
"Door" into the human kingdom closes; and henceforward the number of
"human" Monads, *i.e.*, Monads in the human stage of development, is
complete. For the Monads which had not reached the human stage by this
point will, owing to the evolution of humanity itself, find themselves
so far behind that they will reach the human stage only at the close of
the seventh and last Round. They will, therefore, not be men on this
chain, but will form the humanity of a future Manvantara and be rewarded
by becoming "Men" on a higher chain altogether, thus receiving their
Karmic compensation. To this there is *but one solitary exception*, for
very good reasons, of which we shall speak farther on. But this accounts
for the difference in the races.

It thus becomes apparent how perfect is the analogy between the
processes of Nature in the Kosmos and in the individual man. The latter
lives through his life-cycle, and dies. His "higher principles,"
corresponding in the development of a planetary chain to the cycling
Monads, pass into Devachan, which corresponds to the "Nirvana" and
states of rest intervening between two chains. The Man's lower
"principles" are disintegrated in time and are used by Nature again for
the formation of new human principles, and the same process takes place
in the disintegration and formation of Worlds. Analogy is thus the
surest guide to the comprehension of the Occult teachings.

This is one of the "seven mysteries of the Moon," and it is now
revealed. The seven "mysteries" are called by the Japanese *Yamaboosis*,
the mystics of the Lao-Tze sect and the ascetic monks of Kioto, the
Dzenodoo -- the "seven jewels." Only the Japanese and the Chinese

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 174 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

Buddhist ascetics and Initiates are, if possible, even more reticent in
giving out their "Knowledge" than are the Hindus.

But the reader must not be allowed to lose sight of the Monads, and must
be enlightened as to their nature, as far as permitted, without
trespassing upon the highest mysteries, of which the writer does not in
any way pretend to know the last or final word.

The Monadic Host may be roughly divided into three great classes: --

1\. The most developed Monads (the Lunar Gods or "Spirits," called, in
India, the Pitris), whose function it is to pass in the first Round
through the whole triple cycle of the mineral, vegetable, and animal
kingdoms in their most ethereal, filmy, and rudimentary forms, in order
to clothe themselves in, and assimilate, the nature of the newly formed
chain. They are those who first reach the human form (if there can be
any form in the realm of the almost subjective) on Globe A in the first
Round. It is they, therefore, who lead and represent the human element
during the second and third Rounds, and finally evolve their shadows at
the beginning of the Fourth Round for the second class, or those who
come behind them.

2\. Those Monads that are the first to reach the human stage during the
three and a half Rounds, and to become men.\*

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* We are forced to use here the misleading word "Men," and this is a
clear proof of how little any European language is adapted to express
these subtle distinctions.

It stands to reason that these "Men" did not resemble the men of to-day,
either in form or nature. Why then, it may be asked, call them "Men" at
all? Because there is no other term in any Western language which
approximately conveys the idea intended. The word "Men" at least
indicates that these beings were "MANUS," thinking entities, however
they differed in form and intellection from ourselves. But in reality
they were, in respect of spirituality and intellection, rather "gods"
than "Men."

The same difficulty of language is met with in describing the "stages"
through which the Monad passes. Metaphysically speaking, it is of course
an absurdity to talk of the "development" of a Monad, or to say that
*it* becomes "Man." But any attempt to preserve metaphysical accuracy of
language in the use of such a tongue as the English would necessitate at
least three extra volumes of this work, and would entail an amount of
verbal repetition which would be wearisome in the extreme. It stands to
reason that a **MONAD** cannot either progress or develop, or even be
affected by the changes of states it passes through. *It is not of this
world or plane*, and may be compared only to an indestructible star of
divine light and fire, thrown down on to our \[\[Footnote continued on
next page\]\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 175 THE CLASSIFICATION OF THE MONADS.

3\. The laggards; the Monads which are retarded, and which will not
reach, by reason of Karmic impediments, the human stage at all during
this cycle or Round, save one exception which will be spoken of
elsewhere as already promised.

Now the evolution of the *external* form or body round the *astral* is
produced by the terrestrial forces, just as in the case of the lower
kingdoms; but the evolution of the internal or real MAN is purely
spiritual. It is now no more a passage of the impersonal Monad through
many and various forms of matter -- endowed at best with instinct and
consciousness on quite a different plane -- as in the case of external
evolution, but a journey of the "pilgrim-soul" through various *states*
of *not only matter* but Self-consciousness and self-perception, or of
*perception* from apperception. (See "*Gods*, *Monads and Atoms.*")

The **M**ONAD emerges from its state of spiritual and intellectual
unconsciousness; and, skipping the first two planes -- too near the
ABSOLUTE to permit of any correlation with anything on a lower plane --
it gets direct into the plane of Mentality. But there is no plane in the
whole universe with a wider margin, or a wider field of action in its
almost endless gradations of perceptive and apperceptive qualities, than
this plane, which has in its turn an appropriate smaller plane for every
"form," from the "mineral" monad up to the time when that monad blossoms
forth by evolution into the DIVINE MONAD. But all the time it is still
one and the same Monad, differing only in its incarnations, throughout
its ever succeeding cycles of partial or total obscuration of spirit, or
the partial or total obscuration of matter -- two polar antitheses -- as
it ascends into the realms of mental spirituality, or descends into the
depths of materiality.

To return to "Esoteric Buddhism." It is there stated with regard to the
enormous period intervening between the mineral epoch on Globe A, and
the man-epoch,\* that: "The full development of the

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\[\[Footnote continued from previous page\]\] Earth as a plank of
salvation for the personalities in which it indwells. It is for the
latter to cling to it; and thus partaking of its divine nature, obtain
immortality. Left to itself the Monad will cling to no one; but, like
the "plank," be drifted away to another incarnation by the unresting
current of evolution.

\* The term "Man epoch" is here used because of the necessity of giving
a name to that fourth kingdom which follows the animal. But in truth the
"Man" on Globe A during the First Round is no Man, but only his
prototype or dimensionless image from the astral regions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 176 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

mineral epoch on Globe A, prepares the way for the vegetable
development, and, as soon as this begins, the mineral life-impulse
overflows into Globe B. Then, when the vegetable development on Globe A
is complete and the animal development begins, the vegetable
life-impulse overflows to Globe B, and the mineral impulse passes on to
Globe C. Then finally comes the human life-impulse on Globe A." (Page
49.)

And so it goes on for three Rounds, when it slackens, and finally stops
at the threshold of our Globe, at the Fourth Round; because the human
period (of the true physical men to be), the seventh, is now reached.
This is evident, for as said, " . . . there are processes of evolution
which precede the mineral kingdom, and thus a wave of evolution, indeed
several waves of evolution, precede the mineral wave in its progress
round the spheres" (*ibid*)*.*

And now we have to quote from another article, "The Mineral Monad" in
"*Five Years of Theosophy*," p. 273 *et seq.*

"There are seven kingdoms. The first group comprises three degrees of
elementals, or nascent centres of forces -- from the first stage of
differentiation of (from) Mulaprakriti (or rather Pradhana, primordial
homogeneous matter) to its third degree -- *i.e.*, from full
unconsciousness to semi-perception; the second or higher group embraces
the kingdoms from vegetable to man; the mineral kingdom thus forming the
central or turning point in the degrees of the "Monadic Essence,"
considered as an evoluting energy. Three stages (sub-physical) on the
elemental side; the mineral kingdom; three stages on the objective
physical\* side -- these are the (first or preliminary) seven links of
the evolutionary chain."

"Preliminary" because they are preparatory, and though belonging in fact
to the natural, they yet would be more correctly described as
sub-natural evolution. This process makes a halt in its stages at the
Third, at the threshold of the Fourth stage, when it becomes, on the
plane of the natural evolution, the first really manward stage, thus
forming with the three elemental kingdoms, the ten, the Sephirothal
number. It is at this point that begins: --

"A descent of spirit into matter equivalent to an ascent in physical

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* "Physical" here means differentiated for cosmical purposes and work;
that "physical side," nevertheless, if objective to the apperception of
beings from other planes, is yet quite subjective to us on our plane.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 177 AS ABOVE, SO BELOW, IS THE LAW.

evolution; a re-ascent from the deepest depths of materiality (the
mineral) towards its *status quo ante*, with a corresponding dissipation
of concrete organism -- up to Nirvana, the vanishing point of
differentiated matter." ("*Five Years of Theosophy*," p. 276.)

Therefore it becomes evident why that which is pertinently called in
*Esoteric Buddhism* "Wave of Evolution," and mineral-, vegetable-,
animal- and man-"impulse," stops at the door of our Globe, at its Fourth
cycle or Round. It is at this point that the Cosmic Monad (Buddhi) will
be wedded to and become the vehicle of the Atmic Ray, *i.e.*, it
(Buddhi) will awaken to an apperception of it (Atman); and thus enter on
the first step of a new septenary ladder of evolution, which will lead
it eventually to the tenth (counting from the lowest upwards) of the
Sephirothal tree, the Crown.

Everything in the Universe follows analogy. "As above, so below"; Man is
the microcosm of the Universe. That which takes place on the spiritual
plane repeats itself on the Cosmic plane. Concretion follows the lines
of abstraction; corresponding to the highest must be the lowest; the
material to the spiritual. Thus, corresponding to the Sephirothal Crown
(or upper triad) there are the three elemental Kingdoms, which precede
the Mineral (see diagram on p. 277 in *Five Years of Theosophy*), and
which, using the language of the Kabalists, answer in the Cosmic
differentiation to the worlds of Form and Matter from the
Super-Spiritual to the Archetypal.

Now what is a "Monad?" And what relation does it bear to an Atom? The
following reply is based upon the explanations given in answer to these
questions in the above-cited article: "The Mineral Monad," written by
the author.

"None whatever," is answered to the second question, "to the atom or
molecule as existing in the scientific conception at present. It can
neither be compared with the microscopic organism, once classed among
polygastric infusoria, and now regarded as vegetable, and classed among
Algae; nor is it quite the Monas of the Peripatetics. Physically or
constitutionally the mineral monad differs, of course, from the human
monad, which is neither physical nor can its constitution be rendered by
chemical symbols and elements." In short, as the spiritual Monad is One,
Universal, Boundless and Impartite, whose rays, nevertheless, form what
we, in our ignorance, call the "Individual Monads" of men,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 178 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

so the Mineral Monad -- being at the opposite point of the circle -- is
also One -- and from it proceed the countless physical atoms, which
Science is beginning to regard as individualized.

Otherwise how could one account for and explain mathematically the
evolutionary and spiral progress of the Four Kingdoms? The "Monad" is
the combination of the last two "principles" in man, the 6th and the
7th, and, properly speaking, the term "human monad" applies only to the
dual soul (Atma-Buddhi), not to its highest spiritual vivifying
Principle, Atma, alone. But since the Spiritual Soul, if divorced from
the latter (Atma) could have no existence, no being, it has thus been
called . . . . Now the Monadic, or rather Cosmic, Essence (if such a
term be permitted) in the mineral, vegetable, and animal, though the
same throughout the series of cycles from the lowest elemental up to the
Deva Kingdom, yet differs in the scale of progression. It would be very
misleading to imagine a Monad as a separate Entity trailing its slow way
in a distinct path through the lower Kingdoms, and after an incalculable
series of transformations flowering into a human being; in short, that
the Monad of a Humboldt dates back to the Monad of an atom of
horneblende. Instead of saying a "Mineral Monad," the more correct
phraseology in physical Science, which differentiates every atom, would
of course have been to call it "the Monad manifesting in that form of
Prakriti called the Mineral Kingdom." The atom, as represented in the
ordinary scientific hypothesis, is not a particle of something, animated
by a psychic something, destined after aeons to blossom as a man. But it
is a concrete manifestation of the Universal Energy which itself has not
yet become individualized; a sequential manifestation of the one
Universal Monas. The ocean (of matter) does not divide into its
potential and constituent drops until the sweep of the life-impulse
reaches the evolutionary stage of man-birth. The tendency towards
segregation into individual Monads is gradual, and in the higher animals
comes almost to the point. The Peripatetics applied the word Monas to
the whole Kosmos, in the pantheistic sense; and the Occultists, while
accepting this thought for convenience sake, distinguish the progressive
stages of the evolution of the concrete from the abstract by terms of
which the "Mineral, Vegetable, Animal, (etc.), Monad" are examples. The
term merely means that the tidal wave of spiritual evolution is passing
through that arc of its circuit. The "Monadic

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 179 THE LUNAR MONADS.

Essence" begins to imperceptibly differentiate towards individual
consciousness in the Vegetable Kingdom. As the Monads are uncompounded
things, as correctly defined by Leibnitz, it is the spiritual essence
which vivifies them in their degrees of differentiation, which properly
constitutes the Monad -- not the atomic aggregation, which is only the
vehicle and the substance through which thrill the lower and the higher
degrees of intelligence.

Leibnitz conceived of the Monads as elementary and indestructible units
endowed with the power *of giving and receiving* with respect to other
units, and thus of determining all spiritual and physical phenomena. It
is he who invented the term apperception, which together with nerve-
(not perception, but rather) -- sensation, expresses the state of the
Monadic consciousness through all the Kingdoms up to Man.

Thus it may be wrong on strictly metaphysical lines to call Atma-Buddhi
a MONAD, since in the materialistic view it is dual and therefore
compound. But as Matter is Spirit, and *vice versa;* and since the
Universe and the Deity which informs it are unthinkable apart from each
other; so in the case of Atma-Buddhi. The latter being the vehicle of
the former, Buddhi stands in the same relation to Atma, as Adam-Kadmon,
the Kabalistic Logos, does to En-Soph, or Mulaprakriti to Parabrahm.

A few words more of the Moon.

What, it may be asked, are the "Lunar Monads," just spoken of? The
description of the seven classes of Pitris will come later, but now some
general explanations may be given. It must be plain to everyone that
they are Monads, who, having ended their life-cycle on the lunar chain,
which is inferior to the terrestrial chain, have incarnated on this one.
But there are some further details which may be added, though they
border too closely on forbidden ground to be treated of fully. The last
word of the mystery is divulged only to the adepts, but it may be stated
that our satellite is only the gross body of its invisible principles.
Seeing then that there are 7 Earths, so there are 7 Moons, the last one
alone being visible; the same for the Sun, whose visible body is called
a Maya, a reflection, just as man's body is. "The real Sun and the real
Moon are as invisible as the real man," says an occult maxim.

And it may be remarked *en passant* that those ancients were not so
foolish after all who first started the idea of "the seven moons." For
though

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 180 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

this conception is now taken solely as an astronomical measure of time,
in a very materialised form, yet underlying the husk there can still be
recognised the traces of a profoundly philosophical idea.

In reality the Moon is only the satellite of the Earth in one respect,
viz., that physically the Moon revolves round the Earth. But in every
other respect it is the Earth which is the satellite of the Moon, and
not *vice versa.* Startling as the statement may seem it is not without
confirmation from scientific knowledge. It is evidenced by the tides, by
the cyclic changes in many forms of disease which coincide with the
lunar phases; it can be traced in the growth of plants, and is very
marked in the phenomena of human gestation and conception. The
importance of the Moon and its influence on the Earth were recognized in
every ancient religion, notably the Jewish, and have been remarked by
many observers of psychical and physical phenomena. But, so far as
Science knows, the Earth's action on the Moon is confined to the
physical attraction, which causes her to circle in her orbit. And should
an objector insist that this fact alone is sufficient evidence that the
Moon is truly the Earth's satellite on other planes of action, one may
reply by asking whether a mother, who walks round and round her child's
cradle keeping watch over the infant, is the subordinate of her child or
dependent upon it; though in one sense she is its satellite, yet she is
certainly older and more fully developed than the child she watches.

It is, then, the Moon that plays the largest and most important part, as
well in the formation of the Earth itself, as in the peopling thereof
with human beings. The "Lunar Monads" or Pitris, the ancestors of man,
become in reality man himself. They are the "Monads" who enter on the
cycle of evolution on Globe A, and who, passing round the chain of
planets, evolve the human form as has just been shown. At the beginning
of the human stage of the Fourth Round on this Globe, they "ooze out"
their astral doubles from the "ape-like" forms which they had evolved in
Round III. And it is this subtle, finer form, which serves as the model
round which Nature builds physical man. These "Monads" or "divine
sparks" are thus the "Lunar" ancestors, the Pitris themselves. For these
"Lunar Spirits" have to become "Men" in order that their "Monads" may
reach a higher plane of activity and self-consciousness, *i.e.*, the
plane of the Manasa-Putras, those who

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 181 A TRIPLE EVOLUTION IN NATURE.

endow the "senseless" shells, created and informed by the Pitris, with
"mind" in the latter part of the Third Root-Race.

In the same way the "Monads" or Egos of the men of the seventh Round of
our Earth, after our own Globes A, B, C, D, *et seq.*, parting with
their life-energy, will have informed and thereby called to life other
laya-centres destined to live and act on a still higher plane of being
-- in the same way will the Terrene "Ancestors" create those who will
become their superiors.

It now becomes plain that there exists in Nature a triple evolutionary
scheme, for the formation of the three *periodical Upadhis*; or rather
three separate schemes of evolution, which in our system are
inextricably interwoven and interblended at every point. These are the
Monadic (or spiritual), the intellectual, and the physical evolutions.
These three are the finite aspects or the reflections on the field of
Cosmic Illusion of ATMA, the seventh, the ONE REALITY.

1\. The Monadic is, as the name implies, concerned with the growth and
development into still higher phases of activity of the Monad in
conjunction with: --

2\. The Intellectual, represented by the Manasa-Dhyanis (the Solar
Devas, or the Agnishwatta Pitris) the "givers of intelligence and
consciousness"\* to man and: --

3\. The Physical, represented by the Chhayas of the lunar Pitris, round
which Nature has concreted the present physical body. This body serves
as the vehicle for the "growth" (to use a misleading word) and the
transformations through Manas and -- owing to the accumulation of
experiences -- of the finite into the INFINITE, of the transient into
the Eternal and Absolute.

Each of these three systems has its own laws, and is ruled and guided by
different sets of the highest Dhyanis or "Logoi." Each is represented in
the constitution of man, the Microcosm of the great Macrocosm; and it is
the union of these three streams in him which makes him the complex
being he now is.

"Nature," the physical evolutionary Power, could never evolve
intelligence unaided -- she can only create "senseless forms," as will
be seen in our "**A**NTHROPOGENESIS." The "Lunar Monads" cannot
progress, for they have not yet had sufficient touch with the forms

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

*\* Vide* **C**ONCLUSION in Part II. of this Book.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 182 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

created by "Nature" to allow of their accumulating experiences through
its means. It is the Manasa-Dhyanis who fill up the gap, and they
represent the evolutionary power of Intelligence and Mind, the link
between "Spirit" and "Matter" -- in this Round.

Also it must be borne in mind that the Monads which enter upon the
evolutionary cycle upon Globe A, in the first Round, are in very
different stages of development. Hence the matter becomes somewhat
complicated. . . . Let us recapitulate.

The most developed Monads (the lunar) reach the human germ-stage in the
first Round; become terrestrial, though very ethereal human beings
towards the end of the Third Round, remaining on it (the globe) through
the "obscuration" period as the seed for future mankind in the Fourth
Round, and thus become the pioneers of Humanity at the beginning of
this, the Fourth Round. Others reach the Human stage only during later
Rounds, *i.e.*, in the second, third, or first half of the Fourth Round.
And finally the most retarded of all, *i.e.*, those still occupying
animal forms after the middle turning-point of the Fourth Round -- will
not become men at all during this Manwantara. They will reach to the
verge of humanity only at the close of the seventh Round to be, in their
turn, ushered into a new chain after *pralaya* -- by older pioneers, the
progenitors of humanity, or the Seed-Humanity (*Sishta*), viz., the men
who will be at the head of all at the end of these Rounds.

The student hardly needs any further explanation on the part played by
the fourth Globe and the fourth Round in the scheme of evolution.

From the preceding diagrams, which are applicable, *mutatis mutandis*,
to Rounds, Globes or Races, it will be seen that the fourth member of a
series occupies a unique position. Unlike the others, the Fourth has no
"sister" Globe on the same plane as itself, and it thus forms the
fulcrum of the "balance" represented by the whole chain. It is the
sphere of final evolutionary adjustments, the world of Karmic scales,
the Hall of Justice, where the balance is struck which determines the
future course of the Monad during the remainder of its incarnations in
the cycle. And therefore it is, that, after this central turning-point
has been passed in the Great Cycle, -- *i.e.*, after the middle point of
the Fourth Race in the Fourth Round on our Globe -- no more Monads can
enter the human kingdom. The door is closed for this Cycle and the
balance struck. For were it otherwise -- had there been a new soul

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 183 MAN, THE OLDEST SON OF THE EARTH.

created for each of the countless milliards of human beings that have
passed away, and had there been no reincarnation -- it would become
difficult indeed to provide room for the disembodied "Spirits;" nor
could the origin and cause of suffering ever be accounted for. It is the
ignorance of the occult tenets and the enforcement of false conceptions
under the guise of religious education, which have created materialism
and atheism as a protest against the asserted divine order of things.

The only exceptions to the rule just stated are the "dumb races," whose
Monads are already within the human stage, in virtue of the fact that
these "animals" are later than, and even half descended from man, their
last descendants being the anthropoid and other apes. These "human
presentments" are in truth only the distorted copies of the early
humanity. But this will receive full attention in the next Book.

As the Commentary, broadly rendered, says: --

1*.* "*Every form on earth*, *and every speck* (*atom*) *in Space
strives in its efforts towards self-formation to follow the model placed
for it in the* ' HEAVENLY MAN.' . . *. Its* (*the atom*'*s*) *involution
and evolution*, *its external and internal growth and development*,
*have all one and the same object* -- *man; man*, *as the highest
physical and ultimate form on this earth; the* MONAD, *in its absolute
totality and awakened condition -- as the culmination of the divine
incarnations on Earth.*"

2\. "*The Dhyanis* (*Pitris*) *are those who have evolved their* BHUTA
(*doubles*) *from themselves*, *which RUPA* (*form*) *has become the
vehicle of monads* (*seventh and sixth principles*) *that had completed
their cycle of transmigration in the three preceding Kalpas*
(*Rounds*)*. Then*, *they* (*the astral doubles*) *became the men of the
first Human Race of the Round. But they were not complete*, *and were
senseless.*"

This will be explained in the Books that follow. Meanwhile man -- or
rather his Monad -- has existed on the earth from the very beginning of
this Round. But, up to our own Fifth Race, the external shapes which
covered those divine astral doubles changed and consolidated with every
sub-race; the form and physical structure of the fauna changing at the
same time, as they had to be adapted to the ever-changing conditions of
life on this globe during the geological periods of its formative cycle.
And thus shall they go on changing with every

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 184 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

Root Race and *every chief sub-race* down to the last one of the Seventh
in this Round.

3\. "*The inner*, *now concealed*, *man*, *was then* (*in the
beginnings*) *the external man. The progeny of the Dhyanis* (*Pitris*),
*he was* '*the son like unto his father.*' *Like the lotus*, *whose
external shape assumes gradually the form of the model within itself*,
*so did the form of man in the beginning evolve from within without.
After the cycle in which man began to procreate his species after the
fashion of the present animal kingdom*, *it became the reverse. The
human foetus follows now in its transformations all the forms that the
physical frame of man had assumed throughout the three Kalpas*
(*Rounds*) *during the tentative efforts at Plastic formation around the
monad by senseless*, *because imperfect*, *matter*, *in her blind
wanderings. In the present age*, *the physical embryo is a plant*, *a
reptile*, *an animal*, *before it finally becomes man*, *evolving within
himself his own ethereal counterpart*, *in his turn. In the beginning it
was that counterpart* (*astral man*) *which*, *being senseless*, *got
entangled in the meshes of matter.*"

But this "man" belongs to the fourth Round. As shown, the MONAD had
passed through, journeyed and been imprisoned in, every transitional
form throughout every kingdom of nature during the three preceding
Rounds. But the monad which becomes human *is not the Man.* In this
Round -- with the exception of the highest mammals after man, the
anthropoids destined to die out in this our race, when their monads will
be liberated and pass into the astral human forms (or the highest
elementals) of the Sixth\* and the Seventh Races, and then into lowest
human forms in the fifth Round -- no units of either of the kingdoms are
animated any longer by monads destined to become human in their next
stage, but only by the lower Elementals of their respective realms.\*\*

The last human Monad incarnated before the beginning of the 5th

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Nature never repeats herself, therefore the anthropoids of our day
have not existed at any time since the middle of the Miocene period;
when, like all cross breeds, they began to show a tendency, more and
more marked as time went on, to return to the type of their first
parent, the black and yellow gigantic Lemuro-Atlantean. To search for
the "Missing Link" is useless. To the scientists of the closing sixth
Root-race, millions and millions of years hence, our modern races, or
rather their fossils, will appear as those of small insignificant apes
-- an extinct species of the genus homo.

\*\* These "Elementals" will become human Monads, in their turn, only at
the next great planetary Manvantara.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 185 THE MAN, OR THE APE; WHICH THE FIRST?

Root-Race.\* The cycle of *metempsychosis* for the human monad is
closed, for we are in the Fourth Round and the Fifth Root-Race. The
reader will have to bear in mind -- at any rate one who has made himself
acquainted with "Esoteric Buddhism" -- that the Stanzas which follow in
this Book and Book II speak of the evolution in our Fourth Round only.
The latter is the cycle of the turning-point, after which, matter,

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Such anthropoids form an exception because they were not intended by
Nature, but are the direct product and creation of "senseless" man. The
Hindus give a divine origin to the apes and monkeys because the men of
the Third Race were gods from another plane who had become "senseless"
mortals. This subject had already been touched upon in "Isis Unveiled"
twelve years ago as plainly as was then possible. On pp. 278-279, the
reader is referred "to the Brahmins, if he would know the reason of the
regard they have for the monkeys. For then he (the reader) would perhaps
learn -- were the Brahman to judge him worthy of an explanation -- that
the Hindu sees in the ape but what Manu desired he should: the
transformation of species most directly connected with that of the human
family, a bastard branch engrafted on their own stock before the final
perfection of the latter. He might learn, further, that in the eyes of
the educated 'heathen' the spiritual or inner man is one thing, and his
terrestrial physical casket another. That physical nature, the great
combination of physical correlations of forces, ever creeping onward
towards perfection, has to avail herself of the material at hand; she
models and remodels as she proceeds, and finishing her crowning work in
man, presents him alone as a fit tabernacle for the overshadowing of the
divine Spirit."

Moreover, a German scientific work is mentioned in a footnote on the
same page. It says that a Hanoverian scientist had recently published a
Book entitled "Ueber die Auflosung der Arten durch Naturliche
Zucht-wahl," in which he shows, with great ingenuity, that Darwin was
wholly mistaken in tracing man back to the ape. On the contrary, he
maintains that it is the ape which is evolved from man. He shows that,
in the beginning, mankind were morally and physically the types and
prototypes of our present Race, and of our human dignity, by their
beauty of form, regularity of feature, cranial development, nobility of
sentiments, heroic impulses, and grandeur of ideal conception. This is a
purely Brahmanic, Buddhistic and Kabalistic philosophy. The Book is
copiously illustrated with diagrams, tables, etc. It asserts that the
gradual debasement and degradation of man, morally and physically, can
be readily traced throughout the ethnological transformation down to our
time. And, as one portion has already degenerated into apes, so the
civilized man of the present day will at last, under the action of the
inevitable law of necessity, be also succeeded by like descendants. If
we may judge of the future by the actual Present, it certainly does seem
possible that so unspiritual and materialistic a body should end as
Simia rather than as Seraphs. But though the apes descend from man, it
is certainly not the fact that the human Monad, which has once reached
the level of humanity, ever incarnates again in the form of an animal.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 186 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

having reached its lowest depths, begins to strive onward and to get
spiritualized with every new Race and with every fresh cycle. Therefore
the student must take care not to see contradiction where there is none,
as in "Esoteric Buddhism" Rounds are spoken of in general, while here
only the Fourth, or our present Round, is meant. Then it was the work of
formation; now it is that of reformation and evolutionary perfection.

Finally, to close this chapter anent various, but unavoidable
misconceptions, we must refer to a statement in "Esoteric Buddhism"
which has produced a very fatal impression upon the minds of many
Theosophists. One unfortunate sentence from the work just referred to is
constantly brought forward to prove the materialism of the doctrine. On
p. 48, 5th Edition, the Author, referring to the progress of organisms
on the Globes, says that "the mineral kingdom will no more develop the
vegetable . . . than the Earth was able to develop man from the ape,
till it received an impulse."

Whether this sentence renders literally the thought of the author, or is
simply (as we believe it is) a *lapsus calami*, may remain an open
question.

It is really with surprise that we have ascertained the fact that
"Esoteric Buddhism" was so little understood by some Theosophists, as to
have led them into the belief that it thoroughly supported Darwinian
evolution, and especially the theory of the descent of man from a
pithecoid ancestor. As one member writes: "I suppose you realise that
three-fourths of Theosophists and even outsiders imagine that, as far as
the evolution of man is concerned, Darwinism and Theosophy kiss one
another." Nothing of the kind was ever realised, nor is there any great
warrant for it, so far as we know, in "Esoteric Buddhism." It has been
repeatedly stated that evolution as taught by Manu and Kapila was the
groundwork of the modern teachings, but neither Occultism nor Theosophy
has ever supported the wild theories of the present Darwinists -- least
of all the descent of man from an ape. Of this, more hereafter. But one
has only to turn to p. 47 of "Esoteric Buddhism," 5th edition, to find
there the statement that "Man belongs to a kingdom distinctly separate
from that of the animals." With such a plain and unequivocal statement
before him, it is very strange that any careful student should have been
so misled unless he is prepared to charge the author with a gross
contradiction.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 187 AN ERRONEOUS OPINION.

Every Round repeats on a higher scale the evolutionary work of the
preceding Round. With the exception of some higher anthropoids, as just
mentioned, the Monadic inflow, or inner evolution, is at an end till the
next Manvantara. It can never be too often repeated, that the full-blown
human Monads have to be first disposed of, before the new crop of
candidates appears on this Globe at the beginning of the next cycle.
Thus there is a lull; and this is why, during the Fourth Round, man
appears on Earth earlier than any animal creation, as will be described.

But it is still urged that the author of "Esoteric Buddhism" has
"preached Darwinism" all along. Certain passages would undoubtedly seem
to lend countenance to this inference. Besides which the Occultists
themselves are ready to concede *partial* correctness to the Darwinian
hypothesis, in later details, bye-laws of Evolution, and after the
midway point of the Fourth Race. Of that which has taken place, physical
science can really know nothing, for such matters lie entirely outside
of its sphere of investigation. But what the Occultists have never
admitted, nor will they ever admit, is that man was *an ape in this or
in any other Round;* or that he ever could be one, however much he may
have been "ape-like." This is vouched for by the very authority from
whom the author of "Esoteric Buddhism" got his information.

Thus to those who confront the Occultists with these lines from the
above-named volume: "It is enough to show that we may as reasonably --
and that we must, if we would talk about these matters at all --
conceive a life-impulse giving birth to mineral form, as of the same
sort of impulse concerned to *raise a race of apes into a race of
rudimentary men.*" To those who bring this passage forward as showing
"decided Darwinism," the Occultists answer by pointing to the
explanation of the Master (Mr. Sinnett's "teacher") which would
contradict these lines, were they written in the spirit attributed to
them. A copy of this letter was sent to the writer, together with
others, two years ago (1886), with additional marginal remarks, to quote
from, in the "*Secret Doctrine.*" It begins by considering the
difficulty experienced by the Western student, in reconciling some
facts, previously given, with the evolution of man from the animal,
*i.e.*, from the mineral, vegetable and animal kingdoms, and advises the
student to hold to the doctrine of analogy and correspondences. Then it
touches upon the mystery of the Devas,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 188 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

and even Gods, having to pass through states which it was agreed to
refer to as "Inmetallization, Inherbation, Inzoonization and finally
Incarnation," and explains this by hinting at the necessity of failures
even in the ethereal races of Dhyan Chohans. Concerning this it says:

"Still, as these 'failures' are too far progressed and spiritualized to
be thrown back forcibly from Dhyan Chohanship into the vortex of a new
primordial evolution through the lower kingdoms. . . . ." After which
only a hint is given about the mystery contained in the allegory of the
fallen Asuras, which will be expanded and explained in Book II. When
Karma has reached them at the stage of human evolution, "they will have
to drink it to the last drop in the bitter cup of retribution. Then they
become an active force and commingle with the Elementals, the progressed
entities of the pure animal kingdom, to develop little by little the
full type of humanity."

These Dhyan Chohans, as we see, do not pass through the three kingdoms
as do the lower Pitris; nor do they incarnate in man until the Third
Root Race. Thus, as the teaching stands:

"*Man in the First Round and First Race on Globe D*, *our Earth*, *was
an ethereal being* (*a Lunar Dhyani*, *as man*), *non-intelligent but
superspiritual; and correspondingly*, *on the law of analogy*, *in the
First Race of the Fourth Round. In each of the subsequent races and
sub-races* . . . *he grows more and more into an encased or incarnate
being*, *but still preponderatingly ethereal. .* . *. He is sexless*,
*and*, *like the animal and vegetable he develops monstrous bodies
correspondential with his coarser surroundings.*

"*II. Round. He* (*Man*) *is still gigantic and ethereal but growing
firmer and more condensed in body*, *a more physical man. Yet still less
intelligent than spiritual* (1), *for mind is a slower and more
difficult evolution than is the physical frame* . . .

"*III. Round. He has now a perfectly concrete or compacted body*, *at
first the form of a giant-ape*, *and now more intelligent*, *or rather
cunning*, *than spiritual. For*, *on the downward arc*, *he has now
reached a point where his primordial spirituality is eclipsed and
overshadowed by nascent mentality* (2). *In the last half of the Third
Round his gigantic stature decreases*, *and his body improves in
texture*, *and he becomes a more rational being*, *though still more an
ape than a*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 189 A MASTER'S LETTER.

*Deva*. . . . (*All this is almost exactly repeated in the third
Root-Race of the Fourth Round.*)

"*IV. Round. Intellect has an enormous development in this Round. The*
(*hitherto*) *dumb races acquire* *our* (*present*) *human speech on
this globe*, *on which*, *from the Fourth Race*, *language is perfected
and knowledge increases. At this half-way point of the Fourth Round*
(*as of the Fourth Root*, *or Atlantean*, *race*) *humanity passes the
axial point of the minor Manvantara cycle* . . . . *the world teeming
with the results of intellectual activity and spiritual decrease .* . .
."

This is from the authentic letter; what follows are the later remarks
and additional explanations traced by the same hand in the form of
footnotes.

(1.) " . . *. The original letter contained general teaching -- a*
'*bird*'*s eye view*' *-- and particularized nothing*. . . . *To* *speak
of 'physical man'* *while limiting the statement to the early Rounds
would be drifting back to the miraculous and instantaneous* '*coats of
skin.*' *.* . *. The first* '*Nature*,' *the first* '*body*,' *the
first* '*mind*' *on the first plane of perception*, *on the first Globe
in the* *first* *Round*, *is what was meant. For Karma and evolution
have* --

> ' . . . *centred in our make such strange extremes!  
> From different Natures\* marvellously mixed* . . .'

(2.) "*Restore: he has now reached the point (by analogy*, *and as the*
*Third Root Race in the Fourth Round*) *where his* ("*the
angel*"*-man*'*s*) *primordial spirituality is eclipsed and overshadowed
by nascent human mentality*, *and you have the true version on your
thumb-nail*. . . ."

These are the words of the Teacher -- text, words and sentences in
brackets, and explanatory footnotes. It stands to reason that there must
be an enormous difference in such terms as "objectivity" and
"subjectivity," "materiality" and "spirituality," when the same terms
are applied to different planes of being and perception. All this must
be taken in its relative sense. And therefore there is little to be
wondered at, if, left to his own speculations, an author, however eager
to learn, yet quite inexperienced in these abstruse teachings, has
fallen

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* The *Natures* of the seven hierarchies or classes of Pitris and Dhyan
Chohans which compose our nature and Bodies are here meant.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 190 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

into an error. Neither was the difference between the "Rounds" and the
"Races" sufficiently defined in the letters received, nor was there
anything of the kind required before, as the ordinary Eastern disciple
would have found out the difference in a moment. Moreover, to quote from
a letter of the Master's (188-), "the teachings were imparted under
protest. . . . They were, so to say, smuggled goods . . . and when I
remained face to face with only one correspondent, the other, Mr. . . .
., had so far tossed all the cards into confusion, that little remained
to be said without trespassing upon law." Theosophists, "whom it may
concern," will understand what is meant.

The outcome of all this is that nothing had ever been said in the
"letters" to warrant the assurance that the Occult doctrine has ever
taught, or any Adept believed in, the preposterous modern theory of the
descent of man from a common ancestor with the ape -- an anthropoid of
the actual animal kind, unless metaphorically. To this day the world is
more full of "ape-like men" than the woods are of "men-like apes." The
ape is sacred in India because its origin is well known to the
Initiates, though concealed under a thick veil of allegory. Hanuman is
the son of Pavana (Vayu, "the god of the wind") by Anjana, a monster
called Kesari, though his genealogy varies. The reader who bears this in
mind will find in Book II. *passim*, the whole explanation of this
ingenious allegory. The "Men" of the Third Race (who separated) were
"Gods" by their spirituality and purity, though senseless, and as yet
destitute of mind, as men.

These "Men" of the Third Race -- the ancestors of the Atlanteans -- were
just such ape-like, intellectually senseless giants as were those
beings, who, during the Third Round, represented Humanity. Morally
irresponsible, it was these third Race "men" who, through promiscuous
connection with animal species lower than themselves, created that
missing link which became ages later (in the tertiary period only) the
remote ancestor of the real ape as we find it now in the pithecoid
family.\*

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* And if this is found clashing with that other statement which shows
the animal later than man, then the reader is asked to bear in mind that
the *placental mammal* only is meant. In those days there were animals
of which zoology does not even dream in our own; *and the modes of
reproduction were not identical* with the notions which modern
physiology has upon the subject. It is not altogether convenient to
touch upon such questions in public, but there is *no* contradiction or
impossibility in this whatever.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 191 THE PRELIMINARY CREATION OF MAN.

Thus the earlier teachings, however unsatisfactory, vague and
fragmentary, did not teach the evolution of "man" from the "ape." Nor
does the author of "Esoteric Buddhism" assert it anywhere in his work in
so many words; but, owing to his inclination towards modern science, he
uses language which might perhaps justify such an inference. The man who
preceded the Fourth, the Atlantean race, however much he may have looked
physically like a "gigantic ape" -- "the counterfeit of man who hath not
the life of a man" -- was still a thinking and already a speaking man.
The "Lemuro-Atlantean" was a highly civilized race, and if one accepts
tradition, which is better history than the speculative fiction which
now passes under that name, he was higher than we are with all our
sciences and the degraded civilization of the day: at any rate, the
Lemuro-Atlantean of the closing Third Race was so.

And now we may return to the Stanzas.

-------

\[\[This page continued in next section\]\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next Section](sd1-1-10.md)

[Contents](sd1-0-co.md)
