##### The Secret Doctrine by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol. 1

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 523 SUGGESTIVE ALLEGORIES.

<span id="DDE_LINK20">\[\[This page continued from</span> [previous
section](sd1-3-06)\]\]

#### VII. AN ATTACK ON THE SCIENTIFIC THEORY OF FORCE BY A MAN OF SCIENCE.

**T**HE wise words of several (English) men of Science have now to be
quoted in our favour. Ostracised for "principle's sake" by the few, they
are tacitly approved of by the many. That one of them preaches almost
Occult doctrines, in some things identical with, and often amounting to
a public recognition of our "*Fohat* and his seven Sons" --

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 524 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

the Occult *Gandharva* of the Vedas -- will be recognised by every
Occultist, and even by some profane readers.

If the latter open Volume V. of the *Popular Science Review* (pp.
329-334), they will find in it an article on "*Sun Force and Earth
Force*," by Dr. B. W. Richardson, **F.R.S.**, which reads as follows: --

> "At this moment, when the theory of mere motion as the origin of all
> varieties of force is again becoming the prevailing thought, it were
> almost heresy to re-open a debate, which for a period appears, by
> general consent, to be virtually closed; but I accept the risk, and
> shall state, therefore, what were the precise views of the immortal
> heretic, whose name I have whispered to the readers, (Samuel
> Metcalfe), respecting Sun Force. Starting with the argument on which
> nearly all physicists are agreed, that there exist in nature two
> agencies -- matter which is ponderable, visible, and tangible, and a
> something which is imponderable, invisible, and appreciable only by
> its influence on matter -- Metcalfe maintains that the imponderable
> and active agency which he calls '*caloric*' is *not a mere form of
> motion*, not a vibration amongst the particles of ponderable matter,
> but *itself a material substance flowing from the Sun* through
> Space,\* filling the voids between the particles of solid bodies, and
> conveying by sensation the property called heat. The nature of
> caloric, or Sun-Force, is contended for by him on the following
> grounds: --

> "(i.) That it may be added to, and abstracted from other bodies and
> measured with mathematical precision.

> "(ii.) That it augments the volume of bodies, which are again reduced
> in size by its abstraction.

> "(iii.) That it modifies the forms, properties, and conditions of all
> other bodies.

> "(iv.) That *it passes by radiation through the most perfect
> vacuum*\*\* that can be formed, in which it produces the same effects
> on the thermometer as in the atmosphere.

> "(v.) That it exerts mechanical and chemical forces which nothing can
> restrain, as in volcanoes, the explosion of gunpowder, and other
> fulminating compounds.

> "(vi.) That it operates in a sensible manner on the nervous system,
> producing intense pain; and when in excess, disorganization of the
> tissues.

> "As against the vibratory theory, Metcalfe further argues that if
> caloric were a *mere property or quality*, it could not augment the
> volume of other bodies; for this purpose it must itself have volume,
> it must occupy space, and it must, therefore, be a material agent. If
> caloric were *only the effect of vibratory motion* amongst the
> particles of ponderable matter, *it could not radiate from hot bodies*
> without the simultaneous transition of the vibrating particles; but
> the fact stands out that heat can radiate from material ponderable
> substance without

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Not only "through space," but filling every point of our solar
system, for it is the physical residue, so to say, of Ether, its
*lining* on our plane; Ether having to serve other cosmic and
terrestrial purposes besides being the "*agent*" for transmitting light.
It is the astral fluid or "Light" of the Kabalists, and the "Seven rays"
of Sun-Vishnu.

\*\* What need, then, of etheric waves for the transmission of light,
heat, etc., if *this* substance can pass through vacuum?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 525 DR. RICHARDSON'S HERESY.

> loss of weight of such substance. . . . With this view as to the
> material nature of caloric or sun-force; with the impression firmly
> fixed on his mind that 'everything in Nature is composed of two
> descriptions of matter, the one essentially active and ethereal, the
> other passive and motionless,'\* Metcalfe based the hypothesis that
> the Sun-force, or caloric, is a Self-active principle. For its own
> particles, he holds, it has repulsion; for the particles of all
> ponderable matter it has affinity; it attracts the particles of
> ponderable matter with forces which vary inversely as the squares of
> the distance. It thus acts *through* ponderable matter. If universal
> space were filled with caloric, sun-force, alone (without ponderable
> matter), caloric would also be inactive and would constitute a
> boundless Ocean of powerless or quiescent ether, because it would then
> have nothing on which to act, while ponderable matter, however
> inactive of itself, has 'certain properties by which it modifies and
> controls the actions of caloric, both of which are governed by
> immutable laws that have their origin in the mutual relations and
> specific properties of each.'

> "And he lays down a law which he believes is absolute, and which is
> thus expressed: --

> " 'By the attraction of caloric for ponderable matter, it unites and
> holds together all things; by its self-repulsive energy it separates
> and expands all things.' "

This, of course, is almost the occult explanation of cohesion. Dr.
Richardson continues: --

> "As I have already said, *the tendency of modern teaching is to rest
> upon the hypothesis* . . . *that heat is motion*, or, as it would,
> perhaps, be better stated, a specific force or form of motion.\*\*

> "But this hypothesis, popular as it is, is not one that ought to be
> accepted to the exclusion of the simpler views of the material nature
> of sun-force, and of its influence in modifying the conditions of
> matter. *We do not yet know sufficient to be dogmatic.*"*\*\*\**

> . . . "The hypothesis of Metcalfe respecting sun-force and earth-force
> is not only very simple, but most fascinating. . . . Here are two
> elements in the Universe, the one is ponderable matter . . . The
> second element is the all-pervading Ether, solar-fire. It is *without
> weight*, *substance*, *form*, *or colour; it is matter infinitely
> divisible*, and its particles repel each other; its rarity

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* And how can it be otherwise? Gross *ponderable* matter is the body,
the Shell of matter or Substance, the female passive principle; and this
*Fohatic* force is the second principle, *prana* -- the male and the
active? On our globe this Substance is the second principle of the
septenary *Element* -- Earth; in the atmosphere, it is that of *air*,
which is the cosmic gross body; in the Sun it becomes the *Solar body*
and that of the Seven rays; in sidereal space it corresponds with
another principle, and so on. The whole is a homogeneous Unity alone,
the parts are all differentiations.

\*\* Or the reverberation, and for sound, repercussion *on our plane* of
that which is a perpetual motion of that *Substance* on higher planes.
Our world and senses *are* victims of *Maya*, ceaselessly.

\*\*\* An honest admission, that.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 526 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

> is such that we have no word, except ether,\* by which to express it.
> It pervades and fills space, but alone it too is quiescent --
> dead.\*\* We bring together the two elements, the inert matter, the
> self-repulsive Ether (?) and thereupon dead (?) ponderable matter is
> vivified"; \[*Ponderable matter may be inert but never dead* -- *this
> is Occult Law.* -- H.P.B.\] . . . "through the particles of the
> ponderable substance the ether \[*Ether*'*s second principle.* --
> H.P.B.\] penetrates, and, so penetrating, it combines with the
> ponderable particles and holds them in mass, holds them together in
> bond of union; they are dissolved in the Ether."

> "This distribution of solid ponderable matter through ether extends,
> according to the theory before us, to everything that exists at this
> moment. The ether is all-pervading. The human body itself is charged
> with the ether \[*Say* *astral light.* -- H.P.B.\]; its minute
> particles are held together by it; the plant is in the same condition;
> the most solid earth, rock, adamant, crystal, metal, all are the same.
> But there are differences in the capacities of different kinds of
> ponderable matter to receive sun-force, and upon this depends the
> various changing conditions of matter; the solid, the liquid, the
> gaseous condition. Solid bodies have attracted caloric in excess over
> fluid bodies, and hence their firm *cohesion;* when a portion of
> molten zinc is poured upon a plate of solid zinc, the molten zinc
> becomes as solid because there is a rush of caloric from the liquid to
> the solid, and in the equalization the particles, previously loose or
> liquid, are more closely brought together. . . . Metcalfe himself,
> dwelling on the above-named phenomena, and accounting for them by the
> unity of principle of action, which has already been explained, sums
> up his argument in very clear terms, in a comment on the densities of
> various bodies. 'Hardness and softness' (he says), 'solidity and
> liquidity, are not essential conditions of bodies, but depend on the
> relative proportions of ethereal and ponderable matter of which they
> are composed. The most elastic gas may be reduced to the liquid form
> by the abstraction of caloric, and again converted into a firm solid,
> the particles of which would cling together with a force proportional
> to their augmented affinity for caloric. On the other hand, by adding
> a sufficient quantity of the same principle to the densest metals,
> their attraction for it is diminished when they are expanded into the
> gaseous state, and their cohesion is destroyed.' "

Having thus quoted at length the *heterodox* views of the great
"heretic" -- views that need only a little alteration of terms here and
there, the same eminent scientist -- an original and liberal thinker,
undeniably -- proceeds to sum up those views, and continues: --

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Yet it is not *Ether*, but only one of the principles of Ether, the
latter being itself *one of the principles of Akasa.*

\*\* And so does *prana* (Jiva) pervade the whole living body of man;
but alone, without having an atom to act upon, it would be *quiescent*
-- dead; *i.e.*, would be in *laya*, or as Mr. Crookes has it, "locked
in *protyle*." It is the action of *Fohat* upon a compound or even a
simple body that produces life. When a body dies it passes into the same
polarity as its male energy and repels therefore the active agent,
which, losing hold of the *whole*, fastens on the parts or molecules,
this action being called chemical. Vishnu, the Preserver, transforms
himself into Rudra-Siva, the Destroyer -- a correlation seemingly
unknown to Science.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 527 WE DISAGREE.

> "I shall not dwell at great length on this unity of sun-force and
> earth, which this theory implies. But I may add that out of it, or out
> of the hypothesis of mere motion as force, and of virtue without
> substance, we may gather, as the nearest possible approach to the
> truth on this, the most complex and profound of all subjects, the
> following inferences: --

> "(*a*) Space, inter-stellary, inter-planetary, inter-material,
> inter-organic, is not a vacuum, but is filled with a subtle fluid or
> gas, which for want of a better term\* we may still call, as the
> ancients did, *Aith*-*ur* -- Solar fire, **AE**THER. This fluid,
> unchangeable in composition, indestructible, invisible,\*\* pervades
> everything and all \[*ponderable.* -- H. P. B.\] matter,\*\*\* the
> pebble in the running brook, the tree overhanging, the man looking on,
> is charged with the ether in various degree; the pebble less than the
> tree, the tree less than man. All in the planet is in like manner so
> charged! A world is built up in ethereal fluid, and moving through a
> sea of it.

> "(*b*) The Ether, whatever its nature is, is from the sun and from the
> suns\*\*\*\* the suns are the generators of it, the store-houses of
> it, the diffusers of it.\*\*\*\*\*

> "(*c*.) Without the ether there could be no motion; without it
> particles of ponderable matter could not glide over each other;
> without it there could be no impulse to excite those particles into
> action.

> "(*d*.) Ether determines the constitution of bodies. Were there no
> ether there could be no change of constitution in substance; water,
> for instance, could only exist as a substance, compact and insoluble
> beyond any conception we could form of it. It could never even be ice,
> never flint, never vapour, except for ether.

> "(*e*.) Ether connects sun with planet, planet with planet, man with
> planet, man with man. Without ether there could be no communication in
> the Universe; no light, no heat, no phenomenon of motion."

Thus we find that Ether and *elastic* atoms are, in the alleged
*mechanical* conception of the Universe, the Spirit and Soul of Kosmos,
and that the theory -- put it any way and under whatever disguise --
always leaves a more widely opened issue for men of

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Verily, unless the occult terms of the Kabalists are adopted!

\*\* "Unchangeable" only during Manvantaric periods, after which it
merges once more into Mulaprakriti; "invisible" for ever, in its own
essence, but seen in its reflected coruscations, called the Astral light
by the modern Kabalists. Yet, conscious and grand Beings clothed in that
same Essence move in it.

\*\*\* One has to add (ponderable), to distinguish it from that *Ether*
which is matter still, though a substratum.

\*\*\*\* The Occult Sciences reverse the statement, and say that it is
the sun, and all the suns that are from *it*, which emanate at the
Manvantaric dawn from the *Central Sun.*

\*\*\*\*\* Here, we decidedly beg to differ with the learned gentleman.
Let us remember that this AEther, whether *Akasa* is meant by the term,
or its lower principle, Ether -- is septenary. *Akasa* is Aditi in the
allegory, and the mother of Marttanda (the sun), the *Deva*-*matri* --
"Mother of the gods." In the solar system, the sun is her Buddhi and
*Vahan*, the Vehicle, hence the 6th principle; in Kosmos all the suns
are the Kama rupa of Akasa and so is ours. It is only when regarded as
an individual Entity in his own Kingdom that Surya (the sun) is the 7th
principle of the great body of *matter*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 528 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

Science to speculate beyond the line drawn by modern materialism -- or
call it *agnosticism* rather, to be more correct\* -- than the majority
avails itself of. Atoms, Ether, or both, modern speculation cannot get
out of the circle of ancient thought; and the latter was soaked through
with archaic occultism. Undulatory or corpuscular theory -- it is all
one. It is speculation from the aspects of phenomena, not from the
knowledge of the essential nature of the *cause* and *causes.* When
modern Science has explained to its audience the late achievements of
Bunsen and Kirchoff, and shown the seven colours, the "primary" of a ray
which is decomposed in a fixed order on a screen; and described the
respective lengths of luminous waves, what has it proved? It has
justified its reputation for *exactness* in mathematical achievement by
measuring even the length of a luminous wave -- "varying from about
seven hundred and sixty millionths of a millimetre at the red end of the
spectrum to about three hundred and ninety-three millionths of a
millimetre at the violet end." But when the exactness of the calculation
with regard to the *effect* on the light-wave is thus vindicated,
Science is forced to admit that the *force* (which is the *supposed
cause*) is *believed* to produce "inconceivably minute undulations" in
*some* medium -- "*generally regarded as identical with the ethereal
medium*"\*\* -- and that medium itself is still only -- a
"*hypothetical* agent!"

Auguste Comte's pessimism with respect to the impossibility of knowing
some day the chemical composition of the sun, has not been belied thirty
years later by Kirchoff, as claimed. The spectroscope has helped us to
see that the elements, with which the modern chemist is familiar, *must
in all probability* be present in the sun's outward robes -- *not in the
sun itself;* and, taking these "robes," the solar cosmic veil, for the
sun itself, the physicists have declared its luminosity to be due to
*combustion* and *flame*, and have mistaken the vital principle of that
luminary for a purely *material* thing, and called it
"chromosphere."\*\*\* We have hypotheses and theories only so far, not
law -- by any means.

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Brutal but frank materialism is more honest than Janus-faced
agnosticism in our days. *Monism* is the Pecksniff of modern philosophy,
turning a pharisaical face to psychology and idealism, and its natural
face of a Roman Augur, swelling his cheek with his tongue -- to
Materialism. The Monists are worse than the Materialists; because, while
looking at the Universe and psycho-spiritual man from the same negative
stand-point, the latter put their case far less plausibly than sceptics
of Mr. Tyndall's or even Mr. Huxley's stamp. Herbert Spencer, Bain and
Lewes are more dangerous to universal truths than Buchner.

\*\* "*Geology*," by Professor A. Winchell.

\*\*\* See *Five Years of Theosophy* -- Articles: "Do the Adepts deny
the nebular theory?" and "Is the Sun merely a cooling mass?" -- for the
true Occult teaching.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next Section](sd1-3-08)

[Contents](sd1-0-co.htm#contents)
