##### *The Secret Doctrine* by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol. 1

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 269 THE FIRST CHAPTER OF CREATION.

### SUMMING UP.

> "The History of Creation and of this world from its beginning up to
> the present time is composed of *seven chapters.* The *seventh*
> chapter is not yet written."  
> (T. Subba Row, *Theosophist,* 1881.)

**T**HE first of these Seven chapters has been attempted and is now
finished. However incomplete and feeble as an exposition, it is, at any
rate, an approximation -- using the word in a mathematical sense -- to
that which is the oldest basis for all the subsequent Cosmogonies. The
attempt to render in a European tongue the grand panorama of the ever
periodically recurring Law -- impressed upon the plastic minds of the
first races endowed with Consciousness by those who reflected the same
from the Universal Mind -- is daring, for no human language, save the
Sanskrit -- which is that *of the Gods* -- can do so with any degree of
adequacy. But the failures in this work must be forgiven for the sake of
the motive.

As a whole, neither the foregoing nor what follows can be found in full
anywhere. It is not taught in any of the six Indian schools of
philosophy, for it pertains to their synthesis -- the seventh, which is
the Occult doctrine. It is not traced on any crumbling papyrus of Egypt,
nor is it any longer graven on Assyrian tile or granite wall. The Books
of the *Vedanta* (the last word of human knowledge) give out but the
metaphysical aspect of this world-Cosmogony; and their priceless
thesaurus, the *Upanishads -- Upa-ni-shad* being a compound word meaning
"the conquest of ignorance by the revelation of *secret, spiritual*
knowledge" -- require now the additional possession of a Master-key to
enable the student to get at their full meaning. The reason for this I
venture to state here as I learned it from a Master.

The name, "*Upanishads*," is usually translated "esoteric doctrine."
These treatises form part of the *Sruti* or "revealed knowledge,"
*Revelation,* in short, and are generally attached to the *Brahmana*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 270 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

portion of the Vedas,\* as their third division. There are over 150
*Upanishads* enumerated by, and known to, Orientalists, who credit the
oldest with being written *probably* about 600 years B.C.; but of
*genuine* texts there does not exist a fifth of the number. The
Upanishads are to the Vedas what the Kabala is to the Jewish Bible. They
treat of and expound the secret and mystic meaning of the Vedic texts.
They speak of the origin of the Universe, the nature of Deity, and of
Spirit and Soul, as also of the metaphysical connection of mind and
matter. In a few words: They CONTAIN *the beginning and the end of* *all
human knowledge, but they have now ceased to* REVEAL *it*, since the day
of Buddha. If it were otherwise, the Upanishads could not be called
*esoteric,* since they are now openly attached to the Sacred Brahmanical
books, which have, in our present age, become accessible even to the
*Mlechchhas* (out-*castes*) and the European Orientalists. One thing in
them -- and this in all the *Upanishads* -- invariably and constantly
points to their ancient origin, and proves (*a*) that they were written,
in some of their portions, *before* the caste system became the
tyrannical institution which it still is; and (*b*) that half of their
contents have been eliminated, while some of them were rewritten and
abridged. "The great Teachers of the higher Knowledge and the Brahmans
are continually represented as going to Kshatriya (military caste) kings
to become their pupils." As Cowell pertinently remarks, the *Upanishads*
"breathe an entirely different spirit" (from other Brahmanical
writings), "a freedom of thought unknown in any earlier work except in
the Rig Veda hymns themselves." The second fact is explained by a
tradition recorded in one of the **MSS**. on Buddha's life. It says that
the Upanishads were originally attached to their Brahmanas after the
beginning of a reform, which led to the exclusiveness of the present
caste system among the Brahmins, a few centuries after the invasion of
India by the "twice-born." They were complete in those days, and were
used for the instruction of the chelas who were preparing for their
initiation.

###### <span id="DDE_LINK2">\[\[Footnote(s) -------------------------------------------------\]\]</span>

\* "The Vedas have a distinct dual meaning -- one expressed by the
literal sense of the words, the other indicated by the metre and the
*swara* -- intonation -- which are as the life of the Vedas. . . .
Learned pundits and philologists of course deny that *swara* has
anything to do with philosophy or ancient esoteric doctrines; but the
mysterious connection between *swara* and *light* is one of its most
profound secrets." (T. Subba Row, *Five Years of* *Theosophy,* p. 154.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 271 OCCULTISM IN THE UPANISHADS.

This lasted so long as the Vedas and the Brahmanas remained in the sole
and exclusive keeping of the temple-Brahmins -- while no one else had
the right to study or even read them outside of the *sacred* caste. Then
came Gautama, the Prince of Kapilavastu. After *learning* the whole of
the Brahmanical wisdom in the *Rahasya* or the *Upanishads,* and finding
that the teachings differed little, if at all, from those of the
"Teachers of Life" inhabiting the snowy ranges of the Himalaya,\* the
Disciple of the Brahmins, feeling indignant because the sacred wisdom
was thus withheld from all but the Brahmins, determined to save the
whole world by popularizing it. Then it was that the Brahmins, seeing
that their sacred knowledge and Occult wisdom was falling into the hands
of the "*Mlechchhas,*" abridged the texts of the Upanishads, originally
containing thrice the matter of the Vedas and the Brahmanas together,
without altering, however, one word of the texts. They simply detached
from the **MSS**. the most important portions containing the last word
of the Mystery of Being. The key to the Brahmanical secret code remained
henceforth with the initiates alone, and the Brahmins were thus in a
position to publicly deny the correctness of Buddha's teaching by
appealing to their *Upanishads,* silenced for ever on the chief
questions. Such is the esoteric tradition beyond the Himalayas.

Sri Sankaracharya, the greatest Initiate living in the historical ages,
wrote many a Bhashya on the *Upanishads.* But his original treatises, as
there are reasons to suppose, have not yet fallen into the hands of the
Philistines, for they are too jealously preserved in his *maths*
(monasteries, *mathams*)*.* And there are still weightier reasons to
believe that the priceless Bhashyas (Commentaries) on the esoteric
doctrine of the Brahmins, by their greatest expounder, will remain for
ages yet a dead letter to most of the Hindus, except the *Smartava*
Brahmins. This sect, founded by Sankaracharya, (which is still very
powerful in Southern India) is now almost the only one to produce
students who have preserved sufficient knowledge to comprehend the

###### \[\[Footnote(s) -------------------------------------------------\]\]

\* Also called "the Sons of Wisdom," and of the "Fire-Mist" and the
"Brothers of the Sun" in the Chinese records. *Si-dzang* (Tibet) is
mentioned in the **MSS**. of the sacred library of the province of
Fo-Kien, as the great seat of Occult learning from time immemorial, ages
before Buddha. The Emperor Yu, the "great" (2,207 years **B**.**C**.), a
pious mystic and great adept, is said to have obtained his knowledge
from the "great teachers of the Snowy Range" in Si-dzang.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 272 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

dead letter of the Bhashyas. The reason of this is that they alone, I am
informed, have occasionally real Initiates at their head in their
mathams, as for instance, in the "Sringa-giri," in the Western Ghats of
Mysore. On the other hand, there is no sect in that desperately
exclusive caste of the Brahmins, more exclusive than is the Smartava;
and the reticence of its followers to say what they may know of the
Occult sciences and the esoteric doctrine, is only equalled by their
pride and learning.

Therefore the writer of the present statement must be prepared
beforehand to meet with great opposition and even the denial of such
statements as are brought forward in this work. Not that any claim to
infallibility, or to perfect correctness in every detail of all that
which is herein said, was ever put forward. Facts are there, and they
can hardly be denied. But, owing to the intrinsic difficulties of the
subjects treated, and the almost insurmountable limitations of the
English tongue (as of all other European languages) to express certain
ideas, it is more than probable that the writer has failed to present
the explanations in the best and in the clearest form; yet all that
could be done was done under every adverse circumstance, and this is the
utmost that can be expected of any writer.

Let us recapitulate and show, by the vastness of the subjects expounded,
how difficult, if not impossible, it is to do them full justice.

(1.) The Secret Doctrine is the accumulated Wisdom of the Ages, and its
cosmogony alone is the most stupendous and elaborate system: *e.g.,*
even in the exotericism of the Puranas. But such is the mysterious power
of Occult symbolism, that the facts which have actually occupied
countless generations of initiated seers and prophets to marshal, to set
down and explain, in the bewildering series of evolutionary progress,
are all recorded on a few pages of geometrical signs and glyphs. The
flashing gaze of those seers has penetrated into the very kernel of
matter, and recorded the soul of things there, where an ordinary
profane, however learned, would have perceived but the external work of
form. But modern science believes not in the "soul of things," and hence
will reject the whole system of ancient cosmogony. It is useless to say
that the system in question is no fancy of one or several isolated
individuals. That it is the uninterrupted record covering thousands of
generations of Seers whose respective experiences were made to test and
to verify the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 273 THE PITH AND MARROW OF OCCULTISM.

traditions passed orally by one early race to another, of the teachings
of higher and exalted beings, who watched over the childhood of
Humanity. That for long ages, the "Wise Men" of the Fifth Race, of the
stock saved and rescued from the last cataclysm and shifting of
continents, had passed their lives *in learning, not teaching.* How did
they do so? It is answered: by checking, testing, and verifying in every
department of nature the traditions of old by the independent visions of
great adepts; *i.e.,* men who have developed and perfected their
physical, mental, psychic, and spiritual organisations to the utmost
possible degree. No vision of one adept was accepted till it was checked
and confirmed by the visions -- so obtained as to stand as independent
evidence -- of other adepts, and by centuries of experiences.

(2.) The fundamental Law in that system, the central point from which
all emerged, around and toward which all gravitates, and upon which is
hung the philosophy of the rest, is the One homogeneous divine
SUBSTANCE-PRINCIPLE, the one radical cause.

> . . . "Some few, whose lamps shone brighter, have been led  
> From cause to cause to nature's secret head,  
> And found that one first Principle must be. . . ."

It is called "Substance-Principle," for it becomes "substance" on the
plane of the manifested Universe, an illusion, while it remains a
"principle" in the beginningless and endless abstract, visible and
invisible SPACE. It is the omnipresent Reality: impersonal, because it
contains all and everything. *Its impersonality is the fundamental
conception* of the System. It is latent in every atom in the Universe,
and is the Universe itself. (See in chapters on Symbolism, "Primordial
Substance, and Divine Thought.")

(3.) The Universe is the periodical manifestation of this unknown
Absolute Essence. To call it "essence," however, is to sin against the
very spirit of the philosophy. For though the noun may be derived in
this case from the verb *esse,* "to be," yet IT cannot be identified
with a *being* of any kind, that can be conceived by human intellect. IT
is best described as neither Spirit nor matter, but both. "Parabrahmam
and Mulaprakriti" are One, in reality, yet two in the Universal
conception of the manifested, even in the conception of the One Logos,
its first manifestation, to which, as the able lecturer in the "Notes on
the Bhagavadgita" shows, IT appears from the objective standpoint of

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 274 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

the One Logos as Mulaprakriti and not as Parabrahmam; as its *veil* and
not the one REALITY hidden behind, which is unconditioned and absolute.

(4.) The Universe is called, with everything in it, MAYA, because all is
temporary therein, from the ephemeral life of a fire-fly to that of the
Sun. Compared to the eternal immutability of the ONE, and the
changelessness of that Principle, the Universe, with its evanescent
ever-changing forms, must be necessarily, in the mind of a philosopher,
no better than a will-o'-the-wisp. Yet, the Universe is real enough to
the conscious beings in it, which are as unreal as it is itself.

(5.) Everything in the Universe, throughout all its kingdoms, is
CONSCIOUS: *i.e.,* endowed with a consciousness of its own kind and on
its own plane of perception. We men must remember that because *we* do
not perceive any signs -- which we can recognise -- of consciousness,
say, in stones, we have no right to say that *no consciousness exists
there.* There is no such thing as either "dead" or "blind" matter, as
there is no "Blind" or "Unconscious" Law. These find no place among the
conceptions of Occult philosophy. The latter never stops at surface
appearances, and for it the *noumenal* essences have more reality than
their objective counterparts; it resembles therein the mediaeval
*Nominalists,* for whom it was the Universals that were the realities
and the particulars which existed only in name and human fancy.

(6.) The Universe is worked and *guided* from *within outwards.* As
above so it is below, as in heaven so on earth; and man -- the microcosm
and miniature copy of the macrocosm -- is the living witness to this
Universal Law, and to the mode of its action. We see that every
*external* motion, act, gesture, whether voluntary or mechanical,
organic or mental, is produced and preceded by *internal* feeling or
emotion, will or volition, and thought or mind. As no outward motion or
change, when normal, in man's external body can take place unless
provoked by an inward impulse, given through one of the three functions
named, so with the external or manifested Universe. The whole Kosmos is
guided, controlled, and animated by almost endless series of Hierarchies
of sentient Beings, each having a mission to perform, and who -- whether
we give to them one name or another, and call them Dhyan-Chohans or
Angels -- are "messengers" in the sense only that they are the agents of
Karmic and Cosmic Laws. They vary infinitely in their

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 275 THE NATURE OF THE CELESTIAL MEN.

respective degrees of consciousness and intelligence; and to call them
all pure Spirits without any of the earthly alloy "which time is wont to
prey upon" is only to indulge in poetical fancy. For each of these
Beings either *was,* or prepares to become, a man, if not in the
present, then in a past or a coming cycle (Manvantara). They are
*perfected,* when not *incipient,* men; and differ morally from the
terrestrial human beings on their higher (less material) spheres, only
in that they are devoid of the feeling of personality and of the *human*
emotional nature -- two purely earthly characteristics. The former, or
the "perfected," have become free from those feelings, because (*a*)
they have no longer fleshly bodies -- an ever-numbing weight on the
Soul; and (*b*) the pure spiritual element being left untrammelled and
more free, they are less influenced by *maya* than man can ever be,
unless he is an adept who keeps his two personalities -- the spiritual
and the physical -- entirely separated. The incipient monads, having
never had terrestrial bodies yet, can have no sense of personality or
EGO-ism. That which is meant by "personality," being a limitation and a
relation, or, as defined by Coleridge, "individuality existing in itself
but with a nature as a ground," the term cannot of course be applied to
non-human entities; but, as a fact insisted upon by generations of
Seers, none of these Beings, high or low, have either individuality or
personality as separate Entities, *i.e.,* they have no individuality in
the sense in which a man says, "*I am myself and* no one else;" in other
words, they are conscious of no such distinct separateness as men and
things have on earth. Individuality is the characteristic of their
respective hierarchies, not of their units; and these characteristics
vary only with the degree of the plane to which those hierarchies
belong: the nearer to the region of Homogeneity and the One Divine, the
purer and the less accentuated that individuality in the Hierarchy. They
are finite, in all respects, with the exception of their higher
principles -- the immortal sparks reflecting the universal divine flame
-- individualized and separated only on the spheres of Illusion by a
differentiation as illusive as the rest. They are "Living Ones," because
they are the streams projected on the Kosmic screen of illusion from the
ABSOLUTE LIFE; beings in whom life cannot become extinct, before the
fire of ignorance is extinct in those who sense these "Lives." Having
sprung into being under the quickening influence of the uncreated beam,
the reflection of the great Central Sun that

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 276 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

radiates on the shores of the river of Life, it is the inner principle
in them which belongs to the waters of immortality, while its
differentiated clothing is as perishable as man's body. Therefore Young
was right in saying that

> "Angels are men of a superior kind"

and no more. They are neither "ministering" nor "protecting" angels; nor
are they "Harbingers of the Most High" still less the "Messengers of
wrath" of any God such as man's fancy has created. To appeal to their
protection is as foolish as to believe that their sympathy may be
secured by any kind of propitiation; for they are, as much as man
himself is, the slaves and creatures of immutable Karmic and Kosmic law.
The reason for it is evident. Having no elements of personality in their
essence they can have no personal qualities, such as attributed by men,
in their exoteric religions, to their anthropomorphic God -- a jealous
and exclusive God who rejoices and feels wrathful, is pleased with
sacrifice, and is more despotic in his vanity than any finite foolish
man. Man, as shown in Book II., being a compound of the essences of all
those celestial Hierarchies may succeed in making himself, as such,
superior, in one sense, to any hierarchy or class, or even combination
of them. "Man can neither propitiate nor command the *Devas,*" it is
said. But, by paralyzing his lower personality, and arriving thereby at
the full knowledge of the *non-separateness* of his higher SELF from the
One absolute SELF, man can, even during his terrestrial life, become as
"One of Us." Thus it is, by eating of the fruit of knowledge which
dispels ignorance, that man becomes like one of the Elohim or the
Dhyanis; and once on *their* plane the Spirit of Solidarity and perfect
Harmony, which reigns in every Hierarchy, must extend over him and
protect him in every particular.

The chief difficulty which prevents men of science from believing in
divine as well as in nature Spirits is their materialism. The main
impediment before the Spiritualist which hinders him from believing in
the same, while preserving a blind belief in the "Spirits" of the
Departed, is the general ignorance of all, except some Occultists and
Kabalists, about the true essence and nature of matter. It is on the
acceptance or rejection of the theory of the *Unity of all in Nature, in
its* *ultimate Essence,* that mainly rests the belief or unbelief in the
existence around us of other conscious beings besides the Spirits of the
Dead.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 277 MANY BODIES BUT ONE SOUL.

It is on the right comprehension of the primeval Evolution of
Spirit-Matter and its real essence that the student has to depend for
the further elucidation in his mind of the Occult Cosmogony, and for the
only sure clue which can guide his subsequent studies.

In sober truth, as just shown, every "Spirit" so-called is either a
*disembodied or a future man.* As from the highest Archangel (Dhyan
Chohan) down to the last conscious "Builder" (the inferior class of
Spiritual Entities), all such are *men*, having lived aeons ago, in
other Manvantaras, on this or other Spheres; so the inferior,
semi-intelligent and non-intelligent Elementals -- are all *future* men.
That fact alone -- that a Spirit is endowed with intelligence -- is a
proof to the Occultist that that Being must have been a *man,* and
acquired his knowledge and intelligence throughout the human cycle.
There is but one indivisible and absolute Omniscience and Intelligence
in the Universe, and this thrills throughout every atom and
infinitesimal point of the whole finite Kosmos which hath no bounds, and
which people call SPACE, considered independently of anything contained
in it. But the first differentiation of its *reflection* in the
manifested World is purely Spiritual, and the Beings generated in it are
not endowed with a consciousness that has any relation to the one we
conceive of. They can have no human consciousness or Intelligence before
they have acquired such, personally and individually. This may be a
mystery, yet it is a fact, in Esoteric philosophy, and a very apparent
one too.

The whole order of nature evinces a progressive march towards *a*
*higher life.* There is design in the action of the seemingly blindest
forces. The whole process of evolution with its endless adaptations is a
proof of this. The immutable laws that weed out the weak and feeble
species, to make room for the strong, and which ensure the "survival of
the fittest," though so cruel in their immediate action -- all are
working toward the grand end. The very *fact* that adaptations *do*
occur, that the fittest *do* survive in the struggle for existence,
shows that what is called "unconscious Nature"\* is in reality an
aggregate of forces mani-

###### \[\[Footnote(s) -------------------------------------------------\]\]

\* Nature taken in its abstract sense, *cannot* be "unconscious," as it
is the emanation from, and thus an aspect (on the manifested plane) of
the ABSOLUTE consciousness. Where is that daring man who would presume
to deny to vegetation and even to minerals *a consciousness of their
own.* All he can say is, that this consciousness is beyond his
comprehension.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 278 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

pulated by semi-intelligent beings (Elementals) guided by High Planetary
Spirits, (Dhyan Chohans), whose collective aggregate forms the
manifested *verbum* of the unmanifested LOGOS, and constitutes at one
and the same time the MIND of the Universe and its immutable LAW.

Three distinct representations of the Universe in its three distinct
aspects are impressed upon our thought by the esoteric philosophy: the
PRE-EXISTING (evolved from) the EVER-EXISTING; and the PHENOMENAL -- the
world of illusion, the reflection, and shadow thereof. During the great
mystery and drama of life known as the Manvantara, real Kosmos is like
the object placed behind the white screen upon which are thrown the
Chinese shadows, called forth by the magic lantern. The actual figures
and things remain invisible, while the wires of evolution are pulled by
the unseen hands; and men and things are thus but the reflections, *on*
the white field, of the realities *behind* the snares of *Mahamaya,* or
the great Illusion. This was taught in every philosophy, in every
religion, *ante* as well as *post* diluvian, in India and Chaldea, by
the Chinese as by the Grecian Sages. In the former countries these three
Universes were allegorized, in exoteric teachings, by the three
trinities emanating from the Central eternal germ and forming with it a
Supreme Unity: the *initial,* the *manifested,* and the *Creative*
Triad, or the three in One. The last is but the symbol, in its concrete
expression, of the first *ideal* two. Hence Esoteric philosophy passes
over the necessarianism of this purely metaphysical conception, and
calls the first one, only, the Ever Existing. This is the view of every
one of the six great schools of Indian philosophy -- the *six principles
of* *that unit body of* WISDOM *of which the* "*gnosis,*" the *hidden*
knowledge, is the seventh.

The writer hopes that, superficially handled as may be the comments on
the Seven Stanzas, enough has been given in this cosmogonic portion of
the work to show Archaic teachings to be more *scientific* (in the
modern sense of the word) on their very face, than any other ancient
Scriptures left to be regarded and judged on their exoteric aspect.
Since, however, as confessed before, this work *withholds far more than
it* *gives out,* the student is invited to use his own intuitions. Our
chief care is to elucidate that which has already been given out, and,
to our regret, very incorrectly at times; to supplement the knowledge
hinted at -- whenever and wherever possible -- by addi-

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 279 HERMES, OR ARISTOTLE?

tional matter; and to bulwark our doctrines against the too strong
attacks of modern Sectarianism, and more especially against those of our
latter-day Materialism, very often miscalled Science, whereas, in
reality, the words "Scientists" and "Sciolists" ought alone to bear the
responsibility for the many illogical theories offered to the world. In
its great ignorance, the public, while blindly accepting everything that
emanates from "authorities," and feeling it to be its duty to regard
every *dictum* coming from a man of Science as a proven fact -- the
public, we say, is taught to scoff at anything brought forward from
"heathen" sources. Therefore, as materialistic Scientists can be fought
solely with their own weapons -- those of controversy and argument -- an
*Addendum* is added to every Book contrasting our respective views and
showing how even great authorities may often err. We believe that this
can be done effectually by showing the weak points of our opponents, and
by proving their too frequent sophisms -- made to pass for scientific
*dicta* -- to be incorrect. We hold to Hermes and his "Wisdom" -- in its
universal character; they -- to Aristotle as against intuition and the
experience of the ages, fancying that Truth is the exclusive property of
the Western world. Hence the disagreement. As Hermes says, "Knowledge
differs much from sense; for sense is of things that surmount it, but
Knowledge (gyi) is the end of sense" -- *i.e.,* of the illusion of our
physical brain and its intellect; thus emphasizing the contrast between
the laboriously acquired knowledge of the senses and mind (manas), and
the intuitive omniscience of the Spiritual divine Soul -- Buddhi.

Whatever may be the destiny of these actual writings in a remote future,
we hope to have proven so far the following facts:

\(1\) The Secret Doctrine teaches no *Atheism,* except in the Hindu
sense of the word *nastika,* or the rejection of *idols,* including
every anthropomorphic god. In this sense every Occultist is a *Nastika*.

\(2\) It admits a Logos or a collective "Creator" of the Universe; a
*Demi-urgos* -- in the sense implied when one speaks of an "Architect"
as the "Creator" of an edifice, whereas that Architect has never touched
one stone of it, but, while furnishing the plan, left all the manual
labour to the masons; in our case the plan was furnished by the Ideation
of the Universe, and the constructive labour was left to the Hosts of
intelligent Powers and Forces. But that *Demiurgos* is no

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 280 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

*personal* deity, -- *i.e.,* an imperfect *extra-cosmic god*, -- but
only the aggregate of the Dhyan-Chohans and the other forces.

As to the latter --

\(3\) They are dual in their character; being composed of (*a*) the
irrational *brute energy,* inherent in matter, and (*b*) the intelligent
soul or cosmic consciousness which directs and guides that energy, and
which is the *Dhyan-Chohanic thought reflecting the Ideation of the*
*Universal mind.* This results in a perpetual series of physical
manifestations and *moral effects* on Earth, during manvantaric periods,
the whole being subservient to Karma. As that process is not always
perfect; and since, however many proofs it may exhibit of a guiding
intelligence behind the veil, it still shows gaps and flaws, and even
results very often in evident failures -- therefore, neither the
collective Host (Demiurgos), nor any of the working powers individually,
are proper subjects for divine honours or worship. All are entitled to
the grateful reverence of Humanity, however, and man ought to be ever
striving to help the divine evolution of *Ideas,* by becoming to the
best of his ability a *co-worker with nature* in the cyclic task. The
ever unknowable and incognizable *Karana* alone, the *Causeless* Cause
of all causes, should have its shrine and altar on the holy and ever
untrodden ground of our heart -- invisible, intangible, unmentioned,
save through "the still small voice" of our spiritual consciousness.
Those who worship before it, ought to do so in the silence and the
sanctified solitude of their Souls\*; making their spirit the sole
mediator between them and the *Universal Spirit,* their good actions the
only priests, and their sinful intentions the only visible and objective
sacrificial victims to the *Presence.* (*See Part II.,* "*On the Hidden
Deity.*")

\(4\) Matter is *Eternal.* It is the *Upadhi* (the physical basis) for
the One infinite Universal Mind to build thereon its ideations.
Therefore, the Esotericists maintain that there is no inorganic or
*dead* matter in nature, the distinction between the two made by Science
being as unfounded as it is arbitrary and devoid of reason.

###### \[\[Footnote(s) -------------------------------------------------\]\]

\* "When thou prayest, thou shalt not be as the hypocrites are . . . but
enter into *thine inner chamber* *and having shut thy door, pray to thy
Father which is in secret*." *Matt.* *vi.*). Our Father is *within us*
"in Secret," our 7th principle, in the "inner chamber" of our Soul
perception. "The Kingdom of Heaven" and of God "*is within* *us*" says
Jesus, not *outside.* Why are Christians so absolutely blind to the
self-evident meaning of the words of wisdom they delight in mechanically
repeating?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 281 MATTER IS THE SHADOW OF SPIRIT.

Whatever Science may think, however -- and *exact* Science is a fickle
dame, as we all know by experience -- Occultism knows and teaches
differently, from time immemorial -- from *Manu* and *Hermes* down to
Paracelsus and his successors.

Thus Hermes, the thrice great Trismegistus, says: "Oh, my son, matter
*becomes;* formerly it *was;* for matter is the vehicle of becoming."\*
Becoming is the mode of activity of the uncreate deity. Having been
endowed with the germs of becoming, matter (objective) is brought into
birth, for the creative force fashions it *according to the ideal
forms.* Matter not yet engendered had no form; it becomes when it is put
into operation." (*The Definitions of Asclepios,* p. 134, "Virgin of the
World.")

"Everything is the product of one universal creative effort. . . . There
is nothing *dead,* in Nature. *Everything is organic and living,* and
therefore the whole world appears to be a living organism." (Paracelsus,
"*Philosophia ad Athenienes*," F. Hartmann's translations, p. 44.)

(5.) The Universe was evolved out of its ideal plan, upheld through
Eternity in the unconsciousness of that which the Vedantins call
Parabrahm. This is practically identical with the conclusions of the
highest Western Philosophy -- "the innate, eternal, and self-existing
Ideas" of Plato, now reflected by Von Hartmann. The "unknowable" of
Herbert Spencer bears only a faint resemblance to that transcendental
*Reality* believed in by Occultists, often appearing merely a
personification of a "*force* behind phenomena" -- an infinite and
eternal *Energy*

###### \[\[Footnote(s) -------------------------------------------------\]\]

\* To this the late Mrs. (Dr.) Kingsford, the able translator and
compiler of the Hermetic Fragments (see "*The Virgin of the* *World*")
remarks in a foot-note; "Dr. Menard observes that in Greek the same word
signifies *to be born* and *to become.* The idea here is that the
material of the world is in its essence eternal, but that before
creation or 'becoming' it is in a passive and motionless condition. Thus
it 'was' before being put into operation; now it 'becomes,' that is, it
is mobile and progressive." And she adds the purely Vedantic doctrine of
the Hermetic philosophy that "Creation is thus the period of activity
(Manvantara) of God, who, according to Hermetic thought (or *which,*
according to the Vedantin) has two modes -- Activity or Existence, God
evolved (*Deus explicitus*); and Passivity of Being (Pralaya) God
involved (*Deus* *implicitus*)*.* Both modes are perfect and complete,
as are the waking and sleeping states of man. Fichte, the German
philosopher, distinguished Being (Seyn) as One, which we know only
through existence (Dasein) as the Manifold. This view is thoroughly
Hermetic. The 'Ideal Forms' are the archetypal or formative ideas of the
Neo-Platonists; the eternal and subjective concepts of things subsisting
in the divine mind prior to 'becoming'" (p. 134).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 282 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

from which all things proceed, while the author of the "Philosophy of
the Unconscious" has come (in this respect only) as near to a solution
of the great *Mystery* as mortal man can. Few were those, whether in
ancient or mediaeval philosophy, who have dared to approach the subject
or even hint at it. Paracelsus mentions it inferentially. His ideas are
admirably synthesized by Dr. F. Hartmann, F.T.S., in his "Life of
Paracelsus."

All the *Christian* Kabalists understood well the Eastern root idea: The
active Power, the "Perpetual motion of the great Breath" only awakens
Kosmos at the dawn of every new Period, setting it into motion by means
of the two contrary Forces,\* and thus causing it to become objective on
the plane of Illusion. In other words, that dual motion transfers Kosmos
from the plane of the Eternal Ideal into that of finite manifestation,
or from the *Noumenal* to the *Phenomenal* plane. Everything that *is,
was,* and *will be*, eternally IS, even the countless forms, which are
finite and perishable only in their objective, not in their *ideal*
Form. They existed as Ideas, in the Eternity,\*\* and, when they pass
away, will exist as reflections. Neither the form of man, nor that of
any animal, plant or stone has ever been *created,* and it is only on
this plane of ours that it commenced "becoming," *i.e.,* objectivising
into its present materiality, or expanding *from* *within outwards,*
from the most sublimated and supersensuous essence into its grossest
appearance. Therefore *our* human forms have existed in the Eternity as
astral or ethereal prototypes; according to which models, the Spiritual
Beings (or Gods) whose duty it was to bring them into objective being
and terrestrial Life, evolved the protoplasmic forms of the future
*Egos* from *their own essence.* After which, when this human *Upadhi,*
or basic mould was ready, the natural terrestrial Forces began to work
on those supersensuous moulds *which contained, besides their own,* *the
elements* *of all the past vegetable and* *future animal* *forms of this
globe in them.* Therefore, man's *outward* shell passed through every
vegetable and animal body before it assumed the human shape. As this
will be fully

###### \[\[Footnote(s) -------------------------------------------------\]\]

\* The centripetal and the centrifugal forces, which are male and
female, positive and negative, physical and spiritual, the two being the
one *Primordial* Force.

\*\* Occultism teaches that no form can be given to anything, either by
nature or by man, whose ideal type does not already exist on the
subjective plane. More than this; that no such form or shape can
possibly enter man's consciousness, or evolve in his imagination, which
does not exist in prototype, at least as an approximation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 283 PARACELSUS ANTICIPATED TYNDALL.

described in Book II., with the Commentaries thereupon, there is no need
to say more of it here.

According to the Hermetico-Kabalistic philosophy of Paracelsus, it is
Yliaster -- the ancestor of the just-born *Protyle,* introduced by Mr.
Crookes in chemistry -- or primordial *Protomateria* that evolved out of
itself the Kosmos.

"When Evolution took place the Yliaster divided itself. . . . melted and
dissolved, developing from within itself the *Ideos* or Chaos, called
re*spectively Mysterium magnum, Iliados, Limbus Major,* or Primordial
Matter. This Primordial essence is of a monistic nature, and manifests
itself not only as vital activity, a spiritual force, an invisible,
incomprehensible, and indescribable power, but also as vital matter of
which the substance of living beings consists." In this *Ideos* of
primordial matter, or the *proto-ilos --* which is the matrix of all
created things -- is contained the substance from which everything is
formed. It is the Chaos . . . out of which the Macrocosm, and, later on,
by evolution and division in *Mysteria Specialia,\** each separate
being, came into existence. "All things and all elementary substances
were contained in it *in potentia* but not in *actu*" *--* which makes
the translator, Dr. F. Hartmann, justly observe that "it seems that
Paracelsus anticipated the modern discovery of the 'potency of matter'
three hundred years ago" (P. 42).

This Magnus Limbus, then, or Yliaster of Paracelsus, is simply our old
friend "Father-Mother," *within,* before it appeared in Space, of the
second and other Stanzas. It is the universal matrix of Kosmos,
personified in the dual character of Macro- and Microcosm (or the
Universe and our Globe)\*\* by Aditi-Prakriti, the Spiritual and the
physical nature. For we find it explained in Paracelsus that "the Magnus
Limbus is the nursery out of which all creatures have grown, in the same
sense as a tree grows out of a small seed; with the difference, however,
that the great Limbus takes its origin from the Word, while the Limbus
minor (the terrestrial seed or sperm) takes it from the earth.

###### \[\[Footnote(s) -------------------------------------------------\]\]

\* This word is explained by Dr. Hartmann from the original texts of
Paracelsus before him, as follows. According to this great Rosicrucian:
"Mysterium is everything out of which something may be developed, which
is only germinally contained in it. A seed is the 'Mysterium' of a
plant, an egg that of a living bird, etc."

\*\* It is only the mediaeval Kabalists who, following the Jewish and
one or two Neo-Platonists, applied the term *Microcosm* to man. Ancient
philosophy called the Earth the Microcosm of the Macrocosm, and man the
outcome of the two.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 284 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

The great Limbus is the seed out of which all beings have come, and the
little Limbus is each ultimate being that reproduces its form, and that
has itself been produced by the 'great.' The latter possesses all the
qualifications of the great one, in the same sense as a son has an
organization similar to that of his father." (*See Comment. Book II.
para. iii.*) *.* . . "As Yliaster dissolved, *Ares,* the dividing,
differentiating, and individualising power (*Fohat,* another old
friend,) . . . began to act. All production took place in consequence of
separation. There were produced out of the Ideos, the elements of Fire,
Water, Air and Earth, whose birth, however, did not take place in a
material mode, or by simple separation," but by spiritual and dynamical,
not even complex, combinations -- e.g., mechanical *mixture* as opposed
to *chemical* combination -- just as fire may come out of a pebble, or a
tree out of a seed, although there is originally no fire in the pebble,
nor a tree in the seed. Spirit is living, and Life is Spirit, and Life
and Spirit (*Prakriti Purusha*) (?) produce all things, but they are
essentially one and not two. . . . The elements too, have each one its
own Yliaster, because all the activity of matter in every form is only
an effluvium of the same fount. But as from the seed grow the roots with
their fibres, and after that the stalk with its branches and leaves, and
lastly the flowers and seeds; likewise all beings were born from the
elements, and consist of elementary substances out of which other forms
may come into existence, bearing the characteristics of their parents."
("This doctrine, preached 300 years ago," remarks the translator, "is
identical with the one that has revolutionized modern thought, after
having been put into new shape and elaborated by Darwin. It was still
more elaborated by Kapila in the Sankhya philosophy") . . . . The
elements as the mothers of all creatures *are of an invisible, spiritual
nature, and have souls.\** They all spring from the "*Mysterium
Magnum.*" (*Philosophia ad Athenienses.*)

Compare this with Vishnu Purana.

"From *Pradhana* (primordial substance) presided over by *Kshetrajna*
(embodied Spirit?) proceeds the evolution of those qualities....... From
the great Principle *Mahat* (Universal Intellect, or mind)..... proceeds

###### \[\[Footnote(s) -------------------------------------------------\]\]

\* The Eastern Occultist says -- "are guided and informed by the
Spiritual Beings" the Workmen in the invisible worlds and behind the
veil of Occult nature, or nature *in Abscondito.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 285 HERMES CHRISTIANIZED.

the origin of the subtle elements and from these the organs of sense
(*Book I., ii.*)*.*

Thus it may be shown that all the fundamental truths of nature were
universal in antiquity, and that the basic ideas upon spirit, matter,
and the universe, or upon God, Substance, and man, were identical.
Taking the two most ancient religious philosophies on the globe,
Hinduism and Hermetism, from the scriptures of India and Egypt, the
identity of the two is easily recognisable.

This becomes apparent to one who reads the latest translation and
rendering of the "Hermetic Fragments" just mentioned, by our late
lamented friend, Dr. Anna Kingsford. Disfigured and tortured as these
have been in their passage through Sectarian Greek and Christian hands,
the translator has most ably and intuitionally seized the weak points
and tried to remedy them by means of explanations and foot-notes. And
she says:.......... The creation of the visible world by the 'working
gods' or Titans, as agents of the Supreme God,\* is a thoroughly
Hermetic idea, *recognisable in all religious systems,* and in
accordance with modern scientific research (?), which shows us
everywhere the Divine power operating through natural Forces."

"That Universal Being, that contains all, and which is all, put into
motion the Soul and the World, all that nature comprises, says Hermes.
In the manifold unity of universal life, the innumerable individualities
distinguished by their variations, are, nevertheless, united in such a
manner that the whole is one, and that everything proceeds from Unity."
(*Asclepios, Part I.*)

"God is not a mind, but the cause that the mind is; *not a spirit,* but
the cause that the Spirit is; not light, but the cause that the Light
is." (*Divine Pymander, Book IX.,* v. 64.)

The above shows plainly that "Divine Pymander," however much distorted
in some passages by Christian "smoothing," was nevertheless written by a
philosopher, while most of the so-called "hermetic Fragments" are the
production of sectarian pagans with a tendency towards an
anthropomorphic Supreme Being. Yet both are the echo of the Esoteric
philosophy and the Hindu Puranas.

Compare two invocations, one to the Hermetic "Supreme All," the

###### \[\[Footnote(s) -------------------------------------------------\]\]

\* A frequent expression in the said Fragments, to which we take
exception. The *Universal Mind* is not a *Being* or "God."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 286 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

other to the "Supreme All" of the later Aryans. Says a Hermetic Fragment
cited by Suidas (see Mrs. Kingsford's "*The Virgin of the World*")*:* -

"I adjure thee, Heaven, holy work of the great God; I adjure thee, Voice
of the Father, uttered in the beginning when the universal world was
framed; I adjure thee by the word, only Son of the Father who upholds
all things; be favourable, be favourable."

This just preceded by the following: "Thus the Ideal Light was before
the Ideal Light, and the luminous Intelligence of Intelligence was
always, *and its unity was nothing else than the Spirit enveloping the
Universe. Out of whom is neither God nor Angels, nor any other
essentials, for* He (It?) is the Lord of all things and the power and
the Light; and all depends on Him (It) and is in Him (It), etc."
(*Fragments of the writings of Hermes to Ammon.*)

This is contradicted by the very same *Trismegistos,* who is made to
say: "To speak of God is impossible. For corporeal cannot express the
incorporeal. . . . . That which has not any body nor appearance, nor
form, nor matter, cannot be apprehended by sense. I understand, Tatios,
I understand, that which it is impossible to define -- that is God."
(*Physical Eclogues, Florilegium of Stobaeus.*)

The contradiction between the two passages is evident; and this shows
(*a*) that Hermes was a generic *nom-de-plume* used by a series of
generations of mystics of every shade, and (*b*) that a great
discernment has to be used before accepting a Fragment as esoteric
teaching only because it is undeniably ancient. Let us now compare the
above with a like invocation in the Hindu Scriptures -- undoubtedly as
old, if not far older. Here it is *Parasara,* the Aryan "Hermes" who
instructs *Maitreya,* the Indian Asclepios, and calls upon Vishnu in his
triple hypostasis.

"Glory to the unchangeable, holy, eternal Supreme Vishnu, of one
universal nature, the mighty over all; to him who is Hiranyagarbha,
Hari, and Sankara (Brahma, Vishnu, and Siva), the creator, the
preserver, and the destroyer of the world; to Vasudeva, the liberator
(of his worshippers); to him whose essence is both single and manifold;
who is both subtile and corporeal, indiscreet and discreet; to Vishnu
the cause of final emancipation, the cause of the creation, existence,
the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 287 ALONE THE ETERNAL IS REST.

end of the world; *who is the root of the world,* and who *consists of
the world.*" (*Vish. Purana, Book L.*)

This is a grand invocation, full of philosophical meaning underlying it;
but, for the profane masses, as suggestive as is the first of an
anthropomorphic Being. We must respect the feeling that dictated both;
but we cannot help finding it in full disharmony with its inner meaning,
even with that which is found in the same Hermetic treatise where it is
said:

"Reality is not upon the earth, my son, and it cannot be thereon. . . .
Nothing on earth is real, there are only appearances. . . He (man) is
not real, my son, as man. The real consists solely in itself and remains
what it is. . . Man is transient, therefore he is not real, he is but
appearance, and appearance is the supreme illusion.

*Tatios:* Then the *celestial bodies themselves are not real, my father,
since they also vary?*

*Trismegistos:* That which is subject to birth and to change is not
real. . . . . There is in them a certain falsity, seeing that they too
are variable.......

*Tatios:* And what then is the primordial Reality?

*Trismeg.:* That which is one and alone, 0 Tatios; That which is not
made of matter, nor in any body. Which has neither colour nor form,
which changes not nor is transmitted but which always is."

This is quite consistent with the Vedantic teaching. The leading thought
is Occult; and many are the passages in the Hermetic Fragments that
belong bodily to the Secret Doctrine.

The latter teaches that the whole universe is ruled by intelligent and
semi-intelligent Forces and Powers, as stated from the very beginning.
Christian Theology admits and even *enforces* belief in such, but makes
an arbitrary division and refers to them as "Angels" and "Devils."
Science denies the existence of such, and ridicules the very idea.
Spiritualists believe in the Spirits of the Dead, and, outside these,
deny entirely any other kind or class of invisible beings. The
Occultists and Kabalists are thus the only rational expounders of the
ancient traditions, which have now culminated in dogmatic faith on the
one hand, and dogmatic denials on the other. For, both belief and
unbelief embrace but one small corner each of the infinite horizons of
spiritual and physical manifestations; and thus both are right from

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 288 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

their respective standpoints, and both are wrong in believing that they
can circumscribe the whole within their own special and narrow barriers;
for -- they can never do so. In this respect Science, Theology, and even
Spiritualism show little more wisdom than the ostrich does, when it
hides its head in the sand at its feet, feeling sure that there can be
thus nothing beyond its own point of observation and the limited area
occupied by its foolish head.

As the only works now extant upon the subject under consideration within
reach of the profane of the Western "civilized" races are the
above-mentioned Hermetic Books, or rather Hermetic Fragments, we may
contrast them in the present case with the teachings of Esoteric
philosophy. To quote for this purpose from any other would be useless,
since the public knows nothing of the Chaldean works which are
translated into Arabic and preserved by some Sufi initiates. Therefore
the "Definitions of Asclepios," as lately compiled and glossed by Mrs.
A. Kingsford, F.T.S., some of which sayings are in remarkable agreement
with the Esoteric Eastern doctrine, have to be resorted to for
comparison. Though not a few passages show a strong impression of some
later Christian hand, yet on the whole the characteristics of the
genii\* and gods are those of eastern teachings, while concerning other
things there are passages which differ widely in our doctrines. The
following are a few:--

###### \[\[Footnote(s) -------------------------------------------------\]\]

\* The Hermetic philosophers called *Theoi,* gods, Genii and Daimones
(in the original texts), those Entities whom we call *Devas* (gods),
Dhyan Chohans, *Chitkala* (Kwan-yin, the Buddhists call them), and by
other names. The *Daimones* are -- in the Socratic sense, and even in
the Oriental and Latin theological sense -- the guardian spirits of the
human race; "those who dwell in the neighbourhood of the immortals, and
thence watch over human affairs," as Hermes has it. In Esoteric
parlance, they are called *Chitkala,* some of which are those who have
furnished man with his fourth and fifth Principles from their own
essence; and others the *Pitris* so-called. This will be explained when
we come to the production of the *complete man.* The root of the name is
*Chiti,* "that by which the effects and consequences of actions and
kinds of knowledge are selected for the use of the soul," or conscience
the inner Voice in man. With the Yogis, the *Chiti* is a synonym of
*Mahat,* the first and divine intellect; but in Esoteric philosophy
*Mahat* is the root of Chiti, its germ; and *Chiti* is a quality of
*Manas* in conjunction with Buddhi, a quality that attracts to itself by
spiritual affinity a *Chitkala* when it develops sufficiently in man.
This is why it is said that *Chiti* is a voice acquiring mystic life and
becoming Kwan-Yin.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 289 A FEW OCCULT APHORISMS.

**E**XTRACTS FROM A PRIVATE COMMENTARY,\* *hitherto secret:--*

(xvii.) "*The Initial Existence in the first twilight of the
Maha-Manwantara* (*after the* **M**AHA-**P**RALAYA *that follows every
age of Brahma*) *is a* CONSCIOUS SPIRITUAL QUALITY. *In the manifested*
WORLDS (*solar systems*) *it is, in its* OBJECTIVE SUBJECTIVITY, *like
the film from a Divine Breath to the gaze of the entranced seer. It
spreads as it issues from* **L**AYA*\*\* throughout infinity as a
colourless spiritual fluid. It is on the* SEVENTH PLANE, *and in its*
SEVENTH STATE *in our planetary world.\*\*\**

(xviii.) "*It is Substance to* OUR *spiritual sight. It cannot be called
so by men in their* WAKING STATE; *therefore they have named it in their
ignorance* '*God-Spirit.*'

(xix.) "*It exists everywhere and forms the first* **U**PADHI
(*foundation*) *on which our World* (*solar system*) *is built. Outside
the latter it is to be found in its pristine purity only between* (*the
solar systems or*) *the Stars of the Universe, the worlds already formed
or forming; those in* LAYA *resting meanwhile in its bosom. As its
substance is of a different kind from that known on earth, the
inhabitants of the latter, seeing* THROUGH IT, *believe in their
illusion and ignorance that it is empty space. There is not one
finger*'*s breath* (ANGULA) *of void Space in the whole Boundless*
(*Universe*).........

(xx*.*) "*Matter or Substance is septenary within our World, as it is so
beyond it. Moreover, each of its states or principles is graduated into
seven degrees of density.* **S**URYA (*the Sun*)*, in its visible
reflection, exhibits the first, or lowest state of the seventh, the
highest state of the Universal* PRESENCE*, the pure of the pure, the
first manifested Breath of the ever Unmanifested* SAT (*Be-ness*)*. All
the Central physical or objective Suns are in their substance the lowest
state of the first Principle of the* BREATH*. Nor are any of these any
more than the* REFLECTIONS *of their* PRIMARIES *which are concealed
from the gaze of all but the Dhyan Chohans, whose Corporeal substance
belongs to the fifth division of the seventh Principle of the Mother
substance, and is,*

###### \[\[Footnote(s) -------------------------------------------------\]\]

\* This (teaching) does not refer to Prakriti-Purusha beyond the
boundaries of our small universe.

\*\* The ultimate quiescent state: the *Nirvana* condition of the
seventh Principle.

\*\*\* The teaching is all given from our plane of consciousness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 290 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

*therefore, four degrees higher than the solar reflected substance.* *As
there are seven Dhatu* (*principal substances in the human body*) *so
there are seven Forces in Man and in all Nature.*

(xxi.) "*The real substance of the concealed* (*Sun*) *is a nucleus of
Mother substance.*\* *It is the heart and the matrix of all the living
and existing Forces in our solar universe.* *It is the Kernel from which
proceed to spread on their cyclic journeys all* *the Powers that set in
action the atoms in their functional duties, and the focus within which
they again meet in their* SEVENTH ESSENCE *every eleventh year. He who*
*tells thee he has seen the sun, laugh at him\*\* as* *if he had said
that the* *sun moves really onward on his diurnal path* . . . .

(xxiii). "*It is on account of his septenary* *nature that the Sun is*
*spoken of by the ancients as one who is driven* *by seven horses equal
to* *the metres of the Vedas; or, again, that, though he is identified
with the* SEVEN "*Gaina*" (*classes of being*) *in* *his orb, he is
distinct from them,*\*\*\* *as he is, indeed; as also that he has* SEVEN
RAYS, *as indeed he has* . . . .

(xxv.) "*The Seven Beings in the Sun are the Seven Holy Ones, Self-born
from the inherent power in the* *matrix of Mother substance. It is they
who send the Seven Principal* *Forces, called rays, which at the
beginning of Pralaya will centre into* *seven new Suns for the next
Manvantara. The energy from which they spring into conscious existence
in every Sun, is what some people call Vishnu* (*see foot-note below*)*,
which* *is the Breath of the* ABSOLUTENESS.

*We call it the One manifested life -- itself a reflection of the
Absolute*.........

(xxvi.) "*The latter must never be mentioned in words or speech LEST* IT
SHOULD TAKE AWAY SOME OF OUR SPIRITUAL ENERGIES THAT ASPIRE *towards ITS
state, gravitating ever onward unto* IT *spiritually, as the whole
physical universe gravitates towards* ITS *manifested centre --
cosmically.*

(xxvii.) "*The former -- the Initial existence -- which may be called*
*while in*

###### \[\[Footnote(s) -------------------------------------------------\]\]

\* Or the "dream of Science," the primeval really homogeneous matter,
which no mortal can make objective in this *Race* or *Round* either.

\*\* "Vishnu in the form of the Solar active energy, neither ever rises
nor sets, and is at once, the *sevenfold Sun* and distinct from it,"
says Vishnu Purana (Book II., Chap. 1 1).

\*\*\* "In the same manner as a man approaches a mirror placed upon a
stand, beholds in it his own image, so the energy or reflection of
Vishnu (the Sun) is never disjoined but remains in the Sun as in a
mirror that is there stationed" ("*Vishnu Purana*")*.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 291 OCCULT APHORISMS.

*this state of being the* **O**NE **L**IFE, *is, as explained, a*
**F**ILM *for creative or formative Purposes. It manifests in seven
states, which, with their septenary sub-divisions, are the*
**F**ORTY-NINE *Fires\* mentioned in* *sacred books* . . . . . .

(xxix.) "*The first is the* . . . . '*Mother*' (*prima* MATERIA).
*Separating itself into its primary seven states, it proceeds down
cyclically; when\*\* having consolidated itself in its* LAST *principle
as* GROSS MATTER, it *revolves around itself and informs, with the
seventh emanation of the last, the first and the lowest element* (*the
Serpent biting its own tail*)*. In a hierarchy, or order of being, the
seventh emanation of her last principle is:* --

(*a*) *In the mineral, the spark that lies latent in it, and is called
to its evanescent being by the* **P**OSITIVE *awakening the*
**N**EGATIVE (*and so forth*) . . . .

(*b*) *In the plant it is that vital and intelligent Force which informs
the seed and develops it into the blade of grass, or the root and
sapling. It is the germ which becomes the* **U**PADHI *of the seven
principles of the thing it resides in, shooting them out as the latter
grows and develops.*

(*c*) *In every animal it does the same. It is its life principle and
vital power; its instinct and qualities; its characteristics and special
idiosyncrasies* . . . .

(*d*) *To man, it gives all that it bestows on all the rest of the
manifested units in nature; but develops, furthermore, the reflection of
all its* **F**ORTY-NINE **F**IRES *in him. Each of his seven principles
is an heir in full to, and a partaker of, the seven principles of the*
"*great Mother.*" *The breath of her first principle is his spirit*
(*Atma*)*. Her second principle is* **B**UDDHI (*soul*). *We call it,
erroneously, the seventh. The third furnishes him with* (*a*) *the brain
stuff on the physical plane, and* (*b*) *with the* MIND *that moves it*
\[which is the human soul. -- H. P. B.\] -- *according to his organic
capacities.*

(*e*) *It is the guiding Force in the Cosmic and terrestrial elements.
It resides in the Fire provoked out of its latent into active being; for
the whole of the seven subdivisions of the \* \** \* *principle reside
in the terrestrial Fire. It whirls in the breeze, blows with the
hurricane, and sets the air in motion, which* element *participates in
one of its principles also.* *Proceeding cyclically, it regulates the
motion*

###### \[\[Footnote(s) -------------------------------------------------\]\]

\* In "Vishnu" and other *Puranas.*

\*\* See the Hermetic "Nature," "Going down cyclically into matter when
she meets 'heavenly man.' "

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 292 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

*of the water, attracts and repels the waves\* according to fixed laws
of which its seventh principle is the informing soul.*

(*f*) *Its four higher principles contain the germ that develops into
the Cosmic Gods; its three lower ones breed the lives of the Elements*
(*Elementals*)*.*

(*g*) *In our Solar world, the One Existence is Heaven and the Earth,
the Root and the flower, the Action and the Thought. It is in the Sun,
and is as present in the glow-worm. Not an atom can escape it.
Therefore, the ancient Sages have wisely called it the manifested God in
Nature*. . . ."

It may be interesting, in this connection, to remind the reader of what
Mr. Subba Row said of the Forces -- mystically defined. See "*Five Years
of Theosophy*" and "The Twelve Signs of the Zodiac." Thus he says:

"Kanya (the sixth sign of the Zodiac, or *Virgo*) means a Virgin, and
represents *Sakti or Mahamaya.* The sign . . . is the 6th *Rasi* or
division, and indicates that there are six primary forces in Nature
(synthesized by the Seventh)" . . . These Sakti stand as follows: -

(1.) **P**ARASAKTI. Literally the great or Supreme Force or power. It
means and includes the powers of *light and heat.*

(2.) **J**NANASAKTI. . . . The power of intellect, of real Wisdom or
Knowledge. It has two aspects:

The following are *some* of its manifestations *when placed under the
influence or control of material conditions.* (a) The power of the mind
in interpreting our sensations. (b) Its power in recalling past ideas
(memory) and raising future expectation. (c) Its power as exhibited in
what are called by modern psychologists "the laws of association," which
enables it to form *persisting* connections between various groups of
sensations and possibilities of sensations, and thus generate the notion
or idea of an external object. (d) Its power in connecting our ideas
together by the mysterious link of memory, and thus generating the
notion of self or individuality; *some* of its manifestations when
liberated *from the bonds of matter are* -- (*a*) Clairvoyance, (*b*)
Psychometry.

(3.) **I**TCHASAKTI -- the *power of the Will.* Its most ordinary
manifesta-

###### \[\[Footnote(s) -------------------------------------------------\]\]

\* The writers of the above knew perfectly well the physical cause of
the tides, of the waves, etc. It is the informing Spirit of the whole
Cosmic solar body that is meant here, and which is referred to whenever
such expressions are used from the mystic point of view.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 293 THE SEVEN POWERS.

tion is the generation of certain nerve currents which set in motion
such muscles as are required for the accomplishment of the desired
object.

(4.) **K**RIYASAKTI. The mysterious power of thought which enables it to
produce external, perceptible, phenomenal results by its own inherent
energy. The ancients held that *any idea will manifest itself externally
if one*'*s attention is deeply concentrated upon it.* Similarly *an
intense volition will be followed by the desired result.*

A Yogi generally performs his wonders by means of Itchasakti and
Kriyasakti.

(5.) **K**UNDALINI **S**AKTI. The power or Force which moves in a curved
path. It is the Universal life-Principle manifesting everywhere in
nature. This force includes the two great forces of attraction and
repulsion. Electricity and magnetism are but manifestations of it. This
is the power which brings about that "continuous adjustment of *internal
relations to external relations*" which is the essence of life according
to Herbert Spencer, and that "*continuous adjustment of external
relations to internal relations*" which is the basis of transmigration
of souls, *punar janman* (re-birth) in the doctrines of the ancient
Hindu philosophers. A Yogi must thoroughly subjugate this power before
he can attain Moksham. . . .

(6.) **M**ANTRIKA-SAKTI. The force or power of letters, speech or music.
The *Mantra Shastra* has for its subject-matter this force in all its
manifestations......... The influence of melody is one of its ordinary
manifestations. The power of the ineffable name is the crown of this
Sakti.

Modern Science has but partly investigated the first, second and fifth
of the forces above named, but is altogether in the dark as regards the
remaining powers. The six forces are in their unity represented by the
"*Daiviprakriti*" (the Seventh, the light of the **L**OGOS).

The above is quoted to show the real Hindu ideas on the same. It is all
esoteric, though not covering the tenth part of *what might be said.*
For one, the six names of the Six Forces mentioned are those of *the six
Hierarchies* of Dhyan Chohans synthesized by their *Primary,* the
seventh, who personify the Fifth Principle of Cosmic Nature, or of the
"Mother" in its Mystical Sense. The enumeration alone of the *yogi*
Powers would require ten volumes. Each of these Forces has a *living
Conscious Entity* at its head, of which entity it is an emanation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 294 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

But let us compare with the commentary just cited the words of Hermes,
the "thrice great":--

"The creation of Life *by the Sun* is as continuous as his light;
nothing arrests or limits it. Around him, like an army of Satellites,
*are innumerable choirs of genii.* These dwell in the neighbourhood of
the Immortals, and thence watch over human things. They fulfil the will
of the gods (Karma) *by means of storms, tempests, transitions of fire
and earthquakes;* likewise by famines and wars, for the punishment of
impiety.\* . . . It is the sun who preserves and nourishes all
creatures; and even as the Ideal World which environs the sensible world
fills this last with the plenitude and universal variety of forms, so
also the Sun, enfolding all in his light, accomplishes everywhere the
birth and development of creatures." . . . "*Under his orders is the
choir of Genii,* or rather the choirs, *for there are many and diverse,
and their number corresponds to that of the stars. Every star has its
genii, good and evil by nature,* or rather by their *operation, for
operation is the essence of the genii. .* . . All these Genii *preside
over mundane affairs,\*\** they shake and overthrow the constitution of
States and of individuals; they *imprint their likeness on our Souls,*
they are present in our nerves, our marrow, our veins, our arteries, and
*our very brain-substance* . . . at the moment when each of us receives
life and being, he is taken in charge by the genii (Elementals) who
preside over births,\*\*\* and who are classed beneath the astral powers
(Superhuman astral Spirits.) They change perpetually, not always
identically, but revolving in circles.\*\*\*\* They permeate by the body
two parts of the Soul, that it may receive from each the impress of his
own energy. But the reasonable part of the Soul is not subject to the
genii; it is designed

###### \[\[Footnote(s) -------------------------------------------------\]\]

\* See Stanzas **III**. and **IV**. and the Commentaries thereupon,
especially the Comments on Stanza **IV**. "the *Lipika* and the four
Maharajas," the agents of Karma.

\*\* And "Gods" or Dhyanis, too, not only the genii or "guided Forces."

\*\*\* The meaning of this is that as man is composed of all the Great
Elements: Fire, Air, Water, Earth and Ether -- the ELEMENTALS which
belong respectively to these Elements feel attracted to man by reason of
their co-essence. That element which predominates in a certain
constitution will be the ruling element throughout life. For instance,
if man has a preponderance of the Earthly, gnomic element, the gnomes
will lead him towards assimilating metals -- money and wealth, and so
on. "Animal man is the son of the animal elements out of which his Soul
(life) was born, and animals are the mirrors of man," says Paracelsus
(*De Fundamento Sapientiae*)*.* Paracelsus was cautious, and wanted the
Bible to agree with what he said, and therefore did not say all.

\*\*\*\* Cyclic progress in development.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 295 UNIVERSAL ILLUSION.

for the reception of (the) God,\* who enlightens it with a sunny ray.
Those who are thus illumined are few in number, and from them the genii
abstain: for neither genii nor Gods have any power in the presence of a
single ray of God.\*\* But all other men, both soul and body, are
directed by genii, to whom they cleave, and whose operations they
affect........... The genii have then the control of mundane things and
our bodies serve them as instruments...........

The above, save a few sectarian points, represents that which was a
universal belief common to all nations till about a century or so back.
It is still as orthodox in its broad outlines and features among pagans
and Christians alike, if one excepts a handful of materialists and men
of Science.

For whether one calls the genii of Hermes and his "Gods," "Powers of
Darkness" and "Angels," as in the Greek and Latin Churches; or "Spirits
of the Dead," as in Spiritualism or, again, *Bhoots* and *Devas,
Shaitan* or *Djin,* as they are still called in India and Mussulman
countries -- *they are all one and the same thing --* ILLUSION. Let not
this, however, be misunderstood in the sense into which the great
philosophical doctrine of the Vedantists has been lately perverted by
Western schools.

All that which *is*, emanates from the ABSOLUTE, which, from this
qualification alone, stands as the one and only reality -- hence,
everything extraneous to this Absolute, the generative and causative
Element, *must* be an illusion, most undeniably. But this is only so
from the purely metaphysical view. A man who regards himself as mentally
sane, and is so regarded by his neighbours, calls the visions of an
*insane* brother -- whose hallucinations make *the victim either happy
or supremely wretched,* as the case may be -- illusions and fancies
likewise. But, where is that madman for whom the hideous shadows in his
deranged mind, his *illusions,* are not, for the time being, as actual
and as real as the things which his physician or keeper may see?
Everything is relative in this Universe, everything is an illusion. But

###### \[\[Footnote(s) -------------------------------------------------\]\]

\* The God in man and often the incarnation of a God, a highly Spiritual
Dhyan Chohan in him, besides the presence of his own seventh Principle.

\*\* Now, what "god" is meant here? Not God "the Father," the
anthropomorphic fiction; for that god is the Elohim collectively, and
has no being apart from the Host. Besides, such a god is finite and
imperfect. It is the high Initiates and Adepts who are meant here by
those men "few in number." And it is precisely those men who believe in
"gods" and know no "God," but one Universal unrelated and unconditioned
Deity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 296 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

the experience of any plane is an actuality for the percipient being,
whose consciousness is on that plane; though the said experience,
regarded from the purely metaphysical standpoint, may be conceived to
have no objective reality. But it is not against metaphysicians, but
against physicists and materialists that Esoteric teachings have to
fight, and for these Vital Force, Light, Sound, Electricity, even to the
objectively pulling force of magnetism, have no objective being, and are
said to exist merely as "modes of motion," "sensations and *affections*
of matter."

Neither the Occultists generally, nor the Theosophists, reject, as
erroneously believed by some, the views and theories of the modern
scientists, only because these views are opposed to Theosophy. The first
rule of our Society is to render unto Caesar what is Caesar's. The
Theosophists, therefore, are the first to recognize the intrinsic value
of science. But when its high priests resolve consciousness into a
secretion from the grey matter of the brain, and everything else in
nature into a mode of motion, we protest against the doctrine as being
unphilosophical, self-contradictory, and simply absurd, from a
*scientific* point of view, as much and even more than from the occult
aspect of the esoteric knowledge.

For truly the astral light of the derided Kabalists has strange and
weird secrets for him who can see in it; and the mysteries concealed
within its incessantly disturbed waves *are there,* the whole body of
Materialists and scoffers notwithstanding.\* These secrets, along with

###### \[\[Footnote(s) -------------------------------------------------\]\]

\* The astral light of the Kabalists is very incorrectly translated by
some "AEther;" the latter is confused with the hypothetical Ether of
Science, and both are referred to by some theosophists as synonymous
with *Akasa.* This is a great mistake.

"A characteristic of Akasa will serve to show how inadequately it is
represented by Ether," writes the author of Rational Refutations, thus
unconsciously helping Occultism. "In dimension it is infinite; it is not
made up of parts; and colour, taste, smell, and tangibility do not
appertain to it. So far forth it corresponds exactly to time, space,
*Isvara,* ("The Lord," but rather creative potency and soul -- *anima
mundi*)*.* Its speciality, as compared therewith, consists in its being
the *material cause of sound.* Except for its being so, one might take
it to be one with vacuity" (*p*. 120.)

It is *vacuity,* no doubt, especially for Rationalists. At any rate
Akasa is sure to produce vacuity in the brain of a materialist.
Nevertheless, though Akasa is not that Ether of Science, not even the
Ether of the Occultist, who defines the latter as one of the principles
of Akasa only, it is as certainly, together with its primary, the cause
of sound, only a physical and spiritual, not a material cause by any
means. The relations \[\[fn continued\]\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 297 NOTHING NEW UNDER THE SUN.

many other mysteries, will remain non-existent to the materialists of
our age, in the same way as America was a non-existent myth for
Europeans during the early part of the mediaeval ages, whereas
Scandinavians and Norwegians had actually reached and settled in that
very old "New World" several centuries before. But, as a Columbus was
born to re-discover, and to force the Old World to believe in Antipodal
countries, so will there be born scientists who will discover the
marvels now claimed by Occultists to exist in the regions of Ether, with
their varied and multiform denizens and conscious Entities. Then,
*nolens volens,* Science will have to accept the old "Superstition," as
it has several others. And having been once forced to accept it --
judging from past experience -- its learned professors will, in all
probability, as in the case of **M**ESMERISM and Magnetism, now
re-baptised Hypnotism, father the thing and reject its name. The choice
of the new appellation will depend, in its turn, on the "modes of
motion," the new name for the older "automatic physical processes among
the nerve fibrils of the (Scientific) brain" of Moleschott; as also,
very likely, upon the last meal of the namer; since, according to the
Founder of the new Hylo-Idealistic Scheme, "Cerebration is generically
the same as chylification."\* Thus, were one to believe this
preposterous proposition, the new name of the archaic thing would have
to take its chance, on the inspiration of the namer's liver, and then
only would these truths have a chance of becoming scientific!

But TRUTH, however distasteful to the generally blind majorities, has
always had her champions, ready to die for her, and it is not the
Occultists who will protest against its adoption by Science under
whatever new name. But, until absolutely forced on the notice and
acceptance of Scientists, many an Occult truth will be tabooed, as the
phenomena of the Spiritualists and other psychic manifestations were, to
be finally appropriated by its ex-traducers without the least
acknowledgment or thanks. Nitrogen has added considerably to chemical
knowledge, but its discoverer, Paracelsus, is to this day called a
"quack."

###### \[\[Footnote(s) -------------------------------------------------\]\]

\[\[fn back\]\] of Ether to Akasa may be defined by applying to both
Akasa and Ether the words said of the god in the Vedas, "So himself was
indeed (his own) son," one being the progeny of the other and yet
itself. This may be a difficult riddle to the profane, but very easy to
understand for any Hindu -- though not even a mystic.

*\* National Reformer,* January 9th, 1887. Article
"Phreno-Kosmo-Biology," by Dr. Lewins.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 298 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

How profoundly true are the words of H. T. Buckle, in his admirable
"*History of Civilization*" (Vol. I., p. 256), when he says: -

"Owing to circumstances still unknown (Karmic provision, H.P.B.) there
appear from time to time great thinkers, who, devoting their lives to a
single purpose, are able to anticipate the progress of mankind, and to
produce a religion or a philosophy by which important effects are
eventually brought about. But if we look into history we shall clearly
see that, although the origin of a new opinion may be thus due to a
single man, the result which the new opinion produces will depend on the
condition of the people among whom it is propagated. If either a
religion or a philosophy is too much in advance of a nation it can do no
present service but must bide its time\* until the minds of men are ripe
for its reception. . . . Every science, every creed has had its martyrs.
*According to the ordinary course of affairs, a few generations pass
away, and then there comes a period when these very truths are looked
upon as commonplace facts, and a little later there comes another period
in which they are declared to be necessary, and even the dullest
intellect wonders* how they could ever have been denied."

It is barely possible that the minds of the present generations are not
quite ripe for the reception of Occult truths. Such will be the
retrospect furnished to the advanced thinkers of the Sixth Root Race of
the history of the acceptance of Esoteric Philosophy -- fully and
unconditionally. Meanwhile the generations of our Fifth Race will
continue to be led away by prejudice and preconceptions. Occult Sciences
will have the finger of scorn pointed at them from every street corner,
and everyone will seek to ridicule and crush them in the name, and for
the greater glory, of Materialism and its so-called Science. The
Addendum which completes the present Book shows, however, in an
anticipatory answer to several of the forthcoming Scientific objections,
the true and mutual positions of the defendant and plaintiff. The
Theosophists and Occultists stand arraigned by public opinion, which
still holds high the banner of the inductive Sciences. The latter have,
then, to be examined; and it must be shown how far their achievements
and discoveries in the realm of natural laws are opposed, not so much to
our claims, as to the facts in nature. The hour has now struck to
ascertain whether the

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\]-------------------------------------------------

\* This is Cyclic law, but this law itself is often defied by human
stubbornness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 299 MEN WELCOME ERROR, AND CRUCIFY THE TRUTH.

walls of the modern Jericho are so impregnable that no blast of the
Occult trumpet is ever likely to make them crumble.

The so-called *Forces,* with Light and Electricity heading them, and the
constitution of the Solar orb must be carefully examined; as also
Gravitation and the Nebular theories. The Natures of Ether and of other
Elements must be discussed: thus contrasting scientific with other
Occult teachings, while revealing some of the hitherto secret tenets of
the latter. (*Vide Addendum.*)

Some fifteen years ago, the writer was the first to repeat, after the
Kabalists, the wise Commandments in the Esoteric Catechism. "Close thy
mouth, lest thou shouldst speak of *this* (the mystery), and thy heart,
lest thou shouldst think aloud; and if thy heart has escaped thee, bring
it back to its place, for such is the object of our alliance." (*Sepher
Jezireh, Book of Creation.*) And again: -- "This is a secret which gives
death: close thy mouth lest thou shouldst reveal it to the vulgar;
compress thy brain lest something should escape from it and fall
outside." (Rules of Initiation.)

A few years later, a corner of the Veil of Isis had to be lifted; and
now another and a larger rent is made. . . .

But old and time-honoured errors -- such as become with every day more
glaring and self-evident -- stand arrayed in battle-order now, as they
did then. Marshalled by blind conservatism, conceit and prejudice, they
are constantly on the watch, ready to strangle every truth, which,
awakening from its age-long sleep, happens to knock for admission. Such
has been the case ever since man became an animal. That this proves in
every case *moral death* to the revealers, who bring to light any of
these old, old truths, is as certain as that it gives LIFE and
REGENERATION to those who are fit to profit even by the little that is
now revealed to them.

---------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next Section](sd1-2-01.md)

[Contents](sd1-0-co.htm#contents.md)
