##### The Secret Doctrine by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol. 1

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 500 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

#### V. THE THEORIES OF ROTATION IN SCIENCE.

**C**ONSIDERING that "final cause is pronounced a chimera, and the first
Great Cause is remanded to the Sphere of the Unknown," as a reverend
gentleman justly complains, the number of hypotheses put forward, a
nebula in itself, is most remarkable. The profane student is perplexed,
and does not know in which of the theories of *exact* science he has to
believe. Here we have hypotheses enough for every taste and power of
brain. They are all extracted from a number of scientific volumes.

**C**URRENT **H**YPOTHESES EXPLAINING THE **O**RIGIN OF **R**OTATION.

Rotation has originated either --

(*a*) By the collision of nebular masses wandering aimlessly in space;
or by *attraction*, "in cases where no actual impact takes place."

(*b*) "By the tangential action of currents of nebulous matter (in the
case of an amorphous nebula) descending from higher to lower levels,\*
or *simply by the action of the central gravity of the mass.*"*\*\**

"It is a fundamental principle in physics that *no rotation could be
generated in such a mass by the action of its own parts.* As well
attempt to change the course of a steamer by pulling at the deck
railing," remarks to this Prof. Winchell in "World-Life."

**H**YPOTHESES OF THE **O**RIGIN OF THE **S**EVEN **P**LANETS AND
**C**OMETS.

(*a*) We owe the birth of the Planets (1) to an explosion of the Sun --
a parturition of its central mass;\*\*\* or (2) to some kind of
disruption of the nebular rings.

(*b*) "The Comets are strangers to our planetary system" (*La Place*)*.*
"The Comets are undeniably generated in our Solar system" (*Faye*)*.*

(*c*) The "*fixed* stars are motionless" says one authority. . . . "All
the stars are actually in motion" answers another authority. . .
"Undoubtedly every star is in motion" (*Wolf*)*.*

(*d*) "For over 350,000,000 years, the slow and majestic movement of the
Sun around its axis has never for a moment ceased" (*Panorama des
Mondes*, *Le Couturier.*)

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* The terms "high" and "low" being only relative to the position of the
observer in Space, any use of those terms tending to convey the
impression that they stand for abstract realities, is necessarily
fallacious.

\*\* *Jacob Ennis*, "The Origin of the Stars," p. 221 *et seq.*

\*\*\* If such is the case, how does Science explain the comparatively
small size of the planets nearest the Sun? The theory of meteoric
aggregation is only a step farther from truth than the nebular
conception, and has not even the quality of the latter -- its
metaphysical element.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 501 CONTRADICTORY HYPOTHESES.

(*e*) And "the Sun having Alcyone in the Pleiades for the centre of its
orbit, consumes 180,000,000 of years in completing its revolution"
(*Maedler*)*.* And also,

(*f*) That, "*the Sun has existed no more than 15,000,000 of years*, and
will emit heat for no longer *than 10,000,000 years more*" (*Sir W.
Thomson*'*s lecture on* "*the latent dynamical theory regarding the
probable origin*, *total amount of heat*, *and duration of the Sun*,"
1887).

A few years ago this eminent Scientist was telling the world that the
time required for the earth to cool from incipient incrustation to its
present state, could not exceed 80,000,000 years*\**; (*Thomson and
Tait*, *Natural Philosophy.*) If the encrusted age of the world is only
40 millions, or the half of the duration once allowed, and the Sun's age
only 15 millions, have we to understand that the earth was at one time
independent of the Sun?

Since the ages of the Sun, planets, and the Earth, as stated in the many
scientific hypotheses of the astronomers and physicists, are given
elsewhere (*infra*), we have said enough to show the disagreement
between the ministers of modern Science. Whether we accept the *fifteen*
million years of Sir W. Thomson or the *thousand* millions of Mr.
Huxley, for the rotational evolution of our solar system, it will always
come to this; by accepting *self-generated* rotation for the heavenly
bodies composed of *inert* matter and yet moved by *their own internal
motion*, for millions of years, this teaching of Science amounts to --

(*a*) An evident denial of that fundamental physical law, which states
that "a body *in motion tends constantly to inertia*, (*i.e.*, to
continue in the same state of motion or rest), unless it is stimulated
into further action *by a superior active* force."

(*b.*) To an original impulse, which culminates in an unalterable
motion, within a *resisting* ether that **N**EWTON had declared
*incompatible with that motion.*

(*c.*) Universal gravity, which, we are taught, always tends to a centre
in *rectilinear* descent -- *alone* the cause of the revolution of the
whole solar system, which is performing an eternal *double* gyration,
each body around its axis and orbit. Another occasional version is: --

(*d.*) A magnet in the Sun; or, the said revolution due to a magnetic
force, which acts, just as gravitation does, in a straight line --
varying inversely as the square of the distance. (Coulomb's Law.)

(*e.*) The whole acting under *invariable* and changeless laws, which
are, nevertheless, often shown variable, as during some well-known
freaks

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* And even on these figures Bischof disagrees with Thomson, and
calculates that 350 million years would be required for the earth to
cool from a temperature of 20,000 degrees to 200 degrees centigrade.
This is, also, the opinion of Helmholtz.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 502 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

of planets and other bodies, as also when the Comets approach to or
recede from the Sun.

(*f*.) **A** **M**OTOR **F**ORCE always *proportionate* to the mass it
is acting upon; but *independent of the* specific nature of that mass,
to which it is proportionate; which amounts to saying, as Le Couturier
does, that, "without that Force independent from and of quite another
nature than the said mass, the latter, were it as huge as Saturn, or as
tiny as Ceres, would always fall with the same rapidity" (*Musee des
Sciences*, 15 August, 1857). A mass, furthermore, which derives its
weight from the body on which it weighs.

Thus neither Laplace's perceptions of a solar atmospheric fluid, which
would extend beyond the orbits of the planets, nor Le Couturier's
electricity, nor Foucault's heat (*Panorama des Mondes*, p. 55), nor
this, nor the other, can ever help any of the numerous hypotheses about
the origin and *permanency* of rotation to escape from this squirrel's
wheel, any more than the theory of gravity itself. This mystery is the
Procrustean bed of physical Science. If matter is, as now taught,
passive, the simplest movement cannot be said to be an essential
property of matter -- if the latter is simply an inert mass. How, then,
can such a complicated movement, compound and multiple, harmonious and
equilibrated, lasting in the eternities for millions and millions of
years, be attributed simply to its own inherent Force, unless the latter
is an *intelligence?* A *physical will* is something new -- a conception
that the ancients would have never entertained, indeed!\*

"We talk of the weight of the heavenly bodies," says an astronomer; "but
since it is recognised that weight decreases in proportion to the
distance from the centre, it becomes evident that, at a certain
distance, that weight must be forcibly reduced to Zero? Were there any
*attraction* there would be equilibrium . . . . And since the modern
school recognizes neither a *beneath* nor an *above* in universal space,
it is not clear what should cause the Earth to fall, were there even no
gravitation, nor attraction." (*Cosmographie.*)

Methinks the Count de Maistre was right in solving the question in his
own theological way. He cuts the Gordian knot by saying: -- "The

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* For over a century all distinction between body and force is made
away with. "Force is but the property of a body in motion," say the
physicists; and "*life* -- the property of our *animal* *organs* -- is
but the result of their molecular arrangement," answer the
physiologists. "In the bosom of that aggregate which is named planet,"
teaches Littre, "are developed all the forces immanent to matter . . .
*i.e.*, that matter possesses *in itself* and *through itself* the
forces that are proper to it . . . and which are *primary*, not
*secondary.* Such forces are the property of weight, the property of
electricity, of terrestrial magnetism, the property of life. . . . Every
planet can develop life . . . as earth, for instance, which had not
always mankind on it, and now bears (*produit*) men" . . *.* (*Revue des
Deux Mondes*, *July* 15, 1860.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 503 SCIENTIFIC ABERRATIONS.

planets rotate because *they are made to rotate* . . . . . and the
modern physical system of the universe is a *physical impossibility.*"
(*Soirees.*) For did not Herschell say the same thing when he remarked
that there is a *will* needed to impart a circular motion, and *another
will* to restrain *it?* (*Discours*, 165.) This shows and explains how a
*retarded* planet is cunning enough to calculate so well its time as to
hit off its arrival at the fixed minute. For, if Science sometimes
succeeds with its great ingenuity in explaining some of such stoppages,
retrograde motions, angles outside the orbits, &c., &c., by appearances
resulting from the inequality of their progress and ours in the course
of our mutual and respective orbits, we still know that there are
others, and "very real and considerable deviations," according to
Herschell, "which cannot be explained except by the mutual and irregular
action of those planets and by the *perturbing* influence of the Sun."

We understand, however, that there are, besides those little and
accidental perturbations, continuous perturbations called "secular" --
because of the extreme slowness with which the irregularity increases
and affects the relations of the elliptic movement -- and that these
perturbations *can be corrected.* From Newton, who found that this world
needed *repairing* very often, down to Reynaud, all say the same. In his
*Ciel et Terre* (*p.* 28), the latter speaks of --

". . . . . The orbits described by the planets as being very far from
immutable; on the contrary, subject to a perpetual mutation in their
position and form," -- all prove gravitation and the peripatetic *laws*
to be as negligent as they are quick to repair their mistakes. The
charge as it stands seems to be that "they (the orbits) are alternately
widening and narrowing, their great axis lengthens and diminishes, or
oscillates at the same time from right to left around the Sun, the plane
itself, in which they are situated, raising and lowering itself
periodically while pivoting around itself with a kind of tremor. . . ."

To this, De Mirville, who believes in *intelligent* "workmen" ruling
invisibly the solar system -- as we do -- observes very wittily\* . . .
. . "*Voila certes*, a voyage which has little in it of mechanical
*rigour;* at the utmost, one could compare it to a steamer, pulled to
and fro and tossed on the waves, retarded or accelerated, all and each
of which impediments might put off its arrival indefinitely, were there
not the intelligences of a pilot and engineers to catch up the time
lost, and to repair the damages. . . . ."

The law of gravity, however, seems to be becoming an *obsolete* law in
starry heaven. At any rate those long-haired sidereal *radicals*, called
comets, appear to be very poor respecters of the majesty of that law,

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* *Deuxieme memoire*, "*Manifestations Historiques*," p. 272.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 504 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

and to beard it quite impudently. Nevertheless, and though presenting in
nearly every respect "phenomena *not yet fully understood*," comets and
meteors are credited by the believers in modern Science with *obeying
the same laws and consisting of the same matter*, "as the Suns, stars
and nebulae," and even "the earth and its inhabitants." (*Laing*'*s*
"*Modern Science and Modern Thought.*")

This is what one might call taking things on trust, aye, even to *blind
faith.* But *exact* Science is not to be questioned, and he who rejects
the hypotheses imagined by her students -- gravitation, for instance --
would be regarded as an ignorant fool for it; yet we are told by the
just cited author a queer legend from the scientific annals. "The comet
of 1811 had a tail 120 millions of miles in length and 25 millions of
miles in diameter at the widest part, while the diameter of the nucleus
was about 127,000 miles, more than ten times that of the earth." He
tells us, "in order that bodies of this magnitude, passing near the
earth, *should not affect its* motion or change the length of the year
by even a single second, their actual substance must be inconceivably
rare. . . ." It must be so indeed, yet: --

". . . . . The extreme tenuity of a comet's mass is also proved by the
phenomenon of the tail, which, as the comet approaches the sun, is
thrown out sometimes to a length of 90 millions of miles in a few hours.
And what is remarkable, THIS TAIL IS THROWN OUT AGAINST THE FORCE OF
GRAVITY *by some repulsive force*, probably electrical, so that it
always points away from the Sun (!!!) And yet, thin as the matter of
comets must be, ***IT OBEYS THE COMMON LAW OF GRAVITY*** (*!?*), and
whether the comet revolves in an orbit within that of the outer planets,
or shoots off into the abysses of Space, and returns only after hundreds
of years, its path is, at each instant, regulated *by the same force as
that which causes an apple to fall to the ground.*" (*Ibid*, p. 17.)

Science is like Caesar's wife, and must not be suspected -- this is
evident. But it can be respectfully criticised, nevertheless. At all
events, it may be reminded that "the apple" is a dangerous fruit. For
the second time in the history of mankind, it may become the cause of
the ***FALL*** -- this time, of "exact" Science. A comet whose tail
defies the law of gravity right in the Sun's face can hardly be credited
with obeying that law.

In a series of scientific works on Astronomy and the nebular theory,
written between 1865 and 1866, the present writer, a poor tyro in
Science, has counted in a few hours, no less *than thirty-nine
contradictory hypotheses* offered as explanations for the
self-generated, primitive rotatory motion of the heavenly bodies. The
writer is no astronomer, no mathematician, no scientist; but was obliged
to examine these errors in defence of Occultism, in general, and what is
still more

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 505 THE PARADOXES OF SCIENCE.

important, in order to support the occult teachings concerning astronomy
and Cosmology. Occultists were threatened with terrible penalties for
questioning scientific truths. But now they feel braver -- Science is
less secure in its "impregnable" position than they were led to expect,
and many of its strongholds are built on very shifting sands.

Thus, even this poor and unscientific examination of it was useful, and
it was certainly very instructive. We have learned a good many things,
in fact, having studied with particular care especially those
astronomical data that would be the most likely to clash with our
heterodox and "superstitious" beliefs.

So, for instance, we have found there, concerning gravitation, the axial
and orbital motions, that synchronous movement having been once
overcome, in the early stage -- it was enough to originate a rotatory
motion till the end of Manvantara. We have also come to know in all the
aforesaid combinations of possibilities with regard to incipient
rotation -- most complicated in every case, -- some of the causes *to
which it may have been due*, as well as some others to which it *ought*
and *should* have been due, but, in some way or other, was not. Among
other things, we were informed that *incipient* rotation may be provoked
with equal ease in a mass *in igneous fusion*, and in one that is
characterised by *glacial opacity* ("*Heaven and Earth*")*.* That
gravitation is a law which *nothing can overcome*, but which,
nevertheless, is overcome in and out of season by the most ordinary
celestial or terrestrial bodies -- the tails of impudent comets, for
instance. That we owe the universe to the holy creative Trinity, called
*Inert Matter*, *Senseless Force* and *Blind Chance.* Of the real
essence and nature of any of these three, Science knows nothing, but
this is a trifling detail. *Ergo*, we are told that, when a mass of
cosmic or nebular matter -- whose nature *is unknown* (entirely so), and
which may be in a state of fusion (Laplace), or *dark and cold*
(Thomson), for "this intervention of heat is itself a *pure hypothesis*"
(Faye) -- decides to exhibit its mechanical energy under the form of
rotation, it acts in this wise. It (the mass) either bursts into
spontaneous conflagration, or it remains inert, tenebrous, and frigid,
both states being equally capable of sending it, without *any adequate
cause*, spinning through space for millions of years. Its movements may
be retrograde and they may be direct, about a hundred various reasons
being offered for both motions, in about as many hypotheses. Anyhow,
joining the maze of stars, whose origin belongs to the same miraculous
and spontaneous order -- for "the *nebular theory does not profess to
discover the origin of things*, but only a *stadium* in material
history" (*Winchell: World-Life*) -- those millions of suns, planets,
and satellites, composed of inert matter, will whirl on in most
impressive and majestic symmetry around the firmament, moved

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 506 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

and guided only, their inertia notwithstanding, "*by their own internal
motion.*"

Shall we wonder after this if learned mystics, pious Roman Catholics,
and even such learned astronomers as were Chaubard and Godefroy,\* have
preferred the Kabala and the ancient systems to the modern dreary and
contradictory exposition of the Universe? The *Zohar* makes a
distinction, at any rate, between "the *hajaschar* ("the light Forces"),
the *hachoser* ("Reflected Lights"), and the simple *phenomenal
exteriority of* their spiritual types." (*See Kabala Denudata*, II, 67.)

The question of "gravity" may now be dismissed, and other hypotheses
examined. That physical Science knows nothing of "Forces" is clear. We
may close the argument, however, by calling to our help one more man of
Science -- Professor Jaumes, Member of the Academy of Medicine at
Montpellier. Says this learned man, speaking of Forces: --

"A cause is that which is essentially acting in the genealogy of
phenomena, in every production as in every modification. I said that
activity (or Force) was invisible. . . . To suppose it corporeal and
*residing in the properties of matter* would be a gratuitous hypothesis.
. . To reduce all the causes to God. . . . would amount to embarrassing
oneself with a hypothesis hostile to many verities. But to speak of *a
plurality of forces* proceeding from the Deity and possessing inherent
powers of their own, is not unreasonable. . . . and I am disposed to
admit phenomena produced by intermediate agents called Forces or
Secondary Agents. The *distinction* of Forces is the principle of the
division of Sciences; so many real and separate forces, so many
mother-Sciences. . . . No: Forces are not suppositions and abstractions,
but realities, and the only acting realities whose attributes can be
determined with the help of direct observation and induction." ("*Sur la
distinction des Forces*," published in the *Memoires de l*'*Academie des
Sciences de Montpellier*, Vol. II., fasc. I., 1854.)

--------------

<span id="DDE_LINK19">\[\[This page continued in next section\]\]</span>

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* *L*'*Univers explique par la Reveation*, *and Cosmogonie de la
Revelation.* But see De Mirville's Deuxieme Memoire. The author, a
terrible enemy of Occultism, was yet one who wrote great truths.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next Section](sd1-3-06.md)

[Contents](sd1-0-co.htm#contents.md)
