##### <span id="DDE_LINK1"></span><span id="DDE_LINK3"></span><span id="DDE_LINK4"></span><span id="DDE_LINK5"></span><span id="DDE_LINK7"></span><span id="DDE_LINK8"></span><span id="DDE_LINK9"></span><span id="DDE_LINK11"></span>The Secret Doctrine by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol. 1

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 482 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

#### II. MODERN PHYSICISTS ARE PLAYING AT BLIND MAN'S BUFF.

**A**ND now Occultism puts to Science the question: "Is light a body, or
is it not?" Whatever the answer of the latter, the former is prepared to
show that, to this day, the most eminent physicists know neither one way
nor the other. To know what is light, and whether it is an actual
substance or a mere undulation of the "ethereal medium," Science has
first to learn what are in reality Matter, Atom, Ether, Force. Now, the
truth is, that *it knows nothing of any of these*, and admits it. It has
not even agreed what to believe in, as dozens of hypotheses emanating
from various and very eminent Scientists on the same subject, are
antagonistic to each other and often self-contradictory. Thus their
learned speculations may, with a stretch of good-will, be accepted as
"working hypotheses" in a secondary sense, as Stallo puts it. But being
radically inconsistent with each other, they must finally end by
mutually destroying themselves. As declared by the author of "Concepts
of Modern Physics": --

> "It must not be forgotten that the several departments of Science are
> simply *arbitrary divisions of labour.* In these several departments
> the same physical object may be considered under different aspects.
> The physicist may study its molecular relations, while the chemist
> determines its atomic constitution. But when they both deal with the
> same element or agent, it cannot have one set of properties in
> physics, and another set contradictory of them, in chemistry. If the
> physicist and chemist alike assume the existence of ultimate atoms
> absolutely invariable in bulk and weight, *the atom cannot be a cube
> or oblate spheroid for physical*, *and* *a sphere for chemical
> purposes. A group of constant atoms cannot be an* *aggregate of
> extended and absolutely inert and impenetrable masses in a crucible or
> retort*, *and a system of mere centres of force as part of a magnet or
> of a Clamond battery. The universal Ether cannot be soft and mobile to
> please the chemist*, *and rigid-elastic to satisfy the physicist; it
> cannot be continuous at the command of Sir William Thomson and
> discontinuous on the suggestion of Cauchy or Fresnel.*"*\**

> The eminent physicist, G. A. Hirn, may likewise be quoted saying the
> same in the 43rd Volume of the *Memoires de l*'*Academie Royale de
> Belgique*, which we translate from the French, as cited: "When one
> sees the assurance with which are to-day affirmed doctrines which
> attribute the collectivity, the universality of the phenomena to the
> motions alone of the atom, one has a right to expect to find likewise
> unanimity on the qualities described to this unique being, the
> foundation of all that exists. Now, from the first examination of the
> particular systems proposed, one feels the strangest deception; one
> perceives that the atom of the chemist, the atom of the physicist,
> that of the metaphysician, and that of the mathematician . . . . have
> *absolutely nothing in common but the* *name!* The inevitable result
> is the existing

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* "Concepts of Modern Physics," p. xi-xii., Introd. to the 2nd Edit.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 483 NO AGREEMENT AMONG SCIENTISTS.

> subdivision of our sciences, each of which, in its own little
> pigeon-hole, constructs an atom which satisfies the requirements of
> the phenomena it studies, without troubling itself in the least about
> the requirements proper to the phenomena of the neighbouring
> pigeon-hole. The metaphysician banishes the principles of attraction
> and repulsion as dreams; the mathematician, who analyses the laws of
> elasticity and those of the propagation of light, admits them
> implicitly, without even naming them. . . . The chemist cannot explain
> the grouping of the atoms, in his often complicated molecules, without
> attributing to his atoms specific distinguishing qualities; *for the
> physicist and the metaphysician*, *partisans of the modern doctrines*,
> *the atom is*, *on the contrary*, *always and everywhere the same.*
> What am I saying? **T**HERE IS NO AGREEMENT EVEN IN ONE AND THE SAME
> SCIENCE AS TO THE PROPERTIES OF THE ATOM. Each constructs an atom to
> suit his own fancy, in order to explain some special phenomenon with
> which he is particularly concerned."\*

The above is the photographically correct image of modern Science and
physics. The "pre-requisite of that incessant play of the 'scientific
imagination,' " which is so often found in Professor Tyndall's eloquent
discourses, is *vivid* indeed, as shown by Stallo, and for contradictory
variety leaves far behind it any "phantasies" of occultism. However it
may be, if physical theories are confessedly "mere formal, explanatory,
didactic devices," and if "atomism is only a symbolical graphic
system,"\*\* then the occultist can hardly be regarded as assuming too
much, when he places alongside of these *devices* and "*symbolical*
systems" of modern Science, the symbols and devices of Archaic
teachings.

--------------

<span id="DDE_LINK19">\[\[This page continued in next section\]\]</span>

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* "*Recherches experimentales sur la relation qui existe entre la
resistance de Pair et sa temperature*," p. 68.

\*\* From the criticism of "Concepts of Modern Physics" in *Nature.* See
Stallo's work, p. xvi. of *Introduction.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next Section](sd1-3-03.md)

[Contents](sd1-0-co.htm#contents.md)
