##### The Secret Doctrine by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol. 1

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 483 NO AGREEMENT AMONG SCIENTISTS.

<span id="DDE_LINK20">\[\[This page continued from</span> [previous
section](sd1-3-02.md)\]\]

#### III. "AN LUMEN SIT CORPUS, NEC NON?"

**M**OST decidedly Light is not a body, we are told. Physical Sciences
say Light is a Force, a vibration, the undulation of ether. It is the
property or quality of matter, or even an affection thereof -- never *a
body!*

Just so. For this discovery, the knowledge -- whatever it may be worth
-- that light or caloric is not a motion of *material particles*,
Science is chiefly indebted, if not solely, to Sir W. Grove. It was he
who was the first in a lecture at the London Institution, in 1842, to
show that

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 484 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

"light, heat, etc., etc.\* are *affections* of matter itself, and not a
distinct ethereal, 'imponderable,' fluid, (a state of matter *now*)
permeating it." (*See* "*Correlation of the Physical Forces*,"
*Preface*)*.* Yet, perhaps, for some physicists -- as for Oersted, a
very eminent Scientist -- **F**ORCE and **F**ORCES were tacitly "Spirit
(*and hence Spirits*) *in Nature.*" What several rather mystical
Scientists taught was that light, heat, magnetism, electricity and
gravity, etc., were not the final *causes* of the visible phenomena,
including planetary motion, but themselves the Secondary *effects of
other Causes*, for which Science in our day cares very little, but in
which Occultism believes, for the Occultists have exhibited proofs of
the validity of their claims in every age. And in what age were there no
*Occultists* and no **A**DEPTS?

Sir Isaac Newton held to the Pythagorean corpuscular theory, and was
also inclined to admit its consequences; which made the Count de Maistre
hope, at one time, that Newton would ultimately lead Science back to the
recognition of the fact that *Forces* and the Celestial bodies *were
propelled and guided by Intelligences* (*Soirees*, vol. ii.). But de
Maistre counted without his host. The innermost thoughts and ideas of
Newton were perverted, and of his great mathematical learning only the
mere physical husk was turned to account. Had poor Sir Isaac foreseen to
what use his successors and followers would apply his " gravity,"\*\*
that pious and religious man would surely have quietly eaten his apple,
and never breathed a word about any mechanical ideas connected with its
fall.

Great contempt is shown for metaphysics generally and for onto-

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Mr. Robert Ward, discussing the questions of Heat and Light in the
November *Journal of Science*, 1881, shows us how utterly ignorant is
Science about one of the commonest facts of nature -- the heat of the
sun. He says: -- "The question of the temperature of the sun has been
the subject of investigation with many scientists: Newton, one of the
first investigators of this problem, tried to determine it, and after
him all the scientists who have been occupied with calorimetry have
followed his example. *All have believed themselves successful*, and
have formulated their results with great confidence. The following, in
the chronological order of the publication of the results, are the
temperatures (in centigrade degrees) found by each of them: Newton,
1,699,300 deg.; Pouillet, 1,461 deg.; Tollner, 102,200 deg.; Secchi,
5,344,840 deg.; Ericsson, 2,726,700 deg.; Fizeau, 7,500 deg.; Waterston,
9,000,000 deg.; Spoeren, 27,000 deg.; Deville, 9,500 deg.; Soret,
5,801,846 deg.; Vicaire, 1,500 deg.; Rosetti, 20,000 deg. The difference
is as 1,400 deg. against 9,000,000 deg., or no less than 8,998,600
deg.!! There probably does not exist in science a more astonishing
contradiction than that revealed in these figures. And yet without doubt
if an *Occultist* were to give out an estimate, each of these gentlemen
would vehemently protest in the name of '**E**XACT' Science at the
rejection of his special result." (From the *Theosophist.*)

\*\* According to one atheistic idealist -- Dr. Lewins -- "When Sir
Isaac, in 1687 . . . . showed mass and atom acted upon . . . . by innate
activity . . . . he effectually disposed of Spirit, Anima, or Divinity,
as supererogatory."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 485 THE METAPHYSICS OF PHYSICAL SCIENCE.

logical metaphysics especially. But we see, whenever the Occultists are
bold enough to raise their diminished heads, that materialistic,
physical science is honey-combed with metaphysics;\* that its most
fundamental principles, while inseparably wedded to transcendentalism,
are nevertheless, in order to show modern science divorced from such
"dreams," tortured and often ignored in the maze of contradictory
theories and hypotheses. A very good corroboration of this charge lies
in the fact that Science finds itself absolutely compelled to accept the
"hypothetical" Ether and to try to explain it on the materialistic
grounds of atomo-mechanical laws. This attempt has led directly to the
most fatal discrepancies and radical inconsistencies between the assumed
nature of Ether and its physical actions. A second proof is found in the
many contradictory statements about the atom -- the most metaphysical
object in creation.

Now, what does the modern science of physics know of AEther, the first
concept of which belongs undeniably to ancient philosophers, the Greeks
having borrowed it from the Aryans, and the origin of modern AEther
being found in, and *disfigured* from, **A**KASA? This disfigurement

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Stallo's above-cited work, "Concepts of Modern Physics," a volume
which has called forth the liveliest protests and criticisms, is
recommended to anyone inclined to doubt this statement. "The professed
antagonism of Science to metaphysics," he writes, "has led the majority
of scientific specialists to assume that the methods and results of
empirical research are wholly independent of the control of the laws of
thought. They either silently ignore, or openly repudiate, the simplest
canons of logic, including the laws of non-contradiction and . . .
resent with the utmost vehemence, every application of the rule of
consistency to their hypotheses and theories . . . . and they regard an
examination (of these) . . . . in the light of these laws as an
impertinent intrusion of '*a* *priori* principles and methods' into the
domains of empirical science. Persons of this cast of mind find no
difficulty in holding that atoms are absolutely inert, and at the same
time asserting that these atoms are perfectly elastic; or in maintaining
that the physical universe, in its last analysis, resolves itself into
'dead' matter and motion, and yet denying that all physical energy is in
reality kinetic; or in proclaiming that all phenomenal differences in
the objective world are ultimately due to the various motions of
absolutely simple material units, and, nevertheless, repudiating the
proposition that these units are equal" . . . . (p. xix.) "The blindness
of eminent physicists to some of the most obvious consequences of their
own theories is marvellous . . . . When Prof. Tait, in conjunction with
Prof. Stewart, announces that 'matter is simply passive' (*The Unseen
Universe*, sec. 104), and then, in connection with Sir W. Thomson,
declares that 'matter has an innate power of resisting external
influences' (*Treat. on Nat. Phil.*, Vol. I., sec. 216), it is hardly
impertinent to inquire how these statements are to be reconciled. When
Prof. Du Bois Reymond . . . . insists upon the necessity of reducing all
the processes of nature to motions of a substantial, indifferent
substratum, *wholly destitute of quality* ('*Ueber die Grenzen des
Naturerkennens*,' p. 5), having declared shortly before in the same
lecture that 'resolution of all changes in the material world into
motions of atoms *caused by their constant central forces* would be the
completion of natural science,' we are in a perplexity from which we
have to be relieved." (Pref. xliii.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 486 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

is claimed to be a modification and refinement of the idea of Lucretius.
Let us then examine the modern concept from several scientific volumes
containing the admissions of the physicists themselves.

The existence of Ether is accepted by physical astronomy, in ordinary
physics, and in chemistry. Astronomers, who first began by regarding it
as a fluid of extreme tenuity and mobility, offering no sensible
resistance to the motions of celestial bodies, never gave a thought to
its continuity or discontinuity. "Its main function in modern astronomy
has been to serve as a basis for hydrodynamical theories of gravitation.
In physics this fluid appeared for some time in several *roles* in
connection with the 'imponderables'" -- so cruelly put to death by Sir
W. Grove. Some physicists have even identified the ether of space with
those "imponderables." Then came their Kinetic theories; and from the
date of the dynamical theory of heat, it was chosen in optics as a
substratum for luminous undulations. Then, in order to explain the
dispersion and polarization of light, physicists had to resort once more
to their "scientific imagination" and forthwith endowed the Ether with
(*a*) atomic or molecular structure, and (*b*) with an enormous
elasticity, "so that its resistance to deformation far exceeded that of
the most rigid elastic bodies" (*Stallo*)*.* This necessitated the
*theory of the essential discontinuity of matter*, hence of Ether. After
having accepted this discontinuity, in order to account for dispersion
and polarization, theoretical impossibilities were discovered with
regard to such dispersions. Cauchy's "scientific imagination" saw in
atoms "material points without extension," and he proposed, in order to
obviate the most formidable obstacles to the undulatory theory (namely,
some well-known mechanical theorems which stood in the way), to assume
that the ethereal medium of propagation, instead of being continuous,
should consist of particles separated by sensible distances. Fresnel
rendered the same service to the phenomena of polarization. E. B. Hunt
upset the theories of both (*Silliman*'*s Journal*, vol. viii., p. 364
*et seq.*) There are now men of Science who proclaim them "materially
fallacious," while others -- the "atomo-mechanicalists" -- cling to to
them with desperate tenacity. The supposition of an *atomic* or
*molecular constitution* of ether is upset, moreover, by thermodynamics,
for Clerk Maxwell showed that such a medium would be simply *gas.\** The
hypothesis of "finite intervals" is thus proven of no avail as a
supplement to the undulatory theory. Besides, eclipses fail to reveal
any such variation of colour as supposed by Cauchy (on the assumption
that the chromatic rays are propagated with different velocities).

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\*See Clerk Maxwell's "Treatise on Electricity of Magnetism" and compare
with Cauchy's "*Memoire sur la Dispersion de la lumiere.*"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 487 SCIENTIFIC IMAGINATION.

Astronomy has pointed out more than one phenomenon absolutely at
variance with this doctrine.

Thus, while in one department of physics the atomo-molecular
constitution of the ether is accepted in order to account for one set of
special phenomena, in another department such a constitution is found
quite subversive of a number of well-ascertained facts, Hirn's charges
being thus justified (*vide supra*)*.* Chemistry deemed it impossible to
concede enormous elasticity to the *ether* without depriving it of other
properties, upon the assumption of which the construction of *its*
modern theories depended. This ended in a final transformation of ether.
The exigencies of the atomo-mechanical theory have led distinguished
mathematicians and physicists to attempt to substitute for the
traditional atoms of matter, peculiar forms of *vortical motion* in a
"universal homogeneous, incompressible, and *continuous* material
medium," or AEther. (*See Stallo.*)

The present writer, claiming no great scientific education, but only a
tolerable acquaintance with modern theories, and a better one with
Occult Sciences, picks up weapons against the detractors of the esoteric
teaching in the very arsenal of modern Science. The glaring
contradictions, the mutually-destructive hypotheses of world-renowned
Scientists, their mutual accusations, denunciations and disputes, show
plainly that, whether accepted or not, the Occult theories have as much
right to a hearing as any of the so-called learned and academical
hypotheses. Thus whether the followers of the Royal Society choose to
accept ether as a *continuous* or a *discontinuous* fluid matters
little, and is indifferent to the present purpose. It simply points to
one certainty: Official Science *knows nothing to this day of the
constitution of ether.* Let Science call it matter, if it likes; only
neither as *akasa* nor as the one sacred AEther of the Greeks, is it to
be found in any of the states of matter known to modern physics. It is
MATTER on quite another plane of perception and being, and it can
neither be analyzed by scientific apparatus, appreciated, nor even
conceived by "scientific imagination," unless the possessors thereof
study the Occult Sciences. That which follows proves this statement.

It is clearly demonstrated by Stallo as regards the crucial problems of
modern physics (as was done by De Quatrefages and several others in
those of anthropology, biology, etc., etc.) that, in their efforts to
support their individual hypotheses and systems, the majority of the
eminent and learned materialists very often utter the greatest
fallacies. Let us take the following case. Most of them reject *actio in
distans* (one of the fundamental principles in the question of AEther or
Akasa in Occultism), while, as Stallo justly observes, there is no
physical action,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 488 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

"which, on close examination, does not resolve itself into *actio in
distans*"; and he proves it.

Now, metaphysical arguments, according to Professor Lodge (*Nature*,
*vol. xxvii.*, *p.* 304), are "unconscious appeals to experience." And
he adds that if such an experience *is not conceivable*, then it does
not exist, etc. In his own words: -- ". . . If a highly-developed mind
or set of minds, find a doctrine about some comparatively simple and
fundamental matter *absolutely unthinkable*, it is an evidence . . .
that *the unthinkable state of things has no existence*, *etc."*

And thereupon, toward the end of his lecture, Professor Lodge indicates
that the explanation of cohesion, as well as of gravity, "is to be
looked for in the vortex-atom theory of Sir William Thomson" (Stallo).

It is needless to stop to inquire whether it is to this vortex-theory,
also, that we have to look for the dropping down on earth of the first
life-germ by a passing meteor or comet (Sir W. Thomson's hypothesis).
But Mr. Lodge might be reminded of the wise criticism on his lecture in
the same "Concepts of Modern Physics." Noticing the above-quoted
declaration by the London Professor, the author asks "whether . . . the
elements of the vortex-theory are *familiar*, or even possible, facts of
experience? For, if they are not, *clearly that theory is obnoxious to
the same criticism which is said to invalidate the assumption* of ACTIO
IN DISTANS" (p. xxiv). And then the able critic shows clearly what the
Ether *is not*, nor can ever be, notwithstanding all scientific claims
to the contrary. And thus he opens widely, if unconsciously, the
entrance door to our occult teachings. For, as he says: --

> "The medium in which the vortex-movements arise is, according to
> Professor Lodge's own express statement (NATURE, vol. xxvii., p. 305),
> 'a perfectly homogeneous, incompressible, continuous body, incapable
> of being resolved into simple elements or atoms: it is, in fact,
> continuous, not molecular.' And after making this statement Professor
> Lodge adds: '*There is no other body of which we can say this*, *and
> hence the Properties of the aether must be somewhat* DIFFERENT *from
> those of ordinary matter*.' It appears, then, that the whole
> vortex-atom theory, which is offered to us as a substitute for the
> 'metaphysical theory' *of actio in distans*, rests upon the hypothesis
> of the existence of a material medium which is utterly *unknown to
> experience*, and which has properties *somewhat* different\* from
> those of ordinary matter. Hence this theory, instead of being, as is
> claimed, a reduction of an unfamiliar fact of *experience* to a
> familiar fact, is,

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* "*Somewhat* different!" exclaims Stallo. "The real import of this
'somewhat' is, that the medium in question *is not*, *in any
intelligible sense*, *material at all*, having none of the properties of
matter." All the properties of matter depend upon differences and
changes, and the "hypothetical" aether here defined is not only
destitute of differences, but incapable of difference and change -- (in
the physical sense let us add). This proves that if aether is "matter"
*it is so* only as something visible, tangible and existing, for
*spiritual* senses alone; that it is a Being indeed -- but not of our
plane: Pater AEther, or Akasa.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 489 THE PHYSICAL "PHANTOM."

> on the contrary, a reduction of a fact which is perfectly familiar, to
> a fact which is not only unfamiliar, but wholly unknown, unobserved
> and unobservable. Furthermore, the alleged vortical motion of, or
> rather in, the assumed ethereal medium is . . . impossible, because
> "motion in a perfectly homogeneous, incompressible, and therefore
> continuous fluid, is not sensible motion." . . . . It is manifest,
> therefore, that wherever the vortex-atom theory may lead us, it
> certainly *does not lead us anywhere in the region of physics*, or in
> the domain of *verae* *causae.\** And I may add that, inasmuch as the
> hypothetical undifferentiated\*\* and undifferentiable medium is
> clearly an involuntary re-ification of the old ontological concept
> *pure being*, the theory under discussion has all the attributes of an
> *inapprehensible metaphysical phantom.*"

A "phantom" indeed, which can be made apprehensible only by Occultism.
From such scientific metaphysics to Occultism there is hardly one step.
Those physicists who hold the view that the atomic constitution of
matter is consistent with its penetrability, need not go far out of
their way to be able to account for the greatest phenomena of Occultism,
now so derided by physical scientists and materialists. Cauchy's
"material points without extension" are Leibnitz's monads, and at the
same time the materials out of which the "Gods" and other invisible
powers clothe themselves in bodies (*vide infra*, "*Gods*, *Monads and
Atoms*")*.* The disintegration and reintegration of "material" particles
without extension as a chief factor in phenomenal manifestations ought
to suggest themselves very easily as a *clear possibility*, at any rate
to those few scientific minds which accept M. Cauchy's views. For,
disposing of that property of matter which they call impenetrability by
simply regarding the atoms as "material points exerting on each other
attractions and repulsions which vary with the distances that separate
them" -- the French theorist explains that: "From this it follows that,
if it pleased the author of nature\*\*\* simply to *modify* the laws
according to which the atoms attract or repel each other, *we might
instantly see the hardest bodies penetrating each other*, the smallest
particles of matter *occupying immense spaces*, or the largest masses
reducing themselves to the smallest volumes, the entire universe
concentrating itself, as it were, in a single point." (*Sept lecons de
physique Generale*, p. 38 *et seq.*, ed. Moigno.)

And that "point," *invisible on our plane of perception and matter*, is
quite visible to the eye of the adept who can follow and see it present
on other planes.

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* *Verae causae* for physical science are *mayavic* or illusionary
causes to the Occultist, and *vice versa.*

\*\* Very much "differentiated," on the contrary, since the day it left
its *laya* condition.

\*\*\* For the Occultists who say that the author of nature *is nature
itself*, something indistinct and inseparable from the Deity, it follows
that those who are conversant with the *occult laws* of nature, and know
how to change and provoke new conditions in ether, may -- *not* modify
the laws, but work and do the same *in accordance with* those
*immutable* laws.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next Section](sd1-3-04.md)

[Contents](sd1-0-co.htm#contents.md)
