##### The Secret Doctrine by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol. 1

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 349 THE MANY ARE ONE.

\[\[This page continued from [previous section](sd1-2-04.md)\]\]

#### ยง V. ON THE HIDDEN DEITY, ITS SYMBOLS AND GLYPHS.

**T**HE Logos or Creative deity, the "Word made Flesh," of every
religion, has to be traced to its ultimate source and Essence. In India,
it is a Proteus of 1,008 divine names and aspects in each of its
*personal* transformations, from Brahma-Purusha down through the Seven
*divine* Rishis and ten *semi*-divine Prajapati (also Rishis) to the
*divine-human* Avatars. The same puzzling problem of the "One in many"
and the multitude in One, is found in other Pantheons, in the Egyptian,
the Greek and the Chaldeo-Judaic, the latter having made confusion still
more confused by presenting its Gods as euhemerizations, in the shapes
of Patriarchs. The latter are now accepted by those who reject Romulus
as a myth, and are represented as living and *historical* Entities*.
Verbum satis sapienti.*

In the Zohar, En-Soph is also the **O**NE, and the infinite Unity. This
was known to the very few learned Fathers of the Church, who were aware
that Jehovah was but a *third rate* potency and no "highest" God. But
while complaining bitterly of the Gnostics and saying . . . "our
Heretics hold . . . that **P**ROPATOR is known but to the *Only
begotten* Son\* (who is Brahma among the rest) that is to the mind"
(*nous*), Irenaeus never mentioned that the Jews did the same in their
real *secret* books. Valentinus, "the profoundest doctor of the Gnosis,"
held that "there was a perfect AION who existed before Bythos, or Buthon
(the first father of unfathomable nature, which is the second Logos)
called Propator." It is thus **A**ION, who springs as a Ray from
Ain-Soph (who *does not create*), and **A**ION, who creates, or
*through* whom, rather, everything is created, or evolves.

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* As Mulaprakriti is known only to Iswar, the **L**OGOS, as he is
called now by Mr. T. Subba Row, of Madras. (See his *Bhagavadgita*
Lectures.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 350 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

For, as the Basilidians taught, "there was a supreme god, *Abraxas*, by
whom was created mind" (*Mahat*, in Sanskrit, *Nous* in Greek). "From
Mind proceeded the word, *Logos*, from the word, Providence (Divine
Light, rather), then from it Virtue and Wisdom in Principalities,
Powers, Angels, etc., etc." By these (Angels) the 365 AEons were
created. "Amongst the lowest, indeed, and those who made this world, he
(Basilides) sets last of all the God of the Jews, whom he denies to be
God (and very rightly), affirming he is one of the angels" (*Ibid.*)*.*
Here, then, we find the same system as in the Puranas, wherein the
Incomprehensible drops a seed, which becomes the golden egg, from which
Brahma is produced. Brahma produces Mahat, etc., etc. True Esoteric
philosophy, however, speaks neither of "creation" nor of "evolution" in
the sense the exoteric religions do. All these personified Powers are
not evolutions from one another, but so many aspects of the one and sole
manifestation of the **A**BSOLUTE all. The same system as the gnostic
prevails in the Sephirothal aspects of Ain-Soph, yet, as *these aspects
are in Space and Time*, a certain order is maintained in their
successive appearances. Therefore, it becomes impossible not to take
notice of the great changes that the *Zohar* has undergone under the
handling of generations of Christian Mystics. For, even in the
metaphysics of the Talmud, the "lower Face" (or "Lesser Countenance"),
the microprosopus, in fact, could never be placed on the plane of the
same abstract ideal as the Higher, or "Greater Countenance,"
macroprosopus. The latter is, in the Chaldean Kabala, a pure
abstraction; the Word or **L**OGOS, or **D**ABAR (in Hebrew), which
Word, though it becomes in fact a plural number, or "Words" --
**D**(a)**B**(a)**R**IM, when it reflects itself, or falls into the
aspect of a Host (of angels, or Sephiroth, "numbers") is still
collectively **O**NE, and on the ideal plane a nought -- 0, a
"No-thing." **I**T is without form or being, "with no likeness with
anything else." (*Franck*, "*Die Kabbala*," *p.* 126.) And even Philo
calls the Creator, the *Logos* who stands next God, "*the* **S**ECOND
**G**OD," and "the second God who is his (Highest God's) **W**ISDOM"
(*Philo. Quaest. et Solut*)*.* Deity is not God. It is NOTHING, and
DARKNESS. It is nameless, and therefore called *Ain-Soph* -- "the word
*Ayin* meaning nothing." *See Franck* "*Die Kabbala*," *p.* 153. *See
also Section XII.*, "*Theogony of the Creative Gods.*" The "Highest God"
(the unmanifested **L**OGOS) is its Son.

Nor are most of the gnostic systems, which come down to us mutilated by
the Church Fathers, anything better than the distorted shells of the
original speculations. Nor were they *open* to the public or reader, at
any time; *i.e.*, had their hidden meaning or esotericism been revealed,
it would have been no more an esoteric teaching, and this could never
be. Alone Marcus (the chief of the Marcosians, 2nd century), who taught

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 351 THE GNOSTIC IDEA.

that deity had to be viewed under the symbol of *four syllables*, gave
out more of the esoteric truths than any other Gnostic. But even he was
never well understood. For it is only on the surface or dead letter of
his *Revelation* that it appears that God is a quaternary, to wit: "the
Ineffable, the Silence, the Father, and Truth," -- in reality it is
quite erroneous, and divulges only one more esoteric riddle. This
teaching of Marcus was that of the early Kabalists and ours. For he
makes of Deity, the number 30 *in* 4 *syllables*, which, translated
esoterically, means a Triad or *Triangle*, and a Quaternary or a square,
in all *seven*, which, on the lower plane made the seven divine or
secret letters of which the God-name is composed. This requires
demonstration. In his "Revelation," speaking of divine mysteries
expressed by means of letters and numbers, Marcus narrates how the
"Supreme Tetrad came down unto me (him) from the region which cannot be
seen nor named, *in a female form*, *because the world would have been
unable to bear her appearing under a male figure*," and revealed to him
"the generation of the universe, *untold before to either* gods or men."

This first sentence already contains a double meaning. Why should a
female figure be more easily borne or listened to by the world than a
male figure? On the very face of it this appears nonsensical. Withal it
is quite simple and clear to one who is acquainted with the
mystery-language. *Esoteric Philosophy*, or the Secret Wisdom, was
symbolized by a female form, while a male figure stood for the
*Unveiled* mystery. Hence, the world not being ready to receive, could
not bear it, and the Revelation of Marcus had to be given allegorically.
Then he writes:

"When first the Inconceivable, the Beingless and Sexless (the Kabalistic
Ain-Soph) began to be in labour (*i.e.*, when the hour of manifesting
Itself had struck) and desired that Its Ineffable should be born (the
first **L**OGOS, or AEon, or Aion), and its invisible should be clothed
with form, its mouth opened and uttered the word like unto itself. This
word (logos) manifested itself in the form of the Invisible One. The
uttering of the (ineffable) name (through the word) came to pass in this
manner. He (the Supreme Logos) uttered the first word of his name, which
is a *syllable of four letters.* Then the second syllable was added,
*also of four letters.* Then the third, composed of *ten* letters; and
after this the fourth, which contains *twelve* letters. The whole name
consists thus of *thirty letters* and of *four syllables.* Each letter
has its own accent and way of writing, but neither understands nor ever
beholds that form of the whole Name, -- no; not even the power of the
letter that stands next to Itself (to the Beingless and the
Inconceivable.)\* All these sounds when united are the collective
Beingless,

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Iswara, or the Logos, cannot see Parabrahmam, but only Mulaprakriti,
says the lecturer, in the Four Lectures on Bhagavatgita. (See
*Theosophist*, Feb., 1887.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 352 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

unbegotten AEon, and *these* are the Angels that are ever beholding the
face of the Father\* (the Logos, the "second God," who stands next God,
"the Inconceivable," according to Philo).

This is as plain as ancient esoteric secrecy would make it. It is as
Kabalistic, but less veiled than the Zohar in which the mystic names or
attributes are also four syllabled, twelve, forty-two, and even
seventy-two syllabled words! The *Tetrad* shows to Marcus the TRUTH in
the shape of a naked woman, and letters every limb of that figure,
calling her head \[\[omega\]\], her neck \[\[psi\]\], shoulders and
hands \[\[gamma\]\], and \[\[chi\]\], etc., etc. In this Sephira is
easily recognised, the Crown (*Kether*) or head being numbered *one*;
the brain or Chochmah, 2; the heart, or Intelligence (Binah), 3; and the
other seven Sephiroth representing the limbs of the body. The
Sephirothal Tree is the Universe, and Adam Kadmon represents it in the
West as Brahma represents it in India.

Throughout, the 10 Sephiroth are represented as divided into the three
higher, or the spiritual *Triad*, and the lower Septenary. The true
Esoteric meaning of the sacred number seven is cleverly veiled in the
*Zohar;* yet was betrayed by the double way of writing "in the
beginning" or *Be-resheeth*, and Be-raishath, the latter the "Higher, or
*Upper* Wisdom." As shown by Mr. Macgregor Mathers in his *Kabbalah* (p.
47), and in the *Qabbalah* of Mr. T. Myer (p. 233), both of these
Kabalists being supported by the best ancient authorities, these words
have a dual and secret meaning. *Braisheeth bara Elohim* means that the
*six*, over which stands the *seventh* Sephiroth, belong to the lower
material class, or, as the author says: "Seven . . . . are applied to
the Lower Creation, and three to the spiritual man, the Heavenly
Prototypic or first Adam."

When the Theosophists and Occultists say that God is no **B**EING, for
**I**T is nothing, *No-Thing*, they are more reverential and religiously
respectful to the Deity than those who call God a **H**E, and thus make
of Him a gigantic **M**ALE.

He who studies the Kabala will soon find the same idea in the ultimate
thought of its authors, the earlier and great Hebrew Initiates, who got
this secret Wisdom at Babylonia from the Chaldean Hierophants, while
Moses got his in Egypt. The Zohar cannot well be judged by its after
translations in Latin and other tongues, as all those ideas were, of
course, softened and made to fit in with the views and *policy* of its
Christian arrangers; but in truth its ideas are identical with those of
all other religious systems. The various Cosmogonies show that the
Archaic Universal Soul was held by every nation as the "Mind" of the
Demiurgic Creator; and that it

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* The "Seven Angels of the Face," with the Christians.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 353 THE EGYPTIAN VERSION.

was called the "Mother," *Sophia* with the Gnostics (or the female
Wisdom), the *Sephira* with the Jews, Saraswati or Vach, with the
Hindus, *the Holy Ghost being a female Principle.*

Hence, born from it, the *Kurios* or Logos was, with the Greeks, the
"God, mind" (*nous*)*.* "Now Koros (*Kurios*) signifies the pure and
unmixed nature of intellect -- wisdom," says Plato in "Cratylus"; and
Kurios is Mercury, the Divine Wisdom, and "mercury is the Sol" (Sun)
("*Arnobius*" vi., xii.), from whom Thot-Hermes received this divine
Wisdom. While, then, the *Logoi* of all countries and religions are
correlative (in their sexual aspects) with the female Soul of the World
or the "Great Deep;" the deity, from which these *two in one* have their
being, is ever concealed and called the "Hidden One," connected only
indirectly with Creation,\* as it can act only through the Dual Force
emanating from the Eternal Essence. Even AEsculapius, called the
"Saviour of all," is identical, according to ancient classics, with
*Phta*, the Egyptian Creative Intellect (or Divine Wisdom), and with
Apollo, Baal, Adonis and Hercules (*see Dunlap*'*s* "*Mystery of
Adonis*," *pp.* 23 *and* 95); and Phta is, in one of its aspects, the
"Anima Mundi," the Universal Soul of Plato, the "Divine Spirit" of the
Egyptians, the "Holy Ghost" of the early Christians and Gnostics, and
the *Akasa* of the Hindus, and even, in its lower aspect, the *Astral
Light.* For *Phta* was originally the "God of the Dead," he in whose
bosom they were received, hence the *Limbus* of the Greek Christians, or
the Astral Light. It is far later that *Phta* was classed with the
Sun-gods, his name signifying "he who opens," as he is shown to be the
first to unveil the face of the dead mummy, to call the soul to *life in
his bosom.* (See *Maspero*'*s* "*Bulaq Museum.*") **K**NEPH, the Eternal
*Unrevealed*, is represented by the snake-emblem of eternity encircling
a water-urn, with its head hovering *over the* "*waters*" *which it
incubates with its breath* -- another form of one and the same idea of
"Darkness," its ray moving on the waters, &c. As "Logos-Soul," this
*permutation* is called Phta; as Logos-Creator, he becomes *Imhot-pou*,
his son, "the god of the handsome face." In their primitive characters
these two were the first Cosmic Duad, *Noot*, "space or *Sky*," and
*Noo*, "the primordial Waters," the Androgyne Unity, above whom was the
*Concealed* **B**REATH of Kneph. And all of them had the aquatic animals
and plants sacred to them, the *ibis*, the *swan*, the *goose*, the
*crocodile*, and the *lotus.*

Returning to the Kabalistic deity, this Concealed Unity is then
![](sd1-353a.gif) = \[\[*to pan*\]\] = \[\[*apeiros*\]\], Endless,
Boundless, non-Existent, ![](sd1-353b.gif) so

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* We use the term as one accepted and sanctioned by use, and therefore
more comprehensible to the reader.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 354 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

long as the *Absolute* is within *Oulom*,*\** the boundless and termless
time, as such, En-Soph cannot be the Creator or even the modeller of the
Universe, nor can he be *Aur* (light). Therefore En-Soph is also
Darkness. The *immutably* Infinite and the *absolutely* Boundless can
neither will, think, nor act. To do this it has to become finite, and it
does so, by its ray penetrating into the mundane egg -- infinite space
-- and emanating from it as a finite god. All this is left to the ray
latent in the one. When the period arrives, the absolute will expands
naturally the force within it, according to the Law of which it is the
inner and ultimate Essence. The Hebrews did not adopt the egg as a
symbol, but they substituted for it the "Duplex heavens," for,
translated correctly, the sentence "God made the heavens and the earth"
would read: -- "In and out of his own essence as a womb (the mundane
egg), God created the two heavens." But the Christians have chosen as
the symbol of their Holy Ghost, the dove.

"Whosoever acquaints himself with ![](sd1-354.gif) the Mercaba and the
*lahgash* (secret speech or incantation), will learn the secret of
secrets." *Lahgash* is nearly identical in meaning with Vach, the hidden
power of the Mantras.

When the active period has arrived, from within the eternal essence of
Ain-Soph, comes forth Sephira, the active Power, called the Primordial
Point, and the Crown, *Kether.* It is only through her that the
"Un-bounded Wisdom" could give a concrete form to the abstract Thought.
Two sides of the upper triangle by which the ineffable Essence and the
universe -- its manifested body -- are symbolized, the right side and
the base are composed of unbroken lines; the third, the left side, is
dotted. It is through the latter that emerges Sephira. Spreading in
every direction, she finally encompasses the whole triangle. In this
emanation the triple triad is formed. From the invisible Dew falling
from the higher *Uni-triad* (thus leaving 7 sephiroths only), the "Head"
Sephira *creates* primeval waters, *i.e.*, Chaos takes shape. It is the
first stage towards the solidification of spirit which through various
modifications will produce earth. "*It requires earth and water to make
a living soul*," says Moses. It requires the image of an aquatic bird to
connect it with water, the female element of procreation with the egg
and the bird that fecundates it.

When Sephira emerges like an active power from within the latent Deity,
she is female; when she assumes the office of a creator, she becomes a
male; hence, she is androgyne. She is the "Father and

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* With the ancient Jews, as shown by Le Clerc, the word *Oulom* meant
only a time whose beginning or end is not known. The term "eternity,"
properly speaking, did not exist in the Hebrew tongue with the meaning,
for instance, applied by the Vedantins to Parabrahm.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 355 INTERNATIONAL CORRELATION OF GODS.

Mother Aditi," of the Hindu Cosmogony and of *the Secret Doctrine.* If
the oldest Hebrew scrolls had been preserved, the modern
Jehovah-worshipper would have found that many and uncomely were the
symbols of the *creative* god. The frog in the moon, typical of his
generative character, was the most frequent. All the birds and animals
now held "unclean" in the Bible had been the symbols of the Deity in
days of old. It was because they were too sacred that a mask of
uncleanness was placed over them, in order to preserve them from
destruction. The brazen serpent was not a bit more poetical than the
goose or swan, if symbols are to be accepted *a la lettre.*

In the words of the *Zohar:* "The Indivisible Point, which has no limit
and cannot be comprehended because of its purity and brightness,
expanded *from without*, forming a brightness that served the
indivisible Point as a veil;" yet the latter also "*could not be viewed
in* consequence of its immeasurable light. It too *expanded from
without*, and this expansion was its garment. Thus through a constant
*upheaving* (motion) finally the world originated" (*Zohar I.* 20*a*)*.*
The Spiritual substance sent forth by the Infinite Light is the *first*
Sephira or *Shekinah:* Sephira *exoterically* contains all the other
nine Sephiroths in her*. Esoterically* she contains but two,\*
*Chochmah* or *Wisdom*, "a masculine, *active* potency whose divine name
is *Jah* (![](sd1-355a.gif))," and **B**INAH, a feminine passive
potency, Intelligence, represented by the divine name Jehovah
(![](sd1-355b.gif)); which two potencies form, with Sephira the third,
the Jewish trinity or the Crown, **K**ETHER. These two Sephiroths called
Father, *Abba*, and Mother *Amona*, are the duad or the double-sexed
*logos* from which issued the other seven Sephiroths. (See *Zohar.*)
This first Jewish triad (Sephira, Chochmah, and Binah) is the Hindu
*Trimurti.\** However veiled, even in the *Zohar*, and more still in the
exoteric Pantheon of India, every particular connected with one is
reproduced in the other. The *Prajapati* are the Sephiroths. Ten with
Brahma they dwindle to seven, when the Trimurti, and the Kabalistic
triad, are separated from the rest. The seven Builders (Creators) become
the seven *Prajapati*, or the seven Rishis, in the same order as the
Sephiroths become the Creators; then the Patriarchs, etc. In both Secret
Systems, the One Universal Essence is incomprehensible and *inactive* in
its absoluteness, and can be connected with the building of the Universe
only in an indirect way. In both, the primeval Malefemale or androgynous
Principle, and their ten and seven Emanations (Brahma-Viraj and
Aditi-Vach on the one part and the Elohim-Jehovah, or Adam-Adami (Adam
Kadmon) and Sephira Eve on the

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* In the Indian Pantheon the double-sexed Logos is Brahma, the Creator,
whose seven "mind born" sons are the primeval Rishis -- the "Builders."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 356 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

other), with their Prajapati and Sephiroths, represent in their
totality, first of all the Archetypal man, the *Proto-logos;* and only
in their secondary aspect do they become Cosmic powers, and astronomical
or sidereal bodies. If Aditi is the mother of the gods, *Deva-Matri*,
Eve is the mother of all living; they are the *Sakti* or generative
power in their female aspect of the "Heavenly man," and they are all
compound Creators. Says a "*Gupta Vidya*" Sutra: "In the beginning, a
ray issuing from Paramarthika (*the one* and only true existence), it
became manifested in Vyavaharika (conventional existence) which was used
as a *Vahan* to descend into the Universal Mother, and to cause her to
expand (swell, *brih*)*.*" And in the *Zohar* it is stated: "The
Infinite Unity, formless and without similitude, after the form of the
heavenly man was created, used it. The Unknown Light\* (Darkness) used
the ![](sd1-356a.gif)(heavenly form) as a chariot
![](sd1-356b.gif)through which to descend, and wished to be called by
this form, which is the sacred name Jehovah."

As the Zohar says: "In the beginning was the Will of the King, prior to
any other existence. . . . It (the Will) sketched the forms of all
things that had been concealed but now came into view. And there went
forth as a sealed secret from the head of Ain Soph, a nebulous spark of
matter, without shape or form. . . . Life is drawn from below, and from
above the source renews itself, the sea is always full and spreads its
waters everywhere." Thus the deity is compared to a shoreless sea, to
water which is "the fountain of life" (Zohar iii., 290). "The seventh
palace, the fountain of life, is the first in the order from above" (ii.
261). Hence the Kabalistic tenet on the lips of the very Kabalistic
Solomon, who says in Proverbs ix., 1: "Wisdom hath builded her house; it
hath hewn out its *seven* pillars."

Whence then, all this identity of ideas, if there was no primeval
**U**NIVERSAL Revelation? The few points shown are like a few straws in
a hayrick, in comparison to that which will be shown as the work
proceeds. If we turn to that most hazy of all Cosmogonies -- the
Chinese, even there the same idea is found. *Tsi-tsai* (the
Self-Existent) is the unknown Darkness, the root of the *Wuliang-sheu*
(Boundless Age), Amitabhe, and Tien (heaven) come later on. The "great
Extreme" of Confucius gives the same idea, his "straws" notwithstanding.
The latter are a source of great amusement to the missionaries. These
laugh at every "heathen" religion, despise and hate that of their

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Says Rabbi Simeon: "Ah, companions, companions, man as an emanation
was both man and woman, as well on the side of the '*Father*' as on the
side of the '*Mother.*' And this is the sense of the words: 'And Elohim
spoke; Let there be Light, and it was Light' . . . and this is the
*two-fold man.*" ("*Auszuge aus dem Sohar*," p. 13, 15.) Light, then, in
*Genesis* stood for the Androgyne Ray or "Heavenly Man."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 357 ORNITHOLOGICAL SYMBOLS.

brother Christians of other denominations, and yet one and all accept *a
la lettre* their own *Genesis.* If we turn to Chaldea we find in it
*Anu*, the concealed deity, the One, whose name, moreover, shows it to
be of Sanskrit origin. *Anu*, which means in Sanskrit "atom," aniyamsam
aniyasam (smallest of the small), is a name of Parabrahm in the Vedantic
philosophy; Parabrahm being described as smaller than the smallest atom,
and greater than the greatest sphere or universe: "*Anagraniyam and
Mahatorvavat.*" This is what George Smith gives as the first verses of
the Akkadian *Genesis* as found in the Cuneiform Texts on the "*Lateras
Coctiles.*" There also, we find *Anu* the passive deity or En-Soph,
*Bel*, the Creator, the Spirit of God (Sephira) moving on the face of
the waters, hence water itself, and *Hea*, the Universal Soul or wisdom
of the three combined.

The first eight verses read thus:

1\. When above, were not raised the heavens;  
2*.* And below on the earth a plant had not grown up.  
3. The abyss had not broken its boundaries.  
4. The chaos (or water) Tiamat (the sea) was the producing mother of the
whole of them. (This is the Cosmical Aditi and Sephira.)  
5. Those waters at the beginning were ordained but --  
6. A tree had not grown, a flower had not unfolded.  
7. When the gods had not sprung up, any one of them.  
8. A plant had not grown, and order did not exist.

This was the chaotic or ante-genetic period -- the double Swan and the
Dark Swan, which becomes white, when Light is created.\*

The symbol chosen for the majestic ideal of the Universal Principle will
seem little calculated to answer its sacred character. A goose, or even
a swan, may appear unfit, no doubt, to represent the grandeur of the
Spirit. Nevertheless, it must have had some deep occult meaning, since
it figures not only in every cosmogony and world religion, but even was
chosen by the mediaeval Christians, the Crusaders, as the *vehicle* of
the Holy Ghost supposed to lead the army to Palestine, to wrench the
Tomb of the Saviour from the hands of the Saracen. If we are to credit
Professor Draper's statement in his "Intellectual Development of
Europe," the Crusaders, led on by Peter the Hermit, were preceded, at
the head of the army, by the Holy Ghost under the shape of a white
gander in company of a goat. The Egyptian God of Time, Seb, carries a
goose on his head. Jupiter assumes the form of a swan and Brahma also,
because the root of all this is that mystery of mysteries -- the
**M**UNDANE **E**GG. (See preceding ยง).

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* The Seven Swans that are believed to land from Heaven into Lake
Mansarovara, are in the popular fancy the Seven Rishis of the Great
Bear, who assume that form to visit the locality where the Vedas were
written.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 358 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

One has to learn the reason of a symbol before one depreciates it. The
dual element of Air and Water is that of the ibis, swan, goose and
pelican, of crocodiles and frogs, lotus flowers and water lilies, &c.;
and the result is the choice of the most unseemly symbols among the
modern as much as the ancient mystics. Pan, the great god of nature, was
generally figured in connection with aquatic birds, geese especially,
and so were other gods. If, later on, with the gradual degeneration of
religion, the gods to whom geese were sacred, became Priapic deities, it
does not stand to reason that water fowls were made sacred to Pan and
other Phallic deities as some scoffers even of antiquity would have it
(*see Petronii Satyrica*, cxxxvi.); but that the abstract and divine
power of procreative nature had become grossly anthropomorphized. Nor
does the Swan of Leda show "Priapic doings and her enjoyment thereof,"
as Mr. Hargrave Jennings chastely expresses it -- for the myth is but
another version of the same philosophical idea of cosmogony. Swans are
frequently found associated with Apollo, as they are the emblems of
water and fire (sun-light also), before the separation of the Elements.

Our modern symbologists might profit by some remarks made by a
well-known writer, Mrs. Lydia Maria Child. "From time immemorial an
emblem has been worshipped in Hindostan as the type of creation, or the
origin of life. . . . Siva or the Mahadeva being not only the reproducer
of human forms, but also the fructifying principle, the generative power
that pervades the Universe. The maternal emblem is likewise a religious
type. This reverence for the production of life, introduced into the
worship of Osiris the sexual emblems. Is it strange that they regarded
with reverence the great mystery of human birth? Were they impure thus
to regard it? Or are *we* impure that do not so regard it? But *no clean
and thoughtful mind* could so regard them. . . . We have travelled far,
and unclean have been the paths, since those old Anchorites first spoke
of God and the soul in the solemn depths of their first sanctuaries. Let
us not smile at their mode of tracing the infinite and the
incomprehensible Cause throughout all the mysteries of nature, lest by
so doing we cast the shadow of our own grossness on their patriarchal
simplicity." ("*Progress of Religious Ideas*," *Vol.* 1, *p.* 17, *et
seq.*)

--------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next Chapter](sd1-2-06.md)

[Contents](sd1-0-co.htm#contents.md)
