##### The Secret Doctrine by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol. 1

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 470

<span id="DDE_LINK20">\[\[This page continued from</span> [previous
section](sd1-2-14.md)\]\]

#### ยง XV. ON KWAN-SHI-YIN AND KWAN-YIN.

**L**IKE Avalokiteshwara, Kwan-shi-yin has passed through several
transformations, but it is an error to say of him that he is a modern
invention of the Northern Buddhists, for under another appellation he
has been known from the earliest times. The Secret Doctrine teaches that
"He who is the first to appear at Renovation will be the last to come
before Re-absorption (pralaya)." Thus the logoi of all nations, from the
Vedic Visvakarma of the Mysteries down to the Saviour of the present
civilised nations, are the "Word" who was "in the beginning" (or the
reawakening of the energising powers of Nature) with the One
**A**BSOLUTE. Born of Fire and Water, before these became distinct
elements, **IT** was the "Maker" (fashioner or modeller) of all things;
"without him was not anything made that was made"; "in whom was life,
and the life was the light of men"; and who finally may be called, as he
ever has been, the Alpha and the Omega of manifested Nature. "The great
Dragon of Wisdom is born of Fire and Water, and into Fire and Water will
all be re-absorbed with him" (*Fa-Hwa-King*)*.* As this Bodhisatva is
said "to assume any form he pleases" from the beginning of a Manvantara
to its end, though his special birthday (memorial day) is celebrated
according to the Kin-kwang-ming-King ("Luminous Sutra of Golden Light")
in the second month on the nineteenth day, and that of "Maitreya Buddha"
in the first month on the first day, yet the two are one. He will appear
as Maitreya Buddha, the last of the Avatars and Buddhas, in the seventh
Race. This belief and expectation are universal throughout the East.
Only it is not in the *Kali yug*, our present terrifically materialistic
age of Darkness, the "Black Age," that a new Saviour of Humanity can
ever appear. The Kali yug is

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 471 DISEASED IMAGINATION.

"l'Age d'Or" (!) only in the *mystic* writings of some French
pseudo-Occultists. (See "La Mission des Juifs.")

Hence the ritual in the exoteric worship of this deity was founded on
magic. The Mantras are all taken from special books kept secret by the
priests, and each is said to work a magical effect; as the reciter or
reader produces, by simply chanting them, a secret causation which
results in immediate effects. Kwan-Shi-Yin is Avalokiteshwara, and both
are forms of the seventh Universal Principle; while in its highest
metaphysical character this deity is the synthetic aggregation of all
the planetary Spirits, Dhyani Chohans. He is the "Self-manifested;" in
short, the "Son of the Father." Crowned with seven dragons, above his
statue there appears the inscription Pu-Tsi-K'iun-ling, "the universal
Saviour of all living beings."

Of course the name given in the archaic volume of the Stanzas is quite
different, but Kwan-Yin is a perfect equivalent. In a temple of Pu'to,
the sacred island of the Buddhists in China, Kwan-Shi-Yin is represented
floating on a black aquatic bird (*Kala-Hansa*), and pouring on the
heads of mortals the elixir of life, which, as it flows, is transformed
into one of the chief Dhyani-Buddhas -- the Regent of a star called the
"Star of Salvation." In his third transformation Kwan-Yin is the
informing spirit or genius of Water. In China the Dalai-Lama is believed
to be an incarnation of Kwan-Shi-Yin, who in his third terrestrial
appearance was a Bodhisattva, while the Teshu Lama is an incarnation of
Amitabha Buddha, or Gautama.

It may be remarked *en passant* that a writer must indeed have a
diseased imagination to discover phallic worship everywhere, as do the
authors of "China Revealed" (McClatchey) and "Phallicism." The first
discovers "the old phallic gods, represented under two evident symbols
-- the Khan or Yang, which is the *membrum virile*, and the Kwan or Yin,
the *pudendum muliebre.*" (See "*Phallicism*," p. 273.) Such a rendering
seems the more strange as Kwan-Shi-Yin (Avalokiteswara) and Kwan-Yin,
besides being now the patron deities of the Buddhist ascetics, the Yogis
of Thibet, are the gods of chastity, and are, in their esoteric meaning,
not even that which is implied in the rendering of Mr. Rhys Davids'
"Buddhism," (p. 202): "The name Avalokiteshwara . . . means 'the Lord
who looks down from on high.' "Nor is Kwan-Shi-Yin "the Spirit of the
Buddhas present in the Church," but, literally interpreted, it means
"the Lord that is seen," and in one sense, "the divine SELF perceived by
Self" (the human) -- the Atman or seventh principle merged in the
Universal, perceived by, or the object of perception to, Buddhi, the
sixth principle or divine Soul in man. In a still higher sense,
Avalokiteshwara = Kwan-Shi-Yin, referred to as the seventh Universal
principle, is the Logos

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 472 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

perceived by the Universal Buddhi -- or Soul, as the synthetic aggregate
of the Dhyani-Buddhas: and is not the "Spirit of Buddha present in the
Church," but the omnipresent universal Spirit manifested in the temple
of Kosmos or Nature. This Orientalistic etymology of Kwan and Yin is on
a par with that of "Yogini," which, we are told by Mr. Hargrave
Jennings, "is a Sanskrit word, in the dialects pronounced Yogi or Zogee
(!), and is equivalent to Sena, and exactly the same as Duti or Duti-Ca'
-- *i.e.*, a sacred prostitute of the temple, worshipped as Yoni or
Sakti" (p. 60). "The books of morality," in India, "direct a faithful
wife to shun the society of Yogini or females who have been adored as
Sakti . . . amongst the votaries of a most licentious description."
Nothing should surprise us after this. And it is, therefore, with hardly
a smile that we find another preposterous absurdity quoted about "Budh,"
as being a name "which signifies not only the sun as the source of
generation but also the male organ (*Round Towers of Ireland;* quoted by
Mr. Hargrave Jennings in "*Phallicism*," p. 264). Max Muller, in his
"False Analogies," says that "the most celebrated Chinese scholar of his
time, Abel Remusat," maintains "that the three syllables I Hi Wei (in
the fourteenth chapter of the *Tao-te-king*) were meant for Je-ho-vah
(*Science of Religion*, p*.* 332); and again, Father Amyot, who "feels
certain that the three persons of the Trinity could be recognised" in
the same work. And if Abel Remusat, why not Hargrave Jennings? Every
scholar will recognise the absurdity of ever seeing in Budh, "the
enlightened" and "the awakened," a "phallic symbol."

Kwan-shi-yin, then, is "the Son identical with his Father" mystically,
or the Logos -- the word. He is called the "Dragon of Wisdom" in Stanza
III., as all the Logoi of all the ancient religious systems are
connected with, and symbolised by, serpents. In old Egypt, the God
Nahbkoon, "he who unites the doubles," (astral light re-uniting by its
dual physiological and spiritual potency the divine human to its purely
divine Monad, the prototype "in heaven" or Nature) was represented as a
serpent on human legs, either with or without arms. It was the emblem of
the resurrection of Nature, as also of Christ with the Ophites, and of
Jehovah as the brazen serpent healing those who looked at him; the
serpent being an emblem of Christ with the Templars also, (see the
Templar degree in Masonry). The symbol of Knouph (Khoum also), or the
soul of the world, says Champollion (*Pantheon*, *text* 3), "is
represented among other forms under that of a huge serpent on human
legs; this reptile, being the emblem of the good genius and the
veritable Agathodaemon, is sometimes bearded." The sacred animal is thus
identical with the serpent of the Ophites, and is figured on a great
number of engraved stones, called Gnostic or Basilidean gems. This
serpent appears with various heads (human and animal), but its gems

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 473 SNOBS, OR DRAGONS?

are always found inscribed with the name \[\[*CHNOUBIS*\]\] (Chnoubis).
This symbol is identical with one which, according to Jamblichus and
Champollion, was called "the first of the celestial gods"; the god
Hermes, or Mercury with the Greeks, to which god Hermes Trismegistos
attributes the invention of, and the first initiation of men into,
magic; and Mercury is Budh, Wisdom, Enlightenment, or "Re-awakening"
into the divine Science.

To close, Kwan-Shi-Yin and Kwan-Yin are the two aspects (male and
female) of the same principle in Kosmos, Nature and Man, of divine
wisdom and intelligence. They are the "Christos-Sophia" of the mystic
Gnostics -- the Logos and its Sakti. In their longing for the expression
of some mysteries never to be wholly comprehended by the profane, the
Ancients, knowing that nothing could be preserved in human memory
without some outward symbol, have chosen the (to us) often ridiculous
images of the Kwan-Yins to remind man of his origin and inner nature. To
the impartial, however, the Madonnas in crinolines and the Christs in
white kid gloves must appear far more absurd than the Kwan-Shi-Yin and
Kwan-Yin in their dragon garb. The subjective can hardly be expressed by
the objective. Therefore, since the symbolic formula attempts to
characterise that which is above scientific reasoning, and as often far
beyond our intellects, it must needs go beyond that intellect in some
shape or other, or else it will fade out from human remembrance.

---------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Contents](sd1-0-co.htm#contents.md)
