##### The Secret Doctrine by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol. 1

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 506 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

<span id="DDE_LINK20">\[\[This page continued from</span> [previous
section](sd1-3-05.md)\]\]

#### VI. THE MASKS OF SCIENCE.

PHYSICS OR METAPHYSICS?

**I**F there is anything on earth like progress, Science will some day
have to give up, *nolens volens*, such monstrous ideas as her physical,
self-guiding *laws* -- void of soul and Spirit, -- and then turn to the
occult teachings.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 507 ACADEMICAL MISNOMERS.

It has done so already, however altered are the title-page and revised
editions of the Scientific Catechism. It is now over half a century
since, in comparing modern with ancient thought, it has been found that,
however different our philosophy may appear from that of our ancestors,
it is, nevertheless, composed only *of additions* and *subtractions*
taken from the old philosophy and *transmitted drop by drop through the
filter of antecedents.*

This fact was well known to Faraday, and other eminent men of Science.
Atoms, Ether, evolution itself -- all comes to modern Science from
ancient notions, all is based on the conceptions of the archaic nations.
"Conceptions" for the profane, under the shape of allegories; plain
truths taught during the Initiations to the elect, which truths have
been partially divulged through Greek writers and have descended to us.
This does not mean that Occultism has ever had the same views on matter,
atoms and ether as found in the exotericism of the classical Greek
writers. Yet, if we believe Mr. Tyndall, even Faraday was an
Aristotelean, and an Agnostic more than a materialist. In his "Faraday,
as a Discoverer" (p. 123) the author shows the great physicist *using*
"old reflections of Aristotle" which are "concisely found in some of his
works." Faraday, Boscovitch, and all others, however, who see, in the
atoms and molecules, "centres of force," and in the corresponding
*element force*, an ENTITY BY ITSELF, are far nearer the truth,
perchance, than those, who, denouncing them, denounce at the same time
the "old corpuscular Pythagorean theory" (one, by the way, which has
never passed to posterity as the great philosopher *really* taught it),
on the ground of its "delusion that the conceptual elements of matter
*can be grasped* as separate and real entities."

The chief and most fatal mistake and fallacy made by Science, in the
view of the Occultists, lies in the idea of the possibility of such a
thing as inorganic, or *dead* matter, in nature. Is anything *dead* or
*inorganic* capable of transformation or change? Occultism asks. And is
there anything under the sun which remains immutable or changeless?

This fallacy is nowhere better illustrated than in the scientific work
of a German *savant*, Professor Philip Spiller (*Der Weltaether als
Kosmische Kraft*)*.* In this cosmological treatise, the author attempts
to prove that "no material constituent of a body, no atom, *is in itself
originally endowed with force*, but that every such atom *is absolutely
dead*,*\** and without any power to act at a distance" (p. 4).

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Something *dead* implies that it had been at some time *living.*
When, at what period of cosmogony? Occultism says that in all cases when
matter *appears* inert, it is the most active. A wooden or a stone block
is motionless and impenetrable to all intents and purposes.
Nevertheless, and *de facto*, its particles are in ceaseless eternal
vibration which is so rapid that to the physical eye the body seems
absolutely devoid of motion; \[\[Footnote continued on next page\]\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 508 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

This statement, however, does not prevent Spiller from enunciating an
occult doctrine and principle. He asserts *the independent
substantiality of force*, and shows it as an "incorporeal stuff"
(*unkoerperlicher stoff*) or substance. Now *substance* is not *matter*
in metaphysics, and for argument's sake it may be granted that it is a
wrong expression to use. But this is due to the poverty of European
languages, and especially to that of scientific terms. Then this "stuff"
is identified and connected by Spiller with the aether. Expressed in
occult language it might be said with more correctness that this
"force-substance" is the ever-active phenomenal *positive* aether --
*prakriti;* while the omnipresent all pervading ether is the *noumenon*
of the former, the substratum of all, or *Akasa.* Nevertheless, Stallo
falls foul of Spiller, as he does of the materialists. He is accused of
"utter disregard of the fundamental correlation of force and matter" (of
neither of which Science knows anything certain). For this "hypostasized
half-concept" is, in the view of all other physicists, not only
*imponderable*, but destitute of cohesive, chemical, thermal, electric,
and magnetic forces -- of all of which forces -- according to occultism
-- aether is the source and *cause.*

Therefore Spiller, with all his mistakes, exhibits more intuition than
any other modern Scientist, with the exception of Dr. Richardson,
perhaps, the theorist on the "nerve force," or Nervous Ether, also on
"Sun Force and Earth Force."\* For **AE**THER, in Esotericism, is the
very quintessence of all possible energy, and it is certainly to this
universal agent (composed of many *agents*) that all the manifestations
of energy in the material, psychic and spiritual worlds are due.

What are Electricity and Light, in fact? How can Science know that one
is a fluid and the other a "mode of motion"? Why is it not made clear
why a difference should be made between them, since both are considered
force-correlations. Electricity is a fluid, we are told, immaterial and
non-molecular (though Helmholtz thinks otherwise), and the proof of it
is that we can bottle it up, accumulate and store it away. Then, *it
must* be simply matter, and no peculiar "fluid." Nor is it only "a mode
of motion," for motion could hardly be stored in a Leyden jar. As for
light, it is a still more extraordinary "mode of motion;" since,
"marvellous as it may appear, light (also) can *actually be stored up
for use*," as demonstrated by Professor Grove nearly half a century ago.

"Take an engraving which has been kept for some days in the dark, expose
it to full sunshine -- that is, insulate it for 15 minutes; lay it on

\[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\[\[Footnote continued from previous page\]\] and the spacial distance
between those particles in their vibratory motion is -- considered from
another plane of being and perception -- as great as that which
separates snow flakes or drops of rain. But to physical science this
will be an absurdity.

\* See "Popular Science Review," Vol. V., pp. 329-34.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 509 THE FIXING OF LIGHT.

sensitive paper in a dark place, and at the end of 24 hours it will have
left an impression of itself on the sensitive paper, the whites coming
out as blacks. . . . There seems to be no limit for the reproduction of
engravings, etc., etc. . . . ."

What is it that remains fixed, nailed, so to say, on the paper? It is a
*Force* certainly, that fixed the thing, but what is *that thing*, the
residue of which remains on the paper?

Our learned men will get out of this through some scientific
technicality; but what is it that is intercepted, so as to imprison a
certain quantity of it on glass, paper, or wood? Is it "Motion" or is it
"Force"? Or shall we be told that what remains behind is the effect only
of the force or Motion? Then what is this Force? Force or energy is a
quality; but every quality must belong to a something, or a somebody. In
Physics, Force is defined as "that which changes or tends to change any
physical relation between bodies, whether mechanical, thermal, chemical,
electrical, magnetic, etc." But it is not that "Force" or that "Motion"
which remains behind on the paper, when the Force or Motion has ceased
to act; and yet something, which our physical senses cannot perceive,
has been left there to become a cause in its turn and produce effects.
What is it? It is not matter, as defined by Science -- *i.e.*, matter in
any of its known states. An Alchemist would say it was a spiritual
secretion -- and would be laughed at. But yet, when the physicist said
that Electricity, stored up, was a fluid, or that light fixed on paper
is still Sunlight -- this is Science.\* In the opinion of an experienced
Occultist, one who has verified the whole series of *Nidanas*, of causes
and effects that finally project their last effect on to this our plane
of manifestations; one who has traced matter back to its noumenon, the
explanation of the physicist is like calling anger, or its effects --
the exclamation provoked by it -- a secretion or a fluid, and man, the
cause of it -- its *material* conductor. But, as Grove prophetically
remarked, that day is fast approaching when it will be confessed that
the "forces" *we* know of are but the phenomenal manifestations of
realities we know nothing about, -- but which *were known to the
ancients and* -- *by them worshipped.*

He made one still more suggestive remark, however, which ought to have
become the motto of Science, but has not. Sir W. Grove said that
"**S**CIENCE SHOULD HAVE NEITHER DESIRES NOR PREJUDICES. **T**RUTH
SHOULD BE HER SOLE AIM."

Meanwhile, in our days, Scientists are more self-opinionated and bigoted
than even the clergy. For they minister to, if they do not actually
worship,

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* The newest Authorities have rejected these explanations as "exploded
theories," and have now deified "Motion" as their sole Idol. But,
surely, they and their idol will one day share the fate of their
predecessors.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 510 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

"Force-Matter," which is their *Unknown God.* And how unknown it is may
be inferred from the many confessions of the most eminent physicists and
biologists, with Faraday at their head. Not only, he said, could he
never presume to pronounce whether Force was a property or function of
Matter, but he actually did not know what was meant by the word
*matter.*

There was a time, he added, when he believed he knew something of
matter. But the more he lived, and the more carefully he studied it, the
more he became convinced *of his utter ignorance of the nature of
matter.\** (See Buckwell's "Electric Science.")

The Occultists are often misunderstood because, for lack of better
terms, they apply to the essence of Force *under certain aspects* the
descriptive epithet of *substance.* Now the names for the varieties of
"substance" on different planes of perception and being are *legion.*
Eastern Occultism has a special appellation for each kind; but Science
-- like England, in the recollection of a witty Frenchman, blessed with
thirty-six religions and only one fish-sauce -- has but one name for
all, namely, "Substance." Moreover, neither the orthodox physicists nor
their critics seem to be very certain of their premises, and are as apt
to confuse the effects as they do the causes. It is incorrect, for
instance, to say, as Stallo does, that "matter can no more be realized
or conceived as mere spacial presence than as a concretion of forces,"
or that "force is nothing without mass, and mass is nothing without
force" -- for one is the noumenon and the other the phenomenon. Again;
Schelling, when saying that "It is a mere delusion of the phantasy that
something, we know not what, remains after we have denuded an object of
all the predicates belonging to it"\*\* -- could never have applied the
remark to the realm of transcendental metaphysics. It is true that pure
force is *nothing* in the world of physics; it is ALL in the domain of
Spirit. Says Stallo: "If we reduce the mass upon which a given force,
however small, acts to its limit zero -- or, mathematically expressed,
until it becomes infinitely small -- the consequence is that the
velocity of the resulting motion is infinitely great, and that the
'thing' . . . is at any given moment neither here nor there, but
everywhere -- that there is no

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* This ominous confession was made, we believe, at a Scientific
Congress at Swansea. Faraday held a similar opinion, however, as stated
by Tyndall: "What do we know of the atom *apart from its* force? You
imagine a nucleus which may be called *a* and surround it by forces
which may be called *m*; to my mind the *a* or nucleus vanishes and the
substance consists of the powers *m*. And, indeed, what notion can we
form of the nucleus independent of its powers? What thought remains on
which to hang the imagination of an *a* independent of the acknowledged
forces?"

\*\* Schelling, "Ideen," etc., p. 18.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 511 WHAT IS FORCE?

real presence; it is impossible, therefore, to construct matter by a
synthesis of forces" (p. 161).

This may be true in the phenomenal world, inasmuch as the illusive
reflection of the *one reality* of the supersensual world may appear
true to the dwarfed conceptions of a materialist. It is absolutely
incorrect when the argument is applied to things, in what the Kabalists
call the supermundane spheres. Inertia, so called, "is force" according
to Newton (*Princ. Def. iii.*), and for the student of Esoteric Sciences
the greatest of the occult forces. A body may be considered divorced
from its relations with other bodies -- which, according to physical and
mechanical sciences, give rise to its attributes -- only *conceptually*,
only on this plane of illusion. In fact, it can never be so detached:
death itself being unable to detach it from its relation with the
Universal forces, of which the one **F**ORCE or **L**IFE is the
synthesis: but simply continues such inter-relation on another plane.
But what, if Stallo is right, can Dr. James Croll mean when, in speaking
"On the Transformation of Gravity" (*Philosophical Magazine*, Vol*.*
II., p. 252), he brings forward the views advocated by Faraday,
Waterston, and others? For he says very plainly that gravity --

". . . . . is a force pervading Space *external to bodies*, and that, on
the mutual approach of the bodies, the force is not increased, as is
generally supposed, but the bodies merely pass into a place *where the
force exists with greater intensity*. . . . ."

No one will deny that a force (whether gravity, electricity, or any
other force) which exists *outside* of the bodies and in open space --
be it ether or vacuum -- must be *something*, and not a pure *nothing*,
when conceived apart from a mass? Otherwise it could hardly exist in one
place with a *greater* and in another with reduced "intensity." G. A.
Hirn declares the same in his *Theorie Mecanique de l*'*Univers.* He
tries to demonstrate that the atom of the chemists is not an entity of
pure convention, or simply an explicative device, but that it exists
really, that its volume is unalterable, and that consequently it is
*not* elastic (!!). "Force, therefore, *is not in the atom; it is in the
space which separates the atoms from each other.*"

The above-cited views, expressed by two men of Science of great eminence
in their respective countries, show that it is not in the least
*unscientific* to speak of the substantiality of the so-called *Forces.*
Subject to some future specific name, this force is *substance* of some
kind, and can be nothing else; and perhaps one day Science will be the
first to re-adopt the derided name of phlogiston. Whatever may be the
future name given to it, to maintain that force does *not* reside in the
atoms, but only in "space between them," may be scientific enough;
nevertheless it is not true. To the mind of an Occultist it is like
saying

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 512 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

that water does not reside in the drops of which the ocean is composed,
but only in the space between those drops!

The objection made that there are two distinct schools of physicists, by
one of which "the force is assumed to be an *independent substantial
entity*, which is NOT a property of matter nor is it essentially related
to matter,"\* is hardly likely to help the profane to any clearer
understanding. It is, on the contrary, still more calculated to throw
the question into greater confusion than ever. For Force is, then,
neither this nor the other. By viewing it as "an independent substantial
entity," the theory extends the right hand of fellowship to Occultism,
while the strange contradictory idea that it is not related to matter
"otherwise than by its power to act upon it,"\*\* leads physical science
to the most absurd contradictory hypotheses. Whether "force" or
"motion," (Occultism, seeing no difference between the two, never
attempts to separate them) it cannot act for the adherents of the
atomo-mechanical theory one way, and for those of the rival school in
another way. Nor can the atoms be, in one case, *absolutely uniform in
size and weight*, and in another, vary in their weight (Avogadro's law).
For, in the words of the same able critic,

> . . . "While the absolute equality of the primordial units of mass is
> thus an essential part of the very foundations of the mechanical
> theory, the whole modern Science of chemistry is based *upon a
> principle directly subversive of it* -- a principle of which it has
> recently been said that 'it holds the same place in chemistry that the
> law of gravitation does in astronomy.'\*\*\* This principle is known
> as the law of Avogadro or Ampere."\*\*\*\*

This shows that either modern chemistry or modern physics is entirely
wrong in its respective fundamental principles. For if the assumption of
atoms of different specific gravities on the basis of the atomic theory
in physics is deemed absurd, and chemistry meets, nevertheless, on its
opposite basis (in the question of the formation and transformation of
chemical compounds) with "*unfailing* experimental verification,"

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* "Concepts of Modern Physics," xxxi., Introductory to the 2nd edition.

\**\* Loc. cit.*

\*\*\* J. P. Cooke, *The New Chemistry*, p. 13.

\*\*\*\* "It imports that equal volumes of all substances, when in the
gaseous state, and under like conditions of pressure and temperature,
contain the same number of molecules -- whence it follows that the
weights of the molecules are proportional to the specific gravities of
the gases; that therefore, these being different, the weights of the
molecules are different also; and inasmuch as the molecules of certain
elementary substances are *monatomic* (consist of but one atom each)
while the molecules of various other substances contain the same number
of atoms, that the ultimate atoms of such substances are of different
weights" (*Concepts of Modern Physics*, p. 34). As shown further on in
the same volume, this cardinal principle of modern theoretical chemistry
*is in utter and irreconcilable conflict with the first proposition of
the atomo-mechanical theory* -- namely, the absolute equality of the
primordial units of mass.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 513 THEY AGREE TO DISAGREE.

then it becomes apparent that it is the atomo-mechanical theory which is
untenable. The explanations of the latter, that "the differences of
weight are only differences of density, and differences of density are
differences of distance between the particles contained in a given
space," are not really valid, because, before a physicist can argue in
his defence that, "as in the atom there is no multiplicity of particles
and no void space: hence differences of density or weight are impossible
in the case of atoms," he must first know what an atom is, in reality,
and that he cannot know. He must bring it under the observation *of at
least one of* his physical senses -- and that *he cannot do:* for the
simple reason that no one has ever *seen*, *smelt*, *heard*, *touched*
or *tasted* an "atom." The atom belongs wholly to the domain of
metaphysics. It is *an entified abstraction* -- at any rate for physical
Science -- and has nought to do with physics, strictly speaking, as it
can never be brought to the test of retort or balance. The mechanical
conception, therefore, becomes a jumble of the most conflicting theories
and dilemmas, in the minds of the many Scientists who disagree on this,
as on other subjects; the evolution of which the Eastern Occultist, who
follows this scientific strife, beholds in the greatest bewilderment.

To conclude on the question of gravity. How can Science presume to know
anything certain of it? How can it maintain its position and its
hypotheses against those of the Occultists, who see in gravity only
sympathy and antipathy, or attraction and repulsion, caused by physical
polarity on our terrestrial plane, and by spiritual causes outside of
its influence? How can they disagree with the Occultists before they
agree among themselves? Indeed one hears of the conservation of energy,
and in the same breath of the perfect hardness and inelasticity of the
atoms; of the Kinetic theory of gases being identical with "potential
energy," so called; and, at the same time, of the elementary units of
mass being *absolutely hard* and *inelastic!* An Occultist opens a
scientific work and reads as follows: --

"Physical atomism derives all the qualitative properties of matter from
the forms of atomic motion. *The atoms themselves remain as elements
utterly devoid of property.*" (Wundt, "*Die Theorie der Materie*," *p.*
381.)

And further:

"Chemistry in its ultimate form *must be atomic mechanics.*" (Nazesmann,
"*Thermochemie*," p. 150.)

And a moment after he is told that:

"Gases consist of atoms which *behave* like solid, *perfectly elastic*
spheres." (Kroenig, Clausius, Maxwell, etc., *Philosophical Magazine*,
Vol. **XIX**., p. 18.)

Finally, to crown all, Sir W. Thomson is found declaring that:

"We are forbidden by the modern theory of the conservation of

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 514 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

energy to assume inelasticity, or anything short *of perfect elasticity*
of the ultimate molecules whether of ultra mundane or mundane matter."
(!!!) ("Philosophical Magazine," p. 321, *loc. cit.*)

But what do the men of *true* Science say to all this? By the "men of
true Science" we mean those who care too much for truth and too little
for their personal vanity to dogmatise on anything, as the majority do.
There are several among them -- perhaps more than dare publish openly
their secret conclusions for fear of the cry "Stone him to death!" --
men, whose intuitions have made them span the abyss that lies between
the terrestrial aspect of matter, and the -- to us, on our plane of
illusion -- subjective, *i.e.*, TRANSCENDENTALLY OBJECTIVE SUBSTANCE,
and led them to proclaim the existence of the latter. Matter, to the
Occultist, it must be remembered, is that totality of *existences* in
the Kosmos, which falls within any of the planes of possible perception.
We are but too well aware that the orthodox theories of sound, heat and
light, are against the occult doctrines. But, it is not enough for the
men of Science, or their defenders, to say that *they do not deny
dynamic power to light and heat;* and urge as a proof the fact that Mr.
Crookes' radiometer has unsettled no views. If they would fathom the
ultimate nature of these Forces, they have first to admit their
*substantial* nature, however *supersensuous.* Neither do the Occultists
deny the correctness of the vibratory theory.\* Only they limit its
functions to our Earth -- declaring its inadequacy on other planes than
ours, since "Masters" in the Occult Sciences perceive the CAUSES that
produce ethereal vibrations. Were all these only the fictions of the
alchemists, or dreams of the Mystics, such men as Paracelsus,
Philalethes, Van Helmont, and so many others, would have to be regarded
as worse than visionaries: they would become impostors and deliberate
mystificators.

The Occultists are taken to task for calling the *Cause* of light, heat,
sound, cohesion, magnetism, etc., etc., a *substance*.\*\* Mr. Clerk
Maxwell has stated that the pressure of strong sunlight on a square mile
is about 3 1/4 lbs. It is, they are told, "the energy of the myriad
ether waves;" and when they call it a "substance" impinging on that
area, their explanation is proclaimed *unscientific.*

There is no justification for such an accusation. In no way -- as stated

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Referring to the *Aura*, one of the Masters says in the "Occult
World," "How could you make yourself understood by, command in fact,
those semi-intelligent *forces*, whose means of communication with us
are not through spoken words but *through sounds and colours* in
correlation between the *vibrations* of the two." It is this
"correlation" that is unknown to modern Science, yet was many times
explained by the Alchemists.

\*\* The "substance" of the Occultist, however, is to the most refined
*substance* of the physicist, what *radiant matter* is to the leather of
the Chemist's boots.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 515 THE MYSTIC RAYS.

more than once before now -- do the Occultists dispute the explanations
of Science, as affording a solution of the *immediate* objective
agencies at work. Science only errs in believing that, because it has
detected in vibratory waves the *proximate* cause of these phenomena, it
has, therefore, revealed ALL that lies beyond the threshold of Sense. It
merely traces the sequence of phenomena on a plane of effects, illusory
projections from the region that Occultism has long since penetrated.
And the latter maintains that those etheric tremors, are not, as
asserted by Science, set up by the vibrations of the molecules of
*known* bodies -- the matter of our terrestrial objective consciousness,
-- but that we must seek for the ultimate causes of light, heat, etc.,
etc., in **MATTER** existing in *super*-*sensuous* states -- states,
however, as fully objective to the spiritual eye of man, as a horse or a
tree is to the ordinary mortal. Light and heat are the ghost or shadow
of matter in motion. Such states can be perceived by the SEER or the
Adept during the hours of trance, under the *Sushumna ray* -- the first
of the Seven *Mystic* rays of the Sun.\*

Thus, we put forward the Occult teaching which maintains the reality of
a supersubstantial and supersensible essence of that *Akasa* (not ether,
which is only an aspect of the latter), the nature of which cannot be
inferred from its remoter manifestations -- *its merely phenomenal
phalanx of effects* -- on this terrene plane. Science, on the contrary,
informs us that heat can never be regarded as matter in any conceivable
state.\*\* We are also told that the two great obstacles to the fluid
(?) theory of heat undoubtedly are: --

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* The names of the Seven Rays -- which are, Sushumna, Harikesa,
Viswakarman, Viswatryarchas, Sannaddha, Sarvavasu and Swaraj -- are all
mystical, and each has its distinct application in a distinct state of
consciousness, for occult purposes. The *Sushumna*, which, as said in
the *Nirukta* (11, 6), is only to light up the moon, is the ray
nevertheless cherished by the initiated Yogis. The totality of the Seven
Rays spread through the Solar system constitute, so to say, the physical
*Upadhi* (basis) of the *Ether of Science;* in which Upadhi, light,
heat, electricity, etc., etc., -- the forces of orthodox science --
correlate to produce their terrestrial effects. As psychic and spiritual
effects, they emanate from, and have their origin in, the supra-solar
Upadhi, in the ether of the Occultist -- or Akasa.

\*\* To cite a most impartial critic, one whose authority no one can
call in question, as a reminder to Western Dogmatists, that the question
cannot be in any way considered as settled: "There is no fundamental
difference between light and heat . . . each is merely a metamorphosis
of the other. . . . Heat is light in complete repose. Light is heat in
rapid motion. Directly light is combined with a body, it becomes heat;
but when it is thrown off from that body it again becomes light."
(*Leslie*'*s Fluid Theory of Light and Heat.*) "*Whether this is true or
false we cannot tell*, and many years, perhaps many generations, will
have to elapse before we shall be able to tell." (*Buckle*'*s History of
Civilization*, Vol. III., p. 384.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 516 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

(1.) The production of heat by friction -- excitation of molecular
motions.

(2.) The conversion of heat into mechanical motion.

The answer given is: There are fluids of various kinds. Electricity is
called a fluid, and so was heat quite recently, but it was on the
supposition that heat was some imponderable substance. This was during
the supreme and autocratic reign of matter. When the latter was
dethroned, and MOTION was proclaimed the sole sovereign ruler of the
Universe, heat became "a mode of motion." We need not despair: it may
become something else to-morrow. Like the Universe itself, Science is
ever *becoming*, and can never say, "I am that I am." On the other hand,
Occult Science has its *changeless* traditions from prehistoric times.
It may err in particulars; it can never become guilty of a mistake in
questions of Universal laws, simply because that Science, justly
referred to by philosophy as the "*divine*," was born on higher planes,
and was brought on Earth by beings who were wiser than man will be, even
in the seventh Race of his Seventh Round. And *that* Science maintains
that Forces are not what modern learning would have them; *e.g.*,
Magnetism is *not* a "mode of motion"; and, in this particular case, at
least, *exact* "modern Science" is sure to come to grief some day.
Nothing, at the first blush, can appear more ridiculous, more
outrageously absurd than to say, for instance: "the Hindu initiated Yogi
knows really *ten times more than the greatest European physicist of the
ultimate nature and constitution of light* -- both solar and lunar." Yet
why is the Sushumna ray believed to be that ray which furnishes the moon
with its borrowed light? Why is it "the ray cherished *by the initiated
Yogi?*" Why is the moon held as the *deity of the mind*, by those Yogis?
We say, because light, or rather all its occult properties, every
combination and correlation of it with other forces, mental, psychic,
and spiritual, were perfectly known to the old adepts.

Therefore, although, in its knowledge of the ultimate constitution of
matter, or in the so-called ultimate analysis as opposed to the
proximate in chemistry, occult science may be less well-informed as to
the behaviour of compound elements in various cases of physical
correlations: still, it is immeasurably higher in its knowledge of the
ultimate occult states of matter, and of the true nature of matter, than
all the physicists and chemists of our modern day put together.

Now, if we state the truth openly and in full sincerity, namely, that
the ancient Initiates had a far wider knowledge of physics -- as a
Science of Nature -- than our Academies of Science, all taken together,
possess, the statement will be characterized as an impertinence and an
absurdity; for physical sciences are considered to have been carried in
our age to the apex of perfection. Hence, the twitting query -- "Can

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 517 THE CAUSES AND THE EFFECTS.

the Occultists meet successfully the two points, namely (*a*) the
production of heat by friction -- excitation of molecular motions; and
(*b*) the conversion of heat into mechanical force, if they hold to the
old "exploded" theory of heat being a substance or a fluid?"

To answer the question, it must first be observed that the Occult
Sciences do not regard either electricity or any of the forces supposed
to be generated by it, as matter, *in any of the states known to
physical Science;* to put it more clearly, none of these "forces,"
so-called, are either solids, gases, or fluids. If it did not look
pedantic, an Occultist would even object to electricity being called a
fluid -- *as it is an effect and not a cause.* But its *noumenon*, he
would say, *is a conscious cause.* The same in the cases of "Force" and
the "Atom." Let us see what an eminent Academician, Butlerof, the
chemist, had to say about these two abstractions.

--------------

"What is Force?" argues this great man of Science, "what is it from a
strictly scientific stand-point, and as warranted by the law of
conservation of energy? Conceptions of Force are resumed by our
conceptions of this, that, or another mode of motion." Force is thus
simply the passage of *one state of motion into another state of the
same:* of electricity, into heat and light, of heat into sound or some
mechanical function, and so on.\* The first time electric fluid was
produced by man on earth it must have been by friction; hence, as
well-known, it is heat that produces it by disturbing its *laya*
state,\*\* and electricity exists no more on earth *per se* than heat or
light, or any other force. They are all correlations, as science says.
"When a given quantity of heat, assisted by a steam engine, is
transformed into mechanical work, we speak of steam power (or force).
When a falling body strikes an obstacle in its way, thereby generating
heat and sound -- we call it the power of collision. When electricity
decomposes water or heats a platinum wire, we speak of the force of the
electric fluid. When the rays of the sun are intercepted by the
thermometer bulb and its quicksilver expands, we speak of the calorific
energy of the sun. In short, when one state of a determined quantity of
motion ceases, another state of motion equivalent to the preceding takes
its place, and the result of such a transformation or correlation is --
force. In all cases where such a transformation, or the passage of one
state of motion into another, is entirely absent, there no force is
possible. Let us admit for a moment an absolutely homogeneous state of
the Universe, and our conception of force falls down to nought."

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* On the plane of manifestation and illusionary matter it may be so;
not that it is nothing more, for it is vastly more.

\*\* Neutral, or zero.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 518 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

"Therefore it becomes evident that the force, which materialism
considers as the cause of the diversity that surrounds us, is in sober
reality only an effect, a result of that diversity. From such point of
view force is not the cause of motion, but a result, while the cause of
that force, or forces, is not the substance or matter, but motion
itself. Matter thus must be laid aside and with it the basic principle
of materialism, which has become unnecessary, as force brought down to a
state of motion can give no idea of the substance. If force is the
result of motion, then it becomes incomprehensible *why that motion
should become witness to matter* and not to Spirit or a Spiritual
essence. True, our reason cannot conceive of a motion minus something
moving (and our reason is right); but the nature or *esse* of that
something moving remains to Science entirely unknown; and the
Spiritualist, in such case, has as much right to attribute it to a
"Spirit," as a Materialist to creative and all-potential matter. A
Materialist has no special privileges in this instance, nor can he claim
any. The law of the conservation of energy, as thus seen, is shown to be
illegitimate in its pretensions and claims in this case. The "great
dogma" -- *no force without matter and no matter without force* -- falls
to the ground, and loses entirely the solemn significance with which
materialism has tried to invest it. The conception of force still gives
no idea of matter and compels us in no way to see in it "the origin of
all origins." ("*Scientific Letters*," *Professor Butlerof.*)

We are assured that real science is not materialistic; and our own
conviction tells us that it cannot be so, when its learning is real.
There is a good reason for it, well defined by some physicists and
chemists themselves. Natural sciences *cannot* go hand in hand with
materialism. To be at the height of their calling, men of science have
to reject the very possibility of materialistic doctrines having aught
to do with the *atomic* theory; and we find that Lange, Butlerof, Du
Bois Reymond, -- the latter probably unconsciously -- and several
others, have proved it. And it is, furthermore, demonstrated by the
fact, that Kanada in India, and Leucippus, Democritus, and after them
Epicurus -- the earliest atomists in Europe -- while propagating their
doctrine of definite proportions, believed in *Gods* or supersensuous
entities, at the same time. Their ideas upon matter thus differed from
those now prevalent. We must be allowed to make our statement clearer in
a short synopsis of the ancient and modern views of philosophy upon
atoms, and thus prove that the atomic theory kills Materialism.

From the standpoint of Materialism, which reduces the beginnings of all
to *matter*, the Universe consists, in its fullness, of atoms and
vacuity. Even leaving aside the axiom -- now absolutely demonstrated by
telescope and microscope -- taught by the ancients, that nature abhors

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 519 THE VICIOUS CIRCLE.

vacuum, what is an atom? "It is, we are answered by Science," writes
Professor Butlerof, "the limited division of substance, the indivisible
particle of matter. To admit the divisibility of the atom, amounts to an
admission of an infinite divisibility of substance, which is equivalent
to reducing substance to *nihil*, a nothingness. Owing to a feeling of
self-preservation alone, materialism cannot admit infinite divisibility;
otherwise, it would have to bid farewell for ever to its basic principle
and thus sign its own death-warrant." Buchner, for instance, like a true
dogmatist in materialism, declares that "to accept infinite divisibility
is absurd, and amounts to doubting the very existence of matter." The
Atom is indivisible then, saith Materialism? Very well.

> "See now what a curious contradiction this fundamental principle of
> the materialists is leading them into," writes Butlerof. "The atom is
> *indivisible*, and at the same time we know it to be *elastic.* An
> attempt to deprive it of elasticity is unthinkable; it would amount to
> an absurdity. *Absolutely non*-*elastic atoms could never exhibit a
> single one of those numerous phenomena that are attributed to their
> correlations.* Without any elasticity, the atoms could not manifest
> their energy, and the substance of the materialists would remain
> weeded of every force. Therefore, if the Universe is composed of
> atoms, then those atoms *must be elastic.* It is here that we meet
> with an insuperable obstacle. For, what are the conditions requisite
> for the manifestation of elasticity? An elastic ball, when striking
> against an obstacle, is flattened and contracts, which it would be
> impossible for it to do, were not that ball to consist of particles,
> the relative position of which experiences at the time of the blow a
> temporary change. This may be said of elasticity in general; no
> elasticity is possible without change with respect to the position of
> the compound particles of an elastic body. This means that the elastic
> body is changeful and consists of particles, or, in other words, that
> elasticity can pertain *only to those bodies that are divisible.* And
> the atom *is* elastic."

This is sufficient to show how absurd are the simultaneous admissions of
the non-divisibility and elasticity of the atom. The atom *is* elastic,
*ergo*, the atom is divisible, and must consist of particles, or of
*sub*-atoms. And these *sub*-atoms? They are either non-elastic, and in
such case they represent no dynamic importance, or, they are *elastic*
also; and in that case, they, too, are subject to divisibility. And thus
*ad infinitum.* But infinite divisibility of atoms resolves matter into
simple centres of force, *i.e.*, precludes the possibility of conceiving
matter as an *objective* substance.

This vicious circle is fatal to materialism. It finds itself caught in
its own nets, and no issue is possible for it out of the dilemma. If it
says that the atom is indivisible, then it will have mechanics asking it
the awkward question: "How does the Universe move in this case, and how
do its forces correlate? A world built on absolutely *non*-elastic
atoms, is like an engine without steam, it is doomed to eternal
inertia."\*

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* "Scientific Letters," Butlerof.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 520 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

Accept the explanations and teachings of Occultism, and, the blind
inertia of physical Science being replaced by the *intelligent active*
Powers behind the veil of matter, motion and inertia become subservient
to those Powers. It is on the doctrine of the illusive nature of matter,
and the infinite divisibility of the atom, that the whole science of
Occultism is built. It opens limitless horizons to *substance* informed
by the divine breath of its soul in every possible state of tenuity,
states still undreamt of by the most spiritually disposed chemists and
physicists.

The above views were enunciated by an Academician, the greatest chemist
in Russia, and a recognised authority even in Europe -- the late
Professor Butlerof. True, he was defending the phenomena of the
Spiritualists, the materializations, so called, in which he believed as
Professors Zollner, and Hare did, as Mr. A. Russell Wallace, Mr. W.
Crookes, and many another Fellow of the Royal Society, do still, whether
openly or secretly. But his argument with regard to the nature of the
essence that acts behind the physical phenomena of light, heat,
electricity, etc., is no less scientific and authoritative for all that,
and apply admirably to the case in hand. Science has no right to deny to
the Occultists their claim to a more profound knowledge of the so-called
Forces; which, they say, are only the effects of causes generated by
Powers, substantial, yet supersensuous, and *beyond* any kind of matter
with which they (the Scientists) have hitherto become acquainted. The
most science can do is to assume the attitude of agnosticism and to
maintain it. Then it can say: "Your case is no more proven than is ours;
but we confess to knowing nothing in reality either about Force or
matter, or that which lies at the bottom of the so-called correlations
of Forces. Therefore, time alone can prove who is right and who is
wrong. Let us wait patiently, and meanwhile show courtesy instead of
scoffing at each other."

But to do this requires a boundless love of truth and the surrender of
that prestige -- however false -- of *infallibility*, which the men of
Science have acquired among the ignorant and flippant, though cultured,
masses of the profane. To blend the two sciences, the archaic and the
modern, requires first of all the abandonment of the actual
materialistic lines. It necessitates a kind of religious mysticism and
even the study of old magic, which our Academicians will never take up.
The necessity is easily explained. Just as in old alchemical works the
real meaning of the substances and elements meant are concealed under
the most ridiculous metaphors, so are the physical, psychic, and
spiritual natures of the Elements (say of fire) concealed in the Vedas,
and especially in the Puranas, under allegories comprehensible only to
the Initiates. Had they no meaning, then indeed all those long legends
and allegories about the sacredness of the three types of fire, and the
*forty*-*nine original fires* --

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 521 CHEMICAL GODS.

personified by the Sons of Daksha's daughters and the Rishis, their
husbands, "who with the first son of Brahma and his three descendants
constitute the forty-nine fires" -- would be idiotic verbiage and no
more. But it is not so. Every *fire* has a distinct function and meaning
in the worlds of the physical and the spiritual. It has, moreover, in
its *essential* nature a corresponding relation to one of the human
psychic faculties, besides its well determined chemical and physical
potencies when coming in contact with the *terrestrially* differentiated
matter. Science has no speculations to offer upon fire *per se;*
Occultism and ancient religious science have. This is shown even in the
meagre and purposely veiled phraseology of the Puranas, where (as in the
*Vayu Purana*) many of the qualities of the *personified* fires are
explained. Thus, *Pavaka* is electric, or *Vaidyuta*, fire; Pavamana,
*the fire produced by friction*, (or *Nirmathya*)*:* and *Suchi* is
solar (or *Saura*) fire*\** -- all these three being the sons of
Abhimanin, the Agni (fire), eldest son of Brahma and of Swaha. Pavaka,
moreover, is made parent to Kavyavahana, *the fire of the Pitris:* Suchi
to Havyavahana -- the fire of the gods; and Pavamana, to Saharaksha, the
fire of the Asuras. Now all this shows that the writers of the Puranas
were perfectly conversant with the "Forces" of Science and their
correlations; moreover, with the various qualities of the latter in
their bearing upon those psychic and physical phenomena which receive no
credit and are unknown to physical science now. Very naturally, when an
Orientalist, -- especially one with materialistic tendencies -- reads
that these are only appellations of fire employed *in the invocations*
and rituals, he calls this "Tantrika superstition and mystification";
and he becomes more careful to avoid errors in spelling, than to give
attention to the secret meaning attached to the personifications, or to
seek their explanation in the physical correlations of forces, so far as
known. So little credit, indeed, is given to the ancient Aryans for
knowledge, that even such glaring passages as in *Book I. chap.* ii,
*Vishnu Purana*, are left without any notice. Nevertheless, what can
this sentence mean? -- "Then Ether, air, light, water, and earth,
severally united with the properties of sound and other qualities,
existed as distinguishable according to their properties, . . . . but
possessing many and various energies and being unconnected, they *could
not*, *without combination*, create living beings, not having blended
with each other. . . . Having combined . . . they assumed through mutual
association, the character of one mass of entire unity; and directed by
Spirit . . ." etc. This means, of course, that the writers were
perfectly acquainted with correlation and were well posted about the
origin of Kosmos from the "undiscrete Principle" -- *Avyaktanugrahena*,
as applied

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Called the "drinker of waters," solar heat causing water to
evaporate.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 522 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

to Parabrahmam and Mulaprakriti conjointly, and not to "Avyakta,
*either* First Cause, or matter," as Wilson gives it. The old Initiates
knew of no "miraculous creation," but taught the evolution of atoms (on
our physical plane), and their first differentiation from *laya* into
the *protyle*, as Mr. Crookes has suggestively named matter, or
primordial substance *beyond* the zero-line: -- there where we place
*Mulaprakriti*, the "*root*-Principle" of the world stuff and of all in
the world.

This can be easily demonstrated. Take, for instance, the newly-published
catechism of the *Visishtadwaita Vedantins*, an orthodox and exoteric
system, yet fully enunciated and taught in the XIth century (its
founder, Ramanujacharya, being born in **A.D.** 1017), at a time when
European "Science" still believed in the squareness and flatness of the
Earth, of Cosmas-Indicopleustes of the VIth century. It teaches that
before evolution began, Prakriti (Nature) was in a condition of *laya*
or absolute homogeneity, as "matter exists in two conditions, the
*sukshma*, or latent and undifferentiated, and the *sthula* or
differentiated condition." Then it became *anu*, atomic. It teaches of
*Sudda*-*satwa* -- "a substance not subject to the qualities of matter,
from which it is quite different," and adds that out of that substance
the bodies of the inhabitants of Vaikuntaloka (the heaven of Vishnu),
the gods, are formed. That every particle or atom of Prakriti contains
*Jiva* (divine life), and is the *sarira* (body) of that Jiva which it
contains, while every Jiva is in its turn the *sarira* of the supreme
spirit, as "Parabrahm pervades every Jiva, as well as every particle of
matter." Dualistic and anthropomorphic as may be the philosophy of the
Visishtadwaita, when compared with that of the *Adwaita* -- the
non-dualists, -- it is yet supremely higher in logic and philosophy than
the cosmogony accepted by either Christianity, or its great opponent,
modern Science. The followers of one of the greatest minds that ever
appeared on Earth, the *Adwaita* Vedantins are called *Atheists*,
because they regard all save Parabrahm, the *secondless*, or Absolute
Reality -- as an illusion. Yet the wisest Initiates came from their
ranks, as also the greatest Yogis. The *Upanishads* show that they most
assuredly knew not only what is the *causal* substance in the *effects*
of *friction*, and that their forefathers were acquainted with the
*conversion of heat into mechanical force*, but that they were
acquainted with the *noumena* of every spiritual as well as of every
cosmic phenomenon.

Truly the young Brahmin who graduates in the universities and colleges
of India with the highest honours; who starts in life as an **M.A**. and
an **LL.B.**, with a tail initialed from Alpha to Omega after his name,
and a contempt for his national gods proportioned to the honours
received in his education in physical sciences; truly he has but to read
in the light of the latter, and with an eye to the correlation of

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 523 SUGGESTIVE ALLEGORIES.

physical Forces, certain passages in his Puranas, if he would learn how
much more his ancestors knew than he will ever know -- unless he becomes
an occultist. Let him turn to the allegory of Pururavas and the
celestial *Gandharva*,*\** who furnished the former with a vessel full
of heavenly fire. The primeval mode of obtaining fire by friction has
its scientific explanation in the Vedas, and is pregnant with meaning
for him who reads between the lines. The *Tretagni* (sacred triad of
fires) obtained by the attrition of sticks made of the wood of the
*Aswattha* tree (the Bo-tree, of Wisdom and Knowledge) -- sticks "as
many finger-breaths long as there are syllables in the gayatri" must
have a secret meaning, or else the writers of the Vedas and Puranas were
no sacred writers but mystificators. That it has such a meaning, the
Hindu Occultists are a proof, and they alone are able to enlighten
Science, as to why and how, "the fire, that was primevally *one*, was
made threefold (*treta*) in our present Manvantara, by the Son of Ila
(Vach), the primeval woman after the Deluge, the wife and daughter of
Vaivasvata Manu. The allegory is suggestive, in whatever Purana it may
be read and studied.

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* The Gandharva of the Veda is the deity who knows and reveals the
secrets of heaven and divine truths to mortals. *Cosmically* -- the
Gandharvas are the aggregate powers of the solar-fire, and constitute
its Forces; *psychically* -- the intelligence residing in the
*Sushumna*, Solar ray, the highest of the *seven* rays; *mystically* --
the occult force in the Soma (the moon, or lunar plant) and the drink
made of it; *physically* -- the phenomenal, and *spiritually* -- the
noumenal causes of *Sound* and the "Voice of Nature." Hence, they are
called the 6,333 "heavenly Singers" and musicians of Indra's loka who
personify (even in number) the various and manifold sounds in Nature,
both above and below. In the latter allegories they are said to have
mystic power over women, and *to be fond of them.* The esoteric meaning
is plain. They are one of the forms, if not the prototypes, of Enoch's
angels, the Sons of God, who saw that the daughters of men were fair
(Gen. vi.) who married them, and taught the daughters of the Earth *the
secrets of Heaven.*

--------------

<span id="DDE_LINK19">\[\[This page continued in next section\]\]</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next Section](sd1-3-07.md)

[Contents](sd1-0-co.htm#contents.md)
