##### *The Secret Doctrine* by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol. 1

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 191 THE PRELIMINARY CREATION OF MAN.

\[\[This page continued from [previous section](sd1-1-09)\]\]

#### STANZA VI. -- *Continued.*

5\. **A**T THE FOURTH (*Round*, *or revolution of life and being around*
"*the seven smaller wheels*") (*a*), THE SONS ARE TOLD TO CREATE THEIR
IMAGES. **O**NE THIRD REFUSES. **T**WO (*thirds*) OBEY*.*

The full meaning of this sloka can be fully comprehended only after
reading the detailed additional explanations in the "Anthropogenesis"
and its commentaries, in Book II. Between this Sloka and the last, Sloka
4 in this same Stanza, extend long ages; and there now gleams the dawn
and sunrise of another aeon. The drama enacted on our planet is at the
beginning of its fourth act, but for a clearer comprehension of the
whole play the reader will have to turn back before he can proceed
onward. For this verse belongs to the general Cosmogony given in the
archaic volumes, whereas Book II. will give a detailed account of the
"Creation" or rather the formation, of the first human beings, followed
by the second humanity, and then by the third; or, as they are called,
"the first, second, and the third Root-Races." As the solid Earth began
by being a ball of liquid fire, of fiery dust and its protoplasmic
phantom, so did man.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 192 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

(*a*) That which is meant by the qualification the "Fourth" is explained
as the "fourth Round" only on the authority of the Commentaries. It can
equally mean fourth "Eternity" as "Fourth Round," or even the fourth
(our) Globe. For, as will repeatedly be shown, it is the fourth Sphere
on the fourth or lowest plane of material life. And it so happens that
we are in the Fourth Round, at the middle point of which the perfect
equilibrium between Spirit and Matter had to take place.\* Says the
Commentary explaining the verse: --

"*The holy youths* (*the gods*) *refused to multiply and create species
after their likeness*, *after their kind. They are not fit forms*
(*rupas*) *for us. They have to grow. They refuse to enter the chhayas*
(*shadows or images*) *of their inferiors. Thus had selfish feeling
prevailed from the beginning*, *even among the gods*, *and they fell
under the eye of the Karmic Lipikas.*"

They had to suffer for it in later births. How the punishment reached
the gods will be seen in the second volume.

-------

#### STANZA VI. -- *Continued.*

6\. **T**HE CURSE IS PRONOUNCED (*a*): THEY WILL BE BORN IN THE FOURTH
(*Race*), SUFFER AND CAUSE SUFFERING (*b*). **T**HIS IS THE FIRST WAR
(*c*).

(*a*) It is a universal tradition that, before the physiological "Fall,"
propagation of one's kind, whether human or animal, took place through
the WILL of the Creators, or of their progeny. It was the Fall of Spirit
into generation, not the Fall of mortal man. It has already been stated
that, to become a Self-Conscious Spirit, the latter must pass through
every cycle of being, culminating in its highest point on earth in Man.

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* It was, as we shall see, at this period -- during the highest point
of civilization and knowledge, as also of human intellectuality, of the
fourth, Atlantean Race -- that, owing to the final crisis of
physiologico-spiritual adjustment of the races, humanity branched off
into its two diametrically opposite paths: the RIGHT- and the LEFT-hand
paths of knowledge or of Vidya. "*Thus were the germs of the White and
the Black Magic sown in those days. The seeds lay latent for some time*,
*to sprout only during the early period of the Fifth* (*our Race*)*.*"
(*Commentary.*)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 193 THE FIRST CAUSE OF SIN.

Spirit *per se* is an unconscious negative ABSTRACTION. Its purity is
inherent, not acquired by merit; hence, as already shown, to become the
highest Dhyan Chohan it is necessary for each Ego to attain to full
self-consciousness as a human, *i.e.*, conscious Being, which is
synthesized for us in Man. The Jewish Kabalists arguing that no Spirit
could belong to the divine hierarchy unless Ruach (Spirit) was united to
Nephesh (living Soul), only repeat the Eastern Esoteric teaching. "A
Dhyani has to be an Atma-Buddhi; once the Buddhi-Manas breaks loose from
its immortal Atma of which it (Buddhi) is the vehicle, Atman passes into
NON-BEING, which is absolute Being." This means that the purely Nirvanic
state is a passage of Spirit back to the ideal abstraction of Be-ness
which has no relation to the plane on which our Universe is
accomplishing its cycle.

(*b*) "The curse is pronounced" does not mean, in this instance, that
any personal Being, god, or superior Spirit, pronounced it, but simply
that the cause which could but create bad results had been generated,
and that the effects of a Karmic cause could lead the "Beings" that
counteracted the laws of Nature, and thus impeded her legitimate
progress, only to bad incarnations, hence to suffering.

(*c*) "There were many wars" refers to several struggles of adjustment,
spiritual, cosmical, and astronomical, but chiefly to the mystery of the
evolution of man as he is now. Powers -- pure Essences -- "that were
told to create" is a sentence that relates to a mystery explained, as
already said, elsewhere. It is not only one of the most hidden secrets
of Nature -- that of generation, over whose solution the Embryologists
have vainly put their heads together -- but likewise a divine function
that involves that other religious, or rather dogmatic, mystery, the
"Fall" of the Angels, as it is called. Satan and his rebellious host
would thus prove, when the meaning of the allegory is explained, to have
refused to create physical man, only to become the direct Saviours and
the Creators of "*divine* Man." The symbolical teaching is more than
mystical and religious, it is purely scientific, as will be seen later
on. For, instead of remaining a mere blind, functioning medium, impelled
and guided by fathomless LAW, the "rebellious" Angel claimed and
enforced his right of independent judgment and will, his

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 194 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

right of free-agency and responsibility, since man and angel are alike
under Karmic Law.\*

"And there was war in Heaven. . . . Michael and his angels fought
against the Dragon; and the Dragon fought and his angels, and prevailed
not; neither was their place found any more in Heaven. And the Dragon
was cast out, that old serpent, called the devil and Satan, which
deceiveth the whole world."

The Kabalistic version of the same story is given in the Codex Nazareus,
the scripture of the Nazarenes, the real mystic Christians of John the
Baptist and the Initiates of Christos. Bahak-Zivo, the "Father of the
Genii," is ordered to construct creatures (to create). But, as he is
"ignorant of Orcus," he fails to do so, and calls in Fetahil, a still
purer spirit, to his aid, who fails still worse. This is a repetition of
the failure of the "Fathers," the lords of light who fail one after the
other. (Book II, Sloka 17.)

We will now quote from our earlier Volumes: --

"Then steps on the stage of creation the spirit\*\* (of the Earth
so-called, or the Soul, Psyche, which St. James calls 'devilish') the
lower portion the *Anima Mundi* or Astral Light. (See the close of this
Sloka). With the Nazarenes and the Gnostics this Spirit was

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Explaining Kabalistic views, the author of the "*New Aspects of
Life*" says of the Fallen Angels that, "According to the symbolical
teaching, Spirit, from being simply a functionary agent of God, became
volitional in its developed and developing action; and, substituting its
own will for the Divine desire in its regard, so fell. Hence the Kingdom
and reign of Spirits and spiritual action, which flow from and are the
product of Spirit-volition, are outside, and contrasted with, and in
contradiction to the Kingdom of Souls and Divine action." So far, so
good; but what does the Author mean by saying, "When man was created, he
was human in constitution, with human affections, human hopes and
aspirations. From this state he fell -- into the brute and savage"? This
is diametrically opposite to our Eastern teaching, and even to the
Kabalistic notion so far as we understand it, and to the Bible itself.
This looks like Corporealism and Substantialism colouring positive
philosophy, though it is rather hard to feel quite sure of the Author's
meaning (see p. 235). A FALL, however, "from the natural into the
supernatural and the animal" -- supernatural meaning the purely
spiritual in this case -- means what we suggest.

\*\* On the authority of Irenaeus, of Justin Martyr and the "Codex"
itself, Dunlap shows that the Nazarenes regarded "Spirit" as a female
and *Evil Power* in its connection with our Earth. (Dunlap: "Sod," the
Son of the Man, p. 52).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 195 THE CODEX REPEATS THE ALLEGORY.

*feminine.* Thus the spirit of the Earth perceiving that for Fetahil,\*
the *newest man* (the latest), the splendour was 'changed,' and that for
splendour existed 'decrease and damage,' she awakes Karabtanos,\*\* 'who
was frantic and *without sense and judgment*,' and says to him: --
'Arise, see, the splendour (light) of the *newest* man (Fetahil) has
failed (to produce or create men), the decrease of this splendour is
visible. Rise up, come with thy MOTHER (the Spiritus) and free thee from
limits by which thou art held, and those more ample than the whole
world.' After which follows the union of the frantic and blind matter,
guided by the insinuations of the spirit (not the *Divine* breath but
the *Astral* spirit, which by its double essence is already tainted with
matter); and the offer of the MOTHER being accepted, the Spiritus
conceives "Seven Figures," and the seven *stellars* (planets) which
represent also the *seven capital sins*, the progeny of an astral soul
separated from its divine source (spirit) and *matter*, the blind demon
of concupiscence. Seeing this, Fetahil extends his hand towards the
abyss of matter, and says: -- 'Let the Earth exist, just as the abode of
the powers has existed.' Dipping his hand in the chaos, which he
condenses, he creates our planet.\*\*\*"

"Then the Codex proceeds to tell how Bahak-Zivo was separated from the
Spiritus, and the Genii or angels from the rebels.\*\*\*\* Then
Mano\*\*\*\*\* (the greatest), who dwells with the greatest FERHO, call
Kebar-Zivo (known also by the name of Nebat-Iavar bar Iufin Ifafin),
Helm and *Vine* of the food of life,\*\*\*\*\*\* he being the third
life, and commiserating the rebellious and foolish Genii, on account of
the magnitude of their ambition, says: 'Lord of the Genii\*\*\*\*\*\*\*
(AEons), see what the Genii, the

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Fetahil is identical with the host of the Pitris who "created Man" as
only a "shell." He was, with the Nazarenes, the king of light, and the
creator; but in this instance he is the unlucky Prometheus, who fails to
get hold of the Living Fire necessary for the formation of the divine
Soul, as he is ignorant of the secret name, the ineffable or
incommunicable name of the Kabalists.

\*\* The spirit of Matter and Concupiscence; "Kamarupa" *minus* "Manas,"
Mind.

\*\*\* See Franck's "*Codex Nazaraeus*," and Dunlap's "*Sod*, *the Son
of the Man.*"

*\*\*\*\* Codex Nazaraeus*, ii*.*, 233.

\*\*\*\*\* This Mano of the Nazarenes strangely resembles the Hindu
Manu, the Heavenly Man of the "*Rig Vedas.*"

\*\*\*\*\*\* "I am the *true Vine*, and my father is the husbandman."
(*John* xv*.*, 1.)

\*\*\*\*\*\*\* With the Gnostics, Christ, as well as Michael who is
identical with him in some respects, was the "Chief of the AEons."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 196 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

rebellious angels do, and about what they are consulting.\* They say,
'Let us call for the world, and let us call the 'powers' into
existence." The Genii are the *Principes*, the "Sons of Light," but thou
art the "*Messenger of Life.*"*\*\**

And in order to counteract the influence of the seven "badly disposed"
principles, the progeny of *Spiritus*, CABAR-ZIO, the mighty Lord of
Splendor, produces *seven other lives* (the cardinal virtues) who shine
in their own form and light "from on high"\*\*\* and thus re-establish
the balance between good and evil, light and darkness.

Here one finds a repetition of the early *allegorical*, dual systems, as
the Zoroastrian, and detects a germ of the dogmatic and dualistic
religions of the future, a germ which has grown into such a luxuriant
tree in ecclesiastical Christianity. It is already the outline of the
two "Supremes" -- God and Satan. But in the Stanzas no such idea exists.

Most of the Western Christian Kabalists -- pre-eminently Eliphas Levi --
in their desire to reconcile the Occult Sciences with Church dogmas, did
their best to make of the "Astral Light" only and preeminently the
*Pleroma* of early Church Fathers, the abode of the Hosts of the Fallen
Angels, of the "Archons" and "Powers." But the Astral Light, while only
the lower aspect of the Absolute, is yet dual. It is the *Anima Mundi*,
and ought never to be viewed otherwise, except for Kabalistic purposes.
The difference which exists between its "light" and its "Living Fire"
ought to be ever present in the mind of the Seer and the "Psychic." The
higher aspect, without which only creatures of matter from that Astral
Light can be produced, is this Living Fire, and it is the Seventh
Principle. It is said in "Isis Unveiled," in a complete description of
it: --

"The Astral Light or *Anima Mundi* is dual and bisexual. The (ideal)
male part of it is purely divine and spiritual, it is the *Wisdom*, it
is Spirit or Purusha; while the female portion (the Spiritus of the
Nazarenes) is tainted, in one sense, with matter, *is* indeed matter,
and therefore is evil already. It is the life-principle of every living
creature, and furnishes the astral soul, the fluidic *perisprit*, to
men, animals, fowls of the air, and everything living. Animals have only
the latent germ of the highest immortal soul in them. . . . . This
latter will develop

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

*\** *Codex Nazaraeus*, i, 135*.*

\*\* *Ibid.*

\*\*\* See the Cosmogony of Pherecydes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 197 ILDA-BAOTH-JEHOVAH.

only after a series of countless evolutions; the doctrine of which
evolution is contained in the Kabalistic axiom: 'A stone becomes a
plant; a plant, a beast; a beast, a man; a man, a spirit; and the
spirit, a god.'" (Vol. I., p. 301, note.)

The seven principles of the Eastern Initiates had not been explained
when "Isis" was written, but only the three *Kabalistic Faces* of the
semi-exoteric Kabala.\* But these contain the description of the mystic
natures of the first group of Dhyan Chohans in the *regimen ignis*, the
region and "rule (or government) of fire," which group is divided into
three classes, synthesized by the first, which makes *four* or the
"Tetraktis." (*See Comments on Stanza VII. Book I.*) If one studies the
Comments attentively he will find the same progression in the angelic
natures, viz., from the *passive* down to the *active*, the last of
these Beings being as near to the *Ahamkara* element (the region or
plane wherein *Egoship* or the feeling of *I-am-ness* is beginning to be
defined) as the first ones are near to the undifferentiated essence. The
former are Arupa, incorporeal; the latter, Rupa, corporeal.

In Volume II. of *Isis* (*p.* 183 *et seq.*) the philosophical systems
of the Gnostics and the primitive Jewish Christians, the Nazarenes and
the Ebionites, are fully considered. They show the views held in those
days -- outside the circle of Mosaic Jews -- about Jehovah. He was
identified by all the Gnostics with the evil, rather than with the good
principle. For them, he was *Ilda-Baoth*, "the son of Darkness," whose
mother, Sophia Achamoth, was the daughter of Sophia, the Divine Wisdom
(the female Holy Ghost of the early Christians) -- Akasa;\*\* while
Sophia Achamoth personified the lower Astral Light or *Ether.*
Ilda-Baoth,\*\*\* or Jehovah, is simply one of the Elohim, the seven

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* They are found, however, in the Chaldean Book of Numbers.

\*\* The astral light stands in the same relation to Akasa and *Anima
Mundi*, as Satan stands to the Deity. They are one and the same thing
*seen from two aspects:* the spiritual and the psychic -- the
super-ethereal or connecting link between matter and pure spirit, and
the physical. See for the difference between *nous*, the higher divine
wisdom, and *psyche*, the lower and terrestrial (*St. James* iii. v.
15-17). *Vide* "Demon est Deus inversus," Part II. of this volume.

\*\*\* Ilda-Baoth is a compound name made up of *Ilda*,
![](sd1-197a.gif), "a child," and Baoth; both from ![](sd1-197b.gif) the
egg, and ![](sd1-197c.gif) *Baoth*, "chaos," emptiness, void, or
desolation; or the child born in the egg of Chaos, like Brahma.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 198 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

creative Spirits, and one of the lower Sephiroth. He produces from
himself seven other Gods, "Stellar Spirits" (or the lunar ancestors\*),
for they are all the same.\*\* They are all *in his own image* (the
"Spirits of the Face"), and the reflections one of the other, and have
become darker and more material as they successively receded from their
originator. They also inhabit seven regions disposed like a ladder, as
its rungs slope up and down the scale of spirit and matter.\*\*\* With
Pagans and Christians, with Hindus and Chaldeans, with the Greek as with
the Roman Catholics -- with a slight variation of the texts in their
interpretations -- they all were the Genii of the seven planets, as of
the seven planetary spheres of our septenary chain, of which Earth is
the lowest. (See *Isis*, *Vol. II. p.* 186.) This connects the "Stellar"
and "Lunar" Spirits with the higher planetary Angels and the
*Saptarishis* (the seven Rishis of the Stars) of the Hindus -- as
subordinate Angels (Messengers) to these "Rishis," the emanations, on
the descending scale, of the former. Such, in the opinion of the
philosophical Gnostics, were the God and the Archangels now worshipped
by the Christians! The "Fallen Angels" and the legend of the "War in
Heaven" is thus purely pagan in its origin and comes from India *via*
Persia and Chaldea. The only reference to it in the Christian canon is
found in Revelations xii., as quoted a few pages back.

Thus "**S**ATAN," once he ceases to be viewed in the superstitious,
dogmatic, unphilosophical spirit of the Churches, grows into the
grandiose image of one who made of *terrestrial a divine* MAN; who gave
him, throughout the long cycle of Maha-kalpa the law of the Spirit of
Life, and made him free from the Sin of Ignorance, hence of death. (See
the Section *On Satan* in Part II. Vol. II.)

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Jehovah's connection with the moon in the Kabala is well known to
students.

\*\* About the Nazarenes see *Isis*, *Vol. II. p*. 131 and 132; the true
followers of the true Christos were all Nazarenes and Christians, and
were the opponents of the later Christians.

*\*\*\* Vide supra*, the diagram of the lunar ring of seven worlds,
where, as in our or any other chain, the upper worlds are spiritual,
while the lowest, whether Moon, Earth, or any planet, is dark with
matter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 199 THE SEVEN PLANES.

#### STANZA VI. -- *Continued.*

6\. **T**HE OLDER WHEELS ROTATED DOWNWARD AND UPWARD (*a*). . . .
**T**HE **M**OTHER'S SPAWN FILLED THE WHOLE (*Kosmos*)*.\** **T**HERE
WERE BATTLES FOUGHT BETWEEN THE **C**REATORS AND THE **D**ESTROYERS, AND
BATTLES FOUGHT FOR **S**PACE; THE SEED APPEARING AND REAPPEARING
CONTINUOUSLY (*b*).\*\*

(*a*) Here, having finished for the time being with our side-issues --
which, however they may break the flow of the narrative, are necessary
for the elucidation of the whole scheme -- the reader must return once
more to Cosmogony. The phrase "Older wheels" refers to the worlds or
Globes of our chain as they were during the "previous Rounds." The
present Stanza, when explained esoterically, is found embodied entirely
in the Kabalistic works. Therein will be found the very history of the
evolution of those countless Globes which evolve after a periodical
Pralaya, rebuilt from old material into new forms. The previous Globes
disintegrate and reappear transformed and perfected for a new phase of
life. In the Kabala, worlds are compared to sparks which fly from under
the hammer of the great Architect -- LAW, the law which rules all the
smaller Creators.

The following comparative diagram shows the identity between the two
systems, the Kabalistic and the Eastern. The three upper are the three
higher planes of consciousness, revealed and explained in both schools
only to the Initiates, the lower ones represent the four lower planes --
the lowest being our plane, or the visible Universe.

These seven *planes* correspond to the seven *states* of consciousness
in man. It remains with him to attune the three higher states in himself
to the three higher planes in Kosmos. But before he can attempt to
attune, he must awaken the three "seats" to life and activity. And how
many are capable of bringing themselves to even a superficial
comprehension of *Atma-Vidya* (Spirit-Knowledge), or what is called by
the Sufis, *Rohanee!* In Section the **VII**th of this Book, in
Sub-section 3,

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* The reader is reminded that Kosmos often means in our Stanzas only
our own Solar System, not the Infinite Universe.

\*\* This is purely astronomical.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 200 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

the reader will find a still clearer explanation of the above in the
Commentary upon *Saptaparna* -- the man-plant. See also the Section of
that name in Part II.

![](sd1-200.gif)

###### \[\[Footnote(s) to diagram ------------------------------------------------- \]\]

\* The *Arupa* or "formless," there where form ceases to exist, on the
objective plane.

† The word "Archetypal" must not be taken here in the sense that the
Platonists gave to it, *i.e.*, the world as it existed *in the Mind* of
the Deity; but in that of a world made as a first model, to be followed
and improved upon by the worlds which succeed it physically -- though
deteriorating in purity.

‡ These are the four lower planes of Cosmic Consciousness, the three
higher planes being inaccessible to human intellect as developed at
present. The seven states of human consciousness pertain to quite
another question.

-------------

(*b*) "The Seed appears and disappears continuously." Here "Seed" stands
for "the World-germ," viewed by Science as material particles in a
highly attenuated condition, but in Occult physics as "Spiritual
particles," *i.e.*, supersensuous matter existing in a state of primeval

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 201 NO SHADOW, NO LIGHT.

differentiation.\* In theogony, every Seed is an ethereal organism, from
which evolves later on a celestial being, a God.

In the "beginning," that which is called in mystic phraseology "Cosmic
*Desire*" evolves into absolute Light. Now light without any shadow
would be absolute light -- in other words, absolute darkness -- as
physical science seeks to prove. That shadow appears under the form of
primordial matter, allegorized -- if one likes -- in the shape of the
Spirit of Creative Fire or Heat. If, rejecting the poetical form and
allegory, science chooses to see in this the primordial Fire-Mist, it is
welcome to do so. Whether one way or the other, whether Fohat or the
famous FORCE of Science, nameless, and as difficult of definition as our
Fohat himself, that Something "caused the Universe to move with circular
motion," as Plato has it; or, as the Occult teaching expresses it:

"*The Central Sun causes Fohat to collect primordial dust in the form of
balls*, *to impel them to move in converging lines and finally to
approach each other and aggregate.*" (*Book of Dzyan*) . . . . . "*Being
scattered in Space*, *without order or system*, *the world-germs come
into frequent collision until their final aggregation*, *after which
they become wanderers* (*Comets*)*. Then the battles and struggles
begin. The older* (*bodies*) *attract the younger*, *while others repel
them. Many perish*, *devoured by their stronger companions. Those that
escape become worlds.*"*\*\**

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* To see and appreciate the difference -- the immense gulf that
separates terrestrial matter from the finer grades of supersensuous
matter -- every astronomer, every chemist and *physicist* ought to be a
*psychometer*, to say the least; he ought to be able to sense for
himself that difference in which he now refuses to believe. Mrs.
Elizabeth Denton, one of the most learned, and also one of the most
materialistic and sceptical women of her age -- the wife of Professor
Denton, the well-known American geologist and the author of "The Soul of
Things" -- was, nevertheless, one of the most wonderful psychometers
some years ago. This is what she described in one of her experiments;
with a particle of a meteorite placed on her forehead, in an envelope,
the lady, not being aware of what it contained, said:

"What a difference between that which we recognise as matter here and
that which seems like matter there! In the one, the *elements are so
coarse and so angular*, I wonder that we can endure it all, much more
that we can desire to continue our present relations to it; in the
other, all the elements are so refined, they are so free from those
great, rough angularities, which characterize the elements here, that I
can but regard that as by so much the more than this, the real
existence." (*Vol. III. p.* 345-6.)

\*\* When carefully analysed and reflected upon, this will be found as
scientific as Science could make it, even at our late period.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 202 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

We have been assured that there exist several modern works of
speculative fancy upon such struggles for life in sidereal heaven,
especially in the German language. We rejoice to hear it, for ours is an
Occult teaching lost in the darkness of archaic ages. We have treated of
it fully in "*Isis Unveiled*," and the idea of Darwinian-like evolution,
of struggle for life and supremacy, and of the "survival of the fittest"
among the Hosts above as the Hosts below, runs throughout both the
volumes of our earlier work, written in 1876 (*See Index in* "*Isis*
*Unveiled*" *at the words* "*Evolution*" -- "*Darwin*" -- "*Kapila*" --
"*Battle of* *Life*," *etc. etc.*) But the idea was not ours, it is that
of antiquity.

Even the Puranic writers have ingeniously interwoven allegory with
Cosmic facts and human events. Any symbologist may discern the
astro-cosmical allusion even though he be unable to grasp the whole
meaning. The great "Wars in Heaven," in the Puranas; the wars of the
Titans, in Hesiod and other classical writers; the "struggles," also in
the Egyptian legend between Osiris and Typhon, and even those in the
Scandinavian legends, all refer to the same subject. Northern Mythology
refers to it as the battle of the Flames, the sons of Muspel who fought
on the field of Wigred. All these relate to Heaven and Earth, and have a
double and often even a triple meaning, and esoteric application to
things above as to things below. They relate severally to astronomical,
theogonical and human struggles; to the adjustment of orbs, and the
supremacy among nations and tribes. The "Struggle for Existence" and the
"Survival of the Fittest" reigned supreme from the moment that Kosmos
manifested into being, and could hardly escape the observant eye of the
ancient Sages. Hence the incessant fights of Indra, the god of the
Firmament, with the Asuras -- degraded from high gods into Cosmic
demons; and with Vritri or Ah-hi; the battles fought between stars and
constellations, between Moon and planets -- later on incarnated as kings
and mortals. Hence also the War in Heaven of Michael and his Host
against the Dragon (Jupiter and Lucifer-Venus), when a third of the
stars of the rebellious host was hurled down into Space, and "its place
was found no more in Heaven." As said long ago -- "This is the basic and
fundamental stone of the secret cycles. It shows that the Brahmins and
Tanaim . . . speculated on the creation and development of the world
quite in a Darwinian way, both anticipating him and his school in the
natural selection of species, the survival of the fittest,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 203 THE BIRTH OF THE WORLDS.

and transformation. . . . There were old worlds that perished conquered
by the new," etc., etc. ("*Isis Unveiled*," *Vol. II.*, *p.* 260.) The
assertion that all the worlds (Stars, planets, etc.) -- as soon as a
nucleus of primordial substance in the *laya* (undifferentiated) state
is informed by the freed principles, of a just *deceased* sidereal body
-- become first comets, and then Suns to cool down to inhabitable
worlds, is a teaching as old as the Rishis.

Thus the Secret Books distinctly teach, as we see, an astronomy that
would not be rejected even by modern speculation could the latter
thoroughly understand its teachings.

For, archaic astronomy, and the ancient, physical and mathematical
sciences, expressed views identical with those of modern science, and
many of far more momentous import. A "struggle for life" as a "survival
of the fittest" in the worlds above, as on our planet here below, are
distinctly taught. This teaching, however, although it would not be
"entirely rejected" by Science, is sure to be repudiated as an integral
whole. For it avers that there are only seven Self-born primordial
"gods" emanated from the trinitarian ONE. In other words, it means that
all the worlds or sidereal bodies (always on strict analogy) are formed
one from the other, after the primordial manifestation at the beginning
of the "Great Age" is accomplished. The birth of the celestial bodies in
Space is compared to a crowd or multitude of "pilgrims" at the festival
of the "Fires." Seven ascetics appear on the threshold of the temple
with seven lighted sticks of incense. At the light of these the first
row of pilgrims light their incense sticks. After which every ascetic
begins whirling his stick around his head in space, and furnishes the
rest with fire. Thus with the heavenly bodies. A laya-centre is lighted
and awakened into life by the fires of another "pilgrim," after which
the new "centre" rushes into space and becomes a comet. It is only after
losing its velocity, and hence its fiery tail, that the "Fiery Dragon"
settles down into quiet and steady life as a regular respectable citizen
of the sidereal family. Therefore it is said: --

Born in the unfathomable depths of Space, out of the homogeneous Element
called the World-Soul, every nucleus of Cosmic matter, suddenly launched
into being, begins life under the most hostile circumstances. Through a
series of countless ages, it has to conquer

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 204 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

for itself a place in the infinitudes. It circles round and round
between denser and already fixed bodies, moving by jerks, and pulling
towards some given point or centre that attracts it, trying to avoid,
like a ship drawn into a channel dotted with reefs and sunken rocks,
other bodies that draw and repel it in turn; many perish, their mass
disintegrating through stronger masses, and, when born within a system,
chiefly within the insatiable stomachs of various Suns. (*See Comm. to
Stanza IV*)*.* Those which move slower and are propelled into an
elliptic course are doomed to annihilation sooner or later. Others
moving in parabolic curves generally escape destruction, owing to their
velocity.

Some very critical readers will perhaps imagine that this teaching, as
to the cometary stage passed through by all heavenly bodies, is in
contradiction with the statements just made as to the moon being the
mother of the earth. They will perhaps fancy that intuition is needed to
harmonize the two. But no intuition is in truth required. What does
Science know of Comets, their genesis, growth, and ultimate behaviour?
Nothing -- absolutely nothing! And what is there so impossible that a
laya centre -- a lump of cosmic protoplasm, homogeneous and latent, when
suddenly animated or fired up -- should rush from its bed in Space and
whirl throughout the abysmal depths in order to strengthen its
homogeneous organism by an accumulation and addition of differentiated
elements? And why should not such a comet settle in life, live, and
become an inhabited globe!

"The abodes of Fohat are many," it is said. "He places his four fiery
(electro-positive) Sons in the "Four circles"; these *Circles* are the
Equator, the Ecliptic, and the two parallels of declination, or the
tropics -- to preside over the *climates* of which are placed the Four
mystical Entities. Then again: "Other seven (sons) are commissioned to
preside over the seven hot, and seven cold *lokas* (the hells of the
orthodox Brahmins) at the two ends of the Egg of Matter (our Earth and
its poles). The seven *lokas* are also called the "Rings," elsewhere,
and the "Circles." The ancients made the polar circles *seven* instead
of two, as Europeans do; for Mount Meru, which is the North Pole, is
said to have seven gold and seven silver steps leading to it.

The strange statement made in one of the Stanzas: "The Songs of Fohat
and his Sons were *radiant* as the noon-tide Sun and the Moon combined;"
and that the four Sons on the *middle* four-fold

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 205 SEEING SOUND, HEARING COLOURS.

Circle "*saw* their father's songs and *heard* his Solar-selenic
radiance;" is explained in the Commentary in these words: "The agitation
of *the Fohatic* Forces at the two cold ends (North and South Poles) of
the Earth which resulted in a multicoloured radiance at night, have in
them several of the properties of Akasa (Ether) *colour* and sound as
well." . . . . . . "Sound is the characteristic of Akasa (Ether): it
generates air, the property of which is Touch; which (by friction)
becomes productive of Colour and Light." . . . . . . (Vishnu Purana.)

Perhaps the above will be regarded as archaic nonsense, but it will be
better comprehended, if the reader remembers the Aurora Borealis and
Australis, both of which take place at the very centres of terrestrial
electric and magnetic forces. The two poles are said to be the
store-houses, the receptacles and liberators, at the same time, of
Cosmic and terrestrial Vitality (Electricity); from the surplus of which
the Earth, had it not been for these two natural "safety-valves," would
have been rent to pieces long ago. At the same time it is now a theory
that has lately become an axiom, that the phenomenon of polar lights is
accompanied by, and productive of, strong sounds, like whistling,
hissing, and cracking. (But see Professor Trumholdt's works on the
Aurora Borealis, and his correspondence regarding this moot question.)

-------

#### STANZA VI. -- *Continued.*

7\. **M**AKE THY CALCULATIONS, **O** **L**ANOO, IF THOU WOULDST LEARN
THE CORRECT AGE OF THY SMALL WHEEL (*chain*)*.* **I**TS FOURTH SPOKE IS
OUR MOTHER (*Earth*) (*a*)*.* **R**EACH THE FOURTH "FRUIT" OF THE FOURTH
PATH OF KNOWLEDGE THAT LEADS TO **N**IRVANA, AND THOU SHALT COMPREHEND,
FOR THOU SHALT SEE (*b*)*.*

(*a*) The "small wheel" is our chain of spheres, and the fourth spoke is
our Earth, the fourth in the chain. It is one of those on which the "hot
(positive) breath of the Sun" has a direct effect.\*

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* The seven fundamental transformations of the globes or heavenly
spheres, or rather of their constituent particles of matter, is
described as follows: (1) The *homogeneous;* (2) the *aeriform* and
*radiant* (gaseous); (3) *Curd-like* (nebulous); (4) *Atomic*,
*Ethereal* \[\[Footnote continued on next page\]\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 206 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

To calculate its age, however, as the pupil is asked to do in the
Stanza, is rather difficult, since we are not given the figures of the
Great Kalpa, and are not allowed to publish those of our small Yugas,
except as to the approximate duration of these. "The older wheels
rotated for one Eternity and one half of an Eternity," it says. We know
that by "Eternity" the seventh part of 311,040,000,000,000 years, or an
age of Brahma is meant. But what of that? We also know that, to begin
with, if we take for our basis the above figures, we have first of all
to eliminate from the 100 years of Brahma (or 311,040,000,000,000 years)
two *years* taken up by the Sandhyas (twilights), which leaves 98, as we
have to bring it to the mystical combination 14 x 7. But *we* have no
knowledge at what time precisely the evolution and formation of our
little earth began. Therefore it is impossible to calculate its age,
unless the time of its birth is given -- which the TEACHERS refuse to
do, so far. At the close of this Book and in Book II., however, some
chronological hints will be given. We must remember, moreover, that the
law of Analogy holds good for the worlds, as it does for man; and that
as "The ONE (Deity) becomes Two (Deva or Angel) and *Two* becomes
*Three* (or man)," etc., etc., so we are taught that the *Curds*
(world-stuff) become wanderers, (Comets), these become stars, and the
stars (the centres of vortices) *our sun and planets* -- to put it
briefly.\*

(*b*) There are four grades of initiation mentioned in exoteric works,
which are known respectively in Sanskrit as "Srotapanna," "Sagardagan,"
"Anagamin," and "Arhan" -- the four paths to Nirvana, in this, our
fourth Round, bearing the same appellations. The Arhan, though he can
see the Past, the Present, and the Future, is not yet the highest
Initiate; for the Adept himself, the *initiated* candidate, becomes
chela (pupil) to a higher Initiate. Three further higher grades have to
be conquered by the Arhan who would reach the apex of the ladder of
Arhatship. There are those who have reached it even in this fifth race
of ours, but the faculties necessary for the attainment of these higher

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\[\[Footnote continued from previous page\]\] (beginning of motion,
hence of differentiation); (5) *Germinal*, *fiery*, (differentiated, but
composed of the germs only of the Elements, in their earliest states,
they having seven states, when completely developed on our earth); (6)
*Four-fold*, *vapoury* (the future Earth); (7) *Cold and depending* (on
the Sun for life and light).

\* This cannot be so very *unscientific*, since Descartes thought also
that "the planets rotate on their axes because they were once lucid
stars, the centres of Vortices."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 207 THE TREE FROM WHICH THE ADEPTS GROW.

grades will be fully developed in the average ascetic only at the end of
this Root-Race, and in the Sixth and Seventh. Thus there will always be
Initiates and the Profane till the end of this minor Manvantara, the
present *life-cycle.* The *Arhats* of the "fire-mist" of the 7th rung
are but one remove from the Root-Base of their Hierarchy -- the highest
on Earth, and our Terrestrial chain. This "Root-Base" has a name which
can only be translated by several compound words into English" -- "the
ever-living-human-Banyan." This "Wondrous Being" descended from a "high
region," they say, in the early part of the Third Age, before the
separation of the sexes of the Third Race.

This Third Race is sometimes called collectively "the Sons of *Passive
Yoga*," *i.e.*, it was produced unconsciously by the second Race, which,
as it was intellectually inactive, is supposed to have been constantly
plunged in a kind of blank or abstract contemplation, as required by the
conditions of the Yoga state. In the first or earlier portion of the
existence of this third race, while it was yet in its state of purity,
the "Sons of Wisdom," who, as will be seen, incarnated in this Third
Race, produced by *Kriyasakti* a progeny called the "Sons of Ad" or "of
the Fire-Mist," the "Sons of Will and Yoga," etc. They were a conscious
production, as a portion of the race was already animated with the
divine spark of spiritual, superior intelligence. It was not a Race,
this progeny. It was at first a wondrous Being, called the "Initiator,"
and after him a group of semi-divine and semi-human beings. "*Set
apart*" in Archaic *genesis* for certain purposes, they are those in
whom are said to have incarnated the highest Dhyanis, "Munis and Rishis
from previous Manvantaras" -- *to* *form the nursery for future human
adepts*, on this earth and during the present cycle. These "Sons of Will
and Yoga" born, so to speak, in an immaculate way, remained, it is
explained, entirely apart from the rest of mankind.

The "**B**EING" just referred to, which has to remain nameless, is the
*Tree* from which, in subsequent ages, all the great *historically*
known Sages and Hierophants, such as the Rishi Kapila, Hermes, Enoch,
Orpheus, etc., etc., have branched off. As objective *man*, he is the
mysterious (to the profane -- the ever invisible) yet ever present
Personage about whom legends are rife in the East, especially among the
Occultists and the students of the Sacred Science. It is he who changes
form, yet remains ever the same. And it is he again who holds spiritual
sway over the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 208 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

*initiated* Adepts throughout the whole world. He is, as said, the
"Nameless One" who has so many names, and yet whose names and whose very
nature are unknown. He is *the* "Initiator," called the "GREAT
SACRIFICE." For, sitting at the threshold of LIGHT, he looks into it
from within the circle of Darkness, which he will not cross; nor will he
quit his post till the last day of this life-cycle. Why does the
solitary Watcher remain at his self-chosen post? Why does he sit by the
fountain of primeval Wisdom, of which he drinks no longer, as he has
naught to learn which he does not know -- aye, neither on this Earth,
nor in its heaven? Because the lonely, sore-footed pilgrims on their way
back to their *home* are never sure to the last moment of not losing
their way in this limitless desert of illusion and matter called
Earth-Life. Because he would fain show the way to that region of freedom
and light, from which he is a voluntary exile himself, to every prisoner
who has succeeded in liberating himself from the bonds of flesh and
illusion. Because, in short, he has sacrificed himself for the sake of
mankind, though but a few Elect may profit by the GREAT SACRIFICE.

It is under the direct, silent guidance of this **M**AHA -- (great) --
**G**URU that all the other less divine Teachers and instructors of
mankind became, from the first awakening of human consciousness, the
guides of early Humanity. It is through these "Sons of God" that infant
humanity got its first notions of all the arts and sciences, as well as
of spiritual knowledge; and it is they who have laid the first
foundation-stone of those ancient civilizations that puzzle so sorely
our modern generation of students and scholars.\*

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Let those who doubt this statement explain the mystery of the
extraordinary knowledge possessed by the ancients -- alleged to have
developed from lower and animal-like savages, the *cave-men* of the
Palaeolithic age -- on any other equally reasonable grounds. Let them
turn to such works as those of Vitruvius Pollio of the Augustan age, on
architecture, for instance, in which all the rules of proportion are
those *taught anciently at initiations*, if he would acquaint himself
with the truly divine art, and understand the *deep esoteric
significance hidden in every rule and law of proportion.* No man
descended from a Palaeolithic cave-dweller could ever evolve such a
science unaided, even in millenniums of thought and intellectual
evolution. It is the pupils of those incarnated Rishis and Devas of the
third Root Race, who handed their knowledge from one generation to
another, to Egypt and Greece with its now lost *canon of proportion;* as
it is the Disciples of the Initiates of the 4th, the Atlanteans, who
handed it over to their *Cyclopes*, the "Sons of Cycles" or of the
"Infinite," from whom the name passed to the still later generations of
Gnostic priests. "It is owing to the divine perfection \[\[Footnote
continued on next page\]\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 209 THE SACRED ISLAND.

Although these matters were barely hinted at in "*Isis Unveiled*," it
will be well to remind the reader of what was said in Vol. I., pp. 587
to 593, concerning a certain Sacred Island in Central Asia, and to refer
him for further details to the chapter in Book II. on "The Sons of God
and the Sacred Island." A few more explanations, however, though thrown
out in a fragmentary form, may help the student to obtain a glimpse into
the present mystery.

To state at least one detail concerning these mysterious "Sons of God"
in plain words. It is from them, these Brahmaputras, that the high
Dwijas, the initiated Brahmins of old justly claimed descent, while the
modern Brahmin would have the lowest castes believe literally that they
issued direct from the mouth of Brahma. This is the esoteric teaching,
which adds moreover that, although these descendants (spiritually of
course) from the "sons of Will and Yoga," became in time divided into
opposite sexes, as their "*Kriyasakti*" progenitors did themselves,
later on; yet even their degenerate descendants have down to the present
day retained a veneration and respect for the creative

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\[\[Footnote continued from previous page\]\] of those architectural
proportions that the Ancients could build those wonders of all the
subsequent ages, their Fanes, Pyramids, Cave-Temples, Cromlechs, Cairns,
Altars, proving they had the powers of machinery and a knowledge of
mechanics to which modern skill is like a child's play, and which that
*skill* refers to itself as the 'works of hundred-handed giants.'"
(*See* "*Book of God*," *Kenealy.*) Modern architects may not altogether
have neglected those rules, but they have superadded enough empirical
innovations to destroy those just proportions. It is Vitruvius who gave
to posterity the rules of construction of the Grecian temples erected to
the immortal gods; and the ten books of Marcus Vitruvius Pollio on
Architecture, of one, in short, *who was an initiate*, can only be
studied esoterically. The Druidical circles, the Dolmen, the Temples of
India, Egypt and Greece, the Towers and the 127 towns in Europe which
were found "Cyclopean in origin" by the French Institute, are all the
work of initiated Priest-Architects, the descendants of those primarily
taught by the "Sons of God," justly called "The Builders." This is what
appreciative posterity says of those descendants. "They used neither
mortar nor cement, nor steel nor iron to cut the stones with; and yet
they were so artfully wrought that in many places the joints are not
seen, though many of the stones, as in Peru, are 18 ft. thick, and in
the walls of the fortress of Cuzco there are stones of a still greater
size." (*Acosta*, vi., 14.) "Again, the walls of Syene, built 5,400
years ago, when that spot was exactly under the tropic, which it has now
ceased to be, were so constructed that at noon, at the precise moment of
the solar solstice, the entire disc of the Sun was seen reflected on
their surface -- a work which the united skill of all the astronomers of
Europe would not now be able to effect." -- (Kenealy, "*Book of God.*")

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 210 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

function, and still regard it in the light of a religious ceremony,
whereas the more civilized nations consider it as a mere animal
function. Compare the western views and practice in these matters with
the Institutions of Manu in regard to the laws of Grihasta and married
life. The true Brahmin is thus indeed "he whose seven forefathers have
drunk the juice of the moon-plant (Soma)," and who is a "Trisuparna,"
for he has understood the secret of the Vedas.

And, to this day, such Brahmins know that, during its early beginnings,
psychic and physical intellect being dormant and consciousness still
undeveloped, the spiritual conceptions of that race were quite
unconnected with its physical surroundings. That *divine* man dwelt in
his animal -- though externally human -- form; and, if there was
instinct in him, no self-consciousness came to enlighten the darkness of
the latent fifth principle. When, moved by the law of Evolution, the
Lords of Wisdom infused into him the spark of consciousness, the first
feeling it awoke to life and activity was a sense of solidarity, of
one-ness with his spiritual creators. As the child's first feeling is
for its mother and nurse, so the first aspirations of the awakening
consciousness in primitive man were for those whose element he felt
within himself, and who yet were outside, and independent of him.
**D**EVOTION arose out of that feeling, and became the first and
foremost motor in his nature; for it is the only one which is natural in
our heart, which is innate in us, and which we find alike in human babe
and the young of the animal. This feeling of irrepressible, instinctive
aspiration in primitive man is beautifully, and one may say
intuitionally, described by Carlyle. "The great antique heart," he
exclaims, "how like a child's in its simplicity, like a man's in its
earnest solemnity and depth! heaven lies over him wheresoever he goes or
stands on the earth; making all the earth a mystic temple to him, the
earth's business all a kind of worship. Glimpses of bright creatures
flash in the common sunlight; angels yet hover, doing God's messages
among men . . . . . Wonder, miracle, encompass the man; he lives in an
element of miracle\* . . . . A great law of duty, high as these two
infinitudes (heaven and hell), dwarfing all else, annihilating all else
-- it was a reality, and it is one: the garment

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* That which was *natural* in the sight of primitive man has become
only now *miracle* to us; and that which was to him a miracle could
never be expressed in our language.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 211 THE SONS OF WISDOM.

only of it is dead; the essence of it lives through all times and all
eternity!"

It lives undeniably, and has settled in all its ineradicable strength
and power in the Asiatic Aryan heart from the Third Race direct through
its first "mind-born" sons, -- the fruits of *Kriyasakti.* As time
rolled on the holy caste of Initiates produced but rarely, and from age
to age, such perfect creatures: beings apart, inwardly, though the same
as those who produced them, outwardly.

While in the infancy of the third primitive race: --

> "A creature of a more exalted kind  
> Was wanting yet, and therefore was designed;  
> Conscious of thought, of more capacious breast  
> For empire formed and fit to rule the rest. . . . ."

It was called into being, a ready and perfect vehicle for the
incarnating denizens of higher spheres, who took forthwith their abodes
in these forms born of *Spiritual* WILL and the natural divine power in
man. It was a child of pure Spirit, mentally unalloyed with any tincture
of earthly element. Its physical frame alone was of time and of life, as
it drew its intelligence direct from above. It was the living tree of
divine wisdom; and may therefore be likened to the Mundane Tree of the
Norse Legend, which cannot wither and die until the last battle of life
shall be fought, while its roots are gnawed all the time by the dragon
Nidhogg; for even so, the first and holy Son of Kriyasakti had his body
gnawed by the tooth of time, but the roots of his inner being remained
for ever undecaying and strong, because they grew and expanded in heaven
not on earth. He was the first of the **F**IRST, and he was the seed of
all the others. There were other "Sons of Kriyasakti" produced by a
second Spiritual effort, but the first one has remained to this day the
Seed of divine Knowledge, the One and the Supreme among the terrestrial
"Sons of Wisdom." Of this subject we can say no more, except to add that
in every age -- aye, even in our own -- there have been great intellects
who have understood the problem correctly.

How comes our physical body to the state of perfection it is found in
now? Through millions of years of evolution, of course, yet never
through, or from, animals, as taught by materialism. For, as Carlyle
says: -- ". . . The essence of our being, the mystery in us that calls
itself 'I,' -- what words have we for such things? -- it is a breath of
Heaven,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 212 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

the highest Being reveals himself in man. This body, these faculties,
this life of ours, is it not all as a vesture for the UNNAMED?"

The *breath* of heaven, or rather the breath of life, called in the
Bible *Nephesh*, is in every animal, in every animate speck as in every
mineral atom. But none of these has, like man, the consciousness of the
nature of that highest Being,\* as none has that divine harmony in its
form which man possesses. It is, as Novalis said, and no one since has
said it better, as repeated by Carlyle: --

"There is but one temple in the universe, and that is the body of man.
Nothing is holier than that high form . . . . We touch heaven when we
lay our hand on a human body!" "This sounds like a mere flourish of
rhetoric," adds Carlyle, "but it is not so. If well meditated it will
turn out to be a scientific fact; the expression . . . of the actual
truth of the thing. We are the miracle of miracles, -- the great
inscrutable Mystery."

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* There is no nation in the world in which the feeling of devotion or
of religious mysticism is more developed and prominent than in the Hindu
people. See what Max Muller says of this idiosyncracy and national
feature in his works. This is direct inheritance from the primitive
*conscious* men of the Third Race.

---------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next Section](sd1-1-11)

[Contents](sd1-0-co.htm#contents)
