##### The Secret Doctrine by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol. 1

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 490 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

#### IV. IS GRAVITATION A LAW?

**T**HE corpuscular theory has been unceremoniously put aside; but
gravitation -- the principle that all bodies attract each other with a
force proportional directly to their masses, and inversely to the
squares of the distances between them -- survives to this day and
reigns, supreme as ever, in the alleged ethereal waves of Space. As a
hypothesis, it had been threatened with death for its inadequacy to
embrace all the facts presented to it; as a *physical law*, it is the
King of the late and once all-potent "Imponderables." "It is little
short of blasphemy . . . . an insult to Newton's grand memory to doubt
it, . . . ." is the exclamation of an American reviewer of "*Isis
Unveiled.*" Well; what is finally that *invisible and intangible* God in
whom we should believe on blind faith? Astronomers who see in
gravitation an easy-going solution for many things, and an *universal*
force which allows them to calculate thereby planetary motions, care
little about the Cause of Attraction. They call Gravity a law, a *cause*
in itself. We call the forces acting under that name *effects*, and very
secondary effects, too. One day it will be found that the scientific
hypothesis does not answer after all; and then it will follow the
corpuscular theory of light and be consigned to rest for many scientific
*aeons* in the archives of all exploded speculations. Has not Newton
himself expressed grave doubts about the Nature of Force and the
corporeality of the "Agents," as they were then called? So has Cuvier,
another scientific light shining in the night of research. He warns his
readers, in the *Revolution du Globe*, about the doubtful nature of the
so-called Forces, saying that "it is not so sure whether those agents
were not *Spiritual Powers* after all (*des agents spirituels*)*. At*
the outset of his "Principia," Sir Isaac Newton took the greatest care
to impress upon his school that he did not use the word "attraction"
with regard to the mutual action of bodies in a physical sense. To him
it was, he said, a purely mathematical conception involving no
consideration of real and primary physical causes. In one of the
passages of his "Principia" (*Defin*. 8, *B. I. Prop.* 69,
"*Scholium*"), he tells us plainly that, physically considered,
attractions are rather *impulses.* In section XI. (*Introduction*) he
expresses the opinion that "there *is some subtle spirit by the force
and action of which* all movements of matter are determined" (see *Mod.
Mater.*, *by Rev. W. F. Wilkinson*)*;* and in his third Letter to
Bentley he says: "It is inconceivable that inanimate brute matter
should, without the mediation of something else *which is not material*,
operate upon and affect other matter, without mutual contact, as it must
do if gravi-

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 491 GRAVITY OR WHAT?

tation, in the sense of Epicurus, be essential and inherent in it. . . .
That gravity should be innate, inherent and essential to matter, so that
one body may act upon another at a distance, through a vacuum, without
the mediation of anything else by and through which their action may be
conveyed from one to another, is to me so great an absurdity that I
believe no man, who has in philosophical matters a competent faculty of
thinking, can ever fall into it. Gravity must be caused by an agent
acting constantly according to certain laws; but *whether this agent* be
*material or immaterial* I have left to the consideration of my
readers."

At this, even Newton's contemporaries got frightened -- at the apparent
return of *occult* causes into the domain of physics. Leibnitz called
his principle of attraction "an incorporeal and inexplicable power." The
supposition of an attractive faculty and a perfect *void* was
characterized by Bernoulli as "revolting," the principle of *actio in
distans* finding thus no more favour then than it does now. Euler, on
the other hand, thought the action of gravity was due to either a
*Spirit* or some subtle medium. And yet Newton knew of, if he did not
accept, the Ether of the Ancients. He regarded the intermediate space
between the sidereal bodies as *vacuum.* Therefore he believed in
"subtle spirit" and *Spirits* as we do, guiding the so-called
attraction. The above-quoted words of the great man have produced poor
results. The "absurdity" has now become a dogma in the case of pure
materialism, which repeats, "No matter without force, no force without
matter; matter and force are inseparable, eternal and indestructible
(true); there can be no independent force, since all force is *an
inherent and necessary property of matter* (*false*)*;* consequently,
*there is no immaterial* creative power." Oh, poor Sir Isaac!

If, leaving aside all the other eminent men of Science who shared in the
same opinion as Euler and Leibnitz, the Occultists claim as their
authorities and supporters only Sir Isaac Newton and Cuvier, as above
cited, they need fear little from modern Science, and may loudly and
proudly proclaim their beliefs. But, the hesitation and doubts of the
two before cited authorities, and of many others, too, whom we could
name, did not in the least prevent scientific speculation from
wool-gathering on the fields of brute matter just as before. First it
was matter and an imponderable fluid distinct from it; then came the
*imponderable* fluid so much criticised by Grove; and AEther, which was
at first *discontinuous* and then became continuous; after which came
the "mechanical" Forces. These have now settled in life as "modes of
motion" and the aether has become more mysterious and problematical than
ever. More than one man of Science objects to such crude materialistic
views. But then since the days of Plato, who repeatedly asks his readers
not to confuse *incorporeal* Elements with

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 492 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

their **P**RINCIPLES -- transcendental or spiritual Elements; from those
of the great Alchemists, who, like Paracelsus, made a great difference
between phenomenon and its cause, or the Noumenon; and Grove, who,
though he sees "no reason to divest universally diffused matter of the
*functions* common to all matter," yet uses the term *Forces* where his
critics, "who do not attach to the word any idea of a *specific
action*," say Force -- from those days to this nothing has proved
competent to stem the tide of brutal materialism. Gravitation *is the
sole cause*, the acting God, and matter is its prophet, said the men of
science only a few years ago.

They have changed their views several times since then. But do the men
of Science understand the innermost thought of Newton, one of the most
spiritual-minded and religious men of his day, any better now than they
did then? It is certainly to be doubted. Newton is credited with having
given the death-blow to the Elemental Vortices of Descartes (the idea of
Anaxagoras, resurrected, by-the-bye), though the last modern "vortical
atoms" of Sir W. Thomson do not, in truth, differ much from the former.
Nevertheless, when his disciple Forbes wrote in the *Preface* to the
chief work of his Master a sentence declaring that "attraction was the
*cause* of the System," Newton was the first to solemnly protest. That
which in the mind of the great mathematician assumed the shadowy, but
firmly rooted image of God, as the *noumenon* of all,\* was called more
philosophically by the ancient (and modern) philosophers and Occultists
-- "Gods," or the *creative* fashioning Powers. The modes of expression
may have been different, and the ideas more or less philosophically
enunciated by all sacred and profane Antiquity; but the fundamental
thought was the same.\*\* For Pythagoras the Forces were Spiritual
Entities, Gods inde-

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* "*Attraction*," Le Couturier, a materialist, writes, "has now become
for the public that which it was for Newton himself -- a simple word, an
*idea*" (*Panorama des Mondes*), since its cause is unknown. Herschell
virtually says the same, when remarking, that whenever studying the
motion of the heavenly bodies, and the phenomena of attraction, he feels
penetrated at every moment with the idea of "the *existence of causes*
that act for us under a veil, disguising *their direct* action*.*"
(*Musee des Sciences*, August, 1856.)

\*\* If we are taken to task for believing in operating "Gods" and
"Spirits" while rejecting a *personal God*, we answer to the Theists and
Monotheists: "Admit that your Jehovah is *one of the Elohim*, and we are
ready to recognise him. Make of him, as you do, the Infinite, the ONE
and the *Eternal* God, and we will never accept him in this character."
Of *tribal* Gods there were many; the One Universal Deity is a
principle, an abstract Root-Idea which has nought to do with the unclean
work of finite Form. We do not worship the Gods, we only honour Them, as
beings superior to ourselves. In this we obey the Mosaic injunction,
while Christians *disobey* their Bible -- Missionaries foremost of all.
"*Thou shalt not revile the gods*," says one of them -- (Jehovah) -- in
*Exodus xxii.* 28); but at the same time in verse 20 it is commanded,
"He that sacrificeth to any God, save unto the Lord, he shall be utterly
destroyed." Now in the \[\[Footnote continued on next page\]\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 493 THE TRIPLE SIDEREAL FORCE.

pendent of planets and Matter as we see and know them on Earth, who are
the rulers of the Sidereal Heaven. Plato represented the planets as
moved by an *intrinsic* Rector, one with his dwelling, like "A boatman
in his boat." As for Aristotle, he called those rulers "*immaterial*
substances;"\* though as one who had never been initiated, he rejected
the gods as *Entities* (*See Vossius*, *Vol. II.*, *p.* 528). But this
did not prevent him from recognising the fact that the stars and planets
"were not inanimate masses but *acting and* *living* bodies indeed. . .
. . . ." As if "*sidereal spirits were the divine* portion of their
phenomena, \[\[*ta theoitera pon phaneron*\]\]" (*De Caelo. I.* 9).

If we look for corroboration in more modern and Scientific times, we
find Tycho Brahe recognising in the stars a triple force, *divine*,
*spiritual and vital.* Kepler, putting together the Pythagorean
sentence, "The Sun, guardian of Jupiter," and the verses of David, "He
placed his throne in the Sun," and "The Lord is the Sun," etc., said
that he understood perfectly how the Pythagoreans could believe that all
the globes disseminated through Space were rational Intelligences,
*facultates ratiocinativae*, circulating around the Sun, "in which
resides *a pure Spirit of fire;* the source of the general harmony" (*De
Motibus planetarum harmonicis*, *p.* 248).

When an Occultist speaks of Fohat -- the energising and guiding
intelligence in the Universal Electric or *Vital* Fluid, -- he is
laughed at. Withal, as now shown, neither the nature of electricity, nor
of Life nor even of Light, are to this day understood. The Occultist
sees in the manifestation of every force in Nature, the action of the
quality, or the special characteristic of its noumenon; which *noumenon*
is a distinct and intelligent Individuality *on the other side of the
manifested mechanical Universe.* Now the Occultist does not deny -- on
the contrary he will support the claim -- that light, heat, electricity
and so on are *affections* (not properties or qualities) of matter. To
put it more clearly: matter is the condition -- the necessary basis or
vehicle, a *sine qua non* -- for the manifestation of these forces, or
agents, on this plane.

But in order to gain the point the Occultists have to examine the
credentials of the law of gravity, first of all, of "Gravitation, the
King

\[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\[\[Footnote continued from previous page\]\] *original texts* it is not
"god" but *Elohim*, -- and we challenge contradiction -- and Jehovah is
one of the Elohim, as proved by his own words in *Genesis iii.* 22, when
"the Lord God said: Behold the Man has become *as one of us*," etc.
Hence both those who worship and sacrifice to the *Elohim*, the angels,
and to Jehovah, those who *revile the gods* of their fellow-men, are far
greater transgressors than the Occultists or any Theosophist. Meanwhile
many of the latter prefer believing in some one "Lord" or other, and are
quite welcome to do as they like.

\* To liken the "immateriate species to *wooden iron*," and laugh at
Spiller referring to them as "incorporeal matter" does not solve the
mystery (See "Concepts of Modern Physics," p. 165 *et infra*)*.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 494 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

and Ruler of Matter," under every form. To do so effectually, the
hypothesis in its earliest appearance has to be recalled to mind. To
begin with, is it Newton who was the first to discover it? The
*Athenaeum* of Jan. 26, 1867, has some curious information upon this
subject. It says that "positive evidence can be adduced that Newton
derived all his knowledge of gravitation and its laws from Boehme, *with
whom gravitation or* ATTRACTION is the first property of Nature." . . .
For with him "his (Boehme's) system, shows us the *inside* of things,
while modern physical science is content with looking at the outside."
Then again, "the science of electricity, which was not yet in existence
when he (Boehme) wrote, is there anticipated (in his writings); and not
only does Boehme describe all the now known phenomena of that force, but
he even gives us the origin, generation, and birth of electricity,
itself, etc."

Thus Newton, whose profound mind read easily between the lines, and
fathomed the spiritual thought of the great Seer in its mystic
rendering, owes his great discovery to Jacob Boehme, the nursling of the
genii (Nirmanakayas) who watched over and guided him, of whom the author
of the article in question so truly remarks, that "every new scientific
discovery goes to prove *his profound and intuitive insight into the
most secret workings of nature.*" And having *discovered* gravity,
Newton, in order to render possible the action of attraction in space,
had, so to speak, to *annihilate* every physical obstacle capable of
impeding its free action; ether among others, though he had more than a
presentiment of its existence. Advocating the corpuscular theory, he
made an *absolute vacuum* between the heavenly bodies. . . . Whatever
may have been his suspicions and *inner* convictions about Ether;
however many friends he may have unbosomed himself to -- as in the case
of his correspondence with Bentley -- his teachings never showed that he
had any such belief. If he *was* "persuaded that the power of attraction
could not be exerted by matter across a vacuum,"\* how is it that so
late as 1860, French astronomers (Le Couturier, for instance), combated
"the *disastrous* results of the theory of vacuum established by the
great man?"\*\* Professor Winchell writes, "These passages (letter to
Bentley) show what were his views respecting the nature of the
interplanetary medium of communication. Though declaring that the
heavens '*are void of sensible matter*,' he elsewhere excepted
'*perhaps*

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* World-Life. Prof. Winchell, **LL.D** (pp. 49 and 50).

\*\* "Il n'est plus possible aujourd'hui, *de soutenir comme Newton*,
que les corps celestes se mouvent au milieu du VIDE immense des espaces.
. . . Parmi les consequences de la *theorie du vide etablie* par ce
grand homme, il ne reste plus debout *que le mot* '*attraction*,' et
nous verrons le jour ou ce dernier mot disparaitra du vocabulaire
scientifique." ("*Panorama des mondes*," pp. 47 *and* 53*.*)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 495 NEWTON THEN AND NEWTON NOW.

some very thin vapours, streams, and effluvia, arising from the
atmospheres of the earth, planets, and comets, and from such an
exceedingly rare ethereal medium as we have elsewhere described."
(*Newton*, *Optics*, *III.*, *query* 28, 1704; *quoted in*
"*World-Life.*")

This only shows that even such great men as Newton have not always the
courage of their opinions. Dr. T. S. Hunt "called attention to some
long-neglected passages in Newton's works, from which it appears that a
belief in such universal, intercosmical medium gradually took root in
his mind." (*Ibid.*) But such attention was never called to the said
passages before Nov. 28, 1881, when Dr. Hunt read his "*Celestial
Chemistry*, *from the time of Newton.*" "Till then the idea was
universal, even among the men of Science, that Newton had, while
advocating the corpuscular theory, preached *a void*," as Le Couturier
says. The passages had been "long neglected," no doubt because they
contradicted and clashed with the preconceived pet theories of the day,
till finally the undulatory theory imperiously required the presence of
an "ethereal medium" to explain it. This is the whole secret.

Anyhow, it is from that theory of Newton's of a universal void --
*taught*, if not believed in by himself, -- that dates the immense scorn
now shown by modern for ancient physics. The old sages had maintained
that "Nature abhorred vacuum," and the greatest mathematicians of the
world (read of the Western races) had discovered the antiquated
"fallacy" and exposed it. And now modern science vindicates, however
ungracefully, archaic knowledge, having, moreover, to vindicate Newton's
character and powers of observation at this late hour, after having
neglected for one century and a half to pay any attention to such very
important passages -- perchance, because it was wiser not to attract any
notice to them. Better late than never.

And now Father AEther is *re-welcomed* with open arms; and wedded to
gravitation; linked to it for weal or woe, until the day when it, or
both, shall be replaced by something else. Three hundred years ago it
was *plenum* everywhere, then it became one dismal *vacuity;* later
still the sidereal ocean-beds, dried up by science, rolled onward once
more their ethereal waves. *Recede ut procedes* must become the motto of
exact Science -- "exact," chiefly, in finding itself inexact every
leap-year.

But we will not quarrel with the great men. They had to go back to the
earliest "Gods of Pythagoras and old Kanada" for the very backbone and
marrow of their correlations and "newest" discoveries, and this may well
afford good hope to the Occultists, for their minor gods. For we believe
in Le Couturier's prophecy about gravitation. We know the day is
approaching when an *absolute reform* will be demanded in the present
modes of Science by the scientists themselves -- as was done by Sir W.
Grove, **F.R.S**. Till that day there is nothing to be done. For if
gravitation

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 496 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

were dethroned to-morrow, the day after the Scientists would discover
some other new mode of mechanical motion.\* Rough and up-hill is the
path of true Science, and its days are full of vexation of Spirit. But
in the face of its "thousand" contradictory hypotheses to explain
physical phenomena, there never was yet a better one than that of
"motion" -- however paradoxically interpreted by materialism. As may be
found on the first pages of Book I., Occultists have nothing surely
against *motion*\*\* the GREAT BREATH of Mr. Herbert Spencer's
"UNKNOWN." But, believing that everything on Earth is the *shadow* of
something in *space* -- they believe *in smaller* "Breaths," which,
living, intelligent and independent of all but Law, blow in every
direction during Manvantaric periods. These Science will reject. But
whatever replaces attraction, *alias* gravitation, the result will be
the same. Science will be as far from the solution of its difficulties
as it is now, unless it comes to some compromise with Occultism and even
with Alchemy -- which supposition will be regarded as an impertinence,
but remains a fact, nevertheless. As Faye says: "*Il manque quelque
chose aux geologues pour faire la geologie de la Lune*, *c*'*est
d*'*etre astronomes. A la verite il manque aussi quelquechose aux
astronomes pour aborder avec fruit cette etude*, *c*'*est d*'*etre
geologues.*" But he might have added, with still more pointedness, "*Ce
qui manque a tous les deux*, *c*'*est l*'*intuition du mystique.*"

Let us remember Sir William Grove's wise "concluding remarks," on the
ultimate structure of matter, or the minutiae of molecular actions,
which, he thought, man will never know.

> "Much harm has already been done by attempting hypothetically to
> dissect matter and to discuss the shapes, sizes, and numbers of atoms,
> and their atmospheres of heat, ether, or electricity. . . . . Whether
> the regarding electricity, light, magnetism, etc., as simply motions
> of ordinary matter, be or be not admissible, certain it is that all
> past theories have resolved, and all existing theories do resolve, the
> action of these forces into motion. Whether it be that, on account of
> our familiarity with motion, we refer other affections to it, as to a
> language which is most easily construed, and most capable of

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* When read in a fair and unprejudiced spirit, Sir Isaac Newton's works
are an ever ready witness to show how he must have hesitated between
gravitation and attraction, impulse and some other *unknown cause* to
explain the regular course of the planetary motion. But see *Treatise on
Colour* (Vol. III., question 31.) We are told by Herschell that Newton
left with his successors the duty of drawing all the scientific
conclusions from his discovery. How modern Science abused the privilege
of building its newest theories upon the law of gravitation, may be
realised when one remembers how profoundly religious was that great man.

\*\* The materialistic notion that because, in physics real or sensible
motion is impossible in pure space or *vacuum*, therefore, the eternal
MOTION of and in Cosmos (regarded as infinite Space) is a *fiction* --
only shows once more that such words as "pure space," "pure Being," "the
Absolute," etc., of Eastern metaphysics have never been understood in
the West.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 497 NEW BOTTLES FOR OLD WINE.

> explaining them, or whether it be that it is in reality the only mode
> in which *our minds* as *contra-distinguished from our senses*, are
> able *to conceive material agencies*, certain it is that since the
> period at which the mystic notions of spiritual or preternatural
> powers were applied to account for physical phenomena, all hypotheses
> framed to explain them have resolved them into MOTION."

And then the learned gentleman states a purely occult tenet: --

> "The term perpetual motion, which I have not infrequently used in
> these pages, is itself equivocal. If the doctrines here advanced be
> well founded, *all* *motion is*, *in one sense*, *perpetual.* In
> masses, whose motion is stopped by mutual concussion, heat or motion
> of the particles is generated; and thus the motion continues, so that
> if we could venture to extend such thoughts to the universe, we should
> assume the same amount of motion affecting the same amount of matter
> for ever."\*

Thus, supposing attraction or gravitation should be given up in favour
of the Sun being a *huge magnet* -- which is a theory already accepted
by some physicists -- a magnet that acts on the planets as attraction is
now supposed to do, whereto, or how much farther would it lead the
astronomers from where they are now? Not an inch farther. Kepler came to
this "curious hypothesis" nearly 300 years ago. He had not discovered
the theory of attraction and repulsion in Kosmos, for it was known from
the days of Empedocles, the two opposite forces being called by him
"hate" and "love" -- which comes to the same thing. But Kepler gave a
pretty fair description of cosmic magnetism. That such magnetism exists
in nature, is as certain as that gravitation does not; not at any rate,
in the way in which it is taught by Science, which never took into
consideration the different modes in which the dual Force -- that
Occultism calls attraction and repulsion -- may act within our solar
system, the earth's atmosphere, and *beyond* in the Kosmos.\*\* This was
proven by Newton himself; for there are many phenomena in our

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* "*Correl. Phys. Forces*," p. 173. This is precisely what Occultism
maintains, and on the same principle that "where force is made to oppose
force, and produce static equilibrium, the balance of pre-existing
equilibrium is affected, and *fresh motion is started* equivalent to
that which is withdrawn into a state of abeyance." This process finds
intervals in the pralaya, but is eternal and ceaseless as *the*
"Breath," even when the manifested Kosmos rests.

\*\* "Trans-solar space," writes the great Humboldt, "does not hitherto
show any phenomenon analogous to our solar system. It is a peculiarity
of *our* System, that matter should have condensed within it in nebulous
rings, the nuclei of which condense into earths and moons. I say again,
heretofore, *nothing of the kind has* *ever been observed beyond our
planetary system.*" (*See Revue Germanique of the* *31st Dec. 1860,*
*art.* "*Lettres et conversations d*'*Alexandre Humboldt.*") True, that
since 1860 the nebular theory has sprung up, and being better known, a
few identical phenomena were *supposed* to be observed beyond the solar
system. Yet the great man is quite right; and no *earths* or *moons* can
be found -- *except in appearance* -- beyond, or of the same order of
matter as found in our system. Such is the Occult teaching.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 498 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

Solar system, which he confessed his inability to explain by the law of
gravitation. "Such were the uniformity in the directions of planetary
movements, the nearly circular forms of the orbits, and their remarkable
conformity to one plane" (*Prof. Winchell*)*.* And if there is one
single exception, then the law of gravitation has no right to be
referred to as an *universal law.* "These adjustments," we are told,
"Newton, in his general Scholium, pronounces to be 'the work of an
intelligent and all-powerful Being.' " Intelligent that "Being" may be;
as to "all-powerful" there would be every reason to doubt the claim. A
poor "God" he, who would work upon minor details and leave the most
important to secondary forces! The poverty of the argument and logic in
this case, is surpassed only by that of Laplace, who, seeking very
correctly to substitute motion for Newton's "all-powerful Being," and
ignorant of the true nature of that eternal motion, saw in it a blind
physical law. "Might not those arrangements be an effect of the laws of
motion?" he asks, forgetting, as all our modern Scientists do, that this
*law* and this motion are a vicious circle, so long as the *nature of
both* remains unexplained. His famous answer to Napoleon: "*Dieu est
devenu une hypothese inutile*," would be correctly stated only by one
who adhered to the philosophy of the Vedantins. It becomes a pure
fallacy, if we exclude the interference of operating, intelligent,
powerful (never "*all-powerful*") Beings, who are called "gods."

But we would ask the critics of the mediaeval astronomers why should
Kepler be denounced as *most unscientific*, for offering just the same
solution as Newton did -- only showing himself more sincere, more
consistent and even more logical. Where may be the difference between
Newton's "all-powerful Being" and Kepler's *Rectores*, his sidereal and
Cosmic Forces, or Angels? Kepler is again criticised for his "curious
hypothesis which made use of a vortical movement within the solar
system;" for his theories in general, for his favouring Empedocles' idea
of attraction and repulsion, and "Solar magnetism" in particular. Yet
several modern men of Science, as will be shown -- Hunt (if Metcalfe is
to be excluded), Dr. Richardson, etc. -- favour the idea very seriously.
He is half excused, however, on the plea that "to the time of Kepler no
interaction between masses of matter had been distinctly recognized
which was *generically* different from magnetism" (*World-Life*)*.* Is
it *distinctly* recognised now? Does Prof. Winchell claim for Science
any serious knowledge whatever of the natures of either electricity or
magnetism -- except that *both seem to be the effects of some result
arising from an undetermined cause.*

The ideas of Kepler, weeded from their theological tendencies, are
purely occult. He saw that:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 499 CHRONIC NEGATION.

(I.) The Sun is a great Magnet.\* This is what some eminent modern
scientists and also the Occultists believe in.

(II.) The Solar substance is immaterial.\*\* (*See* "*Isis Unveiled*,"
*Vol. I.* *pp.* 270 *to* 271.)

(III.) He provided, for the constant motion and restoration of the Sun's
energy and planetary motion, the perpetual care of a spirit, or spirits.
The whole of Antiquity believed in this idea. The Occultists do not use
the word Spirit, but say *Creative* Forces, which they *endow with
intelligence.* But we may call them spirits also.

This theory is tabooed a great deal more on account of the "Spirit" that
is given room in it, than of anything else. Herschell, the elder,
believed in it likewise, and so do several modern scientists also.
Nevertheless Professor Winchell declares that "a hypothesis more
fanciful, and less in accord with the requirements of physical
principles, has not been offered in ancient or modern times."
(*World-Life*, *p.* 554.)

The same was said, once upon a time, of the universal Ether, and now it
is not only accepted perforce but advocated *as the only possible
theory* to explain away certain mysteries.

Grove's ideas, when he first enunciated them in London about 1840, were
called as *unscientific* as the above; nevertheless, *his* views on the
correlation of forces are now universally accepted. It would, very
likely, require one more conversant with science than is the writer, to
combat with any success some of the now prevailing ideas about
gravitation and other similar "solutions" of Cosmic Mysteries. But, let
us recall a few objections that came from recognized men of Science;
from astronomers and physicists of eminence, who rejected the theory of
rotation, as well as that of gravitation. Thus one reads in the *French
Encyclopaedia* that "Science agrees, in the face of all its
representatives, that it is *impossible* to explain the *physical*
origin of the rotatory motion of the solar system."

If the question is asked, "what causes rotation?" we are answered: "It
is the centrifugal Force." "And this force, what is it that produces
it?" "The force of rotation," is the grave answer. (*Godefroy*,
*Cosmogonie de la Revelation.\*\*\**) It will be well, perhaps, to
examine both these theories as being directly or indirectly connected.

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* But see *Astronomie du Moyen Age*, by Delambre.

\*\* In the sense, of course, of matter existing in states unknown to
Science.

\*\*\* We shall be taken to task for contradiction. It will be said that
while we deny *God*, we admit Souls and *operative Spirits*, and quote
from Roman Catholic bigoted writers in support of our argument. To this
we reply: "We deny the *anthropomorphic* god of the Monotheists, but
never the Divine Principle in nature. We combat Protestants and Roman
Catholics on a number of dogmatic theological beliefs of human and
sectarian origin. We agree with them in their belief in Spirits and
*intelligent* operative powers, though we do not worship "Angels" as the
Roman Latinists do."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next Section](sd1-3-05.md)

[Contents](sd1-0-co.htm#contents.md)
