##### *The Secret Doctrine* by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol. 1

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 106 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

#### STANZA V.

1\. **T**HE **P**RIMORDIAL **S**EVEN, THE FIRST SEVEN **B**REATHS OF THE
**D**RAGON OF **W**ISDOM, PRODUCE IN THEIR TURN FROM THEIR HOLY
CIRCUMGYRATING **B**REATHS THE **F**IERY **W**HIRLWIND (*a*).

#### COMMENTARY.

(*a*) This is, perhaps, the most difficult of all the Stanzas to
explain. Its language is comprehensible only to him who is thoroughly
versed in Eastern allegory and its purposely obscure phraseology. The
question will surely be asked, "Do the Occultists believe in all these
'Builders,' 'Lipika,' and 'Sons of Light' as Entities, or are they
merely imageries?" To this the answer is given as plainly: "After due
allowance for the imagery of personified Powers, we must admit the
existence of these Entities, if we would not reject the existence of
spiritual humanity within physical mankind. For the hosts of these Sons
of Light and 'Mind-born Sons' of the first manifested Ray of the
**U**NKNOWN **A**LL, are the very root of spiritual man." Unless we want
to believe the unphilosophical dogma of a specially created soul for
every human birth -- a fresh supply of these pouring in daily, since
"Adam" -- we have to admit the occult teachings. This will be explained
in its place. Let us see, now, what may be the occult meaning of this
Stanza.

The Doctrine teaches that, in order to become a divine, fully conscious
god, -- aye, even the highest -- the Spiritual primeval
**I**NTELLIGENCES must pass through the human stage. And when we say
human, this does not apply merely to our terrestrial humanity, but to
the mortals that inhabit any world, *i.e.*, to those Intelligences that
have reached the appropriate equilibrium between matter and spirit, as
*we* have now, since the middle point of the Fourth Root Race of the
Fourth Round was passed. Each Entity must have won for itself the right
of becoming divine, through self-experience. Hegel, the great German
thinker, must have known or sensed intuitionally this truth when saying,
as he did, that the Unconscious evolved the Universe only "in the hope
of attaining clear self-consciousness," of becoming, in other words,
MAN; for this is also the secret meaning of the usual Puranic phrase
about

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 107 NO MAN -- NO GOD.

Brahma being constantly "moved by the desire to create." This explains
also the hidden Kabalistic meaning of the saying: "The *Breath* becomes
a stone; the stone, a plant; the plant, an animal; the animal, a man;
the man, a spirit; and the spirit, a god." The Mind-born Sons, the
Rishis, the Builders, etc., were all men -- of whatever forms and shapes
-- in other worlds and the preceding Manvantaras.

This subject, being so very mystical, is therefore the most difficult to
explain in all its details and bearings; since the whole mystery of
evolutionary creation is contained in it. A sentence or two in it
vividly recalls to mind similar ones in the Kabala and the phraseology
of the King Psalmist (civ.), as both, when speaking of God, show him
making the wind his messenger and his "ministers a flaming fire." But in
the Esoteric doctrine it is used figuratively. The "fiery Wind" is the
incandescent Cosmic dust which only follows magnetically, as the iron
filings follow the magnet, the directing thought of the "Creative
Forces." Yet, this cosmic dust is something more; for every atom in the
Universe has the potentiality of self-consciousness in it, and is, like
the Monads of Leibnitz, a Universe in itself, and *for* itself. *It is
an atom and an angel.*

In this connection it should be noted that one of the luminaries of the
modern Evolutionist School, Mr. A. R. Wallace, when discussing the
inadequacy of "natural selection" as the sole factor in the development
of physical man, practically concedes the whole point here discussed. He
holds that the evolution of man was directed and furthered by superior
Intelligences, whose agency is a necessary factor in the scheme of
Nature. But once the operation of these Intelligences is admitted in one
place, it is only a logical deduction to extend it still further. No
hard and fast line can be drawn.

-------

#### STANZA V. -- *Continued.*

2\. **T**HEY MAKE OF HIM THE MESSENGER OF THEIR WILL (*a*). **T**HE
**D**ZYU BECOMES **F**OHAT; THE **S**WIFT **S**ON OF THE **D**IVINE
**S**ONS, WHOSE SONS ARE THE **L**IPIKA,\* RUNS CIRCULAR ERRANDS. **H**E
IS THE STEED, AND

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* The difference between the "Builders," the Planetary Spirits, and the
Lipika must not be lost sight of. (See Nos. 5 and 6 of this Commentary.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 108 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

THE **T**HOUGHT IS THE RIDER (*i.e.*, *he is under the influence of
their guiding thought*)*.* **H**E PASSES LIKE LIGHTNING THROUGH THE
FIERY CLOUDS (*cosmic mists*) (*b*); TAKES THREE, AND FIVE, AND SEVEN
STRIDES THROUGH THE SEVEN REGIONS ABOVE AND THE SEVEN BELOW (*the world
to be*)*.* **H**E LIFTS HIS VOICE, AND CALLS THE INNUMERABLE SPARKS
(*atoms*) AND JOINS THEM TOGETHER (*c*).

(*a*) This shows the "Primordial Seven" using for their *Vahan*
(vehicle, or the manifested subject which becomes the symbol of the
Power directing it), Fohat, called in consequence, the "Messenger of
their will" -- the fiery whirlwind.

"Dzyu becomes Fohat" -- the expression itself shows it. Dzyu is the one
real (magical) knowledge, or Occult Wisdom; which, dealing with eternal
truths and primal causes, becomes almost omnipotence when applied in the
right direction. Its antithesis is Dzyu-mi, that which deals with
illusions and false appearances only, as in our exoteric modern
sciences. In this case, Dzyu is the expression of the collective Wisdom
of the Dhyani-Buddhas.

(*b*) As the reader is supposed not to be acquainted with the
Dhyani-Buddhas, it is as well to say at once that, *according to the
Orientalists*, there are five Dhyanis who are the "celestial" Buddhas,
of whom the human Buddhas are the manifestations in the world of form
and matter. Esoterically, however, the Dhyani-Buddhas are seven, of whom
five only have hitherto manifested,\* and two are to come in the sixth
and seventh Root-races. They are, so to speak, the eternal prototypes of
the Buddhas who appear on this earth, each of whom has his particular
divine prototype. So, for instance, Amitabha is the Dhyani-Buddha of
Gautama Sakyamuni, manifesting through him whenever this great Soul
incarnates on earth as He did in Tzon-kha-pa.\*\* As the synthesis of
the seven Dhyani-Buddhas, Avalokiteswara was the first Buddha (the
Logos), so Amitabha is the inner "God" of Gautama, who, in China, is
called Amita(-Buddha). They are, as Mr. Rhys Davids

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* See A. P. Sinnett's "Esoteric Buddhism," 5th annotated edition, pp.
171-173.

\*\* The first and greatest Reformer who founded the "Yellow-Caps,"
Gyalugpas. He was born in the year 1355 A.D. in Amdo, and was the
*Avatar* of Amitabha, the celestial name of Gautama Buddha.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 109 THEOGONY OF THE CREATORS.

correctly states, "the glorious counterparts in the mystic world, free
from the debasing conditions of this material life" of every earthly
mortal Buddha -- the liberated Manushi-Buddhas appointed to govern the
Earth in this Round. They are the "Buddhas of Contemplation," and are
all Anupadaka (parentless), *i.e.*, self-born of divine essence. The
exoteric teaching which says that every Dhyani-Buddha has the faculty of
creating from himself, an equally celestial son -- a Dhyani-Bodhisattva
-- who, after the decease of the Manushi (human) Buddha, has to carry
out the work of the latter, rests on the fact that owing to the highest
initiation performed by one overshadowed by the "Spirit of Buddha" --
(who is credited by the Orientalists with having created the five
Dhyani-Buddhas!), -- a candidate becomes virtually a Bodhisattva,
created such by the High Initiator.

(*c*) Fohat, being one of the most, if not the most important character
in esoteric Cosmogony, should be minutely described. As in the oldest
Grecian Cosmogony, differing widely from the later mythology, Eros is
the third person in the primeval trinity: Chaos, Gaea, Eros: answering
to the Kabalistic En-Soph (for Chaos is SPACE, \[\[***C**haino*\]\],
"void") the Boundless **A**LL, Shekinah and the Ancient of Days, or the
Holy Ghost; so Fohat is one thing in the yet unmanifested Universe and
another in the phenomenal and Cosmic World. In the latter, he is that
Occult, electric, vital power, which, under the Will of the Creative
Logos, unites and brings together all forms, giving them the first
impulse which becomes in time law. But in the unmanifested Universe,
Fohat is no more this, than Eros is the later brilliant winged Cupid, or
**L**OVE. Fohat has naught to do with Kosmos yet, since Kosmos is not
born, and the gods still sleep in the bosom of "Father-Mother." He is an
abstract philosophical idea. He produces nothing yet by himself; he is
simply that potential creative power in virtue of whose action the
**N**OUMENON of all future phenomena divides, so to speak, but to
reunite in a mystic supersensuous act, and emit the creative ray. When
the "Divine Son" breaks forth, then Fohat becomes the propelling force,
the active Power which causes the **O**NE to become **T**WO and
**T**HREE -- on the Cosmic plane of manifestation. The triple One
differentiates into the many, and then Fohat is transformed into that
force which brings together the elemental atoms and makes them aggregate
and combine. We find an echo of this primeval teaching

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 110 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

in early Greek mythology. Erebos and Nux are born out of Chaos, and,
under the action of Eros, give birth in their turn to Ether and Hemera,
the light of the superior and the light of the inferior or terrestrial
regions. Darkness generates light. See in the Puranas Brahma's "Will" or
desire to create; and in the Phoenician Cosmogony of Sanchoniathon the
doctrine that Desire, \[\[*pothos*\]\], is the principle of creation.

Fohat is closely related to the "ONE LIFE." From the Unknown One, the
Infinite TOTALITY, the manifested ONE, or the periodical, Manvantaric
Deity, emanates; and this is the Universal Mind, which, separated from
its Fountain-Source, is the Demiurgos or the creative Logos of the
Western Kabalists, and the four-faced Brahma of the Hindu religion. In
its totality, viewed from the standpoint of manifested Divine Thought in
the esoteric doctrine, it represents the Hosts of the higher creative
Dhyan Chohans. Simultaneously with the evolution of the Universal Mind,
the concealed Wisdom of Adi-Buddha -- the One Supreme and eternal --
manifests itself as Avalokiteshwara (or manifested Iswara), which is the
Osiris of the Egyptians, the Ahura-Mazda of the Zoroastrians, the
Heavenly Man of the Hermetic philosopher, the Logos of the Platonists,
and the Atman of the Vedantins.\* By the action of the manifested
Wisdom, or Mahat, represented by these innumerable centres of spiritual
Energy in the Kosmos, the reflection of the Universal Mind, which is
Cosmic Ideation and the intellectual Force accompanying such ideation,
becomes objectively the Fohat of the Buddhist esoteric philosopher.
Fohat, running along the seven principles of **A**KASA, acts upon
manifested substance or the One Element, as declared above, and by
differentiating it into various centres of Energy, sets in motion the
law of Cosmic Evolution, which, in obedience to the Ideation of the
Universal Mind, brings into existence all the various states of being in
the manifested Solar System.

The Solar System, brought into existence by these agencies, consists of
Seven Principles, like everything else within these centres. Such is the
teaching of the trans-Himalayan Esotericism. Every philosophy, however,
has its own way of dividing these principles.

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Mr. Subba Row seems to identify him with, and to call him, the
**L**OGOS. (See his four lectures on the "Bhagavadgita" in the
Theosophist.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 111 THE PROTEAN SPIRIT-SUBSTANCE.

Fohat, then, is the personified electric vital power, the transcendental
binding Unity of all Cosmic Energies, on the unseen as on the manifested
planes, the action of which resembles -- on an immense scale -- that of
a living Force created by WILL, in those phenomena where the seemingly
subjective acts on the seemingly objective and propels it to action.
Fohat is not only the living Symbol and Container of that Force, but is
looked upon by the Occultists as an Entity -- the forces he acts upon
being cosmic, human and terrestrial, and exercising their influence on
all those planes respectively. On the earthly plane his influence is
felt in the magnetic and active force generated by the strong desire of
the magnetizer. On the Cosmic, it is present in the constructive power
that carries out, in the formation of things -- from the planetary
system down to the glow-worm and simple daisy -- the plan in the mind of
nature, or in the Divine Thought, with regard to the development and
growth of that special thing. He is, metaphysically, the objectivised
thought of the gods; the "Word made flesh," on a lower scale, and the
messenger of Cosmic and human ideations: the active force in Universal
Life. In his secondary aspect, Fohat is the Solar Energy, the electric
vital fluid,\* and the preserving fourth

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\]

\* In 1882 the President of the Theosophical Society, Col. Olcott, was
taken to task for asserting in one of his lectures that Electricity is
matter. Such, nevertheless, is the teaching of the Occult Doctrine.
"Force," "Energy," may be a better name for it, so long as European
Science knows so little about its true nature; yet matter it is, as much
as Ether is matter, since it is as atomic, though several removes from
the latter. It seems ridiculous to argue that because a thing is
imponderable to Science, therefore it cannot be called matter.
Electricity is "immaterial" in the sense that its molecules are not
subject to perception and experiment; yet it may be -- and Occultism
says it is -- atomic; therefore it is matter. But even supposing it were
unscientific to speak of it in such terms, once Electricity is called in
Science a source of Energy, Energy simply, and a Force -- where is that
Force or that Energy which can be thought of without thinking of matter?
Maxwell, a mathematician and one of the greatest authorities upon
Electricity and its phenomena, said, years ago, that Electricity was
matter, not motion merely. "If we accept the hypothesis that the
elementary substances are composed of atoms we cannot avoid concluding
that electricity also, positive as well as negative, is divided into
definite elementary portions, which behave like atoms of electricity."
(Helmholtz, *Faraday Lecture,* 1881). We will go further than that, and
assert that Electricity is not only Substance but that it is an
emanation from an Entity, which is neither God nor Devil, but one of the
numberless Entities that rule and guide our world according to the
eternal Law of **K**ARMA. (See the Addendum to this Book.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 112 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

principle, the animal Soul of Nature, so to say, or -- Electricity. In
India, Fohat is connected with Vishnu and Surya in the early character
of the (first) God; for Vishnu is not a high god in the Rig Veda. The
name Vishnu is from the root *vish*, "to pervade," and Fohat is called
the "Pervader" and the Manufacturer, because he shapes the atoms from
crude material.\* In the sacred texts of the Rig Veda, Vishnu, also, is
"a manifestation of the Solar Energy," and he is described as striding
through the Seven regions of the Universe in three steps, the Vedic God
having little in common with the Vishnu of later times. Therefore the
two are identical in this particular feature, and one is the copy of the
other.

The "three and seven" strides refer to the Seven spheres inhabited by
man, of the esoteric Doctrine, as well as to the Seven regions of the
Earth. Notwithstanding the frequent objections made by would-be
Orientalists, the Seven Worlds or spheres of our planetary chain are
distinctly referred to in the exoteric Hindu scriptures. But how
strangely all these numbers are connected with like numbers in other
Cosmogonies and with their symbols, can be seen from comparisons and
parallelisms made by students of old religions. The "three strides of
Vishnu" through the "seven regions of the Universe," of the Rig Veda,
have been variously explained by commentators as meaning "fire,
lightning and the Sun" cosmically; and as having been taken in the
Earth, the atmosphere, and the sky; also as the "three steps" of the
dwarf (Vishnu's incarnation), though more philosophically -- and in the
astronomical sense, very correctly -- they are explained by Aurnavabha
as being the various positions of the sun, rising, noon, and setting.
Esoteric philosophy alone explains it clearly, and the Zohar laid it
down very philosophically and comprehensively. It is said and plainly
demonstrated therein that in the beginning the Elohim (Elhim) were
called Echod, "one," or the "Deity is one in many," a very simple idea
in a pantheistic conception (in its philosophical sense, of course).
Then came the change, "Jehovah is Elohim," thus unifying the
multiplicity and taking the first step towards Monotheism. Now to the
query, "How is Jehovah Elohim?" the answer is, "By three Steps" from
below.

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* It is well known that sand, when placed on a metal plate in vibration
assumes a series of regular curved figures of various descriptions. Can
Science give a *complete* explanation of this fact?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 113 THE CORRELATION OF THE GODS.

The meaning is plain.\* They are all symbols, and emblematic, mutually
and correlatively, of Spirit, Soul and Body (MAN); of the circle
transformed into Spirit, the Soul of the World, and its body (or Earth).
Stepping out of the Circle of Infinity, that no man comprehendeth,
Ain-Soph (the Kabalistic synonym for Parabrahm, for the Zeroana Akerne,
of the Mazdeans, or for any other "**U**NKNOWABLE") becomes "One" -- the
**E**CHOD, the **E**KA, the **A**HU -- then he (or it) is transformed by
evolution into the One in many, the Dhyani-Buddhas or the Elohim, or
again the Amshaspends, his third Step being taken into generation of the
flesh, or "Man." And from man, or Jah-Hova, "male female," the *inner*
divine entity becomes, on the metaphysical plane, once more the Elohim.

The Kabalistic idea is identical with the Esotericism of the Archaic
period. This esotericism is the common property of all, and belongs
neither to the Aryan 5th Race, nor to any of its numerous Sub-races. It
cannot be claimed by the Turanians, so-called, the Egyptians, Chinese,
Chaldeans, nor any of the Seven divisions of the Fifth Root Race, but
really belongs to the Third and Fourth Root Races, whose descendants we
find in the Seed of the Fifth, the earliest Aryans. The Circle was with
every nation the symbol of the Unknown -- "Boundless Space," the
abstract garb of an ever present abstraction -- the Incognisable Deity.
It represents limitless Time in Eternity. The Zeroana Akerne is also the
"Boundless Circle of the Unknown Time," from which Circle issues the
radiant light -- the Universal **S**UN, or Ormazd\*\* -- and the latter

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* The numbers 3, 5, and 7 are prominent in speculative masonry, as
shown in "Isis." A mason writes: -- "There are the 3, 5, and 7 steps to
show a circular walk. The three faces of 3, 3; 5, 3; and 7, 3; etc.,
etc. Sometimes it comes in this form -- 753/2 = 376.5 and 7635/2 =
3817.5 and the ratio of 20612/6561 feet for cubit measure gives the
Great Pyramid measures," etc., etc. Three, five and seven are mystical
numbers, and the last and the first are as greatly honoured by Masons as
by the Parsis -- the triangle being a symbol of Deity everywhere. (See
the *Masonic Cyclopedia*, and "*Pythagorean Triangle*," Oliver.) As a
matter of course, doctors of divinity (Cassel, for instance) show the
Zohar explaining and supporting the Christian trinity (!). It is the
latter, however, that had its origin from the ![](sd1-113.jpg) of the
Heathen, in the Archaic Occultism and Symbology. The three strides
relate metaphysically to the descent of Spirit into matter, of the Logos
falling as a ray into the Spirit, then into the Soul, and finally into
the human physical form of man, in which it becomes **L**IFE.

\*\* Ormazd is the Logos, the "First Born" and the Sun.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 114 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

is identical with Kronos, in his AEolian form, that of a Circle. For the
circle is Sar, and Saros, or cycle, and was the Babylonian god whose
circular horizon was the visible symbol of the invisible, while the sun
was the ONE Circle from which proceeded the Cosmic orbs, and of which he
was considered the leader. Zero-ana, is the Chakra or circle of Vishnu,
the mysterious emblem which is, according to the definition of a mystic,
"a curve of such a nature that as to any, the least possible part
thereof, if the curve be protracted either way it will proceed and
finally re-enter upon itself, and form one and the same curve -- or that
which we call the circle." No better definition could thus be given of
the natural symbol and the evident nature of Deity, which having its
circumference everywhere (the boundless) has, therefore, its central
point also everywhere; in other words, is in every point of the
Universe. The invisible Deity is thus also the Dhyan Chohans, or the
Rishis, the primitive seven, and the nine, without, and ten, including,
their synthetical unit; from which IT steps into Man. Returning to the
Commentary (4) of Stanza IV. the reader will understand why, while the
trans-Himalayan Chakra has inscribed within it ![](sd1-113.jpg) \|
![](sd1-114a.jpg) \| ![](sd1-114b.jpg) (triangle, first line, cube
second line, and a pentacle with a dot in the centre thus:
![](sd1-114b.jpg), and some other variations), the Kabalistic circle of
the Elohim reveals, when the letters of the word ![](sd1-144c.gif)
(Alhim or Elohim) are numerically read, the famous numerals 13514, or by
anagram 31415 -- the astronomical (pi) number, or the hidden meaning of
Dhyani-Buddhas, of the Gebers, the Geborim, the Kabeiri, and the Elohim,
all signifying "great men," "Titans," "Heavenly Men," and, on earth,
"the giants."

The Seven was a Sacred Number with every nation; but none applied it to
more physiologically materialistic uses than the Hebrews. With these it
was pre-eminently the generative number and 9 the male causative one,
forming as shown by the Kabalists the ![](sd1-144d.gif) or *otz* -- "the
Tree of the Garden of Eden,"\* the "double hermaphrodite rod" of the
fourth race. Whereas with the Hindus and Aryans generally, the
significance was manifold, and related almost entirely to purely
metaphysical

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* This was the symbol of the "Holy of Holies," the 3 and the 4 of
sexual separation. Nearly every one of the 22 Hebrew letters are merely
phallic symbols. Of the two letters -- as shown above -- one, the
*ayin,* is a *negative* female letter, symbolically an eye; the other a
male letter, *tza*, a *fish*-hook or a dart.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 115 MANIFESTED SYMBOLS.

and astronomical truths.\* Their Rishis and gods, their Demons and
Heroes, have historical and ethical meanings, and the Aryans never made
their religion rest solely on physiological symbols, as the old Hebrews
have done. This is found in the exoteric Hindu Scriptures. That these
accounts are blinds is shown by their contradicting each other, a
different construction being found in almost every Purana and epic poem.
Read esoterically -- they will all yield the same meaning. Thus one
account enumerates Seven worlds, exclusive of the nether worlds, also
seven in number; these fourteen upper and nether worlds have

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* We are told by a Kabalist, who in a work not yet published contrasts
the Kabala and Zohar with Aryan Esotericism, that "The Hebrew clear,
short, terse and exact modes far and beyond measure surpass the toddling
word-talk of the Hindus -- just as by parallelisms the Psalmist says,
'My mouth speaks with my tongue, I know not thy numbers' (lxxi., 15).
*.* . . The Hindu Glyph shows by its insufficiency in the large
admixture of adventitious sides the same borrowed plumage that the
Greeks (the lying Greeks) had, and that Masonry has: which in the rough
monosyllabic (and apparent) poverty of the Hebrew, shows the latter to
have come down from a far more remote antiquity than any of these, and
to have been the source (!?), or nearer the old original source than any
of them." This is entirely erroneous. Our learned brother and
correspondent judges apparently the Hindu religious systems by their
Shastras and Puranas, probably the latter, and in their modern
translation moreover, which is disfigured out of all recognition, by the
Orientalists. It is to their philosophical systems that one has to turn,
to their esoteric teaching, if he would make a point of comparison. No
doubt the symbology of the Pentateuch and even of the New Testament,
comes from the same source. But surely the Pyramid of Cheops, whose
measurements are all found repeated by Professor Piazzi Smythe in
Solomon's alleged and mythical temple, is not of a later date than the
Mosaic books? Hence, if there is any such great identity as claimed, it
must be due to servile copying on the part of the Jews, not on that of
the Egyptians. The Jewish glyphs -- and even their language, the Hebrew
-- are not original. They are borrowed from the Egyptians, from whom
Moses got his Wisdom; from the Coptic, the probable kinsman, if not
parent, of the old Phoenician and from the Hyksos, their (alleged)
ancestors, as Josephus shows in his "*Against Apion*," I.*,* 25. Aye;
but who are the Hyksos shepherds? And who the Egyptians? History knows
nothing of the question, and speculates and theorizes out of the depths
of the respective consciousnesses of her historians. (*See Isis
Unveiled*, vol. II., p. 430-438.) "Khamism, or old Coptic," says Bunsen,
"is from Western Asia, and contains some germ of the Semitic, thus
bearing witness to the primitive cognate unity of the Aryan and Semitic
races"; and he places the great events in Egypt 9,000 years **B.C**. The
fact is that in archaic Esotericism and Aryan thought we find a grand
philosophy, whereas in the Hebrew records we find only the most
surprising ingenuity in inventing apotheoses for phallic worship and
sexual theogony.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 116 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

nothing to do with the classification of the septenary chain and belong
to the purely aethereal, invisible worlds. These will be noticed
elsewhere. Suffice for the present to show that they are purposely
referred to as though they belonged to the chain. "Another enumeration
calls the Seven worlds -- earth, sky, heaven, middle region, place of
birth, mansion of the blest, and abode of truth; placing the 'Sons of
Brahma' in the sixth division, and stating the fifth, or Jana Loka, to
be that where animals destroyed in the general conflagration are born
again." (see *Hindu Classical Dictionary.*) Some real esoteric teaching
is given in the "Symbolism." He who is prepared for it will understand
the hidden meaning.

-------

#### STANZA V. -- *Continued.*

3\. **H**E IS THEIR GUIDING SPIRIT AND LEADER. **W**HEN HE COMMENCES
WORK, HE SEPARATES THE SPARKS OF THE LOWER KINGDOM (*mineral* *atoms*)
THAT FLOAT AND THRILL WITH JOY IN THEIR RADIANT DWELLINGS (*gaseous
clouds*)*,* AND FORMS THEREWITH THE GERMS OF WHEELS. **H**E PLACES THEM
IN THE SIX DIRECTIONS OF SPACE AND ONE IN THE MIDDLE -- THE CENTRAL
WHEEL (*a*).

(*a*) "Wheels," as already explained, are the centres of force, around
which primordial Cosmic matter expands, and, passing through all the six
stages of consolidation, becomes spheroidal and ends by being
transformed into globes or spheres. It is one of the fundamental dogmas
of Esoteric Cosmogony, that during the Kalpas (or aeons) of life,
MOTION, which, during the periods of Rest "pulsates and thrills through
every slumbering atom"\* (Commentary on Dzyan), assumes an evergrowing

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\*It may be asked, as also the writer has not failed to ask, "Who is
there to ascertain the difference in that motion, since all nature is
reduced to its primal essence, and there can be no one -- not even one
of the Dhyani-Chohans, who are all in Nirvana -- to see it?" The answer
to this is: "Everything in Nature has to be judged by analogy. Though
the highest Deities (Archangels or Dhyani-Buddhas) are unable to
penetrate the mysteries too far beyond our planetary system and the
visible Kosmos, yet there were great seers and prophets in olden times
who were enabled to perceive the mystery of Breath and Motion
retrospectively, when the systems of worlds were at rest and plunged in
their periodic sleep."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 117 THE ANTIQUITY OF PHYSICAL SCIENCES.

tendency, from the first awakening of Kosmos to a new "Day," to circular
movement. The "Deity becomes a WHIRLWIND." They are also called Rotae --
the moving wheels of the celestial orbs participating in the world's
creation -- when the meaning refers to the animating principle of the
stars and planets; for in the Kabala, they are represented by the
Ophanim, the Angels of the Spheres and stars, of which they are the
informing Souls. (See *Kabala Denudata*, "*De Anima*," p. 113.)

This law of vortical movement in primordial matter, is one of the oldest
conceptions of Greek philosophy, whose first historical Sages were
nearly all Initiates of the Mysteries. The Greeks had it from the
Egyptians, and the latter from the Chaldeans, who had been the pupils of
Brahmins of the esoteric school. Leucippus, and Democritus of Abdera --
the pupil of the Magi -- taught that this gyratory movement of the atoms
and spheres existed from eternity.\* Hicetas, Heraclides, Ecphantus,
Pythagoras, and all his pupils, taught the rotation of the earth; and
Aryabhata of India, Aristarchus, Seleucus, and Archimedes calculated its
revolution as scientifically as the astronomers do now; while the theory
of the Elemental Vortices was known to Anaxagoras, and maintained by him
500 years B.C., or nearly 2,000 before it was taken up by Galileo,
Descartes, Swedenborg, and finally, with slight modifications, by Sir W.
Thomson. (See his "*Vortical Atoms.*") All such knowledge, if justice be
only done to it, is an echo of the archaic doctrine, an attempt to
explain which is now being made. How men of the last few centuries have
come to the same ideas and conclusions that were taught as axiomatic
truths in the secrecy of the Adyta dozens of

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\*"The doctrine of the rotation of the earth about an axis is taught by
the Pythagorean Hicetas, probably as early as 500 **B.C**. It was also
taught by his pupil Ecphantus, and by Heraclides, a pupil of Plato. The
immobility of the Sun and the orbital rotation of the earth were shown
by Aristarchus of Samos as early as 281 **B.C**. to be suppositions
accordant with facts of observation. The Heliocentric theory was taught
about 150 **B.C**., by Seleucus of Seleucia on the Tigris. -- \[It was
taught 500 **B.C**. by Pythagoras. -- **H. P. B**.\] It is said also
that Archimedes, in a work entitled Psammites, inculcated the
Heliocentric theory. The sphericity of the earth was distinctly taught
by Aristotle, who appealed for proof to the figure of the Earth's shadow
on the moon in eclipses (Aristotle, De Coelo, lib. II, cap. XIV.). The
same idea was defended by Pliny (Nat. Hist., II., 65). These views seem
to have been lost from knowledge for more than a thousand years. . .
*.*" (*Comparative Geology*, Part IV., "Pre-Kantian Speculation," p.
551, by Alex. Winchell, **LL.D**.).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 118 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

millenniums ago, is a question that is treated separately. Some were led
to it by the natural progress in physical science and by independent
observation; others -- such as Copernicus, Swedenborg, and a few more --
their great learning notwithstanding, owed their knowledge far more to
intuitive than to acquired ideas, developed in the usual way by a course
of study.\* (See "A Mystery about Buddha.")

By the "Six directions of Space" is here meant the "Double Triangle,"
the junction and blending together of pure Spirit and Matter, of the
Arupa and the Rupa, of which the Triangles are a Symbol. This double
Triangle is a sign of Vishnu, as it is Solomon's seal, and the
Sri-Antara of the Brahmins.

-------

#### STANZA V. -- (*Continued.*)

4\. **F**OHAT TRACES SPIRAL LINES TO UNITE THE SIX TO THE SEVENTH -- THE
CROWN (*a*); AN **A**RMY OF THE **S**ONS OF **L**IGHT STANDS AT EACH
ANGLE (*and*) THE **L**IPIKA -- IN THE MIDDLE WHEEL. **T**HEY (*the
Lipika*) SAY, "**T**HIS IS GOOD" (*b*). **T**HE FIRST DIVINE WORLD IS
READY, THE FIRST (*is now*), THE SECOND (*world*), THEN THE "**D**IVINE
**A**RUPA" (*the formless Universe*

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* That Swedenborg, who could not possibly have known anything of the
esoteric ideas of Buddhism, came independently near the Occult teaching
in his general conceptions, is shown by his essay on the Vortical
Theory. In Clissold's translation of it, quoted by Prof. Winchell, we
find the following *resume*: -- "The first Cause is the Infinite or
Unlimited. This gives existence to the First Finite or Limited." (The
Logos in His manifestation and the Universe.) "That which produces a
limit is analogous to motion. (See first Stanza, *supra*.) The limit
produced is a point, the Essence of which is Motion; but being without
parts, this Essence is not actual Motion, but only a connatus to it."
(In our Doctrine it is not a "connatus," but a change from eternal
vibration in the unmanifested, to Vortical Motion in the phenomenal or
manifested World). . . "From this first proceed Extension, Space,
Figure, and Succession, or Time. As in Geometry a point generates a
line, a line a surface, and a surface a solid, so here the connatus of a
point tends towards lines, surfaces and solids. In other words, the
Universe is contained *in ovo* in the first natural point . . . the
Motion toward which the connatus tends, is circular, since the circle is
the most perfect of all figures . . . The most perfect figure of a
Motion *. .* . must be the perpetually circular, that is to say, it must
proceed from the centre to the periphery and from the periphery to the
centre." (Quoted from *Principia Rerum Naturalia.*) This is Occultism
pure and simple.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 119 THE EVOLUTION OF THE PRINCIPLES.

*of Thought*) REFLECTS ITSELF IN **C**HHAYALOKA (*the shadowy* *world of
primal form*, *or the intellectual*) THE FIRST GARMENT OF (*the*)
ANUPADAKA (*c*)*.*

(*a*) This tracing of "Spiral lines" refers to the evolution of man's as
well as Nature's principles; an evolution which takes place gradually
(as will be seen in Book II., on "The origin of the Human Races"), as
does everything else in nature. The Sixth principle in Man (Buddhi, the
Divine Soul) though a mere breath, in our conceptions, is still
something material when compared with divine "Spirit" (Atma) of which it
is the carrier or vehicle. Fohat, in his capacity of **D**IVINE **L**OVE
(*Eros*), the electric Power of affinity and sympathy, is shown
allegorically as trying to bring the pure Spirit, the Ray inseparable
from the ONE absolute, into union with the Soul, the two constituting in
Man the **M**ONAD, and in Nature the first link between the ever
unconditioned and the manifested. "The first is now the second" (world)
-- of the Lipikas -- has reference to the same.

(*b*) The "Army" at each angle is the Host of angelic Beings
(Dhyan-Chohans) appointed to guide and watch over each respective region
from the beginning to the end of Manvantara. They are the "Mystic
Watchers" of the Christian Kabalists and Alchemists, and relate,
symbolically as well as cosmogonically, to the numerical system of the
Universe. The numbers with which these celestial Beings are connected
are extremely difficult to explain, as each number refers to several
groups of distinct ideas, according to the particular group of "Angels"
which it is intended to represent. Herein lies the *nodus* in the study
of symbology, with which, unable to untie by disentangling it, so many
scholars have preferred dealing as Alexander dealt with the Gordian
knot; hence erroneous conceptions and teachings, as a direct result.

The "First is the Second," because the "First" cannot really be numbered
or regarded as the First, as that is the realm of noumena in its primary
manifestation: the threshold to the World of Truth, or **S**AT, through
which the direct energy that radiates from the ONE REALITY -- the
Nameless Deity -- reaches us. Here again, the untranslateable term
**S**AT (*Be-ness*) is likely to lead into an erroneous conception,
since that which is manifested cannot be **S**AT, but is something
phenomenal, not everlasting, nor, in truth, even sempiternal. It is
coeval and

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 120 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

coexistent with the One Life, "Secondless," but as a manifestation it is
still a Maya -- like the rest. This "World of Truth" can be described
only in the words of the Commentary as "A bright star dropped from the
heart of Eternity; the beacon of hope on whose Seven Rays hang the Seven
Worlds of Being." Truly so; since those are the Seven Lights whose
reflections are the human immortal Monads -- the Atma, or the
irradiating Spirit of every creature of the human family. First, this
septenary Light; then: --

(*c*) The "Divine World" -- the countless Lights lit at the primeval
Light -- the Buddhis, or formless divine Souls, of the last Arupa
(formless) world; the "Sum Total," in the mysterious language of the old
Stanza. In the Catechism, the Master is made to ask the pupil: --

"*Lift thy head, oh Lanoo; dost thou see one, or countless lights above
thee, burning in the dark midnight sky?*"

"*I sense one Flame, oh Gurudeva, I see countless undetached sparks
shining in it.*"

"*Thou sayest well. And now look around and into thyself. That light
which burns inside thee, dost thou feel it different in anywise from the
light that shines in thy Brother-men?*"

"*It is in no way different, though the prisoner is held in bondage by
Karma, and though its outer garments delude the ignorant into saying,*
'*Thy Soul and My Soul.*' "

The radical unity of the ultimate essence of each constituent part of
compounds in Nature -- from Star to mineral Atom, from the highest Dhyan
Chohan to the smallest infusoria, in the fullest acceptation of the
term, and whether applied to the spiritual, intellectual, or physical
worlds -- this is the one fundamental law in Occult Science. "The Deity
is boundless and infinite expansion," says an Occult axiom; and hence,
as remarked, the name of Brahma.\* There is a deep philosophy underlying
the earliest worship in the world, that of the Sun and of Fire. Of all
the Elements known to physical science, Fire is the one that has ever
eluded definite analysis. It is confidently asserted that

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* In the Rig Veda we find the names *Brahmanaspati* and *Brihaspati*
alternating and equivalent to each other. Also see "Brihad Upanishad";
Brihaspati is a deity called "the Father of the gods."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 121 THE MYSTERY OF THE FIRE.

Air is a mixture containing the gases Oxygen and Nitrogen. We view the
Universe and the Earth as matter composed of definite chemical
molecules. We speak of the primitive ten Earths, endowing each with a
Greek or Latin name. We say that water is, chemically, a compound of
Oxygen and Hydrogen. But what is **F**IRE? It is the effect of
combustion, we are gravely answered. It is heat and light and motion,
and a correlation of physical and chemical forces in general. And this
scientific definition is philosophically supplemented by the theological
one in Webster's Dictionary, which explains fire as "the instrument of
punishment, or the punishment of the impenitent in another state" -- the
"state," by the bye, being supposed to be spiritual; but, alas! the
presence of fire would seem to be a convincing proof of its material
nature. Yet, speaking of the illusion of regarding phenomena as simple,
because they are familiar, Professor Bain says (*Logic.* Part II.):
"Very familiar facts seem to stand in no need of explanation themselves
and to be the means of explaining whatever can be assimilated to them.
Thus, the boiling and evaporation of a liquid is supposed to be a very
simple phenomenon requiring no explanation, and a satisfactory
explanation of rarer phenomena. That water should dry up is, to the
uninstructed mind, a thing wholly intelligible; whereas to the man
acquainted with physical science the liquid state is anomalous and
inexplicable. The lighting of a fire by a flame is a GREAT SCIENTIFIC
DIFFICULTY, yet few people think so" (p. 125).

What says the esoteric teaching with regard to fire? "Fire," it says,
"is the most perfect and unadulterated reflection, in Heaven as on
Earth, of the **O**NE **F**LAME. It is Life and Death, the origin and
the end of every material thing. It is divine '**S**UBSTANCE.' " Thus,
not only the **F**IRE-**W**ORSHIPPER, the Parsee, but even the wandering
savage tribes of America, which proclaim themselves "born of fire," show
more science in their creeds and truth in their superstitions, than all
the speculations of modern physics and learning. The Christian who says:
"God is a living Fire," and speaks of the Pentecostal "Tongues of Fire"
and of the "burning bush" of Moses, is as much a fire-worshipper as any
other "heathen." The Rosicrucians, among all the mystics and Kabalists,
were those who defined Fire in the right and most correct way. Procure a
sixpenny lamp, keep it only supplied with oil, and you will be able to
light at its flame the lamps, candles,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 122 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

and fires of the whole globe without diminishing that flame. If the
Deity, the radical One, is eternal and an infinite substance ("the Lord
thy God is a consuming fire") and never consumed, then it does not seem
reasonable that the Occult teaching should be held as unphilosophical
when it says: "Thus were the Arupa and Rupa worlds formed: from **O**NE
light seven lights; from each of the seven, seven times seven," etc.,
etc.

-------

#### STANZA V. -- *Continued.*

5\. **F**OHAT TAKES FIVE STRIDES (*having already taken the first
three*) (*a*)*,* AND BUILDS A WINGED WHEEL AT EACH CORNER OF THE SQUARE
FOR THE FOUR HOLY ONES . . . . . AND THEIR ARMIES (*hosts*) (*b*)*.*

(*a*) The "strides," as already explained (see Commentary on Stanza
**IV**.), refer to both the Cosmic and the Human principles -- the
latter of which consist, in the exoteric division, of three (Spirit,
Soul, and Body), and, in the esoteric calculation, of seven principles
-- three rays of the Essence and four aspects.\* Those who have studied
Mr. Sinnett's "*Esoteric Buddhism*" can easily grasp the nomenclature.
There are two esoteric schools -- or rather one school, divided into two
parts -- one for the inner Lanoos, the other for the outer or semi-lay
chelas beyond the Himalayas; the first teaching a septenary, the other a
six-fold division of human principles.

From a Cosmic point of view, Fohat taking "five strides" refers here to
the five upper planes of Consciousness and Being, the sixth and the
seventh (counting downwards) being the astral and the terrestrial, or
the two lower planes.

(*b*) "Four winged wheels at each corner . . . . . for the four holy
ones and their armies (hosts)" . . . . . These are the "four Maharajahs"
or great Kings of the Dhyan-Chohans, the Devas who preside, each over
one of the four cardinal points. They are the Regents or Angels who rule
over the Cosmical Forces of North, South,

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* The four aspects are the body, its life or vitality, and the "Double"
of the body, the triad which disappears with the death of the person,
and the Kama-rupa which disintegrates in *Kama-loka.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 123 THE SECRET OF THE ELEMENTS.

East and West, Forces having each a distinct occult property. These
BEINGS are also connected with Karma, as the latter needs physical and
material agents to carry out her decrees, such as the four kinds of
winds, for instance, professedly admitted by Science to have their
respective evil and beneficent influences upon the health of Mankind and
every living thing. There is occult philosophy in that Roman Catholic
doctrine which traces the various public calamities, such as epidemics
of disease, and wars, and so on, to the invisible "Messengers" from
North and West. "The glory of God comes from the way of the East" says
Ezekiel; while Jeremiah, Isaiah, and the Psalmist assure their readers
that all the evil under the Sun comes from the North and the West --
which proposition, when applied to the Jewish nation, sounds like an
undeniable prophecy for themselves. And this accounts also for St.
Ambrose (On Amos, ch. iv.) declaring that it is precisely for that
reason that "we curse the North-Wind, and that during the ceremony of
baptism we begin by turning towards the West (Sidereal), to renounce the
better him who inhabits it; after which we turn to the East."

Belief in the "Four Maharajahs" -- the Regents of the Four cardinal
points -- was universal and is now that of Christians,\* who call them,
after St. Augustine, "Angelic Virtues," and "Spirits" when enumerated by
themselves, and "Devils" when named by Pagans. But where is the
difference between the Pagans and the Christians in this cause?
Following Plato, Aristotle explained that the term \[\[*stoicheia*\]\]
was understood only as meaning the incorporeal principles placed at each
of the four great divisions of our Cosmical world to supervise them.
Thus, no more than the Christians did, do they *adore* and *worship* the
Elements and the cardinal (imaginary) points, but the "gods" that ruled
these respectively. For the Church there are two kinds of Sidereal
beings, the

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Says the scholarly Vossius, in his Theol. Cir. I. VII.: "Though St.
Augustine has said that every visible thing in this world had an angelic
virtue as an overseer near it, it is not individuals but entire species
of things that must be understood, each such species having indeed its
particular angel to watch it. He is at one in this with all the
philosophers . . . For us these angels are spirits separated from the
objects . . . whereas for the philosophers (pagan) they were gods."
Considering the Ritual established by the Roman Catholic Church for
"Spirits of the Stars," the latter look suspiciously like "Gods," and
were no more honoured and prayed to by the ancient and modern pagan
rabble than they are now at Rome by the highly cultured Catholic
Christians.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 124 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

Angels and the Devils. For the Kabalist and Occultist there is but one;
and neither of them makes any difference between "the Rectors of Light"
and the Cosmocratores, or "Rectores tenebrarum harum," whom the Roman
Church imagines and discovers in a "Rector of Light" as soon as he is
called by another name than the one she addresses him by. It is not the
"Rector" or "Maharajah" who punishes or rewards, with or without "God's"
permission or order, but man himself -- his deeds or Karma, attracting
individually and collectively (as in the case of whole nations
sometimes), every kind of evil and calamity. We produce CAUSES, and
these awaken the corresponding powers in the sidereal world; which
powers are magnetically and irresistibly attracted to -- and react upon
-- those who produced these causes; whether such persons are practically
the evil-doers, or simply Thinkers who brood mischief. Thought is
matter,\* we are taught by modern Science; and "every particle of the
existing matter must be a register of all that has happened," as in
their "*Principles of Science*" Messrs. Jevons and Babbage tell the
profane. Modern Science is drawn more every day into the maelstrom of
Occultism; unconsciously, no doubt, still very sensibly. The two main
theories of science -- *re* the relations between Mind and Matter -- are
Monism and Materialism. These two cover the whole ground of negative
psychology with the exception of the quasi-occult views of the
pantheistic German schools.\*\*

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Not of course in the sense of the German Materialist Moleschott, who
assures us that "Thought is the movement of matter," a statement of
almost unequalled absurdity. Mental states and bodily states are utterly
contrasted as such. But that does not affect the position that every
thought, in addition to its physical accompaniment (brain-change),
exhibits an objective -- though to us supersensuously objective --
aspect on the astral plane. (See "The Occult World," pp. 89, 90.)

\*\* The views of our present-day scientific thinkers as to the
relations between mind and matter may be reduced to two hypotheses.
These show that both views equally exclude the possibility of an
independent Soul, distinct from the physical brain through which it
functions. They are: --

(1.) **M**ATERIALISM, the theory which regards mental phenomena as the
product of molecular change in the brain; *i.e.*, as the outcome of a
transformation of motion into feeling (!). The cruder school once went
so far as to identify mind with a "peculiar mode of motion" (!!), but
this view is now happily regarded as absurd by most of the men of
science themselves.

(2.) **M**ONISM, or the Single Substance Doctrine, is the more subtle
form of negative psychology, which one of its advocates, Professor Bain,
ably terms "guarded \[\[Footnote continued on next page\]\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 125 THE REAL MEANING OF THE TABERNACLE.

In the Egyptian temples, according to Clemens Alexandrinus, an immense
curtain separated the tabernacle from the place for the congregation.
The Jews had the same. In both, the curtain was drawn over five pillars
(the Pentacle) symbolising our five senses and five Root-races
esoterically, while the four colours of the curtain represented the four
cardinal points and the four terrestrial elements. The whole was an
allegorical symbol. It is through the four high Rulers over the four
points and Elements that our five senses may become cognisant of the
hidden truths of Nature; and not at all, as Clemens would have it, that
it is the elements *per se* that furnished the Pagans with divine
Knowledge or the knowledge of God.\* While the Egyptian emblem was
spiritual, that of the Jews was purely materialistic, and, indeed,
honoured only the blind Elements and the imaginary "Points." For what
was the meaning of the square tabernacle raised by Moses in the
wilderness, if it had not the same cosmical significance? "Thou shalt
make an hanging . . . of blue, purple, and scarlet" and "five pillars of
shittim wood for the hanging . . . four brazen rings in the four corners
thereof . . . boards of fine wood for the four sides, North, South,
West, and East . . . of the Tabernacle . . . with Cherubims of cunning
work." (Exodus, ch. xxvi., xxvii.) The Tabernacle and the square
courtyard, Cherubim and all, were precisely the same as those in the
Egyptian temples. The square form of the Tabernacle meant just the same
thing as it still means, to this day, in the exoteric worship of the
Chinese and Tibetans -- the four cardinal points signifying that which
the four sides of the pyramids, obelisks, and other such square
erections mean. Josephus takes care to explain the whole thing. He
declares that the Tabernacle pillars are the same

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\[\[Footnote continued from previous page\]\] Materialism." This
doctrine, which commands a very wide assent, counting among its
upholders such men as Lewis, Spencer, Ferrier, and others, while
positing thought and mental phenomena generally as radically contrasted
with matter, regards both as equal to the two sides, or aspects, of one
and the same substance in some of its conditions. Thought as thought,
they say, is utterly contrasted with material phenomena, but it must be
also regarded as only "the subjective side of nervous motion" whatever
our learned men may mean by this.

\* Thus the sentence, "Natura Elementorum obtinet revelationem Dei," (In
Clemens's *Stromata*, R. **IV**., para. 6), is applicable to both or
neither. Consult the Zends, vol II., p. 228, and Plutarch *De Iside*, as
compared by Layard, *Academie des Inscriptions*, 1854, Vol. **XV.**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 126 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

as those raised at Tyre to the four Elements, which were placed on
pedestals whose four angles faced the four cardinal points: adding that
"the angles of the pedestals had equally the four figures of the Zodiac"
on them, which represented the same orientation (*Antiquities I.,*
VIII., ch. xxii.).

The idea may be traced in the Zoroastrian caves, in the rock-cut temples
of India, as in all the sacred square buildings of antiquity that have
survived to this day. This is shown definitely by Layard, who finds the
four cardinal points, and the four primitive elements, in the religion
of every country, under the shape of square obelisks, the four sides of
the pyramids, etc., etc. Of these elements and their points the four
Maharajahs were the regents and the directors.

If the student would know more of them, he has but to compare the Vision
of Ezekiel (chap. i.) with what is known of Chinese Buddhism (even in
its exoteric teachings); and examine the outward shape of these "Great
Kings." In the opinion of the Rev. Joseph Edkins, they are "the Devas
who preside each over one of the four continents into which the Hindus
divide the world."\* Each leads an army of spiritual beings to protect
mankind and Buddhism. With the exception of favouritism towards
Buddhism, the four celestial beings are precisely this. They are the
protectors of mankind and also the Agents of Karma on Earth, whereas the
Lipika are concerned with Humanity's hereafter. At the same time they
are the four living creatures "who have the likeness of a man" of
Ezekiel's visions, called by the translators of the Bible, "Cherubim,"
"Seraphim," etc.; and by the Occultists, "the winged Globes," the "Fiery
Wheels," and in the Hindu Pantheon by a number of different names. All
these Gandharvas, the "Sweet Songsters," the Asuras, Kinnaras, and
Nagas, are the allegorical descriptions of the "four Maharajahs." The
Seraphim are the fiery Serpents of Heaven which we find in a passage
describing Mount Meru as: "the exalted mass of glory, the venerable
haunt of gods and heavenly choristers . . . . not to be reached by
sinful men . . . . because guarded by Serpents." They are called the
Avengers, and the "Winged Wheels."

Their mission and character being explained, let us see what the

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\*The Hindus happen to divide the world into seven continents,
exoterically as esoterically; and their four cosmic Devas are eight,
presiding over the eight points of the compass and not the Continents.
(Compare "Chinese Buddhism," p. 216.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 127 THE DRAGONS OF SECRET WISDOM.

Christian Bible-interpreters say of the Cherubim: -- "The word signifies
in Hebrew, fullness of knowledge; these angels are so called from their
exquisite Knowledge, and were therefore used for the punishment of men
who affected divine Knowledge." (Interpreted by Cruden in his
Concordance, from Genesis iii., 24.) Very well; and vague as the
information is, it shows that the Cherub placed at the gate of the
garden of Eden after the "Fall," suggested to the venerable Interpreters
the idea of punishment connected with forbidden Science or divine
Knowledge -- one that generally leads to another "Fall," that of the
gods, or "God," in man's estimation. But as the good old Cruden knew
nought of Karma, he may be forgiven. Yet the allegory is suggestive.
From Meru, the abode of gods, to Eden, the distance is very small, and
from the Hindu Serpents to the Ophite Cherubim, the third out of the
seven of which was the Dragon, the separation is still smaller, for both
watched the entrance to the realm of Secret Knowledge. But Ezekiel
plainly describes the four Cosmic Angels: "I looked, and behold, a
whirlwind, a cloud and fire infolding it . . . also out of the midst
thereof came the likeness of four living creatures . . . they had the
likeness of a man. And every one had four faces and four wings . . . the
face of a man, and the face of a lion, the face of an ox, and the face
of an eagle . . . " ("Man" was here substituted for "Dragon." Compare
the "*Ophite Spirits.*"*\**) . . . "Now as I beheld the living creatures
behold one wheel upon the Earth with his four faces . . . as it were a
wheel in the middle of a wheel . . . for the support of the living
creature was in the wheel . . . their appearance was like coals of fire
. . ." etc. (Ezekiel, ch. i.)

There are three chief groups of Builders and as many of the Planetary
Spirits and the Lipika, each group being again divided into Seven
sub-groups. It is impossible, even in such a large work as this, to
enter into a minute examination of even the three principal groups, as
it would demand an extra volume. The "Builders" are the representatives
of the first "Mind-Born" Entities, therefore of the primeval
Rishi-Prajapati: also of the Seven great Gods of Egypt, of which Osiris
is the chief: of the Seven Amshaspends of the Zoroastrians, with

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* The Angels recognised by the Roman Catholic Church who correspond to
these "Faces" were with the Ophites: -- Dragon -- Raphael; Lion --
Michael; Bull, or ox -- Uriel; and Eagle -- Gabriel. The four keep
company with the four Evangelists, and preface the Gospels.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 128 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

Ormazd at their head: or the "Seven Spirits of the Face": the Seven
Sephiroth separated from the first Triad, etc., etc.\*

They build or rather rebuild every "System" after the "Night." The
Second group of the Builders is the Architect of our planetary chain
exclusively; and the third, the progenitor of our Humanity -- the
Macrocosmic prototype of the microcosm.

The Planetary Spirits are the informing spirits of the Stars in general,
and of the Planets especially. They rule the destinies of men who are
all born under one or other of their constellations; the second and
third groups pertaining to other systems have the same functions, and
all rule various departments in Nature. In the Hindu exoteric Pantheon
they are the guardian deities who preside over the eight points of the
compass -- the four cardinal and the four intermediate points -- and are
called *Loka-Palas*, "Supporters or guardians of the World" (in our
visible Kosmos), of which Indra (East), Yama (South), Varuna (West), and
Kuvera (North) are the chief; their elephants and their spouses
pertaining of course to fancy and afterthought, though all of them have
an occult significance.

The Lipika (a description of whom is given in the Commentary on Stanza
**IV**. No. 6) are the Spirits of the Universe, whereas the Builders are
only our own planetary deities. The former belong to the most occult
portion of Cosmogenesis, which cannot be given here. Whether the Adepts
(even the highest) know this angelic order in the completeness of its
triple degrees, or only the lower one connected with the records of our
world, is something which the writer is unprepared to say, and she would
incline rather to the latter supposition. Of its highest grade one thing
only is taught: the Lipika are connected with Karma -- being its direct
Recorders.\*\*

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* The Jews, save the Kabalists, having no names for East, West, South,
and North, expressed the idea by words signifying before, behind, right
and left, and very often confounded the terms exoterically, thus making
the blinds in the Bible more confused and difficult to interpret. Add to
this the fact that out of the forty-seven translators of King James I.
of England's Bible "only three understood Hebrew, and of these two died
before the Psalms were translated" (*Royal Masonic Cyclopaedia*), and
one may easily understand what reliance can be placed on the English
version of the Bible. In this work the Douay Roman Catholic version is
generally followed.

\*\* The Symbol for Sacred and Secret Knowledge was universally in
antiquity, a Tree, by which a Scripture or a Record was also meant.
Hence the word Lipika, the \[\[Footnote continued on next page\]\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 129 THE LIPIKA.

#### STANZA V. -- *Continued.*

6\. **T**HE **L**IPIKA CIRCUMSCRIBE THE TRIANGLE, THE FIRST ONE (*the
vertical line or the figure* 1*.*), THE CUBE, THE SECOND ONE, AND THE
PENTACLE WITHIN THE EGG (*circle*) (*a*)*.* **I**T IS THE RING CALLED
"**P**ASS NOT," FOR THOSE WHO DESCEND AND ASCEND (*as also for those*)
WHO, DURING THE KALPA, ARE PROGRESSING TOWARD THE GREAT DAY "**B**E WITH
US" (*b*). . . . **T**HUS WERE FORMED THE **A**RUPA AND THE **R**UPA
(*the Formless World and the World of Forms*); FROM ONE LIGHT SEVEN
LIGHTS; FROM EACH OF THE SEVEN SEVEN TIMES SEVEN LIGHTS. **T**HE
"**W**HEELS" WATCH THE **R**ING.

The Stanza proceeds with a minute classification of the Orders of
Angelic Hierarchy. From the group of Four and Seven emanates the
"mind-born" group of Ten, of Twelve, of Twenty-one, etc., all these
divided again into sub-groups of septenaries, novenaries, duodecimals,
and so on, until the mind is lost in this endless enumeration of
celestial hosts and Beings, each having its distinct task in the ruling
of the visible Kosmos during its existence.

(*a*) The esoteric meaning of the first sentence of the Sloka is, that
those who have been called Lipikas, the Recorders of the Karmic ledger,
make an impassible barrier between the personal **E**GO and the
impersonal **S**ELF, the Noumenon and Parent-Source of the former. Hence
the allegory. They circumscribe the manifested world of matter within
the **R**ING "Pass-Not." This world is the symbol (objective) of the
**O**NE divided into the many, on the planes of Illusion, of Adi (the
"First") or of Eka (the "One"); and this One is the collective
aggregate, or totality, of the principal Creators or Architects of this
visible universe. In Hebrew Occultism their name is both Achath,
feminine, "One," and Achod, "One" again, but masculine. The monotheists
have taken (and are still taking) advantage of the profound esotericism
of the Kabala to apply the name by which the One Supreme Essence is
known to ITS manifestation, the Sephiroth-Elohim, and call it Jehovah.
But this is

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\[\[Footnote continued from previous page\]\] "writers" or scribes; the
"Dragons," symbols of wisdom, who guard the Trees of Knowledge; the
"golden" apple Tree of the Hesperides; the "Luxuriant Trees" and
vegetation of Mount Meru guarded by a Serpent. Juno giving to Jupiter,
on her marriage with him, a Tree with golden fruit is another form of
Eve offering Adam the apple from the Tree of Knowledge.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 130 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

quite arbitrary and against all reason and logic, as the term Elohim is
a plural noun, identical with the plural word *Chiim,* often compounded
with the Elohim.\* Moreover, in Occult metaphysics there are, properly
speaking, two "**O**NES" -- the One on the unreachable plane of
Absoluteness and Infinity, on which no speculation is possible, and the
Second "One" on the plane of Emanations. The former can neither emanate
nor be divided, as it is eternal, absolute, and immutable. The Second,
being, so to speak, the reflection of the first One (for it is the
Logos, or Iswara, in the Universe of Illusion), can do all this.\*\* It
emanates from itself -- as the upper Sephirothal Triad emanates the
lower seven Sephiroth -- the seven Rays or Dhyan Chohans; in other
words, the Homogeneous becomes the Heterogeneous, the "Protyle"
differentiates into the Elements. But these, unless they return into
their primal Element, can never cross beyond the Laya, or zero-point.

Hence the allegory. The Lipika separate the world (or plane) of pure
spirit from that of Matter. Those who "descend and ascend" -- the
incarnating Monads, and men striving towards purification and
"ascending," but still not having quite reached the goal -- may cross
the "circle of the Pass-Not," only on the day "Be-With-Us"; that day
when man, freeing himself from the trammels of ignorance, and recog-

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* The sentence in the Sepher Jezirah and elsewhere:
"Achath-Ruach-Elohim-Chiim" denotes the Elohim as androgynous at best,
the feminine element almost predominating, as it would read: "**O**NE is
She the Spirit of the Elohim of Life." As said above, Echath (or Achath)
is feminine, and Echod (or Achod) masculine, both meaning **O**NE.

\*\* This metaphysical tenet can hardly be better described than Mr.
Subba Row's in "Bhagavadgita" lectures: "Mulaprakriti (the veil of
Parabrahmam) acts as the one energy through the Logos (or 'Eswara'). Now
Parabrahmam, is the one essence from which starts into existence a
centre of energy, which I shall for the present call the Logos. . . . It
is called the Verbum . . . by the Christians, and it is the divine
Christos who is eternal in the bosom of his father. It is called
Avalokiteshwara by the Buddhists. . . . In almost every doctrine, they
have formulated the existence of a centre of spiritual energy which is
unborn and eternal, and which exists in the bosom of Parabrahmam at the
time of Pralaya, and starts as a centre of conscious energy at the time
of Cosmic activity. . . ." For, as the lecturer premised by saying,
Parabraham is not this or that, it is not even consciousness, as it
cannot be related to matter or anything conditioned. It is not Ego nor
is it Non-ego, not even Atma, but verily the one source of all
manifestations and modes of existence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 131 THE SIDEREAL BOOK OF LIFE.

nising fully the non-separateness of the Ego within his personality --
erroneously regarded as his own -- from the **U**NIVERSAL **E**GO (Anima
Supra-Mundi), merges thereby into the One Essence to become not only one
"with us" (the manifested universal lives which are "ONE" LIFE), but
that very life itself.

Astronomically, the "Ring **P**ASS-**N**OT" that the Lipika trace around
the Triangle, the First One, the Cube, the Second One, and the Pentacle
to circumscribe these figures, is thus shown to contain the symbol of
31415 again, or the coefficient constantly used in mathematical tables
(the value of *,* pi), the geometrical figures standing here for
numerical figures. According to the general philosophical teachings,
this ring is beyond the region of what are called nebulae in astronomy.
But this is as erroneous a conception as that of the topography and the
descriptions, given in Puranic and other exoteric Scriptures, about the
1008 worlds of the Devaloka worlds and firmaments. There are worlds, of
course, in the esoteric as well as in the profane scientific teachings,
at such incalculable distances that the light of the nearest of them
which has just reached our modern Chaldees, had left its luminary long
before the day on which the words "Let there be Light" were pronounced;
but these are no worlds on the Devaloka plane, but in our Kosmos.

The chemist goes to the *laya* or zero point of the plane of matter with
which he deals, and then stops short. The physicist or the astronomer
counts by billions of miles beyond the nebulae, and then they also stop
short; the semi-initiated Occultist will represent this laya-point to
himself as existing on some plane which, if not physical, is still
conceivable to the human intellect. But the full Initiate *knows* that
the ring "Pass-Not" is neither a locality nor can it be measured by
distance, but that it exists in the absoluteness of infinity. In this
"Infinity" of the full Initiate there is neither height, breadth nor
thickness, but all is fathomless profundity, reaching down from the
physical to the "para-para-metaphysical." In using the word "down,"
essential depth -- "nowhere and everywhere" -- is meant, not depth of
physical matter.

If one searches carefully through the exoteric and grossly
anthropomorphic allegories of popular religions, even in these the
doctrine embodied in the circle of "Pass-Not" thus guarded by the
Lipika, may be dimly perceived. Thus one finds it even in the teachings
of

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 132 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

the Vedantin sect of the Visishtadwaita, the most tenaciously
anthropomorphic in all India. For we read of the released soul that: --

After reaching Moksha (a state of bliss meaning "release from Bandha" or
bondage), bliss is enjoyed by it in a place called **P**ARAMAPADHA,
which place is not material, but made of Suddasatwa (the essence, of
which the body of Iswara -- "the Lord" -- is formed). There, Muktas or
Jivatmas (Monads) who have attained Moksha, are never again subject to
the qualities of either matter or Karma. "But if they choose, *for the
sake of doing good to the world*, they may incarnate on Earth."\* The
way to Paramapadha, or the immaterial worlds, from this world, is called
Devayana. When a person has attained Moksha and the body dies: --

"The Jiva (Soul) goes with Sukshma Sarira\*\* from the heart of the
body, to the Brahmarandra in the crown of the head, traversing Sushumna,
a nerve connecting the heart with the Brahmarandra. The Jiva breaks
through the Brahmarandra and goes to the region of the Sun
(Suryamandala) through the solar Rays. Then it goes, through a dark spot
in the Sun, to Paramapadha. The Jiva is directed on its way by the
Supreme Wisdom acquired by Yoga.\*\*\* The Jiva thus proceeds to
Paramapadha by the aid of Athivahikas (bearers in transit), known by the
names of Archi-Ahas . . . Aditya, Prajapati, etc. The Archis here
mentioned are certain pure Souls, etc., etc." (Visishtadwaita Catechism,
by Pundit Bhashyacharya, **F.T.S**.)

No Spirit except the "Recorders" (Lipika) has ever crossed its forbidden
line, nor will any do so until the day of the next Pralaya, for it is
the boundary that separates the finite -- however infinite in man's
sight -- from the truly **I**NFINITE. The Spirits referred to,
therefore, as those who "ascend and descend" are the "Hosts" of what we
loosely call "celestial Beings." But they are, in fact, nothing of the
kind.

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* These voluntary re-incarnations are referred to in our Doctrine as
Nirmanakayas (the surviving spiritual principles of men).

\*\* Sukshma-sarira, "dream-like" illusive body, with which are clothed
the inferior Dhyanis of the celestial Hierarchy.

\*\*\* Compare this esoteric tenet with the Gnostic doctrine found in
"Pistis-Sophia" (Knowledge = Wisdom), in which treatise Sophia Achamoth
is shown lost in the waters of Chaos (matter), on her way to Supreme
Light, and Christos delivering and helping her on the right Path. Note
well, "Christos" with the Gnostics meant the impersonal principal, the
Atman of the Universe, and the Atma within every man's soul -- not
Jesus; though in the old Coptic **MSS**. in the British Museum
"Christos" is almost constantly replaced by "Jesus."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 133 THE GOD OF MAN AND THE GOD OF THE ANT.

They are Entities of the higher worlds in the hierarchy of Being, so
immeasurably high that, to us, they must appear as Gods, and
collectively -- **G**OD. But so we, mortal men, must appear to the ant,
which reasons on the scale of its special capacities. The ant may also,
for all we know, see the avenging finger of a personal God in the hand
of the urchin who, in one moment, under the impulse of mischief,
destroys its anthill, the labour of many weeks -- long years in the
chronology of insects. The ant, feeling it acutely, and attributing the
undeserved calamity to a combination of Providence and sin, may also,
like man, see in it the result of the sin of its first parent. Who knows
and who can affirm or deny? The refusal to admit in the whole Solar
system of any other reasonable and intellectual beings on the human
plane, than ourselves, is the greatest conceit of our age. All that
science has a right to affirm, is that there are no invisible
Intelligences living under the same conditions as we do. It cannot deny
point-blank the possibility of there being worlds within worlds, under
totally different conditions to those that constitute the nature of our
world; nor can it deny that there may be a certain limited
communication\* between some of those worlds and our own. To the
highest, we are taught, belong the seven orders of the purely divine
Spirits; to the six lower ones belong hierarchies that can occasionally
be seen and heard by men, and who do communicate with their progeny of
the Earth; which progeny is indissolubly linked with them, each
principle in man having its direct source in the nature of those great
Beings, who furnish us with the respective invisible elements in us.
Physical Science is welcome to speculate upon the physiological
mechanism of living beings, and to continue her fruitless efforts in
trying to resolve our feelings, our sensations, mental and spiritual,
into functions of their inorganic vehicles. Nevertheless, all that will
ever be accomplished in this direction has already been done, and
Science will go no farther.

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* The greatest philosopher of European birth, Imanuel Kant, assures us
that such a communication is in no way improbable. "I confess I am much
disposed to assert the existence of Immaterial natures in the world, and
to place my own soul in the class of these beings. It will hereafter, I
know not where, or when, yet be proved that the human soul stands even
in this life in indissoluble connection with all immaterial natures in
the spirit-world, that it reciprocally acts upon these and receives
impressions from them." (Traume eines Geistersehers, quoted by C. C.
Massey, in his preface to Von Hartmann's "Spiritismus.")

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 134 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

She is before a dead wall, on the face of which she traces, as she
imagines, great physiological and psychic discoveries, but every one of
which will be shown later on to be no better than the cobwebs spun by
her scientific fancies and illusions. The tissues of our objective
framework alone are subservient to the analysis and researches of
physiological science.\* The six higher principles in them will evade
for ever the hand that is guided by an animus that purposely ignores and
rejects the Occult Sciences.

The "Great Day of **B**E-WITH-US," then, is an expression the only merit
of which lies in its literal translation. Its significance is not so
easily revealed to a public, unacquainted with the mystic tenets of
Occultism, or rather of Esoteric Wisdom or "Budhism." It is an
expression peculiar to the latter, and as hazy for the profane as that
of the Egyptians who called the same the "Day of **C**OME-TO-US,"\*\*
which

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* *E.g.*, all that modern physiological research in connection with
psychological problems has, and owing to the nature of things, could
have shown, is, that every thought, sensation, and emotion is attended
with a re-marshalling of the molecules of certain nerves. The inference
drawn by scientists of the type of Buchner, Vogt, and others, that
thought is molecular motion, necessitates a complete abstraction being
made of the fact of our subjective consciousness.

\*\* See "Le Livre des Morts," by Paul Pierret; "Le Jour de 'Viens a
nous' . . . c'est le jour ou Osiris a dit au Soleil: Viens! Je le vois
rencontrant le Soleil dans l'Amenti." (Chap. xvii., p. 61.) The Sun here
stands for the Logos (or Christos, or Horus) as central Essence
synthetically, and as a diffused essence of radiated Entities, different
in substance, but not in essence. As expressed by the *Bhagavadgita*
lecturer, "it must not be supposed that the Logos is but a single centre
of energy manifested from Parabrahmam; there are innumerable other
centres . . . and their number is almost infinite in the bosom of
Parabrahmam." Hence the expressions, "The Day of Come to us" and "The
Day of Be with us," etc. Just as the square is the Symbol of the Four
sacred Forces or Powers -- Tetraktis -- so the Circle shows the boundary
within the Infinity that no man can cross, even in spirit, nor Deva nor
Dhyan Chohan. The Spirits of those who "descend and ascend" during the
course of cyclic evolution shall cross the "iron-bound world" only on
the day of their approach to the threshold of Paranirvana. If they reach
it -- they will rest in the bosom of Parabrahmam, or the "Unknown
Darkness," which shall then become for all of them Light -- during the
whole period of Mahapralaya, the "Great **N**IGHT," namely,
311,040,000,000,000 years of absorption in Brahm. The day of
"Be-With-Us" is this period of rest or Paranirvana. See also for other
data on this peculiar expression, the day of "Come-To-Us," *The Funerary
Ritual of the Egyptians*, by Viscount de Rouge. It corresponds to the
Day of the Last Judgment of the Christians, which has been sorely
materialised by their religion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 135 THE SOUL'S PILGRIMAGE.

is identical with the former, though the verb "be" in this sense, might
be still better replaced with either of the two words "Remain" or
"Rest-with-us," as it refers to that long period of **R**EST which is
called Paranirvana. As in the exoteric interpretation of the Egyptian
rites the soul of every defunct person -- from the Hierophant down to
the sacred bull Apis -- became an Osiris, was Osirified, though the
Secret Doctrine had always taught, that the real Osirification was the
lot of every Monad only after 3,000 cycles of Existences; so in the
present case. The "Monad," born of the nature and the very Essence of
the "Seven" (its highest principle becoming immediately enshrined in the
Seventh Cosmic Element), has to perform its septenary gyration
throughout the Cycle of Being and forms, from the highest to the lowest;
and then again from man to God. At the threshold of Paranirvana it
reassumes its primeval Essence and becomes the Absolute once more.

---------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next Section](sd1-1-07.md)

[Contents](sd1-0-co.htm#contents.md)
