##### *The Secret Doctrine* by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol. 2

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 690 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

### ยง IV. DURATION OF THE GEOLOGICAL PERIODS, RACE CYCLES, AND THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN.

**M**ILLIONS of years have dropped into Lethe, leaving no more
recollection in the memory of the profane than the few millenniums of
the orthodox Western chronology as to the origin of Man and the history
of the primeval races.

All depends on the proofs found for the antiquity of the Human Race. If
the still-debated man of the Pliocene or even the Miocene period was the
*Homo primigenius,* then science *may* be right (*argumenti causa*) in
basing its present anthropology -- as to the date and mode of origin of
"Homo sapiens" -- on the Darwinian theory.\* But if the skeletons of man
should, at any time, be discovered in the Eocene strata, but no fossil
ape, thereby proving the existence of man prior to the anthropoid --
then Darwinians will have to exercise their ingenuity in another
direction. And it is said in well-informed quarters that the **XX**th
century will be yet in its earliest teens, when such undeniable proof of
Man's priority will be forthcoming.

Even now evidence is brought forward that the dates for the foundations
of cities, civilizations and various other historical events have been
absurdly curtailed. This was done as a peace-offering to Biblical
chronology. "No date," writes the well-known Palaeontologist, Ed.
Lartet, "is to be found in Genesis, which assigns a time for the birth
of primitive humanity"; but chronologists have for fifteen centuries
endeavoured to force the Bible facts into agreement with their systems.
Thus, no less than one hundred and forty different opinions have been
formed about the single date of "Creation"; "and between the extreme
variations there is a discrepancy of 3,194 years, in the reckoning of
the period between the beginning of the world and the birth of
Christ.\*\* Within the last few years, archaeologists have had to throw
back by nearly 3,000 years also the beginnings of Babylonian
civilization. On the

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* It may here be remarked that those Darwinians, who with Mr. Grant
Allen, place our "hairy arboreal" ancestors so far back as the *Eocene
Age,* are landed in rather an awkward dilemma. No fossil anthropoid ape
-- much less the fabulous common ancestor assigned to Man and the
Pithecoid -- appears in Eocene strata. The first presentment of an
anthropoid ape is Miocene.

\*\* Ed. Lartet, "Nouvelles Recherches sur la co-existence de l'homme et
des Grands Mammiferes Fossils de la derniere periode Geologique."
Annales des Soc. Nat., t. **XV**., p. 256.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 691 PROFESSOR SAYCE SKETCHES OUT CHRONOLOGY.

foundation cylinder deposited by Nabonidus, the Babylonian king,
conquered by Cyrus -- are found the records of the former, in which he
speaks of his discovery of the foundation stone that belonged to the
original temple built by Naram-Sin, son of Sargon, of Accadia, the
conqueror of Babylonia, who, says Nabonidus, lived 3,200 years before
his own time."

We have shown in *Isis* that those who based history on the Jewish
Chronology (a race which had none of its own and rejected the Western
till the **XII**th century) would lose themselves, for the Jewish
account could only be followed through Kabalistic computation, and with
a key to it in the hand. . . We had characterised the late George
Smith's chronology of the Chaldeans and Assyrians, made by him to fit in
with that of Moses, as quite fantastic. And now, in this respect at
least, later Assyriologists have corroborated our denial. For, whereas
G. Smith makes Sargon I. (the prototype of Moses in his legend) reign in
the city of Akkad about 1600 **B.C**. -- probably out of a latent
respect for Moses, whom the Bible makes to flourish 1571 **B.C**. -- we
now learn from the first of the six Hibbert lectures delivered by
Professor A. H. Sayce, of Oxford, in 1887, that: "Old views of the early
annals of Babylonia and its religions have been much modified by recent
discovery. The first Semitic Empire, it is now agreed, was that of
Sargon of Accad, who established a great library, patronized literature,
and extended his conquests across the sea into Cyprus. It is now known
that he reigned as early as **B.C**. 3750." "The Accadian monuments
found by the French at Tel-loh must be even older, reaching back to
about **B.C**. 4,000," in other words, to the fourth year of the World's
creation agreeably with Bible chronology, and when Adam was in his
swaddling clothes. Perchance, in a few years more, the 4,000 years may
be further extended. The well-known Oxford lecturer remarked during his
disquisitions upon "*The origin and Growth of Religion as illustrated by
the Babylonian Religion*" that: "The difficulties of systematically
tracing the origin and history of the Babylonian Religion were
considerable. The sources of our knowledge of the subject were almost
wholly monumental, very little help being obtainable from classical or
Oriental writers. Indeed, it was an undeniable fact that the Babylonian
priesthood intentionally swaddled up the study of the religious texts in
coils of almost insuperable difficulty." That they have confused the
dates, and especially the order of events "intentionally," is
undeniable, and for a very good reason: their writings and records were
all esoteric. The Babylonian priests did no more than the Priests of
other ancient nations. Their records were meant only for the Initiates
and their disciples, and it is only the latter who were furnished with
the keys to the true meaning. But Professor

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 692 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

Sayce's remarks are promising. For he explains the difficulty by saying
that as -- "the Nineveh library contained mostly copies of older
Babylonian texts, and the copyists pitched upon such tablets only as
were of special interest to the Assyrian conquerors, belonging to a
comparatively late epoch, this added much to the greatest of all our
difficulties -- namely, our being so often left in the dark as to the
age of our documentary evidence, and the precise worth of our materials
for history." Thus one has a right to infer that some still fresher
discovery may lead to a new necessity for pushing the Babylonian dates
so far beyond the year 4,000 **B.C**., as to make them *pre-Kosmic* in
the judgment of every Bible worshipper.

How much more would paleontology have learned had not millions of works
been destroyed! We talk of the Alexandrian literary lore, which has been
thrice destroyed, namely, by Julius Caesar **B.C**. 48, in **A.D**. 390,
and lastly in the year 640, **A.D**., by the general of Kaliph Omar.
What is this in comparison with the works and records destroyed in the
primitive Atlantean Libraries, wherein records are said to have been
traced on the tanned skins of gigantic antediluvian monsters? Or again
the destruction of the countless Chinese books by command of the founder
of the Imperial Tsin dynasty, Tsin Shi Hwang-ti, in 213 **B.C**.? Surely
the brick-clay tablets of the Imperial Babylonian Library, and the
priceless treasures of the Chinese collections could have never
contained such information as one of the aforesaid "Atlantean" skins
would have furnished to the ignorant world.

But even with the extremely meagre data at hand, Science has been able
to see the necessity of throwing back nearly every Babylonian date, and
has done so quite generously. We learn from Professor Sayce that even
the archaic statues at Tel-loh, in Lower Babylonia, have suddenly been
assigned a date contemporary with the fourth dynasty in Egypt.
Unfortunately, dynasties and Pyramids have the fate of geological
periods; their dates are arbitrary, and depend on the respective whims
of the men of science. Archaeologists know now, it is said, that the
afore-mentioned statues are fashioned out of green diorite, that can
only be got in the Peninsula of Sinai; and "they accord in the style of
art, and in the standard of measurement employed, with the similar
diorite statues of the pyramid builders of the third and fourth Egyptian
dynasties. . . . . Moreover, the only possible period for a Babylonian
occupation of the Sinaitic quarries must be placed shortly after the
close of the epoch at which the pyramids were built; and thus only can
we understand how the name of Sinai could have been derived from that of
Sin, the primitive Babylonian moon-god." This is very logical, but what
is the date fixed for these "dynasties"? Sanchoniathon's and Manetho's
Synchronistic tables and their figures have been rejected, or whatever

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 693 NO AGREEMENT BETWEEN SCIENTISTS.

remained of these after holy Eusebius' handling of them; and still we
have to remain satisfied with the four or five thousand years **B.C**.
so liberally allotted to Egypt. At all events one point is gained. There
is, at last, a city on the face of the earth which is allowed, at least,
6,000 years, and it is Eridu. Geology has found it out. According to
Professor Sayce again, --

> "They are now also able to obtain time for the silting up of the head
> of the Persian Gulf, which demands a lapse of between 5,000 and 6,000
> years since the period when Eridu, now twenty-five miles inland, was
> the seaport at the mouth of the Euphrates, and the seat of Babylonian
> commerce with Southern Arabia and India. More than all, the new
> chronology gives time for the long series of eclipses recorded in the
> great astronomical work called 'The Observations of Bel'; and we are
> also enabled to understand the otherwise perplexing change in the
> position of the vernal equinox, which has occurred since our present
> zodiacal signs were named by the Earliest Babylonian astronomers. When
> the Accadian calendar was arranged and the Accadian months were named,
> the sun at the vernal equinox was not, as now, in Pisces, or even in
> Aries, but in Taurus. The rate of the precession of the equinoxes
> being known, we learn that at the vernal equinox the sun was in Taurus
> from about 4,700 years **B.C**., and we thus obtain astronomical
> limits of date which cannot be impugned."\*

It may make our position plainer if we state at once that we use Sir C.
Lyell's nomenclature for the ages and periods, and that when we talk of
the Secondary and Tertiary age, of the Eocene, Miocene and Pliocene
periods -- this is simply to make our facts more comprehensible. Since
these ages and periods have not yet been allowed fixed and determined
durations, 2 1/2 and 15 million years being assigned at different times
to one and the same age (the Tertiary) -- and since no two geologists
and naturalists seem to agree on this point -- Esoteric teachings may
remain quite indifferent to whether man is shown to appear in the
Secondary or the Tertiary age. If the latter age may be allowed even so
much as 15 million years' duration -- well and good; for the Occult
doctrine, jealously guarding its real and correct figures as far as
concerns the First, Second, and two-thirds of the Third Root-Race --
gives clear information upon one point only -- the age of "Vaivasvata
Manu's humanity." (*Vide Part I., Vol. II.,* "*Chronology of the
Brahmins.*")

Another definite statement is this: It is during the so-called Eocene
period that the continent to which the Fourth Race belonged, and on
which it lived and perished, showed the first symptoms of sinking. And
it was in the Miocene age, that it was finally destroyed -- save the
little island mentioned by Plato. It is these points that have to be
checked by the scientific data.

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* From a Report of the "Hibbert Lectures, 1887. Lectures on the Origin
and Growth of Religion, and Illustrated by the Religion of the Ancient
Babylonians." By A. H. Sayce. (London: Williams and Norgate.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 694 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

**A**.

**M**ODERN **S**CIENTIFIC **S**PECULATIONS ABOUT THE **A**GES OF THE
**G**LOBE,  
**A**NIMAL **E**VOLUTION, AND **M**AN.

May we not be permitted to throw a glance at the works of Specialists?
The work on "Comparative Geology: the World-Life," by Prof. A. Winchell,
furnishes us with curious data. Here we find an opponent of the Nebular
theory, a reverend gentleman, smiting with all the force of the hammer
of his *odium theologicum* on the *rather* contradictory hypothesis of
the great stars of Science, in the matter of sidereal and cosmical
phenomena based on their respective relations to terrestrial durations.
The "too imaginative physicists and naturalists" do not fare very easily
under this shower of their own speculative figures when placed side by
side, and cut rather a sorry figure. Thus he shows: --

"Sir William Thomson, on the basis of the observed principles of
cooling, concludes that no more than ten million years (elsewhere he
makes it 100,000,000) can have elapsed since the temperature of the
Earth was sufficiently reduced to sustain vegetable life.\* Helmholz
calculates that twenty million years would suffice for the original
nebula to condense to the present dimensions of the sun. Prof. S.
Newcomb requires only ten millions to attain a temperature of 212
\[\[degrees\]\] Fahr.\*\* Croll estimates *seventy* million years for
the diffusion of the heat, etc.\*\*\* Bischof calculates that 350
*million years* would be required for the earth to cool from a
temperature of 2,000 \[\[degrees\]\] to 200 \[\[degrees\]\] Centigrade.
Read, basing his estimate on observed rates of denudation, demands 500
million years since sedimentation began in Europe.\*\*\*\* Lyell
ventured a rough guess of 240 million years; Darwin thought 300 million
years demanded by the organic transformations which his theory
contemplates, and Huxley is disposed to demand a 1,000 millions" (!!).

To this Prof. Winchell observes that "some biologists . . . . seem to
close their eyes tight and leap at one bound into the abyss of millions
of years, of which they have no more adequate estimate than of
infinity."\*\*\*\*\* Then he proceeds to give what he takes to be more
correct geological figures: a few will suffice.

According to Sir W. Thomson "the whole incrusted age of the world is
80,000,000 years"; and agreeably with Prof. Houghton's calculations of a
minimum limit for the time since the elevation of

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* *Nat. Philos.* App. D., Trans. Royal Soc., Edin.

\*\* "Popular Astronomy," p. 509.

\*\*\* "Climate and Time," p. 335.

\*\*\*\* Read. Address, "Liverpool Geolog. Society, 1876."

\*\*\*\*\* "World-Life," p. 180.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 695 MATERIALISTS AT LOGGER-HEADS.

Europe and Asia, three hypothetical ages for three *possible* and
different modes of upheaval are given: varying from the modest figures
of 640,730 years, through 4,170,000 years to the tremendous figures of
27,491,000 years!!

This *is enough,* as one can see, to cover our claims for the four
continents and even the figures of the Brahmins.

Further calculations, the details of which the reader may find in Prof.
Winchell's work,\* bring Houghton to an approximation of the sedimentary
age of the globe -- 11,700,000 years. These figures are found too small
by the author, who forthwith extends them to 37,000,000 years.

Again, according to Croll,\*\* 2,500,000 years "represents the time
since the beginning of the Tertiary age" in one work; and according to
another modification of his view, 15,000,000 only have elapsed since the
beginning of the Eocene period;\*\*\* which, being the first of the
three Tertiary periods, leaves the student suspended between 2 1/2 and
15 millions. But if one has to hold to the former moderate figures, then
the whole incrusted age of the world would be 131,600,000 years.\*\*\*\*

As the last glacial period extended from 240,000 to 80,000 years ago
(Prof. Croll's view), therefore, man must have appeared on earth from
100 to 120,000 years ago. But, as says Prof. Winchell, with reference to
the antiquity of the Mediterranean race, "it is generally believed to
have made its appearance during the later decline of the continental
glaciers." Yet, he adds, this "does not concern, however, the antiquity
of the *Black and Brown races,* since there are numerous evidences of
their existence in more southern regions, in times remotely pre-glacial"
(p. 379).

As a specimen of geological *certainty and agreement,* these figures
also may be added. Three authorities -- Messrs. T. Belt, **F.G.S**.; J.
Croll, **F.R.S**.; and Robert Hunt, **F.R.S**., -- in estimating the
time that has elapsed since the Glacial epoch, give absolutely different
figures, namely: --

Mr. Belt ... 20,000 years.  
Mr. J. Croll ... 240,000 "  
Mr. R. Hunt ... 80,000 "

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* "World-Life," pp. 367-8.

\*\* "Climate and Time."

\*\*\* Quoted in Mr. Ch. Gould's "Mythical Monsters," p. 84.

\*\*\*\* According to Bischof, 1,004,177 years -- according to
Chevandier's calculations 672,788 years -- were required for the
so-called coal formation. "The *tertiary* strata, about 1,000 feet in
thickness, required for their development about 350,000 years." See
"Force and Matter," Buchner, J. F. Collingwood's edition.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 696 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

(But see "The Ice-Age Climate and Time," *Popular Science Review,* Vol.
xiv., p. 242.)

No wonder if Mr. Pengelly confesses that "it is at present and *perhaps
always will be* IMPOSSIBLE to reduce, even approximately, geological
time into years *or even into millenniums*" (*Vide supra,* foot-note). A
wise word of advice from the Occultists to the gentlemen geologists:
they ought to imitate the cautious example of Masons. As chronology,
they say, cannot measure the era of the creation, therefore, their
"Antient and Primitive Rite" uses 000,000,000 as the nearest approach to
reality.

The same uncertainty, contradictions and disagreement reign on all other
subjects.

The scientific authorities on the Descent of Man are again, for all
practical purposes, a delusion and a snare. There are many
*anti*-Darwinists in the British Association, and "Natural Selection"
begins to lose ground. Though at one time the saviour, which seemed to
rescue the learned theorists from a final intellectual collapse into the
abyss of fruitless hypothesis, it begins to be distrusted. Even Mr.
Huxley is showing signs of truancy to "Selection," and thinks "natural
selection *not the sole* factor": --

> "We greatly suspect that she (Nature) does make considerable jumps in
> the way of variation now and then, and that these saltations give rise
> to some of the gaps which appear to exist in the series of known
> forms" (*Review of Kolliker*'*s Criticisms*)*.*

Again, in "Fallacies of Darwinism," (p. 160), C. R. Bree, **M.D**.,
argues in this wise in considering the fatal gaps in Mr. Darwin's
theory: --

"It must be again called to mind that the intermediate forms must have
been vast in numbers. . . . . Mr. St. George Mivart believes that
*change in evolution may occur more quickly than is generally believed*;
but Mr. Darwin sticks manfully to his belief, and again tells us
'*natura non facit saltum*' " *--* wherein the Occultists are at one
with Mr. Darwin.

Esoteric teaching fully corroborates the idea of nature's slowness and
dignified progression. "Planetary impulses" are all periodical. Yet this
Darwinian theory, correct as it is in minor particulars, agrees no more
with Occultism than with Mr. Wallace, who, in his "Contributions to the
Theory of Natural Selection," shows pretty conclusively that something
*more* than "natural selection" was requisite to produce physical man.

Let us, meanwhile, examine the *scientific* objections to this
scientific theory, and see what they are.

Mr. St. George Mivart is found arguing that --

> . . . . ". . . . it will be a moderate computation to allow 25,000,000
> for the deposition of the strata down to and including the Upper
> Silurian. If,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 697 MIVART'S BILLIONS OF YEARS.

> then, the evolutionary work done during this deposition only
> represents a hundredth part of the sum total, we shall require
> 2,500,000,000 years for the complete development of the whole *animal*
> Kingdom to its present state. Even one quarter of this, however, would
> far exceed the time which physics and astronomy seem able to allow for
> the completion of this process. Finally, a difficulty exists as to the
> reason of the absence of rich fossiliferous deposits in the oldest
> strata -- if life was then as abundant and varied, as on the Darwinian
> theory it must have been. Mr. Darwin himself admits 'the case at
> present must remain inexplicable'; and this may be truly urged as a
> valid argument against the views entertained in his own work. . . . .

> "Thus, then, we find a wonderful (and *on Darwinian principles all but
> inexplicable*) absence of minutely transitional forms. All the most
> marked groups . . . . . *appear at once upon the scene.* Even the
> horse, the animal whose pedigree has been probably best preserved,
> affords no conclusive evidence of specific origin by infinitesimal
> fortuitous variations; while some forms, as the labyrinthodonts and
> trilobites, which seemed to exhibit gradual change, are shown by
> further investigation to do nothing of the sort. . . . All these
> difficulties are avoided if we admit that new forms of animal life of
> all degrees of complexity appear from time to time with comparative
> suddenness, being evolved according to laws in part depending on
> surrounding conditions, *in part* *internal* -- similar to the way in
> which crystals (and perhaps from recent researches the lowest forms of
> life) build themselves up according to the internal laws of their
> component substance and in harmony and correspondence with all
> environing influences and conditions." ("*Genesis of Species,*" p.
> 142.)

"The internal laws of their component substance." These are wise words,
and the admission of the possibility, a prudent one. But how can these
*internal laws* be ever recognized, if Occult teaching is discarded? As
a friend writes, while drawing our attention to the above speculations:
"In other words, the doctrine of Planetary *Life-Impulses* must be
admitted. Otherwise, why are species now *stereotyped,* and why do even
domesticated breeds of pigeons and many animals relapse into their
ancestral types when left to themselves?" But the teaching about
planetary life-impulses has to be clearly defined and as clearly
understood if present confusion would not be made still more perplexing.
All these difficulties would vanish as the shadows of night disappear
before the light of the rising Sun, if the following esoteric axioms
were admitted: (*a*) the enormous antiquity (and the existence) of our
planetary chain; (*b*) the actuality of the Seven Rounds; (*c*) the
separation of human races (outside the purely anthropological division)
into Seven distinct Root-Races, of which our present European Humanity
is the *fifth*; (*d*) the antiquity of Man in this (*Fourth*) Round; and
finally (*e*) that as these Races evolve from ethereality to
materiality, and from the latter back again into relative physical
tenuity of texture, so every living (so-called) *organic* species of
animals with vegetation included, changes with every new Root-Race. Were
this admitted, if even only

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 698 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

along with other, and surely, on maturer consideration, *no less
absurd,* suppositions, if Occult theories have to be considered "absurd"
at present, then every difficulty would be made away with. Surely,
Science ought to try and be *more logical* than it now is, as it can
hardly maintain the theory of man's descent from an anthropoidal
ancestor, and deny in the same breath any reasonable antiquity to that
man! Once Mr. Huxley talks of "the vast intellectual chasm between the
man and ape," and "the present enormous gulf between the two,"\* and if
he admits the necessity of extending Scientific allowances for the age
of man on earth for such slow and progressive development, then all
those men of Science, who are of his way of thinking, at any rate, ought
to come to some approximate figures, at least, and agree upon the
probable duration of those Pliocene, Miocene, and Eocene periods of
which so much is said, and about which nothing definite is known -- if
they dare not venture *beyond.* But no two scientists seem to agree.
Every period seems to be a mystery in its duration, and a thorn in the
side of the geologists; and, as just shown, they are unable to harmonize
their conclusions even with regard to the comparatively recent
geological formations. Thus, no reliance can be placed on their figures
when they do give any, for with them it is all either millions or simply
thousands of years!

That which is said may be strengthened by the confessions made by
themselves and the synopsis of it, found in that "Circle of Sciences,"
the *Encyclopaedia Britannica,* which shows the *mean* accepted in the
geological and anthropological riddles. In that work the cream of the
most authoritative opinions is skimmed off; nevertheless, we find in it
the refusal to assign any definite chronological date, even to such,
comparatively speaking, late epochs as the Neolithic era, though, for a
wonder, an age is established for the beginnings of certain geological
periods; at any rate of some few, the duration of which could hardly be
shortened any more, without an immediate conflict with facts.

Thus, it is surmised in the great *Encyclopaedia* (Vol. X., art.
"Geology," p. 227), that "100 million years have passed . . . . . since
the solidification of our Earth, when the earliest form of life appeared
upon it.\*\*"

But it seems quite as hopeless to try to convert the modern Geologists
and Ethnologists as it is to make Darwinian Naturalists perceive their
mistakes. About the Aryan Root-Race and its origins,

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* "Man's Place in Nature," p. 102*, note.*

\*\* "100,000,000 of years is probably amply sufficient for all the
requirements of Geology," says the text. In France, some *savants* do
not find it nearly "sufficient." Le Couturier claims for the same 350
million years; Buffon was satisfied with 34 millions -- but there are
those in the more modern schools who will not be content under 500
million years.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 699 THE ADEPT-ASTRONOMER.

Science knows as little as of the men from other planets. With the
exception of Flammarion and a few mystics among astronomers, even the
habitableness of other planets is mostly denied. Yet such great adept
astronomers were the Scientists of the earliest races of the Aryan
stock, that they seem to have known far more about the races of Mars and
Venus than the modern Anthropologist knows of those of the early stages
of the Earth.

Let us leave modern Science aside for a moment and turn to ancient
knowledge. As we are assured by Archaic Scientists that all such
geological cataclysms -- from the upheaval of oceans, deluges, and
shifting of continents, down to the present year's cyclones, hurricanes,
earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, tidal waves, and even the extraordinary
weather and seeming shifting of seasons which perplexes all European and
American meteorologists -- are due to, and depend on the moon and
planets; aye, that even modest and neglected constellations have the
greatest influence on the meteorological and cosmical changes, over, and
within our earth, let us give one moment's attention to our sidereal
despots and rulers of our globe and men. Modern Science denies any such
influence; archaic Science affirms it. We may see what both say with
regard to this question.

-------

**B**.

**O**N **C**HAINS OF **P**LANETS AND THEIR **P**LURALITY.

Did the Ancients know of worlds besides their own? What are the data of
the Occultists in affirming that every globe is a septenary chain of
worlds -- of which only one member is visible -- and that these are,
were, or will be, "man-bearing," just as every visible star or planet
is? What do they mean by "a moral and physical influence" of the
sidereal worlds on our globes?

Such are the questions often put to us, and they have to be considered
from every aspect. To the first of the two queries the answer is: -- We
believe it because the first law in nature is uniformity in diversity,
and the second -- analogy. "As above, so below." That time is gone by
for ever, when, although our pious ancestors believed that our earth was
in the centre of the universe, the church and her arrogant servants
could insist that we should regard as a blasphemy the supposition that
any other planet could be inhabited. Adam and Eve, the Serpent, and the
Original Sin followed by atonement through blood, have been too long in
the way, and thus was universal truth sacrificed to the insane conceit
of us little men.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 700 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

Now what are the proofs thereof? Except inferential evidence and logical
reasoning, there are none for the profane. To the Occultists, who
believe in the knowledge acquired by countless generations of Seers and
Initiates, the data offered in the Secret Books are all-sufficient. The
general public needs other proofs, however. There are some Kabalists and
even some Eastern Occultists, who, failing to find uniform evidence upon
this point in all the mystic works of the nations, hesitate to accept
the teaching. Even such "uniform evidence" will be forthcoming
presently. Meanwhile, we may approach the subject from its general
aspect, and see whether belief in it is so very absurd, as some
scientists along with other Nicodemuses would have it. Unconsciously,
perhaps, in thinking of a plurality of inhabited "*Worlds*," we imagine
them to be like the globe we inhabit and peopled by beings more or less
resembling ourselves. And in so doing we are only following a natural
instinct. Indeed, so long as the enquiry is confined to the life-history
of this globe we can speculate on this question with some profit, and
ask ourselves what were the "*Worlds*" spoken of in all the ancient
scriptures of Humanity, with some hope of at least asking an
intelligible *question.* But how do we know (*a*) what kind of Beings
inhabit the globes in general; and (*b*) whether *those* who rule
planets superior to our own, do not exercise the same influence on our
earth *consciously,* that we may exercise *unconsciously --* say on the
small planets (planetoids or asteroids) in the long run, by our cutting
the Earth to pieces, opening canals, and thereby entirely changing our
climates. Of course, like Caesar's wife, the *planetoids* cannot be
affected by our suspicion. They are too far, etc., etc. Believing in
esoteric astronomy, however, we are not so sure of that.

But when, extending our speculations beyond our planetary chain, we try
to cross the limits of the solar system, then indeed we act as do
presumptuous fools. For -- while accepting the old Hermetic axiom: "As
above, so below" -- we may well believe that as Nature on Earth displays
the most careful economy, utilizing every vile and waste thing in her
marvellous transformations, and withal *never* repeating herself -- we
may justly conclude that there is no other globe in all her infinite
systems so closely resembling this earth that the ordinary powers should
be able to imagine and reproduce its semblance and containment.\*

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* We are taught that the highest Dhyan Chohans, or Planetary Spirits
(beyond the cognizance of the law of analogy), are in ignorance of what
lies beyond the visible planetary systems, since their essence cannot
assimilate itself to that of worlds beyond our solar system. When they
reach a higher stage of evolution these other universes will be open to
them; meanwhile they have complete knowledge of all the worlds within
and beneath the limits of our solar system.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 701 STATES OF CONSCIOUSNESS.

And indeed we find in the romances as in all the so-called scientific
fictions and spiritistic *revelations* from moon, stars, and planets,
merely fresh combinations or modifications of the men and things, the
passions and forms of life with which we are familiar, when even on the
other planets of our own system nature and life are entirely different
from ours. Swedenborg was pre-eminent in inculcating such an erroneous
belief.

But even more. The ordinary man has no experience of any state of
consciousness other than that to which the physical senses link him. Men
dream; they sleep the profound sleep which is too deep for dreams to
impress the physical brain; and in these states there must still be
consciousness. How, then, while these mysteries remain unexplored, can
*we* hope to speculate with profit on the nature of globes which, in the
economy of nature, must needs belong to states of consciousness other
and quite different from *any* which man experiences here?

And this is true to the letter. For even great adepts (those initiated
of course), trained seers though they are, can claim thorough
acquaintance with the nature and appearance of planets and their
inhabitants belonging to our solar system only. They *know* that almost
all the planetary worlds are inhabited, but can have access to -- even
in spirit -- only those of our system; and they are also aware how
difficult it is, *even for them,* to put themselves into full rapport
even with the planes of consciousness *within* our system, but differing
from the states of consciousness possible on this globe; *i.e.*, on the
three planes of the chain of spheres beyond our earth. Such knowledge
and intercourse are possible to them because they have learned how to
penetrate to planes of consciousness which are closed to the perceptions
of ordinary men; but were they to communicate their knowledge, the world
would be no wiser, because it lacks that experience of other forms of
perception which alone could enable them to grasp what was told them.

Still the fact remains that most of the planets, as the stars beyond our
system, are inhabited, a fact which has been admitted by the men of
science themselves. Laplace and Herschell believed it, though they
wisely abstained from imprudent speculation; and the same conclusion has
been worked out and supported with an array of scientific considerations
by C. Flammarion, the well-known French Astronomer. The arguments he
brings forward are strictly scientific, and such as to appeal even to a
materialistic mind, which would remain unmoved by such thoughts as those
of Sir David Brewster, the famous physicist, who writes: --

"Those 'barren spirits' or 'base souls,' as the poet calls them, who
might be led to believe that the Earth is the only inhabited body in the
universe, would have no difficulty in conceiving the earth also to

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 702 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

have been destitute of inhabitants. What is more, if such minds were
acquainted with the deductions of geology, they would admit that it was
uninhabited for myriads of years; and here we come to the impossible
conclusion that during these myriads of years there was not a single
intelligent creature in the vast domains of the Universal King, and that
before the protozoic formations there existed neither plant nor animal
in all the infinity of space"!\*

Flammarion shows, in addition, that all the conditions of life -- even
as *we* know it -- are present on some at least of the planets, and
points to the fact that these conditions must be much more favourable on
them than they are on our Earth.

Thus scientific reasoning, as well as observed facts, concur with the
statements of the seer and the innate voice in man's own heart in
declaring that life -- intelligent, conscious life -- *must* exist on
other worlds than ours.

But this is the limit beyond which the ordinary faculties of man cannot
carry him. Many are the romances and tales, some purely fanciful, others
bristling with scientific knowledge, which have attempted to imagine and
describe life on other globes. But one and all, they give but some
distorted copy of the drama of life around us. It is either, with
Voltaire, the men of our own race under a microscope, or, with de
Bergerac, a graceful play of fancy and satire; but we always find that
at bottom the new world is but the one we ourselves live in. So strong
is this tendency that even great natural, though non-initiated seers,
when untrained, fall a victim to it; witness Swedenborg, who goes so far
as to dress the inhabitants of Mercury, whom he meets with in the
spirit-world, in clothes such as are worn in Europe.

Commenting on this tendency, Flammarion in his work "*Sur la Pluralite
des Mondes habites,*" says: -- "It seems as if in the eyes of those
authors who have written on this subject, the Earth were the type of the
Universe, and the Man of Earth, the type of the inhabitants of the
heavens. It is, on the contrary, much more probable, that, since the
nature of other planets is essentially varied, and the surroundings and
conditions of existence essentially different, while the forces which
preside over the creation of beings and the substances which enter into
their mutual constitution are essentially distinct, it would follow that
our mode of existence cannot be regarded as in any way applicable to
other globes.

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Since no single atom in the entire Kosmos is without life and
consciousness, how much more then its mighty globes? -- though they
remain sealed books to us men who can hardly enter even into the
consciousness of the forms of life nearest us?

We do not know *ourselves,* then how can we, if we have never been
trained to it and initiated, fancy that we can penetrate the
consciousness of the smallest of the animals around us?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 703 WORLDS MENTIONED IN THE BIBLE.

Those who have written on this subject have allowed themselves to be
dominated by terrestrial ideas, and fell therefore into error."
("*Pluralite des Mondes,*" p. 439.)

But Flammarion himself falls into the very error which he here condemns,
for he tacitly takes the conditions of life on earth as the standard by
which to determine the degree to which other planets are adapted for
habitation by "other Humanities."

Let us, however, leave these profitless and empty speculations, which,
though they seem to fill our hearts with a glow of enthusiasm and to
enlarge our mental and spiritual grasp, do but in reality cause a
factitious stimulation, and blind us more and more to our ignorance not
only of the world we inhabit, but even of the infinitude contained
within ourselves.

When, therefore, we find in the Bibles of Humanity "other worlds" spoken
of, we may safely conclude that they not only refer to other states of
our planetary chain and Earth, but also to other inhabited globes --
stars and planets; withal, that the latter were never speculated upon.
The whole of antiquity believed in the Universality of life. But no
really initiated seer of any civilized nation has ever taught that life
on other stars could be judged by the standard of terrestrial life. That
which is generally meant by "earths" and worlds, relates (*a*) to the
"rebirths" of our globe after each manvantara and a long period of
"obscuration"; and (*b*) to the periodical and entire changes of the
Earth's surface, when Continents disappear, to make room for Oceans, and
Oceans and Seas are violently displaced and sent rolling to the poles,
to cede their emplacements to new Continents.

We may begin with the Bible -- the youngest of the World-Scriptures. In
*Ecclesiastes,* chap. i., we read these words of the King-Initiate: --
"*One* generation passeth away and *another* generation cometh, but *the
earth abideth for ever,*" and again, "The thing that hath been, it *is*
that which shall be; and that which is done, *is* that which shall be
done, and there is no new thing under the sun." Under these words it is
not easy to see the reference to the successive cataclysms by which the
Races of mankind are swept away, or, going further back, to the various
transitions of the globe during the process of its formation. But if we
are told that this refers only to *our* world *as we now see it, --*
then we shall refer the reader to the New Testament, where St. Paul
speaks (in *Hebrews i.*) of the Son (the manifested Power) whom (God)
hath appointed heir of all things, by *whom also he made the worlds*
(plural.)\*

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* This relates to the *Logos* of every Cosmogony. The *unknown* Light
-- with which he is said to be co-eternal and coeval -- is reflected in
the "First-Born," the *Protogonos*; \[\[Footnote continued on next
page\]\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 704 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

This "Power" is Hokhmah or (Chochmah) the Wisdom and the Word. We shall
probably be told that by this term "worlds," the stars, heavenly bodies,
etc., were meant. But apart from the fact that "stars" were not known as
"worlds" to the ignorant editors of the Epistles, if even they must have
been known to Paul, who was an Initiate ("a Master-Builder"), we can
quote on this point an eminent theologian, Cardinal Wiseman. In Vol. I,
p. 309, of his work treating of the indefinite period of the six days --
or shall we say "too definite" -- period of the six days of creation and
the 6,000 years, he confesses that we are in total darkness upon the
meaning of that statement of St. Paul, unless we are permitted to
suppose that allusion is made in it, *i.e.,* the period which elapsed
between the *first* and *second* verses of chapter i. of *Genesis --* to
those primitive revolutions, *i.e.*, the destructions and the
re-productions (of the world) indicated in chapter i. of *Ecclesiastes*;
or, to accept, with so many others, and in its *literal sense,* the
passage (*Hebrews i.* 1,) that speaks of the creation of *worlds --* in
plural. . . . . It is very singular, he adds, that all the cosmogonies
should agree to suggest the same idea, and preserve the tradition of a
first series of revolutions, owing to which the world was destroyed and
again renewed.

Had the Cardinal studied the *Zohar* his doubts would have changed to
certitude. Thus saith *Idra Suta* (in the "Zohar," iii., 292, c.):
"There were old worlds which perished as soon as they came into
existence; worlds with and without form called *Scintillas --* for they
were like the sparks under the Smith's hammer, flying in all directions.
Some were the primordial worlds which could not continue long, because
the 'aged' -- his name be sanctified -- had not as yet assumed his
form,\* the workman was not yet the 'Heavenly man.' "\*\* Again in the
*Midrash,* written long before the *Kabala* of Simeon Ben Iochai, Rabbi
Abahu explains: -- "The Holy One, blessed be his name, has successively
formed and destroyed sundry worlds before this one\*\*\* . . . Now this
refers both to the first races (the "Kings of Edom") and to the worlds
*destroyed.*"*\*\*\*\** "Destroyed" means here what we call

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\[\[Footnote continued from previous page\]\] and the Demiurgos or the
Universal Mind directs his Divine Thought into the Chaos that under the
fashioning of minor gods will be divided into the seven oceans -- *Sapta
samudras.* It is Purusha, Ahura Mazda, Osiris, etc., and finally the
gnostic Christos, who is in the Kabala, *Hokhmah* or Wisdom the "Word."

\* The *form* of *Tikkun* or the *Protogonos,* the "first-born," *i.e.*,
the universal form and idea, had not yet been mirrored in *Chaos.*

\*\* The "Heavenly man" is Adam Kadmon -- the synthesis of the
Sephiroth, as "Manu Swayambhuva" is the synthesis of the Prajapatis.

\*\*\* Bereshith Rabba, Parsha **IX.**

\*\*\*\* This refers to the *three Rounds* that preceded our *fourth*
Round.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 705 WHO ARE THE KINGS OF EDOM?

"obscurations." This becomes evident when one reads further on the
explanation given: -- "Still when it is said that they (the worlds)
*perished,* it is only meant thereby that they (their humanities) lacked
the true form, till the human (our) form came into being, in which all
things are comprised and *which contains all forms*. . . . \* -- it does
not mean *death,* but only denotes a *sinking down from their status* .
. ." (that of worlds in activity).\*\*

When, therefore, we read of the destruction of the worlds, this word has
many meanings, which are very clear in several of the Commentaries on
the *Zohar* and Kabalistic treatises. As said elsewhere, it means not
only the destruction of many worlds which have ended their life-career,
but also that of the several continents which have disappeared, as also
their decline and geographical change of place.

The mysterious "Kings of Edom" are sometimes referred to as the "Worlds"
that had been destroyed; but it is a "cloak." The Kings who reigned in
Edom before there reigned a King in Israel, or the "Edomite Kings,"
could never symbolize the "prior worlds," but only the "attempts at men"
on this globe: the "pre-Adamite races," of which the Zohar speaks, and
which we explain as the *First* Root-Race. For, as, speaking of the six
Earths (the six "limbs" of Microprosopus) it is said that the Seventh
(our Earth) came not into the computation when the Six were created (the
six spheres above our globe in the terrestrial chain), so the first
seven Kings of Edom are left out of calculation in Genesis. By the law
of analogy and permutation, in the "Chaldean Book of Numbers," as also
in the "Books of Knowledge" and of "Wisdom," the "seven primordial
worlds" mean also the "seven primordial" races (sub-races of the First
Root-Race of the *Shadows*); and, again, the Kings of Edom are the sons
of "Esau the father of the Edomites" (Gen. xxxvi. 43); *i.e.*, Esau
represents in the Bible the race which stands between the Fourth and the
Fifth, the Atlantean and the Aryan. "Two *nations* are in thy womb,"
saith the Lord to Rebekah; and Esau was *red* and *hairy.* From verse 24
to 34, ch. xxv. of *Genesis* contains the allegorical history of the
birth of the Fifth Race.

"And the Kings of ancient days died and their chiefs (crowns) were found
no more," says *Siphrah Dzenioutha* (3). . . . "The Head of a nation
that has not been formed at the beginning in the likeness of the

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* This sentence contains a dual sense and a profound mystery in the
occult sciences the secret of which *if*, and *when*, known -- confers
tremendous powers on the Adept to *change his visible form.*

\*\* *Idra Suta,* Zohar, iii. 136, c. "A sinking down from their status"
-- is plain; from active worlds they have fallen into a temporary
obscuration -- they rest, and hence are entirely changed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 706 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

White Head: its people is not from this Form," states the *Zohar*
(iii.). . . . "Before it (the White Head, the Fifth Race or Ancient of
the Ancients) arranged itself in its (own, or present) Form . . . all
*worlds* have been destroyed; therefore it is written: And Bela, the Son
of Beor, reigned in Edom" (Gen. xxxvi.). Here the "worlds" stand for
races. "And he (such or another King of Edom) died, and another reigned
in his stead" (*ibid* 31 *et seq.*)*.*

No Kabalist who has hitherto treated of the symbolism and allegory
hidden under these "Kings of Edom" seems to have perceived more than one
aspect of it. They are neither the "*worlds* that were destroyed," nor
the "Kings that died" -- alone; but both, and much more, to treat of
which there is no space at present. Therefore, leaving the mystic
parables of the *Zohar,* we will return to the hard facts of
materialistic science; first, however, citing a few from the long list
of great thinkers who have believed in the plurality of inhabited worlds
in general, and in worlds that preceded our own. These are, the great
mathematicians Leibnitz and Bernouilli, Isaac Newton himself, as can be
read in his "Optics"; Buffon, the naturalist; Condillac, the sceptic;
Bailly, Lavater, Bernardin de St. Pierre, and, as a contrast to the two
last named -- suspected at least of mysticism -- Diderot and most of the
writers of the Encyclopaedia. Following these come Kant, the founder of
modern philosophy; the poet philosophers, Goethe, Krause, Schelling; and
many astronomers, from Bode, Fergusson and Herschell to Lalande and
Laplace, with their many disciples in more recent years.

A brilliant list of honoured names indeed; but the facts of physical
astronomy speak even more strongly in favour of the presence of life,
even organised life, on other planets. Thus in four meteorites which
fell respectively at Alais in France, the Cape of Good Hope, in Hungary,
and again in France, there was found, on analysis, graphite, a form of
carbon known to be invariably associated with organic life on this earth
of ours. And that the presence of this carbon is not due to any action
occurring within our atmosphere is shown by the fact that carbon has
been found in the very centre of a meteorite; while in one which fell at
Argueil, in the south of France, in 1857, there was found water and
turf, the latter being always formed by the decomposition of vegetable
substances.

And further, examining the astronomical conditions of the other planets,
it is easy to show that several are far better adapted for the
development of life and intelligence -- even under the conditions with
which men are acquainted -- than is our earth. For instance, on the
planet Jupiter the seasons, instead of varying between wide limits as do
ours, change by almost imperceptible degrees, and last twelve times

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 707 WHAT FLAMMARION TELLS US.

as long as ours. Owing to the inclination of its axis the seasons on
Jupiter are due almost entirely to the eccentricity of its orbit, and
hence change slowly and regularly. We shall be told, that no life is
possible on Jupiter, as it is in an incandescent state. But not all
astronomers agree with this. For instance what we say, is said by M.
Flammarion: and *he* ought to know.

On the other hand Venus would be less adapted for human life such as
exists on earth, since its seasons are more extreme and its changes of
temperature more sudden; though it is curious that the duration of the
*day* is nearly the same on the four inner planets, Mercury, Venus, the
Earth and Mars.

On Mercury, the Sun's heat and light are seven times what they are on
the Earth, and astronomy teaches that it is enveloped in a very dense
atmosphere. And as we see that life appears more active on earth in
proportion to the light and heat of the sun, it would seem more than
probable that its intensity is far, far greater on Mercury than here.

Venus, like Mercury, has a very dense atmosphere, as also has Mars and
the snows which cover their poles, the clouds which hide their surface,
the geographical configuration of their seas and continents, the
variations of seasons and climates, are all closely analogous -- at
least to the eye of the physical astronomer. But such facts and the
considerations to which they give rise, have reference only to the
possibility of the existence on these planets of human life as known on
earth. That some forms of life such as we know are *possible* on these
planets, has been long since abundantly demonstrated, and it seems
perfectly useless to go into detailed questions of the physiology, etc.,
etc., of these hypothetical inhabitants, since after all the reader can
arrive only at an imaginary extension of his familiar surroundings. It
is better to rest content with the three conclusions which M. C.
Flammarion, whom we have so largely quoted, formulates as rigorous and
exact deductions from the known *facts* and laws of science.

I. The various forces which were active in the beginning of evolution
gave birth to a great variety of beings on the several worlds; both in
the organic and inorganic kingdoms.

**II**. The animated beings were constituted from the first according to
forms and organisms in correlation with the physiological state of each
inhabited globe.

**III**. The humanities of other worlds differ from us, as much in their
inner organization as in their external physical type.

Finally the reader who may be disposed to question the validity of these
conclusions as being opposed to the Bible, may be referred to an
Appendix in M. Flammarion's work dealing in detail with this question;
since in a work like the present it seems unnecessary to point out the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 708 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

logical absurdity of those churchmen, who deny the plurality of worlds
on such grounds.

In this connection we may well recall those days when the burning zeal
of the Primitive Church opposed the doctrine of the earth's rotundity,
on the ground that the nations at the Antipodes would be outside the
pale of salvation; and again how long it took for a nascent science to
break down the idea of a solid firmament, in whose grooves the stars
moved for the special edification of terrestrial humanity.

The theory of the earth's rotation was met by a like opposition -- even
to the martyrdom of its discoverers -- because, besides depriving our
orb of its dignified central position in space, this theory produced an
appalling confusion of ideas as to the Ascension -- the terms "up" and
"down" being proved to be merely relative, thus complicating not a
little the question of the precise locality of heaven.\*

According to the best modern calculations, there are no less than
500,000,000 of stars of various magnitudes, within the range of the best
telescopes. As to the distances between them, they are incalculable. Is,
then, our microscopical Earth -- a "grain of sand on an infinite
sea-shore" -- the only centre of intelligent life? Our own Sun, itself
1,300 times larger than our planet, sinks into insignificance beside
that giant Sun -- Sirius, -- and the latter in its turn is dwarfed by
other luminaries in infinite Space. The self-centred conception of
Jehovah as the special guardian of a small and obscure semi-nomadic
tribe, is tolerable beside that which confines sentient existence to our
microscopical globe. The primary reasons were without doubt: (1)
Astronomical ignorance on the part of the early Christians, coupled with
an exaggerated appreciation of man's own importance -- a crude form of
selfishness; and (2) the dread that, if the hypothesis of millions of
other inhabited globes was accepted, the crushing rejoinder would ensue
-- "Was there then a Revelation to each world?" involving the idea of
the Son of God eternally "going the rounds" as it were. Happily it is
now unnecessary to waste time and energy in proving the possibility of
the existence of such worlds. All intelligent persons admit it. That
which now remains to be demonstrated is, that if it is once proven that
there are inhabited worlds besides our own with humanities entirely
different from each other as from our own -- as maintained in the Occult

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* In that learned and witty work, "God and his Book," by the
redoubtable "Saladin" of Agnostic repute, the amusing calculation that,
if Christ had ascended with the rapidity of a cannon ball, he would not
have reached even Sirius yet, reminds one vividly of the past. It
raises, perhaps, a not ill-founded suspicion that even our age of
scientific enlightenment may be as grossly absurd in its materialistic
negations, as the men of the middle ages were absurd and materialistic
in their religious affirmations.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 709 SCIENCE AND OCCULTISM MAY YET AGREE.

Sciences -- then the evolution of the preceding races is half proved.
For where is that physicist or geologist who is prepared to maintain
that the Earth has not changed scores of times, in the millions of years
which have elapsed in the course of its existence; and changing its
"skin," as it is called in Occultism, that the Earth has not had each
time her special humanities adapted to such atmospheric and climatic
conditions as were entailed. And if so, why should not our preceding
four and entirely different mankinds have existed and thrived before our
Adamic (Fifth Root) Race?

Before closing our debates, however, we have to examine the so-called
organic evolution more closely. Let us search well and see whether it is
quite impossible to make our Occult data and chronology agree up to a
certain point with those of Science.

-------

\[\[This page continued in next section\]\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next Section](sd2-3-05.md)

[Contents](sd2-0-co.htm#contents.md)
