##### The Secret Doctrine by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol. 2

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page 13\]\]

##### BOOK II. -- PART I.

### ANTHROPOGENESIS.

---------------------

##### STANZAS TRANSLATED WITH COMMENTARIES FROM THE SECRET BOOK OF DZYAN.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\[\[Vol. 2, Page 14\]\]

In primeval times, a maiden,  
Beauteous Daughter of the Ether,  
Passed for ages her existence  
In the great expanse of Heaven,

. . . . . . . . . . .

Seven hundred years she wandered,  
Seven hundred years she laboured,  
Ere her first-born was delivered.

. . . . . . . . . . .

Ere a beauteous duck descending,  
Hastens toward the water-mother.

. . . . . . . . . . .

Lightly on the knee she settles,  
Finds a nesting-place befitting,  
Where to lay her eggs in safety,  
Lays her eggs within, at pleasure,  
*Six,* the golden eggs she lays them,  
Then a *Seventh,* an egg of iron . . . . ."

(*Kalevala, Rune* I.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 15 STANZAS FROM THE BOOK OF DZYAN.

#### ANTHROPOGENESIS IN THE SECRET VOLUME.

(VERBATIM EXTRACTS.\*)

##### I.

1\. **T**HE **L**HA WHICH TURNS THE FOURTH IS SUBSERVIENT TO THE **L**HA
OF THE **S**EVEN, THEY WHO REVOLVE DRIVING THEIR CHARIOTS AROUND THEIR
**L**ORD, THE **O**NE **E**YE. **H**IS BREATH GAVE LIFE TO THE
**S**EVEN; IT GAVE LIFE TO THE FIRST.

2\. **S**AID THE **E**ARTH: -- "**L**ORD OF THE **S**HINING **F**ACE; MY
HOUSE IS EMPTY . . . . SEND THY SONS TO PEOPLE THIS WHEEL. **T**HOU HAST
SENT THY SEVEN SONS TO THE **L**ORD OF **W**ISDOM. **S**EVEN TIMES DOTH
HE SEE THEE NEARER TO HIMSELF, SEVEN TIMES MORE DOTH HE FEEL THEE.
**T**HOU HAST FORBIDDEN THY SERVANTS, THE SMALL RINGS, TO CATCH THY
LIGHT AND HEAT, THY GREAT BOUNTY TO INTERCEPT ON ITS PASSAGE. **S**END
NOW TO THY SERVANT THE SAME."

3\. **S**AID THE "**L**ORD OF THE **S**HINING **F**ACE": -- "**I** SHALL
SEND THEE A FIRE WHEN THY WORK IS COMMENCED. **R**AISE THY VOICE TO
OTHER **L**OKAS; APPLY TO THY FATHER, THE **L**ORD OF THE **L**OTUS, FOR
HIS SONS . . . . THY PEOPLE SHALL BE UNDER THE RULE OF THE **F**ATHERS.
**T**HY MEN SHALL BE MORTALS. **T**HE MEN OF THE **L**ORD OF **W**ISDOM,
NOT THE **L**UNAR **S**ONS, ARE IMMORTAL. **C**EASE THY COMPLAINTS.
**T**HY SEVEN SKINS ARE YET ON THEE . . . . THOU ART NOT READY. **T**HY
MEN ARE NOT READY."

4\. **A**FTER GREAT THROES SHE CAST OFF HER OLD THREE AND PUT ON HER NEW
SEVEN SKINS, AND STOOD IN HER FIRST ONE.

-------

##### II.

5\. **T**HE WHEEL WHIRLED FOR THIRTY CRORES MORE. **I**T CONSTRUCTED
RUPAS: SOFT STONES THAT HARDENED; HARD PLANTS THAT SOFTENED. **V**ISIBLE
FROM INVISIBLE, INSECTS AND SMALL LIVES. **S**HE SHOOK THEM OFF HER BACK
WHENEVER THEY OVERRAN THE MOTHER.

###### \[\[Footnote(s) -------------------------------------------------\]\]

\* Only forty-nine Slokas out of several hundred are here given. Not
every verse is translated verbatim. A periphrasis is sometimes used for
the sake of clearness and intelligibility, where a literal translation
would be quite unintelligible.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 16 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

. . . . **A**FTER THIRTY CRORES SHE TURNED ROUND. **S**HE LAY ON HER
BACK; ON HER SIDE . . . **S**HE WOULD CALL NO SONS OF **H**EAVEN, SHE
WOULD ASK NO SONS OF **W**ISDOM. **S**HE CREATED FROM HER OWN BOSOM.
**S**HE EVOLVED WATER-MEN, TERRIBLE AND BAD.

6\. **T**HE WATER-MEN TERRIBLE AND BAD SHE HERSELF CREATED FROM THE
REMAINS OF OTHERS, FROM THE DROSS AND SLIME OF HER FIRST, SECOND, AND
THIRD, SHE FORMED THEM. **T**HE **D**HYANI CAME AND LOOKED -- **T**HE
**D**HYANI FROM THE BRIGHT **F**ATHER-MOTHER, FROM THE WHITE REGIONS
THEY CAME, FROM THE ABODES OF THE IMMORTAL MORTALS.

7\. **D**ISPLEASED THEY WERE. **O**UR FLESH IS NOT THERE. **N**O FIT
RUPAS FOR OUR BROTHERS OF THE FIFTH. **N**O DWELLINGS FOR THE LIVES.
**P**URE WATERS, NOT TURBID, THEY MUST DRINK. **L**ET US DRY THEM.

8\. **T**HE FLAMES CAME. **T**HE FIRES WITH THE SPARKS; THE NIGHT FIRES
AND THE DAY FIRES. **T**HEY DRIED OUT THE TURBID DARK WATERS. **W**ITH
THEIR HEAT THEY QUENCHED THEM. **T**HE **L**HAS OF THE **H**IGH, THE
**L**HAMAYIN OF BELOW, CAME. **T**HEY SLEW THE FORMS WHICH WERE TWO- AND
FOUR-FACED. **T**HEY FOUGHT THE GOAT-MEN, AND THE DOG-HEADED MEN, AND
THE MEN WITH FISHES' BODIES.

9\. **M**OTHER-WATER, THE GREAT SEA, WEPT. **S**HE AROSE, SHE
DISAPPEARED IN THE MOON WHICH HAD LIFTED HER, WHICH HAD GIVEN HER BIRTH.

10\. **W**HEN THEY WERE DESTROYED, **M**OTHER-EARTH REMAINED BARE.
**S**HE ASKED TO BE DRIED.

-------

##### III.

11\. **T**HE **L**ORD OF THE **L**ORDS CAME. **F**ROM HER BODY HE
SEPARATED THE WATERS, AND THAT WAS **H**EAVEN ABOVE, THE FIRST
**H**EAVEN.

12\. **T**HE GREAT **C**HOHANS CALLED THE **L**ORDS OF THE **M**OON, OF
THE AIRY BODIES. "**B**RING FORTH MEN, MEN OF YOUR NATURE. **G**IVE THEM
THEIR FORMS WITHIN. **S**HE WILL BUILD COVERINGS WITHOUT.
**M**ALES-FEMALES WILL THEY BE. **L**ORDS OF THE **F**LAME ALSO . . . .
"

13\. **T**HEY WENT EACH ON HIS ALLOTTED LAND: SEVEN OF THEM EACH ON HIS
LOT. **T**HE **L**ORDS OF THE **F**LAME REMAIN BEHIND. **T**HEY WOULD
NOT GO, THEY WOULD NOT CREATE.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 17 THE SLOKAS OF "DZYAN."

##### IV.

14\. **T**HE **S**EVEN **H**OSTS, THE "**W**ILL-BORN **L**ORDS,"
PROPELLED BY THE **S**PIRIT OF **L**IFE-GIVING, SEPARATE MEN FROM
THEMSELVES, EACH ON HIS OWN ZONE.

15\. **S**EVEN TIMES SEVEN **S**HADOWS OF FUTURE MEN WERE BORN, EACH OF
HIS OWN COLOUR AND KIND. **E**ACH INFERIOR TO HIS FATHER. **T**HE
FATHERS, THE BONELESS, COULD GIVE NO LIFE TO BEINGS WITH BONES.
**T**HEIR PROGENY WERE **B**HUTA, WITH NEITHER FORM NOR MIND.
**T**HEREFORE THEY ARE CALLED THE **C**HHAYA.

16\. **H**OW ARE THE **M**ANUSHYA BORN? **T**HE **M**ANUS WITH MINDS,
HOW ARE THEY MADE? **T**HE FATHERS CALLED TO THEIR HELP THEIR OWN FIRE;
WHICH IS THE FIRE THAT BURNS IN **E**ARTH. **T**HE **S**PIRIT OF THE
**E**ARTH CALLED TO HIS HELP THE **S**OLAR **F**IRE. **T**HESE THREE
PRODUCED IN THEIR JOINT EFFORTS A GOOD **R**UPA. **I**T COULD STAND,
WALK, RUN, RECLINE, OR FLY. **Y**ET IT WAS STILL BUT A **C**HHAYA, A
SHADOW WITH NO SENSE . . . .

17\. **T**HE BREATH NEEDED A FORM; **T**HE **F**ATHERS GAVE IT. **T**HE
BREATH NEEDED A GROSS BODY; THE **E**ARTH MOULDED IT. **T**HE BREATH
NEEDED THE **S**PIRIT OF **L**IFE; THE **S**OLAR **L**HAS BREATHED IT
INTO ITS FORM. **T**HE BREATH NEEDED A **M**IRROR OF ITS **B**ODY;
"**W**E GAVE IT OUR OWN," SAID THE **D**HYANIS. **T**HE **B**REATH
NEEDED A **V**EHICLE OF **D**ESIRES; "**I**T HAS IT," SAID THE
**D**RAINER OF **W**ATERS. **B**UT **B**REATH NEEDS A MIND TO EMBRACE
THE **U**NIVERSE; "**W**E CANNOT GIVE THAT," SAID THE **F**ATHERS.
"**I** NEVER HAD IT," SAID THE **S**PIRIT OF THE **E**ARTH. "**T**HE
FORM WOULD BE CONSUMED WERE I TO GIVE IT MINE," SAID THE **G**REAT
**F**IRE . . . . **M**AN REMAINED AN EMPTY SENSELESS **B**HUTA . . . .
**T**HUS HAVE THE BONELESS GIVEN LIFE TO THOSE WHO BECAME MEN WITH BONES
IN THE THIRD.

-------

##### V.

18\. **T**HE FIRST WERE THE SONS OF **Y**OGA. **T**HEIR SONS THE
CHILDREN OF THE **Y**ELLOW **F**ATHER AND THE **W**HITE **M**OTHER.

19\. **T**HE **S**ECOND **R**ACE WAS THE PRODUCT BY BUDDING AND

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 18 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

EXPANSION, THE **A**-**S**EXUAL FROM THE **S**EXLESS\* -- **T**HUS WAS,
**O** **L**ANOO, THE **S**ECOND **R**ACE PRODUCED.

20\. **T**HEIR FATHERS WERE THE SELF-BORN. **T**HE SELF-BORN, THE
**C**HHAYA FROM THE BRILLIANT BODIES OF THE **L**ORDS, THE **F**ATHERS,
THE **S**ONS OF **T**WILIGHT.

21\. **W**HEN THE **R**ACE BECAME OLD, THE OLD WATERS MIXED WITH THE
FRESHER WATERS. **W**HEN ITS DROPS BECAME TURBID, THEY VANISHED AND
DISAPPEARED IN THE NEW STREAM, IN THE HOT STREAM OF LIFE. **T**HE OUTER
OF THE FIRST BECAME THE INNER OF THE SECOND. **T**HE OLD **W**ING BECAME
THE NEW **S**HADOW, AND THE **S**HADOW OF THE **W**ING.

-------

##### VI.

22\. **T**HEN THE SECOND EVOLVED THE **E**GG-BORN, THE THIRD. **T**HE
SWEAT GREW, ITS DROPS GREW, AND THE DROPS BECAME HARD AND ROUND. **T**HE
**S**UN WARMED IT; THE **M**OON COOLED AND SHAPED IT; THE WIND FED IT
UNTIL ITS RIPENESS. **T**HE WHITE SWAN FROM THE STARRY VAULT
OVERSHADOWED THE BIG DROP. **T**HE EGG OF THE FUTURE RACE, THE
**M**AN-SWAN OF THE LATER THIRD. **F**IRST MALE-FEMALE, THEN MAN AND
WOMAN.

23\. **T**HE SELF-BORN WERE THE **C**HHAYAS: THE **S**HADOWS FROM THE
BODIES OF THE **S**ONS OF **T**WILIGHT.

-------

##### VII.

24\. **T**HE **S**ONS OF **W**ISDOM, THE **S**ONS OF **N**IGHT, READY
FOR REBIRTH, CAME DOWN, THEY SAW THE VILE FORMS OF THE **F**IRST
**T**HIRD, "**W**E CAN CHOOSE," SAID THE **L**ORDS, "WE HAVE WISDOM."
**S**OME ENTERED THE **C**HHAYA. **S**OME PROJECTED THE **S**PARK.
**S**OME DEFERRED TILL THE **F**OURTH. **F**ROM THEIR OWN **R**UPA THEY
FILLED THE **K**AMA. **T**HOSE WHO ENTERED BECAME **A**RHATS. **T**HOSE
WHO RECEIVED BUT A SPARK, REMAINED DESTITUTE OF KNOWLEDGE; THE SPARK
BURNED LOW. **T**HE THIRD REMAINED MIND-LESS. **T**HEIR **J**IVAS WERE
NOT

###### \[\[Footnote(s) -------------------------------------------------\]\]

\* The idea and the spirit of the sentence is here given, as a verbal
translation would convey very little to the reader.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 19 THE SLOKAS OF "DZYAN."

READY. **T**HESE WERE SET APART AMONG THE **S**EVEN. **T**HEY BECAME
NARROW-HEADED. **T**HE **T**HIRD WERE READY. "**I**N THESE SHALL WE
DWELL," SAID THE **L**ORDS OF THE **F**LAME.

25\. **H**OW DID THE **M**ANASA, THE **S**ONS OF **W**ISDOM, ACT?
**T**HEY REJECTED THE **S**ELF-BORN. **T**HEY ARE NOT READY. **T**HEY
SPURNED THE **S**WEAT-BORN. **T**HEY ARE NOT QUITE READY. **T**HEY WOULD
NOT ENTER THE FIRST **E**GG-BORN.

26\. **W**HEN THE **S**WEAT-BORN PRODUCED THE **E**GG-BORN, THE TWOFOLD
AND THE MIGHTY, THE POWERFUL WITH BONES, THE **L**ORDS OF **W**ISDOM
SAID: "**N**OW SHALL WE CREATE."

27\. **T**HE **T**HIRD **R**ACE BECAME THE **V**AHAN OF THE **L**ORDS OF
**W**ISDOM. **I**T CREATED "**S**ONS OF **W**ILL AND **Y**OGA," BY
**K**RIYASAKTI IT CREATED THEM, THE **H**OLY **F**ATHERS, **A**NCESTORS
OF THE **A**RHATS. .

-------

##### VIII.

28\. **F**ROM THE DROPS OF SWEAT; FROM THE RESIDUE OF THE SUBSTANCE;
MATTER FROM DEAD BODIES OF MEN AND ANIMALS OF THE WHEEL BEFORE; AND FROM
CAST-OFF DUST, THE FIRST ANIMALS WERE PRODUCED.

29\. **A**NIMALS WITH BONES, DRAGONS OF THE DEEP, AND FLYING **S**ARPAS
WERE ADDED TO THE CREEPING THINGS. **T**HEY THAT CREEP ON THE GROUND GOT
WINGS. **T**HEY OF THE LONG NECKS IN THE WATER BECAME THE PROGENITORS OF
THE FOWLS OF THE AIR.

30\. **D**URING THE THIRD **R**ACE THE BONELESS ANIMALS GREW AND
CHANGED: THEY BECAME ANIMALS WITH BONES, THEIR **C**HHAYAS BECAME SOLID.

31\. **T**HE ANIMALS SEPARATED THE FIRST. **T**HEY BEGAN TO BREED.
**T**HE TWO-FOLD MAN SEPARATED ALSO. **H**E SAID: "**L**ET US AS THEY;
LET US UNITE AND MAKE CREATURES." **T**HEY DID.

32\. **A**ND THOSE WHICH HAD NO SPARK TOOK HUGE SHE-ANIMALS UNTO THEM.
**T**HEY BEGAT UPON THEM DUMB **R**ACES. **D**UMB THEY WERE THEMSELVES.
**B**UT THEIR TONGUES UNTIED. **T**HE TONGUES OF THEIR PROGENY REMAINED
STILL. **M**ONSTERS THEY BRED. **A** RACE OF CROOKED RED-HAIR-COVERED
MONSTERS GOING ON ALL FOURS. **A** DUMB RACE TO KEEP THE SHAME UNTOLD.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 20 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

##### IX.

33\. **S**EEING WHICH, THE **L**HAS WHO HAD NOT BUILT MEN, WEPT, SAYING:
--

34\. "**T**HE **A**MANASA HAVE DEFILED OUR FUTURE ABODES. **T**HIS IS
**K**ARMA. **L**ET US DWELL IN THE OTHERS. **L**ET US TEACH THEM BETTER,
LEST WORSE SHOULD HAPPEN. **T**HEY DID . . . .

35\. **T**HEN ALL MEN BECAME ENDOWED WITH **M**ANAS. **T**HEY SAW THE
SIN OF THE MINDLESS.

36\. **T**HE **F**OURTH **R**ACE DEVELOPED SPEECH.

37\. **T**HE **O**NE BECAME **T**WO; ALSO ALL THE LIVING AND CREEPING
THINGS THAT WERE STILL ONE, GIANT FISH-BIRDS AND SERPENTS WITH
SHELL-HEADS.

-------

##### X.

38\. **T**HUS TWO BY TWO ON THE SEVEN ZONES, THE **T**HIRD **R**ACE GAVE
BIRTH TO THE **F**OURTH-**R**ACE MEN; THE GODS BECAME NO-GODS; THE SURA
BECAME A-SURA.

39\. **T**HE FIRST, ON EVERY ZONE, WAS MOON-COLOURED; THE SECOND YELLOW
LIKE GOLD; THE THIRD RED; THE FOURTH BROWN, WHICH BECAME BLACK WITH SIN.
**T**HE FIRST SEVEN HUMAN SHOOTS WERE ALL OF ONE COMPLEXION. **T**HE
NEXT SEVEN BEGAN MIXING.

40\. **T**HEN THE **F**OURTH BECAME TALL WITH PRIDE. **W**E ARE THE
KINGS, IT WAS SAID; WE ARE THE GODS.

41\. **T**HEY TOOK WIVES FAIR TO LOOK UPON. **W**IVES FROM THE MINDLESS,
THE NARROW-HEADED. **T**HEY BRED MONSTERS. **W**ICKED DEMONS, MALE AND
FEMALE, ALSO **K**HADO (DAKINI), WITH LITTLE MINDS.

42\. THEY BUILT TEMPLES FOR THE HUMAN BODY. **M**ALE AND FEMALE THEY
WORSHIPPED. **T**HEN THE **T**HIRD **E**YE ACTED NO LONGER.

-------

##### XI.

43\. **T**HEY BUILT HUGE CITIES. **O**F RARE EARTHS AND METALS THEY
BUILT, AND OUT OF THE FIRES VOMITED, OUT OF THE WHITE STONE OF

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 21 THE SLOKAS OF "DZYAN."

THE MOUNTAINS AND OF THE BLACK STONE, THEY CUT THEIR OWN IMAGES IN THEIR
SIZE AND LIKENESS, AND WORSHIPPED THEM.

44\. **T**HEY BUILT GREAT IMAGES NINE YATIS HIGH, THE SIZE OF THEIR
BODIES. **I**NNER FIRES HAD DESTROYED THE LAND OF THEIR FATHERS. **T**HE
WATER THREATENED THE FOURTH.

45\. **T**HE FIRST GREAT WATERS CAME. **T**HEY SWALLOWED THE SEVEN GREAT
ISLANDS.

46\. **A**LL **H**OLY SAVED, THE **U**NHOLY DESTROYED. **W**ITH THEM
MOST OF THE HUGE ANIMALS, PRODUCED FROM THE SWEAT OF THE EARTH.

-------

##### XII.

47\. **F**EW MEN REMAINED: SOME YELLOW, SOME BROWN AND BLACK, AND SOME
RED REMAINED. **T**HE MOON-COLOURED WERE GONE FOREVER.

48\. **T**HE FIFTH PRODUCED FROM THE **H**OLY STOCK REMAINED; IT WAS
RULED OVER BY THE FIRST DIVINE **K**INGS.

49\. . . . . **W**HO RE-DESCENDED, WHO MADE PEACE WITH THE FIFTH, WHO
TAUGHT AND INSTRUCTED IT. . . . . .

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next Section](sd1-1-02)

[Contents](sd2-0-co.htm#contents)
