##### *The Secret Doctrine* by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol. 2

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page 447\]\]

#### BOOK II., PART II.

### THE

### ARCHAIC SYMBOLISM OF THE

### WORLD-RELIGIONS.

---------

> "The narratives of the Doctrine are its cloak. The simple look only at
> the garment -- that is, upon the narrative of the Doctrine; more they
> know not. The instructed, however, see not merely the cloak, but what
> the cloak covers.  
> (The ***Z****OHAR,* iii., 152; Franck, 119.)

> "**T**HE **M**YSTERIES OF THE **F**AITH (are) NOT TO BE DIVULGED TO
> ALL. . . . . It is requisite to hide in a mystery the wisdom
> spoken."  
> (*Clem. Alex.,* "Strom." 12.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page 448\]\]

#### CONTENTS.

--------

ยง **E**SOTERIC **T**ENETS **C**ORROBORATED IN EVERY **S**CRIPTURE ...
449

------

XVI\. **A**DAM-**A**DAMI ... 452

------

XVII\. **T**HE "**H**OLY OF **H**OLIES" -- **I**TS **D**EGRADATION ...
459

------

XVIII\. **O**N THE **M**YTH OF THE "**F**ALLEN **A**NGEL," IN ITS
**V**ARIOUS **P**HASES ... 475

> The Evil Spirit: Who and What? ... 475

> The Gods of Light proceed from the Gods of Darkness ... 483

> The Many Meanings of the "War in Heaven" ... 492

-------

XIX\. **I**S **P**LEROMA **S**ATAN'S **L**AIR? ... 506

-------

XX\. **P**ROMETHEUS, THE **T**ITAN ... 519

> His Origin in Ancient India ... 519

-------

XXI\. ENOICHION ... 529

------

XXII\. **T**HE **S**YMBOLISM OF THE **M**YSTERY-**N**AMES **I**AO AND
**J**EHOVAH, WITH THEIR **R**ELATION TO THE **C**ROSS AND **C**IRCLE ...
536

> Cross and Circle ... 545

> The Fall of the Cross into Matter ... 553

------

XXIII\. **T**HE **U**PANISHADS IN **G**NOSTIC **L**ITERATURE ... 563

------

XXIV\. **T**HE **C**ROSS AND THE **P**YTHAGOREAN **D**ECADE ... 573

-------

XXV\. **T**HE **M**YSTERIES OF THE **H**EBDOMAD ... 590

> Saptaparna ... 590

> The Tetraktis in relation to the Heptagon ... 598

> The Septenary Element in the Vedas. It corroborates the Occult
> Teaching concerning the Seven Globes and the Seven Races ... 605

> The Septenary in the Exoteric Works ... 611

> Seven in Astronomy, Science and Magic ... 618

> The Seven Souls of the Egyptologists ... 630

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page 449\]\]

### BOOK II. -- PART II.

--------

#### ESOTERIC TENETS CORROBORATED IN EVERY SCRIPTURE.

**I**N view of the strangeness of the teachings, and of many a doctrine
which from the modern scientific stand-point must seem absurd, some
necessary and additional explanations have to be made. The theories
contained in the Second Part of the Stanzas are even more difficult to
assimilate than those which are embodied in Vol. 1, on Cosmogony.
Theology, therefore, has to be questioned here, as Science will be in
the *Addenda* (Part **III**.). Since our doctrines differ so widely from
the current ideas of both Materialism and Theology, the Occultists must
be ever prepared to repel the attacks of either or of both.

The reader can never be too often reminded that, as the abundant
quotations from various old Scriptures prove, these teachings are as old
as the world; and that the present work is a simple attempt to render,
in modern language and in a phraseology with which the scientific and
educated student is familiar, archaic Genesis and History as taught in
certain Asiatic centres of esoteric learning. They must be accepted or
rejected on their own merits, fully or partially; but not before they
have been carefully compared with the corresponding theological dogmas
and the modern scientific theories and speculations.

One feels a serious doubt whether, with all its intellectual acuteness,
our age is destined to discover in each western nation even one solitary
*uninitiated* scholar or philosopher capable of fully comprehending the
spirit of archaic philosophy. Nor can one be expected to do so, before
the real meaning of these terms, the Alpha and the *Omega* of Eastern
esotericism, the words *Sat* and *Asat, --* so freely used in the
Rig-Veda, and elsewhere -- is thoroughly assimilated. Without this key
to the Aryan Wisdom, the Cosmogony of the Rishis and the Arhats is in
danger of remaining a dead letter to the average Orientalist. *Asat is*
not merely the negation of *Sat,* nor is it the "not yet existing"; for
*Sat* is in itself neither the "existent," nor "being." **S**AT is the
immutable, the ever present, changeless and eternal root, from and
through which all proceeds. But it is far more than the potential force
in the seed, which propels onward the process of development, or what is
now called evolution. It is the ever becoming, though the never
manifesting.\* *Sat*

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* The Hegelian doctrine, which identifies *Absolute Being* or "Be-ness"
with "non-Being," and represents the Universe as an *eternal becoming,*
is identical with the Vedanta philosophy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 450 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

is born from *Asat*, and **A**SAT is begotten by *Sat:* the perpetual
motion in a circle, truly; yet a circle that can be squared only at the
supreme Initiation, at the threshold of Paranirvana.

Barth started a reflection on the *Rig-Veda* which was meant for a stern
criticism, an unusual, therefore, as was thought, an original view of
this archaic volume. It so happened, however, that, while criticising,
that scholar revealed a truth, without being himself aware of its full
importance. He premises by saying that "neither in the language nor in
the thought of the Rig-Veda" has he "been able to discover that quality
*of primitive natural simplicity,* which so many are fain to see in it."
Barth had Max Muller in his mind's eye when writing this. For the famous
Oxford professor has throughout characterised the hymns of the Rig Veda,
as the unsophisticated expression of the religious feeling of a pastoral
innocent people. "In the Vedic hymns the ideas and myths appear in their
simplest and freshest form;" -- the Sanskrit scholar thinks. Barth is of
a different opinion, however.

So divided and personal are the opinions of Sanskritists as to the
importance and intrinsic value of the Rig Veda, that those opinions
become entirely biassed whichever way they incline. Thus Mr. Max Muller
declares that: "Nowhere is the wide distance which separates the ancient
poems of India from the most ancient literature of Greece more clearly
felt, than when we compare the growing myths of the Veda with the full
grown and decayed myths on which the poetry of Homer is founded. The
Veda is the real Theogony of the *Aryan races,* while that of Hesiod is
a distorted caricature of the original image." This is a sweeping
assertion, and perhaps rather unjust in its general application. But why
not try to account for it? Orientalists cannot do so, for they reject
the chronology of the Secret Doctrine, and could hardly admit the fact
that between the Rig-Vedic hymns and Hesiod's Theogony tens of thousands
of years have elapsed. So they fail to see that the Greek myths are no
longer the primitive symbolical language of the Initiates, the disciples
of the gods-Hierophants, the divine ancient "sacrificers," and that
disfigured by the distance, and encumbered by the exuberant growth of
human *profane* fancy, they now stand like distorted images of stars in
running waves. But if Hesiod's Cosmogony and Theogony are to be viewed
as caricatures of the original images, how much more so the myths in the
Hebrew *Genesis* in the sight of those, for whom they are no more divine
revelation or the word of God, than Hesiod's Theogony is for Mr.
Gladstone.

"The poetry it (the Rig Veda) contains appears to me, on the contrary,"
says Barth "to be of a singularly *refined* character and

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 451 THE VEDAS WRITTEN BY INITIATES.

artificially elaborated, *full of allusions and reticences,* of
*pretensions* (?) to mysticism and theosophic insight, and the manner of
its expression is such as reminds one more frequently of the phraseology
in use *among* *certain small groups of initiated,* than the poetic
language of a large community." ("*The Religions of India,*" p. xiii.)

We will not stop to enquire of the critic what he can know of the
phraseology in use among the "initiated," or whether he belongs himself
to such a group; for, in the latter case, he would hardly have used such
language. But the above shows the remarkable disagreement between
scholars even with regard to the *external* character of the Rig Veda.
What, then, can any of the modern Sanskritists know about its *internal*
or esoteric meaning, beyond the correct inference of Barth, that *this
Scripture has been compiled by* **I**NITIATES?

The whole of the present work is an endeavour to prove this truth. The
ancient adepts have solved the great problems of science, however
unwilling modern materialism may be to admit the fact. The mysteries of
Life and Death *were* fathomed by the great master-minds of antiquity;
and if they have preserved them in secresy and silence, it is because
these problems formed part of the sacred mysteries; and, secondly,
because they must have remained incomprehensible to the vast majority of
men then, as they do now. If such teachings are still regarded as
chimeras by our opponents in philosophy, it may be a consolation to the
Theosophists to learn, on good proofs, that the speculations of modern
psychologists -- whether serious Idealists, like Mr. Herbert Spencer, or
wool-gathering pseudo-Idealists -- are far more chimerical. Indeed,
instead of resting on the firm foundation of facts in Nature, they are
the unhealthy will-o'-the-wisps of materialistic imagination, of the
brains that evolved them -- and no more. While they deny, we affirm; and
our affirmation is corroborated by almost all the sages of antiquity.
Believing in Occultism and a host of invisible Potencies for good
reasons, we say: *Certus sum, scio quod credidi;* to which our critics
reply: *Credat Judaeus Apella.* Neither is converted by the other, nor
does such result affect even our little planet. *E pur se muove!*

Nor is there any need of proselytizing. As remarked by the wise Cicero,
"Time destroys the speculations of man, but it confirms the judgment of
nature." Let us bide our time. Meanwhile, it is not in the human
constitution to witness in silence the destruction of one's gods,
whether they be true or false. And as theology and materialism have
combined together to destroy the old gods of antiquity and seek to
disfigure every old philosophical conception, it is but just that the
lovers of old wisdom should defend their position, by proving that the
whole arsenal of the two is, at best, formed of new weapons made out of
very old material.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next Section](sd2-2-02.md)

[Contents](sd2-0-co.htm#contents.md)
