##### The Secret Doctrine by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol. 2

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 227 THE MOON-COLOURED RACE.

#### STANZA X. THE HISTORY OF THE FOURTH RACE.

-------

> §§ (38) The Birth of the Fourth, Atlantean Race. (39) The sub-races of
> the Fourth Humanity begin to divide and interblend; they form the
> first mixed races of various colours. (40) The superiority of the
> Atlantean over other races. (41) They fall into sin and beget children
> and monsters. (42) The first germs of Anthropomorphism and sexual
> religion. They lose their "third Eye."

---------------------

38\. **T**HUS TWO BY TWO, ON THE SEVEN ZONES, THE **T**HIRD (*Race*)
GAVE BIRTH TO THE **F**OURTH (*Race men*). **T**HE GODS BECAME NO-GODS
(*Sura became a-Sura*) (*a*).

-------

39\. **T**HE **F**IRST (*Race*) **O***N* EVERY ZONE WAS MOON-COLOURED
(*yellow-white*); THE **S**ECOND, YELLOW, LIKE GOLD; THE **T**HIRD, RED;
THE **F**OURTH, BROWN, WHICH BECAME BLACK WITH SIN.\* **T**HE FIRST
SEVEN (*human*) SHOOTS WERE ALL OF ONE COMPLEXION IN THE BEGINNING.
**T**HE NEXT (*seven, the sub-races*) BEGAN MIXING THEIR COLOURS (*b*).

(*a*) To understand this verse 38, it must be read together with the
three verses of Stanza **IX**. Up to this point of evolution man belongs
more to metaphysical than physical nature. It is only after the
so-called **F**ALL*,* that the races began to develop rapidly into a
purely human shape. And, in order that he may correctly comprehend the
full meaning of the Fall, so mystic and transcendental is it in its real
significance, the student must be told at once the details which
preceded

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Strictly speaking, it is only from the time of the Atlantean, brown
and yellow giant Races, that one ought to speak of MAN, since it was the
Fourth race only which was the first *completely human species,* however
much larger in size than we are now. In "Man" (by two chelas), all that
is said of the Atlanteans is quite correct. It is chiefly that race
which became "black with sin" that brought the divine names of the
Asuras, the Rakshasas and the Daityas into disrepute, and passed them on
to posterity as the names of fiends. For, as said, the Suras (gods) or
Devas having incarnated in the wise men of Atlantis, the names of
*Asuras and Rakshasas* were given to the Atlanteans; which names, owing
to their incessant conflicts with the last remnants of the Third Race
and the "Sons of Will and Yoga," have led to the later allegories about
them in the Puranas. "Asura was the generic appellation of all the
Atlanteans who were the enemies of the spiritual heroes of the Aryans
(gods)." ("Man," p. 97.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 228 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

this event; of which event modern theology has formed a pivot on which
its most pernicious and absurd dogmas and beliefs are made to turn.

The archaic commentaries explain, as the reader must remember, that, of
the Host of Dhyanis, whose turn it was to incarnate as the *Egos* of the
immortal, but, *on this plane,* *senseless* monads -- that some "obeyed"
(the law of evolution) immediately when the men of the Third Race became
physiologically and physically ready, *i.e*., when they had separated
into sexes. These were those early conscious Beings who, now adding
conscious knowledge and will to their inherent Divine purity, *created*
by *Kriyasakti* the semi-Divine man, who became the seed on earth for
future adepts. Those, on the other hand, who, jealous of their
intellectual freedom (unfettered as it then was by the bonds of matter),
said: -- "We can choose . . . we have wisdom" (See verse 24), and
incarnated far later -- these had their first Karmic punishment prepared
for them. They got bodies (physiologically) inferior to their astral
models, because their *chhayas* had belonged to progenitors of an
inferior degree in the seven classes. As to those "Sons of Wisdom" who
had "deferred" their incarnation till the Fourth Race, which was already
tainted (physiologically) with sin and impurity, they produced a
terrible cause, the Karmic result of which weighs on them to this day.
It was produced in themselves, and they became the carriers of that seed
of iniquity for aeons to come, because the bodies they had to inform had
become defiled through their own procrastination. (*See verses 32,* 36.)

This was the "Fall of the angels," because of their rebellion against
Karmic Law. The "fall of *man*" was no fall, *for he was irresponsible.*
But "Creation" having been invented on the dualistic system as the
"prerogative of God alone," the legitimate *attribute* patented by
theology in the name of an *infinite* deity of their own making, this
power had to be regarded as "Satanic," and as an usurpation of divine
rights. Thus, the foregoing, in the light of such narrow views, must
naturally be considered as a terrible slander on man, "created in the
image of God," a still more dreadful blasphemy in the face of the
dead-letter dogma. "Your doctrine," the Occultists were already told,
"makes of man, created out of dust in the likeness of his God, a vehicle
of the Devil, from the first." "Why did you make of your god a devil --
both, moreover, created *in your own image?*" is our reply. The
*esoteric* interpretation of the Bible, however, sufficiently refutes
this slanderous invention of theology; the Secret Doctrine must some day
become the just Karma of the Churches -- more anti-Christian than the
representative assemblies of the most confirmed Materialists and
Atheists.

The old doctrine about the true meaning of the "Fallen Angels," in its
anthropological and evolutionary sense, is contained in the Kabala,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 229 THE MYSTERIES AMONG THE MAYAS.

and explains the Bible. It is found pre-eminent in *Genesis* when the
latter is read in a spirit of research for truth, with no eye to dogma,
and in no mood of preconception. This is easily proven. In *Genesis*
(vi.) the "Sons of God" -- *B*'*ne Aleim* -- become enamoured of the
daughters of men, marry, and reveal to their wives the mysteries
unlawfully learnt by them in heaven, according to Enoch; and this is the
"Fall of Angels."\* But what is, in reality, the "Book of Enoch" itself,
from which the author of *Revelation* and even the St. John of the
Fourth Gospel have so profusely quoted? (*e.g.*, verse 8, in chapter 10,
about all who have come before Jesus, being "thieves and robbers.")
Simply a *Book of Initiation,* giving out in allegory and cautious
phraseology the programme of certain archaic mysteries performed in the
*inner* temples. The author of the "Sacred Mysteries among the Mayas and
Quiches" very justly suggests that the so-called "Visions" of Enoch
relate to his (Enoch's) experience at initiation, and what he learned in
the mysteries; while he very erroneously states his opinion that Enoch
had learned them before being converted

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* In general, the so-called *orthodox* Christian conceptions about the
"fallen" angels or Satan, are as remarkable as they are absurd. About a
dozen could be cited, of the most various character as to details, and
all from the pen of educated lay authors, "University graduates" of the
present quarter of our century. Thus, the author of "Earth's Earliest
Ages," J. H. Pember, **M.A**., devotes a thick volume to proving
Theosophists, Spiritualists, Metaphysicians, Agnostics, Mystics, poets,
and every contemporary author on oriental speculations, to be the
devoted servants of the "Prince of the Air," and irretrievably damned.
He describes Satan and his Antichrist in this wise: --

"Satan is the 'Anointed Cherub' of old. . . . God created Satan, the
fairest and wisest of all his creatures in this part of His Universe,
and made him Prince of the World, and of the Power of the Air. . . . He
was placed in an Eden, which was both far anterior to the Eden of
Genesis. . . . and of an altogether different and more substantial
character, resembling the New Jerusalem. Thus, Satan being perfect in
wisdom, and beauty, His vast empire is our earth, if not the whole solar
system. . . . Certainly no other angelic power of greater or even equal
dignity has been revealed to us. The *Archangel Michael himself is
quoted by Jude as preserving towards the Prince of Darkness the respect
due to a superior, however wicked he may be, until God has formally
commanded* his deposition." Then we are informed that "Satan was from
the moment of his creation *surrounded by the insignia of royalty*" (!
!): that he "awoke to consciousness to find the air filled with the
rejoicing music of those whom God had appointed . . . ." Then the Devil
"*passes from the royalty to his priestly dignity*" (! ! !) "Satan *was
also a priest of the Most High,*" etc., etc. And now -- "Antichrist will
be Satan incarnate" (pp. 56-59). The Pioneers of the coming Apollyon
have already appeared -- they are the Theosophists, the Occultists, the
authors of the "Perfect Way," of "Isis Unveiled," of the "Mystery of the
Ages," and even of the "**L**ight of **A**sia"! ! The author notes the
"*avowed origin*" (of Theosophy) *from the* "*descending angels,*" from
the "Nephilim," or the angels of the **VI**th ch. of *Genesis,* and the
Giants. He ought to note his own descent from them also, as the present
Secret Doctrine endeavours to show -- unless he refuses to belong to the
present humanity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 230 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

to Christianity (!!); furthermore, he believes that this book was
written "at the beginning of the Christian era, when . . . the customs
and religion of the Egyptians fell into decadency"! This is hardly
possible, since Jude quotes in his epistle from the "Book of Enoch"
(verse 14); and, therefore, as Archbishop Laurence, the translator of
the Book of Enoch from the Ethiopic version, remarks, it "could not have
been the production of a writer who lived after . . . or was even coeval
with" the writers of the New Testament: unless, indeed, Jude and the
Gospels, and all that follows, was also a production of the already
established Church -- which, some critics say, is not impossible. But we
are now concerned with the "fallen Angels" of Enoch, rather than with
Enoch himself.

In Indian exotericism, these angels (*Asuras*) are also denounced as
"the enemies of the gods;" those who oppose sacrificial worship offered
to the latter. In Christian theology they are broadly referred to as the
"Fallen Spirits," the heroes of various conflicting and contradictory
legends about them, gathered from Pagan sources. The *coluber tortuosus*
"the tortuous snake," a qualification said to have originated with the
Jews, had quite another meaning before the Roman Church distorted it: --
among others, *a purely astronomical meaning.*

The "Serpent" fallen from on high, "*deorsum fluens,*" was credited with
the possession of the Keys of the Empire of the Dead, \[\[*tou thanatus
arche*\]\] to that day, when Jesus saw it "falling like lightning from
heaven" (*Luke* x. 17, 18), the Roman Catholic interpretation of
*cadebat ut fulgur* to the contrary, notwithstanding; and it means
indeed that even "the devils are subject" to the *Logos -- who* is
**W**ISDOM, but who, as the opponent of ignorance, is Satan or Lucifer
at the same time. This remark refers to divine Wisdom falling like
lightning on, and quickening the intellects of those who fight the
devils of ignorance and superstition. Up to the time when Wisdom, in the
shape of the incarnating Spirits of **M**AHAT, descended from on high to
animate and call the Third Race to real conscious life, humanity -- if
it can be so called in its animal, senseless state --was of course
doomed to -*- moral* as well as to physical death. The Angels *fallen
into generation* are referred to metaphorically *as Serpents and Dragons
of Wisdom.* On the other hand, regarded in the light of the **L**OGOS,
the Christian Saviour, like Krishna, whether as man or logos, may be
said to have saved those who believed in the secret teachings from
"eternal death," to have conquered the Kingdom of Darkness, or Hell, as
every Initiate does. This in the human, terrestrial form of the
Initiates, and also because the *logos* is Christos, that principle of
our inner nature which develops in us into the Spiritual Ego -- the
Higher-Self -- being formed of the indissoluble union *of Buddhi* (the
sixth) and the spiritual efflorescence of *Manas, the*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 231 SATANIC MYTHS.

fifth principle.\* "The Logos is passive Wisdom in Heaven and Conscious,
Self-Active Wisdom on Earth," we are taught. It is the Marriage of
"Heavenly man" with the "Virgin of the World" --Nature, as described in
*Pymander*; the result of which is their progeny -- immortal man. It is
this which is called in St. John's Revelation the marriage of the lamb
with his bride. (xix. 7.) That "wife" is now identified with the Church
of Rome owing to the arbitrary interpretations of her votaries. But they
seem to forget that her *linen* may be fine and white *outwardly* (like
the "whitened sepulchre"), but that the rottenness she is inwardly
filled with, is not "the righteousness of Saints" (*v*. 8. *ibid*)*,*
but rather the blood of the Saints she has "slain upon the earth"
(*chap*. xviii. 24.) Thus the remark made by the great Initiate (*in
Luke* x. 18) -- one that referred allegorically to the ray of
Enlightenment and reason, *falling like lightning* from on high into the
hearts and *minds* of the converts to that old wisdom-religion then
presented in a new form by the wise Galilean Adeptt\*\* -- was distorted
out of recognition (as was his own personality), and made to fit in with
one of the most cruel as the most pernicious of all theological dogmas.
(*Vide at the end of Stanza XI.* "**S**ATANIC **M**YTHS.")

But if Western theology alone holds the patent for, and copyright of
**S**ATAN -- in all the dogmatic horror of that fiction -- other
nationalities

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* It is not correct to refer to Christ -- as some theosophists do -- as
the sixth principle in man -- *Buddhi.* The latter *per se* is a passive
and latent principle, the spiritual vehicle of Atman, inseparable from
the manifested Universal Soul. It is only in union and in conjunction
with *Self-consciousness* that *Buddhi* becomes the Higher Self and the
divine, discriminating Soul. *Christos* is the seventh principle, if
anything.

\*\* To make it plainer, any one who reads that passage in *Luke,* will
see that the remark follows the report of the *seventy,* who rejoice
that "even the devils (the spirit of controversy and reasoning, or the
opposing power, since Satan means simply "*adversary*" or *opponent*)
are subject unto us through thy name." (*Luke* x. 17.) Now, "thy name"
means the name of Christos, or Logos, or the spirit of true divine
wisdom, as distinct from the spirit of intellectual or mere
materialistic reasoning -- the HIGHER SELF in short. And when Jesus
remarks to this that he has "beheld Satan as lightning fall from
heaven," it is a mere statement of his clairvoyant powers, notifying
them that he already knew it, and a reference to the incarnation of the
divine ray (the gods or angels) which *falls into generation.* For not
all men, by any means, benefit by that incarnation, and with some the
power remains latent and dead during the whole life. Truly "No man
knoweth who the Son is, but the Father; and who the Father is, but the
Son" as added by Jesus then and there (*Ibid* v. 22) -- the Church "of
Christ" less than any one else. The Initiates alone understood the
secret meaning of the term "Father and the Son," and knew that it
referred to Spirit and Soul on the Earth. For the teachings of Christ
were *occult* teachings, which could only be explained *at the
initiation.* They were never intended for the masses, for Jesus forbade
the twelve to go to the Gentiles and the Samaritans (*Matt*. x. 8), and
repeated to his disciples that the "mysteries of Heaven" were for them
alone, not for the multitudes (*Mark* iv. 11).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 232 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

and religions have committed equal errors in their misinterpretation of
this tenet, which is one of the most profoundly philosophical and ideal
conceptions of ancient thought. For they have both disfigured and hinted
at the correct meaning of it in their numerous allegories touching the
subject. Nor have the

semi-esoteric dogmas of Puranic Hinduism failed to evolve very
suggestive symbols and allegories concerning the rebellious and fallen
gods. The Puranas teem with them; and we find a direct hint at the truth
in the frequent allusions of Parasara (*Vishnu Purana*), to all those
Rudras, Rishis, Asuras, Kumaras and Munis, having *to be born in every
age,* to re-incarnate in every Manvantara. This (esoterically) is
equivalent to saying that the FLAMES born of the Universal Mind (Mahat),
owing to the mysterious workings of Karmic Will and an impulse of
Evolutionary Law, had, as in Pymander -- without any gradual transition
-- landed on this Earth, having *broken through the seven Circles of
fire,* or the seven intermediate Worlds, in short.

There is an eternal cyclic law of re-births, and the series is headed at
every new Manvantaric dawn by those who had enjoyed their rest from
re-incarnations in previous Kalpas for incalculable *AEons* -- by the
highest and the earliest *Nirvanees.* It was the turn of those "Gods" to
incarnate in the present Manvantara; hence their presence on Earth, and
the ensuing allegories; hence, also, the perversion of the original
meaning.\* The Gods who had *fallen* into generation, whose mission it
was to complete *divine* man, are found represented later on as Demons,
evil Spirits, and fiends, at feud and war with Gods, or the
irresponsible agents of the one Eternal law. But no conception of such
creatures as the devils and Satan of the Christian, Jewish, and
Mahomedan religions was ever intended under those thousand and one Aryan
allegories.\*\* (*See* "*The Fallen Angels*" *and* "*The Mystic
Dragons*" *in Part II.*)

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* So, for instance, in the Puranas, "Pulastya," a Prajapati, or son of
Brahma -- the progenitor of the Rakshasas, and the grandfather of
Ravana, the Great King of Lanka (*see Ramayana*) -- had, *in* *a former
birth,* a son named Dattoli, "who is now known as the sage Agastya" --
says Vishnu Purana. This name of Dattoli alone, has six more variants to
it, or seven meanings. He is called respectively, Dattoi, Dattali,
Dattotti, Dattotri, Dattobhri, Dambhobhi and Dambholi -- which seven
variants have each a secret sense, and refer in the esoteric comments to
various ethnological classifications, and also to physiological and
anthropological mysteries of the primitive races. For, surely, the
Rakshasas are not *demons,* but simply the primitive and ferocious
giants, the Atlanteans, who were scattered on the face of the globe as
the Fifth Race is now. Vasishta is a warrant to this, if his words
addressed to Parasara, who attempted a bit of JADOO (sorcery), which he
calls "sacrifice," for the destruction of the Rakshasas, mean anything.
For he says, "Let no more of *these unoffending* '*Spirits Darkness*' be
destroyed." (*see for details Adiparvan, s.* 176*, Mahabharata*; *also
the Linga Purana* "*Purvardha,*" *s.* 64.)

\*\* We have a passage from a Master's letter which has a direct bearing
upon these \[\[Footnote continued on next page\]\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 233 HOLY SATAN.

The true esoteric view about "Satan," the opinion held on this subject
by the whole philosophic antiquity, is admirably brought out in an
appendix, entitled "The Secret of Satan," to the second edition of Dr.
A. Kingsford's "Perfect Way." No better and clearer indication of the
truth could be offered to the intelligent reader, and it is therefore
quoted here at some length: --

"1. And on the seventh day (seventh creation of the Hindus),\* there
went forth from the presence of God a *mighty Angel,* full of wrath and
consuming, and God gave him the dominion of the outermost sphere.\*\*

2\. "Eternity brought forth Time; the Boundless gave birth to Limit;
Being descended into generation."\*\*\*

4*.* "*Among the Gods is none like unto him,* into whose hands are
committed the kingdoms, the power and the glory of the worlds:"

5\. "Thrones and empires, the dynasties of kings,\*\*\*\* the fall of
nations, the birth of churches, the triumph of Time."

For, as is said in Hermes, "Satan is the door-keeper of the *Temple of
the King*; he standeth in Solomon's porch; he holdeth *the key of the
Sanctuary,* that no man enter therein, save the Anointed having the
arcanum of Hermes" (v. 20 and 21).

These suggestive and majestic verses had reference with the ancient
Egyptians and other civilized peoples of antiquity to the *creative and
generative light of the Logos* (Horus, Brahma, Ahura-Mazda, etc., etc.,
as primeval manifestations of the ever-unmanifested Principle, *e.g.*,
Ain-Soph, Parabrahm, or *Zeruana* Akerne-- Boundless Time -- *Kala*),
but the

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\[\[Footnote continued from previous page\]\] incarnating angels. Says
the letter: "Now there are, and there must be, failures in the ethereal
races of the many classes of Dhyan-Chohans, or Devas (*progressed
entities of a previous* planetary period), as well as among men. But
still, as the *failures* are too far progressed and spiritualized to be
thrown back forcibly from Dhyan-Chohanship into the vortex of a new
primordial evolution through the lower Kingdoms, this then happens.
Where a new solar system has to be evolved these Dhyan-Chohans are borne
in by influx 'ahead' of the Elementals (Entities . . . to be developed
into humanity at a *future* time) and remain as a latent or inactive
spiritual force, in the aura of a nascent world . . . until the stage of
human evolution is reached. . . . Then they *become an active force* and
commingle with the Elementals, to *develop little by little the full
type of humanity.*" That is to say, to develop in, and endow man with
his Self-conscious mind, or *Manas.*

\* When the earth with its planetary chain and man were to appear.

\*\* Our earth and the physical plane of consciousness.

\*\*\* When the pure, celestial Being (Dhyan Chohan) and the great
Pitris of various classes were commissioned -- the one to evolve their
images (*Chhaya*), and make of them physical man, the others to inform
and thus endow him with divine intelligence and the comprehension of the
*Mysteries of Creation.*

\*\*\*\* The "dynasties of the kings" who all regard themselves as the
"anointed," reigning "by the Grace of God," whereas in truth, they reign
by the grace of *matter,* the great *Illusion,* the Deceiver.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 234 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

meaning is now degraded in the Kabala. The "Anointed," who has the
secrets and mysteries of Hermes (*Buddha,* Wisdom), and who alone is
entrusted with the key to the "Sanctuary," the Womb of nature, in order
to fructify it and call to active life and being the whole Kosmos, has
become, with the Jews, Jehovah, the "God of generation" on the lunar
mountain (Sinai, the mountain of the moon, "*Sin*")*.* The "Sanctuary"
has become the "Holy of Holies," and the arcanum has been
anthropomorphised and *phallicised* and dragged down into matter,
indeed. Hence arose the necessity of making of the "Dragon of Wisdom,"
the *Serpent of Genesis:* of the conscious god who needed a body to
clothe his too subjective divinity, Satan. But the "innumerable
incarnations of Spirit," and "the ceaseless pulse and current of desire"
refer, the first one, to our doctrine of Karmic and cyclic rebirths, the
second -- to **E**ROS, not the later god of material, physiological
love, but to the divine desire in the gods, as well as in all nature, to
create and give life to Beings. This, the Rays of the one "dark,"
because invisible and incomprehensible, **F**LAME could achieve only by
themselves descending into matter. Therefore, as continued in the
**A**PPENDIX:

12\. "Many names hath God given him (Satan), names of mystery, secret
and terrible."

13\. "The Adversary, because matter opposeth Spirit. Time accuseth even
the Saints of the Lord."

28, 29, 31. "Stand in awe of him, and sin not; speak his name with
trembling . . . . For Satan is the magistrate of the justice of God
(Karma); he beareth the balance and the sword . . . . For to him *are
committed Weight and Measure and Number.*"

Compare the last sentence with what the Rabbi, who explains the Kabala
to Prince *Al-Chazari* in the Book of that name, says; and it will be
found that the *Weight and Measure and Number* are, in *Sepher Jezirah,*
the attributes of the Sephiroth (the three *Sephrim,* or figures,
ciphers) covering the whole collective number of 10; and that the
Sephiroth are the collective Adam Kadmon, the "Heavenly Man" or the
*Logos.* Thus Satan and the anointed were identified in ancient thought.
Therefore,

33\. "Satan is the minister of God, Lord of the seven mansions of Hades"
. . . .

The seven or *Saptaloka* of the Earth with the Hindus; for Hades, or the
Limbo of Illusion, of which theology makes a region bordering on Hell,
*is simply our globe, the Earth,* and thus Satan is called --

33 ". . . . the angel of the *manifest Worlds.*"

It is "Satan who is the god of our planet and *the only* god," and this
without any allusive metaphor to its wickedness and depravity. For he is
one with the Logos, "the first son, *eldest of the gods,*" in the order

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 235 THE SHADOW OF GOD.

of microcosmic (divine) evolution; Saturn (Satan), astronomically, "is
*the seventh and last* in the order of macrocosmic emanation, being the
circumference of the kingdom of which Phoebus (the light of wisdom, also
the Sun) is the centre." The Gnostics were right, then, in calling the
Jewish god "an angel of matter," or he who breathed (conscious) life
into Adam, and he whose planet was Saturn.

34\. "And God hath put a girdle about his loins (the rings of Saturn),
and the name of the girdle is Death."

In anthropogony this "girdle" is the human body with its two lower
principles, which three die, while the innermost man is immortal. And
now we approach the "*Secret* of Satan."

37, 38, 39. " . . . Upon Satan only *is the shame of generation. He*
hath lost his virginal estate (so hath the *Kumara* by incarnating):
*uncovering heavenly secrets,* he hath entered into bondage. . . . He
compasseth with bonds and limits all things. . . ."

42, 43, 44. "Twain are the armies of God: in heaven the hosts of
Michael; in the abyss (the manifested world) the legions of Satan. These
are the unmanifest and the manifest; the free and the bound (in matter):
the virginal and the fallen. And both are the Ministers of the Father,
fulfilling the word Divine. . . ." Therefore --

55\. "Holy is the Sabbath of god: *blessed and sanctified is the name of
the Angel of Havas*" *--* **S**ATAN.

For, "The glory of Satan is the shadow of the Lord": God in the
manifested world; "the throne of Satan is the footstool of Adonai" --
that footstool being the whole **K**osmos. (*Vide* Part **II**., "*Is
Pleroma Satan*'*s Lair?*")

When the Church, therefore, curses Satan, it curses the cosmic
reflection of God; it anathematizes God made manifest in matter or in
the objective; it maledicts God, or the ever-incomprehensible
**W**ISDOM, revealing itself as Light and Shadow, good and evil in
nature, in the only manner comprehensible to the limited intellect of
**M**AN.

This is the true philosophical and metaphysical interpretation of
Samael, or Satan, the adversary in the Kabala; the same tenets and
spirit being found in the allegorical interpretations of every other
ancient religion. This philosophical view does not interfere, however,
with the *historical* records connected with it. We say "historical,"
because allegory and a mythical ornamentation around the kernel of
tradition, in no wise prevent that kernel being a record of real events.
Thus, the Kabala, repeating the time-honoured revelations of the once
universal history of our globe and the evolution of its races, has
presented it under the legendary form of the various records which have
formed the Bible. Its historical foundation is now offered, in however
imperfect a form, on these pages from the Secret Doctrine of the East;
and thus

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 236 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

the allegorical and symbolical meaning of the Serpent of Genesis is
found explained by the "Sons of Wisdom" (or angels from higher spheres,
though all and each pertain to the kingdom of Satan, or Matter)
revealing to men the mysteries of Heaven. Hence, also, all the so-called
myths of the Hindu, Grecian, Chaldean, and Jewish Pantheons are found to
be built on fact and truth. The giants of Genesis are the historical
Atlanteans of Lanka, and the Greek Titans.

Who can forget that Troy was once upon a time proclaimed a myth, and
Homer a non-existing personage, while the existence of such cities as
Herculaneum and Pompeii was denied, and attributed to mere fairy
legends? Yet Schliemann proved that Troy had really existed, and the two
cities, though buried for long ages under the Vesuvian lava, have had
their resurrection day, and live again on the surface of the earth. How
many more cities and localities called "fabulous" are on the list of
future discoveries, how many more personages regarded as mythical\* will
one day become historical, those alone can tell who read the decrees of
Fate in the astral light.

As the tenets of the Eastern doctrine, however, have always been kept
secret, and as the reader can hardly hope to be shown the original texts
unless he becomes an accepted disciple, let the Greek and Latin scholar
turn to the original texts of Hermetic literature. Let him, for one
thing, read carefully the opening pages of the *Pymander* of Hermes
Trismegistus; and then he will see our doctrines corroborated in it,
however veiled its text. There also he will find the evolution of the
Universe, of our Earth (called "Nature" in Pymander) as of everything
else, from the "Moyst Principle" -- or the great Deep,
**F**ATHER-**M**OTHER -- the first differentiation in the manifested
Kosmos. First the "Universal Mind," which the hand of the Christian
translator has metamorphosed in the earliest renderings into God, the
Father: then the "Heavenly Man,"\*\* which is the great Total of that
Host of Angels, which was too pure for the creation of the inferior
worlds or of the men of our globe, but which *fell* nevertheless *into
matter* by virtue of that same evolution, as the second *logos* of the
"Father."\*\*\*

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* See the "Primeval Manus of Humanity."

\*\* The "Heavenly Man" -- please mark again the word -- is "the
**L**OGOS" or the "Son" esoterically. Therefore, once that the title was
applied to Christ (declared God and the very God himself) Christian
theology had no choice. In order to support its dogma of the personal
Trinity it had to proclaim, as it does, that the Christian *Logos* is
the only true one, and that all the *Logoi* of other religions were
false, and only the masquerading Evil Principles, **S**ATAN. Now see
where this led Western theology to.

\*\*\* "For the *Mind,* a deity abounding in both sexes, being Life and
Life, brought forth by its *Word* another *Mind* or Workman; which,
being God of the *Fire* and the Spirit, fashioned and formed seven other
Governors, which in their circles contain the \[\[Footnote continued on
next page\]\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 237 MAHASURA AND SATAN.

Synthetically every Creative Logos, or "the Son who is one with the
Father," is the Host of the Rectores Mundi in itself. Even Christian
theology makes of the seven "Angels of the Presence" the Virtues, or the
personified attributes of God, which, being created by him, as the Manus
were by Brahma, became Archangels. The Roman Catholic *theodice* itself
recognising, in its creative *Verbum Princeps,* the head of those angels
*-- caput angelorum --* and the *magni consilii Angelus* (the Angel of
the great Counsel), thus recognizes the identity of Christ and those
Angels.

"*The Gods became no-Gods, the Sura -- A*-sura," says the text; *i.e*.,
gods became fiends -- **S**ATAN, when read literally. But Satan will now
be shown, in the teaching of the Secret Doctrine, allegorized as Good,
and Sacrifice, a God of Wisdom, under different names.

The Kabala teaches that Pride and Presumption -- the two chief prompters
of Selfishness and Egotism -- are the causes that emptied heaven of *one
third* of its divine denizens -- mystically, and of *one third* of the
stars -- astronomically; in other words, the two statements are -- the
first an allegory, and the second a fact. The former, nevertheless, as
shown, is intimately connected with humanity.

In their turn the Rosicrucians, who were well acquainted with the secret
meaning of the tradition, kept it to themselves, teaching merely that
the whole of *creation* was due to, and the result of, that legendary
"War in Heaven" *brought on by the rebellion of the angels*\* *against
creative law,* or the Demiurge. The statement is correct, but the
*inner* meaning is to this day a mystery. To elude further explanation
of the difficulty by appealing to divine mystery, or to the sin of
prying into its policy -- is to say nothing at all. It may prove
sufficient to

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\[\[Footnote continued from previous page\]\] *Phenomenal World,* and
whose disposition is called Fate or Destiny." (*Section 9, ch.* I, *ed.
of* 1579).

Here it is evident that "Mind" (the primeval universal Divine Thought)
is neither the Unknown unmanifested One, since it abounds in both sexes
(is male and female), nor yet the Christian Father, as the latter is a
male and not an androgyne. The fact is that the *Father, Son, and Man*
are hopelessly mixed up in the translations of Pymander.

\* The allegory of the fire of Prometheus is another version of the
rebellion of the proud Lucifer, who was *hurled down to the bottomless
pit,* or simply unto our Earth, to live as man. The Hindu Lucifer, the
*Mahasura,* is also said to have become envious of the Creator's
resplendent light, and, at the head of inferior Asuras (not gods, but
spirits), to have rebelled against Brahma; for which Siva hurled him
down to Patala. But, as philosophy goes hand in hand with allegorical
fiction in Hindu myths, the *devil* is made to repent, and is afforded
the opportunity to progress: he is a sinful man *esoterically,* and can
by *yoga* devotion, and adeptship, reach his status of *one with the
deity,* once more. Hercules, the Sun-god, descends to Hades (the cave of
Initiation) to deliver the victims from their tortures, etc., etc. The
Christian Church alone creates *eternal* torment for the devil and the
damned, that she has invented.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 238 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

believers in the Pope's infallibility, but will hardly satisfy the
philosophical mind. Yet the truth, although known to most of the higher
Kabalists, has never been told by any of their number. One and all,
Kabalists and symbologists, showed an extraordinary reluctance to
confess the primitive meaning of the Fall of the Angels. In a Christian
such silence is only natural. Neither alchemist nor philosopher could,
during the Mediaeval Ages, utter that\* which in the sight of orthodox
theology was a terrible blasphemy, for it would have led them directly
through the "Holy" office of the Inquisition, to stake and rack. But for
our modern Kabalists and Freethinkers the case is different. With the
latter, we fear, it is merely human pride, vanity based on a loudly
rejected and as ineradicable superstition. Since the Church, in her
struggle with Manichaeism, invented the devil, and by placing

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Why should, for instance, Eliphas Levi, the very *fearless* and
outspoken Kabalist, have hesitated to divulge the mystery of the
*Fallen* Angels so-called? That he knew the fact and real meaning of the
allegory -- both in its religious and mystical, as well as in its
physiological sense -- is proved by his voluminous writings and frequent
allusions and hints. Yet Eliphas, after having alluded to it a hundred
times in his previous works, says in his latest "*Histoire de la
Magie,*" p. 220 . . . "We protest with all our might against the
sovereignty and the ubiquity of Satan. We *pretend neither to deny nor
affirm here the tradition on the Fall of the Angels* . . . but if so,
then the prince of the Angelic Rebels can be at best the last and the
most powerless among the condemned -- now that he is separated from
deity -- which is the principle of every power. . . ." This is hazy and
evasive enough; but see what Hargrave Jennings writes in his weird,
*staccato-like* style: --

"Both Saint Michael and Saint George are types. They are sainted
personages, or dignified heroes, or powers apotheosized. They are each
represented with their appropriate faculties and attributes. These are
reproduced and stand multiplied -- distinguished by different names in
all the mythologies . . . (including the Christian). . . .

The idea regarding each is a general one. This idea and representative
notion is that of the all-powerful champion -- child-like in his 'Virgin
innocence' -- so powerful that this god-filled innocence (the Seraphim
'Know most,' the Cherubim 'love most') can shatter the world
(articulated, so to use the word -- in the magic of Lucifer, but
condemned) in opposition to the artful constructions (this 'side-life')
of the magnificent apostate, the mighty rebel, but yet at the same time
the 'Light-bringer,' the Lucifer, the 'Morning Star,' the 'Son of the
morning' -- the very highest title 'out of heaven, 'for in heaven it
cannot be, but out of heaven it is everything. In an apparently
incredible side of his character -- qualities are of no sex -- this
archangel, St. Michael, is the *invincible, sexless, celestial* 'Energy'
-- to dignify him by his grand characteristics -- the invisible 'Virgin
Combatant,' clothed . . . and at the same time armed, in the denying
mail of the Gnostic 'refusal to create.' This is another . . . 'myth
within myths' . . . a stupendous 'mystery of mysteries,' because it is
so impossible and contradictory. Unexplainable as the Apocalypse.
Unrevealable as the 'Revelation' "(*p*. 213).

Nevertheless, this *unexplainable and unrevealable* mystery will now be
explained and revealed by the doctrines of the East. But as the very
erudite, but still more puzzling author of "Phallicism" gives it, of
course, no uninitiated mortal would ever understand the real drift of
his remarks.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 239 THEOLOGICAL SNUFFERS.

a theological extinguisher on the radiant star-god, *Lucifer,* the "Son
of the Morning," thus created the most gigantic of all her paradoxes --
*a black and tenebrous light --* the myth has struck its roots too deep
in the soil of blind faith to permit, in our age, even those, who do not
acquiesce in her dogmas and laugh at her horned and cloven-footed Satan,
to come out bravely and confess the antiquity of the oldest of all
traditions. In a few brief words it is this. *Semi-exoterically,* the
"First-born" of the Almighty -- *Fiat Lux,* -- or the angels of
primordial light, were commanded *to create*; one third of them rebelled
*and refused*; while those who "obeyed as Fetahil did *-- failed*" most
signally.

To realise the refusal and failure in their correct physical meaning,
one must study and *understand* Eastern philosophy; one has to be
acquainted with the fundamental mystical tenets of the Vedantins, with
regard to the utter fallacy of attributing functional activity to the
infinite and absolute deity. Esoteric philosophy maintains that during
the *Sandhyas,* the "Central Sun" emits *creative light -*- passively so
to say. *Causality* is latent. It is only during the active periods of
being that it gives rise to a stream of ceaseless energy, whose
vibrating currents acquire more activity and potency with every rung of
the hebdomadic ladder of Being which they descend. Hence it becomes
comprehensible how the process of *creating,* or rather of fashioning,
the organic Universe, with all its units of the seven kingdoms,
necessitated intelligent beings -- who became collectively a Being or
creative God -- differentiated already from the one absolute Unity,
unrelated as the latter is to conditioned creation.\*

Now the Vatican **MSS.** of the Kabala -- a single copy of which (in
Europe) is said to have been in the possession of Count St. Germain --
contains the most complete exposition of the doctrine, including the
peculiar version accepted by the Luciferians\*\* and other Gnostics; and
in that parchment the *Seven Suns of Life* are given in the order they
are found in the *Saptasurya.* Only four of these, however, are
mentioned in the editions of the Kabala which are procurable in the
public libraries, and that even in a more or less veiled phraseology.
Nevertheless even this reduced number is amply sufficient to show an
identical origin, as it refers to the quaternary group of the
Dhyan-Chohans, and proves the speculation to have had its origin in the
Secret Doctrines of the Aryans.

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* "Creation" -- out of pre-existent eternal substance, or matter, of
course, which substance, according to our teachings, is boundless,
ever-existing space.

\*\* The Luciferians -- the sect of the fourth century who are alleged
to have taught that the Soul was a *carnal* body transmitted to the
child by its father; -- and that other religious and still earlier sect
of the second century **A.D**., the Lucianists, who taught all this, and
further, that the *animal* Soul was not immortal, were philosophizing on
the grounds of the real Kabalistic and Occult teachings.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 240 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

As is well known, the Kabala never originated with the Jews, who got
their ideas from the Chaldeans and the Egyptians.

Thus even the now *exoteric* Kabalistic teachings speak of a *Central*
Sun, and of three secondary suns in each solar system -- our own
included. As shown in that able though too materialistic work, "*New
Aspects of Life and Religion,*" which is a *synopsis of the views* of
the Kabalists in an aspect deeply thought out and assimilated: --

"The *Central Sun* . . . *was to them* (as much as to the Aryans) *the
centre of Rest*; the centre to which all motion was to be ultimately
referred. Round this central sun . . . 'the first of three systemic suns
. . . revolved on a polar plane . . . the second, on an equatorial
plane' . . . and the third only was our visible sun. These four solar
bodies were '*the organs on whose action what man calls the creation,
the evolution of life on the planet, earth, depends.*' The channels
through which the influence of these bodies was conveyed to the earth
they (the Kabalists) held to be electrical" (*p*. 287). . . . "The
radiant energy flowing from the central sun\* called the Earth into
being as a watery globe," whose tendency, "as the nucleus of a planetary
body, was to rush to the (central) Sun . . . . within the sphere of
whose attraction it had been created," "but the radiant energy,
similarly electrifying both, withheld the one from the other, and so
changed motion towards into motion round the centre of attraction, which
the revolving planet (earth) thus sought to reach.

"In the organic cell the *visible sun* found its own proper matrix, and
produced through this the animal (while maturing the vegetable) Kingdom,
finally placing man at its head, in whom, through the animating action
of that Kingdom, it originated the psychic cell. But the man so placed
at the head of the animal kingdom, at the head of the creation, was the
animal, the *soul-less, the perishable man*. . . . Hence man, although
apparently its crown, would, by his advent have marked the close of
creation; since creation, culminating in him, would at his death have
entered on its decline" . . . (*p*. 289).

This Kabalistic view is here quoted, to show its perfect identity in
spirit with the Eastern doctrine. Explain, or complete the teaching of
the seven Suns with the seven systems of *planes of being,* of which the
"Suns" are the central bodies, and you have the seven angelic planes,

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* This "central sun" of the Occultists, which even Science is obliged
to accept astronomically, for it cannot deny the presence in Sidereal
Space of a central body in the milky way, a point unseen and mysterious,
the ever-hidden centre of attraction of our Sun and system -- this "Sun"
is viewed differently by the Occultists of the East. While the Western
and Jewish Kabalists (and even some pious modern astronomers) claim that
in this sun the God-head is specially present -- referring to it the
volitional acts of God -- the Eastern Initiates maintain that, as the
*supradivine* Essence of the Unknown Absolute is equally in every domain
and place, the "Central Sun" is simply the centre of Universal
life-Electricity; the reservoir within which that divine radiance,
already differentiated at the beginning of every *creation,* is
focussed. Though still in a *laya,* or neutral condition, it is,
nevertheless, the one attracting, as also the ever-emitting, life
Centre.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 241 "PRINCIPLES" EXPLAINED.

whose "Host" are gods thereof, collectively. (*See Comm. to Stanza VII
Book I*.) They are the Head-group divided into four classes from the
*incorporeal* down to the semi-corporeal, which classes are directly
connected -- though in very different ways as regards voluntary
connection and functions -- with our mankind. They are three,
synthesized by the fourth (the first and highest), which is called the
"Central Sun" in the Kabalistic doctrine just quoted. This is the great
difference between the Semitic and the Aryan Cosmogony; one
materializing, humanizes the mysteries of nature; the other
spiritualizes matter, and its physiology is always made subservient to
metaphysics. Thus, though the seventh principle reaches man through all
the phases of being, pure as an indiscrete element and an impersonal
unity, it passes through (the Kabala teaches *from*) the Central
Spiritual Sun and Group the second (the *polar* Sun), which two radiate
on man his Atma. Group *Three* (the equatorial Sun) cement the Buddhi to
Atman and the higher attributes of *Manas,* while group Four (the spirit
of our visible sun) endows him with his Manas and its vehicle -- the
*Kama rupa,* or body of passions and desires, the two elements of
*Ahamkara* which evolve *individualized consciousness --* the personal
*ego.* Finally, it is the spirit of the Earth in its triple unity that
builds the physical body, attracting to it the Spirits of Life and
forming his *Linga Sarira.*

Now, as everything proceeds cyclically, the evolution of man like
everything else, the order in which he is generated is described fully
in the Eastern teachings, whereas it is only hinted at in the Kabala.
Says *the Book of Dzyan* with regard to primeval man when first
projected by the "Boneless," the incorporeal Creator: "*First, the
Breath, then Buddhi, and the Shadow-Son* (the Body) *were* 'CREATED.'
*But where was the pivot* (the middle principle, Manas)? *Man is doomed.
When alone, the indiscrete* (undifferentiated Element) *and the Vahan*
(Buddhi) -- *the cause of the causeless -- break asunder from manifested
life*" *--* "*unless cemented and held together by the middle principle,
the vehicle of the personal consciousness of* **J**IVA"; explains the
Commentary. In other words, the two higher principles *can have no
individuality on Earth,* cannot be *man,* unless there is (*a*) the
Mind, the *Manas-Ego, to* cognize itself, and (*b*) the terrestrial
*false* personality, or the body of egotistical desires and personal
Will, to cement the whole, as if round a pivot (which it is, truly), to
the physical form of man. It is the *Fifth* and the *Fourth*
principles\* -- *Manas* and *Kama rupa --* that contain the dual
personality: the real immortal Ego (*if it assimilates itself to the two
higher*) and the false and transitory personality, the *mayavi* or
astral body, so-called, or the *animal-human* Soul -- the two hav-

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* The Fourth, and the Fifth from *below* beginning by the physical
body; the Third and the Fourth, if we reckon from *Atma.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 242 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

ing to be closely blended for purposes of a *full* terrestrial
existence. Incarnate the Spiritual Monad of a Newton grafted on that of
the greatest saint on earth -- in a physical body the most perfect you
can think of -- *i.e.*, in a two or even a three-principled body
composed of its *Sthula Sarira,* prana (life principle), and *linga
sarira --* and, if it lacks its middle and fifth principles, you will
have created *an idiot --* at best a beautiful, soul-less, empty and
unconscious appearance. "*Cogito -- ergo sum*" *--* can find no room in
the brain of such a creature, not on this plane, at any rate.

There are students, however, who have long ago understood the
philosophical meaning underlying the allegory -- so tortured and
disfigured by the Roman Church -- of the *Fallen* Angels. "The Kingdom
of Spirits and spiritual action which flows from and is the product of
Spirit Volition, is outside and contrasted with and in contradiction to
the Kingdom of (divine) Souls and divine action."\* As said in the text:
--

"*Like produces like and no more at the genesis of being, and evolution
with its limited conditioned laws comes later. The Self-Existentt are
called* **C***REATIONS, for they appear in the Spirit Ray, manifested
through the potency inherent in its UNBORN Nature, which is beyond time
and* (limited or conditioned) *Space. Terrene products, animate and
inanimate, including mankind, are falsely called creation and creatures:
they are the development* (*evolution*) *of the discrete elements.*"
(Com. xiv.) Again: --

"*The Heavenly rupa* (Dhyan Chohan) *creates* (*man*) *in his own form*;
*it is a spiritual ideation consequent on the first differentiation and
awakening of the universal* (*manifested*) *Substance*; *that form is
the ideal shadow of Itself: and this is* THE MAN OF THE FIRST RACE."

To express it in still clearer form, limiting the explanation to this
earth only, it was the duty of the first "differentiated Egos" -- the
Church calls them Archangels -- to imbue primordial matter with the
evolutionary impulse and guide its formative powers in the fashioning of
its productions. This it is which is referred to in the sentences both
in the Eastern and Western tradition --"the Angels were *commanded to
create.*" After the Earth had been made ready by the *lower* and more
material powers, and its three Kingdoms fairly started on their way to
be "fruitful and multiply," the higher powers, the Archangels or
Dhyanis, were compelled by the evolutionary Law to descend on Earth, in
order to construct the crown of its evolution -- MAN. Thus the
"Self-created"

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* "*New Aspects of Life.*"

\*\* Angelic, Spiritual Essences, immortal in their being because
unconditioned in Eternity; periodical and conditioned in their
Manvantaric manifestations.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 243 MAN, THE PALE SHADOW OF GOD.

and the "Self-existent" projected their pale shadows; but group the
Third, the Fire-Angels, *rebelled and refused* to join their Fellow
Devas.

Hindu exotericism represents them all as *Yogins,* whose piety inspired
them to refuse *creating,* as they desired to remain eternally
*Kumaras,* "Virgin Youths," in order to, if possible, anticipate their
fellows in progress towards Nirvana -- the final liberation. But,
agreeably to esoteric interpretation, it was a self-sacrifice for the
benefit of mankind. The "Rebels" would not create will-less
irresponsible men, as the "obedient" angels did; nor could they endow
human beings with only the temporary reflections of their own
attributes; for even the latter, belonging to another and a so-much
higher plane of consciousness, would leave man still irresponsible,
hence interfere with any possibility of a higher progress. No spiritual
and psychic evolution is possible on earth -- the lowest and most
material plane -- for one who on that plane, at all events, is
inherently *perfect* and cannot accumulate either merit or demerit. Man
remaining the pale shadow of the inert, immutable, and motionless
perfection, the one negative and passive attribute of the real *I am
that I am,* would have been doomed to pass through life on earth as in a
heavy dreamless sleep; hence a failure on this plane. The Beings, or the
Being, collectively called Elohim, who first (if ever) pronounced the
cruel words, "Behold, the man is become *as one of us,* to know good and
evil; and now, lest he put forth his hand and take also of the tree of
life and eat and live for ever . . . " must have been indeed the
Ilda-baoth, the *Demiurge* of the Nazarenes, filled with rage and envy
against his own creature, whose reflection created *Ophiomorphos.* In
this case it is but natural -- even from the dead letter standpoint --
to view *Satan,* the Serpent of Genesis, as the real creator and
benefactor, the Father of Spiritual mankind. For it is he who was the
"Harbinger of Light," bright radiant Lucifer, who opened the eyes of the
automaton *created* by Jehovah, as alleged; and he who was the first to
whisper: "in the day ye eat thereof ye shall be as Elohim, knowing good
and evil" -- can only be regarded in the light of a Saviour. An
"adversary" to Jehovah the "*personating* spirit," he still remains in
esoteric truth the ever-loving "Messenger" (the angel), the Seraphim and
Cherubim who both *knew* well, and *loved* still more, and who conferred
on us spiritual, instead of physical immortality -- the latter a kind
*of static* immortality that would have transformed man into an undying
"Wandering Jew."

As narrated in King's "Gnostics," "Ilda-Baoth, whom several sects
regarded as the God of Moses, was not a pure spirit, he was ambitious
and proud, and rejecting the spiritual light of the middle space offered
him by his mother Sophia-Achamoth, he set himself to create a world of
his own. Aided by his sons, the six planetary genii, he fabricated man,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 244 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

but this one proved a failure. It was a monster, soulless, ignorant, and
crawling on all fours on the ground like a material beast. Ilda-Baoth
was forced to implore the help of his spiritual mother. She communicated
to him a ray of her divine light, and so animated man and endowed him
with a soul. And now began the animosity of Ilda-Baoth toward his own
creature. Following the impulse of the divine light, man soared higher
and higher in his aspirations; very soon he began presenting not the
image of his creator Ilda-Baoth but rather that of the Supreme Being,
the 'primitive man,' Ennoia. Then the Demiurgos was filled with rage and
envy; and fixing his jealous eye on the abyss of matter, his looks
envenomed with passion were suddenly reflected as in a mirror; the
reflection became animate, and there arose out of the abyss Satan,
serpent, Ophiomorphos -- 'the embodiment of envy and cunning. He is the
union of all that is most base in matter, with the hate, envy, and craft
of a spiritual intelligence.' " This is the exoteric rendering of the
Gnostics, and the allegory, though a *sectarian* version, is suggestive,
and seems true to life. It is the natural deduction from the dead letter
text of chapter iii. of Genesis.

Hence the allegory of Prometheus, who steals the divine fire so as to
allow men to proceed consciously on the path of spiritual evolution,
thus transforming the most perfect of *animals* on earth into a
potential god, and making him free to "take the kingdom of heaven by
violence." Hence also, the *curse* pronounced by Zeus against
Prometheus, and by Jehovah-Il-da-Baoth against his "rebellious son,"
Satan. The cold, pure snows of the Caucasian mountain and the
never-dying, singeing fire and flames of an extinguishable hell. Two
poles, yet the same idea; the dual aspect of a refined torture: a *fire
producer --* the personified emblem of \[\[*Phosphoros*\]\] of the
astral fire and light in the *anima mundi --* (that element of which the
German materialist philosopher Moleschott said: "ohne *phosphor* kein
gedanke," *i.e.*, without phosphorus no thought), burning in the fierce
flames of his terrestrial passions; the conflagration fired by his
*Thought,* discerning as it now does good from evil, and yet a slave to
the passions of its earthly Adam; feeling the vulture of doubt and full
consciousness gnawing at its heart -- a *Prometheus indeed, because a
conscious,* hence a *responsible* entity.\* The curse of *life* is
great, yet how few are those men, outside some Hindu and Sufi mystics,
who would exchange all the tortures of conscious life, all the evils of
a responsible existence, for the unconscious perfection of a passive
(objectively) *in*cor*poreal* being, or even the universal static
Inertia personified in Brahma during his "night's" rest. For, to quote
from an able article by one\*\*

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* The history of Prometheus, Karma, and human consciousness, is found
further on.

\*\* By an Englishman whose erratic genius killed him. The son of a
Protestant clergyman, he became a Mahomedan, then a rabid atheist, and
after meeting with a \[\[Footnote continued on next page\]\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 245 SATAN, A CENTRIPETAL FORCE.

who, confusing the planes of existence and consciousness, fell a victim
to it: --

"Satan, or Lucifer, represents the *active,* or, as M. Jules Baissac
calls it, the 'Centrifugal Energy of the Universe' in a cosmic sense. He
is Fire, Light, Life, Struggle, Effort, Thought, Consciousness,
Progress, Civilization, Liberty, Independence. At the same time he is
pain, which is the Re-action of the *pleasure* of action, and *death -*-
which is the revolution of *life* -- Satan, burning in his own hell,
produced by the fury of his own momentum -- the expansive disintegration
of the nebulae which is to concentrate into new worlds. And fitly is he
again and again baffled by the eternal *Inertia* of the *passive* energy
of the Kosmos -- the inexorable '*I AM*' *--* the flint from which the
sparks are beaten out. Fitly is he . . . and his adherents . . .
consigned to the 'sea of fire,' because it is the *Sun* (in one sense
only in the Cosmic allegory), the fount of life in *our system,* where
they are purified (disintegrated) and churned up to re-arrange them for
another life (the resurrection); that *Sun* which, as the origin of the
active principle of our Earth, is at once the *Home* and the *Source* of
the Mundane Satan. . . ." To demonstrate furthermore the accuracy of
Baissac's general theory (in *Le Diable et Satan*) cold is known to have
a 'Centripetal' effect. "Under the influence of cold everything
contracts. . . . Under it *life hybernates,* or dies out, thought
congeals, and fire is extinguished. Satan is immortal in his own
Fire-Sea -- it is only in the 'Nifl-heim' (the cold Hell of the
Scandinavian *Eddas*) of the '*I AM*' that he cannot exist. But for all
that there is a kind of *Immortal Existence* in the Nifl-heim, and that
existence must be *painless and peaceful,* because it is *Unconscious
and Inactive.* In the Kingdom of *Jehovah* (if this God were all that
the Jews and Christians claim for him) there is no Misery, no War, no
marrying and giving in marriage, no change, no *Individual
Consciousness.*\* All is absorbed in the spirit of the most Powerful.
*It is emphatically a kingdom of Peace and loyal Submission as that of
the* '*Arch-Rebel*' *is one of War and Revolution*. . . . . It (the

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\[\[Footnote continued from previous page\]\] *master,* a Guru, he
became a mystic; then a theosophist who doubted, despaired; threw up
*white* for *black* magic, went insane and joined the Roman Church. Then
again turning round, anathematized her, re-became an atheist, and died
cursing humanity, knowledge, and God, in whom he had ceased to believe.
Furnished with all the esoteric data to write his "War in Heaven," he
made a semi-political article out of it, mixing Malthus with Satan, and
Darwin with the astral light. Peace be to his *-- Shell.* He is a
warning to the chelas who fail. His forgotten tomb may now be seen in
the Mussulman burial ground of the Joonagad, Kathiawar, in India.

\* The author talks of the *active, fighting,* damning Jehovah as though
he were a synonym of Parabrahm! We have quoted from this article to show
where it dissents from theosophic teachings; otherwise it would be
quoted some day against us, as everything published in the *Theosophist*
generally is.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 246 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

former) is in fact what Theosophy calls *Nirvana.* But then Theosophy
teaches that separation from the *Primal Source having once occurred,*
Re-union can only be achieved *by Will -- Effort* -- which is distinctly
*Satanic* in the sense of this essay."

*It is* "Satanic" from the standpoint of orthodox Romanism, for it is
owing to the prototype of that which became in time the Christian Devil
-- to the Radiant Archangels, Dhyans-Chohans, who refused to create,
because they wanted Man *to become his own creator* and an immortal god
-- that men can reach *Nirvana* and the haven of heavenly divine Peace.

To close this rather lengthy comment, the Secret Doctrine teaches that
the Fire-Devas, the Rudras, and the Kumaras, the "Virgin-Angels," (to
whom Michael and Gabriel, the Archangels, both belong), the divine
"Rebels" -- called by the *all-materializing* and positive Jews, the
*Nahash* or "Deprived" -- preferred the *curse of incarnation* and the
long cycles of terrestrial existence and rebirths, to seeing the misery
(even if *unconscious*) of the beings (evolved as shadows out of their
Brethren) through the semi-passive energy of their *too spiritual*
Creators. If "man's uses of life should be such as neither to animalize
nor to spiritualize, but to *humanize* Self,"\* before he can do so, he
must be born *human* not angelic. Hence, tradition shows the celestial
*Yogis* offering themselves as voluntary victims in order to redeem
Humanity -- created god-like and perfect at first -- and to endow him
with human affections and aspirations. To do this they had to give up
their natural status and, descending on our globe, take up their abode
on it for the whole cycle of the Mahayuga, thus exchanging their
impersonal individualities for individual personalities -- the bliss of
sidereal existence for the curse of terrestrial life. This voluntary
sacrifice of the Fiery Angels, whose nature was *Knowledge and Love,*
was construed by the exoteric theologies into a statement that shows
"the rebel angels hurled down from heaven into the darkness of Hell" --
our Earth. Hindu philosophy hints at the truth by teaching that the
*Asuras* hurled down by Siva, are only in an *intermediate state* in
which they prepare for higher degrees of purification and redemption
from their

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Explaining the Kabala, Dr. H. Pratt says, "Spirit was to man (to the
Jewish Rabbin, rather?) a bodiless, disembodied, or deprived, and
degraded being, and hence was termed by the ideograph *Nahash*
'Deprived;' represented as appearing to and seducing the human race --
men through the Woman. . . . In the picture from this Nahash, this
spirit was represented by a serpent, because from its *destitution of
bodily members,* the Serpent was looked upon as a deprived and depraved
and degraded creature" ("*New Aspects,*" *p.* 235). Symbol for symbol
there are those who would prefer that of the serpent -- the symbol of
wisdom and eternity, deprived of limbs as it is -- to the Jod
(![](sd1-78c.gif)) -- the poetical ideograph of Jehovah in the Kabala --
the god of the male symbol of generation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 247 THE CURSE OF VASISHTA.

wretched condition; but Christian theology, claiming to be based on the
rock of divine love, charity, and justice of him it appeals to as its
Saviour -- has invented, to enforce that claim paradoxically, the dreary
dogma of hell, that Archimedean lever of Roman Catholic philosophy.

As to Rabbinical Wisdom -- than which there is none more positive,
materialistic, or grossly terrestrial, as it brings everything down to
physiological mysteries -- it calls these Beings, the "Evil One;" and
the Kabalists *-- Nahash,* "Deprived," as just said, and the *Souls,*
that have thrown themselves, *after having been alienated in Heaven from
the Holy One*, into an abyss at the dawn of their very existence, and
have anticipated the time when they are to descend on earth. (*Zohar*
iii., 61, *C.*)

And let me explain at once that our quarrel is not with the *Zohar* and
the Kabala in their right interpretation -- for the latter is ours --
but only with the gross, *pseudo*-esoteric explanations of the later,
and especially those of the Christian Kabalists.

"*Our earth and man,*" says the Commentary, "*being the products of the
three Fires*" *--* whose three names answer, in Sanskrit, to "*the
electric fire, the Solar fire, and the fire produced by friction,*" *--*
these three fires, explained on the Cosmic and human planes, are Spirit,
Soul, and Body, the three great Root groups, with their four additional
divisions. These vary with the Schools, and become -- according to their
applications -- the *upadhis* and the *vehicles,* or the *noumena* of
these. In the exoteric accounts, they are personified by the "three sons
of surpassing brilliancy and splendour" of Agni Abhimanin, the eldest
son of Brahma, the *Cosmic* **L**OGOS, by *Swaha,* one of Daksha's\*
daughters. In the metaphysical sense the "Fire of friction" means the
Union between *Buddhi,* the sixth, and *Manas,* the fifth, principles,
which thus are united or cemented together; the fifth merging partially
into and becoming part of the *monad*; in the physical, it relates to
the *creative spark,* or germ, which fructifies and generates the human
being. The three Fires, it is said (whose names are Pavaka, Pavamana and
Suchi) were condemned by a curse of Vasishta, the great sage, "*to be
born over and over again.*" (Bhagavata-Purana iv. 24, 4.) This is clear
enough.

Therefore, the *FLAMES,* whose functions are confused in the exoteric
books, and who are called indifferently Prajapati, Pitris, Manus,
Asuras,

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Daksha, the "intelligent, the competent." "This name generally
carries with it the idea of *creative power.*" He is a son of Brahma,
and of Aditi, and agreeably to other versions, a self-born power, which,
like Minerva, sprang from his father's body. He is the chief of the
*Prajapati* -- the Lords or Creators of Being. In Vishnu Purana,
*Parasara* says of him, "in every Kalpa (or manvantara) Daksha and the
rest are born and are again destroyed." And the Rig-Veda says that
"Daksha sprang from Aditi and Aditi from Daksha," a reference to the
eternal cyclic re-birth of the same divine Essence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 248 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

Rishis, Kumaras,\* etc. etc., are said to incarnate personally in the
Third Root-Race and thus find themselves "reborn over and over again."
In the Esoteric doctrine they are generally named the Asuras, or the
*Asu-ra Devata* or *Pitar-devata* (gods) for, as said, they were first
Gods -- and the highest -- before they became "*no*-gods," and had from
Spirits of Heaven fallen into Spirits of the Earth\*\* *--
exoterically,* note well, in orthodox dogma.

No Theologian, any more than an Orientalist, can ever understand the
genealogies of the Prajapati, the Manus, and the Rishis, nor the direct
connection of these -- or their correlation rather -- with the Gods,
unless he has the key to the old primitive Cosmogony and Theogony, which
all the Nations originally had in common. All these gods and demi-gods
are found reborn on earth, in various Kalpas and in as various
characters; each, moreover, *having his Karma distinctly traced, and
every effect assigned to its cause.*

Before other Stanzas could be explained, it was, as seen, absolutely
necessary to show that the sons of "Dark Wisdom," though identical with
the Archangels which Theology has chosen to call the "Fallen," are as
divine and as pure and more so than all the Michaels and Gabriels so
glorified in the churches. The "old Book" goes into various details of
Astral life, which at this juncture would be quite incomprehensible to
the reader. It may, therefore, be left for later explanations, and the
First and Second Races can now only receive bare notice. Not so for the
Third Race -- the Root-Race which separated into sexes, and which was
the first to be endowed with reason. Men evolving *pari passu* with the
globe, and the latter having "incrustated" more than a hundred million
of years before -- the first human sub-race had already begun to
materialize or solidify, so to say. But, as the *Stanza* has it: "*the
inner man* (the conscious Entity) *was not.*" This "Conscious Entity"
Occultism says, comes from, nay, in many cases *is,* the very entire
essence and *esse* of the high Intelligences condemned, by the
undeviating law of Karmic evolution, to reincarnate in this manvantara.

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* No one of these orders is distinct from the Pitris or Progenitors, as
says Manu (iii. 284). "The wise call our fathers Vasus; our paternal
grandfathers, Rudras; our paternal great grandfathers, Adityas;
agreeably to a text of the Vedas," or "this is an everlasting Vedic
text" in another translation.

\*\* As now discovered by the late G. Smith in the Babylonian cylinder
literature, it was the same in Chaldean theogony. Ishtar, "eldest of
Heaven and of Earth." Below him the *Igaga* or Angels of Heaven, and the
*Anunnaki,* or angels of Earth. Below these again various classes of
Spirits and "Genii" called Sadu, Vadukku, Ekimu, Gallu -- of which some
were good, some evil. (See "*Babylonian Mythology.*")

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 249 SCIENTIFIC ANTHROPOLOGY IN THE PURANAS.

(*b*) This verse (thirty-ninth) relates exclusively to the racial
divisions. Strictly speaking, esoteric philosophy teaches a modified
polygenesis. For, while it assigns to humanity a oneness of origin, in
so far that its forefathers or "Creators" were all divine beings --
though of different classes or degrees of perfection in their hierarchy
-- men were nevertheless born on seven different centres of the
continent of that period. Though all of one common origin, yet for
reasons given their potentialities and mental capabilities, outward or
physical forms, and future characteristics, were very different.\* As to
their complexions, there is a suggestive allegory told in *Linga
Purana.* The *Kumdra* -- the Rudra gods, so called (*see* *further*),
are described as incarnations of Siva, the *destroyer* (of *outward
forms*), named also Vamadeva. The latter, as a *Kumara,* the "Eternal
Celibate," the chaste Virgin youth, springs from Brahma in each great
Manvantara, and "again becomes four"; a reference to the *four great
divisions of* the human races, as regards complexion and type -- and
three chief variations of these. Thus in the 29th Kalpa -- in this case
a reference to the transformation and evolution of the human form which
Siva ever destroys and remodels periodically, down to the manvantaric
great turning point about the middle of the Fourth (Atlantean) Race --
in the 29th Kalpa, Siva, as Swetalohita, the *root* Kumara, becomes,
from moon-coloured, *white*; in his next transformation -- he is *red*
(and in this the exoteric version differs from the Esoteric teaching);
in the third *-- yellow*; in the fourth -- *black.*

Esotericism now classes these seven variations, with their four great
divisions, into only *three* distinct primeval races -- as it does not
take into consideration the First Race, which had neither type nor
colour, and hardly an objective, though colossal form. The evolution of
these races, their formation and development, went *pari passu* and on
parallel lines with the evolution, formation, and development of three
geological strata, from which the human complexion was as much derived
as it was determined by the climates of those zones. It names three
great divisions, namely, the RED-YELLOW, the BLACK, and the
BROWN-WHITE.\*\* The Aryan races, for instance, now varying from dark
brown, almost black, red-brown-yellow, down to the whitest creamy
colour, are yet all of one and the same stock -- the Fifth Root-Race --
and spring

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Some superior, others inferior, *to suit the Karma* of the various
reincarnating Monads which could not be all of the same degree of purity
in their last births in other worlds. This accounts for the difference
of races, the inferiority of the savage, and other human varieties.

\*\* "There are," says Topinard (English edition of "Anthropology," with
preface by Professor Broca), "THREE fundamental elements of colour in
the human organism -- namely, the *red*, *the yellow,* and the *black,*
which, mixed in variable quantities with the white of the tissues, give
rise to those numerous shades seen in the human family." Here is science
unintentionally supporting Occultism again.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 250 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

from one single progenitor, called in Hindu *exotericism* by the generic
name of Vaivasvata Manu: the latter, remember, being that generic
personage, the Sage, who is said to have lived over 18,000,000 years
ago, and also 850,000 years ago -- at the time of the sinking of the
last remnants of the great continent of Atlantis\* (*See the Root and
Seed Manus* further on), and who is said to live even *now* in his
mankind. (*Vide at the end of this Stanza,* "**T**HE **P**RIMEVAL
**M**ANUS OF **H**UMANITY.") The light yellow is the colour of the first
SOLID human race, which appeared after the middle of the Third Root Race
(*after its fall* into generation -- as just explained), bringing on the
final changes. For, it is only at that period that the last
transformation took place, which brought forth man as he is now, only on
a magnified scale. This Race gave birth to the Fourth Race; "Siva"
gradually transforming that portion of Humanity which became "black with
sin" into *red-yellow* (the red Indians and the Mongolians being the
descendants of these) and finally into Brown-white races -- which now,
together with the yellow Races, form the great bulk of Humanity. The
allegory in *Linga Purana* is curious, as showing the great ethnological
knowledge of the ancients.

When reading of "the last transformation," let the reader consider at
this juncture, if that took place 18,000,000 years ago, how many
millions more it must have required to reach that final stage? And if
man, in his gradual consolidation, developed *pari passu* with the
earth, how many millions of years must have elapsed during the *First,
Second,* and the first half of the *Third* Race? For the Earth was in a
comparatively ethereal condition before it reached its last consolidated
state; the archaic teachings, moreover, telling us that, during the
middle period of the Lemuro-Atlantean Race, three and a half Races after
the Genesis of man, the Earth, man, and everything on the Globe was of a
still grosser and more material nature, while such things as corals and
some shells were still in a semi-gelatinous, astral state. The cycles
that intervened since then, have already carried us onward, on the
opposite ascending arc, some steps toward our *dematerialization,* as
the spiritualists would say. The Earth, ourselves, and all things have
softened since then -- aye, even our brains. But it has been objected by
some theosophists that an ethereal Earth even some 15, or 20,000,000
years ago, *does not square with Geology,* which teaches us that winds
blew, rains fell, waves broke on the shore, sands shifted and
accumulated,

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* It must be remembered that the "last remnants" here spoken of, refer
to those portions of the "great continent" which still remained, and not
to any of the numerous islands which existed contemporaneously with the
continent. Plato's "island" was, for instance, one of such remnants; the
others having sunk at various periods previously. An occult "tradition"
teaches that such submersions occur whenever there is an eclipse of the
"spiritual sun."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 251 ANSWERS TO OBJECTIONS.

etc., etc., that, in short, all natural causes now in operation were
then in force, "*in the very earliest ages of geological time,* aye,
that of the oldest palaeozoic rocks." To this the following answers are
given. *Firstly,* what is the date assigned by geology to those "oldest
palaezoic rocks"? And *secondly,* why could not the winds blow, rain
fall, and waves (of *carbonic acid* apparently, as science seems to
imply) break on the shore, on an Earth semi-astral, *i.e*., viscid? The
word "astral" does not necessarily mean as thin as smoke, in occult
phraseology, but rather "starry," shining or pellucid, in various and
numerous degrees, from a quite filmy to a viscid state, as just
observed. But it is further objected: How could an astral *Earth* have
affected the other planets in this system? Would not the whole process
get out of gear now if the attraction of one planet was suddenly
removed? The objection is evidently invalid, since our system is
composed of older and younger planets, some dead (like the moon), others
in process of formation, for all astronomy knows to the contrary. Nor
has the latter ever affirmed, so far as we know, that all the bodies of
our system have sprung into existence and developed simultaneously. The
Cis-Himalayan secret teachings differ from those of India in this
respect. Hindu Occultism teaches that the Vaivasvata Manu Humanity is
eighteen million and odd years old. We say, yes; but only so far as
*physical,* or approximately physical, man is concerned, who dates from
the close of the Third Root-Race. Beyond that period MAN, or his filmy
image, may have existed for 300 million years, for all we know; *since
we are not taught figures* which are and will remain secret with the
Masters of Occult Science, as justly stated in "Esoteric Buddhism."
Moreover, whereas the Hindu Puranas speak of one Vaivasvata Manu, we
affirm that there were several, the name being a generic one. (*Vide
supra*)*.*

We must now say a few more words on the physical evolution of man.

-------

<span id="DDE_LINK19">\[\[This page continued in next section\]\]</span>
<span id="DDE_LINK20"></span><span id="DDE_LINK21"></span><span
id="DDE_LINK22"></span><span id="DDE_LINK23"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next Section](sd2-1-14.md)

[Contents](sd2-0-co.htm#contents.md)
