##### The Secret Doctrine by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol. 2

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 351 THE "GREAT DRAGONS" AND SERPENTS.

#### STANZA XII. THE FIFTH RACE AND ITS DIVINE INSTRUCTORS.

-------

> §§ (47) The remnants of the first two races disappear for ever. Groups
> of the various Atlantean races saved from the Deluge along with the
> Forefathers of the Fifth. (48) The origins of our present Race, the
> Fifth. The first divine Dynasties. (49) The earliest glimmerings in
> History, now pinned to the allegorical chronology of the Bible, and
> "universal" History slavishly following it. -- The nature of the first
> instructors and civilizers of mankind.

---------------------

47\. **F**EW (*men*) REMAINED. **S**OME YELLOW, SOME BROWN AND BLACK,
AND SOME RED, REMAINED. **T**HE MOON-COLOURED (*of the primitive*
*Divine Stock*) WERE GONE FOR EVER (*a*) . . . .

48\. **T**HE **F**IFTH **R**ACE PRODUCED FROM THE **H**OLY **S**TOCK
(*remained*)*.* **I**T WAS RULED BY **H**ER **F**IRST **D**IVINE
**K**INGS.

49\. **T**HE "**S**ERPENTS" WHO RE-DESCENDED; WHO MADE PEACE WITH THE
**F**IFTH (*Race*)*,* WHO TAUGHT AND INSTRUCTED IT (*b*) . . . .

(*a*) This verse (47) relates to the Fifth Race. History does not begin
with it, but living and ever-recurring tradition does. History -- or
what is called history -- does not go further back than the fantastic
origins of our fifth sub-race, a "few thousands" of years. It is the
sub-divisions of this first sub-race of the Fifth Root-Race which are
referred to in the sentence, "Some yellow, some brown and black, and
some red, remained." The "moon coloured" (*i.e*., the First and the
Second Races) were gone for ever -- ay, without leaving any traces
whatever; and that, so far back as the third "Deluge" of the Third
Lemurian race, that "Great Dragon," whose tail sweeps whole nations out
of existence in the twinkling of an eye. And this is the true meaning of
the Verse in the **C**OMMENTARY which says:

"*The* **G**REAT **D**RAGON *has respect but for the* '**S**ERPENTS'
*of* **W**ISDOM, *the Serpents whose holes are now under the triangular
stones,*" *i.e.,* "the Pyramids, at the four corners of the world."

(*b*) This tells us clearly that which is mentioned more than once
elsewhere in the Commentaries; namely, that the Adepts or "Wise" men of
the three Races (the Third, Fourth and the Fifth) dwelt in subterranean
habitats, generally under some kind of pyramidal structure, if not

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 352 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

actually under a pyramid. For such "pyramids" existed in the four
corners of the world and were never the monopoly of the land of the
Pharaohs, though until found scattered all over the two Americas, under
and over ground, beneath and amidst virgin forests, as in plain and
vale, they were supposed to be the exclusive property of Egypt. If the
true geometrically correct pyramids are no longer found in European
regions, many of the supposed early *neolithic* caves, of the colossal
triangular, pyramidal and conical *menhirs* in the Morbihan, and
Brittany generally; many of the Danish tumuli and even of the "giant
tombs" of Sardinia with their inseparable companions, the *nuraghi,* are
so many more or less clumsy copies of the pyramids. Most of these are
the works of the first settlers on the newly-born continent and isles of
Europe, the -- "some yellow, some brown and black, and some red" --
races that remained after the submersion of the last Atlantean
continents and islands (850,000 years ago), with the exception of
Plato's Atlantean island, and before the arrival of the great Aryan
races; while others were built by the earliest immigrants from the East.
Those who can hardly accept the antiquity of the human race so far back
as the 57,000 years assigned by Dr. Dowler to the skeleton found by him
at New Orleans on the banks of the Mississippi, will, of course, reject
these facts. But they may find themselves mistaken some day. It is the
foolish self-glorification of the Arcadians who styled themselves
\[\[*proselenoi*\]\] -- older than the moon -- and of the people of
Attica, who claimed that they had existed before the sun appeared in
heaven, that we may disparage, not their undeniable antiquity. Nor can
we laugh at the universal belief that we had giant ancestors. The fact
that the bones of the mammoth and mastodon, and, in one case, those of a
gigantic salamander, have been mistaken for human bones, does not make
away with the difficulty that, of all the mammalians, man is the only
one whom science will not allow to have dwarfed down, like all other
animal frames, from the giant *homo* *diluvii* to the creature between 5
and 6 feet that he is now.

But the "Serpents of Wisdom" have preserved their records well, and the
history of the human evolution is traced in heaven as it is traced on
underground walls. Humanity and the *stars* are bound together
indissolubly, because of the *intelligences* that rule the latter.

Modern symbologists may scoff at this and call it "fancy," but "it is
unquestionable that the Deluge has (ever) been associated in the legends
of some Eastern peoples not only with the Pyramids, but also with the
constellations," writes Mr. Staniland Wake **(**"*The Great*
*Pyramid*"). The "Old Dragon" is identical with the "great Flood," says
Mr. Proctor (*in* "*Knowledge,*" *Vol. I., p.* 243): "We know that in
the past the constellation of the Dragon was at the pole, or boss, of
the celestial sphere. In stellar temples . . . the Dragon would be the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 353 THE ASTRONOMICAL DRAGON.

uppermost or ruling constellation . . . it is singular how closely the
constellations . . . correspond in sequence and in range of right
ascension with the events recorded respecting the (Biblical) Flood."

The reasons for this *singularity* have been made clear in this work.
But it shows only that there were *several* Deluges mixed up in the
memories and traditions of the sub-races of the Fifth Race. The first
great "Flood" was astronomical and cosmical, while several others were
*terrestrial.* Yet, this did not prevent our very learned friend Mr.
Gerald Massey -- an *Initiate* truly in the mysteries of the British
Museum, still only a *Self*-initiate -- from declaring and insisting
that *the Atlantean* submersion and Deluge were only the
anthropomorphized fancies of ignorant people; and that Atlantis was no
better than an *astronomical allegory.* Nevertheless, the great Zodiacal
allegory is based upon historical events, and one can hardly interfere
with the other; and it stands also to reason that every student of
Occultism knows what that astronomical and zodiacal allegory means.
Smith shows in the Nimrod Epic of the Assyrian tablets the real meaning
of it. Its "*twelve cantos*" refer to the "annual course of the Sun
through the twelve months of the year. Each tablet answers to a special
month, and contains a distinct reference to the animal forms in the
signs of the Zodiac"; the eleventh canto being "consecrated to Rimmon,
the God of storms and of rain, and harmonizes with the eleventh sign of
the Zodiac -- Aquarius, or the Waterman" (*Nineteenth Century,* 1882,
*p*. 236). But even this is preceded in the old records by the
*pre-*astronomical Cosmic FLOOD, which became allegorized and symbolized
in the above Zodiacal or Noah's Flood. But this has nothing to do with
Atlantis. The Pyramids are closely connected with the ideas of both the
Great Dragon (the constellation), the "Dragons of Wisdom," or the great
Initiates of the Third and Fourth Races, and the Floods of the Nile,
regarded as a divine reminder of the great Atlantic Flood. The
astronomical records of Universal History, however, are said to have had
their beginnings with the Third Sub-race of the Fourth Root-race or the
Atlanteans. When was it? Occult data show that even since the time of
the regular establishment of the Zodiacal calculations in Egypt, *the
poles have been thrice inverted.*

We will presently return once more to this statement. Such symbols as
are represented by the Signs of the Zodiac -- a fact which offers a
handle to materialists upon which to hang their one-sided theories and
opinions -- have too profound a signification, and their bearing upon
our Humanity is too important to suffer dismissal in a few words.
Meanwhile, we have to consider the meaning of that other statement which
mentions (verse 48) the first *divine Kings,* who are said to have
"redescended," guided and *instructed* our Fifth Race after the last
deluge!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 354 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

We shall consider this last claim historically in the sections that
follow, but must end with a few more details on the subject of
"Serpents."

The rough commentaries on the Archaic Stanzas have to end here. Further
elucidation requires proofs obtained from ancient, mediaeval, and modern
works that have treated of these subjects. All such evidence has now to
be gathered in, collated and brought together in better order, so as to
compel the attention of the reader to this wealth of historical proofs.
And as the manifold meaning of the weird symbol -- so often referred to
and suggestive of the "tempter of man" in the orthodox light of the
church -- can never be too strongly insisted upon, it seems more
advisable to exhaust the subject by every available proof at this
juncture, even at the risk of repetition. The Titans and Kabirs have
been invariably made out by our theologians and some pious symbologists
as indissolubly connected with the grotesque personage called *devil,*
and every proof to the contrary has been hitherto as invariably rejected
and ignored; therefore, the occultist must neglect nothing which may
tend to defeat this conspiracy of slander. It is proposed to divide the
subjects involved in these three last verses into several groups, and
examine them in this final chapter as carefully and as fully as space
permits. A few more details may thus be added to the general evidences
of antiquity, on the most disputed tenets of Occultism and the Esoteric
Doctrine -- the bulk of which will be found in Part **II**. on
Symbology.

-------

**S**ERPENTS AND **D**RAGONS UNDER DIFFERENT **S**YMBOLISMS.

The name of the Dragon in Chaldea was not written phonetically, but was
represented by two monograms, *probably* meaning, according to the
Orientalists, "the scaly one." "This description," very pertinently
remarks G. Smith, "of course might apply either to a fabulous dragon, a
serpent, or a fish," and we may add: "It applies in one case to
*Makara,* the tenth Zodiacal sign, meaning in Sanskrit a non-descript
amphibious animal, generally called Crocodile, and really signifying
something else. (*Vide* Part **II**., "*The Mysteries of the
Hebdomad.*") This, then, is a virtual admission that the Assyriologists,
at all events, know nothing certain as to the status of the "Dragon" in
ancient Chaldea, whence the Hebrews got *their* symbolism, only to be
afterwards robbed of it by the Christians, who made of the "Scaly one" a
living entity and a maleficent power.

A specimen of Dragons, "winged and scaled," may be seen in the British
Museum. Representing the events of the Fall according to the same
authority, there are also two figures sitting on each side of a tree,
and holding out their hands to the "apple," while at the back of the
"Tree"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 355 THE NAASENIAN GNOSTICS.

is the Dragon-Serpent. Esoterically, the two figures are two "Chaldees"
ready for initiation, the Serpent symbolising the "Initiator"; while the
jealous gods, who curse the three, are the exoteric profane clergy. Not
much of the literal "Biblical event" there, as any occultist can see.

"The Great Dragon has respect but for the Serpents of Wisdom," says the
Stanza; thus proving the correctness of our explanation of the two
figures and the "Serpent."

"*The Serpents who redescended* . . . . *who taught and instructed*" the
Fifth Race. What sane man is capable of believing in our day that *real*
serpents are hereby meant? Hence the rough guess, now become almost an
axiom with the men of science, that those who wrote in antiquity upon
various sacred Dragons and Serpents either were superstitious and
credulous people, or were bent upon deceiving those more ignorant than
themselves. Yet, from Homer downwards, the term implied something hidden
from the profane.

"Terrible are the gods when they manifest themselves" -- those *gods*
whom men call *Dragons.* And AElianus, treating in his "*De Natura*
*Animalium*" of these Ophidean symbols, makes certain remarks which show
that he understood well the nature of this most ancient of symbols. Thus
he most pertinently explains with regard to the above Homeric verse --
"For the Dragon, while sacred and to be worshipped, *has within*
*himself something still more of the divine nature* of which it is
better (for others?) to remain in ignorance" (Book xi., ch. 17).

This "Dragon" having a septenary meaning, the highest and the lowest may
be given. The former is identical with the "Self-born," the Logos (the
Hindu *Aja*)*.* He was the second person of the Trinity, the **S**ON,
with the Christian Gnostics called the Naasenians, or
Serpent-Worshippers. His symbol was the constellation of the Dragon.\*
Its seven "stars" are the seven stars held in the hand of the "Alpha and
Omega" in *Revelation.* In its most terrestrial meaning, the term
"Dragon" was applied to the *Wise* men.

This portion of the religious symbolism of antiquity is very abstruse
and mysterious, and may remain incomprehensible to the profane. In our
modern day it so jars on the Christian ear that it can hardly escape,
all civilization notwithstanding, being regarded as a direct
denunciation of the most cherished Christian dogmas, the subject of
which required, to do it justice, the pen and genius of Milton, whose
poetical fiction has now taken root in the Church as a revealed dogma.

Did the allegory of the Dragon and his supposed conqueror in

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* As shown by H. Lizeray in the "Trinite Chretienne Devoilee" -- placed
between the immutable Father (the Pole, a fixed Point) and mutable
matter, the Dragon transmits to the latter the influences received by
him from the Pole, whence his name -- the *Verbum.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 356 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

Heaven originate with St. John, and in his *Revelation?* Emphatically we
answer -- No. His "Dragon" is Neptune, the symbol of Atlantean magic.

To demonstrate the negation the reader is asked to examine the symbolism
of the Serpent or the Dragon under its several aspects.

-------

**T**HE **S**IDEREAL AND **C**OSMIC **G**LYPHS.

Every astronomer -- besides Occultists and Astrologers -- knows that,
figuratively, the astral light, the milky way, and also the path of the
Sun to the tropics of Cancer and Capricorn, as well as the circles of
the Sidereal or Tropical year, were always called "Serpents" in the
allegorical and mystic phraseology of the adepts.

This, cosmically, as well as metaphorically. Poseidon is a "Dragon":
"*Chozzar,* called by the profane Neptune" (Peratae Gnostics); the "Good
and Perfect Serpent," the Messiah of the Naaseni, whose symbol in Heaven
is *Draco.*

But one ought to discriminate between the characters of this symbol. For
instance: Zoroastrian Esotericism is identical with that of the Secret
Doctrine; and when, as an example, we read in the *Vendidad* complaints
uttered against the "Serpent," whose bites have transformed the
beautiful, eternal spring of Airyana-Vaego, changing it into winter,
generating disease and death, at the same time as mental and psychic
consumption, every occultist knows that the Serpent alluded to is the
north pole, as also the pole of the heavens.\* The latter produces the
seasons according to the angle at which it penetrates the centre of the
earth. The two axes were *no more parallel*; hence the eternal spring of
Airyana Vaego by the good river Daitya had disappeared, and "the Aryan
Magi had to emigrate to Sagdiani" -- say the exoteric accounts. But the
esoteric teaching states that the pole had passed through the equator,
and that the "land of bliss" of the Fourth Race, its inheritance from
the Third, had now become the region of desolation and woe. This alone
ought to be an incontrovertible proof of the great antiquity of the
Zoroastrian Scriptures. The Neo-Aryans of the post-diluvian age could,
of course, hardly recognise the mountains, on the summits of which their
forefathers had met *before the Flood,* and conversed with the pure
"Yazathas" (celestial Spirits of the Elements), whose life and *food*
they had once shared. As shown by Eckstein (*Revue Archeologique,*
**8***th year,* 1885), "the Vendidad seems to point out a great change
in the atmosphere of central Asia; strong volcanic eruptions and the
collapse of a whole range of mountains in the neighbourhood of the
Kara-Korum chain."

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Symbolized by the Egyptians under the form of a Serpent with a hawk's
head.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 357 THE TWO MYSTIC POLES.

The Egyptians, according to Eusebius, who for once (and for a wonder)
wrote the truth, symbolised Kosmos by a large fiery circle, representing
a serpent with a hawk's head lying across its diameter. "Here we have
the pole of the earth within the plane of the ecliptic, attended with
all the fiery consequences that must arise from such a state of the
heavens: when the whole Zodiac in 25,000 (odd) years, must have reddened
with the solar blaze, and *each sign must have been* *vertical* to the
polar region." (*See Mackey*'*s* "*Sphinxiad.*")

Meru -- the abode of the gods -- was placed, as before explained, in the
North Pole, while *Patala,* the nether region, was supposed to lie in
the South. As each symbol in esoteric philosophy has *seven keys,*
geographically, *Meru* and *Patala* have one significance and represent
localities; while astronomically, they have another, and mean "the two
poles," which meanings ended by their being often rendered in *exoteric*
sectarianism -- the "Mountain" and the "Pit," or Heaven and Hell. If we
hold at present only to the astronomical and geographical significance,
it may be found that the ancients knew the topography and nature of the
Arctic and Antarctic regions better than any of our modern astronomers;
they had reasons, and good ones for naming one the "*Mountain*" and the
other the "*Pit.*" As the author just quoted half explains, *Helion* and
*Acheron* meant nearly the same: "*Heli-on is the Sun in* *the highest*"
(Helios, Heli-on, the "most high"); "and *Acheron* is 32 deg. above the
pole, and 32 below it, the allegorical river being thus supposed to
touch the northern horizon in the latitude of 32 degrees. The vast
concave, that is for ever hidden from our sight and which surrounded the
southern pole, being therefore called the **P**IT, while observing,
toward the Northern pole that a certain circuit in the heavens always
appeared above the horizon -- they called it the Mountain. As Meru is
the high abode of the Gods, these were said to *ascend* and *descend*
periodically; by which (astronomically) the *Zodiacal gods* were meant,
the passing of the original North Pole of the Earth to the South Pole of
the heaven." "In that age," adds the author of that curious work, the
"*Sphinxiad*" and of "*Urania*'*s Key to the Revelations*" -- "at noon,
the ecliptic would be parallel with the meridian, and part of the Zodiac
would descend from the North Pole to the north horizon; crossing the
*eight coils of the Serpent* (eight sidereal years, or over 200,000
solar years), which would seem like an imaginary *ladder* with *eight
staves* reaching from the earth up to the pole, *i.e*., the throne of
Jove. Up this ladder, then, the Gods, *i.e*., the signs of the Zodiac,
ascended and descended. (Jacob's ladder and the angels) . . . . It is
more than 400,000 years since the Zodiac formed the sides of this
ladder." . . . .

This is an ingenious explanation, even if it is not altogether free from
occult heresy. Yet it is nearer the truth than many of a more scientific

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 358 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

and especially theological character. As just said, the Christian
trinity was purely astronomical from its beginning, which made Rutilius
say -- of those who euhemerized *it --* "*Judaea gens, radix
stultorum.*"

But the profane, and especially the Christian fanatics, ever in search
of scientific corroboration for their *dead-letter* texts, will persist
in seeing in the celestial pole the true Serpent of Genesis, Satan, the
Enemy of mankind, instead of what it is -- a cosmic metaphor. *When the*
*gods are said to forsake the earth,* it does not only mean the gods,
protectors and instructors, but also the *minor* gods -- the regents of
the Zodiacal signs. Yet, the former, as actual and existing Entities
which gave birth to, nursed, and instructed mankind in its early youth,
appear in every Scripture, in that of the Zoroastrians as much as in the
Hindu Gospels. Ormazd, or Ahura-Mazda, the "Lord of Wisdom," is the
synthesis of the Amshaspends (or *Amesha-Spenta --* "*Immortal*
Benefactors"),\* the "Word," however, or the *Logos* and its six highest
aspects in Mazdyanism. These "Immortal Benefactors" are described *in
Zamyad yasht* as the "Amesha-Spentas, the shining, having efficacious
eyes, great, helpful . . . . imperishable and pure which are all seven
of like mind, like speech, all seven doing alike . . . . which are *the
creators and destroyers of the creatures* of Ahura-Mazda, their creators
and overseers, their protectors and rulers . . . ."

These few lines alone indicate the dual and even the triple character of
the Amshaspends, our Dhyan-Chohans or the "Serpents of Wisdom." They are
identical with, and yet separate from Ormazd (Ahura-Mazda). They are
also the Angels of the Stars of the Christians -- the Stary-azatas of
the Zoroastrians -- or again the seven planets (including the sun) of
every religion.\*\* The epithet -- "the shining having efficacious eyes"
-- proves it. This on the physical and sidereal planes. On the
spiritual, they are the divine powers of Ahura-Mazda; but on the astral
or psychic plane again, they are the "Builders," the "watchers," the
*Pitar* (fathers), and the first Preceptors of mankind.

When mortals shall have become sufficiently spiritualised, there will be
no more need of *forcing* them into a correct comprehension of ancient
Wisdom. Men will *know* then, that there never yet was a great
World-reformer, whose name has passed into our generation, who (*a*) was
not a direct emanation of the **L**OGOS (under whatever name known to
us), *i.e.*, *an essential* incarnation of one of "the seven," of the
"divine Spirit who is sevenfold"; and (*b*) who had not appeared before,
during the

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Also translated as "blissful Immortals" by Dr. W. Geiger; but the
first is more correct.

\*\* These "seven" became the eight, the *Ogdoad,* of the later
*materialized* religions, the seventh, or the highest principle, being
no longer the pervading Spirit, the Synthesis, but becoming an
anthropomorphic number, or additional unit.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 359 GOD AND NATURE ANTHROPOMORPHIZED.

past Cycles. They will recognise, then, the cause which produces in
history and chronology certain riddles of the ages; the reason why, for
instance, it is impossible *for them* to assign any reliable date to
Zoroaster, who is found multiplied by twelve and fourteen in the
*Dabistan*; why the Rishis and Manus are so mixed up in their numbers
and individualities; why Krishna and Buddha speak of themselves as
*re-incarnations, i.e.,* Krishna is identified with the Rishi Narayana,
and Gautama gives a series of his previous births; and why the former,
especially, being "the *very supreme* Brahma," is yet called
*Amsamsavatara --* "a part of a part" only of the Supreme on Earth.
Finally, why Osiris is a great God, and at the same time a "prince on
Earth," who reappears in Thoth-Hermes, and why Jesus (in Hebrew, Joshua)
of Nazareth is recognised, cabalistically, in Joshua, the Son of Nun, as
well as in other personages. The esoteric doctrine explains it by saying
that each of these (as many others) had first appeared on earth as one
of the seven powers of the **L**OGOS, individualized as a God or "Angel"
(messenger); then, mixed with matter, they had re-appeared in turn as
great sages and instructors who "taught the Fifth Race," after having
instructed the two preceding races, had ruled during the Divine
Dynasties, and had finally sacrificed themselves, to be reborn under
various circumstances for the good of mankind, and for its salvation at
certain critical periods; until in their last incarnations they had
become truly only "the parts of a part" on earth, though *de facto* the
One Supreme in Nature.

This is the metaphysics of Theogony. And, as every "Power" among the
SEVEN has (once individualized) in his charge one of the elements of
creation, and rules over it,\* hence the many meanings in every symbol,
which, unless interpreted according to the esoteric methods, generally
lead to an inextricable confusion.

Does the Western Kabalist -- generally an opponent of the Eastern
Occultist -- require a proof? Let him open Eliphas Levi's *Histoire de*
*la Magic,*" p. 53, and carefully examine his "*Grand Symbole
Kabalistique*" of the Zohar. He will find, on the engraving given, a
*white* man standing erect and a *black* woman upside down, *i.e*.,
standing on her head, her legs passing under the extended arms of the
male figure, and protruding behind his shoulders, while their hands join
at an angle on each side. Eliphas Levi makes of it, God and Nature; or
God, "light," mirrored inversely in "Nature and Matter," darkness.
Kabalistically and symbolically he is right; but only so far as
emblematical cosmogony goes. Nor has he invented the symbol any more

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* These elements are: -- The cosmic, the terrene, the mineral, the
vegetable, the animal, the aqueous, and finally the human -- in their
physical, spiritual, and psychic aspects.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 360 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

than the Kabalists have: the two figures in white and black stone have
existed in the temples of Egypt from time immemorial -- agreeably to
tradition; and historically -- ever since the day of King Cambyses, who
personally saw them. Therefore the symbol must have been in existence
since nearly 2,500 years ago. This, at the very least, for that Persian
sovereign, who was a son of Cyrus the Great, succeeded his father in the
year 529 B.C. These figures were the two *Kabiri* *personifying the
opposite poles.* Herodotus (*Thalia,* No. 77) tells posterity that when
Cambyses entered the temple of the Kabirim, he went into an
inextinguishable fit of laughter, on perceiving what he thought a man
erect and a woman standing on the top of her head before him. These were
the poles, however, whose symbol was intended to commemorate "the
passing of the original North Pole of the Earth to the South Pole of the
Heaven," as perceived by Mackey.\* But they represented also the poles
*inverted,* in consequence of the great inclination of the axis,
bringing each time as a result the displacement of the Oceans, the
submersion of the polar lands, and the consequent *upheaval* of new
continents in the equatorial regions, and *vice* *versa.* These Kabirim
were the "Deluge" gods.

This may help us to get at the key of the seemingly hopeless confusion
among the numbers of names and titles given to one and the same gods,
and classes of gods. Faber showed already, at the beginning of this
century, the identity of the Corybantes, Curetes, Dioscuri, Anactes, Dii
Magni, Idei Dactyli, Lares, Penates, Manes,\*\* Titans, and Aletae with
the **K**ABIRI. And we have shown that the latter were the same as the
Manus, the Rishis and our Dhyan Chohans, who incarnated in the Elect of
the Third and Fourth Races. Thus, while in Theogony the Kabiri-Titans
were seven great gods: cosmically and astronomically the Titans were
called Atlantes, because, perhaps, as Faber says, they were connected

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Who adds that the Egyptians had various ways of representing the
angles of the Poles. Also in Perry's *View of the Levant* there is "a
figure representing the South Pole of the Earth in the constellation of
the Harp," in which the poles appear like two *straight rods,*
surmounted with hawks' wings, but they were also often represented as
serpents with heads of hawks, one at each end.

\*\* Faber and Bishop Cumberland would make them all the later pagan
personifications, as the former writer has it, of "the Noetic Ark, and
no other than the Patriarch (Noah) and his family" (!) *See his*
"*Kabiri,*" *Vol.* **I***.,* 136; because, we are told, "after the
Deluge in commemoration of the event, the pious Noachidae had
established a religious festival, which was, later on, corrupted by
their *impious* descendants; demons or hero-gods; and at length
unblushing obscenity usurped the name and garb of religion" (*Vol. I.,
p.* 10.). Now this is indeed putting an extinguisher upon the human
reasoning powers, not only of antiquity, but even of our present
generations. Reverse the statement, and explain after the words "Noah
and his family" that what is meant by that patriarch and family is
simply the Jewish version of a Samothracian mystery, of *Saturn, or
Kronos-Sadic and his Sons,* and then we may say *Amen.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 361 WHO WERE ENOCH AND THE OTHERS?

(*a*) *with At-al-as* "the divine Sun," and (*b*) with *tit* "the
deluge." But this, if true, is only the exoteric version. Esoterically,
the meaning of their symbols depends on the appellation, or title, used.
The seven mysterious, awe-inspiring great gods -- the *Dioscuri*,\* the
deities surrounded with the darkness of occult nature -- become the
*Idei* (or Idaeic finger) with the adept-healer by metals. The true
etymology of the name *lares* (now signifying "ghosts") must be sought
in the Etruscan word "*lars*," "conductor," "leader." Sanchoniathon
translates the word *Aletae* as fire worshippers, and Tabor believes it
derived from *Al-Orit,* "the god of fire." Both are right, as in both
cases it is a reference to the Sun (the highest God), toward whom the
planetary gods "gravitate" (astronomically and allegorically) and whom
they worship. As *Lares,* they are truly the Solar Deities, though
Faber's etymology, who says that "*lar*" is a contraction of "*El-Ar,*"
the solar deity, is not very correct. They are the "lares," the
conductors and leaders of men. As *Aletae,* they were the seven planets
-- astronomically; and as *Lares,* the regents of the same, our
protectors and rulers -- mystically. For purposes of exoteric or phallic
worship, as also cosmically, they were the Kabiri, their attributes
being recognised in these two capacities by the name of the temples to
which they respectively belonged, and those of their priests. They all
belonged, however, to the Septenary creative and informing groups of
Dhyan Chohans. The Sabeans, who worshipped the "regents of the Seven
planets" as the Hindus do their Rishis, held Seth and his son Hermes
(Enoch or *Enos*) as the highest among the planetary gods. Seth and Enos
were borrowed from the Sabeans and then disfigured by the Jews
(exoterically); but the truth can still be traced about them even in
*Genesis.\*\** Seth is the "progenitor" of those early men of the Third
Race in whom the "Planetary" angels had incarnated -- a Dhyan Chohan
himself, who belonged to the *informing* gods; and Enos (Hanoch or
Enoch) or Hermes, was said to be *his son* -- because it was a generic
name for all the early *Seers* ("Enoichion"). Thence the worship. The
Arabic writer Soyuti says that the earliest records mention Seth, or
*Set,* as the founder of Sabeanism; and therefore that the pyramids
which embody the planetary system were regarded as the place of
sepulchre of both Seth and *Idris* (Hermes or Enoch), (*See Vyse,*
"*Operations,*" *Vol. II., p.* 358); that thither Sabeans proceeded

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Who became later on, with the Greeks, limited only to Castor and
Pollux. But in the days of Lemuria, the *Dioscuri,* the "Egg-born," were
the Seven Dhyan Chohans (Agnishwatta-Kumara) who incarnated in the Seven
Elect of the Third Race.

\*\* Clement of Alexandria recognized the astronomical significance of
chapter xxv. *et seq.* of Exodus. According to the Mosaic doctrine, he
says that the seven planets help in the generation of terrestrial
things. The two cherubs standing on the two sides of the sacred
tetragrammaton represent the Ursa Major and Ursa Minor.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 362 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

on pilgrimage, and *chanted prayers seven times* a day, *turning to the*
*North* (the Mount Meru, Kaph, Olympus, etc., etc.) (*See Palgrave,*
*Vol. II., p.* 264). Abd Allatif says curious things about the Sabeans
and their books. So does Eddin Ahmed Ben Yahya, who wrote 200 years
later. While the latter maintains "that each pyramid was consecrated *to
a star*" (a star *regent* rather), Abd Allatif assures us "that he had
read in Sabean books that one pyramid was the tomb of Agathodaemon and
the other of Hermes" (*Vyse, Vol. II., p.* 342). "Agathodaemon was none
other than Seth, and, according to some writers, Hermes was his son,"
adds Mr. Staniland Wake in "*The Great Pyramid,*" p. 57.

Thus, while in Samothrace and the oldest Egyptian temples they were the
great Cosmic Gods (the seven and the *forty-nine* Sacred Fires), in the
Grecian fanes their rites became mostly phallic, therefore to the
profane, obscene. In the latter case they were 3 and 4, or 7 -- the male
and female principles -- (the *crux ansata*); this division showing why
some classical writers held that they were only three, while others
named four. And these were -- the Kabiri -- Axieros (in his female
aspect, Demeter); Axio-Kersa (Persephone)\*; Axiokersos (Pluto or
Hades); and Kadmos or Kadmilos (Hermes -- not the ithyphallic Hermes
mentioned by Herodotus (**II**. 51) but "he of the sacred legend,"
explained only during the Samothracian mysteries). This identification,
due, according to the Scholiast Apollon (Rh. I. 217), to an indiscretion
of Mnaseas, is none at all, as names alone do not reveal much. There
were still others again who maintained, being as right in their way,
that there were only two Kabiri. These were, esoterically, the two
Dioscuri, Castor and Pollux, and exoterically, Jupiter and Bacchus. The
two personified the terrestrial poles, geodesically; the terrestrial,
and the pole of the heavens -- astronomically, as also the physical and
the spiritual man. The story of Semele and Jupiter and the birth of
Bacchus, the *Bimater,* with all the circumstances attending it, needs
only to be read esoterically to understand the allegory. The parts
played in the event by the fire, water, earth, etc., in the many
versions, will show how "the father of the gods"

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* It is a curious idea -- yet one not very far from the truth, perhaps
-- that speculation of Mackey, the self-made Adept of Norwich, found in
his "Mythological Astronomy." He says that the Kabiri named Axieros and
Axiokersa derived their names (*a*) from *Kab* or *Cab,* a measure, and
from *Urim*, the heavens: the Kabirim being thus "a measure of the
heavens"; and (*b*) that their distinctive names, implying the
*principle of generation,* referred to the sexes. For, "the word *sex*
was formerly understood by *aix*; which has now settled . . . . into
sex." And he refers to "Encyclopaedia Londinus" at the word
"*aspiration.*" Now if we give the aspirated sound to Axieros, it would
be *Saxieros*; and the other pole would be *Saxiokersa.* The two poles
would thus become the generators of the other powers of nature -- they
would be the *parents:* therefore the most powerful gods.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 363 THE POLES, THE "HEAVENLY MEASURE."

and the "merry God of the wine" were also made to personify the two
terrestrial Poles. The telluric, metalline, magnetic, electric and the
fiery elements are all so many allusions and references to the cosmic
and astronomic character of the diluvian tragedy. In astronomy, the
poles are indeed the "heavenly measure" (*vide* note *supra*); *and* so
are the Kabiri *Dioscuri,* as will be shown, and the Kabiri-Titans, to
whom Diodorus ascribes the *invention of fire\** and the art of
manufacturing iron. Moreover, Pausanias shows that the original Kabiric
deity was Prometheus. (I. ix. p. 751.)

But the fact that, astronomically, the Titans-Kabirim were also the
generators and regulators of the seasons, and cosmically the great
Volcanic Energies, the gods presiding over all the metals and
terrestrial works, does not prevent them from being, in their original
divine characters, the beneficent Entities who, symbolized in
Prometheus, brought light to the world, and endowed humanity with
intellect and reason. They are pre-eminently in every theogony --
especially in the Hindu -- the sacred divine fires, 3, 7, or 49,
according as the allegory demands it. Their very names prove it, as they
are the *Agni-putra* (Sons of the Fire) in India, and the genii of the
fire under numerous names in Greece and elsewhere. Welcker, Maury, and
now Decharme, show the name Kabeiron meaning "the powerful through
fire," from the Greek word *\[\[kaio\]\]* "to burn." The Semitic
*Kabirim,* "the powerful, the mighty, and the great," answering to the
Greek \[\[*megaloi dunatoi*\]\], are later epithets. They were
universally worshipped, and their origin is lost in the night of time.
Yet whether propitiated in Phrygia, Phoenicia, the Troad, Thrace, Egypt,
Lemnos or Sicily, their cult was always connected with fire; their
temples ever built in the most volcanic localities, and in exoteric
worship they belonged to Chthonian divinities. Therefore Christianity
has made of them *infernal gods.*

They are truly "the great, beneficent and powerful Gods," as Cassius
Hermone calls them (*See Macrob. Sat. I., iii., c. 4, p*. 376). At
Thebes, Kore and Demeter, the *Kabirim,* had a sanctuary (*Pausan. IX.*
22; 5)*,* and at Memphis, the Kabiri had a temple so sacred, that none,
excepting the priests, were suffered to enter their holy precincts
(*Herodotus I. ii.,* *c.* 37). But we must not lose sight, at the same
time, of the fact that the title of Kabiri was a generic one; that the
Kabiri (the *mighty* gods as well as mortals), were of both sexes, as
also terrestrial, celestial and kosmic. That, while in their later
capacity of the Rulers of sidereal and terrestrial powers, a purely
geological phenomenon (as it is now

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* The word "guebra" comes from Kabiri, *gabiri,* and means Persian
ancient fire-worshippers, or Parsis. Kabiri became *gabiri* and then
remained as an appellation of the Zoroastrians in Persia. (*See
Hyde*'*s* "*De Religio Persarum,*" *cap.* 29.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 364 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

regarded) was symbolized in the persons of those rulers, they were also,
in the beginning of times, the rulers of mankind. When incarnated as
Kings of the "divine Dynasties," they gave the first impulse to
civilizations, and directed the mind with which they had endued men to
the invention and perfection of all the arts and sciences. Thus the
Kabiri are said to have appeared as the benefactors of men, and as such
they lived for ages in the memory of nations. To them -- the Kabiri or
Titans -- is ascribed the invention of letters (the *Devanagari,* or the
alphabet and language of the gods), of laws and legislature; of
architecture, as of the various modes of magic, so-called; and of the
medical use of plants. Hermes, Orpheus, Cadmus, Asclepius, all those
demi-gods and heroes, to whom is ascribed the revelation of sciences to
men, and in whom Bryant, Faber, Bishop Cumberland, and so many other
Christian writers -- too zealous for plain truth --would force posterity
to see only pagan copies of one and sole prototype, named Noah -- are
all generic names.

It is the Kabiri who are credited with having revealed, by *producing*
corn or wheat, the great boon of agriculture. What *Isis-Osiris, the*
once living Kabiria, has done in Egypt, that Ceres is said to have done
in Sicily; they all belong to one class.

That the Serpents were ever the emblems of wisdom and prudence is again
shown by the caduceus of Mercury, one with Thot, the god of wisdom, with
Hermes, and so on. The two serpents, entwined around the rod, are
phallic symbols of Jupiter and other gods who transformed themselves
into snakes for purposes of seducing goddesses -- but only in the
unclean fancies of profane symbologists. The serpent has ever been the
symbol of the adept, and of his powers of immortality and divine
knowledge. Mercury in his psychopompic character, conducting and guiding
with the caduceus the souls of the dead to Hades and even raising the
dead to life with it, is simply a very transparent allegory. It shows
the dual power of the Secret Wisdom: the black and the white magic. It
shows this personified Wisdom guiding the Soul after death, and its
power to call to life that which is dead -- a very deep metaphor if one
thinks over its meaning. Every people of antiquity reverenced this
symbol, with the exception of Christians, who chose to forget the brazen
Serpent of Moses, and even the implied acknowledgment of the great
wisdom and prudence of the Serpent by Jesus himself, "Be ye *wise* as
serpents and harmless as doves." The Chinese, one of the oldest nations
of our Fifth Race, made of it the emblem of their Emperors, who are thus
the degenerate successors of the "Serpents" or Initiates, who ruled the
early races of the Fifth Humanity. The Emperor's throne is the "Dragon's
Seat," and his dresses of State are embroidered with the likeness of the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 365 THE VARIOUS NOAHS.

Dragon. The aphorisms in the oldest books of China, moreover, say
plainly that the "Dragon" is a human, albeit *divine,* Being. Speaking
of the "Yellow Dragon," the chief of the others, the *Twan-ying-t*'*u,
says:* "His wisdom and virtue are unfathomable . . . he does not go in
company and does not live in herds (he is an ascetic). He wanders in the
wilds beyond the heavens. He goes and comes, fulfilling the decree
(Karma); at the proper seasons if there is perfection he comes forth, if
not he remains (invisible).". . . And Kon-fu-tyu is made to say by
Lu-lan, "The Dragon feeds in the pure water of Wisdom and sports in the
clear waters of Life."

-------

**O**UR **D**IVINE **I**NSTRUCTORS.

Now Atlantis and the Phlegyan isle are not the only record that is left
of the deluge. China has also her tradition and the story of an island
or continent, which it calls Ma-li-ga-si-ma, and which Kaempfer and
Faber spell "Maurigosima," for some mysterious phonetic reasons of their
own. Kaempfer, in his "*Japan*" (*Appendix, p.* 13), gives the
tradition: The island, owing to the iniquity of its giants, sinks to the
bottom of the ocean, and Peiru-un, the king, the Chinese Noah, escapes
alone with his family owing to a warning of the gods through two idols.
It is that pious prince and his descendants who have peopled China. The
Chinese traditions speak of the divine dynasties of Kings as much as
those of any other nations.

At the same time there is not an old fragment but shows belief in a
multiform and even multigeneric evolution -- spiritual, psychic,
intellectual and physical -- of human beings, just as given in the
present work. A few of these claims have now to be considered.

Our races -- they all show -- have sprung from divine races, by whatever
name they are called. Whether we deal with the Indian Rishis or Pitris;
with the Chinese *Chim-nang* and *Tchan-gy --* their "divine man" and
demi-gods; with the Akkadian *Dingir* and *Mul-lil* -- the creative god
and the "Gods of the ghost-world"; with the Egyptian Isis-Osiris and
Thot; with the Hebrew Elohim, or again with Manco Capac and his Peruvian
progeny -- the story varies nowhere. Every nation has Amshaspends\* (six
exoterically), ten and seven Chaldean Anedots,

\[\[Footnote continued\]\]---------------------------------

\* The Amshaspends are six -- if Ormazd, their chief and Logos, is
excluded. But in the secret doctrine he is the seventh and highest, just
as Phtah is the seventh Kabir among the Kabiri.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 366 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

ten and seven Sephiroth, etc., etc. One and all have been derived from
the primitive Dhyan-Chohans of the Esoteric doctrine, or the "Builders"
of the Stanzas (Book I.). From Manu, Thot-Hermes, Oannes-Dagon, and
Edris-Enoch, down to Plato and Panadores, all tell us of seven *divine*
Dynasties, of seven Lemurian, and seven Atlantean divisions of the
Earth; of the seven primitive and dual gods who descend from their
celestial abode\* and reign on Earth, teaching mankind Astronomy,
Architecture, and all the other sciences that have come down to us.
These Beings appear first as "gods" and Creators; then they merge in
nascent man, to finally emerge as "divine-Kings and Rulers." But this
fact has been gradually forgotten. As Bosuage shows, the Egyptians
themselves confessed that science flourished in their country only since
Isis-Osiris, whom they continue to adore as gods, "though they had
become Princes in human form." And he adds of Osiris-Isis (the divine
androgyne: -- "It is said that this Prince (Isis-Osiris) built cities in
Egypt, stopped the overflowing of the Nile; invented agriculture, the
use of the vine, music, astronomy, and geometry."

When Abul-Feda says in his "*Historia Anteislamitica*" (*Fleisher, p.*
16) that the Sabean language was established by Seth and Edris (Enoch)
-- he means by "Sabean language" astronomy. In the "Melelwa Nohil" (*MS.
47 in Nic. Cat.*) Hermes is called the disciple of Agathodaemon. And in
another account (*See Col. Vyse*'*s 2nd Vol. of the* "*Pyramids* *of
Ghizeh,*" *p.* 364*, MS.* 785*, Uri*'*s Cat*.) Agathodaemon is mentioned
as a "*King of Egypt.*" Celepas Geraldinus gives curious traditions
about Henoch. He calls him the "divine giant." In the "*Book of* *the
various names of the Nile,*" the same author (the historian
Ahmed-Ben-Yusouf Eltiphas) tells us of the belief among the Semitic
Arabs that Seth (become later the Egyptian Typhon, Set), had been one of
the seven angels (or Patriarchs in the Bible): then he became a mortal
and Adam's son, after which he communicated the gift of prophecy and
astronomical science to Jared, who passed it to his son Henoch. But
Henoch (Idris) "the author of thirty books, was Sabaean by origin"
(*i.e*., belonging to the *Saba,* "a Host"); "having established the
rites and ceremonies of primitive worship, he went to the East, where he
constructed 140 cities, of which Edessa was the least important, then
returned to Egypt where he became its King." Thus, he is identified with
Hermes. But there were five Hermes -- or rather one, who appeared -- as
some Manus and Rishis did -- in several different characters. In the
*Burham-i-Kati* he is mentioned as "Hormig," a name of the planet
Mercury or Budha; and Wednes-

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* In the Purana it is identified with Vishnu's or Brahma's Sveta Dwipa
of Mount Meru.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 367 HERMES IN ASTRONOMY AND ELSEWHERE.

day was sacred both to Hermes and Thot. The Hermes of Oriental
tradition, worshipped at Phineata and said to have fled after the death
of Argus into Egypt, civilized it under the name of Thoth. But under
whichever of these characters, he is always credited with having
transferred all the sciences from *latent to active potency,* *i.e.*,
with having been the first to teach magic to Egypt and to Greece,
*before the days of Magna Graecia,* and when the Greeks were not even
Hellenes.

Not only Herodotus -- the "father of History" -- tells us of the
marvellous dynasties of gods that preceded the reign of mortals,
followed by the dynasties of demi-gods, Heroes, and finally men, but the
whole series of classics support him; Diodorus, Eratosthenes, Plato,
Manetho, etc., etc., repeat the same, and never vary the order given.

"It is, indeed," as Creuzer shows: --

"From the spheres of the stars wherein dwell the gods of light that
wisdom descends to the inferior spheres." "In the system of the ancient
priests (Hierophants and Adepts) all things without exception, gods, the
genii, *manes* (souls), the whole world, are conjointly developed in
Space and duration. The pyramid may be considered as the symbol of this
magnificent hierarchy of Spirits. . . . "\*

There were more efforts made by the modern historians (French
Academicians, like Renan, chiefly) to suppress truth by ignoring the
ancient annals of *divine* Kings, than is strictly consistent with
honesty. But M. Renan could never be more unwilling than was
Eratosthenes 260 years B.C. to accept the unpalatable fact; and yet the
latter found himself obliged to recognise its truth. For this, the great
astronomer is treated with great contempt by his colleagues 2,000 years
later. Manetho became with them "a superstitious priest born and bred in
the atmosphere of other lying priests of Heliopolis" (*Freret*)*.* "All
those historians and priests," justly remarks the demonologist, de
Mirville, "so *veracious* when repeating stories of *human* kings and
men, suddenly become *extremely suspicious* no sooner do they go back
*to their gods.*" *.* . . But there is the synchronistic table of
Abydos, which, thanks to the genius of Champollion, has now vindicated
the good faith of the priests of Egypt (Manetho's above all), and that
of Ptolemy. In the Turin papyrus, the most remarkable of all, in the
words of the Egyptologist, de Rouge: --

". . . Champollion, struck with amazement, found that he had under his
own eyes the whole truth. . . . It was the remains of a list of
dynasties embracing the furthest mythoic times, or the REIGN OF THE GODS
AND HEROES. . . . At the very outset of this curious

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Ch. iv. of "*Egypt,*" *p.* 441.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 368 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

papyrus we have to arrive at the conviction that so far back already as
the period of Ramses, those mythic and heroical traditions were just as
Manetho had transmitted them to us; we see figuring in them, as Kings of
Egypt, the gods Seb, Osiris, Horus, Thoth-Hermes, and the goddess Ma, a
long period of centuries being assigned to the reign of each of these."
(*Ann. de Philologie Chretienne,* Vol. **XXXII**., p. 442).

The synchronistic tables of Manetho, besides the fact that they were
disfigured by Eusebius for dishonest purposes, had never gone beyond
Manetho. The chronology of the divine Kings and Dynasties, like that of
the age of humanity, has ever been in the hands of the priests, and was
kept secret from the profane multitudes.

Africa, as a continent, it is said, appeared before Europe did;
nevertheless it appeared later than Lemuria and even the earliest
Atlantis. That the whole region of what is now Egypt and the deserts was
once upon a time covered with the sea, was known firstly through
Herodotus, Strabo, Pliny, and all the Greeks; and, secondly, through
geology. Abyssinia was once upon a time an island; and the Delta was the
first country occupied by the pioneer emigrants who came with their gods
from the North-east.

When was it? History is silent upon the subject. Fortunately we have the
Dendera Zodiac, the planisphere on the ceiling of one of the oldest
Egyptian temples, which records the fact. This Zodiac, with its
mysterious three *Virgos* between the *Lion* and *Libra,* has found its
OEdipus, who understood the riddle of these signs, and justified the
truthfulness of those priests who told Herodotus that: -- (*a*) The
poles of the Earth and the Ecliptic had formerly coincided; and (*b*)
That even since their first Zodiacal records were commenced, the Poles
have been three times within the plane of the Ecliptic, as the Initiates
taught.

Bailly had not sufficient words at his command to express his surprise
at the *sameness* of all such traditions about the *divine* races. "What
are finally," he exclaims, "all those reigns of Indian *Devas* and
Persian *Peris?* . . . . Or, those reigns and dynasties of the Chinese
legends; those Tien-hoang or the *Kings of Heaven,* quite distinct from
the *Ti-hoang,* the Kings on Earth, and the *Gin-hoang* the King's men,
a distinction which is in perfect accord with that other one made by the
Greeks and the Egyptians, in enumerating *their dynasties of Gods,* *of
demi-gods, and of mortals.*"*\**

"Now," says Panadoras, "it is before that time (Menes), that *the reign*
*of the seven gods who rule the world took place.* It was during that
period that those benefactors of humanity *descended* on Earth and
taught

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* *Histoire de l'Astronomie Ancienne.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 369 WHAT THE PRIESTS TOLD HERODOTUS.

men to calculate the course of the sun and moon by the twelve signs of
the Ecliptic."

Nearly five hundred years before the actual era, Herodotus was shown by
the priests of Egypt the statues of their human Kings and
Pontiffs*-piromis* (the archi-prophets or Maha-Chohans of the temples),
*born one from the other* (without the intervention of woman) who had
reigned before Menes, their first *human* King. These statues, he says,
were enormous colossi in wood, three hundred and forty-five in number,
*each of which had his name, his history and his annals.* And they
assured Herodotus\* (unless the most truthful of historians, the "Father
of History," is now accused of fibbing, *just in this instance*) that no
historian could ever understand or write an account of these superhuman
Kings, unless he had studied and learned the history *of the three
dynasties* that preceded the human -- namely, the DYNASTIES OF THE GODS,
that of demi-gods, and of the Heroes, or giants. These "three dynasties"
are the three Races.\*\*

Translated into the language of the Esoteric doctrine, these three
dynasties would also be those of the Devas, of Kimpurushas, and of
Danavas and Daityas -- otherwise gods, celestial spirits, and giants or
Titans. "Happy are those who are born, even from the condition of gods,
as men, in Bharata-Varsha!" exclaim the incarnated gods themselves,
during the Third Root-Race. Bharata is India, but in this case it
symbolized the chosen land in those days, and was considered the best of
the divisions of Jambu-dwipa, as it was the land of active (spiritual)
works *par excellence*; the land of initiation and of divine knowledge.

Can one fail to recognise in Creuzer great powers of intuition, when,
being almost unacquainted with the Aryan Hindu philosophies, little
known in his day, he wrote: --

> "We modern Europeans feel surprised when hearing talk of the Spirits
> of the Sun, Moon, etc. But we repeat again, the *natural good sense
> and the upright*

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* See also *Memoires a l*'*Academie, etc., of de Mirville, Vol. III.,*
for a mass of evidence.

\*\* In *Vishnu-Purana, Book II., chap.* 3, 4, *et seq.,* may be found
many corroborations of the same, if one reads carefully. The reigns of
gods, lower gods, and men are all enumerated in the descriptions of the
seven Islands, seven seas, seven mountains, etc., etc., ruled by Kings.
Each king is said invariably to have *seven* sons, an allusion to the
seven sub-races. One instance will do. The King of *Kusa dwipa* had
seven sons (follow names) . . . "after whom the seven portions (Varsha)
of the island were called. *There reside mankind along with Daityas and
Danavas, as well as with spirits of* *Heaven* (*Gandharvas, Yakshas,
Kimpurushas, etc*.) *and gods.*" (*Chapter iv.*) There is but one
exception in the case of King Priyavrata, the son of the first Manu,
Swayambhuva -- who had *ten* sons. But of these, three -- Medha,
Agnibahu, and Putra -- became ascetics, and refused their portions. Thus
Priyavrata divided the earth again into *seven* continents.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 370 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

> *judgment* of the ancient peoples, quite foreign to our *entirely
> material* ideas upon celestial mechanics and physical sciences . . .
> could not see in the stars and planets only that which we see: namely,
> simple masses of light, or opaque bodies moving in circuits in
> sidereal space, merely according to the laws of attraction or
> repulsion; but they saw in them *living* bodies, *animated* by spirits
> as they saw the same in every kingdom of nature. . . . *This doctrine
> of spirits, so* *consistent and conformable to nature,* from which it
> was derived, formed a grand and unique conception, wherein the
> physical, the moral, and the political aspects were all blended
> together . . . " ("*Egypte,*" *pp.* 450 *to* 455.)

It is such a conception only that can lead man to form a correct
conclusion about his origin and the genesis of everything in the
universe -- of Heaven and Earth, between which he is a living link.
Without such a psychological link, and the feeling of its presence, no
science can ever progress, and the realm of knowledge must be limited to
the analysis of physical matter only.

Occultists believe in "spirits," because they *feel* (and some see)
themselves surrounded on every side by them.\* Materialists do not. They
live on this earth, just as, in the world of insects and even of fishes,
some creatures live surrounded by myriads of their own *genus,* without
seeing, or so much as sensing them.\*\*

Plato is the first sage among the classics who speaks at length of the

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* As a general rule, *now* that the very nature of the *inner* man has
become as blind as his physical nature, man is situated on this globe as
the *Amphioxus* is in the Ocean. Surrounded by shoals and millions of
various other fishes and creatures that see it, *the Amphioxus* species
--having neither brain nor any of the senses possessed by the other
classes -- sees them not. Who knows whether, on the Darwinian theory,
these "Branchiostoma" are not the direct ancestors of our Materialists.

\*\* The Occultists have been accused of worshipping *gods* or devils.
We deny this. Among the numberless hosts of spirits -- *men* that were,
and those who will be men -- there are those immeasurably superior to
the human race, higher and holier than the highest Saint on Earth, and
wiser than any mortal without exception. And there are those again who
are no better than we are, as some are far worse and inferior to the
lowest savage. It is the latter classes that command the readiest
communication with our earth, who perceive and sense us, as the
clairvoyants perceive and sense them. The close proximity of our
respective abodes and planes of perception are in favour of such
inter-communication unfortunately, as they are ever ready to interfere
with our affairs for weal or woe. If we are asked how it is that none
but sensitive hysterical natures, neuro- and psycho-pathic persons see
and occasionally talk with "Spirits," we answer the question by several
other queries. We ask: "Do you know the nature of hallucination, and can
you define its psychic process? How can you tell that all such visions
are due merely to physical hallucinations? What makes you feel so sure
that mental and nervous diseases, while drawing a veil over our *normal*
senses (so-called) *do not* reveal at the same time vistas unknown to
the healthy man, by throwing open doors usually closed against your
scientific perceptions (?): or that a psycho-spiritual faculty *does
not* forthwith replace the loss, or the temporary atrophy, of a purely
physical sense? It is disease, or the exuberance of nervous fluid which
produces mediumship and visions --hallucinations, as you call them. But
what *does* Science know even of mediumship?" Truly were the
\[\[Footnote continued on next page\]\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 371 A UNIVERSAL CORROBORATION.

divine Dynasties, and locates them on a vast continent which he calls
Atlantis. Bailly was not the first nor last to believe the same, and he
had been preceded and anticipated in this theory by Father Kircher. This
learned Jesuit writes in "*OEdipus AEgyptiacus*" (*Vol.* I., p. 70): --

"I confess, for a long time I had regarded all this (dynasties and the
Atlantis) as pure fables (*meras nugas*) to the day when, better
instructed in Oriental languages, I judged that all those legends must
be, after all, only the development of a great truth. . . . ."

As de Rougemont shows, Theopompus, in his *Meropis,* made the priests of
Phrygia and Asia Minor speak exactly as the priests of Sais did when
they revealed to Solon the history and fate of Atlantis. According to
Theopompus, it was a unique continent of an indefinite size, and
containing two countries inhabited by *two races --* a fighting, warrior
race, and a pious, meditative race,\* which Theopompus symbolizes by two
cities.\*\* The pious "city" was *continually visited by* *the gods*;
the belligerent "city" was inhabited by various beings *invulnerable* to
iron, liable to be *mortally wounded* only by stone and wood."\*\*\* De
Rougemont treats this as a pure *fiction* of Theopompus ("*Peuple
Primitif,*" *vol. iii.* 157) and even sees a fraud (*supercherie*) in
the assertion of the Saitic priests. This was denounced by the
"Demonologists" as illogical. In the words of De Mirville: -- "A
*supercherie* which was based on a belief, the product of faith of the
whole antiquity; a *supposition* which yet gave its name to a whole
mountain chain (the Atlas); which specified with the greatest precision
a topographical region (by placing some of its lands at a small distance
from Cadiz and the strait of Calpetus), which prophesied, 2,000 years
before Columbus, *the great* *trans-oceanic land* situated beyond that
Atlantis and which "is reached" it said -- "by the *islands* not of the
blessed, but of the good spirits \[\[*eudaimonia*\]\] (our '*Iles
Fortunees*') *--* such a supposition can never be an universal chimera."
(*A word on* "*Atlantis,*" *p.* 29.)

It is certain that, whether "chimera" or reality, the priests of the
whole world had it from one and the same source: the universal tradition

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\[\[Footnote continued from previous page\]\] modern Charcots to pay
attention to the *delirium* of their patients from a more psychic
standpoint, Science, and physiology especially, might be more benefited
than they are now, and truth have a wider field of fact in its
knowledge.

\* These were the early Aryans and the bulk of the Fourth Root Races --
the former pious and meditative (*yoga*-contemplation), the latter -- a
fighting race of sorcerers, who were rapidly degenerating owing to their
uncontrolled passions.

\*\* The Northern and Southern Divisions of Lemuria-Atlantis. The
Hyperborean and the Equatorial lands of the two continents. (See
Sections about Lemuria and Atlantis in History.)

\*\*\* This is Occult and refers to the property of iron which,
attracted by magnetic elements, is repelled by others, which are made,
by an occult process, as impervious to it as water to a blow.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 372 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

about the third great continent which perished some 850,000 years ago.\*
A continent inhabited by two distinct races; distinct physically and
especially morally; both deeply versed in primeval wisdom and the
secrets of nature; mutually antagonistic in their struggle, during the
course and progress of their double evolution. Whence even the Chinese
teachings upon the subject, if it is but a *fiction?* Have they not
recorded the existence once upon a time of a *holy* island beyond the
sun (*Tcheou*)*,* and beyond which were situated the lands *of the
immortal men?* (*See de* *Rougemont, ibid.*) Do they not still believe
that the remnants of those *immortal* men -- who survived when the
*holy* island had become black with sin and perished -- have found
refuge in the great desert of Gobi, where they still reside invisible to
all, and defended from approach by hosts of Spirits?

"If one has to lend ear to traditions," writes the very unbelieving
Boulanger, ("*Regne des Dieux,*" *Introduction*) *.* . . "the latter
place before the reign of Kings, that of the Heroes and demi-gods; and
still earlier and beyond they place the marvellous reign of the gods and
all the fables of the golden age. . . . One feels surprised that annals
so interesting should have been rejected by almost all our historians.
And yet the ideas communicated by them were once universally admitted
and revered by all the peoples; not a few revere them still, making them
the basis of their daily life. Such considerations seem to necessitate a
less hurried judgment. . . . The ancients, from whom we hold these
traditions, which *we accept no longer because* *we do not understand
them now,* must have had motives for believing in them furnished by
their greater proximity to the first ages, and which the distance that
separates us from them refuses to us . . . . Plato in his fourth book of
*Laws,* says that, long before the construction of the first cities,
Saturn had established on earth a *certain* form of government under
which man was very happy. As it is the golden age he refers to, or to
that reign of gods so celebrated in ancient fables . . . . let us see
the ideas he had of that happy age, and what was the occasion he had to
introduce this *fable* into a treatise on politics. According to Plato,
in order to obtain clear and precise ideas on royalty, its origin and
power, one has to turn back to the first principles of history and
tradition. Great changes, he says, have occurred in days of old, *in
heaven and on earth,* and the present state of things is one of the
results (*Karma*). Our traditions tell us of many marvels, of changes
that have taken place in the course of the Sun, of Saturn's reign, and
of a thousand other matters that remained scattered about in human
memory; but *one never hears anything of the* **EVIL** *which has*

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* The first continent, or island, if so preferred, "the cap of the
North Pole," has never perished; nor will it to the end of the Seven
Races.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 373 WHEAT BROUGHT DOWN BY THE GODS.

*produced those revolutions, nor of the evil which directly followed
them.* Yet . . . . that Evil is the principle one has to talk about, to
be able to treat of royalty and the origin of power. . . ."

That *evil*, Plato seems to see in the sameness or consubstantiality of
the natures of the rulers and the ruled, for he says that long before
man built his cities, in the golden age, there was naught but happiness
on earth, for there were no needs. Why? Because Saturn, knowing that man
could not rule man, without injustice filling forthwith the universe
through his whims and vanity, would not allow any mortal to obtain power
over his fellow creatures. To do this the god used the same means we use
ourselves with regard to our flocks. We do not place a bullock or a ram
over our bullocks and rams, but give them a leader, a shepherd, *i.e., a
being of a species quite different from their own and of* *a superior
nature.* It is just what Saturn did. He loved mankind and placed to rule
over it no mortal King or prince but -- "Spirits and genii
\[\[*daimones*\]\] of a divine nature more excellent than that of man."

It was god, the Logos (the synthesis of the Host) who thus presiding
over the genii, became the first shepherd and leader of men.\* When the
world had ceased to be so governed and the gods retired, "ferocious
beasts devoured a portion of mankind." "Left to their own resources and
industry, inventors then appeared among them successively and discovered
fire, wheat, wine; and public gratitude deified them . . . ."("*De
Legibus*" 1*, iv.*; *in Crit. and in Politic*).

And mankind was right, as fire by friction was the first mystery of
nature, the first and chief property of matter that was revealed to man.

"*Fruits and grain, unknown to Earth to that day, were brought by* *the*
'*Lords of Wisdom*' *for the benefit of those they ruled -- from other*
*lokas* (spheres). . . " say the Commentaries. Now: "The earliest
inventions (?) of mankind are the most wonderful that the race has ever
made. . . The *first use of fire,* and the discovery of the methods by
which it can be kindled; the domestication of animals; and, above all,
*the processes by which the various cereals were first developed* out of
some wild grasses (?) -- these are all *discoveries with which, in
ingenuity and in importance,* *no subsequent discoveries may compare.*
They are all unknown to history -- all lost in the light of an EFFULGENT
DAWN." ("*Unity of Nature,*" Argyll.)

This will be doubted and denied in our proud generation. But if it is
asserted that there are no grains and fruits *unknown to earth,* then we
may remind the reader *that wheat has never been found in the wild
state: it is* *not a product of the earth.* All the other cereals have
been traced to their primogenital forms in various species of wild
grasses, but wheat has

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* The Secret Doctrine explains and expounds that which Plato says, for
it teaches that those "inventors" were gods and demi-gods (Devas and
Rishis) who had become -- some deliberately, some forced to by Karma --
incarnated in man.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 374 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

hitherto defied the efforts of botanists to trace it to its origin. And
let us bear in mind, in this connection, how sacred was that cereal with
the Egyptian priests; wheat being placed even with their mummies, and
found thousands of years later in their coffins. Remember: -- "The
servants of Horus glean the wheat in the field of Aanroo. . . . wheat
*seven cubits high.*" ("*Book of the Dead,*" *chap. xcix.,* 33; *and
clvi.,* 4.)\* The reader is referred to Stanza **VII.,** Verse 3, Book
I., wherein this verse is explained in another of its meanings, and also
to the "*Book of the* *Dead,*" *chap. cix.,* v. 4 *and 5.*

"I am the Queen of these regions," says the Egyptian Isis; "I was the
first to reveal to mortals the mysteries of wheat and corn. . . . I am
she who rises in the constellation of the dog . . . (Dog-star) . . . .
Rejoice, O Egypt! thou who wert my nurse." (Book I., chap. **XIV**.\*\*

Sirius was called the *dog-star.* It was the star of Mercury or Budha,
called the great instructor of mankind, before other Buddhas.

The book of the Chinese Y-King, attributes the discovery of agriculture
to "the instruction given to men by celestial genii."

"Woe, woe to the men who know nought, observe nought, nor will they see.
. . . They are all blind\*\*\* since they remain ignorant how much the
world is full of various and invisible creatures which crowd even in the
most sacred places" (*Zohar, Part I., col.* 177.)

The "Sons of God" *have* existed and *do* exist. From the Hindu
*Brahmaputras and Manasaputras* (Sons of Brahma and Mind-born sons) down
to the *B*'*ne-aleim* of the Jewish Bible, the faith of the centuries
and

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* This is a direct reference to the esoteric division of man's
principles symbolised by the divine wheat. The legend which inscribes
the third Registrar of the papyrus (*Chap. cx. of the* "*Book of the
Dead*") states: "This is the region of the *Manes* (disembodied men)
*seven cubits high --* to wit: those just translated and supposed to be
still sevenfold with all their principles, even the body represented
*astrally* in the Kama-loka or *Hades,* before their separation . . . .
. " and, there is wheat three *cubits high* for mummies in a *state of
perfection*" (*i.e.,* those already separated, whose *three* higher
principles are in Devachan "who are permitted to glean it." This region
(Devachan) is called "the land of the re-birth of gods," and shown to be
inhabited by Scheo, Tefnant, and Seb. The "region for the manes seven
cubits high," (for the yet imperfect mummies), and the region for those
"*in a state of perfection*" who "glean wheat *three* cubits high," is
as clear as possible. The Egyptians had the same esoteric philosophy
which is now taught by the cis-Himalayan adepts, who, when buried, have
corn and wheat placed over them.

\*\* There are Egyptologists who have tried to identify Osiris with
Menes, which is quite erroneous. Bunsen assigns to Menes an antiquity of
5867 years **B.C**., and is denounced for it by Christians. But
"Isis-Osiris" reigned in Egypt before the Dendera Zodiac was painted on
the ceiling of that temple, and that is over 75,000 years ago!

\*\*\* In the text, "corked up" or "screwed up."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 375 "SONS OF GOD" PERFECT AND IMPERFECT.

*universal* tradition force reason to yield to such evidence. Of what
value is *independent criticism* so called, or "internal evidence"
(based usually on the respective hobbies of the critics), in the face of
the universal testimony, which never varied throughout the historical
cycles? Read esoterically the sixth chapter of Genesis, which repeats
the statements of the Secret Doctrine, only changing slightly its form,
and drawing a different conclusion which clashes even with the *Zohar.*
"There were giants in the earth in those days; and *also after that*
when 'the Sons of *God*' (*b*'*ne-aleim*) "came in unto the daughters of
men, and they bare children to them, the same became *mighty men* which
were of old, men of renown" (or giants).\*

What does this sentence "and also after that" signify unless it means
when explained: "There were giants in the earth BEFORE, *i.e*., before
the sinless sons of the Third Race; and *also after that* when other
sons of God, lower in nature, inaugurated sexual connection on earth (as
Daksha did, when he saw that his *Manasaputras* would not people the
earth)"? And then comes a long break in this chapter vi. of Genesis,
between verses 4 and 5. For surely, it was not in or through the
wickedness of the "mighty men" . . . . men of renown, among whom is
placed Nimrod the "mighty hunter before the Lord," that "god saw that
the wickedness of man *was* great," nor in the builders of Babel, for
this was *after* the Deluge; but in the progeny of the giants who
produced *monstra quaedam de genere giganteo,* monsters from whence
sprang the lower races of men, now represented on earth by a few
miserable dying-out tribes and the huge anthropoid apes.

And if we are taken to task by theologians, whether Protestant or Roman
Catholic, we have only to refer them to their own literal texts. The
above quoted verse was ever a dilemma, not alone for the men of science
and Biblical scholars, but also for priests. For, as the Rev. Father
Peronne puts it: -- "Either they (the B'ne-aleim) were good angels, and
in such case how could they fall? Or they were bad (angels) and in this
case could not be called *b*'*ne-aleim,* the "sons of *God.*"
(*Praelectiones theol. ch.* ii.) This Biblical riddle -- "the real sense
of which no author has ever understood," as candidly confessed by
Fourmont\*\* -- can only be explained by the Occult doctrine, through
the Zohar to the Western, and the *Book of Dzyan* to the Eastern. What
the former says we have seen; what the Zohar tells us is this:
*B*'*ne-aleim* was a name common to the *Malachim* (the good Messengers)
and to the *Ischin* ("the lower angels") (*Rabbi Parcha*).

We may add for the benefit of the demonologists that their Satan,

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* *Genesis vi*., *v*. 4.

\*\* *Reflections critiques sur l*'*origine des anciens peuples.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 376 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

"the adversary," is included in *Job* among the sons of God or
*b*'*ne-aleim* who visit their father." (*Chapter i.*) But of this later
on.

Now the Zohar says that the *Ischin,* the beautiful *B*'*ne-aleim*, were
*not* guilty, but mixed *themselves with mortal men because they were
sent* *on earth to do so.* (*Book of Ruth and Schadash*; *fol.* 63,
*col.* 3; *Amsterdam edition*)*.* Elsewhere the same volume shows these
*b*'*ne-aleim* belonging to the tenth sub-division of the "Thrones"
(*Zohar, part iii.,* *col.* 113*. But see also 1st vol.* 184). It also
explains that the Ischin, "men-spirits," *viri* *spirituales,* now that
men can see them no longer, help magicians to produce, through their
science, *homunculi* which are not *small men* but "men *smaller* (in
the sense of *inferiority*) than men." Both show themselves under the
form that the Ischin had then, *i.e*., gaseous and ethereal. Their chief
is Azazel.

But Azazel, whom the Church dogma will associate with Satan, is nothing
of the kind. Azazel is a *mystery,* as explained elsewhere, and it is so
expressed in Maimonides, "*In More Nevochim*" (*chapter xxvi., p.* 8).
"There is an impenetrable mystery in the narrative concerning Azazel."
And so there is, as Lanci, a librarian to the Vatican and one who ought
to know, says -- we have quoted him before -- that "this venerable
divine name (*nome divino e venerabile*) has become through the pen of
Biblical scholars, a *devil,* a wilderness, a mountain, and a he-goat"
(*Sagra Scrittura*). Therefore it seems foolish to derive the name as
Spencer does, from Ajal (separated) and El (god), hence "one separated
from God," the **D**EVIL. In the Zohar, Azazel is rather the Sacrificial
victim than the "formal adversary of Jehovah," as Spencer would have it
(*II., pp.* 14, 29).

The amount of malicious fancy and fiction bestowed on that "Host" by
various fanatical writers is quite extraordinary. Azazel and his "host"
are simply the Hebrew "Prometheus," and ought to be viewed from the same
standpoint. The Zohar shows the *Ischin* chained on the mountain in the
desert, allegorically; thus simply alluding to those "spirits" as being
chained to the earth during the cycle of incarnation. Azazel (or
Azaziel) is one of the chiefs of the "transgressing" angels in *Enoch,*
who descending upon Ardis, the top of Mount Armon, bound themselves by
swearing loyalty to each other. It is said that Azaziel taught men to
make swords, knives, shields, to fabricate mirrors (?) to make *one see
what is behind him* (*viz.,* "*magic mirrors*"). Amazarak taught all the
sorcerers and dividers of roots; Amers taught the solution of magic;
Barkayal, astrology; Akibeel, the meaning of portents and signs; Tamial,
astronomy; and Asaradel taught the motion of the moon. "These seven were
the first instructors of the Fourth man" (*i.e.,* of the *Fourth* Race).
But why should allegory be always understood as meaning all that its
dead-letter expresses?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 377 THE FALLACIES OF THE TWO CHURCHES.

It is the symbolical representation of the great struggle between divine
wisdom, *nous,* and its earthly reflection, *Psuche,* or between Spirit
and Soul, in Heaven and on Earth. In Heaven --because the divine
**M**ONAD had voluntarily exiled itself therefrom, to descend, for
incarnating purposes, to a lower plane and thus transform the animal of
clay *into an immortal god.* For, as Eliphas Levi tells us, "the angels
aspire to become men; for the perfect man, the man-god, is above even
angels." On Earth -- because no sooner had Spirit descended than it was
strangled in the coils of matter.

Strange to say, the Occult teaching reverses the characters; it is the
anthropomorphous archangel with the Christians, and the man-like God
with the Hindus, which represent matter in this case; and the Dragon, or
Serpent, Spirit. Occult symbolism furnishes the key to the mystery;
theological symbolics conceal it still more. For the former explains
many a saying in the Bible and even in the New Testament which have
hitherto remained incomprehensible; while the latter, owing to its dogma
of Satan and his rebellion, has belittled the character and nature of
its would-be infinite, absolutely perfect god, and created the greatest
evil and curse on earth -- belief in a personal Devil. This mystery is
opened with the key to its metaphysical symbolism now restored; while
that of theological interpretation shows the gods and the archangels
standing as symbols for the dead letter or dogmatic religions, and as
arrayed against the pure truths of Spirit, naked and unadorned with
fancy.

Many were the hints thrown out in this direction in "Isis Unveiled," and
a still greater number of references to this mystery may be found
scattered throughout these volumes. To make the point clear once for
all: that which the clergy of every dogmatic religion -- pre-eminently
the Christian -- points out as Satan, the enemy of God, is in reality,
the highest divine Spirit -- (occult Wisdom on Earth) -- in its
naturally antagonistic character to every worldly, evanescent illusion,
dogmatic or ecclesiastical religions included. Thus, the Latin Church,
intolerant, bigoted and cruel to all who do not choose to be its slaves;
the Church which calls itself the bride of Christ, and the trustee at
the same time of Peter, to whom the rebuke of the Master "get thee
behind me Satan" was justly addressed; and again the Protestant Church
which, while calling itself Christian, paradoxically replaces the New
Dispensation by the old "Law of Moses" which Christ openly repudiated:
both these Churches are fighting against divine Truth, when repudiating
and slandering the Dragon of esoteric (because *divine*) Wisdom.
Whenever anathematizing the Gnostic Solar Chnouphis -- the Agathodaemon
-- Christos, or the theosophical Serpent of Eternity, or even the
Serpent of Genesis -- they

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 378 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

are moved by the same Spirit of dark fanaticism that moved the Pharisees
to curse Jesus by saying to him "Say we not well thou hast a devil?"

Read the account about Indra (Vayu) in the *Rig-Veda,* the occult volume
*par excellence* of Aryanism, and then compare it with the same in the
Puranas -- the exoteric version thereof, and the purposely garbled
account of the true Wisdom religion. In the Rig Veda Indra is the
highest and greatest of the Gods, and his Soma-drinking is allegorical
of his highly spiritual nature. In the Puranas Indra becomes a
profligate, and a regular drunkard on the Soma juice, in the terrestrial
way. He is the conqueror of all the "enemies of the gods" -- the
Daityas, Nagas (Serpents), Asuras, all the *Serpent-*gods, and of
Vritri, the Cosmic Serpent. Indra is the St. Michael of the Hindu
Pantheon -- the chief of the *militant* Host. Turning to the Bible, we
find Satan, one of the "Sons of God" (*Job. i.* 6), becoming in exoteric
interpretation the Devil, and the Dragon in its infernal, evil sense.
But in the Kabala ("*Book* *of Numbers*") Samael, who is Satan, is shown
to be identical with St. Michael, the *slayer of the Dragon.* How is
this? For it is said that Tselem (the image) reflects alike Michael and
Samael *who are one.* Both proceed, it is taught, from *Ruach* (Spirit),
*Neschamah* (Soul) and *Nephesch* (life). In the "Chaldean Book of
Numbers" Samael is the concealed (occult) Wisdom, and Michael the higher
*terrestrial* Wisdom, both emanating from the same source but diverging
after their issue from *the mundane soul,* which on Earth is Mahat
(intellectual understanding, *or Manas* (the seat of Intellect). They
diverge, because one (Michael) is *influenced* by Neschamah, while the
other (Samael) remains *uninfluenced.* This tenet was perverted by the
dogmatic spirit of the Church; which, loathing independent Spirit,
uninfluenced by the external form (hence by dogma), forthwith made of
Samael-Satan (the most wise and spiritual spirit of all) -- the
adversary of its anthropomorphic God and sensual physical man, the
DEVIL!

--------<span id="DDE_LINK19"></span>

<span id="DDE_LINK25">\[\[This page continued in next section\]\]</span>
<span id="DDE_LINK20"></span><span id="DDE_LINK21"></span><span
id="DDE_LINK22"></span><span id="DDE_LINK23"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next Section](sd2-1-22)

[Contents](sd2-0-co.htm#contents)
