##### *The Secret Doctrine* by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol. 2

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 519 THE "FATHER OF MORTALS."

### § XX.

#### PROMETHEUS, THE TITAN.

##### **H**IS **O**RIGIN IN **A**NCIENT **I**NDIA.

**I**N our modern day there does not exist the slightest doubt in the
minds of the best European symbologists that the name Prometheus
possessed the greatest and most mysterious significance in antiquity.
While giving the history of Deukalion, whom the Boeotians regarded as
the ancestor of the human races, and who was the Son of Prometheus,
according to the significant legend, the author of the *Mythologie* *de
la Grece Antique* remarks: "Thus Prometheus is something more than the
archetype of humanity; he is *its generator.* In the same way that we
saw Hephaestus moulding the first woman (Pandora) and endowing her with
life, so Prometheus kneads the moist clay, of which he fashions the body
of the first man whom he will endow with the soul-spark" (*Apollodorus,*
I., 7, 1). After the Flood of Deukalion, Zeus, it was taught, had
commanded Prometheus and Athena to call forth a new race of men from the
mire left by the waters of the deluge (*Ovid*, *Metam.* 1, 81. *Etym.
M.* *v*. \[\[*Prometheus*\]\]); and in the day of Pausanias the slime
which the hero had used for this purpose was still shown in Phocea
(*Paus.* x, 4, 4). "On several archaic monuments one still sees
Prometheus modelling a human body, either alone or with Athena's help"
(*Myth. Grece Ant. 246*)*.*

The same authors remind the world of another equally mysterious
personage, though one less generally known than Prometheus, whose legend
offers remarkable analogies with that of the Titan. The name of this
second ancestor and generator is *Phoroneus,* the hero of an ancient
poem, now unfortunately no longer extant -- the *Phoronidae.* His legend
was localized in Argolis, where a perpetual flame was preserved on his
altar as a reminder that he was the bringer of fire upon earth
(*Pausanias,* 11, 19, 5; *Cf.* 20*,* 3.) A benefactor of men as
Prometheus was, he had made them participators of every bliss on earth.
Plato (*Timaeus, p.* 22)*,* and Clemens Alexandrinus (*Strom.* 1*, p.*
380) say that Phoroneus was the first man, or "the father of mortals."
His genealogy, which assigns to him as his father Inachos, the river,
reminds one of that of Prometheus, which makes that Titan the son of the
Oceanid Clymene. But the mother of Phoroneus was the nymph Melia; a
significant descent which distinguishes him from Prometheus.

Melia, Decharme thinks, is the personification of the *ash-tree,*
whence,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 520 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

according to Hesiod, issued the race of the age of Bronze\* (*Opera et*
*Dies,* 142-145); and which with the Greeks is the *celestial tree*
common to every Aryan mythology. This *ash* is the Yggdrasil of the
Norse antiquity, which the Norns sprinkle daily with the waters from the
fountain of Urd, that it may not wither. It remains verdant till the
last days of the Golden Age. Then the Norns -- the three sisters who
gaze respectively into the Past, the Present, and the Future -- make
known the decree of Fate (*Karma, Orlog*)*,* but men are conscious only
of the Present. But when Gultweig comes (the golden ore) "the bewitching
enchantress who, thrice cast into the fire, arises each time more
beautiful, and fills the souls of gods and men with unapproachable
longing, then the Norns . . . enter into being, and the blessed peace of
childhood's dreams passes away, and Sin comes into existence with all
its evil consequences . . ." and **K**ARMA (*See "Asgard and the Gods,"
p.* 10-12)*.* The thrice purified Gold is -*- Manas,* the Conscious
Soul.

With the Greeks, the "ash-tree" represented the same idea. Its luxuriant
boughs are the sidereal heaven, golden by day and studded with stars by
night -- the fruits of Melia and Yggdrasil, under whose protecting
shadow humanity lived during the Golden Age without desire as without
any fear . . . . "That tree had a fruit, or an inflamed bough, *which
was lightning,"* Decharme guesses.

And here steps in the killing materialism of the age; that peculiar
twist in the modern mind, which, like a Northern blast, bends all on its
way, and freezes every intuition, allowing it no hand in the physical
speculations of the day. After having seen in Prometheus no better than
*fire by friction,* the learned author of the *"Mythologie de la Grece*
*Antique"* perceives in this "fruit" a trifle *more than an allusion to*
*terrestrial fire and its discovery. It is no longer fire, owing to the
fall of* *lightning setting some dry fuel in a blaze,* and thus
revealing all its priceless benefits to Palaeolithic men; -- but
something more mysterious this time, though still as earthly. . . . "A
divine bird, nestled in the boughs of the celestial ash-tree, stole that
bough (or the fruit) and carried it down on the earth in its bill. Now
the Greek word \[\[*Phoroneus*\]\] is the rigid equivalent of the
Sanskrit word *bhuranyu* ('the rapid') an epithet of Agni, considered as
the carrier of the divine spark. Phoroneus, son of *Melia* or of the
celestial ash, thus corresponds to a conception far more ancient,
probably, than that one which transformed the *pramantha* (of the old
Aryan Hindus) into the Greek Prometheus. Phoroneus is the

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* According to the Occult teaching, three yugas passed away during the
time of the Third Root-Race, *i.e*., the Satya, the Treta, and the
Dvapara yuga, answering to the golden age of its early innocence: to the
silver -- when it reached its maturity: and to the Bronze age, when,
separating into sexes, they became the mighty demi-gods of old.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 521 THE POETRY OF MODERN ORIENTALISTS.

(personified) bird, that brings the heavenly lightning to the Earth.
Traditions relating to the birth and origin of the race of Bronze, and
those which made of Phoroneus the father of the Argians, are an evidence
to us that this thunderbolt (or lightning), as in the legends of
Hephaestus or Prometheus, was the origin of the human race" (266).

This still affords us no more than the external meaning of the symbols
and the allegory. It is now supposed that the name of Prometheus has
been unriddled, and the modern mythologists and Orientalists see in it
no longer what their fathers saw on the authority of the whole of
classical antiquity. They only find therein something far more
appropriate to the spirit of the age, namely, a phallic element. But the
name of Phoroneus, as well as that of Prometheus, bears not one, nor
even two, but a series of esoteric meanings. Both relate to the *seven*
*celestial fires;* to Agni Abhimanin, his three sons, and their
forty-five sons, *constituting the forty-nine fires.* Do all these
numbers relate only to the terrestrial mode of fire and to the flame of
sexual passion? Did the Hindu Aryan mind never soar above such purely
sensual conceptions? that mind which is declared by Prof. Max Muller to
be the most spiritual and mystically inclined on the whole globe? The
number of those fires alone ought to have suggested an inkling of the
truth.

We are told that one is no longer permitted, in this age of rational
thought, to explain the name of Prometheus as the old Greeks did. The
latter, it seems, "basing themselves on the false analogy of
\[\[*prometheus*\]\] with the verb \[\[*Promanthanein*\]\]*,* saw in him
the type of the 'foreseeing' man, to whom, for the sake of symmetry, a
brother was added -- Epimetheus, or 'he who takes counsel *after* the
event.' " But now the Orientalists have decided otherwise. They know the
real meaning of the two names better than those who invented them.

The legend is based upon an event of universal importance. It was built
"to commemorate a great event which must have strongly impressed itself
upon the imagination of the first witnesses to it, and its remembrance
has never since faded out from popular memory." What is it? Laying aside
every poetical *fiction,* all those dreams of the golden age, let us
imagine -- argue the modern scholars -- in all its gross realism, the
first miserable state of humanity, the striking picture of which was
traced for us after AEschylus by Lucretius, and the exact truth of which
is now confirmed by science; and then one may understand better that a
new life really began for man, on that day when he saw the first spark
produced by the friction of two pieces of wood, or from the veins of a
flint. How could man help feeling gratitude to that mysterious and
marvellous being which they were henceforth enabled to create at their
will, and which was no sooner born, than it grew and expanded,
developing with singular power. "This terrestrial flame,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 522 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

was it not analogous in nature to that one which they received from
above, or that other which frightened them in the thunderbolt?"

"Was it not derived from the same source? And if its origin was in
heaven, it must have been brought down some day on earth. If so, who was
the powerful being, the beneficent being, god or man, who had conquered
it? Such are the questions which the curiosity of the Aryans offered in
the early days of their existence, and which found their answer in the
myth of Prometheus"; (*Mythologie de la Grece* *Antique,* p. 258).

The philosophy of Occult Science finds two weak points in the above
reflections, and points them out. The miserable state of Humanity
described by AEschylus and Prometheus was no more wretched then, in the
early days of the Aryans, than it is now. That "state" was limited to
the savage tribes; and the now-existing savages are not a whit more
happy or unhappy than their forefathers were a million years ago.

It is an accepted fact in Science that "rude implements, exactly
resembling those in use *among existing savages,"* are found in
river-gravels and caves geologically "implying an enormous antiquity."
So great is that resemblance that, as the author of "The Modern
Zoroastrian" tells us: "If the collection in the Colonial Exhibition of
stone celts and arrow-heads used now by the Bushmen of South Africa were
placed side by side with one from the British Museum of similar objects
from Kent's Cavern or the Caves of Dordogne, no one but an expert could
distinguish between them" (*p*. 145). And if there are Bushmen existing
now, in our age of the highest civilization, who are no higher
intellectually than the race of men which inhabited Devonshire and
Southern France during the *Palaeolithic* age, why could not the latter
have lived simultaneously with, and have been the contemporary of, other
races as highly civilized for their day as we are for ours? That the sum
of knowledge increases daily in mankind, "but that intellectual capacity
does not increase with it," is shown when the intellect, if not the
physical knowledge, of the Euclids, Pythagorases, Paninis, Kapilas,
Platos, and Socrates, is compared with that of the Newtons, Kants, and
the modern Huxleys and Haeckels. On comparing the results obtained by
Dr. J. Barnard Davis, the Craniologist, worked out in 1868 (*Trans. of
the Royal Society* *of London*)*,* with regard to the internal capacity
of the skull -- its volume being taken as the standard and test for
judging of the intellectual capacities -- Dr. Pfaff finds that this
capacity among the French (certainly in the highest rank of mankind) is
88.4 cubic inches, being thus "perceptibly smaller than that of the
Polynesians generally, which, even among many Papuans and Alfuras of the
lowest grade, amounts to 89 and 89.7 cubic inches"; which shows that it
is the *quality* and not the *quantity* of the brain that is the cause
of intellectual capacity. The

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 523 THE BOON GIVEN BY PROMETHEUS.

average index of skulls among various races having been now recognized
to be "one of the most characteristic marks of difference between
different races," the following comparison is suggestive: "The index of
breadth among the Scandinavians (is) at 75: among the English at 76;
among Holsteiners at 77; in Bresgau at 80; Schiller's skull shows an
index of breadth even of 82 . . . the Madurese also 82!" Finally, the
same comparison between the oldest skulls known and the European, brings
to light the startling fact *"that most of these old skulls, belonging
to the* *stone period, are above rather than below the average of the
brain of the* *now living man in volume."* Calculating the measures for
the height, breadth, and length in inches from the average measurements
of several skulls, the following sums are obtained: --

> 1\. Old Northern skulls of the stone age . . . . 18.877 ins.

> 2\. Average of 48 skulls of the same period from England . . . .
> 18.858 "

> 3\. Average of 7 skulls of the same period from Wales . . . . 18.649 "

> 4\. Average of 36 skulls of the stone age from France . . . . 18.220 "

The average of the *now living Europeans* is 18.579 inches; of
*Hottentots,* 17.795 inches!

Which figures show plainly "that the size of the brain of the oldest
populations known to us is not such as to place them on a lower level
than that of the now living inhabitants of the Earth" ("*The Age and*
*Origin of Man*"). Besides which, they show the "missing link" vanishing
into thin air. Of these, however, more anon: we must return to our
direct subject.

The race which Jupiter so ardently desired "to quench, and plant a new
one in its stead" (*AEsch.\** 241), suffered *mental*, not physical
misery. The first boon Prometheus gave to mortals, as he tells the
"Chorus," was to hinder them "from *foreseeing* death" (256); he "saved
the mortal race from sinking blasted down to Hades' gloom" (244); and
then only, "besides" that, he gave them fire (260). This shows plainly
the dual character, at any rate of the Promethean myth, if Orientalists
will not accept the existence of the *seven keys* taught in Occultism.
This relates to the first opening of man's spiritual perceptions, not to
his first seeing or *discovering* *fire*. For *fire* was never
"discovered," but existed on earth since its beginning. It existed in
the seismic activity of the early ages, volcanic eruptions being as
frequent and constant in those periods as fog is in England now. And if
we are told that men appeared so late on Earth that nearly all the
volcanoes, with the exception of a few, were already extinct, and that
geological disturbances had made room for a more settled state of
things, we answer: Let a new race of men -- whether evolved from angel
or gorilla -- appear now on any uninhabited

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

*\* Prometheus Vinctus.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 524 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

spot of the globe, with the exception perhaps of the Sahara, and a
thousand to one it would not be a year or two old before discovering
fire, through the fall of lightning setting in flames grass or something
else. This assumption, that primitive man lived ages on earth before he
was made acquainted with fire, is one of the most painfully illogical of
all. But old AEschylus was an initiate, and knew well what he was giving
out.\*

No occultist acquainted with symbology and the fact that Wisdom came to
us from the East, will deny for a moment that the myth of Prometheus has
reached Europe from Aryavarta. Nor is he likely to deny that in one
sense Prometheus represents *fire by friction*. Therefore, he admires
the sagacity of M. F. Baudry, who shows in his *Les Mythes* *du feu et
breuvage celeste* (*Revue germanique,* 1861 *p*. 356)\*\* one of the
aspects of Prometheus and his origin from India. He shows the reader the
*supposed* primitive process to obtain fire, still in use to-day in
India to light the sacrificial flame. This is what he says: --

> "This process, such as it is minutely described in the Vedic Sutras,
> consists in rapidly turning a stick in a socket made in the centre of
> a piece of wood. The friction develops intense heat and ends by
> setting on fire the particles of wood in contact. The motion of the
> stick is not a continuous rotation, but a series of motions in
> contrary senses, by means of a cord fixed to the stick in its middle:
> the operator holds one of the ends in each hand and pulls them
> alternately. . . . The full process is designated in Sanskrit by the
> verb manthami, mathnani; which means 'to rub, agitate, shake and
> obtain by rubbing,' and is especially applied to rotatory friction, as
> proved by its derivation from *mandala,* which signifies a circle. . .
> . The pieces of wood serving for the production of fire have each
> their name in Sanskrit. The stick which turns is called *pramantha;*
> the discus which receives it is called *arani* *and* *aranî* two
> aranis' designating the *ensemble* of the instrument" (*p*. 358 *et
> seq*.)*.\*\*\**

It remains to be seen what the Brahmins will say to this. But supposing
Prometheus has been conceived in one of the aspects of his

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* The modern attempt of some Greek scholars (poor and pseudo scholars,
they would have appeared in the day of the old Greek writers!) to
explain the real meaning of the ideas of AEschylus, which, being an
ignorant ancient Greek, he could not express so well himself, is
absurdly ludicrous!

\*\* See also his *Memoires de la Societe de la* *Linguistique*
following the "Fire Myths," (*Vol.* I*, p.* 337, *et seq.*)

\*\*\* There is the *upper* and *nether* piece of timber used to produce
this sacred fire by attrition at sacrifices, and it is the *aranî* which
contains the socket. This is proven by an allegory in the *Vayu Purana*
and others, which tell us that Nemi, the son of Ikshwaku, had left no
successor, and that the Rishis, fearing to leave the earth without a
ruler, introduced the king's body into the socket of an *aranî* -- like
an upper *aranî* -- and produced from it a prince named Janaka. "It was
by reason of the peculiar way in which he was engendered that he was
called Janaka." (*But see Goldstucker's* *Sanskrit Dictionary at the
word Arani.*) Devaki, Krishna's mother, in prayer addressed to her, is
called "the aranî whose attrition engenders fire."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 525 GREEK IDEAS MISUNDERSTOOD.

myth as the producer of fire by means of *pramantha,* or as an animate
and divine *pramantha,* would this imply that the symbolism had no other
than the phallic meaning attributed to it by the modern symbologists?
Decharme, at any rate, seems to have a correct glimmering of the truth;
for he unconsciously corroborates by his remarks all that the Occult
sciences teach with regard to the *Manasa* Devas, who have endowed man
with the consciousness of his immortal soul: that consciousness which
hinders man "from foreseeing death," and makes him *know* he is
immortal.\* "How has Prometheus got into the possession of the (divine)
spark?" he asks. "Fire having its abode in heaven, it is there he must
have gone to find it before he could carry it down to men, and, to
approach the gods, he must have been a god himself." The Greeks held
that he was of the *divine* race; the Hindus, that he was a Deva. Hence
"with the Greeks he was the son of the Titan lapetos,"
\[\[*Iapetonides*\]\] (*Theog.* 528) . . . . "But celestial fire
belonged in the beginning to the gods alone; it was a treasure they
reserved for themselves . . . over which they jealously watched . . .
'The prudent son of Iapetus,' says Hesiod, 'deceived Jupiter by stealing
and concealing in the cavity of a narthex, the indefatigable fire of the
resplendent glow' (*Theog.* 565) . . . Thus the gift made by Prometheus
to men was a conquest made from heaven. . . " "Now according to Greek
ideas," (identical in this with those of the Occultists) "this
possession forced from Jupiter, this human trespassing upon the property
of the gods, had to be followed by an expiation. . . . Prometheus,
moreover, belongs to that race of Titans who had rebelled\*\* against
the gods, and whom the master of Olympus had hurled down into Tartarus;
like them, he is the genius of Evil, doomed to cruel suffering, etc.,
etc."

That which is revolting in the explanations that follow, is the
one-sided view taken of this grandest of all the myths. The most
intuitional among modern writers cannot or will not rise in their
conceptions above the level of the Earth and Cosmic phenomena. It is not
denied that the moral idea in the myth, as presented in the Theogony of
Hesiod, plays a certain part in the primitive Greek conception. The
Titan is more than a thief of the celestial fire. He is the
representation of humanity -- active, industrious, intelligent, but at
the same time ambitious, which aims at equalling divine powers.
Therefore it is humanity punished in the person of Prometheus, but it is
only so with the Greeks. With the latter, Prometheus is not a

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* The *monad* of the animal is as immortal as that of man, yet the
brute knows nothing of this; it lives an animal life of sensation just
as the first human would have lived, when attaining physical development
in the Third Race, had it not been for the Agnishwatta and the *Manasa*
Pitris.

\*\* The fallen angels, therefore; the *Asuras* of the Indian Pantheon.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 526 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

criminal, save in the eyes of the gods. In his relation with the Earth,
he is, on the contrary, a god himself, a friend of mankind
(\[\[*philanthropos*\]\]), which he has raised to civilization and
initiated into the knowledge of all the arts; a conception which found
its most poetical expounder in AEschylus. But with all other nations
Prometheus is -- what? The fallen Angel, Satan, as the Church would have
it? Not at all. *He is* *simply the image of the pernicious and dreaded
effects of lightning.* He is the "evil fire" (*mal feu*) *and the symbol
of the divine reproductive* *male organ.* "Reduced to its simple
expression, the myth we are trying to explain is then simply a (Cosmic)
genius of fire" (p. 261). It is the former idea (the phallic) which was
*pre-eminently Aryan,* if we believe Ad. Kuhn (*in his Herabkunft des
Feuers und des Gottertranks*) and Baudry. For --

"The fire used by man being the result of the action of *pramantha* in
the *arani,* the Aryas *must have* ascribed (?) the same origin to
celestial fire, and they *must\* have* imagined (?) that a god armed
with pramantha, or a divine pramantha, exercised in the bosom of the
clouds a violent friction, which gave birth to lightning and
thunderbolts. . . . . This idea is supported by the fact that, according
to Plutarch's testimony (*Philosoph. Plant.,* iii*.* 3), the Stoics
thought that thunder was the result of the struggle of storm-clouds and
lightning -- a conflagration due to friction; while Aristotle saw in the
thunderbolt only the action of clouds which clashed with each other.
What was this theory, if not the scientific translation of the
production of fire by friction? . . . . . . Everything leads us to think
that, from the highest antiquity, and before the dispersion of the
Aryans, it was believed that the pramantha lighted fire in the storm
cloud as well as in the aranis." (*Revue Germanique, p.* 368.)

Thus, suppositions and idle hypotheses are made to stand for discovered
truths. Defenders of the Bible dead-letter could never help the writers
of missionary tracts more effectually, than do materialistic
Symbologists in thus taking for granted that the ancient Aryans based
their religious conceptions on no higher thought than the physiological.

But it is not so, and the very spirit of Vedic philosophy is against
such an interpretation. And if, as Decharme himself confesses, "this
idea of the creative power of fire is explained at once by the ancient
assimilation of the human soul to a celestial spark," as shown by the
imagery often made use of in the Vedas when speaking of *Arani,* it
would mean something higher than simply a gross sexual conception. A
hymn to Agni in the Veda is cited as example: -- "Here is the pramantha,
the generator is ready. Bring the mistress of the race (the female
*Arani*)*.* Let us produce Agni by attrition, according

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* The italics are ours; they show how assumptions are raised to laws in
our day.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 527 THE SIX BROTHERS OF KRISHNA.

to ancient custom" -- which means no worse than an abstract idea
expressed in the tongue of mortals. The "female Arani," the mistress of
the race, is Aditi, the mother of the gods, or Shekinah, eternal light
-- in the world of Spirit, the "Great Deep" and **C**HAOS; or primordial
Substance in its first remove from the **U**NKNOWN, in the manifested
Kosmos. If, ages later, the same epithet is applied to Devaki, the
mother of Krishna, or the incarnated **L**OGOS; and if the symbol, owing
to the gradual and irrepressible spread of exoteric religions, may
already be regarded as having a sexual significance, this in no way mars
the original purity of the image. The subjective had been transformed
into the objective; Spirit had fallen into matter. The universal kosmic
polarity of Spirit-Substance had become, in human thought, the mystic,
but still sexual union of Spirit and Matter, and had thus acquired an
anthropomorphic colouring which it had never had in the beginning.
Between the Vedas and the Puranas there is an abyss of which both are
the poles, like the seventh (*atmic*) and the first or lowest principle
(the physical body) in the Septenary constitution of man. The primitive,
purely spiritual language of the Vedas, conceived many decades of
millenniums earlier, had found its purely human expression for the
purpose of describing events taking place 5,000 years ago, the date of
Krishna's death (from which day the Kali Yuga, or Black-Age, began for
mankind).

As Aditi is called *Surarani* (the matrix or "mother" of the *sura*
gods), so Kunti, the mother of the Pandavas, is called in Mahabharata
*Pandavarani* -- which term is already *physiologized.* But Devaki, the
antetype of the Roman Catholic Madonna, is a later anthropomorphized
form of Aditi. The latter is the goddess mother, the "Deva-matri" of
Seven Sons (the *six* and the *seven* Adityas of early Vedic times); the
mother of Krishna, Devaki, has six embryos conveyed into her womb by
Jagaddhatri (the "nurse of the world"), the seventh (Krishna, the
Logos,) being transferred to that Rohini. Mary, the mother of Jesus, is
the mother of seven children, of five sons and two daughters, (a later
transformation of sex) in Matthew's Gospel (*xiii.* 55-56). No one of
the worshippers of the Roman Catholic Virgin would object to reciting in
her honour the prayer addressed by the gods to Devaki. Let the reader
judge.

"Thou art that Prakriti (essence), infinite and subtile, which bore
Brahma in its womb. Thou eternal being, comprising in thy substance the
essence of all created things, wast identical with creation; thou wast
the parent of the triform sacrifice, becoming the germ of all. . . .
Thou art sacrifice, whence all fruit proceeds; thou art the *arani*
whose attrition engenders fire" . . . . ("Womb of Light," "holy Vessel,"
are the epithets of the Virgin). "As Aditi, thou art the parent of the
gods. . . . Thou art Jyotsna (the morning twilight)." The Virgin

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 528 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

is often addressed as the "morning Star" and the "star of Salvation" --
the light whence day is begotten. "Thou art *Samnati* (humility, a
daughter of Daksha), the mother of Wisdom; thou art *Niti,* the parent
of harmony (*Naya*)*;* thou art modesty, the progenitrix of affection
(*Prasraya or vinaya*); thou art desire, of whom love is born. . . .
Thou art the mother of knowledge (*Avabodha*); patience (*Dhriti*)*,*
the parent of fortitude (*Dhairya*) . . . . etc., etc."

Thus *arani* is shown here as the Roman Catholic "vase of election" and
no worse. As to its primitive meaning, it was purely metaphysical. No
unclean thought traversed these conceptions in the ancient mind. Even in
the *Zohar --* far less metaphysical than any other symbolism -- the
idea is an abstraction and nothing more. Thus, when the *Zohar* (iii.,
290) says: "All that which exists, all that which has been formed by the
ancient, whose name is holy, can only exist through a male and female
principle," it means no more than this: "The divine Spirit of Life is
ever coalescing with matter." It is the **W**ILL of the Deity that acts;
and the idea is purely Schopenhauerian. "When *Atteekah Kaddosha,* the
ancient and the concealed of the concealed, desired to form all things,
it formed all things like male and female. This wisdom cornprises ALL
when it goeth forth." Hence Chochmah (male wisdom) and Binah (female
consciousness or Intellect) are said to create all between the two --
the active and the passive principles. As the eye of the expert jeweller
discerns under the rough and uncouth oyster shell the pure immaculate
pearl, enshrined within its bosom, his hand dealing with the former but
to get at its contents, so the eye of the true philosopher reads between
the lines of the Puranas the sublime Vedic truths, and corrects the form
with the help of the Vedantic wisdom. Our Orientalists, however, never
perceive the pearl under the thick coating of the shell, and -- act
accordingly.

From all that has been said in this section, one sees clearly that,
between the Serpent of Eden and the Devil of Christianity, there is an
abyss. Alone the sledge hammer of ancient philosophy can kill this
dogma.

-------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next Section](sd2-2-08.md)

[Contents](sd2-0-co.htm#contents.md)
