##### *The Secret Doctrine* by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol. 2

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### <span id="DDE_LINK20">\[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 492 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</span>

\[\[This page continued from [previous section](sd1-3-06.md)\]\]

### C.

#### **T**HE **M**ANY **M**EANINGS OF THE "**W**AR IN **H**EAVEN."

The Secret Doctrine points out, as a self-evident fact, that Mankind,
collectively and individually, is, with all manifested nature, the
vehicle (*a*) of the breath of One Universal Principle, in its primal
differentiation; and (*b*) of the countless "breaths" proceeding from
that One **B**REATH in its secondary and further differentiations, as
Nature with its many *mankinds* proceeds downwards toward the planes
that are ever increasing in materiality. The primary Breath informs the
higher Hierarchies; the secondary -- the lower, on the constantly
descending planes.

Now there are many passages in the Bible which prove on their face,
*exoterically,* that this belief was at one time *Universal*; and the
most convincing are the two chapters Ezekiel xxviii. and Isaiah xiv.
Christian theologians are welcome to interpret both as referring to the
great War before Creation, the Epos of Satan's rebellion, etc., if they
so choose, but the absurdity of the idea is too apparent. Ezekiel
addresses his lamentations and reproofs to the King of Tyre; Isaiah --
to King Ahaz, who indulged in the worship of idols, as did the rest of
the nation, with the exception of a few Initiates (the *Prophets,* so
called), who tried to arrest it on its way to exotericism, or idolatry,
which is the same thing. Let the student judge.

In *Ezekiel* xxviii. it is said, "Son of Man, say unto the prince of
Tyrus, thus saith the Lord God (as we understand it, the "god"
**K**ARMA): Because thine heart *is* lifted up, and thou hast said I
*am* a God . . . . and yet thou *art* a man . . . . behold I shall bring
strangers upon thee . . . . and they shall draw their swords against the
beauty of thy wisdom . . . . and they shall bring thee down to the pit .
. . ." or Earth-life.

The origin of the "prince of Tyrus" is to be traced to, and sought in

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 493 THE REAL MEANING OF THE CHERUB.

the "divine Dynasties" of the iniquitous Atlanteans, the Great Sorcerers
(See last Comments, on Stanza **XII**., verses 47-49). There is no
metaphor in the words of Ezekiel, but actual *history,* this time. For
the voice *in* the prophet, the voice of the "Lord," his own Spirit,
which spake unto him, says: -- "Because thou hast said, 'I *am* a God, I
sit in the seat of God(s) -- (divine Dynasties), in *the midst of the
seas*,' yet thou art a man. . . . . Behold thou *art* wiser than Daniel;
there is no secret that they can hide from thee: with thy wisdom . . .
thou hast increased thy riches, and thine heart is lifted up because of
thy riches. Behold therefore . . . strangers shall draw their swords
against the beauty of thy wisdom . . . they shall bring thee down . . .
and thou shalt die the deaths *of them that are* slain *in the midst of
the seas.*" (Verses 3-8.) All such imprecations are not *prophecy,* but
simply *reminders* of the fate of the Atlanteans, the "Giants on Earth."

What can be the meaning of this last sentence if it is not a narrative
of the fate of the Atlanteans? Verse 17 saying, "thine heart was lifted
up because of thy beauty," may refer to the "Heavenly Man" in Pymander,
or to the Fallen Angels, who are accused of having fallen through pride
on account of the great beauty and wisdom which became their lot. There
is no metaphor here, except in the preconceived ideas of our
theologians, perhaps. These verses relate to the Past and belong more to
the Knowledge acquired at the mysteries of Initiation than to
retrospective clairvoyance! Says the voice, again: --

"Thou hast been in Eden, the garden of God (in the Satya Yuga) every
precious stone was thy covering . . . . the workmanship of thy tabrets
and thy pipes *was prepared in thee* in the day *thou was created*. . .
*Thou art the anointed cherub* . . . thou hast walked up and down in the
midst of the stones of fire . . . thou wast perfect in thy ways from the
day that thou wast created, till iniquity was found in thee. Therefore I
will cast thee out of the *mountain of God* and destroy thee. . . . "

The "Mountain of God" means the "Mountain of *the Gods*" *or* Meru,
whose representative in the Fourth Race was Mount Atlas, the *last form
of one of the divine Titans,* so high in those days that the ancients
believed that the heavens rested on its top. Did not Atlas assist the
giants in their war against the gods? (Hyginus). Another version shows
the *fable* as arising from the fondness of Atlas, son of Iapetus and
Clymene, for astronomy, and from his dwelling for that reason on the
highest mountain peaks. The truth is that Atlas, "the mountain of the
gods," and also the hero of that name, are the esoteric symbols of the
Fourth Race, and his seven daughters, the Atlantides, are the symbols of
its Seven Sub-races. Mount Atlas, according to all the legends, was
three times as high as it is now; having sunk at two different times. It
is of a volcanic origin, and therefore the voice

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 494 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

within Ezekiel says: "I will *bring forth a fire from the midst of
thee,* it shall devour thee," etc. (v. 18). Surely it does not mean, as
seems to be the case from the translated texts, that this fire was to be
brought from the midst of the Prince of Tyrus, or his people, but from
Mount Atlas, symbolising the proud race, learned in magic and high in
arts and civilization, whose last remnant was destroyed almost at the
foot of the range of those once gigantic mountains.

Truly, "thou shalt be a terror, and never *shalt* thou be *any more*";
*as* the very name of the race and its fate is now annihilated from
man's memory. Bear in mind, that almost every ancient King and priest
was an initiate; that from toward the close of the Fourth Race there had
been a feud between the Initiates of the *Right* and those of the *Left*
Path; finally, that the garden of Eden is referred to by other
personages than the Jews of the *Adamic* race, since even Pharaoh is
compared to the fairest tree of Eden by this same Ezekiel, who shows
"all the trees of Eden, the choicest and best of Lebanon, . . .
comforted in the nether parts of the earth . . . ," for "they also went
down into hell with him" (Pharaoh)\* unto the nether parts, which are in
fact the bottom of the ocean, whose floor gaped wide to devour the lands
of the Atlanteans and themselves. If one bears all this in mind and
compares the various accounts, then one will find out that the whole of
chapters xxviii. and xxxi. of Ezekiel relate neither to Babylon,
Assyria, nor yet Egypt, since none of these have been so destroyed, but
simply fell into ruins on the *surface,* not *beneath* the earth -- but
indeed to Atlantis and most of its nations. And he will see that the
"garden of Eden" of the Initiates was no myth, but a locality now
submerged. Light will dawn upon him, and he will appreciate such
sentences as these at their true esoteric value: "Thou hast been in
Eden; . . . thou wast upon the holy mountain of God" -- for every nation
had and many still have *holy* mountains: some, Himalayan Peaks, others,
Parnassus, and Sinai. They were all places of initiation and the abodes
of the *chiefs* of the communities of ancient and even modern adepts.
And again: "Behold, the Assyrian (why not Atlantean, Initiate?) was a
cedar in Lebanon; . . . *his height was exalted above all the trees*; .
. . . the cedars in the garden of God could not hide him, . . . so that
all the trees of Eden . . . . envied him" (Ezekiel xxxi. 3-9).

Throughout all Asia Minor, the Initiates were called the "trees of
Righteousness," and the cedars of Lebanon, as also were some kings of
Israel. So were the great adepts in India, but only the adepts of the

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* The only Pharaoh whom the Bible shows going down into the Red Sea was
the king who pursued the Israelites, and who remained unnamed, for very
good reasons, perhaps. The story was surely made up from the Atlantean
legend.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 495 VARIOUS NAMES FOR INITIATES.

left hand. When Vishnu Purana narrates that "the world was overrun with
trees," while the Prachetasas -- who "passed 10,000 years of austerity
in the vast ocean" -- were absorbed in their devotions, the allegory
relates to the Atlanteans and the adepts of the early Fifth Race -- the
Aryans. Other "*trees* (adept Sorcerers) spread, and overshadowed the
unprotected earth; and the people perished . . . unable to labour for
ten thousand years." Then the sages, the Rishis of the Aryan race,
called Prachetasas, are shown "coming forth *from the* *deep,*"*\** and
destroying by the wind and flame issuing from their mouths, the
iniquitous "trees" and the whole vegetable kingdom; until Soma (the
moon), the sovereign of the vegetable world, pacifies them by making
alliance with the adepts of the *Right* Path, to whom he offers as bride
Marisha, "the offspring of the trees."\*\* This means that which is
given in the Stanzas and Commentaries, and what is also given in Part
**II**. of Vol. I., "The Sacred Island." It hints at the great struggle
between the "Sons of God" and the Sons of the Dark Wisdom -- our
forefathers; or the Atlantean and the Aryan Adepts.

The whole History of that period is allegorized in the *Ramayana,* which
is the mystic narrative in epic form of the struggle between Rama -- the
first king of the *divine* dynasty of the early Aryans -- and Ravana,
the symbolical personation of the Atlantean (Lanka) race. The former
were the incarnations of the Solar Gods; the latter, of the lunar Devas.
This was the great battle between Good and Evil, between white and black
magic, for the supremacy of the divine forces, or of the lower
terrestrial or cosmic powers. If the student would understand better the
last statement, let him turn to the *Anugita* episode of the
Mahabharata, chapter v., where the Brahmana tells his wife, "I have
perceived by means of the Self the seat abiding in the Self -- (the
seat) where dwells the Brahman free from the pairs of opposites and the
moon, together with the fire (or the sun), upholding (all) beings (as),
the mover of the intellectual principle." The moon *is* the deity of the
mind (Manas) but only on the lower plane. "Manas is dual -- *lunar* in
the lower, *solar* in its upper portion," says a commentary. That is to
say, it is attracted in its higher aspect towards Buddhi, and in its

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Vishnu Purana, Book I., ch. xv.

\*\* This is pure allegory. The waters are a symbol of wisdom and of
occult learning. Hermes represented the sacred Science under the symbol
of *fire*; the Northern Initiates, under that of water. The latter is
the production of *Nara*, the "Spirit of God," or rather *Paramatman*,
the "Supreme Soul," says Kulluka Bhatta, Narayana, meaning "he who
abides in the deep" or plunged in the Waters of Wisdom -- "water being
the body of Nara" (*Vayu*). Hence arises the statement that for 10,000
years they remained in austerity "in the vast Ocean"; and are shown
emerging from it. Ea, the God of Wisdom, is the "Sublime Fish," and
Dagon or Oannes is the Chaldean man-fish, who emerges from the waters to
teach wisdom.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 496 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

lower descends into, and listens to the voice of its *animal* soul full
of selfish and sensual desires; and herein is contained the mystery of
an adept's as of a profane man's life, as also that of the *post-mortem*
separation of the divine from the animal man. The Ramayana -- every line
of which has to be read esoterically -- discloses in magnificent
symbolism and allegory the tribulations of both man and soul. "Within
the body, in the midst of all these life-winds (? principles), which
move about in the body, and swallow up one another,\* blazes the
Vaishvana fire\*\* sevenfold, of which 'I' am the goal," says the
Brahmana.\*\*\*

But the chief "Soul" is *Manas* or mind; hence, Soma, the moon, is shown
as making an alliance with the solar portion in it, personified as the
Prachetasas. But of the seven keys that open the seven aspects of the
Ramayana, as of every other Scripture, this is only one -- the
metaphysical.

The symbol of the "Tree" standing for various Initiates was almost
universal. Jesus is called "the tree of Life," as also all the adepts of
the good Law, while those of the *left* Path are referred to as the
"withering trees." John the Baptist speaks of "the axe" which "is laid
to the root of the trees" (Matth. iii. 10); and the King of Assyria's
armies are called *trees* (Isaiah x. 19).

The true meaning of the Garden of Eden was sufficiently given in "*Isis
Unveiled.*"

The writer has more than once heard surprise expressed that *Isis*
should contain so few of the doctrines now taught. This is quite
erroneous. For the allusions to such teachings are plentiful, even if
the teachings themselves were still withheld. The time had not arrived
then, as the hour has not struck now *to say all.* "No Atlanteans, or
the Fourth Race which preceded our Fifth Race, are mentioned in '*Isis
Unveiled,*' " a critic on "Esoteric Buddhism" wrote one day. I, who
wrote *Isis Unveiled,* maintain that the Atlanteans *are* mentioned as
our predecessors, namely, in Volume I., p. 133, when speaking of the
Book of Job. For what can be plainer than this: "In the original text,
instead of 'dead things,' it is written dead *Rephaim,* giants, or
mighty primitive men, from whom 'Evolution' *may one* *day trace our
present race.*" It is invited to do so now, now that this hint is
explained quite openly; but Evolutionists are as sure to

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* This is explained by the able translator of Anugita in a foot-note
(p. 258) in these words: "The sense appears to be this; the course of
worldly life is due to the operations of the life-winds which are
attached to the **SELF**, and lead to its manifestations as individual
souls.

\*\*" Vaisvanara (or Vaishvanara) is a word often used to denote the
Self" -- explains Nilakantha. \*\*\* Translated by Kashinath Trimbak
Telang, **M.A**., Bombay.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 497 TRACES OF PRE-HISTORIC STRIFES.

decline nowadays as they did ten years ago. Science and theology are
against us: therefore we question both, and have to do so in
self-defence. On the strength of hazy metaphors scattered throughout the
prophets, and in St. John's Revelation, a grand but re-edited version of
the Book of Enoch, on these insecure grounds Christian theology built
its dogmatic Epos of the War in Heaven. It did more: it used the
symbolical visions, intelligible only to the Initiates, as pillars upon
which to support the whole bulky edifice of its religion; and now the
pillars have been found very weak reeds, and the cunning structure is
foundering. The entire Christian scheme rests upon these *Jakin* and
*Boaz* -- the two contrary forces of good and evil, Christ and Satan the
\[\[*agathai kai kakai dunameis*\]\]. Take away from Christianity its
main prop of the Fallen Angels, and the Eden Bower vanishes with its
Adam and Eve into thin air; and Christ, in the exclusive character of
the One God and Saviour, and the victim of Atonement for the Sin of
animal-man, becomes forthwith a useless, meaningless myth.

In an old number of the *Revue Archaeologique* for the year 1845 (p.
41), a French writer, M. Maury, remarks: -- "This universal strife
between good and bad spirits seems to be only the reproduction of
*another more ancient and more terrible strife,* that, according to an
ancient myth, took place before the creation of the universe, between
the faithful and the rebellious legions."

Once more, it is a simple question of priority. Had John's *Revelation*
been written during the Vedic period, and were not one sure now of its
being simply another version of the *Book of Enoch* and the Dragon
legends of pagan antiquity -- the grandeur and the beauty of the imagery
might have biased the critics' opinion in favour of the Christian
interpretation of that first war, whose battle field was starry Heaven,
and the first slaughterers -- the Angels. As the matter stands now,
however, one has to trace Revelation, event by event, to other and far
older visions. For the better comprehension of the Apocalyptic
allegories and of the esoteric *epos* we ask the reader to turn to
*Revelation,* and to read chapter xii., from verse 1 to verse 7.

This has several meanings, most of which have been found out with regard
to the astronomical and numerical keys of this universal myth. That
which may be given now, is a fragment, a few hints as to its secret
meaning, as embodying the record of a real war, the struggle between the
Initiates of the two schools. Many and various are the still existing
allegories built on that same foundation stone. The true narrative, that
which gives the full esoteric meaning, is in the Secret books, but the
writer has had no access to these.

In the exoteric works, however, the episode of the Taraka war, and some
esoteric commentaries, may offer a clue perhaps. In every Purana

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 498 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

the event is described with more or less variations, which show its
allegorical character.

In the Mythology of the earliest Vedic Aryans as in the later *Puranic*
narratives, mention is made of Budha, the "Wise"; one "learned in the
*Secret* Wisdom," and who is the planet Mercury in his euhemerization.
The *Hindu Classical Dictionary* credits Budha with being the author of
a hymn in the Rig Veda. Therefore, he can by no means be "a later
fiction of the Brahmins," but is a very old personation indeed.

It is by inquiring into his genealogy, or theogony, rather, that the
following facts are disclosed. As a myth, he is the son of Tara, the
wife of Brihaspati the "gold coloured," and of "Soma" the (male) Moon,
who, Paris-like, carries this new Helen of the Hindu sidereal Kingdom
away from her husband, which causes a great strife and *war* in Swarga
(Heaven). The episode brings on a battle between the gods and the
Asuras: King Soma, finds allies in Usanas (Venus), the leader of the
Danavas; and the gods are led by Indra and Rudra, who side with
Brihaspati. The latter is helped by Sankara (Siva), who, having had for
his guru Brihaspati's father, Angiras, befriends his son. Indra is here
the Indian prototype of Michael, the Archistrategus and the slayer of
the "Dragon's" angels -- since one of his names is *Jishnu* "leader of
the (celestial) Host." Both fight, as some Titans did against other
Titans in defence of revengeful gods, one -- of Jupiter *tonans* (in
India, Brihaspati is the planet Jupiter, which is a curious
coincidence); the other, in support of the ever-thundering Rudra
Sankara. During this war, he is deserted by his body-guard, the
storm-gods (Maruts). The story is very suggestive in some of its
details.

Let us examine some of them, and seek to discover their meaning.

The presiding genius, or "regent" of the planet Jupiter is Brihaspati,
the wronged husband. He is the instructor or spiritual guru of the gods,
who are the representatives of the procreative powers. In the Rig Veda,
he is called *Brahmanaspati,* a name meaning "the deity in whom *the
action of the worshipped* upon the gods is personified." Hence
Brahmanaspati represents the materialization of the *divine grace,* so
to say, by means of ritual and ceremonies, or the exoteric worship.

"**T**ARA"\* -- his wife -- is on the other hand the personification of
the powers of one initiated into *Gupta Vidya* (secret knowledge), as
will be shown.

**S**OMA is the moon astronomically; but in mystical phraseology, it is
also the name of the sacred beverage drunk by the Brahmins and the
Initiates during their mysteries and sacrificial rites. The "Soma" plant
is the *asclepias acida,* which yields a juice from which that mystic
beverage,

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* See Dowson's *Classical Dictionary.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 499 ALLEGORIES ON THE "WAR IN HEAVEN."

the *Soma* drink, is made. Alone the descendants of the Rishis, the
*Agnihotri* (the fire priests) of the great mysteries knew all its
powers. But the real property of the true Soma was (and *is*) to make a
new *man* of the Initiate, after he is *reborn,* namely once that he
begins to live in his *astral* body (See "The Elixir of Life"\*); for,
his spiritual nature overcoming the physical, he would soon snap it off
and part even from that etherealized form.\*\*

Soma was never given in days of old to the non-initiated Brahman -- the
simple *Grihasta,* or priest of the exoteric ritual. Thus Brihaspati --
"guru of the gods" though he was -- still represented the dead-letter
form of worship. It is Tara *his wife --* the symbol of one who, though
wedded to dogmatic worship, longs for true wisdom -- who is shown as
initiated into his mysteries by King *Soma,* the giver of that Wisdom.
Soma is thus made in the allegory *to carry her away.* The result of
this is the birth of Budha -- *esoteric Wisdom --* (Mercury, or Hermes
in Greece and Egypt). He is represented as "so beautiful," that even the
husband, though well aware that Budha is not the progeny of his
*dead-letter* worship -- claims the "new-born" as his Son, the fruit of
his ritualistic and meaningless forms.\*\*\* Such is, *in brief, one* of
the meanings of the allegory.

*War in Heaven* refers to several events of that kind on various and
different planes of being. The first is a purely astronomical and
cosmical fact pertaining to cosmogony. Mr. John Bentley thought that
with the Hindus *war in Heaven* is only a figure referring to their
calculations of time periods (see Bentley's *Hindu
Astronomy*)*.\**\*\*\*

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* See "Five Years of Theosophy."

\*\* The partaker of *Soma* finds himself both linked to his external
body, and yet away from it in his spiritual form. The latter, freed from
the former, soars for the time being in the ethereal higher regions,
becoming virtually "as one of the gods," and yet preserving in his
physical brain the memory of what he sees and learns. Plainly speaking,
*Soma* is the fruit of the Tree of Knowledge forbidden by the jealous
Elohim to Adam and Eve or *Yah-ve*, "lest Man should become as one of
us."

\*\*\* We see the same in the modern exoteric religions.

*\*\*\*\* "Historical Views of Hindu Astronomy.*" Quoting from the work
in reference to Aryachatta, who is said to give a near approach to the
true relation among the various values for the computations of the value
of \[\[*pi*\]\], the author of the "Source of Measures" reproduces a
curious statement. Mr. Bentley, it is said, "was greatly familiar with
the Hindu astronomical and mathematical knowledge . . . this statement
of his then may be taken as authentic: the same remarkable trait, among
so many Eastern and ancient nations of *sedulously concealing the arcana
of this kind of knowledge, is* *a marked one* among the Hindus. That
which was given out to be popularly taught and to be exposed to public
inspection, *was but the approximate of a more exact but hidden*
*knowledge.* And this very formulation of Mr. Bentley will strangely
exemplify the assertion; and explained, will show that it (the Hindu
*exoteric* astronomy and sciences) was derived *from a system exact
beyond the European one,* in which Mr. Bentley himself, of \[\[footnote
continued on following page\]\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 500 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

This served as a prototype, he thinks, for the Western nations to build
their *war of the Titans* upon. The author is not quite wrong, but
neither is he quite right. If the sidereal prototype refers indeed to a
*pre*-manvantaric period, and rests entirely on the Knowledge claimed by
the Aryan Initiates of the whole programme and progress of cosmogony,\*
the *war of the Titans* is but a legendary and deified copy of the real
war that took place in the Himalayan *Kailasa* (heaven) instead of in
the depths of Cosmic interplanetary Space. It is the record of the
terrible strife between the "Sons of God" and the "Sons of the Shadow"
of the Fourth and the Fifth Races. It is on these two events, blended
together by legends borrowed from the exoteric account of the war waged
by the Asuras against the gods, that every subsequent national tradition
on the subject has been built.

Esoterically, the *Asuras,* transformed subsequently into evil Spirits
and lower gods, who are eternally at war with the *great* deities -- are
the gods of the Secret Wisdom. In the oldest portions of the Rig Veda,
they are the spiritual and the *divine*, the term *Asura* being used for
the Supreme Spirit and being the same as the great Ahura of the
Zoroastrians. (See Darmesteter's **V**ENDIDAD). There was a time when
the gods Indra, Agni, and Varuna themselves belonged to the *Asuras.*

In the Aitareya Brahmana, the breath (*asu*) of Brahma-Prajapati became
alive, and from that breath he created the Asuras. Later on, after the
war, the Asuras are called the enemies of the gods, hence -- "A-suras,"
the initial "A" being a negative prefix -- or "*no*-gods" -- the "gods"
being referred to as "Suras." This then connects the *Asuras* and their
"Hosts," enumerated further on, with the "Fallen Angels" of the
Christian Churches, a hierarchy of spiritual Beings to be found in every
Pantheon of ancient and even modern nations -- from the Zoroastrian down
to that of the Chinaman. They are the sons of the primeval Creative
Breath at the beginning of every new Maha Kalpa, or Manvantara; in the
same rank as the Angels who had remained "faithful." These *were the
allies of Soma* (the parent of the *Esoteric* *Wisdom*) as against
*Brihaspati* (representing ritualistic or *ceremonial*

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\[\[Continued from previous page\]\] course, trusted as far in advance
of the Hindu Knowledge, at any time, in any generation."

Which is Mr. Bentley's misfortune, and does not take away from the glory
of the ancient Hindu astronomers, who were all Initiates.

\* The Secret Doctrine teaches that every event of universal importance,
such as geological cataclysms at the end of one race and the beginning
of a new one, involving a great change each time in mankind, spiritual,
moral and physical -- is pre-cogitated and preconcerted, so to say, in
the sidereal regions of our planetary system. Astrology is built wholly
upon this mystic and intimate connection between the heavenly bodies and
mankind; and it is one of the great secrets of Initiation and Occult
mysteries.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 501 SARPAS -- SERPENTS -- NAGAS.

worship). Evidently they have been degraded in Space and Time into
opposing powers or demons by the ceremonialists, on account of their
rebellion against hypocrisy, sham-worship, and the dead-letter form.

Now what is the real character of all those who fought along with them?
They are (1) the *Usanas,* or the "host" of the planet Venus, become now
in Roman Catholicism -- *Lucifer,* the genius of the "morning star" (see
Isaiah xiv., 12), the *tsaba,* or army of "Satan." (2) The *Daityas* and
*Danavas* are the Titans, the demons and giants whom we find in the
Bible (*Gen.* vi.) -- the progeny of the "Sons of God" and the
"Daughters of Men." Their generic name shows their alleged character,
and discloses at the same time the secret *animus* of the Brahmins: for
they are the *Krati-dwishas --* the "enemies of the sacrifices" or
exoteric *shams.* These are the "hosts" that fought against Brihaspati,
the representative of *exoteric* popular and national religions; and
Indra -- the god of the *visible* heaven, the firmament, who, in the
early *Veda,* is the *highest* god of Cosmic heaven, the fit habitation
for an *extra*-Cosmic and personal God, higher than whom no exoteric
worship can ever soar.

\(3\) Then come the Nagas,\* the *Sarpa* (serpents or Seraphs). These,
again, show their character by the hidden meaning of their glyph. In
Mythology they are *semi-divine* beings with a human face and the tail
of a Dragon. They are therefore, undeniably, the Jewish *seraphim* (from
*Serapis* and *Sarpa,* Serpent); the plural being *saraph,* "burning,
fiery" (See Isaiah, vi. 23). Christian and Jewish angelology
distinguishes between the Seraphim and the *Cherubim* or Cherubs, who
come second in order; esoterically, and Kabalistically, they are
identical; the *cherubim* being simply the name for the images or
likenesses of any of the divisions of the celestial hosts. Now, as said
before, the Dragons and *Nagas* were the names given to the
Initiates-hermits, on account of their great Wisdom and Spirituality and
their living in caves. Thus, when Ezekiel applies the adjective of
*Cherub* to the King of Tyre, and tells him that by his *wisdom* and his
*understanding* there is *no secret* that can be hidden from him (v. 3,
4, xxviii.), he shows to an Occultist that it is a "prophet," perhaps,
still a follower of *exoteric* worship, who fulminates against an
*Initiate* of another school and not against an imaginary Lucifer, a
fallen cherub from the stars, and then from the garden of Eden. Thus the
so-called "war" is, in one of its many meanings, also an allegorical
record of the strife between the two classes of adepts -- of the right
and of the left path. There were three classes of Rishis in India, who
were

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* *The Nagas* are described by the Orientalists as a mysterious people
whose landmarks are found abundantly in India to this day, and who lived
in *Naga dwipa* one of the *Seven* continents or divisions of
*Bharatavarsha* (old India), the town of Nagpur being one of the most
ancient cities in the country.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 502 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

the earliest adepts known; the royal, or Rajarshis, kings and princes,
who adopted the ascetic life; the Devarshis, divine, or the sons of
Dharma or Yoga; and Brahmarshis, descendants of those Rishis who were
the founders of *gotras* of Brahmans, or caste-races. Now, leaving the
mythical and astronomical keys for one moment aside, the secret
teachings show many Atlanteans who belonged to these divisions; and
there were strifes and wars between them, *de facto* and *de jure.*
Narada, one of the greatest Rishis, was a *Devarishi*; and he is shown
in constant and everlasting feud with Brahma, Daksha, and other gods and
sages. Therefore we may safely maintain that whatever the *astronomical*
meaning of this universally accepted legend, its human phase is based on
real and historical events, disfigured into a theological dogma only to
suit ecclesiastical purposes. As above so below. Sidereal phenomena, and
the behaviour of the celestial bodies in the heavens, were taken as a
model, and the plan was carried out below, on earth. Thus, space, in its
abstract sense, was called "the realm of divine knowledge," and by the
*Chaldees* or Initiates *Ab Soo,* the habitat (or Father, *i.e.*, the
source) of knowledge, because it is in space that dwell the intelligent
Powers which *invisibly* rule the Universe.\*

In the same manner and on the plan of the Zodiac in the *upper* Ocean or
the heavens, a certain realm on Earth, an inland sea, was consecrated
and called "the Abyss of Learning"; twelve centres on it in the shape of
twelve small islands representing the Zodiacal signs -- two of which
remained for ages the "mystery signs"\*\* and were the abodes of twelve
Hierophants and masters of wisdom. This "sea of knowledge" or
learning\*\*\* remained for ages there, where now stretches the Shamo,
or Gobi desert. It existed until the last great glacial period, when a

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Not less suggestive are the qualities attributed to Rudra Siva, the
great *Yogi,* the forefather of all the Adepts -- in Esotericism one of
the greatest Kings of the Divine Dynasties. Called "the Earliest" and
the "Last," he is the patron of the Third, Fourth, and the Fifth
Root-Races. For, in his earliest character, he is the ascetic
*Dig-ambara,* "clothed with the Elements," *Trilochana,* "the
*three*-eyed"; *Pancha-anana,* "the five-faced," an allusion to the past
four and the present fifth race, for, though *five*-faced, he is only
"four-armed," as the fifth race is still alive. He is the "God of Time,"
Saturn-Kronos, as his *damaru* (drum), in the shape of an hour-glass,
shows; and if he is accused of having cut off Brahma's fifth head, and
left him with only four, it is again an allusion to a certain degree in
initiation, and also to the Races.

\*\* G. Seiffarth's idea that the signs of the Zodiac were in ancient
times only ten is erroneous. Ten only were known to the profane; the
initiates, however, knew them all, *from the time of the separation of
mankind into sexes,* whence arose the separation of Virgo-Scorpio into
two; which, owing to a secret sign added and the *Libra* invented by the
Greeks, instead of the secret name which was not given, made 12. (*Vide
Isis Unveiled,* Vol. **II**., p. 456.)

\*\*\* The above is, perhaps, a key to the Dalai-Lama's symbolical name
-- the "Ocean" lama, meaning the Wisdom Ocean. Abbe Huc speaks of it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 503 THE MYTH OF BEL AND MERODACH.

local cataclysm, which swept the waters south and west and so formed the
present great desolate desert, left only a certain oasis, with a lake
and one island in the midst of it, as a relic of the *Zodiacal Ring* on
Earth. For ages the watery abyss -- which, with the nations that
preceded the later Babylonians, was the abode of the "great mother" (the
terrestrial post-type of the "great mother chaos" in heaven), the parent
of Ea (Wisdom), himself the early prototype of Oannes, the man-Fish of
the Babylonians -- for ages, then, the "Abyss" or *Chaos* was the abode
of wisdom and not of evil. The struggle of Bel and then of Merodach, the
Sun-god, with *Tiamat,* the Sea and its Dragon, a "war" which ended in
the defeat of the latter, has a purely cosmic and geological meaning, as
well as an historical one. It is a page torn out of the History of the
Secret and Sacred Sciences, their evolution, growth and DEATH -- *for
the profane masses.* It relates (*a*) to the systematic and gradual
drying up of immense territories by the fierce Sun at a certain
pre-historic period; one of the terrible droughts which ended by a
gradual transformation of once fertile lands abundantly watered into the
sandy deserts which they are now; and (*b*) to the as systematic
persecution of the Prophets of the Right Path by those of the Left. The
latter, having inaugurated the birth and evolution of the sacerdotal
castes, have finally led the world into all these exoteric religions,
invented to satisfy the depraved tastes of the "*hoi polloi*" and the
ignorant for ritualistic pomp and the materialization of the
ever-immaterial and Unknowable Principle.

This was a certain improvement on the Atlantean sorcery, the memory of
which lingers in the remembrances of all the literary and
Sanskrit-speaking portion of India, as well as in the popular legends.
Still it was a parody on, and the desecration of the Sacred Mysteries
and their science. The rapid progress of anthropomorphism and idolatry
led the early Fifth, as it had already led the Fourth Race, into sorcery
once more, though on a smaller scale. Finally, even *the four* "*Adams*"
(symbolizing under other names the four preceding races) were forgotten;
and passing from one generation into another, each loaded with some
additional myths, got at last drowned in that ocean of popular symbolism
called the Pantheons. Yet they exist to this day in the oldest Jewish
traditions, as the *Tzelem,* "the Shadow-Adam" (the *Chhayas* of our
doctrine); the "model" Adam, the copy of the first, and the "male and
female" of the exoteric genesis (chap. i.); the third, the "earthly
Adam" before the Fall, an androgyne; and the Fourth -- the Adam after
*his fall, i.e.,* separated into sexes, or the pure Atlantean. The Adam
of the garden of Eden, or the forefather of our race -- the fifth -- is
an ingenious compound of the above four. As stated in *Zohar* (iii.,
fol. 4, col. 14, Cremona Ed.) Adam, the FIRST *man*, is not found

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 504 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

now on earth, he "is not found in all, below." Because, "where does the
lower earth come from? *From the chain of the Earth, and heaven*
*above,*" *i.e.,* from the superior globes, those which precede and are
above our Earth. "And there came out from it (the chain) creatures of
all kinds. Some of them in (solid) skins, some in shells (*Klippoth*)
*.* . . some in red shells, some in black, some in white, and some of
other colours . . . " (See *Qabbalah*).

As in the Chaldean Cosmogony of Berosus and the Stanzas just given, some
treatises on the Kabala speak of creatures with two faces, some with
four, and some with one face: for "the highest Adam did not come down in
all the countries, or produce progeny and have many wives," but is a
Mystery.

So is the Dragon a mystery. Truly, says Rabbi Simeon Ben-Iochai, that to
understand the meaning of the Dragon is not given to the "Companions"
(students, or *chelas*)*,* but only to "the little ones," *i.e*., the
*perfect Initiates.\** "The work of the beginning the companions
understand; but it is only the little ones who understand the parable on
the work in the *Principium* by *the mystery of the serpent of the
Great* *Sea.*"*\*\** And those Christians, who may happen to read this,
will also understand by the light of the above sentence who their
"Christ" was. For Jesus states repeatedly that he who "shall not receive
the Kingdom of God as a *little child,* he shall not enter therein"; and
if some of his sayings have been meant to apply to children without any
metaphor, most of what relates to the "little ones" in the Gospels,
related to the *Initiates, of whom Jesus was one.* Paul (Saul) is
referred to in the Talmud as "the little one."

That "Mystery of the Serpent" was this: Our Earth, or rather
*terrestrial life,* is often referred to in the Secret Teachings as the
great Sea, "the sea of life" having remained to this day a favourite
metaphor. The *Siphrah Dzeniouta* speaks of primeval chaos and the
evolution of the Universe after a destruction (*pralaya*), comparing it
to an uncoiling serpent: -- "Extending hither and thither, its tail in
its mouth, the head twisting on its neck, it is enraged and angry. . .
It watches and conceals itself. *Every thousand Days* it is manifested."
(I., § 16).

\[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Such was the name given in ancient Judea to the Initiates, called
also the "Innocents" and the "Infants," *i.e*., once more reborn. This
*key* opens a vista into one of the New Testament mysteries; the
slaughter by Herod of the 40,000 "Innocents." There is a legend to this
effect, and the event which took place almost a century **B.C.**, shows
the origin of the tradition blended at the same time with that of
Krishna and his uncle Kansa. In the case of the N. T., Herod stands for
Alexander Janneus (of Lyda), whose persecution and murder of hundreds
and thousands of Initiates led to the adoption of the Bible story.

\*\* Zohar ii., 34.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 505 THE SACREDNESS OF THE SERPENT.

A commentary on the Puranas says: "Ananta-Sesha is a form of Vishnu, the
Holy Spirit of Preservation, and a symbol of the Universe, on which it
is supposed to sleep during the intervals of the *Days* of Brahma. The
seven heads of Sesha support the Universe. . . . "

So the Spirit of God "sleeps," is "breathing" (meracha' pheth') over the
Chaos of undifferentiated matter, before each new "Creation." (*Siphrah
Dzeniouta*)*.* Now one "Day" of Brahma is composed, as already
explained, of *one thousand* Mahayugas; and as each "Night" or period of
rest is equal in duration to this "day," it is easy to see to what this
sentence in *Siphrah Dzeniouta* refers, viz.: -- that the serpent
manifests "once in a thousand days." Nor is it more difficult to see
whither the initiated writer of the *Siphrah* is leading us, when he
says: "Its head is broken in the waters of the great sea, as it is
written: 'Thou dividest the sea by thy strength, thou brakest the
*heads* of the *dragons* in the waters' " (lxxiv. 13). It refers to the
trials of the Initiates in this physical life, the "sea of sorrow," if
read with one key; it hints at the successive destruction of the seven
spheres of a chain of worlds in the great sea of space, when read with
another key: for every sidereal globe or sphere, every world, star, or
group of stars, is called in symbolism "the Dragon's head." But however
it may read, the Dragon was never regarded as Evil, nor was the Serpent
either -- in antiquity. In the metaphors, whether astronomical,
cosmical, theogonical or simply physiological, *i.e.*, phallic -- the
Serpent was always regarded as a *divine* symbol. When it is said "The
(Cosmic) Serpent which runs with 370 leaps" (*Siphrah Dzeniouta*, § 33)
it means the cyclic periods of the great Tropical year (25,868 years),
divided in the esoteric calculation into 370 periods or cycles, as one
solar year is divided into 365 days. And if Michael was regarded by the
Christians as the Conqueror of Satan, the Dragon, it is because in the
Talmud this fighting personage is represented as the Prince of Waters,
who had seven subordinate Spirits under him -- a good reason why the
Latin Church made him the patron Saint of every promontory in Europe. In
the Kabala (*Siph. Dzen*.) the creative Force "makes sketches and spiral
lines of his creation *in the* *shape of a Serpent.*" It "holds its tail
in its mouth," because it is the symbol of endless eternity and of
cyclic periods. Its meanings, however, would require a volume, and we
must end.

Thus the reader may now see for himself what are the several meanings of
the "War in Heaven," and of the "great dragon." The most solemn and
dreaded of church dogmas, the alpha and omega of Christian faith, and
the pillar of its **F**ALL and **A**TONEMENT, dwindles down to a pagan
symbol, in the many allegories about those prehistoric struggles.

-------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next Section](sd2-2-06.md)

[Contents](sd2-0-co.htm#contents.md)
