##### he Secret Doctrine by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol. 2

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 402 THE SECRET DOCTRINE. <span id="DDE_LINK24"></span><span id="DDE_LINK26"></span>

<span id="DDE_LINK27">\[\[This page continued from</span> [previous
section](sd2-1-22.md)\]\]

**W**ESTERN **S**PECULATIONS,

FOUNDED ON THE **G**REEK AND **P**URANIC **T**RADITIONS.

Thus it becomes natural to find that, on even such meagre data as have
reached the profane historian, Rudbeck, a Swedish scientist, tried to
prove about two centuries ago that Sweden was the Atlantis of Plato. He
thought, even, that he had found in the configuration of ancient Upsala,
the situation and measurements given by the Greek sage of the capital of
"Atlantis." As Bailly proved, Rudbeck was mistaken; but so was Bailly
likewise, and still more. For Sweden and Norway had formed part and
parcel of ancient Lemuria, and also of Atlantis on the European side,
just as Eastern and Western Siberia and Kamschatka had belonged to it,
on the Asiatic. Only, once more, when was it? We can find it out
approximately only by studying the *Puranas,* if we will have nought to
do with the Secret teachings.

Three quarters of a century have already elapsed since Captain (now
Colonel) Wilford brought forward his fanciful theories about the British
islands being the "White Island," the *Atala* of the Puranas. This was
sheer nonsense, as the Atala is one of the seven *dwipas,* or islands,
belonging to the nether lokas, one of the seven regions of Patala (the
antipodes). Moreover, as Wilford\* shows, the Puranas place it "on

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Wilford makes many mistakes. He identifies, for instance, Sveta-dwipa
(the white Island), the "island in the northern part of *Toyambhudi,*"
with England, and then tries to identify it with Atala (a nether region)
and Atlantis. Now the former is the abode of Vishnu, *exoterically,* and
Atala is a hell. He also places it in the Euxine or Icshu (Black) Sea,
and then seems to connect it, in another place, with Africa and Atlas.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 403 ORIENTALISTS IN THE WRONG BOX.

the seventh zone or seventh climate," -- rather, on the seventh measure
of heat: which thus locates it between the latitudes of 24 and 28
degrees north. It is then to be sought on the same degree as the Tropic
of Cancer, whereas England is between the 50th and 60th degrees of
latitude. Wilford speaks of it as *Atala,* Atlantis, the white island.
And in vol. viii. of Journal of Asiatic Researches, p. 280, its enemy is
called the "White Devil," the *demon of terror.* For he says: "In their
(the Hindu and Mahomedan) romances, we see Kai-caus going to the
mountain of '*As-burj, at the foot of which* the Sun sets,' to fight the
*Dev-Sefid,* or white devil, the *Taradaitya* of the *Puranas,* whose
abode was on the *seventh stage* of the world, answering to the seventh
zone of the Buddhists, or the *White* Island."

Now here the Orientalists have been, and are still, facing the Sphinx's
riddle, the wrong solution of which will ever destroy their authority,
if not their persons, in the eyes of every Hindu scholar, even those who
are not initiates. For there is not a statement in the Puranas -- on the
conflicting details of which Wilford based his speculations -- which has
not several meanings, and does not apply to both the physical and the
metaphysical worlds. If the old Hindus divided the face of the globe
geographically into seven zones, climates, dwipas, and into seven hells
and seven heavens, allegorically, that measure of seven did not apply in
both cases to the same localities. It is the north pole, the country of
"Meru," which is the seventh division, as it answers to the Seventh
principle (or fourth metaphysically), of the occult calculation, for it
represents the region of Atma, of pure soul, and Spirituality. Hence
Pushkara is shown *as the seventh zone,* or dwipa, which encompasses the
*Kshira* Ocean, or Ocean of milk (the ever-frozen white region) in the
Vishnu (and other) Puranas (*Book II ch. iv.*). And Pushkara, with its
two *Varshas,* lies directly at the foot of Meru. For it is said that
"the two countries north and south of Meru are *shaped like a* *bow,*" .
. and that "one half of the surface of the earth is on the south of Meru
and the other half on the north of Meru *-- beyond which* *is half of
Pushkara*" (*Vishnu Purana, Asiatic Researches, etc.*). Geographically,
then, Pushkara is America, Northern and Southern; and *allegorically* it
is the prolongation of Jambu-dwipa\* in the middle of

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Every name in the Puranas has to be examined at least under two
aspects; geographically, and metaphysically, in its allegorical
application; *e.g., Nila,* the (blue) mountain which is one of the
boundaries to the north of Meru, is again to be sought geographically in
a mountain range in Orissa, and again in a mountain quite different from
the others (in Western Africa). Jambu-dwipa is Vishnu's dominion -- the
world, limited in the Puranas to our globe, the region which contains
Meru *only*, and again it is divided to contain Bharata-varsha (India),
its *best* division, and the fairest, says Parasara. Likewise with
Pushkara and all others.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 404 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

which stands Meru, for it is the country inhabited by beings who live
ten thousand years, who are free from sickness or failing; where there
is neither virtue nor vice, caste or laws, for these men are "of the
same nature as the Gods," (Vishnu Purana, Book **II**. ch. iv.). Wilford
is inclined to see Meru in Mount Atlas, and locates there also the
Loka-lokas. Now Meru, we are told, which is the *Swar*-loka, the abode
of Brahma, of Vishnu, and the Olympus of Indian exoteric religions, is
described geographically as "passing through the middle of the
earth-globe, and protruding on either side" (*Surya Siddhanta, v. 5,
Whitney*'*s* *trans.*)*.* On its upper station are the gods, on the
nether (or South pole) is the abode of demons (hells). How can then Meru
be Mount Atlas? Besides which, Taradaitya, a demon, cannot be placed on
the seventh zone if the latter is identified with the "white" Island,
which is *Sveta-dwipa,* for reasons given in the foot-note. (*Vide
infra.*)

Wilford accuses the modern Brahmans "of having jumbled them (islands and
countries) all together" (A.R. **III**. 300); but *he* jumbled them
still more. He believes that as the Brahmanda and Vayu Puranas divide
the old continent into seven dwipas, said to be surrounded by a vast
ocean, beyond which lie the regions and mountains of Atala (*ibid*),
hence "most probably the Greeks divided the nation of Atlantis, which,
as it could not be found after having once been discovered, they
conceived to have been destroyed by some shock of nature."

Finding certain difficulties in believing that the Egyptian priests,
Plato, and even Homer, had all built their notions of Atlantis on Atala
-- a nether region located at the Southern pole -- we prefer holding to
the statements given in the secret books. We believe in the seven
"continents," four of which have already lived their day, the fifth
still exists, and two are to appear in the future. We believe that each
of these is not strictly a continent in the modern sense of the word,
but that each name, from Jambu down to Pushkara,\* refers to the
geographical names given (i.) to the dry lands covering the face of the
whole earth during the period of a Root-Race, in general; and (ii.) to
what remained of these after a geological (race) *Pralaya* -- as
"Jambu," for instance: and (iii.) to those localities which will enter,
after the future cataclysms, into the formation of new *universal*
"continents," peninsulas, or dwipas\*\* -- each continent being, in one
sense, a greater or smaller region of dry land surrounded with water.
Thus, that whatever

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Jambu, Plaksha, Salmali, Kusa, Krauncha, Saka, and Pushkara.

\*\* Such as Saka and Pushkara, for instance, which do not yet exist,
but into which will enter such lands as some portions of America, of
Africa, and Central Asia, with the Gobi region. Let us bear in mind that
*Upadwipas* means "*root*" islands, or the dry land in general.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 405 FUTURE CONTINENTS, SYMBOLIZED.

"jumble" the nomenclature of these may represent to the profane, there
is none, in fact, to him who has the key.

Thus, we believe *we know* that, though two of the Puranic "islands" --
the *sixth and seventh* "continents" -- are yet to come, nevertheless
there *were,* or there *are*, lands which will enter into the
composition of the future dry lands, of new earths whose geographical
faces will be entirely changed, as were those of the past. Therefore we
find in the Puranas that Saka-dwipa is (or will be) a continent, and
that Sankha-dwipa, as shown in the Vayu Purana, is only "a minor
island," one of the nine divisions (to which Vayu adds six more) of
Bharata Varsha. Because Sankha-dwipa was peopled by "Mlechchhas (unclean
foreigners), who worshipped Hindu divinities," therefore they were
connected with India.\* This accounts for Sankhasura, a King of a
portion of Sankha-dwipa, who was killed by Krishna; that King who
resided in the palace "which was an ocean shell, and whose subjects
lived in shells also," says Wilford.

"On the banks of the Nile\*\* (?) there were frequent contests between
the Devatas (divine beings, demi-gods) and the Daityas (giants); but the
latter tribe having prevailed, their King, Sankhasura, who resided in
the Ocean, made frequent incursions in the night" (*As. Res.,* Vol.
**III**. 225.)

It is not on the banks of the *Nile,* but on the coasts of Western
Africa, south of where now lies Morocco, that these battles took place.
There was a time when the whole of the Sahara desert was a sea, then a
continent as fertile as the Delta, and then, only after another
temporary submersion, it became a desert similar to that other
wilderness, the desert of Shamo or Gobi. This is shown in Puranic
tradition, for on the same page as above cited, it is said: "The people
were between two fires; for, while Sankhasura was ravaging one side of
the continent, Krauncha (or Cracacha), King of Kraunch, used to desolate
the other; both armies . . . thus *changed the most fertile regions into
a savage desert.*"

That not only the last island of Atlantis, spoken of by Plato, but a
large continent, first divided, and then broken later on into seven
peninsulas and islands (called *dwipas*)*,* preceded Europe, is sure. It
covered the whole of the North and South Atlantic regions, as well as
portions of the North and South Pacific, and had islands even in the
Indian Ocean (relics of Lemuria). The claim is corroborated by Indian
Puranas, Greek writers, and Asiatic, Persian, and Mohammedan traditions.
Wilford, who confuses sorely the Hindu and the Mussulman legends, shows
this, however, clearly. (*See Vol. VIII., X. and XI. of*

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* They were called demons, *Asuras,* giants, and monsters, because of
their wickedness; and thus their country was likened to Atala -- a hell,
because of that.

\*\* Not on the river Nile, surely, but near the *Nila* mountains of the
Atlas range.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 406 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

*Asiatic Researches.*) And his facts and quotations from the *Puranas*
give direct and conclusive evidence that the Aryan Hindus and other
ancient nations were earlier navigators than the Phoenicians, who are
now credited with having been the first seamen that appeared in the
*post-*diluvian times. This is what is given in the *Journal* of the
Asiatic Society, *III., pp.* 325, *et seq.: -*-

"In their distress the few nations who survived (in the war between
Devatas and Daityas) raised their hands to Bhagavan, 'Let him who can
deliver us . . . be our King'; using the word I'T (a *magic* term not
understood by Wilford, evidently) which re-echoed through the whole
country."

Then comes a violent storm, the waters of the *Kali* are strangely
agitated, "when there appeared from the waves . . a man, afterwards
called I'T, at the head of a numerous army, saying *abhayan,* no fear" .
. . and scattered the enemy. "The King I'T," explains Wilford, "is a
subordinate incarnation of M'rira" (*Mrida,* a form of Rudra, probably?)
who "re-established peace and prosperity throughout all Sankha-dwipa,
*through Barbaradesa,* Hissast'han and Awasthan or Arabia . . " etc.,
etc.

Surely, if the Hindu Puranas give a description of wars on continents
and islands situated beyond Western Africa in the Atlantic Ocean; if
their writers speak of *Barbaras* and other people such as Arabs -- they
who were never known to navigate, or cross the *Kala pani* (the black
waters of the Ocean) in the days of Phoenician navigation -- then their
Puranas must be older than those Phoenicians (placed at from 2,000 to
3,000 years **B.C**.). At any rate those traditions must have been
older;\* as --

"In the above accounts," writes an adept, "the Hindus speak of this
island as *existing* and in great power; it must, therefore, have been
more than *eleven thousand years ago.*"

But another calculation and proof may be adduced of the great antiquity
of these Hindu Aryans who knew of (because they had once dwelt in it)
and described the last surviving island of Atlantis -- or rather of that
remnant of the Eastern portion of that continent which had

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Says Wilford of the division of Atlantis and Bharata or India,
confusing the two accounts and Priyavrata with Medhatithi: -- "The
division was made by Priyavrata. . . . He had ten sons, and it was his
intention to divide the whole world. In the same manner Neptune divided
Atlantis between his ten sons. . . . One of them had . . . the extremity
of the Atlantis" -- which "is probably the old continent. . . . This
Atlantis was overwhelmed by a flood. . . . and it seems that *by
Atlantis we should* *understand the Antediluvian Earth* over which ten
princes were born to rule according to the mythology of the West (and of
the East, also) but *seven only* of them sat upon the throne." (*Vol.
III. p.* 286.) . . Some also are of opinion that of the seven dwipas
*six* were destroyed by a flood (*Vol. VIII. p.* 367). Wilford takes it
to be "Gades which included Spain," but it was Plato's island -- rather.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 407 THE PUZZLES OF ANTIQUITY.

perished soon after the upheaval of the two Americas\* -- the two
Varshas of Pushkara. This may be demonstrated, moreover, on an
astronomical calculation by an adept who criticises Wilford. For
recalling what the Orientalist had brought forward concerning the Mount
Ashburj "at the foot of which the sun sets," where was the war between
the Devatas and the Daityas,\*\* he says: --

"We will consider, then, the latitude and longitude of the lost island,
and of the remaining Mount Ashburj. It was on the seventh stage of the
world, *i.e*., in the seventh climate (which is between the latitude of
24 degrees and latitude 28 degrees north) . . . This island, the
daughter of the Ocean, is frequently described as lying in the West; and
the sun is represented as setting at the foot of its mountain (Ashburj,
Atlas, Teneriffe or Nila, no matter the name), and fighting the white
Devil of the 'White Island.' "

Now, considering this statement from its astronomical aspect, and
knowing that Krishna is the incarnated Sun (Vishnu), a solar God; and
that he is said to have killed Dev-Sefid, the white giant -- a
*possible* personification of the ancient inhabitants at the foot of the
Atlas -- perchance Krishna may be only a representation of the vertical
beams of the Sun? Those inhabitants (the Atlantides) are, we have seen,
accused by Diodorus of daily *cursing the Sun,* and ever fighting his
influence. This is an astronomical interpretation of course. But it will
now be proved that Sankhasura, and Sancha dwipa, and all their history,
is also geographically and ethnologically Plato's "Atlantis" in Hindu
dress.

It was just remarked that since, in the Puranic accounts, the island is
*still existing,* then those accounts must be older than the 11,000
years elapsed since Sancha dwipa, or the Poseidonis of Atlantis,
disappeared. Is it not barely possible that Hindus should have known the
island still earlier? Let us turn again to astronomical demonstrations,
which make this quite plain if one assumes, according to the said adept,
that "at the time when the summer tropical 'colure' passed through the
*Pleiades,* when *cor-Leonis* would be upon the equator; and when Leo
*was vertical* to Ceylon at sunset, then would *Taurus* be vertical to
the island of *Atlantis at noon.*"

This explains, perhaps, why the Singhalese, the heirs of the

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* America, the "new" world -- is thus, though not *much,* older; still
it *is* older than Europe, the "old world."

\*\* If Div or Dev-Sefid's (the Taradaitya's) abode was on the *seventh
stage,* it is because he came from Pushkara, the *Patala* (antipodes) of
India, or from America. The latter touched the walls, so to say, of
Atlantis, before the latter sank finally. The word *Patala,* meaning
both the antipodal countries and infernal regions, thus became
synonymous in ideas and attributes as well as in name.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 408 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

Rakshasas and Giants of Lanka, and the direct descendants of *Singha,*
or *Leo,* became connected with Sancha dwipa or Poseidonis (Plato's
Atlantis). Only, as shown by Mackey's "*Sphinxiad,*" this must have
occurred about 23,000 years ago, *astronomically*; at which time the
obliquity of the ecliptic must have been rather more than 27 degrees,
and consequently Taurus must have passed over "Atlantis" or "Sancha
dwipa." And that it was so is clearly demonstrated.

"*The sacred bull Nandi was brought from Bharata to Sancha to meet*
*Rishabha* (*Taurus*) *every Kalpa. But when those of the White Island*
(who descended originally from Sveta dwipa),\* *who had mixed with the*
*Daityas* (giants) *of the land of iniquity, had become black with Sin,
then* *Nandi remained for ever in the* "*White Island*" (or Sveta
dwipa.) "*Those* *of the Fourth World* (race) *lost* **AUM**" *--* say
the *Commentaries.*

Asburj (or Azburj), whether the peak of Teneriffe or not, was a volcano,
when the sinking of the "western Atala" (or hell) began, and those who
were saved told the tale to their children. Plato's Atlantis perished
between water below and fire above; the great mountain vomiting flames
all the while. "The 'fire-vomiting Monster' survived alone out of the
ruins of the unfortunate island."

Do the Greeks, accused of borrowing a Hindu fiction (Atala), and
inventing from it another (Atlantis), stand also accused of getting
their geographical notions and the number seven from them? (*Vide* in
Part **II**. the several sections on the **S**EPTENATE in nature.)

"The famous Atlantis exists no longer, but we can hardly doubt that it
did once," says Proclus, "for Marcellus, who wrote a history of
Ethiopian affairs, says that such, and so great an island once existed,
and this is evidenced by those who composed histories relative to the
external sea. For *they relate that in this time there were seven
islands in* the Atlantic sea sacred to Proserpine; and besides these,
three of immense magnitude, sacred to Pluto . . . Jupiter . . . and
Neptune. And, besides this, the inhabitants of the last island
(Poseidonis) *preserved* *the memory of the prodigious magnitude* of the
Atlantic island as related by their ancestors, and of its governing for
many periods all the islands in the Atlantic sea. From this *isle* one
may pass to other large

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Neither Atlantis, nor yet Sancha dwipa, was ever called "White
Island." When tradition says that "the White Island became black on
account of the sins of people" it only means the denizens of the "White
Island," or Siddhapura, or Sveta dwipa, who descended to the Atlantis of
the Third and Fourth races, to "inform the latter; and who, having
incarnated, became black with sin" -- a figure of speech. All the
Avatars of Vishnu are said to come originally from the White Island.
According to Tibetan tradition the White Island is the only locality
which escapes the general fate of other dwipas and can be destroyed by
neither fire nor water, for -- it is the "eternal land."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 409 WHAT MARCELLUS SAYS.

islands beyond, which are not far from the firm land, near which is the
true sea."

"These seven dwipas (inaccurately rendered islands) constitute,
according to Marcellus, the body of the famous Atlantis," writes Wilford
himself. . . . . This evidently shows that *Atlantis is the old
continent*. . . . The Atlantis was destroyed after a violent storm (?):
this is well known to the Puranics, some of whom assert that in
consequence of this dreadful convulsion of nature, six of the dwipas
disappeared" . . *.* (*xi.,* 27).

Enough proofs have now been given to satisfy the greatest sceptic.
Nevertheless, direct proofs based on exact science are also added.
Volumes might be written, however, to no purpose for those who will
neither see nor hear, except through the eyes and ears of their
respective authorities.

Hence the teaching of the Roman Catholic scholiasts, namely, that
Hermon, the mount in the land of Mizpeth -- meaning "anathema,"
"destruction" -- is the same as Mount Armon. As a proof of this,
Josephus is often quoted, as affirming that still in his own day
enormous bones of giants were daily discovered on it. But it was the
land of Balaam the prophet, whom the "Lord loved well"; and so mixed up
are facts and personages in the said scholiasts' brains, that, when the
Zohar explains the "birds" which inspired Balaam to mean "Serpents," to
wit, the wise men and adepts at whose school he had learnt the mysteries
of prophecy -- the opportunity is again taken of showing Mount Hermon
inhabited by the "winged dragons of Evil, whose chief is Samael" (the
Jewish Satan).

"It is to those unclean spirits chained on Mount Hermon of the Desert,
that the scapegoat of Israel, who assumed the name of one of them
(Azaz(y)el), was sent" (*Spencer*).

We say it is not so. The Zohar has the following explanation on the
practice of magic which is called in Hebrew *Nehhaschim,* or the
"Serpents' Works." It says (*Part III. col. 302*)*: -*- "It is called
*nehhaschim,* because the magicians (practical Kabalists) work
*surrounded by* *the light of the primordial serpent,* which they
perceive in heaven as a luminous zone composed of myriads of small
stars" . . . which means simply the *astral light,* so called by the
Martinists, by Eliphas Levi, and now by all the modern Occultists. (Vide
Sections about.)

-------

**T**HE "**C**URSE" FROM A **P**HILOSOPHICAL POINT OF VIEW.

The foregoing teachings of the **S**ECRET **D**OCTRINE, supplemented by
universal traditions, must now have demonstrated that the Brahmanas and
Puranas, the Yathas and other Mazdean Scriptures,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 410 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

down to the Egyptian, Greek, and Roman, and finally to the Jewish Sacred
records, all have the same origin. None are meaningless and baseless
stories, invented to entrap the unwary profane: all are allegories
intended to convey, under a more or less fantastic veil, the great
truths gathered in the same field of pre-historic tradition. Space
forbids us from entering, in these two volumes, into further and more
minute details with respect to the four Races which preceded our own.
But before offering to the student the history of the psychic and
spiritual evolution of the direct antediluvian fathers of our Fifth
(Aryan) humanity, and before demonstrating its bearing upon all the
other side branches grown from the same trunk, we have to elucidate a
few more facts. It has been shown, on the evidence of the whole ancient
literary world, and the intuitional speculations of more than one
philosopher and scientist of the later ages, that the tenets of our
Esoteric Doctrine are corroborated by inferential as well as by direct
proof in almost every case. That neither the "legendary" giants, nor the
lost continents, nor yet the evolution of the preceding races, are quite
baseless tales. In the *Addenda* which close this volume, science will
find itself more than once unable to reply; they will, it is hoped,
finally dispose of every sceptical remark with regard to the sacred
number in nature, and our figures in general. (Vide §§ on the
*Septenaries.*)

Meanwhile, one task is left incomplete: that of disposing of that most
pernicious of all the theological dogmas -- the CURSE under which
mankind is alleged to have suffered ever since the supposed disobedience
of Adam and Eve in the bower of Eden.

Creative powers in man were the gift of divine wisdom, not the result of
sin. This is clearly instanced in the paradoxical behaviour of Jehovah,
who first *curses* Adam and Eve (or Humanity) for the supposed committed
crime, and then *blesses* his "chosen people" by saying "Be fruitful and
multiply, and replenish the earth" (*Gen. ix.* 1). The curse was not
brought on mankind by the Fourth Race, for the comparatively sinless
Third Race, the still more gigantic Antediluvians, had perished in the
same way; hence the Deluge was no punishment, but simply a result of a
periodical and geological law. Nor was the curse of **K**ARMA called
down upon them for seeking *natural* union, as all the mindless
animal-world does in its proper seasons; but, for abusing the creative
power, for desecrating the divine gift, and wasting the life-essence for
no purpose except bestial personal gratification. When understood, the
third chapter of Genesis will be found to refer to the Adam and Eve of
the closing Third and the commencing Fourth Races. In the beginning,
conception was as easy for woman as it was for all animal creation.
Nature had never intended that woman should bring forth her young ones
"in sorrow." Since that period, however, during the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 411 THE ANCIENT AND THE MODERN MAN.

evolution of the Fourth Race, there came enmity between its seed, and
the "Serpent's" seed, the seed or product of *Karma* and divine wisdom.
For the seed of woman or lust, *bruised the head* of the seed of *the
fruit of* *wisdom and knowledge,* by turning the holy mystery of
procreation into animal gratification; hence the law of Karma "bruised
the *heel*" of the Atlantean race, by gradually changing
physiologically, morally, physically, and mentally, the whole nature of
the Fourth Race of mankind,\* until, from the healthy King of animal
creation of the Third Race, man became in the Fifth, our race, a
helpless, scrofulous being, and has now become the wealthiest heir on
the globe to constitutional and hereditary diseases, the most
consciously and intelligently bestial of all animals!\*\*

This is the real CURSE from the physiological standpoint, almost the
only one touched upon in the Kabalistic esotericism. Viewed from this
aspect, the curse is undeniable, for it is evident. The intellectual
evolution, in its progress hand-in-hand with the physical, has certainly
been a curse instead of a blessing -- a gift quickened by the "Lords of
Wisdom," who have poured on the human *manas* the fresh dew of their own
spirit and essence. The divine Titan has then suffered in vain; and one
feels inclined to regret his benefaction to mankind, and sigh for those
days so graphically depicted by AEschylus, in his "Prometheus Bound,"
when, at the close of the first Titanic age (the age that followed that
of ethereal man, of the pious Kandu and Pramlocha), nascent, physical
mankind, still mindless and (physiologically) senseless, is described as
--

> "Seeing, they saw in vain;  
> Hearing, they heard not; but like shapes in dreams,  
> Through the long time all things at random mixed."

Our *Saviours,* the Agnishwatta and other divine "Sons of the Flame of
Wisdom" (personified by the Greeks in Prometheus\*\*\*), may well, in

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* How wise and grand, how far-seeing and morally beneficent are the
laws of Manu on connubial life, when compared with the licence tacitly
allowed to man in civilized countries. That those laws have been
neglected for the last two millenniums does not prevent us from admiring
their forethought. The Brahmin was a *grihasta,* a family man, till a
certain period of his life, when, after begetting a son, he broke with
married life and became a chaste Yogi. His very connubial life was
regulated by his Brahmin astrologer in accordance with his nature.
Therefore, in such countries as the Punjab, for instance, where the
lethal influence of Mussulman, and later on of European, licentiousness,
has hardly touched the orthodox Aryan castes, one still finds the finest
men -- so far as stature and physical strength go -- on the whole globe;
whereas the mighty men of old have found themselves replaced in the
Deccan, and especially in Bengal, by men whose generation becomes with
every century (and almost with every year) dwarfed and weakened.

\*\* Diseases and over-population are facts that can never be denied.

\*\*\* In Mrs. Anna Swanwick's volumes, "The Dramas of AEschylus," it is
said of "Prometheus Bound" (Vol. **II**., pp. 146, 147), that Prometheus
truly appears in it "as \[\[Footnote continued on next page\]\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 412 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

the injustice of the human heart, be left unrecognized and unthanked.
They may, in our ignorance of the truth, be indirectly cursed for
Pandora's gift: but to find themselves proclaimed and declared by the
mouth of the clergy, the EVIL ONES, is too heavy a Karma for "Him" "who
dared alone "-- when Zeus "ardently desired" to quench the entire human
race -- to save "that mortal race" from perdition, or, as the suffering
Titan is made to say: --

> "From sinking blasted down to Hades' gloom.  
> For this by the dire tortures I am bent,  
> Grievous to suffer, piteous to behold,  
> I who did mortals pity! . . . . "

The chorus remarking very pertinently: --

> "Vast boon was this thou gavest unto mortals . . . ."

Prometheus answers: --

> "Yea, and besides 'twas I that gave them fire.  
> **C**HORUS: Have now these short-lived creatures flame-eyed fire?  
> **P**ROM.: Ay, and by it full many arts will learn. . . . . "

But, with the arts, the fire received has turned into the greatest
curse: the animal element, and *consciousness* of its possession, has
changed periodical instinct into chronic animalism and sensuality.\* It
is this which hangs over humanity like a heavy funereal pall. Thus
arises the responsibility of free-will; the Titanic passions which
represent humanity in its darkest aspect; "the restless insatiability of
the lower passions and desires, when, with self-asserting insolence,
they bid defiance to the restraints of law."\*\*

Prometheus having endowed man, according to Plato's "Protagoras," with
that "wisdom which ministers to physical well-being," but the lower
aspect of *manas* of the animal (*Kama*) having remained unchanged,

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\[\[Footnote continued from previous page\]\] the champion and
benefactor of mankind, whose condition . . . . is depicted as weak and
miserable in the extreme. . . . Zeus, it is said, proposed to annihilate
these puny ephemerals, and to plant upon the earth a new race in their
stead." We see the Lords of Being doing likewise, and exterminating the
first product of nature and the sea, in the Stanzas (V, *et seq*.). . .
. Prometheus *represents* himself as having frustrated this design, and
as being consequently subjected, for the sake of mortals, to the most
agonising pain, inflicted by the remorseless cruelty of Zeus. We have,
thus, the Titan, the symbol of finite reason and free will (of
intellectual humanity, or the higher aspect of *Manas*), depicted *as
the sublime philanthropist,* while Zeus, the supreme deity of Hellas, is
portrayed as the cruel and obdurate despot, a character peculiarly
revolting to Athenian sentiment." The reason for it is explained further
on. The "Supreme Deity" bears, in every ancient Pantheon -- including
that of the Jews -- a *dual* character, composed of light and shadow.

\* The animal world, having simple instinct to guide it, has its
*seasons of procreation,* and the sexes become neutralized during the
rest of the year. Therefore, the free animal knows sickness but once in
its life -- before it dies.

\*\* Introduction to "*Prometheus Bound,*" p. 152.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 413 THE TRAVESTY OF PROMETHEUS.

instead of "an untainted mind, heaven's first gift" (AEschylus), there
was created the eternal vulture of the ever unsatisfied desire, of
regret and despair coupled with "the dreamlike feebleness that fetters
the blind race of mortals" (*p*. 556), unto the day when Prometheus is
released by his heaven-appointed deliverer, Herakles.

Now Christians -- Roman Catholics especially -- have tried to
prophetically connect this drama with the coming of Christ. No greater
mistake could be made. The true theosophist, the pursuer of divine
wisdom and worshipper of ABSOLUTE perfection -- the unknown deity which
is neither Zeus nor Jehovah -- will demur to such an idea. Pointing to
antiquity he will prove that there never was an *original* sin, but only
an abuse of physical intelligence -- the psychic being guided by the
animal, and both putting out the light of the spiritual. He will say,
"All ye who can read between the lines, study ancient wisdom in the old
dramas -- the Indian and the Greek; read carefully the one just
mentioned, one enacted on the theatres of Athens 2,400 years ago, namely
'Prometheus Bound' " The myth belongs to neither Hesiod nor AEschylus;
but, as Bunsen says, it "is older than the Hellenes themselves," for it
belongs, in truth, to the dawn of human consciousness. The *Crucified*
Titan is the personified symbol of the collective Logos, the "Host," and
of the "Lords of Wisdom" or the HEAVENLY MAN, who incarnated in
Humanity. Moreover, as his name *Pro*-me-*theus*, meaning "he who sees
before him" or futurity, shows\* -- in the arts he devised and taught to
humanity, psychological insight was not the least. For as he complains
to the daughters of Oceanos: --

> "Of prophecies the various modes I fixed,  
> And among dreams did first discriminate  
> The truthful vision . . . and mortals guided  
> To a mysterious art. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
> All arts to mortals from Prometheus came. . ."

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* From \[\[*pro metis*\]\] *pro metis*, "forethought." "Professor
Kuhn," we are told in the above-named volumes of "The Dramas of
AEschylus," "considers the name of the Titan to be derived from the
Sanskrit word Pramantha, the instrument used for kindling fire. The root
*mand* or *manth*, implies rotatory motion, and the word *manthami*
(used to denote the process of fire kindling) acquired the secondary
sense of snatching away; hence we find another word of the same stock,
*pramatha*, signifying theft." This is very ingenious, but perhaps not
altogether correct; besides, there is a very prosaic element in it. No
doubt in physical nature, the higher forms may develop from the lower
ones, but it is hardly so in the world of thought. And as we are told
that the word *manthami* passed into the Greek language and became the
word *manthano,* to learn; that is to say, to appropriate knowledge;
whence *prometheia,* fore-knowledge, fore-thought; we may find, in
searching, a more poetical origin for the "fire-bringer" than that
displayed in its Sanskrit origin. The *Svastica,* the sacred sign and
the instrument for kindling *sacred* fire, may explain it better.
"Prometheus, the fire-bringer, is the *Pramantha* personified," goes on
the author; "he finds his prototype in the Aryan \[\[Footnote continued
on next page\]\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 414 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

Leaving for a few pages the main subject, let us pause and see what may
be the hidden meaning of this, the most ancient as it is the most
suggestive of traditional allegories. As it relates directly to the
early races, this will be no real digression.

The subject of AEschylus' drama (the trilogy is lost) is known to all
cultured readers. The demi-god robs the gods (the Elohim) of their
secret -- the mystery of the *creative fire.* For this sacrilegious
attempt he is struck down by KRONOS\* and delivered unto Zeus, the
FATHER and creator of a mankind which he would wish to have blind
intellectually, and animal-like; a *personal* deity, which will not see
MAN "like one of us." Hence Prometheus, "the fire and light-giver," is
chained on Mount Caucasus and condemned to suffer torture. But the
triform Fates (Karma), whose decrees, as the Titan says, even Zeus: --

> "E'en he the fore-ordained cannot escape. . . "

-- ordain that those sufferings will last only to that day when a son of
Zeus --

> "Ay, a son bearing stronger than his sire" (787)  
> . . . . . . . . . .  
> "One of thine (Io's) own descendants it must be. ."(791)

-- is born. This "Son" will deliver Prometheus (the suffering Humanity)
from his own fatal gift. His name is, "He who has to come. . . . "

On the authority, then, of these few lines, which, like any other
allegorical sentence, may be twisted into almost any meaning; namely, on
the words pronounced by Prometheus and addressed to Io, the daughter of
Inachos, persecuted by Zeus -- a whole prophecy is constructed by some
Catholic writers. Says the crucified Titan: --

> "And, portent past belief, the speaking oaks  
> By which full clearly, in no riddling phrase  
> Wast hailed *as the illustrious spouse of Zeus*  
> *. . . . . . . . .* (v*.* 853).  
> . . . . stroking thee  
> With *touch alone of unalarming hand;*  
> Then thou *dark Epaphos* shalt bear, whose name  
> Records his sacred gendering . . . . " (870)

This was construed by several fanatics -- des Mousseaux and de Mir-

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\[\[Footnote continued from previous page\]\] Matarisvan, a divine . . .
. personage, closely associated with the fire god of the Veda, Agni. . .
." Mati, in Sanskrit, is "understanding," and a synonym of MAHAT and
*manas,* and must be of some account in the origin of the name:
*Promati* is the son of Fohat, and has his story also.

\* Kronos is "time," and thus the allegory becomes very suggestive.
(*See closing* *pages of this Sub-section.*)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 415 CHRIST CONNECTED WITH EPAPHOS.

ville amongst others -- into a clear prophecy. Io -- "is the mother of
God," we are told, and "dark Epaphos" -- Christ. But, the latter has not
dethroned his father, except metaphorically, if one has to regard
Jehovah as that "Father"; nor has the Christian Saviour hurled *his*
Father down into Hades. Prometheus says, in verse 930, that Zeus will be
humbled yet; as for himself: --

> " . . . . such marriage he prepares  
> Which from his throne of power to nothingness  
> Shall hurl him down; so shall be all fulfilled  
> His father Kronos' curse . . . .  
> . . . . Then let him sit  
> Confiding in his lofty thunder-peals,  
> And wielding with both hands the fiery bolt;  
> For *these shall not avail, but fail he shall,*  
> *A fall disgraceful,* not to be endured . . . . " (v. 980).

"Dark Epaphos" was the Dionysos-Sabazius, the son of Zeus and of Demeter
in the Sabasian Mysteries, during which the "father of the gods,"
assuming the *shape of a Serpent,* begot on Demeter, Dionysos, or the
solar Bacchus. Io is the moon, and at the same time the **E**VE *of a*
*new race,* and so is Demeter -- in the present case. The Promethean
myth is a prophecy indeed; but it does not relate to any of the cyclic
Saviours who have appeared periodically in various countries and among
various nations, in their transitionary conditions of evolution. It
points to the last of the mysteries of cyclic transformations, in the
series of which mankind, having passed from the ethereal to the solid
physical state, from spiritual to physiological procreation, is now
carried onward on the opposite arc of the cycle, toward that second
phase of its primitive state, when *woman knew no man,* and human
progeny *was created,* *not begotten.*

That state will return to it and to the world at large, when the latter
shall discover and really appreciate the truths which underlie this vast
problem of sex. It will be like "the light that never shone on sea or
land," and has to come to men through the Theosophical Society. That
light will lead on and up to the *true spiritual intuition.* Then (as
expressed once in a letter to a theosophist), "the world *will have a
race of Buddhas and* *Christs,* for the world will have discovered that
individuals *have it in their* *own powers to procreate Buddha-like
children -- or demons.*" "When that knowledge comes, all dogmatic
religions, and with these the demons, will die out."

If we reflect upon the serial development of the allegory, and the
character of the heroes, the mystery may be unriddled. **K**RONOS is of
course "time" in its cyclic course. He swallows his children -- the

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* See, for explanation of this curse, the last page of the present
sub-section.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 416 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

*personal* gods of exoteric dogmas included. He has swallowed instead of
Zeus, his *stone* idol; but the symbol has grown, and has only developed
in human fancy as mankind was cycling down toward only its physical and
intellectual -- not spiritual -- perfection. When it is as far advanced
in its spiritual evolution Kronos will be no longer deceived. Instead of
the *stone image* he will have swallowed the anthropomorphic fiction
itself. Because, *the serpent of wisdom,* represented in the Sabasian
mysteries by the anthropomorphised Logos, the unity of spiritual and
physical Powers, will have begotten in Time (Kronos) a progeny --
Dionysos-Bacchus or the "dark Epaphos," the "mighty one" -- the race
that will overthrow him. Where will he be born? Prometheus traces him to
his origin and birth-place in his prophecy to Io. Io is the moon-goddess
of generation -- for she is Isis and she is Eve, the great mother.\* He
traces the path of the (racial) wanderings as plainly as words can
express it. She has to quit Europe and go to Asia's continent, reaching
there the highest of the mountains of Caucasus (737), the Titan telling
her: --

> "When thou hast crossed the flood, limit betwixt  
> Two continents, fronting the burning East." (810)

that she must travel eastward, after passing the "Kimmerian Bosphorus,"
and cross what is evidently the Volga and now Astrakhan on the Caspian
Sea. After this she will encounter "fierce northern blasts" and cross
thither to the land of the "Arimaspian host" (east of Herodotus'
Scythia) to --

> "Pluto's gold-abounding flood. . . ."(825)

Which is rightly conjectured by Professor Newman to have meant the

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* It is complained by the author of the version on, and translator of,
"Prometheus Bound" that in this tracing of Io's wanderings, "no
consistency with our known geography is attainable" (*p.* *191, Vol.
II*). There may be good reason for it. First of all it is the journey
and wandering from place to place of the *race* from which the "tenth,"
or *Kalki* Avatar, so called, is to issue. This he calls the "Kingly
race born *in Argos*" (888). But Argos has no reference here to Argos in
Greece. It comes from *Arg* or *arca* -- the female generative power
symbolised in the moon -- the navi-formed Argha of the mysteries,
meaning the Queen of Heaven. Eustathius shows that, in the dialect of
the Arg-ians, Io signified the moon; while esotericism explains it as
the divine Androgyne, or the mystic 10; in Hebrew 10 is the perfect
number, or Jehovah. *Arghya* in Sanskrit is the libation cup, the
*navi*-form or boat-shaped vessel in which flowers and fruit are offered
to the deities. *Arghyanath* is a title of the Maha-Chohan, meaning "the
Lord of Libations;" and *Arghya Varsha --* "the land of libations" -- is
the mystery name of that region which extends from Kailas mountain
nearly to the Schamo Desert -- from within which the *Kalki Avatar* is
expected. The Airyana-Varsedya of the Zoroastrians, as a locality, is
identical with it. It is now said to have been situated between the sea
of Aral, Baltistan, and little Tibet; but in olden times its area was
far larger, as it was the birth-place of *physical* humanity, of which
Io is the mother and symbol.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 417 THE MISTAKE OF ARRIAN EXPLAINED.

Ural, the Arimaspi of Herodotus being "the recognised inhabitants of
this golden region."

And here comes, between verses 825 and 835, a puzzle to all the European
interpreters. Says the Titan: --

> "To these (Arimaspi and Grypes) approach not; a far border land  
> Thou next wilt reach, where dwells a swarthy race  
> Near the Sun's founts, where is the AEthiop "river";  
> Along its banks proceed till thou attain  
> The mighty rapids, where from Bybline heights  
> Pure draughts of sacred water Neilos sends . . . "

There Io was ordained to found a colony for herself and sons. Now we
must see how the passage is interpreted. As Io is told that she has to
travel eastward till she comes to the river Ethiops, which she is to
follow till it falls into the Nile -- hence the perplexity. "According
to the geographical theories of the earliest Greeks" we are informed by
the author of the version on "Prometheus Bound" --

> "This condition was fulfilled by the river Indus. Arrian (*vi.* i.)
> mentions that Alexander the Great, when preparing to sail down the
> Indus (having seen crocodiles in the river Indus, and in no other
> river except the Nile . . . ), seemed to himself to have discovered
> the sources of the Nile, as though the Nile, rising from some place in
> India, and flowing through much desert land, and thereby losing its
> name Indus, next . . . flowed through inhabited land, being now called
> the Nile by the Ethiopians of those parts and afterwards by the
> Egyptians. Virgil in the 4th Georgic echoes the absolute error" (*p*.
> 197, *Vol. II*.).

Both Alexander and Virgil may have erred considerably in their
geographical notions; but the prophecy of Prometheus has not so sinned,
in the least -- not, at any rate, in its esoteric spirit. When a certain
race is symbolised, and events pertaining to its history are rendered
allegorically, no topographical accuracy ought to be expected in the
itinerary traced for its personification. Yet it so happens, that the
river "Ethiops" is certainly the Indus, and it is also the *Nil or Nila.
It* is the river born on the *Kailas* (heaven) mountain, the mansion of
the gods -- 22,000 feet above the level of the sea. It was the Ethiops
river -- and was so called by the Greeks, long before the days of
Alexander, because its banks, from Attock down to Sind, were peopled by
tribes generally referred to as the Eastern Ethiopians. India and Egypt
were two kindred nations, and the Eastern Ethiopians -- the mighty
builders -- have come from India, as is pretty well proved, it is hoped,
in "**I**SIS **U**NVEILED." (Vol. I. p. 569-70).

Then why could not Alexander, and even the learned Virgil have used the
word Nile or *Neilos* when speaking of the Indus, since it is one of its
names? To this day that river is called, in the regions around
Kala-Bagh, *nil* (blue), and *Nilah,* "the blue river." The water here
is of such dark blue colour that the name given to it from time
immemorial led to

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 418 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

a small town on its banks being called by the same name. It exists to
this day. Evidently Arrian -- who wrote far later than the day of
Alexander, and who was ignorant of the old name of the Indus -- has
unconsciously slandered the Greek conqueror. Nor are our modern
historians much wiser, in judging as they do. For they often make the
most sweeping declarations on mere appearances, as much as their ancient
colleagues ever did in days of old, when no Encyclopaedias were yet
ready for them.

The race of IO, "the cow-horned maid" is then simply the first pioneer
race of the AEthiopians brought by her from the Indus to the Nile (which
received its name in memory of the mother river of the colonists from
India\*). For does not Prometheus say to Io\*\* that the sacred Neilos
(the god, not the river) --

. . . "He to the land, *three-cornered,* thee shall guide," -- namely,
to the *Delta,* where her sons are foreordained to found -- . . . . .
"that far-off colony . . ." (*v*. 830 *et seq*.).

It is there that a new race (the Egyptians) will begin, and a "female
race" (873) which, "fifth in descent" from dark Epaphos --

> "Fifty in number shall return to Argos."

> . . . . . . . .

Then one of the fifty virgins will fail through love and shall -- . . .

> A kingly race in Argos bear  
> . . . . . . . .  
> But from this seed shall dauntless heroes spring,  
> Bow-famous, who shall free me from these ills."

When this hero shall arise, the Titan does not reveal; for as he
remarks: --

> "This, to set forth at large needs lengthy speech."

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Alexander, who was better acquainted with Attock than with India
(where he never went) could not have failed to hear the Indus near its
very sources called Nil and *Nilah.* Even if a mistake, it is thus
easily accounted for.

\*\* That Io is identical allegorically with Isis and the moon is shown
by her being "cow-horned." The allegory undeniably reached Greece from
India, where Vach -- "the melodious cow" (Rig-Veda) "from whom mankind
was produced" (Bhagavata Purana) is shown in the Aitareya Brahmana as
pursued by her father Brahma, who was moved by an illicit passion, and
changed her into a deer. Hence Io, refusing to yield to Jupiter's
passion, becomes "horned." The cow was in every country the symbol of
the passive generative power of nature, Isis, Vach, Venus -- the mother
of the prolific god of love, Cupid, but, at the same time, that of the
*Logos* whose symbol became with the Egyptians and the Indians -- the
bull -- as testified to by Apis and the Hindu bulls in the most ancient
temples. In esoteric philosophy the cow is the symbol of creative
nature, and the Bull (her calf) the spirit which vivifies her, or "the
Holy Spirit," as Mr. Kenealy shows. Hence the symbol of the horns. These
were sacred also with the Jews, who placed near the altar horns of
Shittim wood, by seizing which a criminal ensured his safety.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 419 WAS AESCHYLUS INITIATED?

But "Argos" is *Arghya Varsha,* the land of libation of the old
Hierophants, whence the deliverer of Humanity will appear, a name which
became ages later that of its neighbour, India -- the Arya-varta of old.

That the subject formed part of the Sabasian mysteries is made known by
several ancient writers: by Cicero (*in Tuscul. Quaest. I, ii. No.* 20)
and by Clemens Alexandrinus (*Strom*. I, *ii., oper. tom*. 1*,* p. 467
-- *Ed.* *Potter*'*s*). The latter writers are the only ones who
attribute the fact that AEschylus was charged by the Athenians with
sacrilege and condemned to be stoned to death, to its true cause. They
say that having been himself uninitiated, AEschylus had profaned the
Mysteries by exposing them in his trilogies on a public stage.\* But he
would have incurred the same condemnation had he been initiated -- which
must have been the case, as otherwise he must, like Socrates, have had a
*daimon* to reveal to him the secret and sacred allegorical drama of
initiation. At all events, it is not the "father of the Greek tragedy"
who invented the prophecy of Prometheus; for he only repeated in
dramatic form that which was revealed by the priests during the MYSTERIA
of the Sabasia.\*\* The latter, however, is one of the oldest sacred
festivals, whose origin is to this day unknown to history. Mythologists
connect it through Mithras (the Sun, called Sabasius on some old
monuments) with Jupiter and Bacchus. But it was never the property of
the Greeks, but dates from days immemorial.

The translators of the drama wonder how AEschylus could become guilty of
such "discrepancy between the character of Zeus as portrayed in the
'Prometheus Bound' and that depicted in the remaining dramas." (*Mrs. A.
Swanwick.*) This is just because AEschylus, like Shakespeare, was and
will ever remain the intellectual "Sphinx" of the ages. Between Zeus,
the abstract deity of Grecian thought, and the Olympic Zeus, there was
an abyss. The latter represented during the mysteries no higher a
principle than the lower aspect of human physical intelligence --
*Manas* wedded to *Kama*; Prometheus -- its divine aspect merging into
and aspiring to Buddhi -- the divine Soul. Zeus was the human soul and
nothing more, whenever shown yielding to his lower passions, -- the
*jealous* God, revengeful and cruel in its egotism or **I**-AM-NESS.
Hence, Zeus is represented as a serpent -- the intellectual tempter of
man -- which, nevertheless, begets in the course of

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Herodotus and Pausanias supposed that the cause of the condemnation
was that AEschylus, adopting the theogony of the Egyptians, made Diana,
the daughter of Ceres, and not of Latona. (See *AElian Var. Hist. I, v.
c*. xviii., *tom*. *1, p*. *433 Edition* *Gronov.*) But AEschyIus *was*
initiated.

\*\* *Sabasia* was a periodical festival with mysteries enacted in
honour of some gods, a variant on the Mithraic Mysteries. The whole
evolution of the races was performed in them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 420 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

cyclic evolution the "Man-Saviour," the solar Bacchus or "Dionysos,"
*more than a man.*

Dionysos is one with Osiris, with Krishna, and with Buddha (the heavenly
wise), and with the coming (tenth) Avatar, the glorified Spiritual
*Christos,* who will deliver the suffering *Christos* (mankind, or
Prometheus, on its trial). This, say Brahminical and Buddhistic legends,
echoed by the Zoroastrian and now by the Christian teachings (the latter
only occasionally), will happen at the end of *Kaliyuga.* It is only
after the appearance of Kalki-Avatar, or Sosiosh, that man will be born
from woman without sin. Then will Brahma, the Hindu deity; Ahura-Mazda
(Ormazd), the Zoroastrian; Zeus, the Greco-Olympian Don Juan; Jehovah,
the jealous, repenting, cruel, tribal God of the Israelites, and all
their likes in the universal Pantheon of human fancy -- vanish and
disappear in thin air. And along with these will vanish their shadows,
*the dark aspects* of all those deities, ever represented as their "twin
brothers" and creatures, in exoteric legend, *their own reflection on*
earth -- in esoteric philosophy. The Ahrimans and Typhons, the Samaels
and Satans, must be all dethroned on that day, when every dark evil
passion will be subdued.

There is one eternal Law in nature, one that always tends to adjust
contraries and to produce final harmony. It is owing to this law of
spiritual development superseding the physical and purely intellectual,
that mankind will become freed from its false gods, and find itself
finally -*-* **SELF***-***REDEEMED***.*

In its final revelation, the old myth of Prometheus -- his *proto-* and
*anti-*types being found in every ancient theogony -- stands in each of
them at the very origin of physical evil, because at the threshold of
human physical life. **K**RONOS is "Time," whose first law is that the
order of the successive and harmonious phases in the process of
evolution during cyclic development should be strictly preserved --
under the severe penalty of abnormal growth with all its ensuing
results. It was not in the programme of natural development that man --
higher animal though he may be -- should become at once --
intellectually, spiritually, and psychically -- the demi-god he is on
earth, while his physical frame remains weaker and more helpless and
ephemeral than that of almost any huge mammal. The contrast is too
grotesque and violent; the tabernacle much too unworthy of its
indwelling god. The gift of Prometheus thus became a CURSE -- though
*foreknown* and *foreseen* by the HOST personified in that personage, as
his name well shows.\* It is in this that rests, at one and the same
time,

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* *Vide supra,* a foot-note concerning the etymology of
\[\[*prometis*\]\] *prometis* or *forethought.* Prometheus confesses it
in the drama when saying: -- \[\[Footnote continued on next page\]\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 421 ONE OF THE FUNCTIONS OF ZEUS.

its sin and its redemption. For the Host that incarnated in a portion of
humanity, though led to it by Karma or *Nemesis,* preferred free-will to
passive slavery, intellectual self-conscious pain and even torture
"while myriad time shall flow" -- to inane, imbecile, instinctual
beatitude. Knowing such an incarnation was premature and not in the
programme of nature, the heavenly host, "Prometheus," still sacrificed
itself to benefit thereby, at least, one portion of mankind.\* But while
saving man from mental darkness, they inflicted upon him the tortures of
the self-consciousness of his responsibility -- the result of his free
will -- besides every ill to which mortal man and flesh are heir to.
This torture Prometheus accepted for himself, since the Host became
henceforward blended with the tabernacle prepared for them, which was
still unachieved at that period of formation.

Spiritual evolution being incapable of keeping pace with the physical,
once its homogeneity was broken by the admixture, the gift thus became
the chief cause, if not the sole origin of *Evil.*\*\* The allegory
which shows **K**RONOS cursing Zeus for dethroning him (in the primitive
"golden" age of Saturn, when all men were demi-gods), and for creating a
physical race of men weak and helpless in comparison; and then as
delivering to his (Zeus') revenge the culprit, who despoiled the gods of
their prerogative of creation and who thereby raised man to their level,
intellectually and spiritually -- is highly philosophical. In the case
of Prometheus, Zeus represents the Host of the primeval progenitors, of
the PITAR, the "Fathers" who created man senseless

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\[\[Footnote continued from previous page\]\]

> "Oh! holy Ether, swiftly-winged gales . . . .  
> Behold what I, a god, from gods endure  
> . . . . . . . . .  
> And yet what say I? *Clearly I foreknew*  
> All that must happen . . . .  
> . . . . The Destined it behoves,  
> As best I may, to bear, for well I wot  
> How incontestable the strength of Fate . . . . (88-105)

"Fate" stands here for **K**ARMA, or *Nemesis.*

\* Mankind is obviously divided into god-informed men and lower human
creatures. The intellectual difference between the Aryan and other
civilized nations and such savages as the South Sea Islanders, is
inexplicable on any other grounds. No amount of culture, nor generations
of training amid civilization, could raise such human specimens as the
Bushmen, the Veddhas of Ceylon, and some African tribes, to the same
intellectual level as the Aryans, the Semites, and the Turanians so
called. The "sacred spark" is missing in them and it is they who are the
only *inferior* races on the globe, now happily -- owing to the wise
adjustment of nature which ever works in that direction -- fast dying
out. Verily mankind is "of one blood," *but not of the same* *essence.*
We are the hot-house, artificially quickened plants in nature, having in
us a spark, which in them is latent.

\*\* The philosophical view of Indian metaphysics places the Root of
Evil in the differentiation of the Homogeneous into the Heterogeneous,
of the unit into plurality.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 422 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

and without any mind; while the divine Titan stands for the Spiritual
creators, the *devas* who "fell" into generation. The former are
spiritually lower, but physically stronger, than the "Prometheans":
therefore, the latter are shown conquered. "The lower Host, whose work
the Titan spoiled and thus defeated the plans of Zeus," was on this
earth in its own sphere and plane of action; whereas, the superior Host
was an exile from Heaven, who had got entangled in the meshes of matter.
They (the inferior "Host") were masters of all the Cosmic and lower
titanic forces; the higher Titan possessed only the intellectual and
spiritual fire. This drama of the struggle of Prometheus with the
Olympic tyrant and despot, sensual Zeus, one sees enacted daily within
our actual mankind: the lower passions chain the higher aspirations to
the rock of matter, to generate in many a case the vulture of sorrow,
pain, and repentance. In every such case one sees once more --

> "A god . . . in fetters, anguish fraught;  
> The foe of Zeus, in hatred held by all. . . . "

A god, bereft even of that supreme consolation of Prometheus, who
suffered in self-sacrifice --

> "For that to men he bare too fond a mind. . ."

as the divine Titan is moved by altruism, but the mortal man by
Selfishness and Egoism in every instance.

The modern Prometheus has now become *Epi-metheus,* "he who sees only
after the event"; because the universal philanthropy of the former has
long ago degenerated into selfishness and self-adoration. Man will
rebecome the *free* Titan of old, but not before cyclic evolution has
re-established the broken harmony between the two natures -- the
terrestrial and the divine; after which he becomes impermeable to the
lower titanic forces, invulnerable in his personality, and immortal in
his individuality, which cannot happen before every animal element is
eliminated from his nature. When man understands that "*Deus non fecit
mortem*" (*Sap. I.,* 13), but that man has created it himself, he will
re-become the Prometheus before his Fall.

For the full symbolism of Prometheus and the origin of this mythos in
Greece, the reader is referred to Part **II**. of this Volume, chapter
"A Second Key to Prometheus," etc. In the said Part -- a kind of
supplement to the present portion -- every additional information is
given upon those tenets that will be the most controverted and
questioned. This work is so heterodox, when confronted with the
acknowledged standards of theology and modern science, that no proof
which tends to show that these standards often usurp an illegal
authority should be neglected.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next Section](sd2-1-24.md)

[Contents](sd2-0-co.htm#contents.md)
