##### The Secret Doctrine by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol. 2

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 180 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

STANZA VIII.  
EVOLUTION OF THE ANIMAL MAMMALIANS. -- THE  
FIRST FALL.

-------

> §§ (28) How the first mammals were produced. (29) A quasi-Darwinian
> Evolution. (30) The animals get solid bodies. (31) Their separation
> into sexes. (32) The first sin of the mindless men.

---------------------

28\. **F**ROM THE DROPS OF SWEAT (a); FROM THE RESIDUE OF THE SUBSTANCE;
MATTER FROM DEAD BODIES AND ANIMALS OF THE WHEEL BEFORE (*previous,
Third Round*); AND FROM CAST-OFF DUST; THE FIRST ANIMALS (*of this
Round*) WERE PRODUCED.

(*a*) The Occult doctrine maintains that, in this Round, the mammalians
were a later work of evolution than man. Evolution proceeds in cycles.
The great Manvantaric cycle of Seven Rounds, beginning in the First
Round with mineral, vegetable, and animal, brings its evolutionary work
on the descending arc to a dead stop in the middle of the Fourth *Race,*
at the close of the first half of the Fourth *Round.* It is on our
Earth, then, (the Fourth sphere and the lowest) and in the present
*Round,* that this middle point has been reached. And since the Monad
has passed, after its "first inmetallization" on Globe A, through the
mineral, vegetable, and animal worlds in every degree of the three
states of matter, except the last degree of the third or solid state,
which it reached only at the "*mid-point of evolution*" it is but
logical and natural that at the beginning of the Fourth Round on Globe
D, Man should be the first to appear; and also that his frame should be
of the most tenuous matter that is compatible with objectivity. To make
it still clearer: if the Monad begins its cycle of incarnations through
the three objective kingdoms on the descending curved line, it has
necessarily to enter on the re-ascending curved line of the sphere as a
man also. On the descending arc it is the spiritual which is gradually
transformed into the material. On the middle line of the base, Spirit
and Matter are equilibrized in Man. On the ascending arc, Spirit is
slowly re-asserting itself at the expense of the physical, or matter, so
that, at the close of the seventh Race of the Seventh Round, the Monad
will find itself as

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 181 MEN, THE PROGENITORS OF ANIMALS.

free from matter and all its qualities as it was in the beginning;
having gained in addition the experience and wisdom, the fruition of all
its personal lives, without their evil and temptations.

This order of evolution is found also in *Genesis* (*ch.* 1 *and* 2) if
one reads it in its true esoteric sense, for chapter i. contains the
history of the first Three Rounds, as well as that of the first Three
Races of the Fourth, up to that moment when Man is called to conscious
life by the Elohim of Wisdom. In the first chapter, animals, whales and
fowls of the air, are created before the androgyne Adam.\* In the
second, Adam (the sexless) comes first, and the animals only appear
after him. Even the state of mental torpor and unconsciousness of the
first two races, and of the first half of the Third Race, is symbolized,
in the second chapter of *Genesis,* by the *deep sleep of Adam.* It was
the dreamless sleep of mental inaction, the slumber of the Soul and
Mind, which was meant by that "sleep," and not at all the physiological
process of differentiation of sexes, as a learned French theorist (M.
Naudin) imagined.

The Puranas, the Chaldean and Egyptian fragments, and also the Chinese
traditions, all show an agreement with the Secret Doctrine as to the
process and order of evolution. We find in them the corroboration of
almost all our teaching. For instance: the statement concerning the
oviparous mode of procreation of the Third Race, and even a hint at a
less innocent mode of the procreation of the first mammal forms,
"gigantic, transparent, dumb and monstrous they were," says the
Commentary. Study the stories of the several Rishis and their
multifarious progeny; *e.g*., Pulastya is the father of *all the
Serpents and Nagas --* the oviparous brood; Kasyapa was grandsire,
through his wife Tamra, of the birds and of Garuda, king of the
feathered tribe; while by his wife Surabhi, he was the parent of cows
and buffaloes, etc., etc.

In the Secret Doctrine, the first *Nagas --* beings wiser than Serpents
-- are the "Sons of Will and Yoga," born before the complete separation
of the sexes, "matured in the man-bearing eggs\*\* produced by the power
(Kriyasakti) of the holy sages" of the early Third Race.\*\*\*

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\*An allegorical reference to the "Sacred Animals" of the Zodiac and
other heavenly bodies. Some Kabalists see in them the prototypes of the
animals.

\*\* In "Hesiod," Zeus creates his *third* race of men out of ash-trees.
In the "Popol Vuh" the Third Race of men is created out of the tree
*Tzita* and the marrow of the reed called *Sibac.* But Sibac means "egg"
in the mystery language of the *Artufas* (or Initiation caves). In a
report sent in 1812 to the Cortes by Don Baptista Pino it is said: "All
the Pueblos have their *Artufas --* so the natives call subterranean
rooms with only a single door where they (secretly) assemble. . . . .
These are impenetrable temples . . . . and the doors are always closed
to the Spaniards. . . . . They adore the Sun and Moon . . . . fire and
the great SNAKE (the creative power), whose eggs are called *Sibac.*"

\*\*\* There is a notable difference *esoterically* between the words
Sarpa and Naga, \[\[Footnote continued on next page\]\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 182 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

". . . . . In these were incarnated the Lords of the three (upper)
worlds, the various classes of Rudras, who had been *Tushitas,* who had
been *Jayas,* who are *Adityas*;" for, as explained by Parasara, "There
are a hundred appellations of the immeasurably mighty Rudras."

Some of the descendants of the primitive Nagas, the Serpents of Wisdom,
peopled America, when its continent arose during the palmy days of the
great Atlantis, (America being the *Patala* or Antipodes of Jambu-Dwipa,
not of Bharata-Varsha). Otherwise, whence the traditions and legends --
the latter *always more true than history,* as says Augustin Thierry --
and even the identity in the names of certain "medicine men" and
priests, who exist to this day in Mexico? We shall have to say something
of the *Nargals* and the *Nagals* and also of *Nagalism,* called
"devil-worship" by the Missionaries.

In almost all the Puranas, the story of the "Sacrifice of Daksha" is
given, the oldest account of which is to be found in *Vayu Purana.*
Allegorical as it is, there is more meaning and biological revelation in
it to a Naturalist, than in all the *pseudo-scientific* vagaries, which
are regarded as learned theories and hypotheses.

Daksha, who is regarded as the Chief Progenitor, is, moreover, pointed
out as the creator of *physical man* in the "fable," which makes him
lose his head from his body in the general strife between the gods and
the *Raumas.* This head, being burnt in the fire, is replaced by the
*head of a ram* (Kasi-Khanda). Now the ram's head and horns are ever the
symbol of generating power and of reproductive force, and are *phallic.*
As we have shown, it is Daksha who establishes the era of men engendered
by sexual intercourse. But this mode of procreation did not occur
suddenly, as one may think, and required long ages before it became the
one "natural" way. Therefore, his sacrifice to the gods is shown as
interfered with by Siva, the *destroying* deity*, evolution and*
PROG*RESS personified,* who is the *regenerator* at the same time; who
destroys things under one form but to recall them to life under another
more perfect type. Siva-Rudra creates the terrible Virabhadra (born of
his breath) the "thousand-headed, thousand-armed" (etc.) monster, and
commissions him to destroy the sacrifice prepared by Daksha. Then
Virabhadra, "abiding in the region of the ghosts (ethereal men) . . . .

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\[\[Footnote continued from previous page\]\] though they are both used
indiscriminately. Sarpa (serpent) is from the root *Srip, serpo* to
creep; and they are called "Ahi," from *Ha*, to abandon. "The sarpa was
produced from Brahma's hair, which, owing to his fright at beholding the
Yakshas, whom he had created horrible to behold, fell off from the head,
each hair becoming a serpent. They are called Sarpa from their creeping
and *Ahi* because they had deserted the head" (Wilson). But the *Nagas,*
their serpent's tail notwithstanding, do not creep, but manage to walk,
run and fight in the allegories.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 183 ARCHAIC ZOOLOGY.

*created from the pores of the skin* (*Romakupas*)*,* powerful Raumas,\*
(or Raumyas)." Now, however mythical the allegory, the Mahabharata,
which is history as much as is the Iliad, shows\*\* the Raumyas and
other races, as springing in the same manner from the *Romakupas,* hair
or skin pores. This allegorical description of the "sacrifice" is full
of significance to the students of the Secret Doctrine who know of the
"Sweat-born."

In the Vayu Purana's account of Daksha's sacrifice, moreover, it is said
to have taken place in the presence of creatures *born from the egg,*
from the vapour, vegetation, pores of the skin, and, finally only, from
the womb.

Daksha typifies the early Third Race, holy and pure, still devoid of an
individual *Ego,* and having merely the passive capacities. Brahma,
therefore, commands him to create (in the exoteric texts); when, obeying
the command, he made "inferior and superior" (*avara and vara*) progeny
(*putra*), *bipeds* and *quadrupeds*; and by his *will,* gave birth to
females . . . . to the gods, the *Daityas* (giants of the Fourth Race),
the snake-gods, animals, cattle and the *Danavas* (Titans and demon
Magicians) and other beings."

. . . . "From that period forward, *living creatures were engendered*
*by sexual intercourse. Before the time of Daksha, they were variously*
*propagated --* by the *will*, by sight, by touch, and by
*Yoga-power.*"\*\*\* And now comes the simply zoological teaching.

-------

29\. **A**NIMALS WITH BONES, DRAGONS OF THE DEEP AND FLYING SARPAS
(*serpents*) WERE ADDED TO THE CREEPING THINGS. **T**HEY THAT CREEP ON
THE GROUND GOT WINGS. **T**HEY OF THE LONG NECKS IN THE WATER, BECAME
THE PROGENITORS OF THE FOWLS OF THE AIR (*a*).

(*a*) This is a point on which the teachings and modern biological
speculation are in perfect accord. The missing links representing this
transition process between reptile and bird are apparent to the veriest
bigot, especially in the *ornithoscelidae, hesperornis,* and the
archaeopteryx of Vogt.

-------

30\. **D**URING THE **T**HIRD (*Race*), THE BONELESS ANIMALS GREW AND
CHANGED: THEY BECAME ANIMALS WITH BONES (*a*), THEIR **C**HHAYAS BECAME
SOLID (*also*)*.*

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Wilson translates the word as "demigods" (*See his Vishnu Purana, p.*
130); but Raurnas or Raumyas are simply a race, a tribe.

\*\* xii. 10308.

\*\*\* "*Vishnu Purana*"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 184 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

31\. **T**HE ANIMALS SEPARATED THE FIRST (*into mate and female*) (*b*)
. . . .

(*a*) Vertebrates, and after that mammalians. Before that the animals
were also ethereal proto-organisms, just as man was.

(*b*) The fact of former hermaphrodite mammals and the subsequent
separation of sexes is now indisputable, even from the stand-point of
Biology. As Prof. Oscar Schmidt, an avowed Darwinist, shows: "Use and
disuse combined with selection elucidate (?) *the separation of the
sexes,* and the existence, totally incomprehensible, of rudimentary
sexual organs. In the Vertebrata especially, *each sex possesses such
distinct traces of the reproductive apparatus characteristic of the
other,* that even antiquity assumed hermaphroditism as a natural
primeval form of mankind. . . . The tenacity with which the rudiments of
sexual organs are inherited is remarkable. In the class of mammals,
actual hermaphroditism is unheard of, although through the whole period
of their development they drag along with them these residues born by
*their unknown ancestry,* no one can say how long ago."\*

-------

31\. . . . . **T**HEY (*the animals*) BEGAN TO BREED. **T**HE TWO-FOLD
*MAN* (*then*) SEPARATED ALSO. **H**E (man), SAID "**L**ET US AS THEY;
LET US UNITE AND MAKE CREATURES." **T**HEY DID. . . .

-------

32\. **A**ND THOSE WHICH HAD NO SPARK (*the* "*narrow-brained*"\*\*
*TOOK* HUGE SHE-ANIMALS UNTO THEM (*a*). **T**HEY BEGAT UPON THEM DUMB
RACES. **D**UMB THEY WERE (*the* "*narrow-brained*") THEMSELVES. **B**UT
THEIR TONGUES UNTIED (*b*). **T**HE TONGUES OF THEIR PROGENY REMAINED
STILL. **M**ONSTERS THEY BRED. **A** RACE OF CROOKED, RED-HAIR-COVERED
MONSTERS, GOING ON ALL FOURS.\*\*\* **A** DUMB RACE, TO KEEP THE SHAME
UNTOLD.\*\*\*\*

(*a*) The animals "separated the first," says Stanza 31. Bear in mind
that at that period men were different, even physiologically, from what

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* "*Doctrine of Descent and Darwinism,*" pp. 186-7. The "Unknown
Ancestry" referred to are the *primeval* astral prototypes. Cf. §
**II**., p. 260 (*a*)*.*

\*\* See verse 24.

\*\*\* These "animals," or monsters, are not the anthropoid or any other
apes, but verily what the Anthropologists might call the "missing link,"
the primitive lower man; *see infra.*

\*\*\*\* The shame of their animal origin which our modern scientists
would emphasize if they could.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 185 THE SIN OF THE MINDLESS MEN.

they are now, having passed the middle point of the Fifth Race. We are
not told what the "huge she-animals" were; but they certainly were as
different from any we know now, as were the men.

This was the first physical "fall into matter" of some of the then
existing and lower races. Bear in mind Stanza 24. The "Sons of Wisdom"
had spurned the early *Third* Race, *i.e*., the non-developed, and are
shown incarnating in, and thereby endowing with intellect, the *later*
Third Race. Thus the sin of the brainless or "mindless" Races, who had
no "spark" and were irresponsible, fell upon those who failed to do by
them their Karmic duty.

(*b*) See later on concerning the beginning of human speech.

-------

**<span id="what">W</span>**HAT MAY BE THE **O**BJECTIONS TO THE
**F**OREGOING.

Thus Occultism rejects the idea that Nature developed man from the ape,
or even from an ancestor common to both, but traces, on the contrary,
some of the most anthropoid species to the Third Race man of the early
Atlantean period. As this proposition will be maintained and defended
elsewhere, a few words more are all that are needed at present. For
greater clearness, however, we shall repeat in brief what was said
previously in Book I., Stanza **VI.**

Our teachings show that, while it is quite correct to say that nature
had built, at one time, around the human astral form an *ape-like
external* shape, yet it is as correct that this shape was no more that
of the "missing link," than were the coverings of that astral form,
during the course of its natural evolution through all the kingdoms of
nature. Nor was it, as shown in the proper place, on this Fourth Round
planet that such evolution took place, but only during the First,
Second, and Third Rounds, when MAN was, in turn, "a stone, a plant, and
an animal" until he became what he was in the First Root-Race of present
humanity. The real line of evolution differs from the Darwinian, and the
two systems are irreconcilable, except when the latter is divorced from
the dogma of "Natural Selection" and the like. Indeed, between the
*Monera* of Haeckel and the *Sarisripa* of Manu, there lies an
impassable chasm in the shape of the *Jiva*; for the "human" Monad,
whether *immetallized* in the stone-atom, or *invegetallized* in the
plant, or *inanimalized* in the animal, is still and ever a divine,
hence also a HUMAN Monad. It ceases to be human only when it becomes
*absolutely divine.* The terms "mineral," "vegetable" and "animal"
*monad* are meant to create a superficial distinction: there is no such
thing as a Monad (jiva)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 186 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

other than divine, and consequently having been, or having to become,
human. And the latter term has to remain meaningless unless the
difference is well understood. The Monad is a drop out of the shoreless
Ocean beyond, or, to be correct, *within* the plane of primeval
differentiation. It is divine in its higher and *human* in its lower
condition -- the adjectives "higher" and "lower" being used for lack of
better words -- and a monad it remains at all times, save in the
Nirvanic state, under whatever conditions, or whatever external forms.
As the Logos reflects the Universe in the Divine Mind, and the
manifested Universe reflects itself in each of its Monads, as Leibnitz
put it, repeating an Eastern teaching, so the **M**ONAD has, during the
cycle of its incarnations, to reflect in itself every *root-form* of
each kingdom. Therefore, the Kabalists say correctly that "**M**AN
becomes a stone, a plant, an animal, a man, a Spirit, and finally God.
Thus accomplishing his cycle or circuit and returning to the point from
which he had started as the *heavenly* **M**AN." But by "Man" the divine
Monad is meant, and not the thinking Entity, much less his physical
body. While rejecting the immortal Soul, the men of Science now try to
trace the latter through a series of animal forms from the lowest to the
highest; whereas, in truth, all the present fauna are the descendants of
those primordial monsters of which the Stanzas speak. The animals -- the
creeping beasts and those in the waters that preceded man in this Fourth
Round, as well as those contemporary with the Third Race, and again the
mammalia that are posterior to the Third and Fourth Races -- all are
either directly or indirectly the mutual and correlative product
(physically) of man. It is correct to say that the man of this
Manvantara, *i.e*., during the three preceding Rounds, has passed
through all the kingdoms of nature. That he was "a stone, a plant, an
animal." But (*a*) these stones, plants, and animals were the
prototypes, the filmy presentments of those of the Fourth Round; and
(*b*) even those at the beginning of the Fourth Round were the astral
shadows of the present, as the Occultists express it. And finally the
forms and *genera* of neither man, animal, nor plant were what they
became later. Thus the astral prototypes of the lower beings of the
animal kingdom of the Fourth Round, which *preceded* (the chhayas of)
*Men,* were the consolidated, though still very ethereal *sheaths* of
the still more ethereal forms or models produced at the close of the
Third Round on Globe D.\* "Produced from the residue of the substance
matter; from dead bodies of men and (other *extinct*) animals of the
wheel before," or the previous *Third* Round -- as Stanza 24 tells us.
Hence, while the nondescript "animals"

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* *Vide* "*Esoteric Buddhism.*"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 187 THE DARWINISTS MISTAKEN.

that preceded the astral man at the beginning of this life-cycle on our
Earth were still, so to speak, the progeny of the man of the Third
Round, the mammalians of this Round owe their existence, in a great
measure, to man again. Moreover, the "ancestor" of the present
anthropoid animal, the ape, is the direct production of the yet mindless
*Man,* who desecrated his human dignity by putting himself physically on
the level of an animal.

The above accounts for some of the alleged physiological proofs, brought
forward by the anthropologists as a demonstration of the descent of man
from the animals.

The point most insisted upon by the Evolutionists is that, "The history
of the embryo is an epitome of that of the race." That "every organism,
in its development from the egg, runs through a series of forms, through
which, in like succession, its ancestors have passed in the long course
of Earth's history.\* The history of the embryo . . . . is a picture in
little, and outline of that of the race. *This conception forms the gist
of our fundamental biogenetic law, which we are obliged to place at the
head of the study of the fundamental law of organic development.*"\*\*

This modern theory was known as a fact to, and far more philosophically
expressed by, the Sages and Occultists from the remotest ages. A passage
from "*Isis Unveiled*" may here be cited to furnish a few points of
comparison. In Vol. I., pp. 388-9, it was asked why, with all their
great learning, physiologists were unable to explain teratological
phenomena? Any anatomist who has made the development and growth of the
embryo "a subject of special study," can tell, without much brain-work,
what daily experience and the evidence of his own eyes show him, viz.,
that up to a certain period, the human embryo is facsimile of a young
batrachian in its first remove from the spawn -- tadpole. But no
physiologist or anatomist seems to have had the idea of applying to the
development of the human being -- from the first

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* "A very strong argument in favour of variability is supplied by the
science of Embryology. Is not a man in the uterus . . . . . a simple
cell, a vegetable with three or four leaflets, a tadpole with branchiae,
a mammal with a tail, lastly a primate (?) and a biped? It is scarcely
possible not to recognise in the embryonic evolution a rapid sketch, a
faithful summary, of the entire organic series." (*Lefevre, Philosophy,
p.* 484).

The summary alluded to is, however, only that of the *store of types*
hoarded up in man, the microcosm. This simple explanation meets all such
objections, as the presence of the rudimentary tail in the foetus -- a
fact triumphantly paraded by Haeckel and Darwin as conclusively in
favour of the Ape-Ancestor theory. *It may also be pointed out that the
presence of a vegetable with leaflets* in the embryonic stages is *not
explained* on ordinary evolutionist principles. Darwinists have not
traced man through the vegetable, but Occultists have. *Why then this
feature in the embryo,* and how do the former explain it?

\*\* "*The Proofs of Evolution,*" a lecture by Haeckel.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 188 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

instant of its physical appearance as a germ to its ultimate formation
and birth -- the Pythagorean esoteric doctrine of metempsychosis, so
erroneously interpreted by critics. The meaning of the axiom: "A stone
becomes a plant; a plant, a beast; a beast, a man, etc." was mentioned
in another place in relation to the spiritual and physical evolution of
men on this Earth. We will now add a few more words to make the matter
clearer.

What is the primitive shape of the future man? A grain, a corpuscle, say
some physiologists; a molecule, an ovum of the ovum, say others. If it
could be analysed -- by the microscope or otherwise -- of what ought we
to expect to find it composed? Analogically, we should say, of a nucleus
of inorganic matter, deposited from the circulation at the germinating
point, and united with a deposit of organic matter. In other words, this
infinitesimal nucleus of the future man is composed of the same elements
as a stone -- of the same elements as the Earth, which the man is
destined to inhabit. Moses is cited by the Kabalists as authority for
the remark that it required earth and water to make a living being, and
thus it may be said that man first appears as a stone.

At the end of three or four weeks the ovum has assumed a plant-like
appearance, one extremity having become spheroidal and the other
tapering like a carrot. Upon dissection it is found to be composed, like
an onion, of very delicate laminae or coats, enclosing a liquid. The
laminae approach each other at the lower end, and the embryo hangs from
the root of the umbilicus almost like the fruit from the bough. The
stone has now become changed, by "metempsychosis," into a plant. Then
the embryonic creature begins to shoot out, from the inside outward, its
limbs, and develops its features. The eyes are visible as two black
dots; the ears, nose, and mouth form depressions, like the points of a
pineapple, before they begin to project. The embryo develops into an
animal-like foetus -- the shape of a tadpole -- and, like an amphibious
reptile, lives in water and develops from it. Its Monad has not yet
become either human or immortal, for the Kabalists tell us that this
only occurs at the "fourth hour." One by one the foetus assumes the
characteristics of the human being, the first flutter of the immortal
breath passes through its being; it moves; and the divine essence
settles in the infant frame, which it will inhabit until the moment of
physical death, when man becomes a spirit.

This mysterious process of a nine-months' formation, the Kabalists call
the completion of the "individual cycle of evolution." As the foetus
develops amidst the *liquor amnii* in the womb, so the Earths germinate
in the universal ether, or astral fluid, in the womb of the Universe.
These cosmic children, like their pigmy inhabitants, are at first
nuclei; then ovules; then gradually mature; and becoming

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 189 NATURALISTS INVENTING LINKS.

mothers, in their turn, develop mineral, vegetable, animal, and human
forms. From centre to circumference, from the imperceptible vesicle to
the uttermost conceivable bounds of the Kosmos, those glorious thinkers,
the Occultists, trace cycle merging into cycle, containing and contained
in an endless series. The embryo evolving in its pre-natal sphere, the
individual in his family, the family in the state, the state in mankind,
the Earth in our system, that system in its central universe, the
universe in the Kosmos, and the Kosmos in the ONE CAUSE . . . thus runs
*their* philosophy of evolution, differing as we see, from that of
Haeckel: --

> "All are but parts of one stupendous whole,  
> Whose body Nature is, and (Parabrahm) the soul . . ."

These are the proofs of Occultism, and they are rejected by Science. But
how is the chasm between the mind of man and animal to be bridged in
this case? How, if the anthropoid and *Homo primigenius* had, *argumenti
gratia,* a common ancestor (in the way modern speculation puts it), did
the two groups diverge so widely from one another as regards mental
capacity? True, the Occultist may be told that in every case Occultism
does what Science repeats; it gives a *common* ancestor to ape and man,
since it makes the former issue from primeval man. Ay, but that
"primeval man" was *man* only in external form. He was *mindless* and
*soulless* at the time he begot, with a female animal monster, the
forefather of a series of apes. This speculation -- if speculation it be
-- is at least logical, and fills the chasm between the mind of man and
animal. Thus it accounts for and explains the hitherto unaccountable and
inexplicable. The fact that, in the present stage of evolution, Science
is almost certain that no issue can follow from the union of man and
animal, is considered and explained elsewhere.

Now what is the fundamental difference between the accepted (or nearly
so) conclusions, as enunciated in "*The Pedigree of Man,*" viz., that
man and ape have a common ancestor; and the teachings of Occultism,
which deny this conclusion and accept the fact that all things and all
living beings have originated from one common source? Materialistic
science makes man evolve gradually to what *he is now,* and, starting
from the first protoplasmic speck called *Moneron* (which we are told
has, like the rest, "originated in the course of immeasurable ages from
a few, or from one simple, *spontaneously arising* original form, that
has obeyed one law of evolution"), pass through "unknown and unknowable"
types up to the ape, and thence to the human being. Where the
transitional shapes are discoverable we are not told; for the simple
reason that no "missing links" between man and the apes have ever yet
been found, though this fact in no way prevents men like Haeckel from
inventing them *ad libitum.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 190 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

Nor will they ever be met with; simply, again, because that link which
unites man with his real ancestry is searched for on the objective plane
and in the material world of forms, whereas it is safely hidden from the
microscope and dissecting knife *within* the animal tabernacle of man
himself. We repeat what we have said in Isis Unveiled: --

". . . . . . . All things had their origin in spirit -- evolution having
originally begun from above and proceeded downward, instead of the
reverse, as taught in the Darwinian theory. In other words, there has
been a gradual materialization of forms until a fixed ultimate of
debasement is reached. This point is that at which the doctrine of
modern evolution enters into the arena of speculative hypothesis.
Arrived at this period we will find it easier to understand Haeckel's
*Anthropogeny,* which traces the pedigree of man 'from its protoplasmic
root, sodden in the mud of seas which existed before the oldest of the
fossiliferous rocks were deposited,' according to Professor Huxley's
exposition. We may believe the man (of the Third Round) evolved 'by
gradual modification of an (astral) mammal of ape-like organization'
still easier when we remember that (though in a more condensed and less
elegant, but still as comprehensible, phraseology) the same theory was
said by Berosus to have been taught many thousands of years before his
time by the man-fish Oannes or Dagon, the semi-demon of Babylonia\*
(though on somewhat modified lines).

"But what lies back of the Darwinian line of descent? So far as he is
concerned nothing but 'unverifiable hypotheses.' For, as he puts it, he
views all beings 'as the lineal descendants of some few beings which
lived long before the first bed of the Silurian system was
deposited.'\*\* He does not attempt to show us who these 'few beings'
were. But it answers our purpose quite as well, for, in the admission of
their existence at all, resort to the ancients for corroboration and
elaboration of the idea receives the stamp of scientific approbation. .
. . "

Truly, as also said in our first work: "If we accept Darwin's theory of
the development of species, we find that his starting-point is placed in
front of an open door. We are at liberty with him, to either remain
within, or cross the threshold, beyond which lies the limitless and the
incomprehensible, or rather the *Unutterable.* If our mortal language is
inadequate to express what our spirit dimly foresees in the great
'*Beyond*' *--* while on this earth -- it *must* realize it at some
point in the timeless Eternity." But what lies "beyond" Haeckel's
theory? Why *Bathybius Haeckelii,* and no more!

A further answer is given in Part **III**. *Addenda.*

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Cory: "Ancient Fragments."

\*\* "Origin of Species," pp. 448, 489, first edition.

-------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next Section](sd2-1-10.md)

[Contents](sd2-0-co.htm#contents.md)
