##### The Secret Doctrine by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol. 2

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 437 MORE IN THE FORTHCOMING VOLUMES.

#### CONCLUSION.

Space forbids us to say anything more, and this part of the "Secret
Doctrine" has to be closed. The forty-nine Stanzas and the few fragments
from the Commentaries just given are all that can be published in these
volumes. These, with some still older records -- to which none but the
highest Initiates have access -- and a whole library of comments,
glossaries, and explanations, form the synopsis of Man's genesis.

It is from the Commentaries that we have hitherto quoted and tried to
explain the hidden meaning of some of the allegories, thus showing the
true views of esoteric antiquity upon geology, anthropology, and even
ethnology. We will endeavour in the Part which follows, to establish a
still closer metaphysical connection between the earliest races and
their Creators, the *divine* men from other worlds; accompanying the
statements proffered with the most important demonstrations of the same
in esoteric Astronomy and Symbolism.

In Volume **III**. of this work (the said volume and the **IV**th being
almost ready) a brief history of all the great adepts known to the
ancients and the moderns in their chronological order will be given, as
also a bird's eye view of the Mysteries, their birth, growth, decay, and
final death -- in Europe. This could not find room in the present work.
Volume **IV**. will be almost entirely devoted to Occult teachings.

The duration of the periods that separate, in space and time, the Fourth
from the Fifth Race -- in the historical\* or even the legendary
beginnings of the latter -- is too tremendous for us to offer, even to a
Theosophist, any more detailed accounts of them. During the course of
the post-diluvian ages -- marked at certain periodical epochs by the
most terrible cataclysms -- too many races and nations were born, and
have disappeared almost without leaving a trace, for any one to offer
any description of the slightest value concerning them. Whether the
Masters of Wisdom have a consecutive and full history of our race from
its incipient stage down to the present times; whether they possess the
uninterrupted record of man since he became the complete physical being,
and became thereby the king of the animals and master on this earth --
is not for the writer to say. Most probably they have,

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* The word "historical" is used, because, although historians have
dwarfed almost absurdly the dates that separate certain events from our
modern day, nevertheless, once that they are known and accepted, they
belong to history. Thus the Trojan War *is* an historical event; and
though even less than 1,000 years **B.C.** is the date assigned to it,
yet in truth it is nearer 6,000 than 5,000 years **B.C**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 438 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

and such is our own personal conviction. But if so, this knowledge is
only for the *highest* Initiates, who do not take their students into
their confidence. The writer can, therefore, give but what she has
herself been taught, and no more.

But even this will appear to the profane reader rather as a weird,
fantastic dream, than as a possible reality.

This is only natural and as it should be, since for years such was the
impression made upon the humble writer of these pages herself. Born and
bred in European, matter-of-fact and presumably civilized countries, she
assimilated the foregoing with the utmost difficulty. But there are
proofs of a certain character which become irrefutable and are
undeniable in the long run, to every earnest and unprejudiced mind. For
a series of years such were offered to her, and now she has the full
certitude that our present globe and its human races must have been
born, grown and developed in this, and in no other way.

But this is the personal view of the writer; and her orthodoxy cannot be
expected to have any more weight than any other "doxy," in the eyes of
those to whom every fresh theory is heterodox until otherwise proved.
Therefore are we Occultists fully prepared for such questions as these:
"How does one know that the writer has not invented the whole scheme?
And supposing *she* has not, how can one tell that the whole of the
foregoing, as given in the Stanzas, is not the product of the
imagination of the ancients? How could they have preserved the records
of such an immense, such an incredible antiquity?"

The answer that the history of this world since its formation and to its
end "is written in the stars," *i.e.,* is recorded in the Zodiac and the
Universal Symbolism whose keys are in the keeping of the Initiates, will
hardly satisfy the doubters. The antiquity of the Zodiac in Egypt is
much doubted, and it is denied point-blank with regard to India. "Your
conclusions are often excellent, but your premises are always doubtful,"
the writer was once told by a profane friend. To this, the answer came
that it was one point, at least, gained on the scientific syllogisms.
For, with the exception of a few problems from the domain of purely
physical science, both the premises and conclusions of the men of
Science are as hypothetical as they are almost invariably erroneous. And
if they do not so appear to the profane, the reason is simply this: the
said profane is very little aware, taking as he does his scientific data
on faith, that both premises and conclusions are generally the product
of the same brains, which, however learned, are not infallible; a truism
demonstrated daily by the shifting and re-shifting of scientific
theories and speculations.

However it may be, the records of the temples, Zodiacal and traditional,
as well as the ideographic records of the East, as read by the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 439 MODERN SCIENCE MISTRUSTED.

adepts of the Sacred Science and Vidya, are not a whit more doubtful
than the so-called ancient history of the European nations, now edited,
corrected, and amplified by half a century of archaeological
discoveries, and the very problematical readings of the Assyrian tiles,
cuneiform fragments, and Egyptian hieroglyphics. So are our data based
upon the same readings, in addition to an almost inexhaustible number of
Secret works of which Europe knows nothing -- *plus* the perfect
knowledge by the Initiates of the symbolism of every word so recorded.
Some of these records belong to an immense antiquity. Every
archaeologist and palaeontologist is acquainted with the ideographic
productions of certain semi-savage tribes, who from time immemorial have
aimed at rendering their thoughts symbolically. This is the earliest
mode of recording events and ideas. And how old this knowledge is in the
human race may be inferred from some signs, evidently ideographic, found
on hatchets of the Palaeolithic period. The red Indian tribes of
America, only a few years ago comparatively speaking, petitioned the
President of the United States to grant them possession of four small
lakes, the petition being written on the tiny surface of a piece of a
fabric, which is covered with barely a dozen representations of animals
and birds. (See Lubbock.) The American savages have a number of such
different kinds of writing, but not one of our Scientists is yet
familiar, or even knows of the early hieroglyphic cypher, still
preserved in some Fraternities, and named in Occultism the *Senzar.*
Moreover, all those who have decided to regard such modes of writing --
*e.g.,* the ideographs of the Red Indians, and even the Chinese
characters -- as "attempts of the early races of mankind to express
their untutored thoughts," will decidedly object to our statement, that
writing was invented by the Atlanteans, and not at all by the
Phoenicians. Indeed, such a claim as that writing was known to mankind
many hundreds of millenniums ago, in the face of the philologists who
have decreed that writing was unknown in the days of, and to Panini, in
India, as also to the Greeks in the time of Homer, will be met by
general disapprobation, if not with silent scorn. All denial and
ridicule notwithstanding, the Occultists will maintain the claim, and
simply for this reason: from Bacon down to our modern Royal Society, we
have a too long period, full of the most ludicrous mistakes made by
Science, to warrant our believing in modern scientific assumptions
rather than in the denials of our Teachers. Writing, our scientists say,
was unknown to Panini; and this sage nevertheless composed a grammar
which contains 3,996 rules, and is the most perfect of all the grammars
that were ever made! Panini is made out to have lived barely a few
centuries **B.C**., by the most liberal; and the rocks in Iran and
Central Asia (whence the philologists and historians

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 440 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

show us the ancestors of the same Panini, the Brahmins, coming into
India) are *covered with writing,* two and three thousand years old
(12,000, according to some fearless palaeontologists).

Writing was an *ars incognita* in the days of Hesiod and Homer,
agreeably to Grote, and unknown to the Greeks so late as 770 **B.C.**;
and the Phoenicians who had *invented* it, and knew writing as far back
as 1500 **B.C**., at the earliest,\* were living among the Greeks, and
elbowing them, all the time! All these scientific and contradictory
conclusions disappeared, however, into thin air, when Schliemann
discovered (*a*) the site of ancient Troy, whose actual existence had
been so long regarded as a fable; and (*b*), excavated on that site
earthenware vessels with inscriptions *in characters unknown* to the
paleontologists and the all-denying Sanskritists. Who will now deny
Troy, or these Archaic inscriptions? As Professor Virchow witnesses: --
"I was myself an eye-witness of two such discoveries, and helped to
gather the articles together. The slanderers have long since been
silenced, who were not ashamed to charge the discoverer with an
imposture."\*\* Nor were truthful women spared any more than truthful
men. Du Chaillu, Gordon-Cumming, Madame Merian,\*\*\* Bruce, and a host
of others were charged with lying.

Madame Merian -- says the author of "*Mythical Monsters,*" who gives
this information in the *Introduction* -- was accused of deliberate
falsehood in reference to her description of a bird-eating spider nearly
two hundred years ago. But now-a-days reliable observers have confirmed
it in regard to South America, India, and elsewhere. Audubon was accused
by botanists of having invented the yellow water-lily, which he figured
in his *Birds of the South* under the name of Nymphaea lutea, and after
having lain under the imputation for years, was confirmed at last by the
discovery of the long-lost flower in Florida in 1876 (*Pop. Sci.
Monthly,* No. 60, April 1877). And, as Audubon was called *a liar* for
this, and for his Holiaetus Washingtonii,\*\*\*\* so Victor Hugo was
ridiculed for . . . . his marvellous word-painting of the devil-fish,
and his description of a man becoming its helpless victim. "The thing
was derided as an impossibility; yet within a few years were discovered,
on the shores of Newfoundland, cuttle fish with arms extending to thirty
feet in length, and capable of dragging a good-sized

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* It is an historical fact that Sanchoniathon compiled and wrote in
Phoenician characters -- from annals and State documents in the archives
of *the older* Phoenician cities -- the full record of their religion in
1250 **B.C**.

\*\* Prof. Virchow, in Appendix I to Schliemann's *Ilios*. Murray, 1880.

\*\*\* Gosse writes of the latter: "She is set down a thorough heretic,
not at all to be believed, a manufacturer of unsound natural history, an
inventor of false facts in science." ("*Romance of* *Natural History*,"
p. 227.)

\*\*\*\* Dr. Cover writes: "That famous bird of Washington was a myth;
either Audubon was mistaken, or else, as some do not hesitate to affirm,
*he lied* about it."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 441 A WHOLESALE DENIAL.

boat beneath the surface; and their action has been reproduced for
*centuries past* . . . . by Japanese artists." ("*Mythical Monsters,*"
p. 11 *Introd*.).

And if Troy was denied, and regarded as a myth; the existence of
Herculaneum and Pompeii declared a fiction; the travels of Marco Polo
laughed at and called as absurd a fable as one of Baron Munchausen's
tales, why should the writer of "Isis Unveiled" and of the "Secret
Doctrine" be any better treated? Mr. Charles Gould, the author of the
above-cited volume quotes in his excellent work a few lines from
Macmillan (1860), which are as true as life, and too much to the point
not to be reproduced: "When a naturalist, either by visiting such spots
of earth as are still out of the way, or by his good fortune, finds a
very queer plant or animal, he is forthwith accused of *inventing* his
game. . . . . . As soon as the creature is found to sin against
preconception, the great (mis ?) guiding Spirit, *a priori* by name, who
furnishes philosophers with their omniscience *pro re nata,* whispers
that no such thing *can* be, and forthwith there is a charge of hoax.
The heavens themselves have been charged with hoaxes. When Leverrier and
Adams predicted a planet by calculation, it was gravely asserted in some
quarters that the planet which had been calculated was not *the* planet
but another which had clandestinely and improperly got into the
neighbourhood of the true body. *The disposition to suspect hoax is
stronger than the disposition to hoax.* Who was it that first announced
that the classical writings of Greece and Rome were one huge hoax
perpetrated by the monks in what the announcer would be as little or
less inclined than Dr. Maitland to call the dark ages?" (p. 13).

Thus let it be. No disbeliever who takes the "Secret Doctrine" for a
"hoax" is forced or even asked to credit our statements. These have
already been proclaimed to be such by certain very clever American
journalists before even the work went to press.\*

Nor, is it after all, necessary that any one should believe in the
Occult Sciences and the old teachings, before one knows anything or even

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* So far back as July, 1888, at a time when the **MSS**. of this work
had not yet left my writing table, and the *Secret Doctrine* was utterly
unknown to the world, it was already being denounced as a product of my
brain and no more. These are the flattering terms in which the *Evening
Telegraph* (of America) referred to this still unpublished work in its
issue of June 30, 1888: "*Among the fascinating books for July*
*reading* is Mme. Blavatsky's new book on Theosophy . . . (!) the
**S**ECRET **D**OCTRINE. . . . But because she can soar back into the
Brahmin ignorance . . . (! ?) . . . *is no proof* *that everything she
says is true.*" And once the prejudiced verdict given on the mistaken
notion that my book was out, and that the reviewer had read it, neither
of which was or could be the case, now that it is really out the critic
will have to support his first statement, whether correct or otherwise,
and thus get out of it, probably by a more slashing criticism than ever.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 442 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

believes in his own soul. No great truth was ever accepted *a priori,*
and generally a century or two passed before it began to glimmer in the
human consciousness as a possible verity, except in such cases as the
positive discovery of the thing claimed as a fact. The truths of to-day
are the falsehoods and errors of yesterday, and *vice versa.* It is only
in the **XX**th century that portions, if not the whole, of the present
work will be vindicated.

It is no fact going against our statements, therefore, even if Sir John
Evans does affirm that writing was unknown in the stone age. For it may
have been unknown during that period in the Fifth Aryan race, and have
been perfectly known to the Atlanteans of the Fourth, in the palmy days
of their highest civilization. The cycles of the rise and fall of the
nations and races are there to account for it.

If told that there have been cases before now of forged pseudographs
being palmed off on the credulous, and that our work may be classed with
Jacolliot's "Bible in India" (in which, by the way, there are more
truths among its errors than are found in the works of orthodox and
recognized Orientalists) -- the charge and comparison will dismay us
very little. We bide our time. Even the famous "Ezour-Veda" of the last
century, considered by Voltaire "the most precious gift from the East to
the West," and by Max Muller "about the silliest book that can be read,"
is not altogether without facts and truths in it. The cases when the *a
priori* negations of specialists became justified by subsequent
corroborations form but an insignificant percentage of those that were
fully vindicated by subsequent discoveries, and confirmed to the great
dismay of the learned objectors. "Ezour Veda," was a very small bone of
contention compared with the triumph of Sir William Jones, Anquetil de
Perron, and others in the matter of Sanskrit and its literature. Such
facts are recorded by Professor Max Muller himself, who, speaking of the
discomfiture of Dugald Stewart and Co. in connection with this, states
that "if the facts about Sanskrit were true, Dugald Stewart was too wise
not to see that the conclusions drawn from them were inevitable. He
therefore denied the reality of such a language as Sanskrit altogether,
and wrote his famous essay to prove that Sanskrit had been put together
after the model of Greek and Latin, by those arch-forgers and liars, the
Brahmans, and that the whole of Sanskrit literature was an imposition"
(*Science of Language,* p. 168). The writer is quite willing and feels
proud to keep company with these Brahmans, and other *historical*
"liars," in the opinion of our modern Dugald Stewarts. She has lived too
long, and her experience has been too varied and personal, for her not
to know at least something of human nature. "When you doubt, abstain,"
says the wise Zoroaster,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 443 PARADOXES OF SCIENCE.

whose prudent aphorism is found corroborated in every case by daily life
and experience. Yet, like St. John the Baptist, this sage of the past
Ages is found preaching in the desert, in company with a more modern
philosopher, namely Bacon, who offers the same priceless bit of
practical Wisdom. "In contemplation," he says (in any question of
Knowledge, we add), "if a man begin with certainties, he shall end in
doubts; but *if he will be content to begin with doubts, he shall end
in* *certainties.*"

With this piece of advice from the father of English Philosophy to the
representatives of British scepticism we ought to close the debate, but
our theosophical readers are entitled to a final piece of Occult
information.

Enough was said to show that evolution in general, events, mankind, and
everything else in Nature proceed in cycles. We have spoken of seven
Races, five of which have nearly completed their earthly career, and
have claimed that every Root-Race, with its sub-races and innumerable
family divisions and tribes, was entirely distinct from its preceding
and succeeding race. This will be objected to, on the authority of
uniform experience in the question of Anthropology, and Ethnology. Man
was -- save in colour and type, and perhaps a difference in facial
peculiarities and cranial capacity -- ever the same under every climate
and in every part of the world, say the Naturalists: ay, even in
stature. This, while maintaining that man descends from the same unknown
ancestor as the ape, a claim that is logically impossible without an
infinite variation of stature and form, from his first evolution into a
biped. The very logical persons who maintain both propositions are
welcome to their paradoxical views. Once more we address only those who,
doubting the general derivation of myths from "the contemplation of the
visible workings of external nature" . . . . think it, "less hard to
believe that these wonderful stories of gods and demi-gods, of giants
and dwarfs, of dragons and monsters of all descriptions, are
transformations, than to believe them to be inventions." It is only such
"transformations" in physical nature, as much as in the memory and
conceptions of our present mankind, that the Secret Doctrine teaches. It
confronts the purely speculative hypotheses of modern Science, based
upon the experience and exact observations of barely a few centuries,
with the unbroken tradition and records of its Sanctuaries; and brushing
away that tissue of cobweb-like theories, spun in the darkness that
covers a period of hardly a few millenniums back, and which Europeans
call their "History," the Old Science says to us: Listen, now, to my
version of the memoirs of Humanity.

The human Races are born one from the other, grow, develop, become

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 444 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

old, and die. Their sub-races and nations follow the same rule. If your
all-denying modern science and so-called philosophy do not contest that
the human family is composed of a variety of well-defined types and
races, it is only because the fact is undeniable, no one would say that
there was no external difference between an Englishman, an African
negro, and a Japanese or Chinaman. On the other hand it is formally
denied by most naturalists that *mixed human races, i.e.,* the seeds for
entirely new races, are any longer formed in our days. But this last is
maintained on good grounds by de Quatrefages and some others.

Nevertheless our general proposition will not be accepted. It will be
said that whatever forms man has passed through in the long pre-historic
Past there are no more changes for him (save certain variations, as at
present) in the future. Hence that our Sixth and Seventh Root Races are
fictions.

To this it is again answered: How *do you* know? Your experience is
limited to a few thousand years, to less than a day in the whole age of
Humanity and to the present types of the actual continents and isles of
our Fifth Race. How can you tell what will or will not be? Meanwhile,
such is the prophecy of the Secret Books and their no uncertain
statements.

Since the beginning of the Atlantean Race many million years have
passed, yet we find the last of the Atlanteans, still mixed up with the
Aryan element, 11,000 years ago. This shows the enormous overlapping of
one race over the race which succeeds it, though in character and
external type the elder loses its characteristics, and assumes the new
features of the younger race. This is proved in all the formations of
mixed human races. Now, Occult philosophy teaches that even now, under
our very eyes, the new Race and Races are preparing to be formed, and
that it is in America that the transformation will take place, and has
already silently commenced.

Pure Anglo-Saxons hardly three hundred years ago, the Americans of the
United States have already become a nation apart, and, owing to a strong
admixture of various nationalities and inter-marriage, almost a race
*sui generis,* not only mentally, but also physically. "Every mixed
race, when uniform and settled, has been able to play the part of a
primary race in fresh crossings," says de Quatrefages. "Mankind, in its
present state, has thus been formed, certainly, for the greatest part,
by the successive crossing of a number of races *at present*
*undetermined*" ("*The Human Species*," *p.* 274.)

Thus the Americans have become in only three centuries a "primary race,"
*pro tem.,* before becoming a race apart, and strongly separated from
all other now existing races. They are, in short, the germs of the
*Sixth* sub-race, and in some few hundred years more, will become

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 445 THE COMING NEW RACE.

most decidedly the pioneers of that race which must succeed to the
present European or fifth sub-race, in all its new characteristics.
After this, in about 25,000 years, they will launch into preparations
for the seventh sub-race; until, in consequence of cataclysms -- the
first series of those which must one day destroy Europe, and still later
the whole Aryan race (and thus affect both Americas), as also most of
the lands directly connected with the confines of our continent and
isles -- the Sixth Root-Race will have appeared on the stage of our
Round. When shall this be? Who knows save the great Masters of Wisdom,
perchance, and they are as silent upon the subject as the snow-capped
peaks that tower above them. All we know is, that it will silently come
into existence; so silently, indeed, that for long millenniums shall its
pioneers -- the peculiar children who will grow into peculiar men and
women -- be regarded as anomalous *lusus naturae,* abnormal oddities
physically and mentally. Then, as they increase, and their numbers
become with every age greater, one day they will awake to find
themselves in a majority. It is the present men who will then begin to
be regarded as exceptional mongrels, until these die out in their turn
in civilised lands; surviving only in small groups on islands -- the
mountain peaks of to-day -- where they will vegetate, degenerate, and
finally die out, perhaps millions of years hence, as the Aztecs have, as
the Nyam-Nyam and the dwarfish Moola Koorumba of the Nilghiri Hills are
dying. All these are the remnants of once mighty races, the recollection
of whose existence has entirely died out of the remembrance of the
modern generations, just as we shall vanish from the memory of the Sixth
Race Humanity. The Fifth will overlap the Sixth Race for many hundreds
of millenniums, changing with it slower than its new successor, still
changing in stature, general physique, and mentality, just as the Fourth
overlapped our Aryan race, and the Third had overlapped the Atlanteans.

This process of preparation for the Sixth great Race must last
throughout the whole sixth and seventh sub-races (*vide supra,* the
diagram of the Genealogical Tree of the Fifth Race). But the *last*
remnants of the Fifth Continent will not disappear until some time after
the birth of the *new* Race; when another and *new* dwelling, the sixth
continent, will have appeared above the *new* waters on the face of the
globe, so as to receive the new stranger. To it also will emigrate and
settle all those who shall be fortunate enough to escape the general
disaster. When this shall be -- as just said -- it is not for the writer
to know. Only, as nature no more proceeds by sudden jumps and starts,
than man changes suddenly from a child into a mature man, the final
cataclysm will be preceded by many smaller submersions and destructions
both by wave and volcanic fires. The exultant pulse will beat

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 446 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

high in the heart of the race now in the American zone, but there will
be no more Americans when the Sixth Race commences; no more, in fact,
than Europeans; for they will have now become a *new race, and* *many
new nations.* Yet the Fifth will not die, but survive for a while:
overlapping the new Race for many hundred thousands of years to come, it
will become transformed with it -- slower than its new successor --
still getting entirely altered in mentality, general physique, and
stature. Mankind will not grow again into giant bodies as in the case of
the Lemurians and the Atlanteans; because while the evolution of the
Fourth race led the latter down to the very bottom of materiality in its
physical development, the present Race is on its ascending arc; and the
Sixth will be rapidly growing out of its bonds of matter, and even of
flesh.

Thus it is the mankind of the New world -- one by far the senior of our
Old one, a fact men had also forgotten -- of *Patala* (the Antipodes, or
the Nether World, as America is called in India), whose mission and
Karma it is, to sow the seeds for a forthcoming, grander, and far more
glorious Race than any of those we know of at present. The Cycles of
Matter will be succeeded by Cycles of Spirituality and a fully developed
mind. On the law of parallel history and races, the majority of the
future mankind will be composed of glorious Adepts. Humanity is the
child of cyclic Destiny, and not one of its Units can escape its
unconscious mission, or get rid of the burden of its co-operative work
with nature. Thus will mankind, race after race, perform its appointed
cycle-pilgrimage. Climates will, and have already begun, to change, each
tropical year after the other dropping one sub-race, but only to beget
another higher race on the ascending cycle; while a series of other less
favoured groups -- the failures of nature -- will, like some individual
men, vanish from the human family without even leaving a trace behind.

Such is the course of Nature under the sway of **K**ARMIC **L**AW: of
the ever present and the ever-becoming Nature. For, in the words of a
Sage, known only to a few Occultists:-- "**T**HE **P**RESENT IS THE
**C**HILD OF THE **P**AST; THE **F**UTURE, THE BEGOTTEN OF THE
**P**RESENT. **A**ND YET, **O** PRESENT MOMENT! **K**NOWEST THOU NOT
THAT THOU HAST NO PARENT, NOR CANST THOU HAVE A CHILD; THAT THOU ART
EVER BEGETTING BUT THYSELF? **B**EFORE THOU HAST EVEN BEGUN TO SAY
'**I** AM THE PROGENY OF THE DEPARTED MOMENT, THE CHILD OF THE PAST,'
THOU HAST BECOME THAT PAST ITSELF. **B**EFORE THOU UTTEREST THE LAST
SYLLABLE, BEHOLD! THOU ART NO MORE THE **P**RESENT BUT VERILY THAT
**F**UTURE. **T**HUS, ARE THE **P**AST, THE **P**RESENT, AND THE
**F**UTURE, THE EVER-LIVING TRINITY IN ONE -- THE **M**AHAMAYA OF THE
**A**BSOLUTE **IS**."

-------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next Section](sd2-2-01)

[Contents](sd2-0-co.htm#contents)
