##### *The Secret Doctrine* by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol. 2

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 341 THE MATERIALISM OF THE BIBLE.

\[\[This page continued from [previous section](sd2-1-19)\]\]

**C**YCLOPEAN **R**UINS AND **C**OLOSSAL **S**TONES AS **W**ITNESSES TO
**G**IANTS.

In his enormous works *-- Memoires addressees a l*'*Academie des
Sciences --* de Mirville, carrying out the task of proving the reality
of the devil and showing his abode in every ancient and modern idol, has
collected several hundred pages of "historical evidence" that in the
days of *miracle* -- Pagan and Biblical -- the stones walked, spoke,
delivered oracles, and even sung. That finally, "Christ-stone," or
*Christ-Rock,* "the spiritual Rock" that followed "Israel" (I *Corinth.
x.* 4) "became a *Jupiter lapis,*" swallowed by his father Saturn,
"under the shape of a stone."\* We will not stop to discuss the evident
misuse and materialization of Biblical metaphors, simply for the sake of
proving the *Satanism* of idols, though a good deal might be said\*\* on
this subject. But without claiming any such peripateticism and innate
psychic faculties for our stones, we may collect, in our turn, every
available evidence on hand, to show that (*a*) had there been no giants
to move about such colossal rocks, there could never have been a
Stonehenge, a Carnac (Brittany) and other such Cyclopean structures; and
(*b*) were there no such thing as MAGIC, there could never have been so
many witnesses to *oracular* and *speaking* stones.

In the *Achaica* (p. 81) we find Pausanias confessing that, in beginning
his work, he had regarded the Greeks as mighty *stupid* "for worshipping
stones." But, having reached Arcadia, he adds: "I have changed my way of
thinking." Therefore, without worshipping stones or stone idols and
statues, which is the same -- a crime Roman Catholics are unwise to
reproach Pagans with, as they do likewise -- one may be allowed to
believe in what so many great philosophers and holy men have believed
in, without deserving to be called an "idiot" by modern Pausaniases.

The reader is referred to Volume **VI**. of the *Academie des
Inscriptions* (*Memoires,* p. 518, *et seq*.) if he would study the
various properties of flints and pebbles from the standpoint of *Magic*
and psychic powers. In a poem on *Stones* attributed to Orpheus, those
stones are divided into *ophites* and *siderites,* "serpent-stones" and
"star-stones." "The '*Ophite*'

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* *Pierres Animees et parlantes., p.* 283*. Theologie de la Pierre,
270.*

\*\* Saturn is *Kronos --* "*Time.*" His swallowing *Jupiter lapis* may
turn out one day a prophecy. "Peter (*Cephas, lapis*)*,* is the *stone*
on which the Church of Rome is built" we are assured. But *Kronos* is as
sure "to *swallow* it" one day, as he has swallowed *Jupiter-lapis* and
still greater characters.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 342 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

is shaggy, hard, heavy, black, and *has the gift of speech*; when one
prepares to cast it away, *it produces a sound similar to the cry of a
child.* It is by means of this stone that Helanos foretold the ruin of
Troy, his fatherland . . " etc. (Falconnet.)

Sanchoniathon and Philo Byblius, in referring to these *betyles,* call
them "*Animated* Stones." Photius repeats what Damascius, Asclepiades,
Isidorus and the physician Eusebius had asserted before him. The latter
(Eusebius) never parted with his *ophites,* which he carried in his
bosom, and received oracles from them, delivered *in a small voice
resembling a low whistling.\** Arnobius (a holy man who, "from a Pagan
had become one of the *lights of the Church,*" Christians tell their
readers) confesses he could never meet on his passage with one of such
stones without putting it questions, "which is answered occasionally in
*a clear and sharp small voice.*" Where is the difference between the
Christian and the Pagan *ophites,* we ask?

It is also known that the famous stone at Westminster was called
*liafail --* "the speaking stone," -- which raised its voice only to
name the king that had to be chosen. Cambry (*Monuments Celtiques*) says
he saw it when it still bore the inscription: --\*\*

> *"Ni fallat fatum, Scoti quocumque locatum  
> Invenient lapidem, regnasse tenentur ibidem."*

Finally, Suidas speaks of a certain Heraclius, who could distinguish at
a glance the inanimate stones from those which were endowed with motion;
and Pliny mentions stones which "ran away when a hand approached them."
(See *Dictionnaire des Religions par l*'*abbe Bertrand*; *art. on words
Heraclius and Betyles.*)

De Mirville -- who seeks to justify the Bible -- inquires very
pertinently, why the monstrous stones of Stonehenge were called in days
of old *chior-gaur* (from *Cor*, "dance," whence *chorea,* and *gaur,* a
GIANT), or the dance of giants? And then he sends the reader to receive
his reply from the Bishop of St. Gildas. But the authors of the *Voyage
dans le Comte*

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* The same, of course, as the "small voice" heard by Elijah after the
earthquake at the mouth of the cave. (I *Kings xix.* 12.)

\*\* The rocking, or Logan, stones bear various names. The Celts had
their *clacha-brath,* the "Destiny or judgment-stone"; the
*divining*-stone, or "stone of the ordeal" and the oracle stone; the
moving or animated stone of the Phoenicians; the rumbling stone of the
Irish. Brittany has its "*pierres branlantes*" at Huelgoat. They are
found in the Old and the New Worlds: in the British Islands, France,
Spain, Italy, Russia, Germany, etc., as in North America. (*See
Hodson*'*s* "*Letters from North America,*" *Vol.* **II***., p.* 440.)
Pliny speaks of several in Asia (*Hist. Nat. Lib. I., c.* 96), and
Apollonius Rhodius expatiates on the rocking stones, and says that they
are "stones placed on the apex of a tumulus, and so sensitive *as to be
movable by the mind*" (*Ackerman*'*s Arth. Index, p.* 34), referring no
doubt to the ancient priests who moved such stones by will-power and
from a distance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 343 THE "ROCKING-STONES" IN EUROPE.

*de Cornouailles, sur les traces des giants,* and of various learned
works on the ruins of Stonehenge,\* Carnac and West Hoadley, give far
better and more reliable information upon this particular subject. In
those regions -- true forests of rocks -- immense monoliths are found,
"some weighing over 500,000 kilograms" (Cambry). These "hinging stones"
of Salisbury Plain are believed to be the remains of a Druidical temple.
But the Druids were historical men and not Cyclopes, nor giants. Who
then, *if not giants, could ever raise such masses* (especially those at
Carnac and West Hoadley), range them in such symmetrical order that they
should represent the planisphere, and place them in such wonderful
equipoise that they seem to hardly touch the ground, are set in motion
at the slightest touch of the finger, and would yet resist the efforts
of twenty men who should attempt to displace them.

We say, that most of these stones are the relics of the last Atlanteans.
We shall be answered that all the geologists claim them to be of a
natural origin. That, a rock when "weathering," *i.e.*, losing flake
after flake of its substance under influence of weather, assumes this
form. That, the "tors" in West England exhibit curious forms, also
produced by this cause. That, finally, as all scientists consider the
"rocking stones to be of purely natural origin, wind, rain, etc.,
causing disintegration of rocks in layers" -- our statement will be
justly denied, especially as " we see this process of rock-modification
in progress around us to-day." Let us examine the case.

But read what Geology has to say, and you will learn that often these
gigantic masses do not even belong to the countries wherein they are now
fixed; that their geological congeners often pertain to strata unknown
in those regions and to be found only far beyond the seas. Mr. William
Tooke (*French trans., Sepulture des Tartares. Arch. VII, p.* 222),
speculating upon the enormous blocks of granite which are strewn over
Southern Russia and Siberia, tells the reader that there, where they now
rest, there are neither rocks nor mountains; and that they must have
been brought over "from immense distances and with prodigious efforts."
Charton (*Voyageurs Anciens et Modernes, Vol.* I., p. 230) speaks of a
specimen of such rock "from Ireland," which had been submitted to the
analysis of an eminent English geologist, who assigned to it a foreign
origin, "*most probably African.*"

This is a strange *coincidence,* as Irish tradition attributes the
origin of her circular stones to a *Sorcerer who brought them from
Africa.* De Mirville sees in that sorcerer "an accursed *Hamite.*" We
see in him a

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* See, among others, "*History of Paganism in Caledonia,*" *by Dr. Th.
A. Wise,* **F.R.A.S.***, etc.*

\*\* Ham was no more a Titan or Giant than Shem and Japhet. They are
either all Arkite Titans, as Faber shows them, or myths.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 344 THE SECRET DOCTRINE

dark Atlantean, or perhaps even some earlier Lemurian, who had survived
till the birth of the British Islands -- **G**IANTS in every and any
case.\*

"Men," says Cambry, naively, "have nothing to do with it . . . for never
could *human* power and industry undertake anything of this kind. Nature
alone has accomplished it all (!!) and Science will demonstrate it some
day" (!!) (p. 88). Nevertheless, it is a *human*, though gigantic power,
which has accomplished it, and no more "nature" alone than god or devil.

"Science," having undertaken to demonstrate that even the mind and
Spirit of man are simply the production of *blind forces,* is quite
capable of accepting the task. It may come out some fine morning, and
seek to prove that nature alone has marshalled the gigantic rocks of
Stonehenge, traced their position with mathematical precision, given
them the form of the Dendera planisphere and of the signs of the Zodiac,
and brought stones weighing over one million of pounds flying from
Africa and Asia to England and Ireland!

It is true that Cambry recanted later on. "I had believed for a long
time," he says, "that *Nature alone* could produce those wonders . . . .
but I *recant* . . . . chance is *unable to create* such marvellous
combinations . . . . and those who placed the said rocks in equipoise,
are the same who have raised the moving masses of the pond of Huelgoat,
near Concarneau. . . . ." Dr. John Watson, quoted by the same author
"*Antiquites Celtiques*," p. 99, says, when speaking of the *moving*
rocks, or Rocking-Stones situated on the slope of Golcar (the
"Enchanter"): "The astonishing movement of those masses poised in
equilibrium made the Celts compare them to gods." . . . .

In "Stonehenge" (Flinders Petrie) it is said that "Stonehenge is built
of the stone of the district, a red sandstone, or 'sarsen' stone,
locally called 'grey wethers.' But some of the stones, especially those
which are said to have been devoted to astronomical purposes, have been
brought from a distance, probably the North of Ireland."

To close, the reflections of a man of Science, in an article upon the
subject published in 1850 in the *Revue Archeologique* (*p.* 473), are
worthy of being quoted. Says the paper, concerning the rocking stones:
--

> "Every stone is a block whose weight would try the most powerful
> machines. There are, in a word, scattered throughout the globe,
> masses, before which the word *materials* seems to remain
> inexplicable, at the sight of which imagination is confounded, and
> that had to be endowed with a name as colossal as the

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Diodorus Siculus asserts that in the days of Isis, all men were of a
vast stature, who were denominated by the Hellenes Giants. \[Gk chars\]
"\[*Oi d*'*en Aiguptoi muthologousi kata ten Isidos helikian gegonenai
tinas polusomatous\].*"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 345 LIVING, SPEAKING, AND MOVING STONES.

> things themselves. Besides which, these *immense rocking* stones,
> called sometimes *routers* -- placed upright on one of their sides as
> on a point, their equipoise being so perfect that the slightest touch
> is sufficient to set them in motion . . . betray a most positive
> knowledge of statics. Reciprocal counter-motion, surfaces, plane,
> convex and concave, in turn . . . all this allies them to Cyclopean
> monuments, of which it can be said with good reason, repeating after
> de La Vega that 'the demons seem to have worked on them more than
> men.' "\*

For once we agree with our friends and foes, the Roman Catholics, and
ask whether such prodigies of statics and equilibrium, applied to masses
weighing millions of pounds, can be the work of Palaeolithic *savages,*
of cave-men, taller than the average man in our century, yet ordinary
mortals as we are? It is no use for *our* purpose to refer to the
various traditions attached to the rocking-stones. Still, it may be as
well to remind the English reader of *Giraldus Cambrensis,* who speaks
of such a stone on the Isle of Mona, which returned to its place, every
effort made to keep it elsewhere notwithstanding. At the time of the
conquest of Ireland by Henry **II**., a Count Hugo Cestrensis, desiring
to convince himself of the reality of the fact, tied the Mona stone to a
far bigger one and had them thrown into the sea. On the following
morning it was found in its accustomed place. . . The learned William of
Salisbury warrants the fact by testifying to its presence in the wall of
a church where he had seen it in 1554. . . And this reminds one of what
Pliny said of the stone left by the Argonauts at Cyzicum, which the
Cyzicans had placed in the Prytanea "whence it *ran away several times,*
which forced them to lead it" (*Nat. Hist., XXXVI., p.* 592) . . . Here
we have immense stones stated by all antiquity to be "living, moving,
speaking and self-perambulating." They were also capable, it seems, of
making people run away, since they have been called *routers* ("to put
to flight," to rout) and Des Mousseaux shows them all to be prophetic
stones and

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* "It is difficult," writes Creuzer, "not to suspect in the structures
of Tiryns and Mycenae planetary forces supposed to be moved by celestial
powers, analogous to the famous Dactyles." (*Pelasges et Cyclopes*)*.*
To this day Science is ignorant on the subject of the Cyclopes. They are
supposed to have built all the so-called "Cyclopean" works whose
erection necessitated several regiments of Giants, and -- they were only
seventy-seven in all (about one hundred, Creuzer thinks). They are
called "Builders," and Occultism calls them the INITIATORS, who,
initiating some Pelasgians, thus laid the foundation stone of true
MASONRY. Herodotus associates the Cyclops with Perseus "the son of an
Assyrian demon" (I. *VI. p.* 54). Raoul Rochette found that Palaemonius,
the Cyclops, to whom a sanctuary was raised, "was the Tyrian Hercules."
Anyhow, he was the builder of the sacred columns of Gadir, covered with
mysterious characters to which Apollonius of Tyana was the only one in
his age to possess the key; and with figures which may still be found on
the walls of Ellora, the gigantic ruins of the temple of Viswakarma,
"the builder and artificer of the Gods."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 346 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

called *mad* stones (*see his,* "*Dieu et les Dieux,*" *p.* 587). "The
rocking-stone is accepted in Science. Why did it rock, why was it made
to do so? One must be blind not to see that this motion was one more
means of divination, and that they were called for this very reason 'the
stones of truth.' " (*de Mirville,* "*Fetichisme*")*\**

*This is history,* the Past of prehistoric times, warranting the same in
later ages. The Dracontia, sacred to the moon and the serpent, were the
more ancient "Rocks of Destiny" of older nations, whose motion, or
*rocking,* was a code perfectly clear to the initiated priests, who
alone had the key to this ancient *reading.* Vormius and Olaius Magnus
show that it was according to the orders of the oracle, "whose voice
spoke through the immense rocks raised by the colossal powers of ancient
giants," that the kings of Scandinavia were elected. "In India and
Persia," says Pliny, "it is she (the Persian Oitzoe) whom the magi had
to consult for the election of their sovereigns" (*Nat. Hist., lxxxvii.,
chap. LIV.*); and he describes (*in chap. XXXVIII., 1. ii.*) a rock
overshadowing Harpasa, in Asia, and placed in such a manner that "a
single finger

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Messrs. Richardson and Barth are said to have been amazed at finding
in the Desert of Sahara the same trilithic and raised stones they had
seen in Asia, Circassia, Etruria, and in all the North of Europe. Mr.
Rivett-Carnac, **B.C.S.**, of Allahabad, the distinguished
Archaeologist, shows the same amazement in finding the description given
by Sir J. Simpson of the cuplike markings on stones and rocks in
England, Scotland, and other Western countries -- "offering an
extraordinary resemblance" to "the marks on the trap Boulders which
encircle the Barrows near Nagpur" (the city of Snakes). The eminent
scholar saw in this "another and very extraordinary addition to the mass
of evidence. . . that a branch of the nomadic tribes, who swept at an
early date over Europe, penetrated into India also." We say Lemuria,
Atlantis and her giants, and the earliest races of the Fifth Root-Race
had all a hand in these betyles, lithoi, and "magic" stones in general.
The cup marks noticed by Sir J. Simpson, and the "holes scooped out on
the face" of rocks and monuments found by Mr. Rivett-Carnac "of
different sizes varying from six inches to an inch-and-a-half in
diameter, and in depth from one to one-and-a-half inch . . . . . .
generally arranged in perpendicular lines presenting many permutations
in the number and size and arrangement of the cups" -- are simply
*written* RECORDS of the oldest races. Whosoever examines with attention
the drawings made of such marks in the "*Archaeological Notes on Ancient
Sculpturing on Rocks in Kumaon, India, etc.,*" will find in it the most
primitive style of marking or recording; something of the sort having
been adopted by the American inventors of the Morse code of telegraphic
writing, which reminds us of the Ahgam writing, a combination of long
and short strokes, as Mr. Rivett-Carnac describes it "cut on sandstone."
Sweden, Norway, and Scandinavia are full of such *written* records, the
Runic characters having followed the cup-marks and long and short
strokes. In "Johannes Magnus' Infolio" one sees the representation of
the demi-god, the giant Starchaterus (Starkad, the pupil of
Kroszharsgrani, the Magician) who holds under each arm a huge stone
covered with Runic characters; and Starkad, according to Scandinavian
legend, went to Ireland and performed marvellous deeds in the North and
South, East and West. (*See* "*Asgard and the Gods.*")

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 347 UNIVERSAL WITNESSES.

can move it, while the weight of the whole body makes it resist." Why
then should not the rocking stones of Ireland, or those of Brinham, in
Yorkshire, have served for the same mode of *divination* or oracular
communications? The hugest of them are evidently the relics of the
Atlanteans; the smaller ones, such as Brinham Rocks, with some revolving
stones on their summit, are copies from the more ancient lithoi. Had not
the bishops of the middle ages destroyed all the plans of the
*Dracontia* they could lay their hands on, Science would know more of
these.\* As it is, we know that they were universally used during long
prehistoric ages, and all for the same purposes of prophecy and MAGIC.
E. Biot, a member of the Institute of France, published in his
*Antiquites de France, Vol.* ix., an article showing the *Chatam
peramba* (the Field of Death, or ancient burial ground in Malabar), to
be identical with the old tombs at Carnac -- "a prominence and a central
tomb." . . . "Bones are found in them (the tombs)," he says, "and Mr.
Hillwell tells us that some of these are enormous, the natives (of
Malabar) calling the tombs the dwellings of Rakshasas (giants)." Several
stone circles, "considered the work of the *Panch Pandava* (five
Pandus), as all such monuments are in India, so numerous in that
country," when opened by the direction of Rajah Vasariddi, "were found
to contain *human bones of a very large size.*" (*T. A. Wise, in*
"*History of Paganism in Caledonia,*" *p.* 36).

Again, de Mirville is right in his *generalization,* if not in his
conclusions. As the long cherished theory that the Dracontia are mostly
witnesses to "great natural geological commotions" (Charlton), and "are
the *work of Nature*" (Cambry) is now exploded, his remarks are very
just. "Before the *impossibility* of such a theory is asserted, we
advise Science to reflect . . . . and, above all, no longer to class
*Titans and Giants* among primitive legends: for their works are there,
under our eyes, and those rocking stones will oscillate on their basis
to the end of the world to help them to see clearer and realise once for
all, that *one is not altogether a candidate for Charenton for believing
in wonders certified to by the whole of Antiquity*" ("*Fetichisme,*"
*p.* 288).

It is just what we can never repeat too often, though the voices of both
Occultists and Roman Catholics are raised in the desert. Nevertheless,
no one can fail to see that Science is as inconsistent, to say the
least, in its modern speculations, as was ancient and mediaeval theology
in *its* interpretations of the so-called *Revelation.* Science would
have men descend from the pithecoid ape -- a transformation requiring
millions of years -- and yet fears to make mankind older than 100,000
years! Science teaches the gradual transformation of species,

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Charton, the Author of "*Voyageurs anciens et modernes,*" quoted by
de Mirville.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 348 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

natural selection and evolution from the lowest form to the highest;
from mollusc to fish, from reptile to bird and mammalian. Yet it refuses
to man, who physiologically is only a higher mammal and animal, such
transformation of his external form. But if the monstrous iguanodon of
the Wealden may have been the ancestor of the diminutive iguana of
to-day, why could not the monstrous man of the Secret Doctrine have
become the modern man -- the link between Animal and Angel? Is there
anything more unscientific in *this* "theory," than in that of refusing
to man any spiritual immortal Ego, making of him an automaton, and
ranking him, at the same time, *as a distinct genus* in the system of
Nature? Occult Sciences may be less scientific than the present exact
Sciences, they are withal more logical and consistent in their
teachings. Physical forces, and natural affinities of atoms may be
sufficient as factors to transform a plant into an animal; but it
requires more than a mere interplay between certain material aggregates
and their environment, to call to life a *fully conscious man*; even
though he were no more indeed than a ramification between two "poor
cousins" of the Quadrumanous order. Occult Sciences admit with Haeckel
that (objective) life on our globe "is a logical postulate of Scientific
natural history," but add that the rejection of a like *Spiritual*
involution, from *within without,* of invisible subjective Spirit-life
-- eternal and a Principle in Nature -- is more illogical, if possible,
than to say that the Universe and all in it has been gradually built by
blind forces inherent in matter, without any *external help.*

Suppose an Occultist were to claim that the first grand organ of a
cathedral had come originally into being in the following manner. First,
there was a progressive and gradual elaboration in Space of an
organizable material, which resulted in the production of a state of
matter named *organic* PROTEIN. Then, under the influence of incident
forces, those states having been thrown into a phase of unstable
equilibrium, they slowly and majestically evolved into and resulted in
new combinations of carved and polished wood, of brass pins and staples,
of leather and ivory, wind-pipes and bellows. After which, having
adapted all its parts into one harmonious and symmetrical machine, the
organ suddenly pealed forth Mozart's *Requiem.* This was followed by a
Sonata of Beethoven, etc., *ad infinitum*; its keys playing of
themselves and the wind blowing into the pipes by its own inherent force
and fancy. . . . . What would Science say to such a theory? Yet, it is
precisely in such wise that the materialistic *savants* tell us that the
Universe was formed, with its millions of beings, and man, its spiritual
crown.

Whatever may have been the real inner thought of Mr. Herbert Spencer,
when writing on the subject of the gradual transformation of

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 349 IT TAKES A GOD TO BECOME A MAN.

species, what he says in it applies to our doctrine. "Construed in terms
of evolution, every kind of being is conceived as a product of
modifications wrought by insensible gradations *on a pre-existing kind
of being.*" ("*Essays on Physiology,*" Subj. p. 144.) Then why, in this
case, should not historical man be the product of a modification on a
pre-existent and pre-historical kind of man, even supposing for
argument's sake that there is *nothing* within him to last longer than,
or live independently of, his physical structure? But this is not so!
For, when we are told that "organic matters are produced in the
laboratory by what we may literally call *artificial evolution*"
(*Appendix to* "*Principles of Biology,*" *p.* 482), we answer the
distinguished English philosopher, that Alchemists and great adepts have
done as much, and, indeed, far more, before the chemists ever attempted
to "build out of dissociated elements complex combinations." The
*Homunculi* of Paracelsus are a fact in Alchemy, and will become one in
Chemistry very likely, and then Mrs. Shelley's Frankenstein will have to
be regarded as a prophecy. But no chemist, or Alchemist either, will
ever endow such a "Frankenstein's Monster" with more than animal
instinct, unless indeed he does that which the "Progenitors" are
credited with, namely, if he leaves his own physical body, and
incarnates in the "empty form." But even this would be an *artificial,*
not a natural man, for our "Progenitors" had, in the course of eternal
evolution, to become *gods* before they became men.

The above digression, if one, is an attempt at justification before the
few thinking men of the coming century who may read this. But this
accounts also for the reason why the best and most spiritual men of our
present day can no longer be satisfied with either Science or theology;
and why they prefer any such "psychic craze" to the dogmatic assertions
of both, neither of the two having anything better to offer than *blind*
faith in their respective infallibility. *Universal* tradition is indeed
the far safer guide in life. And universal tradition shows primitive man
living for ages together with his Creators and first instructors -- the
Elohim -- in the World's "Garden of Eden," or "Delight." We shall treat
of the Divine Instructors in Stanza **XII**.

-------

45\. **T**HE FIRST GREAT WATERS CAME. **T**HEY SWALLOWED THE SEVEN GREAT
ISLANDS (*a*).

-------

46\. **A**LL HOLY SAVED, THE UNHOLY DESTROYED. **W**ITH THEM MOST OF THE
HUGE ANIMALS PRODUCED FROM THE SWEAT OF THE EARTH (*b*)*.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 350 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

(*a*) As this subject -- the fourth great deluge on our globe in this
Round -- is fully treated in the chapters that follow the last Stanza,
to say anything more at present would be mere repetition. The seven
great islands (Dwipas) belonged to the continent of Atlantis. The secret
teachings show that the "Deluge" overtook the Fourth, giant Race, not on
account of their depravity, or because they had become "black with sin,"
but simply because such is the fate of every continent, which -- like
everything else under our Sun -- is born, lives, becomes decrepit, and
dies. This was when the Fifth Race was in its infancy.

(*b*) Thus the giants perished -- the magicians and the sorcerers, adds
the fancy of popular tradition, but "all holy saved," and alone the
"unholy were destroyed." This was due, however, as much to the
*prevision* of the "holy" ones, who had not lost the use of their "third
eye," as to Karma and natural law. Speaking of the subsequent race (our
Fifth Humanity), the commentary says: --

"*Alone the handful of those Elect, whose divine instructors had gone to
inhabit that Sacred Island --* '*from whence the last Saviour will
come*' *-- now kept mankind from becoming one-half the exterminator of
the other* \[as mankind does now -- **H.P.B.**\]. *It* (mankind) *became
divided. Two-thirds of it were ruled by Dynasties of lower, material
Spirits of the earth, who took possession of the easily accessible
bodies*; *one-third remained faithful, and joined with the nascent Fifth
Race -- the divine Incarnates. When the Poles moved* (for the fourth
time) *this did not affect those who were protected, and who had
separated from the Fourth Race. Like the Lemurians -- alone the ungodly
Atlanteans perished, and* '*were seen no more* . . . . ."

-------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next Section](sd2-1-21)

[Contents](sd2-0-co.htm#contents)
