##### *The Secret Doctrine* by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol. 2

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page 643\]\]

#### BOOK II. -- PART III. ADDENDA.

### SCIENCE AND THE SECRET DOCTRINE CONTRASTED.

"The knowledge of this nether world --  
Say, friend, what is it, false or true?  
The false, what mortal cares to know?  
The true, what mortal ever knew?"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page 644\]\]

CONTENTS.

-------

###### §§ PAGE

I. ARCHAIC OR MODERN ANTHROPOLOGY? ... 645

**-------**

II\. **T**HE **A**NCESTORS **M**ANKIND IS **O**FFERED BY **S**CIENCE ...
656

Plastidular Souls, and Conscious Nerve-Cells ... 670

-------

III\. **T**HE **F**OSSIL **R**ELICS OF **M**AN AND THE **A**NTHROPOID
**A**PE ... 675

Western Evolutionism: the comparative Anatomy of Man and Ape ... 680  
Darwinism and the Antiquity of Man: the Anthropoids and their Ancestry
... 685

-------

IV\. **O**N THE **D**URATION OF **G**EOLOGICAL **P**ERIODS, **R**ACE
**C**YCLES, AND THE **A**NTIQUITY OF **M**AN ... 690

Modern Scientific Speculations thereon ... 694  
On Chains of Planets and their Plurality ... 699  
Esoteric Geological Chronology ... 709

-------

V. **O**RGANIC **E**VOLUTION -- **C**REATIVE **C**ENTRES ... 731

The Origin and Evolution of the Mammalia ... 734  
The European Palaeolithic Races ... 738

-------

VI\. **G**IANTS, **C**IVILIZATIONS, AND **S**UBMERGED **C**ONTINENTS
TRACED IN **H**ISTORY ... 742

-------

VII\. **S**CIENTIFIC AND **G**EOLOGICAL **P**ROOFS OF THE **E**XISTENCE
OF SEVERAL **S**UBMERGED **C**ONTINENTS ... 778

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 645 THE NEW MASTERS OF PROTESTANTISM.

### ADDENDA TO BOOK II.

#### § I. ARCHAIC, OR MODERN ANTHROPOLOGY?

**W**HENEVER the question of the origin of man is offered seriously to
an unbiassed, honest, and earnest man of science, the answer comes
invariably: -- "**W**E DO NOT KNOW." De Quatrefages, in his agnostic
attitude, is one of such anthropologists.

This does not imply that the rest of the men of science are neither
fair-minded nor honest, as in such case our remark would be questionably
discreet. But, it is estimated that 75 per cent. of European Scientists
are Evolutionists. Are these representatives of modern thought all
guilty of flagrant misrepresentation of the facts? No one says this --
but there are a few very exceptional cases. However, the Scientists in
their anti-clerical enthusiasm and despair of any alternative theory to
Darwinism, except that of "special creation," are unconsciously
insincere in "forcing" a hypothesis the elasticity of which is
inadequate, and which resents the severe strain to which it is now
subjected. Insincerity on the same subject is, however, patent in
ecclesiastical circles. Bishop Temple has come forward as a
thorough-going supporter of Darwinism in his "Religion and Science."
This clerical writer goes so far as to regard *Matter* -- after
receiving its "primal impress" -- as the unaided evolver of all cosmic
phenomena. This view only differs from that of Haeckel, in postulating a
hypothetical deity at "the back of beyont," a deity which stands
entirely aloof from the interplay of forces. Such a metaphysical entity
is no more the Theological God than that of Kant. Bishop Temple's truce
with Materialistic Science is, in our opinion, impolitic -- apart from
the fact that it involves a total rejection of the Biblical cosmogony.
In the presence of this display of flunkeyism before the materialism of
our "learned" age, we Occultists can but smile. But how about loyalty to
the Masters such theological truants profess to serve, Christ, and
Christendom at large?

However, we have no desire, for the present, to throw down the gauntlet
to the clergy, our business being now with materialistic Science alone.
The latter answers to our question, in the person of its best
representatives "We do not know;" -- yet the majority of these act as
though Omniscience was their heirloom, and they knew all things.

For, indeed, this negative reply has not prevented the majority of
Scientists from speculating on that question, each seeking to have his

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 646 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

own special theory accepted to the exclusion of all others. Thus, from
Maillet in 1748 down to Haeckel in 1870, theories on the origin of the
human Race have differed as much as the personalities of their inventors
themselves. Buffon, Bory de St. Vincent, Lamarck, E. G. St. Hilaire,
Gaudry, Naudin, Wallace, Darwin, Owen, Haeckel, Filippi, Vogt, Huxley,
Agassiz, etc., etc., each evolved a more or less scientific hypothesis
of genesis. De Quatrefages arranges them in two principal groups -- one
holding to a *rapid,* and the other to a very *gradual transmutation*;
the former, favouring a new type (man) produced by a being entirely
different; the latter teaching the evolution of man by progressive
differentiation.

Strangely enough, it is from the most scientific of these authorities
that the most unscientific of all the theories upon the subject of the
origin of man has hitherto emanated. This is so evident, that the hour
is rapidly approaching when the current teaching about the descent of
man from an Ape-like mammal will be regarded with less respect than the
formation of Adam out of clay, and of Eve out of Adam's rib. For --

> "It is evident, especially after the most fundamental principles of
> Darwinism, that an organized being cannot be a descendant of another
> whose development is in an inverse order to his own. . . .
> Consequently, in accordance with these principles *man cannot be
> considered as the descendant of any simian type whatever.*"\*

Lucae's argument *versus* the Ape-theory, based on the different
flexures of the bones constituting the axis of the skull in the cases of
Man and the Anthropoids, is fairly discussed by Schmidt ("*Doctrine of
Descent and Darwinism,*" p. 290). He admits that "*the ape as he grows
becomes more bestial*; *man* . . . *more human,*" and seems, indeed, to
hesitate a moment before he passes on: *e.g*., "This flexure of the
cranial axis may, therefore, still be emphasized as a human character,
in contradistinction to the apes; the peculiar characteristic of an
order can *scarcely* be elicited from it; and especially as to the
doctrine of descent, this circumstance *seems* in no way decisive." The
writer evidently is not a little disquieted at the argument. He assures
us that it upsets any possibility of the present apes having been the
progenitors of mankind. But does it not also negative the bare
possibility of the man and anthropoid having had a common -- though, so
far, an absolutely theoretical -- ancestor.

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* "*The Human Species*," p. 111, by de Quatrefages. The respective
developments of the human and Simian brains are referred to. "In the ape
the temporo-spheroidal convolutions, which form the middle lobe, make
their appearance and are completed before the anterior convolutions
which form the frontal lobe. In man, the frontal convolutions are, on
the contrary, the first to appear, and those of the middle lobe are
formed later." (*Ibid.*)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 647 THE FALLACIES OF MODERN SCIENTISTS.

Even "Natural Selection" itself is with every day more threatened. The
deserters from the Darwinian camp are many, and those who were at one
time its most ardent disciples are, owing to new discoveries, slowly but
steadily preparing to turn over a new leaf. In the "Journal of the Royal
Microscopical Society" for October, 1886, one can read as follows: --

> "**P**HYSIOLOGICAL **S**ELECTION. -- Mr. G. J. Romanes finds certain
> difficulties in regarding natural selection as a theory for the origin
> of adaptive structures. He proposes to replace it by what he calls
> physiological selection, or the segregation of the fit. His view is
> based on the extreme sensitiveness of the reproductive system to small
> changes in the conditions of life, and he thinks that variations in
> the direction of greater or less sterility must frequently occur in
> wild species. If the variation be such that the reproductive system,
> while showing some degree of sterility with the parent form, continues
> to be fertile within the limits of the varietal form, the variation
> would neither be swamped by intercrossing nor die out on account of
> sterility. When a variation of this kind occurs, the physiological
> barrier must divide the species into two parts. . . . . The author, in
> fine, regards mutual sterility, not as one of the effects of specific
> differentiation, but as the cause of it."\*

An attempt is made to show the above to be a complement of, and sequence
to, the Darwinian theory. This is a *clumsy* attempt at best. The public
will soon be made to believe that Mr. C. Dixon's "*Evolution without
Natural Selection*" is also Darwinism -- expanded, as the author
certainly claims it to be!

But it is like splitting the body of a man into three pieces or various
portions of man, and then maintaining that each portion is the identical
man as he was before; only -- expanded. Yet the author states on p. 79:
-- "Let it be clearly understood that not one single syllable in the
foregoing pages has been written antagonistic to Darwin's theory of
Natural Selection. All I have done is to explain certain phenomena . . .
. the more one studies Darwin's works, the more one is convinced of the
truth of his hypothesis." (!!)

And before this, on p. 48, he alludes to: -- "the overwhelming array of
facts which Darwin gave in support of his hypothesis, and which
triumphantly carried the theory of Natural Selection over all obstacles
and objections."

This does not prevent the learned author, however, from upsetting this
theory as "triumphantly," and from even openly calling his work

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* To this an editorial remark adds that an "**F.J.B.**," in the
*Athenaeum --* (No. 3069, Aug. 21, 1886, pp. 242-3) points out that
naturalists have long recognised that there are "morphological" and
"physiological" species. The former have their origin in men's minds,
the latter in a series of changes sufficient to affect the internal as
well as the external organs of a group of allied individuals. The
"physiological selection" of morphological species is a confusion of
ideas; that of physiological species "a redundancy of terms."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 648 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

"Evolution *without* a Natural Selection," or, in so many words, with
Darwin's fundamental idea knocked to atoms in it.

As to Natural Selection itself, the utmost misconception prevails among
many present-day thinkers who tacitly accept the conclusions of
Darwinism. It is, for instance, a mere device of rhetoric to credit
"Natural Selection" with the power of *originating* species. "Natural
Selection" is no Entity; but a convenient phrase for describing the mode
in which the survival of the fit and the elimination of the unfit among
organisms is brought about in the struggle for existence. Every group of
organisms tends to multiply beyond the means of subsistence, the
constant battle for life -- the "struggle to obtain enough to eat and to
escape being eaten" added to the environmental conditions --
necessitating a perpetual weeding out of the unfit. The *elite* of any
stock thus sorted out, propagate the species and transmit their organic
characteristics to their descendants. All useful variations are thus
perpetuated, and a progressive improvement is effected. But Natural
Selection, in the writer's humble opinion, "Selection, *as a Power,*" is
in reality a pure myth; especially when resorted to as an explanation of
the origin of species. It is merely a representative term expressive of
the manner in which "useful variations" are stereotyped when produced.
Of itself, "it" *can produce nothing,* and only operates on the rough
material presented to "it." The real question at issue is: what
**C**AUSE -- combined with other secondary causes -- produces the
"variations" in the organisms themselves. Many of these secondary causes
are purely physical, climatic, dietary, etc., etc. Very well. But beyond
the secondary aspects of organic evolution, a deeper principle has to be
sought for. The materialist's "spontaneous variations," and
"*accidental* divergencies" are self-contradictory terms in a universe
of "Matter, Force and **N**ECESSITY." Mere variability of type, apart
from the supervisory presence of a quasi-intelligent impulse, is
powerless to account for the stupendous complexities and marvels of the
human body for instance. The insufficiency of the Darwinists' mechanical
theory has been exposed at length by Dr. Von Hartmann among other purely
negative thinkers. It is an abuse of the reader's intelligence to write,
as does Haeckel, of *blind* indifferent cells, "arranging themselves
into organs." The esoteric solution of the origin of animal species is
given elsewhere.

Those purely *secondary* causes of differentiation, grouped under the
head of sexual selection, natural selection, climate, isolation, etc.,
etc., mislead the Western Evolutionist and offer no real explanation
whatever of the "whence" of the "ancestral types" which served as the
*starting point* for physical development. The truth is that the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 649 THE OCCULT AND THE MODERN DOCTRINES.

differentiating "causes" known to modern science only come into
operation after the *physicalization of the primeval animal root-types
out of the astral.* Darwinism only meets Evolution at its midway point
-- that is to say when astral evolution has given place to the play of
the ordinary physical forces with which our present senses acquaint us.
But even here the Darwinian Theory, even with the "expansions" recently
attempted, is inadequate to meet the facts of the case. The underlying
physiological variation in species -- one to which all other laws are
subordinate and secondary -- is a sub-conscious intelligence pervading
matter, ultimately traceable to a REFLECTION of the Divine and
Dhyan-Chohanic wisdom.\* A not altogether dissimilar conclusion has been
arrived at by so well known a thinker as Ed. von Hartmann, who,
despairing of the efficacy of *unaided* Natural Selection, regards
evolution as intelligently guided by the **U**NCONSCIOUS (the Cosmic
*Logos* of Occultism). But the latter acts only mediately through
**F**OHAT, or Dhyan-Chohanic energy, and not quite in the direct manner
which the great pessimist describes.

It is this divergence among men of Science, their mutual, and often
their *self*-contradictions, that gave the writer of the present volumes
the courage to bring to light other and older teachings -- if only as
hypotheses for *future* scientific appreciation. Though not in any way
very learned in modern sciences, so evident, even to the humble recorder
of this archaic clearing, are the said scientific fallacies and gaps,
that she determined to touch upon all these, in order to place the two
teachings on parallel lines. For Occultism, it is a question of
self-defence, and nothing more.

So far, the "Secret Doctrine" has concerned itself with metaphysics,
pure and simple. It has now landed on Earth, and finds itself within the
domain of physical science and practical anthropology, or those branches
of study which materialistic Naturalists claim as their rightful domain,
coolly asserting, furthermore, that the higher and more perfect the
working of the Soul, the more amenable it is to the analysis and
explanations *of the zoologist and the physiologist alone.* (*Haeckel
on* "*Cell-Souls and Soul-Cells.*") This stupendous pretension comes
from one, who, to prove his pithecoid descent, has not hesitated to
include among the ancestors of man the *Lemuridae*; which have been
promoted by him to the rank of *Prosimiae, indeciduate mammals,* to
which he very incorrectly attributes a *decidua*

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* The "*principle of perfectibility*" of Nageli; von de Baer's
"*striving towards the purpose*"; Braun's "*Divine breath* as the inward
impulse in the evolutionary history of Nature"; Professor Owen's
"*tendency to perfectibility,* etc.," are all veiled manifestations of
the universal guiding **F**OHAT, rich with the Divine and Dhyan-Chohanic
thought.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 650 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

and a discoidal placenta.\* For this Haeckel was taken severely to task
by de Quatrefages, and criticised by his own brother materialists and
agnostics, as great, if not greater, authorities than himself, namely,
by Virchow and du Bois-Reymond.\*\*

Such opposition notwithstanding, Haeckel's wild theories are, to this
day, called scientific and logical by some. The mysterious nature of
Consciousness, of Soul, Spirit in Man being now explained as a mere
advance on the functions of the protoplasmic molecules of the lively
*Protista,* and the gradual evolution and growth of human mind and
"social instincts" toward civilization having to be traced back to their
origin in the civilization of ants, bees, and other creatures, the
chances left for an impartial hearing of the doctrines of archaic
Wisdom, are few indeed. The *educated* profane is told that "the social
instincts of the lower animals have, of late, been regarded *as being
clearly the origin of morals,* even of those of man" (!) and that our
divine consciousness, our soul, intellect, and aspirations have "worked
their way up from the lower stages of the simple cell-soul" of the
gelatinous Bathybius -- (*See Haeckel*'*s* "*Present Position of
Evolution*" *Notes*)*, --* and he seems to believe it. For such men, the
metaphysics of Occultism must produce the effect that our grandest
orchestral and vocal oratorios produce on the Chinaman: a sound that
jars upon their nerves.

Yet, are our esoteric teachings about "angels," the first three
*pre*-animal human Races, and the downfall of the Fourth, *on a lower
level of fiction and self-delusion* than the Haeckelian "plastidular,"
or the inorganic "molecular Souls of the *Protista*"? Between the
evolution of the spiritual nature of man from the above Amoebian Souls,
and the alleged development of his physical frame from the protoplastic
dweller in the Ocean slime, there is an abyss which will not be easily
crossed by any man in the *full* possession of his intellectual
faculties. Physical evolution, as modern Science teaches it, is a
subject for open controversy; spiritual and moral development on the
same lines is the insane dream of a crass materialism.

Furthermore, past as well as present daily experience teaches that no
truth has ever been accepted by the learned bodies unless it dovetailed

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* *Vide infra,* M. de Quatrefages' *expose* of Haeckel, in § ii., "The
Ancestors Mankind is offered by Science."

\*\* Strictly speaking du Bois-Reymond is an *agnostic,* and not a
materialist. He has protested most vehemently against the materialistic
doctrine, which affirms mental phenomena to be merely the product of
molecular motion. The most accurate *physiological* knowledge of the
structure of the brain leaves us "nothing but matter in motion," he
asserts; "*we must go further,* and admit the utterly incomprehensible
nature of the psychical principle which it is *impossible to regard* as
a mere outcome of material causes."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 651 AN EXCHANGE OF MUTUAL COMPLIMENTS.

with the habitual preconceived ideas of their professors. "The crown of
the innovator is a crown of thorns": -- said G. St. Hilaire. It is only
that which fits in with popular hobbies and accepted notions that as a
general rule gains ground. Hence the triumph of the Haeckelian ideas,
notwithstanding their being proclaimed by Virchow, du Bois-Reymond, and
others as the "*testimonium paupertatis* of natural Science."

Diametrically opposed as may be the materialism of the German
Evolutionists to the spiritual conceptions of Esoteric philosophy,
radically inconsistent as is their accepted anthropological system with
the real facts of nature, -- the pseudo-idealistic bias now colouring
English thought is almost more pernicious. The pure materialistic
doctrine admits of a direct refutation and appeal to the logic of facts.
The idealism of the present day, not only contrives to absorb, on the
one hand, the basic negations of Atheism, but lands its votaries in a
tangle of *unreality,* which culminates in a practical Nihilism.
Argument with such writers is almost out of the question. Idealists,
therefore, will be still more antagonistic to the Occult teachings now
given than even the Materialists. But as no worse fate can befall the
exponents of Esoteric Anthropo-*Genesis* than being openly called by
their foes by their old and time-honoured names of "lunatics" and
"ignoramuses," the present archaic theories may be safely added to the
many modern speculations, and bide their time for their full or even
partial recognition. Only, as the existence itself of these "archaic
theories" will probably be denied, we have to give our best proofs and
stand by them to the bitter end.

In our race and generation the one "temple in the Universe" is in rare
cases -- *within* us; but our body and mind have been too defiled by
both Sin and Science to be outwardly *now* anything better than a fane
of iniquity and error. And here our mutual position -- that of Occultism
and Modern Science -- ought to be once for all defined.

We, Theosophists, would willingly bow before such men of learning as the
late Prof. Balfour Stewart, Messrs. Crookes, Quatrefages, Wallace,
Agassiz, Butlerof, and several others, though we may not agree, from the
stand-point of esoteric philosophy, with all they say. But nothing could
make us consent to even a show of respect for the opinions of other men
of science, such as Haeckel, Carl Vogt, or Ludwig Buchner, in Germany;
or even of Mr. Huxley and his co-thinkers in materialism in England --
the colossal erudition of the first named, notwithstanding. Such men are
simply the intellectual and moral murderers of future generations;
especially Haeckel, whose crass materialism often rises to the height of
idiotic *naivetes* in his reasonings. One has but to read his "Pedigree
of Man, and Other Essays" (*Aveling*'*s transl.*) to feel a desire, in
the words of Job, that his

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 652 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

remembrance should perish from the earth, and that he "shall have no
name in the streets." Hear him deriding the idea of the origin of the
human race "as a supernatural (?) phenomenon," as one "that could not
result from *simple mechanical causes,* from *physical and chemical
forces,* but requires the direct intervention of a creative personality.
. . "

. . . . "Now the central point of Darwin's teaching," . . goes on the
creator of the mythical *Sozura,* "lies in this, that it demonstrates
the simplest mechanical causes, purely physico-chemical phenomena of
nature, as wholly sufficient to explain the highest and most difficult
problems. Darwin puts in the place of *a conscious creative force,*
building and arranging the organic bodies of animals and plants on a
designed plan, *a series of natural forces working blindly* (*or we
say*) *without aim, without design.* In place of an arbitrary act of
operation, we have a necessary law of Evolution . . . . " (So had Manu
and Kapila, and, at the same time, guiding, conscious and intelligent
Powers). . . "Darwin had very wisely . . . put on one side the question
as to the first appearance of life. But very soon that consequence, so
full of meaning, so wide reaching, was openly discussed by able and
brave scientific men, such as Huxley, Carl Vogt, Ludwig Buchner. *A
mechanical origin of the earliest living form,* was held as the
necessary sequence to Darwin's teaching . . and we are at present
concerned with a single consequence of the theory, *the natural* origin
of the human race through ALMIGHTY EVOLUTION" (pp. 34, 37).

To which, unabashed by this scientific farrago, Occultism replies: in
the course of Evolution, when the physical triumphed over, and nearly
crushed under its weight, spiritual and mental evolutions, the great
gift of *Kriyasakti\** remained the heirloom of only a few elect men in
every age . . . . Spirit strove vainly to *manifest itself in its
fulness in purely organic forms* (as has been explained in Part I. of
this Volume), and the faculty, which had been a natural attribute in the
early humanity of the Third Race, became one of the class regarded as
simply phenomenal by the Spiritualists and Occultists, and as
*scientifically impossible* by the materialists.

In our modern day the mere assertion that there exists a power which can
create human forms -- ready-made *sheaths* for the "*conscious* monads"
or Nirmanakayas of past Manvantaras to incarnate within -- is, of
course, absurd, ridiculous! That which is regarded as quite natural, on
the other hand, is the production of a Frankenstein's monster, *plus*
moral consciousness, religious aspirations, genius, and a feeling of
one's own immortal nature within one's self -- by "physico-chemical
forces, guided by blind Almighty Evolution" ("Pedigree of Man").

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* For explanation of the term *Kriyasakti,* see Com. 2 in Stanza 26.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 653 SCIENCE IS SILENT ON EVERY PROBLEM.

As to the origin of that man, not *ex-nihilo,* cemented by a little red
clay, but from a living divine Entity consolidating the astral body with
surrounding materials -- this conception is too absurd even to be
mentioned in the opinion of the materialists. Nevertheless, Occultists
and Theosophists are ready to have their claims and theories -- however
unscientific and superstitious at first glance -- compared as to their
intrinsic value and probability, with those of the modern evolutionists.
Hence the esoteric teaching is absolutely opposed to the Darwinian
evolution, as *applied to man, and partially* so with regard to other
species.

It would be interesting to obtain a glimpse of the mental representation
of *Evolution* in the Scientific brain of a materialist. What *is*
**E**VOLUTION? If asked to define the full and *complete* meaning of the
term, neither Huxley nor Haeckel will be able to do it any better than
Webster does: "the act of unfolding; the process of growth, development;
as the evolution of a flower from a bud, or an animal from the egg." Yet
the bud must be traced through its parent-plant to the seed, and the egg
to the animal or bird that laid it; or at any rate to the speck of
protoplasm from which it expanded and grew. And both the *seed* and the
*speck* must have the latent potentialities in them for the reproduction
and gradual development, the unfolding of the thousand and one forms or
phases of evolution, through which they must pass before the flower or
the animal are fully developed? Hence, the future plan, if not a DESIGN,
*must be there.* Moreover, that *seed has to be traced,* and its nature
ascertained. Have the Darwinists been successful in this? Or will the
Moneron be cast in our teeth? But this atom of the Watery Abysses is
*not* homogeneous matter; and there must be something or somebody that
had moulded and cast it into being.

Here Science is once more silent. But since there is no
Self-consciousness as yet in either speck, seed, or germ, according to
both Materialists and Psychologists of the modern school -- Occultists
agreeing in this for once with their natural enemies -- what is it that
guides the force or forces so unerringly in this process of evolution?
*Blind* force? As well call *blind* the brain which evolved in Haeckel
his "Pedigree of Man" and other lucubrations. We can easily conceive
that the said brain lacks an important centre or two. For, whoever knows
anything of the anatomy of the human, or even of any animal, body, and
is still an *atheist* and a *materialist,* must be "hopelessly insane,"
according to Lord Herbert, who rightly sees in the frame of man's body
and the coherence of its parts, something so strange and paradoxical
that he holds it "to be the greatest miracle of nature." *Blind* forces,
"and *no* design" in anything under the Sun; when no *sane* man of
Science would hesitate to say that, even from the little he knows and
has hitherto discovered of the forces at work in Kosmos, he sees very
plainly

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 654 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

that every part, every speck and atom are in harmony with their fellow
atoms, and these with the whole, each having its distinct mission
throughout the life-cycle. But, fortunately, the greatest, the most
eminent thinkers and Scientists of the day are now beginning to rise
against this "Pedigree," and even Darwin's *natural selection* theory,
though its author had never, probably, contemplated such widely
stretched conclusions. The remarkable work of the Russian Scientist N.
T. Danilevsky -- "Darwinism, a Critical Investigation of the Theory" --
upsets it completely and without appeal, and so does de Quatrefages in
his last work. Our readers are recommended to examine the learned paper
by Dr. Bourges -- read by its author, a member of the Paris
Anthropological Society at a recent official meeting of the latter --
called "*Evolutionary Psychology*; *the Evolution of Spirit, etc.*" in
which he reconciles entirely the two teachings -- namely, those of the
physical and spiritual evolutions. He explains the origin of the variety
of organic forms, made to fit their environments with such evident
intelligent design, by the existence and the mutual help and
*interaction* of two principles in (manifest) nature, the inner
Conscious Principle adapting itself to physical nature and the innate
potentialities in the latter. Thus the French Scientist has to return to
our old friend -- *Archaeus,* or the life-Principle -- without naming
it, as Dr. Richardson has done in England in his "Nerve-Force," etc. The
same idea was recently developed in Germany by Baron Hellenbach, in his
remarkable work, "Individuality in the light of Biology and modern
Philosophy."

We find the same conclusions arrived at in still another excellent
volume of another Russian deep thinker, N. N*.* Strachof -- who says in
his "Fundamental Conceptions of Psychology and Physiology": -- "The most
clear, as the most familiar, type of development may be found in our own
mental or physical evolution, which has served others as a model to
follow . . . . If organisms are *entities* . . . then it is only just to
conclude and assert that the organic life strives to beget psychic life;
but it would be still more correct and in accordance with the spirit of
these two categories of evolution to say, that *the true cause of
organic life is the tendency of spirit to manifest in substantial forms,
to clothe itself in substantial reality. It is the highest form which
contains the complete explanation of the lowest, never the reverse.*"
This is admitting, as Bourges does in the *Memoire* above quoted, the
identity of this mysterious, integrally acting and organizing Principle
with the Self-Conscious and Inner Subject, which we call the **E**GO and
the world at large -- the Soul. Thus, gradually, all the best Scientists
and Thinkers are approaching the Occultists in their general
conclusions.

But such metaphysically inclined men of Science are out of court and
will hardly be listened to. Schiller, in his magnificent poem on

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 655 THE ONE UNPARDONABLE SIN.

the Veil of Isis, makes the mortal youth who dared to lift the
impenetrable covering fall down dead after beholding naked Truth in the
face of the stern goddess. Have some of our Darwinians, so tenderly
united in natural selection and affinity, also gazed at the Saitic
Mother bereft of her veils? One might almost suspect it after reading
their theories. Their great intellects must have collapsed while gauging
too closely the uncovered face of Nature, leaving only the grey matter
and ganglia in their brain, to respond to *blind* physico-chemical
forces. At any rate Shakespeare's lines apply admirably to our modem
Evolutionist who symbolizes that "proud man," who --

> "*Dress*'*d in a little brief authority*;  
> *Most ignorant of what he*'*s most assured,  
> *His glassy essence -- like an angry ape,  
> Plays such fantastic tricks before high heaven,  
> As make the Angels weep! . . . . "

These have nought to do with the "angels." Their only concern is the
human ancestor, the pithecoid Noah who gave birth to three sons -- the
tailed Cynocephalus, the tailless Ape, and the "arboreal" Palaeolithic
man. On this point, they will not be contradicted. Every doubt expressed
is immediately set down as an attempt to cripple scientific inquiry. The
insuperable difficulty at the very foundation of the evolution theory,
namely, that no Darwinian is able to give even an approximate definition
of the period *at* which, and the form *in* which, the first man
appeared, is smoothed down to a trifling impediment, which is "really of
no account." Every branch of knowledge is in the same predicament, we
are informed. The chemist bases his most abstruse calculations simply
"upon a hypothesis of atoms and molecules, of which not one has ever
been seen isolated, weighed, or defined. The electrician speaks of
magnetic fluids which have never tangibly revealed themselves. No
definite origin can be assigned either to molecules or magnetism.
Science cannot and does not pretend to any knowledge of the beginnings
of law, matter or life, . . ." etc., etc. (*Knowledge,* January, 1882.)

And, withal, to reject a *scientific hypothesis,* however absurd, is to
commit the one unpardonable sin! We risk it.

-------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next Section](sd2-3-02)

[Contents](sd2-0-co.htm#contents)
