##### *The Secret Doctrine* by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol. 2

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 778 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

### ยง VII. SCIENTIFIC AND GEOLOGICAL PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF SEVERAL SUBMERGED CONTINENTS.

**I**T may not be amiss -- for the benefit of those who resolve the
tradition of a lost Miocene Atlantis into an "antiquated myth," to
append a few scientific admissions on this point. Science, it is true,
is largely indifferent to such questions. But there are Scientists ready
to admit that, in any case, a cautious agnosticism as to geological
problems concerning the remote past is far more philosophical than *a
priori* denial, or even hasty generalizations on insufficient data.

Meanwhile two very interesting instances, that have been lately met
with, may be pointed out as "confirming" certain passages in the letter
of a Master, published in "Esoteric Buddhism." The eminence of the
authorities will not be questioned: --

\[\[First Column\]\]

Extract from p. 61 of "Esoteric Buddhism."

No. 1.

"The sinking of the Atlantis (the group of continents and islands) began
during the Eocene period . . . . and it culminated in the Miocene, first
in the *final disappearance of the largest, an event coincident with the
elevation of the Alps,* and second in the sinking of the last of the
fair islands mentioned by Plato."

\[\[First Column continued on next page\]\]

\[\[Second Column\]\]

Extract from a Lecture by W. Pengelly, **F.R.S**., **F.G.S**.

No. 1.

"Was there, as some have believed, an Atlantis -- a continent or
Archipelago of large islands occupying the area of the North Atlantic?
There is, perhaps, nothing unphilosophical in the hypothesis. For since,
as geologists state, '*The Alps have acquired 4,000 and even in some
places more than 10,000 feet of their present altitude since the
commencement of the Eocene epoch*' (Lyell's Principles 2nd Ed. p.
256*.*) -- a *post-Miocene depression might have carried the
hypothetical Atlantis into almost abysmal depths.*"*\**

\[\[Second Column continued on next page\]\]

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Having already given several instances of the vagaries of Science, it
is delightful to find such *agreement* in this particular case. Read in
connection with the scientific admission (cited elsewhere) of the
geologists' ignorance of even the approximate duration of periods, the
following passage is highly instructive: "We are not yet able to assign
an *approximate* date for the most recent epoch at which our Northern
Hemisphere was covered with glaciers. According to Mr. Wallace, this
epoch may have occurred *seventy thousand years* ago, while others would
assign to it an antiquity of at least *two hundred thousand* years, and
there are yet others who urge strong arguments on behalf of the opinion
that a *million of years* is barely enough to have produced the changes
which have taken place since that event." (Fiske, "*Cosmic* \[\[Footnote
continued on next page\]\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 779 GEOLOGY CORROBORATES OCCULTISM.

\[\[First Column continued from previous page\]\]

No. 2.

"Lemuria cannot any more be confounded with the Atlantis continent than
Europe with America. Both sank and were drowned with all their 'gods';
yet, between the two catastrophes a short period of about some 700,000
years elapsed; Lemuria flourishing and ending her career just about that
trifling lapse of time before the early *Eocene* Age, since its Race was
the Third. Behold *the relics of that once great race in some of the
flat-headed aborigines of your* **A**USTRALIA." ("Esoteric Buddhism," p.
55*.*)

\[\[Second Column continued from previous page\]\]

No. 2.

"It would be premature to say, because no evidence has yet been adduced,
*that men may not have existed in the Eocene Age,* especially as it can
be shown that *a race of men, the lowest we know of, co-exists with that
remnant of the Eocene flora which still survives on the continent and
islands of Australia.*" (Extract from an article in "Popular Science
Review," Vol. V. p. 18, by Professor Seemann, Ph.D., **F.L.S**.,
**P.A.S**.).

Haeckel, who fully accepts the reality of a former Lemuria, also regards
the *Australians as direct descendants of the Lemurians.* "Persistent
forms (of both his Lemurian stems,) are in all probability still
surviving . . . Papuans and Hottentots . . . *Australians* . . . one
division of the Malays."

\[\[End of Columns\]\]

With regard to a former civilization, of which a *portion* of these
degraded Australians are the last surviving offshoot, the opinion of
Gerland is strongly suggestive. Commenting upon the religion and
mythology of the tribes, he writes, "The statement that the Australian
civilization (?) indicates a *higher grade,* is nowhere more clearly
proved than here, where *everything resounds like the expiring voices of
a previous and richer age.* The idea that the Australians have no
religion or mythology is thoroughly false. But this religion is
certainly *quite deteriorated.*" (Cited in Schmidt's "*Doctrine of
Descent of Darwinism,*" pp. 301-2.) As to his other statement, namely,
that the Australians are a "division of the Malays" (*Vide* his
ethnological theories in the "*Pedigree of Man*")*,* Haeckel is in
error, if he classes the Australians with the rest. The Malays and
Papuans are a *mixed* stock, resulting from the intermarriages of the
low Atlantean sub-races with the Seventh sub-race of the Third
Root-Race. Like the Hottentots, they are of indirect *Lemuro-Atlantean*
descent. It is a most suggestive fact -- to those concrete thinkers who
demand a *physical* proof of Karma -- that the lowest races of men are
now rapidly dying out; a phenomenon largely due to an extraordinary
sterility setting in among the women, from the time that they were first
approached by the Europeans. A process of decimation is taking

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\[\[Footnote continued from previous page\]\] *Philosophy,*" *Vol.* II.,
p. 304). Prof. Lefevre, again, gives us as *his* estimate 100,000 years.
Clearly, then, if modern Science is unable to estimate the date of so
comparatively recent an era as the Glacial Epoch, it can hardly impeach
the Esoteric Chronology of Race-Periods and Geological Ages.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 780 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

place all over the globe, among those races, whose "time is up" -- among
just those stocks, be it remarked, which esoteric philosophy regards as
the senile representatives of lost archaic nations. It is inaccurate to
maintain that the extinction of a lower race is *invariably* due to
cruelties or abuses perpetrated by colonists. Change of diet,
drunkenness, etc., etc., have done much; but those who rely on such data
as offering an all-sufficient explanation of the crux, cannot meet the
phalanx of facts now so closely arrayed. "Nothing," says even the
materialist Lefevre, "can save *those that have run their course*. . . .
It would be necessary to extend their *destined cycle*. . . . *The
peoples that have been most spared* . . . *Hawaiians or Maories, have
been no less decimated than the tribes massacred or tainted by European
intrusion.*" ("*Philosophy,*" p. 508.)

True; but is not the phenomenon here confirmed of the operation of
**C**YCLIC **L**AW difficult to account for on materialist lines? Whence
the "destined cycle" and the order here testified to? Why does this
(Karmic) sterility attack and root out certain races at their "appointed
hour"? The answer that it is due to a "mental disproportion" between the
colonizing and aboriginal races is obviously evasive, since it does not
explain the sudden "*checks to fertility*" which so frequently
supervene. The dying out of the Hawaiians, for instance, is one of the
most mysterious problems of the day. Ethnology will sooner or later have
to recognize with Occultists that the true solution has to be sought for
in a comprehension of the workings of Karma. As Lefevre remarks, "the
time is drawing near when there will remain nothing but three great
human types" (before the Sixth Root-Race dawns), the white (Aryan, Fifth
Root-Race), the yellow, and the African negro -- with their crossings
(Atlanto-European divisions). Redskins, Eskimos, Papuans, Australians,
Polynesians, etc., etc. -- all are dying out. Those who realize that
every Root-Race runs through a gamut of seven sub-races with seven
branchlets, etc., will understand the "why." The tide-wave of
incarnating **E**GOS has rolled past them to harvest experience in more
developed and less senile stocks; and their extinction is hence a Karmic
necessity. Some extraordinary and *unexplained* statistics as to Race
extinction are given in de Quatrefages' "*Human Species,*" p. 428 *et
seq.* No solution, except on the occult lines, is able to account for
these.

But we have digressed from our direct subject. Let us hear now what
Professor Huxley has to say on the subject of former Atlantic and
Pacific Continents.

He writes in "**N**ATURE," Nov. 4th, 1880: "There is nothing, so far as
I am aware, in the biological or geological evidence at present
accessible, to render untenable the hypothesis that *an area of the
mid*-

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 781 TRADITION AS TRUE AS HISTORY.

*Atlantic or Pacific sea-bed as big as Europe,* should have been
uplifted as high as Mont Blanc, and have subsided again, any time since
the Palaeozoic epoch, if there were any grounds for entertaining it."

That is to say, then, that there is nothing which can militate against
*positive* evidence to the fact; nothing, therefore, against the
geological postulates of the Esoteric Philosophy. Dr. Seemann assures us
in the "Popular Science Review" (Vol. V., p. 18), article "*Australia
and Europe formerly one Continent,*"*\** that: --

"The facts which botanists have accumulated for reconstructing these
lost maps of the globe are rather comprehensive; and they have not been
backward in demonstrating the former existence of large tracts of solid
land in parts now occupied by the great oceans. The many striking points
of contact between the present flora of the United States and Eastern
Asia, induced them to assume that, during the present order of things,
there existed a continental connection between South-Eastern Asia and
Western America. The singular correspondence of the present flora of the
Southern United States with that of the lignite flora of Europe induces
them to believe that, *in the Miocene period, Europe and America were
connected by a land passage, of which Iceland, Madeira, and the other
Atlantic islands are remnants*; *that, in fact, the story of an
Atlantis, which an Egyptian priest told to Solon, is not purely
fictitious, but rests on a solid historical basis*. . . . Europe of the
Eocene period received the plants which spread over mountains and
plains, valleys and river-banks (from Asia generally), neither
exclusively from the South nor from the East. The west also furnished
additions, and if at that period these were rather meagre, they show, at
all events, that the bridge was already building, which, at a late
period, was to facilitate communication between the two continents in
such a remarkable manner. At that time some plants of the Western
Continent began to reach Europe by means of the *island of Atlantis,*
then probably just rising (?) above the ocean."

And in another number of the same review (Vol. I., p. 143) Mr. Duppa
Crotch, **M.A**., **F.L.S**., in an article entitled "*The Norwegian
Lemming and its Migrations,*" alludes to the same subject.

"Is it probable that land could have existed where now the broad
Atlantic rolls? All tradition says so: old Egyptian records speak of
Atlantis, as Strabo and others have told us. The Sahara itself is the
sand of an ancient sea, and the shells which are found upon its surface

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Undoubtedly a fact and a confirmation of the esoteric conception of
the Lemuria which originally not only embraced great areas in the Indian
and Pacific oceans, but projected round South Africa into the North
Atlantic. Its Atlantic portion subsequently became the geological basis
of the future home of the Fourth Race Atlanteans.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 782 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

prove that, no longer ago than the Miocene period, a sea rolled over
what is now desert. The voyage of the 'Challenger' has proved the
existence of *three long ridges\* in the Atlantic Ocean,\*\* one
extending for more than three thousand miles,* and lateral spurs may, by
connecting these ridges, account for *the marvellous similarity of the
fauna of the Atlantic islands.\*\*\** . . . . The submerged continent of
**L**EMURIA, in what is now the Indian Ocean, *is considered to afford
an explanation of many difficulties in the distribution of organic
life,* and, I think, the existence of a **M**IOCENE **A**TLANTIS will be
found to have a *strong elucidative bearing on subjects of greater
interest* \[Truly So!\] than the migration of the lemming. At all
events, if it can be shown that land existed in former ages where the
North Atlantic now rolls, not only is a motive found for these
apparently suicidal migrations, but also a strong collateral proof that
what we call instincts are but the blind and sometimes even prejudicial
inheritance of previously acquired experiences."

(At certain periods, we learn, multitudes of these animals swim to sea
and perish. Coming, as they do, from all parts of Norway, the powerful
instinct which survives throughout ages as an inheritance from their
progenitors impels them to seek a continent, once existing but now
submerged beneath the ocean, and to court a watery grave.)

In an article containing a criticism of Mr. A. R. Wallace's "Island
Life" -- a work devoted largely to the question of the distribution of
animals, etc. -- Mr. Starkie Gardiner writes ("Subsidence and
Elevation," Geological Magazine, June, 1881): --

> "By a process of reasoning supported by a large array of facts of
> different kinds, he arrives at the conclusion that the distribution of
> life upon the land as we now see it, has been accomplished without the
> aid of important changes in the relative positions of continents and
> seas. Yet if we accept his views, we must believe that Asia and
> Africa, Madagascar and Africa, New Zealand and Australia, Europe and
> America, have been united at some period not remote geologically, and
> that seas to the depth of 1,000 fathoms have been bridged over; but we
> must treat as utterly gratuitous and entirely opposed to

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Cf. the published reports of the "Challenger" expedition; also
Donnelly's "Atlantis," p. 468 and pp. 46-56, chap. "*The Testimony of
the Sea.*"

\*\* Even the cautious Lefevre speaks of the existence of *Tertiary* men
on "upheaved lands, islands and continents then flourishing, but since
submerged beneath the waters," and elsewhere introduces a "*possible*
Atlantis" to explain ethnological facts. Cf. his "*Philosophy,*" *Eng.
Ed., pp.* 478 and 504. Mr. Donnelly remarks with rare intuition that
"modern civilization is *Atlantean* . . . . the '*inventive*' *faculty
of the present age is taking up the delegated work of Creation where
Atlantis left it thousands of years ago*" (Atlantis, p. 133). He also
refers the origin of culture to the *Miocene* times. It is, however, to
be sought for in the teachings given to the *Third Race*-men by their
Divine Rulers -- at a vastly earlier period.

\*\*\* An equally "curious" similarity is traced between some of the
West Indian and West African fauna.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 783 ATLANTIS, NECESSARY TO ETHNOLOGY.

> all the evidences at our command (!!), the supposition that temperate
> Europe and temperate America, Australia, and South America, have ever
> been connected except by way of the Arctic or Antarctic circles and
> that lands now separated by seas of more than 1,000 fathoms depth have
> ever been united. Mr. Wallace, it must be admitted, has succeeded in
> explaining the chief features of existing life-distribution, without
> bridging the Atlantic or Pacific, except towards the Poles, yet I
> cannot help thinking that some of the facts *might perhaps be more
> easily explained by admitting the former existence of the connection
> between the coast of Chile and Polynesia\* and Great Britain and
> Florida,* shadowed by the submarine banks which stretch between them.
> Nothing is urged that renders the more direct connection impossible,
> and no *physical reason is advanced why the floor of the ocean should
> not be upheaved from any depth.* The route by which (according to the
> anti-Atlantean and Lemurian hypotheses of Wallace) the *floras* of
> South America and Australia are supposed to have mingled, is beset by
> almost insurmountable obstacles, and the apparently sudden arrival of
> a number of sub-tropical American plants in our Eocene flora,
> necessitates a connection more to the south than the present 1,000
> fathom line . . . . forces are unceasingly acting, and there is *no
> reason why an elevating force once set in action in the centre of an
> ocean should cease to act until a continent is formed.* They have
> acted and lifted out from the sea, in comparatively recent geological
> times, the loftiest mountains on earth. Mr. Wallace himself admits
> repeatedly that sea-beds have been elevated 1,000 fathoms and islands
> have risen up from the depths of 3,000 fathoms; and to suppose that
> the upheaving forces are limited in power, is, it seems to me,
> 'utterly gratuitous and entirely opposed to all the evidences at our
> command.' "

The "Father" of English Geology -- Sir Charles Lyell -- was an
Uniformitarian in his views of continental formation. On page 492 of his
"Antiquity of Man" we find him saying: --

> "Professor Unger (Die versunkene Insel Atlantis) and Heer (Flora
> Tertiaria Helvetiae) have admitted on botanical grounds the *former
> existence of an Atlantic Continent during some part of the Tertiary
> Period*, as affording the only plausible explanation that can be
> imagined of the analogy between the Miocene flora of central Europe,
> and the existing flora of Eastern America. Professor Oliver, on the
> other hand, after showing how many of the American types found fossil
> in Europe are common to Japan, inclines to the theory, first advanced
> by Dr. Asa Gray, that the migration of species, to which the community
> of types in the Eastern States of North America, and the Miocene flora
> of Europe is due, took place when there was an overland communication
> from America to central Asia between the fiftieth and sixtieth
> parallels of latitude, or south of Behring Straits, following the
> direction of the Aleutian islands. By this course they *may* have made
> their way, at any epoch, Miocene, Pliocene, or Pleistocene,
> antecedently to the Glacial Epoch, to Amoorland, on the East coast of
> North Asia."

The unnecessary difficulties and complications here incurred in order to
avoid the hypothesis of an Atlantic Continent, are really too

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* The Pacific portion of the giant Lemurian Continent christened by Dr.
Carter Blake, the anthropologist, "Pacificus."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 784 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

apparent to escape notice. *If the botanical evidences stood alone,*
scepticism would be half legitimate; but in this case all branches of
science converge to one point. Science has made blunders, and has
exposed itself to greater errors than the admission of our two now
invisible continents, would lay it open to. It has denied even the
undeniable, from the days of the mathematician Laplace down to our own,
and that only a few years ago.\* We have Professor Huxley's authority
for saying that there is no *a priori* improbability whatever against
possible evidences supporting the belief. (*Vide supra.*) But now that
the POSITIVE EVIDENCE *is brought forward,* will that eminent scientist
admit the corollary?

Touching on the problem in another place ("*Principles of Geology,*" pp.
12-13), Sir Charles Lyell tells us: "Respecting the cosmogony of the
Egyptian priests, we gather much information from writers of the Grecian
sects, who borrowed almost all their tenets from Egypt, and amongst
others that of the former successive destruction and renovation of the
world. (*Continental,* not cosmic, catastrophes.) We learn from Plutarch
that this was the theme of one of the hymns of Orpheus, so celebrated in
the fabulous ages of Greece. It was brought by him from the banks of the
Nile; and we even find in his verses, as in the Indian systems, a
definite period assigned for the duration of every successive World. The
returns of great catastrophes were determined by the present period of
the Magnus Annus, or great year -- a cycle composed of the revolutions
of the sun, moon, and planets, and terminating when these return
together to the sign whence they were supposed at some remote epoch to
set out. We learn particularly from the *Timaeus* of Plato *that the
Egyptians believed the world to be subject to occasional conflagrations
and deluges.* The sect of the Stoics adopted most fully the system of
catastrophes destined at intervals to destroy the world. These, they
taught, were of two kinds -- the cataclysm, *or* *destruction by water,*
and the *Ecpyrosis, or destruction by fire* (submarine volcanoes). From
the Egyptians they derived the doctrine of the gradual debasement of man
from a state of innocence" (nascent simplicity of the first sub-races of
each Root-Race). "Towards the

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* When Howard read, before the Royal Society of London, a paper on the
first serious researches that were made on the aerolites, the Geneva
naturalist Pictet, who was present, communicated, on his return to
Paris, the facts reported to the French Academy of Sciences. But he was
forthwith interrupted by Laplace, the great astronomer, who cried:
"Stop! we have had enough of such *fables,* and know all about them,"
thus making Pictet feel very small. Globular-shaped lightnings or
thunderbolts have been admitted by Science only since Arago demonstrated
their existence, says de Rochat ("*Forces non-definies,*" p. 4): "Every
one remembers Dr. Bouilland's misadventure at the Academy of Medicine
when he had declared Edison's phonograph *'a trick of ventriloquism! \`*
"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 785 ASTRAEA FALLS ON HER HEAD.

termination of each era the gods could no longer bear with the
wickedness of man, and a shock of the elements, or a deluge, overwhelmed
them; (vide degeneracy into magical practices and gross animality of the
Atlanteans) after which calamity, Astraea again descended on the earth
to renew the golden age." (Dawn of a new Root-Race.)

*Astraea,* the goddess of justice, is the last of the deities to forsake
the earth, when the gods are said to abandon it and *be taken up into
heaven by Jupiter again.* But, no sooner does Zeus carry away from earth
Ganymedes (the object of *lust,* personified) than the father of the
gods throws down Astraea back on the earth again, on which she *falls
upon her head.* Astraea is *Virgo,* the constellation of the Zodiac.
Astronomically it has a very plain significance, and one which gives the
Key to the occult meaning. But it is inseparable from *Leo,* the sign
that precedes it, and from the Pleiades and their sisters, the Hyades,
of which Aldebaran is the brilliant leader. All of these are connected
with the periodical renovations of the earth, with regard to its
continents -- even Ganymedes, who in astronomy is Aquarius. It was
already shown that while the South Pole is the *pit* (or the infernal
regions figuratively and cosmologically), the North Pole is
geographically the first continent; while astronomically and
metaphorically the celestial pole, with its pole star in *heaven,* is
Meru, or the seat of Brahma, the throne of Jupiter, etc. For in the age
when the gods forsook the earth and were said to ascend into heaven, the
ecliptic had become parallel with the meridian, and part of the Zodiac
appeared to descend from the north pole to the north horizon. Aldebaran
was in conjunction then with the Sun, as it was 40,000 years ago, at the
great festival in commemoration of that Magnus Annus, of which Plutarch
was speaking. Since that year (40,000 years ago) there has been a
retrograde motion of the equator, and about 31,000 years ago Aldebaran
was in conjunction with the vernal equinoctial point. The part assigned
to *Taurus,* even in Christian mysticism, is too well known to need
repetition. The famous Orphic hymn on the great periodical cataclysm
divulges the whole esotericism of the event. Pluto (in the pit) carries
off Eurydice, bitten by the (polar) serpent. Then Leo, the *lion,* is
vanquished. Now, when the Lion is *in the pit,* or below the south pole,
then Virgo, as the next sign, follows him, and when her head, down to
the waist, is *below* the South horizon -- she is *inverted.* On the
other hand, the Hyades are the rain or *Deluge* constellations; and
*Aldebaran* (he who follows, or *succeeds* the daughters of Atlas, or
the Pleiades) looks down from the eye of Taurus. It is from this point
of the ecliptic that the calculations of the new cycle were commenced.
The student has to remember also, that when Ganymedes (*Aquarius*) is
raised to

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 786 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

heaven (or above the horizon of the North Pole) *Virgo* or Astraea, who
*is Venus-Lucifer,* descends head downwards below the horizon of the
South Pole, or the pit; which *pit*, or the pole, is also the Great
Dragon, or the Flood. Let the student exercise his intuition by placing
these facts together; no more can be said.

"The connection," comments Lyell, "between the doctrine of successive
catastrophes and repeated deteriorations in the moral character of the
human race, is more intimate and natural than might at first be
imagined. For, in a rude state of society, all great calamities are
regarded by the people as judgments of God on the wickedness of man. . .
. In like manner in the account given to Solon by the Egyptian priests
of the submersion of the island of Atlantis under the waters of the
ocean, after repeated shocks of an earthquake, we find that *the event
happened when Jupiter had seen the moral depravity of the inhabitants.*"

True; but was it not owing to the fact that all esoteric truths were
given out to the public by the Initiates of the temples *under the guise
of allegories?* "Jupiter," is merely the personification of that
immutable Cyclic Law, which arrests the downward tendency of each
Root-Race, after attaining the zenith of its glory.\* Unless we hold
with Prof. John Fiske's singularly dogmatic opinion\*\* that *every*
myth "is an explanation by the uncivilized mind, of some natural
phenomenon; not an allegory, not an esoteric symbol, for the ingenuity
is wasted (! !) which strives to detect in myths the remnants of a
refined primeval science -- but an explanation. Primitive men had no
profound science to perpetuate by means of allegory \[How does Mr. Fiske
know?\], nor were they such sorry pedants as to talk in riddles when
plain language would serve their purpose." We venture to say the
language of the *Initiated* few was far more "plain," and their
science-philosophy far more com-

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* The Cyclic Law of Race-Evolution is most unwelcome to scientists. It
is sufficient to mention the fact of "primeval civilization" to excite
the frenzy of Darwinians; it being obvious that the further culture and
science is pushed back, the more precarious becomes the basis of the
ape-ancestor theory. But as Jacolliot says: -- "Whatever there may be in
these traditions (submerged continents, etc.), and whatever may have
been the place where a civilization more ancient than that of Rome, of
Greece, of Egypt, and of India, was developed, *it is certain that this
civilization did exist,* and it is highly important for Science to
recover its traces, however feeble and fugitive they be." (*Histoire des
Vierges*; *les peuples et les continents disparus, p.* 15*.*) Donnelly
has proved the fact from the clearest premises, but the Evolutionists
will not listen. A *Miocene* civilization upsets the "universal
stone-age" theory, and that of a *continuous* ascent of man from
animalism! And yet Egypt, at least, runs counter to current hypotheses.
There is no stone-age visible there, but a more glorious culture is
apparent, the further back we are enabled to carry our retrospect.
(Verb. Sap.)

\*\* "Myths and Myth-Makers," p. 21.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 787 INGENIOUS EXPLANATIONS.

prehensive and satisfying alike to the physical and *spiritual* wants of
man, than even the terminology and system respectively elaborated by Mr.
Fiske's Master -- Herbert Spencer. What, however, is Sir Charles Lyell's
"explanation" of the "myth"? Certainly, he in no way countenances the
idea of its "astronomical" origin, as asserted by some writers.

The two interpreters are entirely at variance with one another. Lyell's
solution is as follows. A disbeliever in cataclysmal changes, from the
absence (?) of any reliable historical data on the point, as well as
from a strong bias to the Uniformitarian conceptions of geologic
changes,\* he attempts to trace the Atlantis "tradition" to the
following sources: --

\(1\) Barbarous tribes connect catastrophes with an avenging God, who is
assumed in this way to punish immoral races.

\(2\) *Hence* the commencement of a new race is logically a virtuous
one.

\(3\) The primary source of the geologic basis of the tradition was Asia
-- a continent subject to violent earthquakes. Exaggerated accounts
would thus be handed down the ages.

\(4\) Egypt, being herself free from earthquakes, nevertheless based her
not inconsiderable geologic knowledge on these cataclysmal traditions.

An ingenious "explanation," as all such are. But proving a negative is
proverbially a difficult task. Students of esoteric science, who know
what the resources of the Egyptian priesthood really were, need no such
laboured hypothesis. Moreover, while an imaginative theorist is always
able to furnish a reasonable solution of problems which, in one branch
of science, seem to necessitate the hypothesis of periodical cataclysmic
changes on the surface of our planet, the impartial critic, who is not a

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Violent minor cataclysms and colossal earthquakes are recorded in the
annals of most nations -- if not of all. Elevation and subsidence of
continents is always in progress. The whole coast of South America has
been raised up 10 to 15 feet and settled down again in an hour. Huxley
has shown that the British islands have been four times depressed
beneath the ocean and subsequently raised again and peopled. The Alps,
Himalayas and Cordilleras were all the result of depositions drifted on
to sea-bottoms and upheaved by Titanic forces to their present
elevation. The Sahara was the basin of a Miocene sea. Within the last
five or six thousand years the shores of Sweden, Denmark and Norway have
risen from 200 to 600 feet; in Scotland there are raised beaches with
outlying stacks and skerries *surmounting* the shore now eroded by the
hungry wave. The North of Europe is still rising from the sea and South
America presents the phenomenon of raised beaches of over 1,000 miles in
length, now at a height varying from 100 to 1,300 feet above the
sea-level. On the other hand, the coast of Greenland is sinking fast, so
much so that the Greenlander will not build by the shore. All these
phenomena are certain. *Why may not a gradual change have given place to
a violent cataclysm in remote epochs? --* such cataclysms occurring on a
*minor scale* even now (*e.g*., the case of Sunda island with 80,000
Malays).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 788 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

specialist, will recognise the immense difficulty of explaining away the
*cumulative* evidences, -- namely, the archaeological, ethnological,
geological, traditional, botanical, and even biological -- in favour of
former continents now submerged. When each science is fighting for its
own hand, the cumulative force of the evidence in its collectivity is
almost invariably lost sight of.

In the "*Theosophist*" (August, 1880), we wrote: "We have as evidences
the most ancient traditions of various and wide-separated peoples --
legends in India, in ancient Greece, Madagascar, Sumatra, Java, and all
the principal isles of Polynesia, as well as the legends of both
Americas. Among savages; and in the traditions of the richest literature
in the world -- the Sanskrit literature of India -- there is an
agreement in saying, that, ages ago, *there existed in the Pacific
Ocean, a large Continent, which by a geological cataclysm was engulfed
by the sea,\** (Lemuria). And it is our firm belief . . . that most, if
not all, of the islands from the Malayan archipelago to Polynesia, are
fragments of that once immense submerged Continent. Both Malacca and
Polynesia, which lie at the two extremities of the ocean, and which,
since the memory of man never had, and never could have any intercourse
with, or even a knowledge of each other, have yet a tradition common to
all the islands and islets, that their respective countries extended
far, far into the Sea: that there were in the world but two immense
continents, one inhabited by yellow, the other by dark men; and that the
Ocean, by command of the gods, and to punish them for their incessant
quarrelling, swallowed them up. Notwithstanding the geographical proof
that New Zealand, the Sandwich and Easter Islands, are at a distance
from each other of between 800 and 1,000 leagues, and that, according to
every testimony, neither these nor any other intermediate islands, for
instance, the Marquesan, Society, Fiji, Tahitian, Samoan, and other
islands, could, since they became islands, ignorant as their people were
of the compass, have communicated with each other before the arrival of
Europeans; yet they one and all maintain that their respective countries
extended far toward the West, on the Asian side. Moreover, with very
small differences, they all speak dialects evidently of the same
language; and understand each other with little difficulty; have the
same religious beliefs and superstitions; and pretty much the same
customs. And as few of the Polynesian islands were discovered earlier
than a century ago, the Pacific Ocean itself being unknown to Europe
till the days of Columbus, and as these islanders have never ceased
repeating the same old traditions since the Europeans first set

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* For the opinions of Jacolliot, after long travels through the
Polynesian Islands and his proofs of a former great geological cataclysm
in the Pacific Ocean, see his "*Histoire des Vierges*: *Peuples et
Continents disparus,*" p. 308.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 789 HAECKEL FOR ONCE IS RIGHT.

foot on their shores, it seems to us a logical inference that our theory
is nearer to the truth than any other. "Chance would have to change its
name and meaning, were all this due but to chance alone."

"A great series of animal-geographical facts," declares Professor
Schmidt, writing in defence of the hypothesis of a former Lemuria, "is
explicable only on the theory of the former existence of *a Southern
Continent of which Australia is a remnant*. . . . . " \[the distribution
of species\] "points to the vanished land of the South where perhaps the
*home of the progenitors of the Maki of Madagascar* may also be looked
for."\*

Mr. A. R. Wallace, in his "Malay Archipelago," arrives at the following
conclusion after a review of the mass of evidence at hand: -- "The
inference that we must draw from these facts is undoubtedly that the
whole of the islands eastwards beyond Borneo and Sumatra do essentially
form part of *a former Australian or Pacific Continent* . . . This
continent must have been broken up before the extreme south-eastern
portion of Asia was raised above the waters of the ocean, for a great
part of the land of Borneo and Java is known to be geologically of quite
recent formation."

According to Haeckel: -- "Southern Asia itself was not the earliest
cradle of the human race, but *Lemuria, a continent that lay to the
South of Asia, and sank later on beneath the surface of the Indian
Ocean.*" ("*Pedigree of Man,*" *Eng. Trans. p.* 73.) In one sense
Haeckel is right as to Lemuria -- the "cradle of the Human race." That
continent *was* the home of the first *physical* Human Stock -- the
later Third-Race Men. Previous to that epoch the Races were far less
consolidated and physiologically quite different. (Haeckel makes Lemuria
extend from *Sunda Island to Africa and Madagascar* and eastwards *to
Upper India.*)

Professor Rutimeyer, the eminent Palaeontologist, asks: -- "Need the
conjecture that the almost exclusively graminivorous and insectivorous
marsupials, sloths, armadilloes, ant-eaters and ostriches, once
possessed an actual point of union in *a Southern Continent of which the
present flora of Terra del Fuego and Australia must be the remains --*
need this conjecture raise difficulties at a moment when from their
fossil remains, Heer restores to sight the ancient forests of Smith's
Sound and Spitzbergen." (*Cited in Schmidt*'*s* "*Doctrine of Descent
and Darwinism,*" *p*. 237.)

Having now dealt generally with the broad scientific attitude on the two
questions, it will, perhaps, conduce to an agreeable brevity, if we sum
up the more striking isolated facts in favour of that fundamental
contention of Esoteric Ethnologists -- the reality of Atlantis. Lemuria

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

*\** "*Doctrine of Descent and Darwinism,*" p. 236. (Cf. also his
lengthy arguments on the subject, pp. 231-7.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 790 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

is so widely accepted, that further pursuit of the subject is
unnecessary. With regard, however, to the former, it is found that: --

\(1\) The Miocene flora of Europe have their most numerous and striking
analogues in the flora of the United States. In the forests of Virginia
and Florida are found the magnolias, tulip-trees, evergreen oaks, plane
trees, etc., etc., etc., which correspond with European Tertiary flora
term for term. How was the migration effected, if we exclude the theory
of an Atlantic Continent bridging the ocean between America and Europe?
The proposed "explanation" to the effect that the transition was by way
of Asia and the Aleutian islands is a mere uncalled-for theory,
obviously upset by the fact that a large number of these flora *only
appear* EAST *of the Rocky Mountains.* This also negatives the idea of a
trans-Pacific migration. They are now superseded by European continents
and islands to the North.

\(2\) Skulls exhumed on the banks of the Danube and Rhine bear *a*
*striking similarity to those of the Caribs and Old Peruvians* (Littre).
Monuments have been exhumed in Central America, which bear
*representations of undoubted negro heads and faces.* How are such facts
to be accounted for except on the Atlantean hypothesis? What is now N.
W. Africa was once connected with Atlantis by a network of islands, few
of which now remain.

\(3\) According to Farrar ("*Families of Speech*") the "*isolated*
language" of the Basques has no affinities with the other languages\* of
Europe, but with "*the aboriginal languages of the vast opposite
continent* (America) *and those alone.*" Professor Broca is also of the
same opinion.

Palaeolithic European man of the Miocene and Pliocene times was a pure
Atlantean, as we have previously stated. The Basques are, of course, of
a much later date than this, but their affinities, as here shown, go far
to prove the original extraction of their remote ancestors. The
"mysterious" affinity between their tongue and that of the Dravidian
races of India will be understood by those who have followed our outline
of continental formations and shiftings.

\(4\) *Stones have been found in the Canary Islands bearing sculptured
symbols similar to those found on the shore of Lake Superior.*
Berthollet was induced

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* For further facts as to the *isolation* of the Basques in Europe and
their ethnological relations, cf. Joly, "*Man before Metals,*" p. 316.
B. Davis is disposed to concede, from an examination of the skulls of
the *Guanches of the Canary Islands and modern Basques,* that both
belong to a race proper to *those ancient islands, of which the Canaries
are the remains!!* This is a step in advance indeed. De Quatrefages and
Hamy also both assign the Cro-Magnon men of South France and the
Guanches to *one type --* a proposition which involves a certain
corollary which both these writers may not care to father.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 791 FINAL AND IRREFUTABLE EVIDENCE.

by such evidence to postulate the unity of race of the early men of
Canary Islands and America (Cf. Benjamin, the "*Atlantic Islands,*" p*.*
130.)

The Guanches of the Canary Islands were lineal descendants of the
Atlanteans. This fact will account for the *great stature* evidenced by
their old skeletons, as well as by those of their European congeners the
Cro-Magnon Palaeolithic men.

\(5\) Any experienced mariner has but to navigate the fathomless ocean
along the *Canary Islands* to ask himself the question when or how that
group of volcanic and rocky little islands has been formed, surrounded
on every side by that vast watery space. Such frequent questions led
finally to the expedition of the famous Leopold von Buch, which took
place in the first quarter of the present century. Some geologists
maintained that the volcanic islands had been raised right from the
bottom of the ocean, the depth of which in the immediate vicinity of the
island varies from 6,000 to 18,000 feet. Others were inclined to see in
these groups, including Madeira, the Azores, and the islands of Cape de
Verdes -- the remnants of a gigantic but submerged continent which had
once united Africa with America. The latter men of science supported
their hypothesis by a mass of evidence in its favour, drawn from ancient
"myths." Hoary "superstitions," such as the fairy-like Atlantis of
Plato, the *Garden of Hesperides,* Atlas supporting the world on his
shoulders, all of them mythoi connected with the peak of Teneriffe, did
not go far with sceptical Science. The identity of animal and vegetable
species -- showing either a previous connection between America and the
remaining groups of the islands -- (the hypothesis of their having been
drifted from the New to the Old World by the waves was too absurd to
stand long) -- found more serious consideration. But it is only quite
lately, and after Donnelly's book had been published several years, that
the theory has greater chances than ever of becoming an accepted fact.
*Fossils found on the Eastern Coast of South America have now been
proved to belong to the Jurassic formations, and are nearly identical
with the Jurassic fossils of Western Europe and Northern Africa. The
geological structure of both coasts is also almost identical*; the
resemblance between the smaller marine animals dwelling in the more
shallow waters of South America, the Western African, and the South
European coasts, is also very great. All such facts are bound to bring
naturalists to the conclusion that there has been, in distant
pre-historic ages, a continent which extended from the coast of
Venezuela, across the Atlantic Ocean, to the Canarese Islands and North
Africa, and from Newfoundland nearly to the coast of France.

\(6\) The great resemblance between the Jurassic fossils of South

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 792 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

America, North Africa, and Western Europe is a striking enough fact in
itself, and admits of no explanation, unless the ocean is bridged with
an Atlantis. But why, also, is there so *marked a similarity between the
fauna* (animal life) *of the --* now -- *isolated Atlantic islands?* Why
did the specimens of *Brazilian fauna* dredged up by Sir C. Wyville
Thompson resemble those of *Western Europe?* Why does a resemblance
exist between many of the *West African* and *West Indian* animal
groups? Again:

"When the animals and plants of the Old and New World are compared, one
*cannot but be struck with their identity*; all, nearly all belong to
the same genera, while many, even of the species, are common to both
continents . . . indicating that they radiated *from a common centre*"
(*Atlantis*)*,* ("*Westminster Review,*" Jan., 1872).

The horse, according to Science, originated in America. At least, a
large proportion of the once "missing links" connecting it with inferior
forms have been exhumed from American strata. *How did the horse
penetrate into Europe and Asia, if no land communication bridged the
oceanic interspaces?* Or if it is asserted that the horse originated in
the New World, how did such forms as the hipparion, etc., get into
America in the first instance on the migration hypothesis?

Again "Buffon had . . . remarked in the *repetition of the African in
the American fauna,* how, for example, the *lama* is a juvenescent and
feeble *copy of the camel,* and how the *puma* of the New *represented
the lion* of the Old World" (*Schmidt,* "*Doctrine of Descent and
Darwinism,*" *p.* 223)*.*

\(7\) The following quotation runs with No. (2), but its significance is
such and the writer cited so authoritative, that it deserves a place to
itself: --

"With regard to the *primitive dolichocephalae of America,* I entertain
a hypothesis still more bold, namely, that they are *nearly related to
the Guanches of the Canary Islands, and to the Atlantic populations of
Africa,* the Moors, Tuaricks, Copts, which Latham comprises under the
name of Egyptian-Atlantidae. We find *one and the same form of skull in
the Canary Islands, in front of the African coast, and in the Carib
islands, on the opposite coast which faces Africa.* The colour of the
skin on both sides of the Atlantic is represented in these populations
as being of a reddish-brown." (Professor Retzius, "Smithsonian Report,"
1859, p. 266.)

If, then, Basques and Cro-Magnon Cave-Men are of the same race as the
Canarese Guanches, it follows that the former are also allied to the
aborigines of America. This is the conclusion which the independent
investigations of Retzius, Virchow, and de Quatrefages necessitate. The
*Atlantean affinities* of these three types become patent.

\(8\) The sea-soundings undertaken by **H.M.S**. "Challenger" and the
"Dolphin," have established the fact that a huge elevation some 3,000
*miles in length,* projecting upwards from the abysmal depths of the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 793 RECENT SUGGESTIVE DISCOVERIES.

Atlantic, extends from a point near the British Islands southwards,
curving round near Cape de Verde, and running in a south-easterly
direction along the West African Coast. This elevation averages some
*9,000 feet in height,* and rises above the waves at the Azores,
Ascension, and other places. In the ocean depths around the
neighbourhood of the former the ribs of a former massive piece of land
have been discovered (*vide* investigations of United States Ship
"Dolphin" and others). "The inequalities, the *mountains and valleys* of
its surface *could never have been produced in accordance with any known
laws for the deposition of sediment, nor by submarine elevation*; but,
on the contrary, must have been carved by agencies acting above the
water-level." *--* (*Scientific American,* July 28th, 1877). It is most
probable that necks of land formerly existed knitting Atlantis to South
America, somewhere above the mouth of the Amazon; to Africa near Cape de
Verde, while a similar point of juncture with Spain is not unlikely, as
contended for by Donnelly. (*Vide* his chart, "Atlantis," p. 47, Eng.
Ed., 1884, though he deals with only a fragment of the *real*
continent.) Whether the latter existed or not, is of no consequence, as
the fact that (what is now) N. W. Africa was -- before the elevation of
the Sahara and the rupture of the Gibraltar connection -- an extension
of Spain. Consequently no difficulty can be raised as to how the
migration of the European fauna (etc.) took place.

Enough has now been said from the *purely scientific standpoint,* and it
is needless, in view of the manner in which the subject has now been
developed on the lines of *esoteric knowledge,* to swell the mass of
testimony further. In conclusion, the words of one of the most intuitive
writers of the day may be cited as admirably illustrative of the
opinions of the occultist, who awaits in patience the dawn of the coming
day: --

"We are but beginning to understand the past; one hundred years ago the
world knew nothing of Pompeii or Herculaneum; nothing of the lingual tie
that binds together the Indo-European nations; nothing of the
significance of the vast volume of inscriptions upon the tombs and
temples of Egypt; nothing of the meaning of the arrow-headed
inscriptions of Babylon; nothing of the marvellous civilizations
revealed in the remains of Yucatan, Mexico, and Peru. We are on the
threshold. Scientific investigation is advancing with giant strides. Who
shall say that one hundred years from now, the great museums of the
world may not be adorned with gems, statues, arms, and implements from
Atlantis, while the libraries of the world shall contain translations of
its inscriptions, throwing new light upon all the past history of the
human race, and all the great problems which now perplex the thinkers of
to-day."\*

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Donnelly, "*Atlantis*; *the Ante-Diluvian World,*" p. 480.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 794 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

And now to conclude.

-------

We have concerned ourself with the ancient records of the nations, with
the doctrine of chronological and psychic cycles, of which these records
are the tangible proof; and with many other subjects, which may, at
first sight, seem out of place in this volume.

But they were necessary in truth. In dealing with the secret annals and
traditions of so many nations, whose very origins have never been
ascertained on more secure grounds than inferential suppositions, in
giving out the beliefs and philosophy of more than *prehistoric* races,
it is not quite as easy to deal with the subject matter as it would be
if only the philosophy of one special race, and its evolution, were
concerned. The Secret Doctrine is the common property of the countless
millions of men born under various climates, in times with which History
refuses to deal, and to which esoteric teachings assign dates
incompatible with the theories of Geology and Anthropology. The birth
and evolution of the Sacred Science of the Past are lost in the very
night of Time; and that, even, which is historic -- *i.e.,* that which
is found scattered hither and thither throughout ancient classical
literature -- is, in almost every case, attributed by modern criticism
to lack of observation in the ancient writers, or to superstition born
out of the ignorance of antiquity. It is, therefore, impossible to treat
this subject as one would the ordinary evolution of an art or science in
some well-known historical nation. It is only by bringing before the
reader an abundance of proofs all tending to show that in every age,
under every condition of civilization and knowledge, the educated
classes of every nation made themselves the more or less faithful echoes
of one identical system and its fundamental traditions -- that he can be
made to see that so many streams of the same water must have had a
common source from which they started. What was this source? If coming
events are said to cast their shadows before, past events cannot fall to
leave their impress behind them. It is, then, by those shadows of the
hoary Past and their fantastic silhouettes on the external screen of
every religion and philosophy, that we can, by checking them as we go
along, and comparing them, trace out finally the body that produced
them. There must be truth and fact in that which every people of
antiquity accepted and made the foundation of its religions and its
faith. Moreover, as Haliburton said, "Hear one side, and you will be in
the dark; hear both sides, and all will be clear." The public has
hitherto had access to, and heard but one side -- or rather the two
one-sided views of two diametrically opposed classes of men, whose
*prima* *facie* propositions or respective premises differ widely, but
whose final conclusions are the same -- Science and Theology. And now
our

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 795 OLD MASONIC SYMBOLISM.

readers have an opportunity to hear the other -- the defendants' --
justification on and learn the nature of our arguments.

Were the public to be left to its old opinions: namely, on one side,
that Occultism, Magic, the legends of old, etc., were all the outcome of
ignorance and superstition; and on the other, that everything outside
the orthodox groove was the work of the devil, what would be the result?
In other words, had no theosophical and mystic literature obtained a
hearing for the few last years, the present work would have had a poor
chance of impartial consideration. It would have been proclaimed -- and
by many will still be so proclaimed -- a fairy tale woven out of
abstruse problems, poised in, and based on the air; built of soap
bubbles, bursting at the slightest touch of serious reflection, with
*no* foundation, as it would be alleged, to stand upon. Even "the
ancient *superstitious* and *credulous* classics" have no word of
reference to it in clear and unmistakable terms, and the symbols
themselves fail to yield a hint at the existence of such a system. Such
would be the verdict of all. But when it becomes undeniably proven that
the claim of the modern Asiatic nations to a Secret Science and an
esoteric history of the world, is based on fact; that, though hitherto
unknown to the masses and a veiled mystery even to the learned, (because
they never had the key to a right understanding of the abundant hints
thrown out by the ancient classics), it is still no fairy tale, but an
actuality -- then the present work will become but the pioneer of many
more such books. The statement that hitherto even the keys discovered by
some great scholars have proved too rusty for use, and that they were
but the silent witnesses that there do exist mysteries behind the veil
which are unreachable without a new key -- is borne out by too many
proofs to be easily dismissed. An instance may be given as an
illustration out of the history of Freemasonry.

In his "Franc-maconnerie Occulte," rightly or wrongly, Ragon, an
illustrious and learned Belgian Mason, reproaches the English Masons
with having *materialized* and dishonoured Masonry, once based upon the
Ancient Mysteries, by adopting, owing to a mistaken notion of the origin
of the craft, the name of *Free Masonry* and *Free Masons.* The mistake
is due, he says, to those who connect Masonry *with the building* of
Solomon's Temple, deriving its origin from it. He derides the idea, and
says: . . "The *Franc Mason* (which is not *macon libre,* or free
masonry) knew well when adopting the title, that it was no question of
*building a wall,* but that of *being initiated into the ancient
Mysteries* veiled under the name of *Francmaconnerie* (Freemasonry);
that his work was only to be the continuation or the renovation of the
ancient mysteries, and that he was to become a *mason* after the manner
of *Apollo* or Amphion. And do not we know that the ancient *initiated*
poets, when speaking *of the foundation*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 796 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

*of a city,* meant thereby the *establishment of a doctrine?* Thus
*Neptune,* the god of reasoning, and *Apollo,* the god of the *hidden*
things, presented themselves as masons before Laomedon, Priam's father,
to help him to build the city of Troy -- that is to say, to establish
the Trojan religion." (*Maconnerie Orthodoxe,* p. 44.)

Such *veiled* sentences with double meaning abound in ancient classical
writers. Therefore, had an attempt been made to show that, *e.g.,*
Laomedon was the founder of a branch of archaic mysteries in which the
earth-bound material soul (the fourth principle), was personified in
Menelaus' faithless wife (the fair Helen), if Ragon had not come to
corroborate what we asserted, we might be told that no classical author
speaks of it, and that Homer shows Laomedon building a *city,* not an
*esoteric worship* or **M**YSTERIES! And who are those left now, save a
few *Initiates,* who understand the language and correct meaning of such
symbolical terms?

But after having pointed to many a misconceived symbol bearing on our
thesis, there still remains more than one difficulty to be overcome.
Most important among several such obstacles is that of chronology. But
this could hardly be helped.

Wedged in between theological chronology and that of the geologists,
backed by all the materialistic Anthropologists who assign dates to man
and nature which fit in with their own theories alone -- what could the
writer do except what is being done? Namely, since theology places the
Deluge 2448 **B.C**., and the World's Creation only 5890 years ago; and
since the accurate researches by the methods of *exact* Science, have
led the geologists and physicists to assign to the incrusted age of our
Globe between 10 million and 1,000 million of years\* (a *trifling*
difference, verily!): and the Anthropologists to vary their divergence
of opinion as to the appearance of man -- between 25,000 and 500,000 of
years -- what can one who studies the Occult doctrine do, but come out
and bravely present the esoteric calculations before the world?

But to do this, corroboration by even a few "historical" proofs was
necessary, though all know the real value of the so-called "historical
evidence." For, whether man had appeared on earth 18,000 or 18,000,000
years ago, can make no difference to profane History, since it begins
hardly a couple of thousand years before our era, and since, even then,
it grapples hopelessly with the clash and din of contradictory and
mutually-destroying opinions around it. Nevertheless, in view of the
respect the average reader has been brought up in for exact science,
even that short *Past* would remain meaningless, unless the esoteric
teachings were corroborated and supported on the spot --

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* *Vide* Sir W. Thomson and Mr. Huxley.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 797 THE PROLOGUE TO ESOTERIC TRUTH.

*whenever possible* -- by references to historical names of a so-called
*historical* period. This is the only guide that can be given to the
beginner before he is permitted to start among the (to him) unfamiliar
windings of that dark labyrinth called the pre-historic ages. This
necessity has been complied with. It is only hoped that the desire to do
so, which has led the writer to be constantly bringing ancient and
modern evidence as a corroboration of the Archaic and quite unhistoric
Past, will not bring on her the accusation of having sorely jumbled up
without order or method the various and widely-separated periods of
history and tradition. But literary form and method had to be sacrificed
to the greater clearness of the general exposition.

To accomplish the proposed task, the writer had to resort to the rather
unusual means of dividing each volume or Book into three Parts; the
first of which only is the consecutive, though very fragmentary, history
of the Cosmogony and the Evolution of Man on this globe. But these two
volumes had to serve as a **P**ROLOGUE, and prepare the reader's mind
for those which shall now follow. In treating of Cosmogony and then of
the Anthropogenesis of mankind, it was necessary to show that no
religion, since the very earliest, has ever been entirely based on
fiction, as none was the object of special revelation; and that it is
dogma alone which has ever been killing primeval truth. Finally, that no
human-born doctrine, no creed, however sanctified by custom and
antiquity, can compare in sacredness with the religion of Nature. The
Key of Wisdom that unlocks the massive gates leading to the arcana of
the innermost sanctuaries can be found hidden in her bosom only: and
that bosom is in the countries pointed to by the great seer of the past
century Emanuel Swedenborg. There lies the heart of nature, that shrine
whence issued the early races of primeval Humanity, and which is the
cradle of *physical* man.

Thus far have proceeded the rough outlines of the beliefs and tenets of
the archaic, earliest Races contained in their hitherto secret
Scriptural records. But our explanations are by no means complete, nor
do they pretend to give out the full text, or to have been read by the
help of more than three or four keys out of the sevenfold bunch of
esoteric interpretation, and even this has only been partially
accomplished. The work is too gigantic for any one person to undertake,
far more to accomplish. Our main concern was simply to prepare the soil.
This, we trust we have done. These two volumes only constitute the work
of a pioneer who has forced his way into the well-nigh impenetrable
jungle of the virgin forests of the Land of the Occult. A commencement
has been made to fell and uproot the deadly upas trees of superstition,
prejudice, and conceited ignorance, so that these two

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 798 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

volumes should form for the student a fitting prelude for Volumes
**III**. and **IV**. Until the rubbish of the ages is cleared away from
the minds of the Theosophists to whom these volumes are dedicated, it is
impossible that the more practical teaching contained in the Third
Volume should be understood. Consequently, it entirely depends upon the
reception with which Volumes **I.** and **II**. will meet at the hands
of Theosophists and Mystics, whether these last two volumes will ever be
published, though they are *almost* completed.

> *Satyat Nasti paro dharmah.*

THERE IS NO RELIGION HIGHER THAN TRUTH.

End of Vol. **II**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Contents](sd2-0-co.htm#contents.md) of Volume 2

[Contents](sd1-0-co.md) of Volume 1

[Homepage](index.md)
