[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dg00)  [Next](dg02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_701">p. 701</span>

# CHAPTER XXXI.

### The Birth of Pârvatî in the House of Himâlayâs

1-2. Janamejaya said--"O Muni! You told before that "the Highest Light
took Her birth on the top of the Himilayas." Now describe to me in
detail about this Highest liight. What intelligent man

<span id="page_702">p. 702</span>

can desist from hearing these nectar-like words about the S'akti? The
danger of death may come even to the Davas that drink nectars but no
such danger can possibly come to those that drink the nectar of the
Devî's glorious deeds.

3-43. Vyâsa said:--"O King! You are blessed; you have attained what you
are to attain in this life; you are taught by the high-souled men; you
are fortunate since you are so sincerely devoted to the Devî. O King!
Hear the ancient history:--Wherever the Deva of the Devas, the
Mahes'vara rested while He was wandering all over the world in a
distracted state, carrying the Satî's body that as burnt by fire, He
spent his time there with his senses controlled, in Samâdhi, forgetting
all his knowledge of Samsâra in deep meditation of the form of the Devî.
At this time, the three worlds, with their objects, moving and immoving,
with their oceans, mountains and islands became void of prosperity and
power. The hearts of all the embodied beings became dried up, without
any trace of joy; they were all burdened with anxious thoughts and
remained indifferent. All were merged in the ocean of sorrows and.became
diseased. Planets retrograded and the Devas had their states reversed.
The Kings were attacked with a series of ills and misfortunes.
Âdhibhantik and Âdhidaivik (from material causes and from divine
interference). At this time a great Asura, named Târaka, became
unconquerable owing to his receiving a boon from Brahmâ. Being
intoxicated by his power and heroism, he conquered the three worlds and
became the sovereign ruler.The Brahmâ Prajâpati, gave him boon to this
effect that the legitimate son of S'iva would be able to kill him. And
as at that time S'iva had no son, the great Asura, elated with joy,
became infatuated and carried off all victories. All the Devas were
banished from their places by his oppression; they remained always
anxious owing to the want felt by them of a son of S'iva. "S'ânkara has
now no wife; how can He then have a son! We are very unfortunate; how
can our work be accomplished? Thus oppressed with thoughts, all the
Devas went to Vaiku<u>nt</u>ha and informed the Bhâgava<u>n</u>
Vi<u>sn</u>u of all that had happened, in privacy. The Bhâgavan Visnu
began to tell them the means, thus:--"O Devas! Why are you all so
anxious when the Auspicious Goddess of the Universe, the Dweller in the
Ma<u>n</u>i Dvîpa, the Yielder of all desires like a Kalpa Vrik<u>s</u>a
is always wakeful for you. It is due to your faults that She is showing
Her indifference; it is meant to teach us (not for our destruction but
to show Her Infinite mercy). When a mother nourishes and frightens and
reprimands a son, it is not that she has became merciless; so the World
Mother, the Controller of the Universe, will never be merciless to you
as regards your qualifications and defects. A son commits offence at
every step who can bear that in these three

<span id="page_703">p. 703</span>

worlds except the mother! So soon take refuge to the Highest Mother, the
Goddess of the universe, with the sincerest devotion. She will certainly
take action and help your cause. Thus ordering the Devas, Vi<u>sn</u>u
with His consort Lak<u>s</u>mî and the other Devas quickly went out to
worship the Devî. Going to the Himâlayâs, they soon engaged themselves
in doing the Puras'chara<u>n</u>a Karma (act of repeating the names of
the Deity, attended with burnt oblations and offerings, etc.). O King!
Those who were well versed with the performance of sacrifice to the
Mother, began their sacrificial ceremonies and all began to hold vows,
*viz*, Tritiyâdi Vratâ<u>n</u>î. Some were engaged in incessantly
meditating on the Devî; some began to repeat Her names constantly; some
began to repeat the Devî Sûkta. Thus some devoted themselves to
repeating names; others to repeating mantrams. Again some wore engaged
in performing severe (painful) Chândrâya<u>n</u>a and other Vratas. Some
wore doing Antarayâgas (inner sacrifices); some wore doing Prânâgnihotra
Yâgas; whereas others engaged themselves in Nyâsâdi, etc. Again some
began to worship the Highest S'aktî, the Goddess of the Universe,
without any sleep or rest, by the seed mantra of Mâyâ. O King! Thus many
years of the Devas passed away. When the ninth Tithî came in the month
of Chaitra on Friday, the Highest Light of the Supreme Force suddontly
appeared in front of them. That Light was equal to Ko<u>t</u>i
lightnings, of a red colour, and cool like the Ko<u>t</u>i Moons. Again
the lustre was like the Ko<u>t</u>i Suns. The four Vedas personified,
were chanting hymns all round Her. That mass of fire was above, below,
on all sides, in the middle; nowhere it was obstructed. It had no
beginning, nor end. It was of the form of a female with hands and feet
and all the limbs. The appearance was not that of a male nor that of an
hermophrodite. The Devas, dazzled by the brilliant lustre, first closed
their eyes; but at the next moment, holding patience when they opened
again their eyes, they found the Highest Light manifesting in the form
of an exceedingly beautiful Divine Woman. Her youth was just blooming
and Her rising breasts, plump and prominent, vying as it were, with a
lotus bud, added to the beauty all around. Bracelets were on Her hands;
armlets on Her four arms; necklace on Her neck; and the garland made of
invaluable gems and jewels spread very bright lustre all arouud. Lovely
ornaments on Her waist making tinkling sounds and beautiful anklets were
on Her feet. The hairs of Her head, flowing between Her ears and cheek
sparkled bright like the large black bees shining on the flower leaves
of the blooning Ketakî flower. Her loins were nicely shaped and
exquisitely lovely and the hairs on Her navel gave additional beauty.
Her exquisitely lively lotus mouth rendered more lustrous and beautiful
by the shining golden ear-ornaments, was filled with betel leaves mixed
with camphor, etc.; on Her forehead there was

<span id="page_704">p. 704</span>

the half crescaut moon; Her eye-brows were extended and Her eyes looked
bright and beautifully splendid like the red lotus; Her nose was
elevated and Her lips very sweet. Her teeth were very beautiful like the
opening buds of Kunda flowers; from Her neck was suspended a necklace of
pearls; on Her head was the brilliant crown decked with diamonds and
jewels; on Her ears, earrings were suspended like the lines on the Moon;
Her hairs were ornamented with Mallikâ and Mâlatî flowers; Her forehead
was pasted with Kâ<u>s</u>mîra Kunkuma drops; and Her three eyes gave
unparallelled lustre to Her face. On Her one hand there was the noose
and on Her other hand there was the goad; her two other hands made signs
granting boons and dispelling fears; Her body shed lustre like the
flowers of a Dârima tree. Her wearing is a red coloured cloth. All these
added great beauty. Thus the Devas saw before them the Mother Goddess,
the Incarnate of unpretended mercy, with a face ready to offer Her
Grace, the Mother of the Whole Universe, the Enchantreas of all,
sweet-smiling, saluted by all the Devas, yielding all desires, and
wearing a dress, indicative of all lovely feelings. The Devas bowed at
once they saw Her; but they could not speak with their voice as it was
choked with tears. Then holding their patience, with much difficulty,
they began to praise and chant hymns to the World Mother with their eyes
filled with tears of love and devotion and with their heads bent low.

44-54. The Devas said:--We bow down to Thee, the Devî and the Maha Devî,
always obeisance to Thee! Thqu art the Prakriti, and the Auspicious One;
we always salute to Thee. O Mother! Thou art of a fiery colour (residing
as a Red Flame in the heart of a Yogî) and burning with Asceticism and
Wisdom (shedding lustre all around). Thou art specially shining
everywhere as the Pure Chaitanya; worshipped by the Devas and all the
Jîvas) for the rewards of their actions; We take refuge to Thee, the
Durgâ, the Devî, we bow down to Thee, that can well make others cross
the ocoan of Samsâra; so that Thou helpest us in crossing this terrible
ocean of world. Mother! The Devas have created the words (*i.e.*, the
words conveying ideas are uttered by the five Vâyus, Prâ<u>n</u>a, etc.,
which are called the Devas) which are of the nature of Vis'varûpu,
pervading everywhere, like the Kâma Dhenu (the Heavenly Cow yielding all
desires, riches, honor, food, etc.,) and by which the brutes (the gods)
become egotistical, O Mother! Thou art that language to us; so Thou
fulfillest our desires when we praise and eba at hymns to Thee. O Devî!
Thou art the Night of Destruction at the end of the world; Thou art
worshipped by Brahmâ; Thou art the Lak<u>s</u>mi, the S'akti of
Vi<u>sn</u>u; Thou art the Mother of Skanda the S'aktî of S'iva; Thou
art the S'aktî Sarasvatî of Brahmâ. Thou art Aditi,

<span id="page_705">p. 705</span>

the Mother of the gods and Thou art Satî, the daughter of Dak<u>s</u>a.
Thus Thou art purifying the worlds in various forms and giving peace to
all. We bow down to Thee. We know Thee to be the great Mahâ
Lak<u>s</u>mî; wa meditate on Thee as of the nature of all the S'aktis
as Bhaghavatî. O Mother! Illumine us so that we can meditate and know
Thee. O Devî! Obeisance to Thee, the Virâ<u>t</u>! Obeisance to Thee,
the Sûtrâtmâ, the Hira<u>n</u>yagarbha; obeisance to Thee, the
transformed into sixteen Vikritis (or transformations). Obeisance to
Thee, of the natara of Brahma. We bow down with great devotion to Thee,
the Goddess of the Universe, the Creatrix of Mâyic Avidyâ (the
Nescience) under whose influence this world is mistaken as the rope as a
garland is mistaken for a rope and again that mistake is corrected by
whose Vidyâ.

We bow down to Thee who art indicated by both the letters Tat and Tvam
in the sentence Tat Tvamasi (Thou art That), Tat indicating the Chit
(Intelligence) of the nature of oneness and Tvam indicating the nature
of Akha<u>nd</u>a Brahma (beyond the Annamaya, Prâ<u>n</u>amaya,
Manomaya, Vijnânamaya and the Ânandamaya--the five Kos'as, the Witness
of the three states of wakefulness, dream, and deep sleep states) and
indicating Thee. O Mother! Thou art of the nature of Pra<u>n</u>ava Om;
Thou art Hrîm; Thou art of the nature of various Mantras and Thou art
merciful; we bow down again and again to Thy lotus Feet. When the Devas
thus praised the Devî, the In-dweller of the Ma<u>n</u>i Dvîpa, the
Bhagavatî spoke to them in a sweet cuckoo voice.

55\. O Devas! What for have you come here? What do you want? I am always
the Tree, yielding all desires to my Bhaktas; and I am ready to grant
boons to them.

56-57. You are my devotees; why do you care, when I am on your side? I
will rescue you from the ocean of troubles, O Devas! Know this as My
true resolve. O King! Hearing these words of deep love, the Devas became
very glad and gave out all their causes of troubles.

58-65. O Parames'varâ! Thou art omniscient and witness of all these
worlds. What is there in the three worlds that is not known to Thee! O
Auspicious Mother! The Demon Târaka is giving us troubles day and night.
Brahmâ has given him boon that he will be killed by the S'iva's son. O
Mahes'varî! Satî, the wife of S'iva has cast aside Her body. It is known
to Thee. What will the ignorant low people inform the one, Who is
Omniscient? O Mother! We have described in brief all what we had to say.
What more shall we say? Thou knowest all our other troubles and causes
of sorrows. Bless us so that our devotion remains uufliuohed at Thy
lotus feet; this is our earnest prayer. That Thou

<span id="page_706">p. 706</span>

takest the body to have a son of S'iva is our fervent Prayer to Thee.
Hearing the Dava's words, Parames'varî, with a graceful countenance,
spoke to them, thus:--"My S'aktî will incarnate as Gaurî in the house of
Himâlayâs; She will be the wife of S'iva and will beget a son that will
destroy Târaka Damon and will serve your purpose. And your devotion will
remain steadfast at My Lotus feet. Himâlayâs, too, is worshipping Me
with his wholehearted devotion; so to take birth in his house is to my
greatest liking; know this.

66-73. Vylsa said:--"O King! Hearing the kind words of the Devî, the
King of mountains was filled with love; and, with voice choked with
feelings and with tears in his eyes spoke to the Goddess of the world,
the Queen. of the three worlds. Thou hast raised me muoh higher, that
Thou dost me so great a favour; otherwise where am I inert, and unmoving
and where art Thou, of the nature of Existence, Intelligence and Bliss!
It manifests the Greatness of Thy Glory. O Sinless One! My becoming the
father of Thee indicates nothing less than the merits earned by me for
doing, countless As'vamedha sacrifices or for my endless Samâdhi. Oh!
What a favour hast Thou shewn towards me! Henceforth my unparalleled
fame will be sprerd throughout the whole Universe of five original
elements that "The Upholder of the Universe, the World Mother has become
the daughter of this Himâlayâs! This man is blessed and fortunate!" Who
can be so fortunate, virtuous and merited as he whose daughter She has
become, Whose belly contains millions of Brahmâ<u>nd</u>as! I cannot
describe what pre-eminent heavens are intended for my Pitris, my, family
predecessors, wherein virtuous persons like myself are born. O Mother! O
Parames'varâ! Now describe to me Thy Real Self as exemplified in all the
Vedântas; and also Jñâna with Bhakti approved by the Vedas in the same
way that Thou hast shown already this favour to me, so that by That Know
ledge I will be able to realise Thy Self.

74\. Vyâsa said:--"O King! Thus hearing the praise of HimAlayas, the
Goddess of the Universe, with a graceful look, began to speak the very
secret essences of the S'rutis.

Here ends the Thirty. first Chapter of the Seventh Book on the birth of
Pârvatî in the House of Himâlayâs in the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am S'ri Mad
Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses, by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXII: On Self-realization, Spoken by the World
Mother](dg02)
