[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dg02)  [Next](dg04.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER XXXIII.

### The Goddess displays her Cosmic Form

1-19. The Devî said:--"O Girirâja! This whole universe, moving and
unmoving, is created by My Mâyâ S'aktî. This Mâyâ is conceived in Me. It
is not, in reality, different or separate from Me. So I am the only
Chit, Intelligence. There is no other intelligence than Me. Viewed
practically, it is known variously as Mâyâ, Vidyâ; but viewed really
from the point of Brahma<u>n</u>, there is no such thing as Mâyâ; only
one Brahman exists, I am that Brahma, of the nature of Intelligence

<span id="page_711">p. 711</span>

I create this whole world on this Unchangeable Eternal (Mountain-like)
Brahma, (composed of Avidyâ, Karma, and various Samskâras) and enter
first as Prâ<u>n</u>a (vital breath) within it in the form of
Chidâbhâ<u>s</u>a. O Mountain! Unless I enter as Breath, how can this
birth and death and leaving and retaking bodies after bodies be
accounted for! As one great Âkâs'â is denominated variously
Gha<u>t</u>âkâs'a (Âkâs'â in the air), Pa<u>t</u>âkâs'a (Âkâs'â in cloth
or picture), so I too appear variously by acknowledging this
Prâ<u>n</u>a in various places due to Avidyâ and various
Anta<u>h</u>kara<u>n</u>as. As the Sun's rays are never defiled when
they illumine various objects on earth, so I, too, am not defiled in
entering thus into various high and low An<u>t</u>ahkara<u>n</u>as
(hearts). The ignorant people attach Buddhi and other things of activity
on Me and say that Âtman is the Doer; the intelligent people do not say
that. I remain as the Witness in the hearts of all men, not as the Doer.
O Achalendra! There are many Jîvas and many Îs'varas due to the
varieties in Avidyâ and Vidyâ. Really it is Mâyâ that differentiates
into men, beasts and various other Jîvas; and it is Mâyâ that
differentiates into Brahma, Vi<u>sn</u>u and other Îs'varas. As the one
pervading sky (Âkâs'a) is called Mahâkâs'a Gha<u>t</u>âkas'a (being
enclosed by jars), so the One All pervading Paramâtmâ is called
Paramâtmâ, Jîvâtmâ (being enclosed within Jîvas). As the Jîvas are
conceived many by Mâyâ, not in reality; so Îs'varas also are conceived
many by Mâyâ; not in essence. O Mountain! This Avidyâ and nothing else,
is the cause of the difference in Jîvas, by creating differences in
their bodies, indriyas (organs) and minds. Again, due to the varieties
in the three Gu<u>n</u>as and their wants (due to the differences
between Sâttvik, Râjasik and Tâmasik desires), Mâyâ also appears
various. And their differences are the causes of different Îs'varas,
Brahma, Vi<u>sn</u>u and others. O Mountain! This whole world is
interwoven in Me; It is I that am the Îs'vara that resides in causal
bodies; I am the "Sutrâtman, Hira<u>n</u>yagarbha that resides in subtle
bodies and it is I that am the Virât, residing in the gross bodies. I am
Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u, and Mahes'vara; I am the Brâhmâ, Vai<u>sn</u>avi
and Raudrî S'aktis. I am the Sun, I am the Moon, I am the Stars; I am
beast, birds, Cha<u>nd</u>âlas and I am the Thief, I am the cruel
hunter; I am the virtuous high-souled persons and I am the female, male,
and hermaphrodite. There is no doubt in this. O Mountain! Wherever there
is anything, seen or heard, I alway exist there, within and without,
There is nothing moving or unmoving, that can exist without Me. If there
be such, that is like the son of a barren woman. Just as one rope is
mistaken for a snake or a garland, so I am the One Brahma and appears as
Îs'vara, etc. There, is no doubt in this. This world cannot appear
without a substratum.

<span id="page_712">p. 712</span>

And That Substratum is My Existence. There can be nothing else.

20\. The Himâlayâs said:--"O Devî! If Thou art merciful on me, I desire,
then, to see Thy Virâ<u>t</u> form in the Fourth Dimensional Space.

This sight is developed when the mind resides in the heart centre or in
the cenlre of the eye-brows. A proper teacher is necessary.

21-41. Vyâsa said:--"O King! Hearing the words of Girirâja, Vi<u>sn</u>u
and all the other Devas gladly seconded him. Then the Devî, the Goddess
of the Universe, knowing the desires of the Devas, showed Her Own Form
that fulfils the desires of the Bhaktas, that is auspicious and that is
like the Kalpa Vrik<u>s</u>a towards the Bhaktas. They saw Her Highest
Virâ<u>t</u> Form. The Satyaloka is situated on the topmost part and is
Her head; the Sun and Moon are Her eyes; the quarters, Her ears; the
Vedas are Her words; the Universe is Her heart; the earth is Her loins;
the Bhuvarloka is Her navel; the asterisms are Her Thighs; the Maharloka
is Her neck; the Janarloka is Her Face; the Taparloka is Her head,
situated below the S'atyaloka; Indra and the Devas and the Svarloka is
Her arms; the sound is the organ of Her ears; the As'vin twins, Her
nose; the smell is the organ of smell; the fire is within Her face; day
and night are like Her two wings. The four-faced Brahmâ is Her eyebrows;
water is Her palate; the juice thereof is Her organ of taste; Yama, the
God of Death, is Her large teeth; the affection is Her small teeth; Mâyâ
is Her smile; the creation of Universe is Her sidelooks; modesty is Her
upper lip; covetousness is Her lower lip; unrighteousness is Her back.
The Prajâpati is Her organ of generation; the oceans are Her bowels; the
mountains are Her bones; the rivers are Her veins; and the trees are the
hairs of Her body. O King! Youth, virginity, and old age are Her best
gaits, positions or ways (courses) paths, the clouds are Her handsome
hairs; the two twilights are Her clothings; the Moon is the mind of the
Mother of the Universe; Hari is Her Vijnâna S'âkti (the knowledge
power); and Rudra is Her all-destroying power. The horses and other
animals are Her loins; the lower regions Atala, etc., are Her lower
regions from Her hip to Her feet. The Devas began to behold Her this
Cosmic (Virâ<u>t</u>a) appearance with eyes, wide awake, with wonder.
Thousands of fiery rays emitted from Her form; She began to lick the
whole universe with Her lips; the two rows of teeth began to make
horrible sounds; fires came out from Her eyes; various weapons were seen
in Her hands; and the Brâhma<u>n</u>as and K<u>s</u>attriyas are become
the food cf that Awful Deity. Thousands of heads, eyes and feet were
seen in that form. Crores of Suns, crores of lightnings flashes, mingled
there. Horrible, Awful, That appearance looked terrific to the eyes,
heart and mind. The Devas thus beheld and began to utter cries of horror
and consternation; their hearts trembled and they were

<span id="page_713">p. 713</span>

caught with immoveable senselessness. "Here is the Devî, our Mother and
Preserver." this ides vanished away at once from their minds.

At this moment the Vedas that were on the four sides of the Devî,
removed the swoon of the Devas and made them conscious. The Immortals
got, then, the excellant Vedas; and, having patience, began to praise
and chant hymns in words choked with feelings and with tears flowing
flowing from their eyes.

42-53. The Devas said:--"O Mother! Forgive our faults. Protect us, the
miserable, that are born of Thee. O Protectress of the Devas! Withhold
Thy anger we are very much terrified at the sight of Thy this form. "O
Devî! We are inferior immortals; what prayers can we offer to Thee! Thou
Thyself canst not measure Thy powers; how then can we, who are born
later, know of Thy greatness! Obeisance to Thee, the Lady of the
Universe! Obeisance to Thee of the nature of the Pra<u>n</u>ava Om; Thou
art the One that is proved in all the Vedântas. Obeisance to Thee, of
the form of Hrîm! Obeisance to Thee, the Self of all, whence has
originated the Fire, the Sun, and the Moon and whence have sprung all
the medicinal plants. Obeisance to the Devî, the Cosmic Deity, the Self
in all whence have sprung all the Devas, Sâdhyas, the beasts, birds, and
men! We bow down again and again to the Great Form, Mâhâ Mâyâ, the Self
of all, whence have-sprung the vital breath Pra<u>n</u>a, Apâna, grains
and wheats, and Who is the source of asceticism, faith, truth,
continence and the rules what to do and what not to do under the present
circumstances. The seven Prâ<u>n</u>as, the seven Lokas, the seven
Flames, the seven Samidhs, the seven Oblations to Fire, have sprung from
Thee! Obeisance to Thee, the Great Self in all! Obeisance to the
Universal form of the Deity of the Universe whence have sprung all the
oceans, all the mountains, all the rivers, all the medicinal plants and
all the Rasas (the tastes of all things). We bow down to that
Virâ<u>t</u> Form, the Great Self, the Mahâ Mâyâ, whence have originated
the sacrifices, the sacrifical post (to which the victim about to be
immolated is bound) and Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>âs (the sacrificial fees)
and the Rik, the Yajus, and the Sâma Vedas. O Mother! O Mahâ Mâyâ! We
bow down to Thy front, to Thy back, to Thy both the sides, to Thy top,
to Thy bottom and on all sides of Thee. O Devî! Be kind enough to
withhold this Extraordinary Terrific Form of Thine, and sbew us Thy
Beautiful Lovely Form.

54-56. Vyâsa said:--"O King! The World Mother, the Ocean of mercy,
seeing the Devas terrified, withheld Her Fearful Cosmic Form and showed
Her very beautiful appearance, pleasing to the whole world. Her body
became soft and gentle. In one hand She held the noose, and in another
She held the goad. The two other hands made signs to dispel all their
fears

<span id="page_714">p. 714</span>

and ready to grant the boons. Her eyes emitted rays of kindness; Her
face was adorned with beautiful smiles. The Devas became glad at this
and bowed down to Her in a peaceful mind and then spoke with great joy.

Here ends the Thirhy-third Chapter of the Seventh Book on the Devî's
Virâ<u>t</u> Rûpa in the Mahâ Parâ<u>n</u>am, Sri Mad Devî Bhâgavatam,
of 18,000 verses, by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXIV: On Knowledge and Final Emancipation](dg04.md)
