[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dg08)  [Next](dg10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER XXXIX.

### The Worship of the World Mother

1\. The Himâlayâs said:--"O Devî! O Mahes'vari! O Thou, the Ocean of
Mercy! O World-Mother! Now describe in detail how Thy worship is
conducted, the rules and ceremonials thereof.

2-20. The Devî said:--"O King of Mountains! I now describe to you the
rites and ceremonies and the methods of My worship that are pleasing to
Me. Hear it attentively and with fai th. My worship in of two
kinds:--External and internal. The external worship is again twofold:
one is Vaidik, and the other is Tântrik. The Vaidik worship is also of
two kinds according to the differences in My forms. Those who are
initiated in the Vedic Mantrams worship according to the Vedic rites and
ceremonies and those who are initiated in the Tântrik-Mantram worship;
according to the Tântrik rites. That stupid man is entirely ruined and
goes to Hell who knowing the secrets of worship, act contrary to them.
First I will describe to you the Vaidik worship; hear. The highest Form
of Mine that you saw before, with innumerable heads, innumerable eyes,
innumerable feet, and the Illuminer of the intelligenees of all the
Jîvas, endowed with all powers, Higher than the Highest, Very Grand,
worship That, bow down to That and meditate on That. O Nagendra! This is
the first form of worship that I describe to you. With your senses
controlled, peaceful, with a well concentrated mind, void of egoism and
vanity, and devoted to That, perform sacrifices to That,, take refuge of
That, see That within the temple of your mind, and always recite

<span id="page_735">p. 735</span>

Her name and meditate on that. Take hold of Me, and My ideas with one
pointed loving devotion and please Me with the performance of
sacrifices, austerities and gifts. By My Grace, you will no doubt be
able to get the Final Liberation. Whoever is entirely attached to Me,
thinking Me as the Highest, is the foremost amongst the Bhaktas. I
promise that I will certainly deliver him from this ocean of the world.
O King of mountains! Meditation with Karma and Jñâna with Bhakti will
lead one to Me. Only the work alone will fail to get one to Me. O
Himavan! From Dharma arises Bhakti and from Bhakti arises the Highest
Jñâna. What are said in the S'ruti and Smriti S'astras the
Mahar<u>s</u>is take that as the Dharma; and what are written in other
S'astras, they take them to be Dharmâbhâsa (the Shadow or reflection of
Dharma). Out of My omniscient and omnipotent Nature, the Vedas have
come. Owing to the want of Ignorance in Me, the Vedas can never be
invalidated. The Smritis are formed out of the meaning of the Vedas; so
the Smritii and Purâ<u>n</u>as, formed, by Manu and the other
<u>R</u>i<u>s</u>is, are authoritative. In some places it is hinted that
there other S'astras than the Vedas, taking the Tantras indirectly into
account. Although the matters relating to the Dharmas are mentioned
therein, but as they are apparently contrary to the S'rutis, the Tantras
are not accepted by the Vaidik Pundits. The other S'âstra makers are
marked with their ignorance; so their sayings cannot be authoritative.
Therefore he must resort entirely to the Vedas who want the final
liberation. As the king's order is never disobeyed amongst his subjects,
so the S'ruti, the Command of Mine, the Lord of all, can never be
abandoned by men.

21-30. To preserve My Commandments, I have created the Brâhma<u>n</u>a
and the K<u>s</u>attriya castes. My secrets are all embodied in the
S'rutis. For that reason, the words of the S'rutis are no doubt to be
known and observed by the sages. O Mountain! When the Dharma
(righteousness) declines and the Adharma (unrighteousness) reigns
supreme, I then manifest Myself in the world as Sâkambharî, Râma,
Kri<u>sn</u>a and others. Therefore, the Devas, the preservers of the
Vedas, and the Daityas, the destroyers of the Vedas are classified.
Whoever does not practise according to the Vedas I have created many
hells for their lessons. When the sinners hear of those hells, they get
extremely terrified. The king should banish those stupid persons from
his kingdom and the Brâhmi<u>n</u>s should not talk with them nor take
them in their own lines nor when partaking of food, those who forsake
the Vaidic Dharma and go for shelter to another Dharma. The S'âstras
that are extant, as contrary to the S'rutis and Smritis, are all Tâmasa
S'âstras, Mahâdeva has framed these Vâma, Kâpâlak, Kaulaks, Bhairava and
such like S'astras for fascinating the

<span id="page_736">p. 736</span>

people; else he has no object in framing thein. Those Brânma<u>n</u>s
that were burnt up by the curses of Dak<u>s</u>a, S'ukra, Dadhîchi and
were banished from the path of the Vedas, it is for delivering them,
step by step that Mahâdeva has framed the five Âgamas, S'aiva,
Vai<u>sn</u>ava, S'aura, S'âtta and Gânapatya S'âstras.

31-37. In those Tantra S'âstras, there are some passages in conformity
with the Vedas and there are other passages contradictory to the Vedas.
If the Vaidik persons resort to passages in conformity with the Veda,
then there cannot arise any fault in them. The Brâhmi<u>n</u>s are not
Adhikâris to those Tântric texts that are contradictory to the Vedas.
Those persons that have no claim to the Vedas can be Adhikâris to these
latter texts. Therefore the Vaidik Brâhma<u>n</u>as should resort to the
Vedas with all the care possible and make the Para Brahma ot the nature
of Jñâna manifest within them. The Sa<u>n</u>ynsins, Vânaprasthas,
householders and Brâhmachâris should give up all their desires and take
refuge in Me; free from egoism and vanity, kind to all creatures, their
hearts wholly given to Me and engaged in speaking out My places with
enrapt devotion. They always worship My Virât (Cosmic) form, immersed in
the Yoga called Ais'varya Yoga (Cosmic Yoga dealing with the glories,
prosperity of god). Illumine the understanding with the Sun of My
Consciousness, and I destroy the Darkness of Ignorance of those persons
that are always engaged in practising Yoga with Me. There is no doubt in
this. O Nagendra! Thus I have described in brief the methods and
practises of the Vaidik Pûjâ; now I will tell you the Tântrikî Pûjâ;
hear attentively.

38-47, On an image, or clean plot of ground, or on the Sun or the Moon,
in water, in Vâna Linga, in Yantra or on a cloth or in the lotus of
heart, one is to meditate and worship the Blissful, Higher than the
Highest, the Devî, Who creates this universe with the three Gu<u>n</u>as
Sattva, Raja and Tama, Who is filled with the juice of mercy, Who is
blooming in youth, Whose colour is red like the rising Sun, Whose beauty
overtops to the full, Whose all the limbs are exquisitely beautiful, Who
is the sentiment of Love Incarnate, Who feels very much for the mental
pain of Her Bhaktas on Who being pleased, manifests Herself before the
Bhaktas on Whose forehead, the segment of the Moon shines incessantly,
and Whose four hands hold goad, noose and the signs of fearlessness and
to grant boons. Until one is entitlad to the internal worship, one
should worship the external; never he is to abandon it. Worship is
internal when ones, heart gets diluted in Para Brahma, of the nature of
the Universal Consciousness, O Mountain! Know My Consciousness (Samvit)
to

<span id="page_787">p. 787</span>

be My Highest Nature without any limitations. Therefore it is highly
incumbent to attach one's hearts, free from other adjuncts, constantly
to this Samvit. And what is more than this Samvit is this illusive world
full of Mâyâ. So to get rid of this world one is to constantly meditate
on Me, the Witness of all, the Self of all, with a heart full of
devotiou and free from any Sankalaps or desires.

O Best of Mountains! Now I will describe to you in detail the external
form of worship. Hear attentively.

Here ends the Thirty-ninth Chapter of tho Seventh Book on the worship of
the World Mother in S'ri Mad Devî Bhâgavatam, the Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am,
of 18,000 verses, by Mahrsi Veda Vyâsa.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XL: The External Worship of the Devî](dg10)
