[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc42006)  [Next](cc42008) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 42: Philippians, Colossians, and
Thessalonians*, tr. by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p1"></span>CHAPTER 3

<span id="iv.iv.i"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p1"></span><span id="iv.iv.i-p1.1"></span>[Philippians
3:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#001)<span id="iv.iv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p2"></span>**1**. Finally, my brethren, rejoice in the
Lord. To write the same things to you, to me indeed *is* not grievous,
but you *it is* safe.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p3"></span>**1**. Quod reliquum est, fratres, mei,
gaudete in Domino; eadem scribere vobis, me equidem, haud piget, vobis
autem tutm est.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p4"></span>**2**. Beware of dogs, beware of evil
workers, beware of the concision.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p5"></span>**2**. Videte canes, videte malos
operarios, videte concisionem.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p6"></span>**3**. For we are the cirmcumcision, which
worship God in the spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no
confidence in the flesh.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p7"></span>**3**. Nos enim sumus cicrcumcisio, qui
spiritu Deum colimus, et gloriamur in Christo Iesu, non autem in carne
confidimus.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p8"></span>**4**. Though I might also have confidence
in the flesh. If any other man thinketh that he hath whereof he might
trust in the flesh, I more:

<span id="iv.iv.i-p9"></span>**4**. Tametsi ego etiam in carne fiduciam
habeo. Si qauis alius videtur confidere in carne, ego magis:

<span id="iv.iv.i-p10"></span>**5**. Circumcised the eighth day, of the
stock of Israel, *of* the tribe of Benjamin, an Hebrew of the Hebrews;
as touching the law, a Pharisee;

<span id="iv.iv.i-p11"></span>**5**. Circumcisus die occtavo, ex genere
Israel, tribu Beniamin, Hebraeus ex Hebraeis, secundum legem Pharisaeus:

<span id="iv.iv.i-p12"></span>**6**. Concerning zeal, persecuting the
Church; touching the righteousness which is in the law, blameless.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p13"></span>**6**. Secundum zelum persequens
Ecclesiam, secundum iustitiam, quae est in lege, irreprehensibilis.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p14"></span> 

<span id="iv.iv.i-p15"></span><span id="iv.iv.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p16"></span>**1** *Rejoice in the Lord* This is a
conclusion from what goes before, for as Satan never ceased to distress
them with daily rumors, he bids them divest themselves of anxiety and be
of good courage. In this way he exhorts them to constancy, that they may
not fall back from the doctrine which they have once received. The
phrase *henceforward* denotes a continued course, that, in the midst of
many hinderances, they may not cease to exercise holy joy. It is a rare
excellence when Satan endeavors to exasperate us  <span
id="fr_163"></span>[164](#fn_163) by means of the bitterness of the
cross, so as to make God’s name unpleasant  <span
id="fr_164"></span>[165](#fn_164) , to take such satisfaction in the
simple tasting of God’s grace, that all annoyances, sorrows, anxieties,
and griefs are sweetened.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p19"></span>*To write the same thing to you.* Here he
begins to speak of the false Apostles, with whom, however, he does not
fight hand to hand, as in the Epistle to the Galatians, but in a few
words severely  <span id="fr_165"></span>[166](#fn_165) exposes them, as
far as was sufficient. For as they had simply made an attempt upon the
Philippians, and had not made an inroad upon them,  <span
id="fr_166"></span>[167](#fn_166) it was not so necessary to enter into
any regular disputation with the view of refuting errors, to which they
had never lent an ear. Hence he simply admonishes them to be diligent
and attentive in detecting impostors and guarding against them.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p22"></span>In the *first* place, however, he calls
them *dogs;* the metaphor being grounded upon this — that, for the sake
of filling their belly, they assailed true doctrine with their impure
barking. Accordingly, it is as though he had said, — impure or profane
persons; for I do not agree with those who think that they are so called
on the ground of envying others, or biting them  <span
id="fr_167"></span>[168](#fn_167)

<span id="iv.iv.i-p24"></span>In the *second* place, he calls them *evil
workers,* meaning, that, under the pretext of building up the Church,
they did nothing but ruin and destroy everything; for many are busily
occupied  <span id="fr_168"></span>[169](#fn_168) who would do better to
remain idle. As the public crier  <span
id="fr_169"></span>[170](#fn_169) on being asked by Gracchus in mockery,
on the ground of his sitting idle, what he was doing? had his answer
ready, “Nay, but what are you doing?” for he was the ringleader of a
ruinous sedition. Hence Paul would have a distinction made among
*workers,* that believers may be on their guard against those that are
*evil.*

<span id="iv.iv.i-p27"></span>In the *third* term employed, there is an
elegant *(*<span id="iv.iv.i-p27.1"></span>προσωνομασία*) play upon
words.* They boasted that they were the *circumcision:* he turns aside
this boasting by calling them the *concision*  <span
id="fr_170"></span>[171](#fn_170) *,* inasmuch as they tore asunder the
unity of the Church. In this we have an instance tending to shew that
the Holy Spirit in his organs  <span id="fr_171"></span>[172](#fn_171)
has not in every case avoided wit and humor, yet so as at the same time
to keep at a distance from such pleasantry as were unworthy of his
majesty. There are innumerable examples in the Prophets, and especially
in Isaiah, so that there is no profane author that abounds more in
agreeable plays upon words, and figurative forms of expression. We
ought, however, more carefully still to observe the vehemence with which
Paul inveighs against the false Apostles, which will assuredly break
forth wherever there is the ardor of pious zeal. But in the mean time we
must be on our guard lest any undue warmth or excessive bitterness
should creep in under a pretext of zeal.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p30"></span>When he says, that to *write the same
things is not grievous to him,* he seems to intimate that he had already
written on some other occasion to the Philippians. There would, however,
be no inconsistency in understanding him as meaning, that he now by his
writings reminds them of the same things as they had frequently heard
him say, when he was with them. For there can be no doubt that he had
often intimated to them in words, when he was with them, how much they
ought to be on their guard against such pests: yet he does not grudge to
repeat these things, because the Philippians would have incurred danger
in the event of his silence. And, unquestionably, it is the part of a
good pastor, not merely to supply the flock with pasture, and to rule
the sheep by his guidance, but to drive away the wolves when threatening
to make an attack upon the fold, and that not merely on one occasion,
but so as to be constantly on the watch, and to be indefatigable. For as
*thieves and robbers* (<span id="iv.iv.i-p30.1"></span>[Joh
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#008)<span id="iv.iv.i-p30.1"></span>)
are constantly on the watch for the destruction of the Church, what
excuse will the pastor have if, after courageously repelling them in
several instances, he gives way on occasion of the ninth or tenth
attack?

<span id="iv.iv.i-p31"></span>He says also, that a repetition of this
nature is profitable to the Philippians, lest they should be—as is wont
to happen occasionally—of an exceedingly fastidious humor, and despise
it as a thing that was superfluous. For many are so difficult to please,
that they cannot bear that the same thing should be said to them a
second time, and, in the mean time, they do not consider that what is
inculcated upon them daily is with difficulty retained in their memory
ten years afterwards. But if it was profitable to the Philippians to
listen to this exhortation of Paul—to be on their guard against wolves,
what do Papists mean who will not allow that any judgment should be
formed as to their doctrine? For to whom, I pray you, did Paul address
himself when he said, *Beware?* Was it not to those whom they do not
allow to possess any right to judge? And of the same persons Christ
says, in like manner,

<span id="iv.iv.i-p32"></span>My sheep hear my voice, and they follow
me; they flee from, a stranger, and they hear not his voice. (<span
id="iv.iv.i-p32.1"></span>[John 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#005),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#027)<span id="iv.iv.i-p32.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.iv.i-p33"></span><span id="iv.iv.i-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p34"></span>**3.** *For we are the circumcision*—that
is, we are the true seed of Abraham, and heirs of the testament which
was confirmed by the sign of circumcision. For the true circumcision is
*of the spirit* and *not of the letter,* inward, and situated in the
heart, not visible according to the flesh. (<span
id="iv.iv.i-p34.1"></span>[Ro
2:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#029)<span id="iv.iv.i-p34.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.iv.i-p35"></span>By *spiritual worship* he means that which
is recommended to us in the gospel, and consists of confidence in God,
and invocation of him, self-renunciation, and a pure conscience. We must
supply an antithesis, for he censures, on the other hand, legal worship,
which was exclusively pressed upon them by the false Apostles.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p36"></span>“They command that God should be
worshipped with outward observances, and because they observe the
ceremonies of the law, they boast on false grounds that they are the
people of God; but we are the truly circumcised, who worship God in
spirit and in truth.” (<span id="iv.iv.i-p36.1"></span>[Joh
4:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#023)<span id="iv.iv.i-p36.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.iv.i-p37"></span>But here some one will ask, whether *truth
excludes* the sacraments, for the same thing might be said as to Baptism
and the Lord’s Supper. I answer, that this principle must always be kept
in view, that figures were abolished by the advent of Christ, and that
circumcision gave way to baptism. It follows, also, from this principle,
that the pure and genuine worship of God is free from the legal
ceremonies, and that believers have the true circumcision without any
figure.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p38"></span>*And we glory in Christ* We must always
keep in view the antithesis. “We have to do with the reality, while they
rest in the symbols: we have to do with the substance, while they look
to the shadows.” And this suits sufficiently well with the corresponding
clause, which he adds by way of contrast— *We have no confidence in the
flesh* For under the term *flesh* he includes everything of an external
kind in which an individual is prepared to glory, as will appear from
the context, or, to express it in fewer words, he gives the name of
*flesh* to everything that is apart from Christ. He thus reproves, and
in no slight manner, the perverse zealots the law, because, not
satisfied with Christ, they have recourse to grounds of glorying apart
from him. He has employed the terms *glorying,* and *having confidence,*
to denote the same thing. For confidence lifts up a man, so that he
ventures even to glory, and thus the two things are connected.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p39"></span><span id="iv.iv.i-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p40"></span>**4** *Though I might also* He does not
speak of the disposition exercised by him, but he intimates, that he has
also ground of glorying, if he were inclined to imitate their folly. The
meaning therefore is, “My glorying, indeed, is placed in Christ, but,
were it warrantable to glory in the flesh, I have also no want of
materials.” And from this we learn in what manner to reprove the
arrogance of those who glory in something apart from Christ. If we are
ourselves in possession of those very things in which they glory, let us
not allow them to triumph over Christ by an unseemly boasting, without
retorting upon them also our grounds of glorying, that they may
understand that it is not through envy that we reckon of no value, nay,
even voluntarily renounce those things on which they set the highest
value. Let, however, the conclusion be always of this nature — that all
confidence in the flesh is vain and preposterous.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p41"></span>*If any one has confidence in the flesh, I
more* Not satisfied with putting himself on a level with any one of
them, he even gives himself the preference to them. Hence he cannot on
this account be suspected, as though he were envious of their
excellence, and extolled Christ with the view of making his own
deficiencies appear the less inconsiderable. He says, therefore, that,
if it were coming to be matter of dispute, he would be superior to
others. For they had nothing (as we shall see erelong) that he had not
on his part equally with them, while in some things he greatly excelled
them. He says, not using the term in its strict sense, that he has
*confidence in the flesh,* on the ground that, while not placing
confidence in them, he was furnished with those grounds of fleshly
glorying, on account of which they were puffed up.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p42"></span><span id="iv.iv.i-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p43"></span>**5.** *Circumcised on the eighth day* It
is literally— “The *circumcision of the eighth day.”* There is no
difference, however, in the sense, for the meaning is, that he was
circumcised in the proper manner, and according to the appointment of
the law  <span id="fr_172"></span>[173](#fn_172) . Now this customary
circumcision was reckoned of superior value; and, besides, it was a
token of the race to which he belonged; on which he touches immediately
afterwards. For the case was not the same as to foreigners, for after
they had become *proselytes* they were circumcised in youth, or when
grown up to manhood, and sometimes even in old age. He says,
accordingly, that he is of the *race of Israel* He names the tribe
 <span id="fr_173"></span>[174](#fn_173) , — not, in my opinion, on the
ground that the *tribe of Benjamin* had a superiorityof excellence above
others, but for shewing more fully that he belonged to the race of
Israel, as it was the custom that every one was numbered according to
his particular tribe. With the same view he adds still farther, that he
is an *Hebrew of the Hebrews* For this name was the most ancient, as
being that by which Abraham himself is designated by Moses. (<span
id="iv.iv.i-p45.2"></span>[Ge
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#013)<span
id="iv.iv.i-p45.2"></span>.)  <span id="fr_174"></span>[175](#fn_174)
The sum, therefore, is this — that Paul was descended from the seed of
Jacob from the most ancient date, so that he could reckon up
grandfathers and great-grandfathers, and could even go still farther
back.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p47"></span>*According to the law, a Pharisee* Having
spoken of the nobility of his descent, he now proceeds to speak of
special endowments of persons, as they are called. It is very generally
known, that the sect of the Pharisees was celebrated above the others
for the renown in which it was held for sanctity and for doctrine. He
states, that he belonged to that sect. The common opinion is, that the
Pharisees were so called from a term signifying *separation*  <span
id="fr_175"></span>[176](#fn_175) *;* but I approve rather of what I
learned at one time from Capito, a man of sacred memory  <span
id="fr_176"></span>[177](#fn_176) , that it was because they boasted
that they were endowed with the gift of *interpreting* Scripture, for
<span id="iv.iv.i-p49.2"></span>פרש *(parash,)* among the Hebrews,
conveys the idea of *interpretation.*  <span
id="fr_177"></span>[178](#fn_177) While others declared themselves to be
*literals*  <span id="fr_178"></span>[179](#fn_178) *,* they preferred
to be regarded as *Pharisees*  <span id="fr_179"></span>[180](#fn_179)
*,* as being in possession of the interpretations of the ancients. And
assuredly it is manifest that, under the pretext of antiquity, they
corrupted the whole of Scripture by their inventions; but as they, at
the same time, retained some sound interpretations, handed down by the
ancients, they were held in the highest esteem.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p53"></span>But what is meant by the clause,
*according to the law?* For unquestionably nothing is more opposed to
the law of God than sects, for in it is communicated the truth of God,
which is the bond of unity. Besides this, Josephus tells us in the 13th
book of his Antiquities, that all the sects took their rise during the
high priesthood of Jonathan. Paul employs the term *law,* not in its
strict sense, to denote the doctrine of religion, however much corrupted
it was at that time, as Christianity is at this day in the Papacy. As,
however, there *were* many that were in the rank of teachers, who were
less skillful, and exercised  <span id="fr_180"></span>[181](#fn_180) he
makes mention also of his *zeal.* It was, indeed, a very heinous sin on
the part of Paul to *persecute the Church,* but as he had to dispute
with unprincipled persons, who, by mixing up Christ with Moses,
*pretended* zeal for the law, he mentions, on the other hand, that he
was so keen a zealot of the law, that on that ground *he persecuted the
Church*

<span id="iv.iv.i-p55"></span><span id="iv.iv.i-p55.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p56"></span>**6.** *As to the righteousness which is
in the law* There can be no doubt he means by this the entire
righteousness of the law, for it were too meagre a sense to understand
it exclusively of the ceremonies. The meaning, therefore, is more
general — that he cultivated an integrity of life, such as might be
required on the part of a man that was devoted to the law. To this,
again, it is objected, that the *righteousness of the law* is perfect in
the sight of God. For the sum of it is — that men be fully devoted to
God, and what beyond this can be desired for the attainment of
perfection? I answer, that Paul speaks here of that *righteousness*
which would satisfy the common opinion of mankind. For he separates the
law from Christ. Now, what is the law without Christ but a dead letter?
To *make* the matter plainer, I observe, that there are two
righteousnesses of the law. The one is *spiritual* — perfect love to
God, and our neighbors: it is contained in doctrine, and had never an
existence in the life of any man. The other is *literal* — such as
appears in the view of men, while, in the mean time, hypocrisy reigns in
the heart, and there is in the sight of God nothing but iniquity. Thus,
the law has two aspects; the one has an eye to God, the other to men.
Paul, then, was in the judgment of men holy, and free from all censure —
a rare commendation, certainly, and almost unrivalled; yet let us
observe in what esteem he held it.

<span id="iv.iv.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p1"></span><span
id="iv.iv.ii-p1.1"></span>[Philippians
3:7-11](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#007)<span id="iv.iv.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p2"></span>**7**. But what things were gain to me,
those I counted loss for Christ.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p3"></span>**7**. Verum quae mihi lucra erant, ea
existimavi propter Christum iacturam.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p4"></span>**8**. Yea doubtless, and I count all
things *but* loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my
Lord: for whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and do count them
*but* dung, that I may win Christ,

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p5"></span>**8**. Quin etiam omnia existimo iacturam
esse, propter eminentiam cognitionis Christi Iesu Domini mei: propter
quem omnium iacturam feci et existimo reiectamenta esse, ut Christum
lucri faciam.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p6"></span>**9**. And be found in him, not having
mine own righteousness, which is of the law, but that which is through
the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith:

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p7"></span>**9**. Et inveniam  <span
id="fr_181"></span>[182](#fn_181) in ipso, non habens meam iustitiam que
ex Lege est, sed quae est per fidem Christi: quae, inquam, ex Deo est
iustitia in fide.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p9"></span>**10**. That I may knowhim, and the power
of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings, being made
comformable unto his death;

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p10"></span>**10**. Ut cognoscam ipsu, et potentiam
resurrectionis eius, et communicationem passionumeius, dum configuror
morti eius,

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p11"></span>**11**. If by any means I might attain
unto the resurrection of the dead.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p12"></span>**11**. Si quo modo perveniam ad
resurrectionem mortuorum.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p13"></span> 

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p14"></span><span id="iv.iv.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p15"></span>**7.** *What things were gain to me* He
says, that those things were gain to him, for ignorance of Christ is the
sole reason why we are puffed up with a vain confidence. Hence, where we
see a false estimate of one’s own excellence, where we see arrogance,
where we see pride, *there* let us be assured that Christ is not known.
On the other hand, so soon as Christ shines forth all those things that
formerly dazzled our eyes with a false splendor instantly vanish, or at
least are disesteemed. Those things, accordingly, which had been *gain*
to Paul when he was as yet blind, or rather had imposed upon him under
an appearance of *gain,* he acknowledges to have been *loss* to him,
when he has been enlightened. Why *loss?* Because they were hinderances
in the way of his coming to Christ. What is more hurtful than anything
that keeps us back from drawing near to Christ? Now he speaks chiefly of
his own *righteousness,* for we are not received by Christ, except as
naked and emptied of our own righteousness. Paul, accordingly,
acknowledges that nothing was so injurious to him as his own
righteousness, inasmuch as he was by means of it shut out from Christ.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p16"></span><span id="iv.iv.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p17"></span>**8.** *Nay more, I reckon.* He means,
that he continues to be of the same mind, because it often happens,
that, transported with delight in new things, we forget everything else,
and afterwards we regret it. Hence Paul, having said that he renounced
all hinderances, that he might gain Christ, now adds, that he continues
to be of this mind.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p18"></span>*For the sake of the excellency of the
knowledge* He extols the gospel in opposition to all such notions as
tend to beguile us. For there are many things that have an appearance of
excellence, but the knowledge of Christ surpasses to such a degree
everything else by its sublimity  <span
id="fr_182"></span>[183](#fn_182) , that, as compared with it, there is
nothing that is not contemptible. Let us, therefore, learn from this,
what value we ought to set upon the knowledge of Christ alone. As to his
calling him *his Lord,* he does this to express the intensity of his
feeling.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p20"></span>*For whom I have suffered the loss of all
things* He expresses more than he had done previously; at least he
expresses himself with greater distinctness. It is a similitude taken
from seamen, who, when urged on by danger of shipwreck, throw everything
overboard, that, the ship being lightened, they may reach the harbour in
safety. Paul, then, was prepared to lose everything that he had, rather
than be deprived of Christ.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p21"></span>But it is asked, whether it is necessary
for us to renounce riches, and honors, and nobility of descent, and even
external righteousness, that we may become *partakers of Christ,* (<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p21.1"></span>[Heb
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#014)<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p21.1"></span>,) for all these things are gifts of God,
which, in themselves, are not to be despised? I answer, that the Apostle
does not speak here so much of the things themselves, as of the quality
of them. It is, indeed, true, that the kingdom of heaven is like a
*precious pearl,* for the purchase of which no one should hesitate to
sell everything that he has (<span id="iv.iv.ii-p21.2"></span>[Mt
13:46](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#046)<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p21.2"></span>.) There is, however, a difference between
the substance of things and the quality. Paul did not reckon it
necessary to disown connection with his own tribe and with the race of
Abraham, and make himself an alien, that he might become a Christian,
but to renounce dependence upon his descent. It was not befitting, that
from being chaste he should become unchaste; that from being sober, he
should become intemperate; and that from being respectable and
honorable, he should become dissolute; but that he should divest himself
of a false estimate of his own righteousness, and treat it with
contempt. We, too, when treating of the righteousness of faith, do not
contend against the substance of works, but against that quality with
which the sophists invest them, inasmuch as they contend that men are
justified by them. Paul, therefore, divested himself — not of works, but
of that mistaken confidence in works, with which he had been puffed up.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p22"></span>As to riches and honors, when we have
divested ourselves of attachment to them, we will be prepared, also, to
renounce the things themselves, whenever the Lord will require this from
us, and so it ought to be. It is not expressly necessary that you be a
poor man, in order that you may be Christian; but if it please the Lord
that it should be so, you ought to be prepared to endure poverty. In
fine, it is not lawful for Christians to have anything apart from
Christ. I consider as *apart from Christ* everything that is a
hinderance in the way of Christ alone being our ground of glorying, and
having an entire sway over us.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p23"></span>*And I count them but refuse.* Here he
not merely by words, but also by realities, amplifies greatly what he
had before stated. For those who cast their merchandise and other things
into the sea, that they may escape in safety, do not, therefore, despise
riches, but act as persons prepared rather to live in misery and *want*
 <span id="fr_183"></span>[184](#fn_183) *,* than to be drowned along
with their riches. They part with them, indeed, but it is with regret
and with a sigh; and when they have escaped, they bewail the loss of
them. Paul, however, declares, on the other hand, that he had not merely
abandoned everything that he formerly reckoned precious, but that they
were like *dung,* offensive to him, or were disesteemed like things that
are thrown awayin contempt. Chrysostom renders the word—*straws.*
Grammarians, however, are of opinion, that <span
id="iv.iv.ii-p24.4"></span>σκύβαλον is employed as though it were <span
id="iv.iv.ii-p24.5"></span>κυσίβαλον — *what is thrown to dogs.*  <span
id="fr_184"></span>[185](#fn_184) And certainly there is good reason why
everything that is opposed to Christ should be offensive to us, inasmuch
as it is an *abomination in, the sight of God.* (<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p25.2"></span>[Lu
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#015)<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p25.2"></span>.) There is good reason why it should be
offensive to us also, on the ground of its being an unfounded
imagination.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p26"></span>*That I may gain Christ.* By this
expression he intimates that we cannot *gain Christ* otherwise than by
losing everything that we have. For he would have us rich by his grace
alone: he would have him alone be our entire blessedness. Now, in what
way we must suffer the loss of all things, has been already stated — in
such a manner that nothing will turn us aside from confidence in Christ
alone. But if Paul, with such innocence and integrity of life, did not
hesitate to reckon his own righteousness to be *loss* and *dung,* what
mean those Pharisees of the present day, who, while covered over with
every kind of wickedness, do nevertheless feel no shame in extolling
their own merits in opposition to Christ?

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p27"></span><span id="iv.iv.ii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p28"></span>**9.** *And may find them in him* The
verb is in the passive voice, and hence all others have rendered it*, I
may be found.* They pass over the context, however, in a very
indifferent manner, as though it had no peculiar force. If you read it
in the passive voice, an *antithesis* must be understood — thatPaul was
lost before he was found in Christ, as a rich merchant is like one
*lost,* so long as he has his vessel laden with riches; but when they
have been thrown overboard, he is *found?*  <span
id="fr_185"></span>[186](#fn_185) For here that saying  <span
id="fr_186"></span>[187](#fn_186) is admirably in point — “I had been
lost, if I had not been lost.” But as the verb <span
id="iv.iv.ii-p30.2"></span>εὐρίσκομαι*,* while it has a passive
termination, has an active signification, and means — to recover what
you have voluntarily given up, (as Budaeus shews by various examples,) I
have not hesitated to differ from the opinion of others. For, in this
way, the meaning will be more *complete,* and the doctrine the more
ample — that Paul renounced everything that he had, that he might
recover them in Christ; and this corresponds better with the word
*gain,* for it means that it was no trivial or ordinary *gain,* inasmuch
as Christ contains everything in himself. And, unquestionably, we lose
nothing when we come to Christ naked and stript of everything, for those
things which we previously imagined, on false grounds, that we
possessed, we then begin really to acquire. He, accordingly, shews more
fully, how great the riches of Christ, because we obtain and *find* all
things in him.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p31"></span>*Not having mine own righteousness* Here
we have a remarkable passage, if any one is desirous to have a
particular description of the *righteousness of faith,* and to
understand its true nature. For Paul here makes a comparison between two
kinds of *righteousness.* The one he speaks of as belonging to the man,
while he calls it at the same time the *righteousness of the law;* the
*other,* he tells us, is from God, is obtained through faith, and rests
upon faith in Christ. These he represents as so directly opposed to each
other, that they cannot stand together. Hence there are two things that
are to be observed here. In the *first* place, that the *righteousness
of the law* must be given up and renounced, that you may be righteous
through faith; and *secondly,* that the *righteousness of faith* comes
forth from God, and does not belong to the individual. As to both of
these we have in the present day a great controversy with Papists; for
on the one hand, they do not allow that the *righteousness of faith* is
altogether from God, but ascribe it partly to man; and, on the other
hand, they mix them together, as if the one did not destroy the other.
Hence we must carefully examine the several words made use of by Paul,
for there is not one of them that is not very emphatic.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p32"></span>He says, that believers have no
righteousness of their own. Now, it cannot be denied, that if there were
any righteousness of works, it might with propriety be said to be ours.
Hence he leaves no room whatever for the righteousness of works. Why he
calls it the righteousness of the law, he shows in <span
id="iv.iv.ii-p32.1"></span>[Ro
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#005)<span id="iv.iv.ii-p32.1"></span>;
because this is the sentence of the law, *He that doeth these things
shall live in them.* The law, therefore, pronounces the man to be
righteous through works. Nor is there any ground for the cavil of
Papists, that all this must be restricted to ceremonies. For in the
*first* place, it is a contemptible frivolity to affirm that Paul was
righteous only through ceremonies; and *secondly,* he in this way draws
a contrast between those two kinds of righteousness — the one being of
man, the other, from God. He intimates, accordingly, that the one is the
reward of works, while the other is a free gift from God. He thus, in a
general way, places man’s merit in opposition to Christ’s grace; for
while the law brings works, faith presents man before God as naked, that
he may be clothed with the righteousness of Christ. When, therefore, he
declares that the righteousness of faith is from God, it is not simply
because faith is the gift of God, but because God justifies us by his
goodness, or because we receive by faith the righteousness which he has
conferred upon us.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p33"></span><span id="iv.iv.ii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p34"></span>**10** *That I may know him* He points
out the efficacy and nature of faith — that it is the knowledge of
Christ, and that, too, not bare or indistinct, but in such a manner that
the power of his resurrection is felt. *Resurrection* he employs as
meaning, the completion of redemption, so that it comprehends in it at
the same time the idea of death. But as it is not enough to know Christ
as crucified and raised up from the dead, unless you experience, also,
the fruit of this, he speaks expressly of efficacy.  <span
id="fr_187"></span>[188](#fn_187) Christ therefore is rightly known,
when we feel how powerful his death and resurrection are, and how
efficacious they are in us. Now all things are there furnished to us —
expiation and destruction of sin, freedom from condemnation,
satisfaction, victory over death, the attainment of righteousness, and
the hope of a blessed immortality.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p36"></span>*And the fellowship of his sufferings*
Having spoken of that freely-conferred righteousness, which was procured
for us through the resurrection of Christ, and is obtained by us through
faith, he proceeds to treat of the exercises of the pious, and that in
order that it might not seem as though he introduced an inactive faith,
which produces no effects in the life. He also intimates, indirectly,
that these are the exercises in which the Lord would have his people
employ themselves; while the false Apostles pressed forward upon them
the useless elements of ceremonies. Let every one, therefore, who has
become through faith a partaker of all Christ’s benefits, acknowledge
that a condition is presented to him — that his whole life be conformed
to his death.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p37"></span>There is, however, a twofold
participation and fellowship in the death of Christ. The *one* is inward
— what the Scripture is wont to term the *mortification of the flesh,*
or the *crucifixion of the old man,* of which Paul treats in <span
id="iv.iv.ii-p37.1"></span>[Ro 6](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#000)<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p37.1"></span>; the *other* is outward — what is termed the
*mortification of the outward man.* It is the endurance of the Cross, of
which he treats in <span id="iv.iv.ii-p37.2"></span>[Ro
8](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#000)<span id="iv.iv.ii-p37.2"></span> of
the same Epistle, and here also, if I do not mistake. For after
introducing along with this the *power of his resurrection,* Christ
crucified is set before us, that we may follow him through tribulations
and distresses; and hence the resurrection of the dead is expressly made
mention of, that we may know that we must die before we live. This is a
continued subject of meditation to believers so long as they sojourn in
this world.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p38"></span>This, however, is a choice consolation,
that in all our miseries we are partakers of Christ’s Cross, if we are
his members; so that through afflictions the way is opened up for us to
everlasting blessedness, as we read elsewhere,

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p39"></span>If we die with him, we shall also live
with him; if we suffer with him, we shall also reign with him. (<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p39.1"></span>[2Ti
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#011)<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p39.1"></span>,)

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p40"></span>We must all therefore be prepared for
this — that our whole life shall represent nothing else than the image
of death, until it produce death itself, as the life of Christ is
nothing else than a prelude of death. We enjoy, however, in the mean
time, this consolation — that the end is everlasting blessedness. For
the death of Christ is connected with the resurrection. Hence Paul says,
that he is conformed to his death, that he may attain the glory of the
resurrection. The phrase, *if by any means,* does not indicate doubt,
but expresses difficulty, with a view to stimulate our earnest endeavor
 <span id="fr_188"></span>[189](#fn_188) for it is no light contest,
inasmuch as we must struggle against so many and so serious hinderances.

<span id="iv.iv.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p1"></span><span
id="iv.iv.iii-p1.1"></span>[Philippians
3:12-17](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#012)<span
id="iv.iv.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p2"></span>**12**. Not as though I had already
attained, either were already perfect: but I follow after, if that I may
apprehend that for which also I am apprehended of Christ Jesus.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p3"></span>**12**. Non quod iam apprehenerim, aut
iam perfectus sim; sequor autem, si ego quoque appreehendam, quemadmodum
 <span id="fr_189"></span>[190](#fn_189) et apprehensus sum a Christo
Iesu.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p5"></span>**13**. Brethren, I count not myself to
have apprehended: but *this* one thing *I do*, forgetting those things
which are behind, and reaching forth unto those things which are before,

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p6"></span>**13**. Fratres, ego me ipsum nondum
arbitror apprehendisse, unum autem, eq que retro sunt oblitus, ad ea
quae ante sunt me extendens,

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p7"></span>**14**. I press toward the mark for the
prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p8"></span>**14**. Secundum scopum sequor ad palmam
supernae vocataionis Dei in Christo Iesu

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p9"></span>**15**. Let us therefore, as many as be
perfect, be thus minded: and if in any thing ye be otherwise minded, God
shall reveal even this unto you.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p10"></span>**15**. Quicunque perfecti sumus, hoc
sentiamus: et si quod aliter sentitis, etiam hoc vobis Deus revelabit.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p11"></span>**16**. Nevertheless, whereto we have
already attained, let us walk by the same rule, let us mind the same
thing.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p12"></span>**16**. Caeterum quo perveniamus, ut
idem sentiamus, eadem procedamus regula.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p13"></span>**17**. Brethren, be followers together
of me, and mark them which walk so as ye have us for an ensample.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p14"></span>**17**. Simul imitatorres mei estote,
fratres, et considerate eos qui sic ambulant: quemadmodum nos habetis
pro exemplari.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p15"></span> 

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p16"></span><span id="iv.iv.iii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p17"></span>**12** *Not as though I had already
apprehended* Paul insists upon *this,* that he may convince the
Philippians that he thinks of nothing but Christ — knows nothing else —
desires nothing else — is occupied with no other subject of meditation.
In connection with this, there is much weight in what he now adds — that
he himself, while he had given up all hinderances, had nevertheless not
attained *that* object of aim, and that, on this account, he always
aimed and eagerly aspired at something further. How much more was this
incumbent on the Philippians, who were still far behind him?

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p18"></span>It is asked, however, what it is that
Paul says he has not yet attained? For unquestionably, so soon as we are
by faith ingrafted into the body of Christ, we have already entered the
kingdom of God, and, as it is stated in <span
id="iv.iv.iii-p18.1"></span>[Eph
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#006)<span id="iv.iv.iii-p18.1"></span>,
we already, in hope, *sit in heavenly places.* I answer, that our
salvation, in the mean time, is in hope, so that the inheritance indeed
is secure; but we nevertheless have it not as yet in possession. At the
same time, Paul here looks at something else — the advancement of faith,
and of that mortification of which he had made mention. He had said that
he aimed and eagerly aspired at the resurrection of the dead through
fellowship in the Cross of Christ. He adds, that he has not as yet
arrived at this. At what? At the attainment of having entire fellowship
in Christ’s sufferings, having a full taste of the power of his
resurrection, and knowing him perfectly. He teaches, therefore, by his
own example, that we ought to make progress, and that the knowledge of
Christ is an attainment of such difficulty, that even those who apply
themselves exclusively to it, do nevertheless not attain perfection in
it so long as they live. This, however, does not detract in any degree
from the authority of Paul’s doctrine, inasmuch as he had acquired as
much as was sufficient for discharging the office committed to him. In
the mean time, it was necessary for him to make progress, that this
divinely-furnished instructor of all might be trained to humility.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p19"></span>*As also I have been apprehended* This
clause he has inserted by way of correction, that he might ascribe all
his endeavors to the grace of God. It is not of much importance whether
you read *as,* or *in so far as;* for the meaning in either case remains
the same — that Paul was apprehended by Christ, that he might apprehend
Christ; that is, that he did nothing except under Christ’s influence and
guidance. I have chosen, however, the more distinct rendering, as it
seemed to be optional.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p20"></span><span id="iv.iv.iii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p21"></span>**13** *I reckon not myself to have as
yet apprehended* He does not here call in question the certainty of his
salvation, as though he were still in suspense, but repeats what he had
said before — that he still aimed at making farther progress, because he
had not yet attained the end of his calling. He shews this immediately
after, by saying that he was intent on this one thing, leaving off
everything else. Now, he compares our life to a race-course, the limits
of which God has marked out to us for running in. For as it would profit
the runner nothing to have left the starting-point, unless he went
forward to the goal, so we must also pursue the course of our calling
until death, and must not cease until we have obtained what we seek.
Farther, as the way is marked out to the runner, that he may not fatigue
himself to no purpose by wandering in this direction or in that, so
there is also a goal set before us, towards which we ought to direct our
course undeviatingly; and God does not permit us to wander about
heedlessly. Thirdly, as the runner requires to be free from
entanglement, and not stop his course on account of any impediment, but
must continue his course, surmounting every obstacle, so we must take
heed that we do not apply our mind or heart to anything that may divert
the attention, but must, on the contrary, make it our endeavor, that,
free from every distraction, we may apply the whole bent of our mind
exclusively to God’s calling. These three things Paul comprehends in one
similitude. When he says that he *does this one thing,* and forgets all
things that are behind, he intimates his assiduity, and excludes
everything fitted to distract. When he says that he *presses toward the
mark,* he intimates that he is not wandering from the way.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p22"></span>*Forgetting those things that are
behind* He alludes to runners, who do not turn their eyes aside in any
direction, lest they should slacken the speed of their course, and, more
especially, do not look behind to see how much ground they have gone
over, but hasten forward unremittingly towards the goal, Thus Paul
teaches us, that he does not think of what he has been, or of what he
has done, but simply presses forward towards the appointed goal, and
that, too, with such ardor, that he runs forward to it, as it were, with
outstretched arms. For a metaphor of this nature is implied in the
participle which he employs.  <span id="fr_190"></span>[191](#fn_190)

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p24"></span>Should any one remark, by way of
objection, that the remembrance of our past life is of use for stirring
us up, both because the favors that have been already conferred upon us
give us encouragement to entertain hope, and because we are admonished
by our sins to amend our course of life, I answer, that thoughts of this
nature do not turn away our view from what is before us to what is
behind, but rather help our vision, so that we discern more distinctly
the goal. Paul, however, condemns here such looking back, as either
destroys or impairs alacrity. Thus, for example, should any one persuade
himself that he has made sufficiently great progress, reckoning that he
has done enough, he will become indolent, and feel inclined to *deliver
up the lamp*  <span id="fr_191"></span>[192](#fn_191) to others; or, if
any one looks back with a feeling of regret for the situation that he
has abandoned, he cannot apply the whole bent of his mind to what he is
engaged in. Such was the nature of the thoughts from which Paul’s mind
required to be turned away, if he would in good earnest follow out
Christ’s calling. As, however, there has been mention made here of
endeavor, aim, course, perseverance, lest any one should imagine that
salvation consists in these things, or should even ascribe to human
industry what comes from another quarter, with the view of pointing out
the cause of all these things, he adds — *in Christ Jesus*

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p26"></span><span id="iv.iv.iii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p27"></span>**15** *As many as are perfect* Lest any
one should understand this as spoken of the generality of mankind, as
though he were explaining the simple elements to those that are mere
children in Christ, he declares that it is a rule which all that are
perfect ought to follow. Now, the rule is this — that we must renounce
confidence in all things, that we may glory in Christ’s righteousness
alone, and preferring it to everything else, aspire after a
participation in his sufferings, which may be the means of conducting us
to a blessed resurrection. Where now will be that state of perfection
which monks dream of — where the confused medley of such contrivances —
where, in short, the whole system of Popery, which is nothing else than
an imaginary perfection, that has nothing in common with this rule of
Paul? Undoubtedly, whoever will understand this single term, will
clearly perceive that everything that is taught in the Papacy, as to the
attainment of righteousness and salvation, is nauseous dung.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p28"></span>*If in anything otherwise* By the same
means he both humbles them, and inspires them with good hope, for he
admonishes them not to be elated in their ignorance, and at the same
time he bids them be of good courage, when he says that we must wait for
the revelation of God. For we know how great an obstacle to truth
obstinacy is. This, therefore, is the best preparation for docility —
when we do not take pleasure in error. Paul, accordingly, teaches
indirectly, that we must make way for the revelation of God, if we have
not yet attained what we seek. Farther, when he teaches that we must
advance by degrees, he encourages them not to draw back in the middle of
the course. At the same time, he maintains beyond all controversy what
he has previously taught, when he teaches that others who differ from
him will have a revelation given to them of what they do not as yet
know. For it is as though he had said, — “The Lord will one day shew you
that the very thing which I have stated is a perfect rule of true
knowledge and of right living.” No one could speak in this manner, if he
were not fully assured of the reasonableness and accuracy of his
doctrine. Let us in the mean time learn also from this passage, that we
must bear for a time with ignorance in our weak brethren, and forgive
them, if it is not given them immediately to be altogether of one mind
with us. Paul felt assured as to his doctrine, and yet he allows those
who could not as yet receive it time to make progress, and he does not
cease on that account to regard them as brethren, only he cautions them
against flattering themselves in their ignorance. The rendering of the
Latin copies  <span id="fr_192"></span>[193](#fn_192) in the preterite,
<span id="iv.iv.iii-p29.2"></span>*revelavit,* (he *has revealed,)* I
have no hesitation in rejecting as unsuitable and inappropriate.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p30"></span><span id="iv.iv.iii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p31"></span>**16** *Nevertheless, so far as we have
attained* Even the Greek manuscripts themselves differ as to the
dividing of the clauses, for in some of them there are two complete
sentences. If any one, however, prefer to divide the verse, the meaning
will be as Erasmus has rendered it.  <span
id="fr_193"></span>[194](#fn_193) For my part, I rather prefer a
different reading, implying that Paul exhorts the Philipplans to imitate
him, that they may at last reach the same goal, so as to *think the same
thing,* and *walk by the same rule* For where sincere affection exists,
such as reigned in Paul, the way is easy to a holy and pious concord,
As, therefore, they had not yet learned what true perfection was, in
order that they might attain it he wishes them to be imitators of him;
that is, to seek God with a *pure conscience,* (<span
id="iv.iv.iii-p32.3"></span>[2Ti
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#003)<span
id="iv.iv.iii-p32.3"></span>,) to arrogate nothing to themselves, and
calmly to subject their understandings to Christ. For in the imitating
of Paul all these excellences are included — pure zeal, fear of the
Lord, modesty, self-renunciation, docility, love, and desire of concord.
He bids them, however, be at one and the same time imitators of him;
that is, all with one consent, and with one mind.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p33"></span>Observe, that the goal of perfection to
which he invites the Philippians, by his example, is, that they *think
the same thing,* and *walk by the same rule* He has, however, assigned
the first place to the doctrine in which they ought to harmonize, and
the rule to which they should conform themselves.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p34"></span><span id="iv.iv.iii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p35"></span>**17** *Mark them* By this expression he
means, that it is all one to him what persons they single out for
themselves for imitation, provided they conform themselves to that
purity of which he was a pattern. By this means all suspicion of
ambition is taken away, for the man that is devoted to his own interests
wishes to have no rival. At the same time he warns them that all are not
to be imitated indiscriminately, as he afterwards explains more fully.

<span id="iv.iv.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p1"></span><span
id="iv.iv.iv-p1.1"></span>[Philippians
3:18-21](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#018)<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p2"></span>**18**. (For many walk, of whom I have
told you often, and now tell you even weeping, *that they are* the
enemies of the cross of Christ:

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p3"></span>**18**. Multi enim ambulant (quos saepe
dicebam vobis, ac nunc etiam flens dico, inimicos esse crucis Christi:

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p4"></span>**19**. Whose end *is* destruction, whose
God *is their* belly, and *whose* glory *is* in their shame, who mind
earthly things.)

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p5"></span>**19**. Quorum finis perditio, quorum deus
venter est, et gloria in confusione ipsorum terrena cogitantes.)

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p6"></span>**20**. For our conversation is in heaven;
from whence also we look for the Saviour, the Lord Jesus Christ:

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p7"></span>**20**. Nostra qutem conversatio in coelis
est, e quibus etiam salvatorem respectamus, Dominum Iesum Christum.

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p8"></span>**21**. Who shall change our vile body,
that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body, according to the
working whereby he is able even to subdue all things unto himself.

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p9"></span>**21**. Qui transformabit corpus nostrum
humile, ut sit conforme corpori suo glorioso, secundum efficaciam, qua
potest etiam sibi subiicere omnia.

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p10"></span> 

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p11"></span><span id="iv.iv.iv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p12"></span>**18** *For many walk* The simple
*statement,* in my opinion, is this — *Many walk who mind earthly
things,* meaning by this, that there are many who creep upon the ground
 <span id="fr_194"></span>[195](#fn_194) , not feeling the power of
God’s kingdom. He mentions, however, in connection with this, the marks
by which such persons may be distinguished. These we will examine, each
in its order. By *earthly things* some understand ceremonies, and the
outward elements of the world, which cause true piety to be forgotten, I
prefer, however, to view the term as referring to carnal affection, as
meaning that those who are not regenerated by the Spirit of God think of
nothing but the world. This will appear more distinctly from what
follows; for he holds them up to odium on this ground — that, being
desirous exclusively of their own honor, ease, and gain, they had no
regard to the edification of the Church.

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p14"></span>*Of whom I have told you often* He shews
that it is not without good reason that he has often warned the
Philippians, inasmuch as he now endeavors to remind them by letter of
the same things as he had formerly spoken of to them when present with
them. His tears, also, are an evidence that he is not influenced by envy
or hatred of men, nor by any disposition to revile, nor by insolence of
temper, but by pious zeal, inasmuch as he sees that the Church is
miserably destroyed  <span id="fr_195"></span>[196](#fn_195) by such
pests. It becomes us, assuredly, to be affected in such a manner, that
on seeing that the place of pastors is occupied by wicked and worthless
persons, we shall sigh, and give evidence, at least by our tears, that
we feel deeply grieved for the calamity of the Church.

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p16"></span>It is of importance, also, to take notice
of whom Paul speaks — not of open enemies, who were avowedly desirous
that doctrine might be undermined — but of impostors and profligates,
who trampled under foot the power of the gospel, for the sake of
ambition or of their own belly. And unquestionably persons of this sort,
who weaken the influence of the ministry by seeking their own interests,
 <span id="fr_196"></span>[197](#fn_196) sometimes do more injury than
if they openly opposed Christ. We must, therefore, by no means spare
them, but must point them out with the finger, as often as there is
occasion. Let them complain afterwards, as much as they choose, of our
severity, provided they do not allege anything against us that it is not
in our power to justify from Paul’s example.

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p18"></span>*That they are the enemies of the cross
of Christ.* Some explain *cross* to mean the whole mystery of
redemption, and they explain that this is said of them, because, by
preaching the law, they made void the benefit of Christ’s death. Others,
however, understand it as meaning, that they shunned the cross, and were
not prepared to expose themselves to dangers for the sake of Christ. I
understand it, however, in a more general way, as meaning that, while
they pretended to be friends, they were, nevertheless, the worst enemies
of the gospel. For it is no unusual thing for Paul to employ the term
*cross to* mean the entire preaching of the gospel. For as he says
elsewhere,

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p19"></span>If any man is in Christ, let him be a new
creature.  
(<span id="iv.iv.iv-p19.2"></span>[2Co
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#017)<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p19.2"></span>.)  <span id="fr_197"></span>[198](#fn_197)

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p21"></span><span id="iv.iv.iv-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p22"></span>**19** *Whose end is destruction* He adds
this in order that the Philippians, appalled by the danger, may be so
much the more carefully on their guard, that they may not involve
themselves in the ruin of those persons. As, however, profligates of
this description, by means of show and various artifices, frequently
dazzle the eyes of the simple for a time, in such a manner that they are
preferred even to the most eminent servants of Christ, the Apostle
declares, with great confidence  <span id="fr_198"></span>[199](#fn_198)
, that the glory with which they are now puffed up will be exchanged for
ignominy.

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p24"></span>*Whose god is the belly* As they pressed
the observance of circumcision and other ceremonies, he says that they
did not do so from zeal for the law, but with a view to the favor of
men, and that they might live peacefully and free from annoyance. For
they saw that the Jews burned with a fierce rage against Paul, and those
like him, and that Christ could not be proclaimed by them in purity with
any other result, than that of arousing against themselves the same
rage. Accordingly, consulting their own ease and advantage, they mixed
up these corruptions with the view of mitigating the flames of others.
 <span id="fr_199"></span>[200](#fn_199)

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p26"></span><span id="iv.iv.iv-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p27"></span>**20** *But our conversation is in
heaven* This statement overturns all empty shows, in which pretended
ministers of the gospel are accustomed to glory, and he indirectly holds
up to odium all their objects of aim,  <span
id="fr_200"></span>[201](#fn_200) because, by flying about above the
earth, they do not aspire towards heaven. For he teaches that nothing is
to be reckoned of any value except God’s spiritual kingdom, because
believers ought to lead a heavenly life in this world. *“They mind
earthly things:* it is therefore befitting that we, whose *conversation
is in heaven,* should be separated from them.”  <span
id="fr_201"></span>[202](#fn_201) We are, it is true, intermingled here
with unbelievers and hypocrites; nay more, the chaff has more of
appearance in the granary of the Lord than wheat. Farther, we are
exposed to the common inconveniences of this earthly life; we require,
also, meat and drink, and other necessaries, but we must, nevertheless,
be conversant with heaven in mind and affection. For, on the one hand,
we must pass quietly through this life, and, on the other hand, we must
be dead to the world that Christ may live in us, and that we, in our
turn, may live to him. This passage is a most abundant source of many
exhortations, which it were easy for any one to elicit from it.

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p30"></span>*Whence also.* From the connection that
we have with Christ, he proves that our citizenship  <span
id="fr_202"></span>[203](#fn_202) is in heaven, for it is not seemly
that the members should be separated from their Head. Accordingly, as
Christ is in heaven, in order that we may be conjoined with him, it is
necessary that we should in spirit dwell apart from this world. Besides,

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p32"></span>where our treasure is, there is our heart
also.  
(<span id="iv.iv.iv-p32.2"></span>[Mt
6:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#021)<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p32.2"></span>.)

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p33"></span>Christ, who is our blessedness and glory,
is in heaven: let our souls, therefore, dwell with him on high. On this
account he expressly calIs him *Savior.* Whence does salvation come to
us? Christ will come to us from heaven as a *Savior.* Hence it were
unbefitting that we should be taken up with this earth  <span
id="fr_203"></span>[204](#fn_203) . This epithet, *Savior,* is suited to
the connection of the passage; for we are said to be in heaven in
respect of our minds on this account, that it is from that source alone
that the hope of salvation beams forth upon us. As the coming of Christ
will be terrible to the wicked, so it rather turns away their minds from
heaven than draws them thither: for they know that he will come to them
as a Judge, and they shun him so far as is in their power. From these
words of Paul pious minds derive the sweetest consolation, as
instructing them that the coming of Christ is to be desired by them,
inasmuch as it will bring salvation to them. On the other hand, it is a
sure token of incredulity, when persons tremble on any mention being
made of it. See <span id="iv.iv.iv-p34.2"></span>[Ro
8](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#000)<span id="iv.iv.iv-p34.2"></span>.
While, however, others are transported with vain desires, Paul would
have believers contented with Christ alone.

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p35"></span>Farther, we learn from this passage that
nothing mean or earthly is to be conceived of as to Christ, inasmuch as
Paul bids us look upward to heaven, that we may seek him. Now, those
that reason with subtlety that Christ is not shut up or hid in some
corner of heaven, with the view of proving that his body is everywhere,
and fills heaven and earth, say indeed something that is true, but not
the whole: for as it were rash and foolish to mount up beyond the
heavens, and assign to Christ a station, or seat, or place of walking,
in this or that region, so it is a foolish and destructive madness to
draw him down from heaven by any carnal consideration, so as to seek him
upon earth. Up, then, with our hearts  <span
id="fr_204"></span>[205](#fn_204) , that they may be with the Lord.

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p37"></span><span id="iv.iv.iv-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p38"></span>**21** *Who will change* By this argument
he stirs up the Philippians still farther to lift up their minds to
heaven, and be wholly attached to Christ — because this body which we
carry about with us is not an everlasting abode, but a frail tabernacle,
which will in a short time be reduced to nothing. Besides, it is liable
to so many miseries, and so many dishonorable infirmities, that it may
justly be spoken of as *vile* and full of ignominy. Whence, then, is its
restoration to be hoped for? From heaven, at Christ’s coming. Hence
there is no part of us that ought not to aspire after heaven with
undivided affection. We see, on the one hand, in life, but chiefly in
death, the present meanness of our bodies; the glory which they will
have, conformably to Christ’s body, is incomprehensible by us: for if
the disciples could not endure the slight taste which he afforded  <span
id="fr_205"></span>[206](#fn_205) in his transfiguration, (<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p39.2"></span>[Mt
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#006)<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p39.2"></span>,) which of us could attain its fullness? Let
us for the present be contented with the evidence of our adoption, being
destined to know the riches of our inheritance when we shall come to the
enjoyment of them.

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p40"></span>*According to the efficacy* As nothing is
more difficult to believe, or more at variance with carnal perception,
than the resurrection, Paul on this account places before our eyes the
boundless power of God, that it may entirely remove all doubt; for
distrust arises from this — that we measure the thing itself by the
narrowness of our own understanding. Nor does he simply make mention of
*power,* but also of *efficacy,* which is the effect, or power showing
itself in action, so to speak. Now, when we bear in mind that God, who
created all things out of nothing, can command the earth, and the sea,
and the other elements, to render back what has been committed to them
 <span id="fr_206"></span>[207](#fn_206) , our minds are imrnediately
roused up to a firm hope — nay, even to a spiritual contemplation of the
resurrection.

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p42"></span>But it is of importance to take notice,
also, that the right and power of raising the dead, nay more, of doing
everything according to his own pleasure, is assigned to the person of
Christ — an encomium by which his Divine majesty is illustriously set
forth. Nay, farther, we gather from this, that the world was created by
him, for to *subject all things to himself* belongs to the Creator
alone.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_163"></span>[164](cc42007.htm#fr_163) <span
id="iv.iv.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p17"></span> “<span id="iv.iv.i-p17.1"></span>De nous
troubler et effaroucher;” — “To trouble and frighten us.”

<span id="fn_164"></span>[165](cc42007.htm#fr_164) <span
id="iv.iv.i-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p18"></span> “<span id="iv.iv.i-p18.1"></span>Fascheux
et ennuyeux;” — “Disagreeable and irksome.”

<span id="fn_165"></span>[166](cc42007.htm#fr_165) <span
id="iv.iv.i-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p20"></span> “<span id="iv.iv.i-p20.1"></span>Il les
rembarre rudement et auec authorite;” — “He baffles them sternly and
with authority."

<span id="fn_166"></span>[167](cc42007.htm#fr_166) <span
id="iv.iv.i-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p21"></span> “<span id="iv.iv.i-p21.1"></span>Pource
qu’ils auoyent seulement fait leurs efforts, et essaye de diuer-tir les
Philippiens, et ne les auoyent gaignez et abbatus;” — “As they had
merely employed their efforts, and had attempted to turn aside the
Philippians, and had not prevailed over them and subdued them."

<span id="fn_167"></span>[168](cc42007.htm#fr_167) <span
id="iv.iv.i-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p23"></span> “<span id="iv.iv.i-p23.1"></span>Pour
autant qu’ils portoyent enuie auec autres, ou les mordoyent et
detractoyent d’eux;” — “On the ground of their bearing envy to others,
and biting and calumniating them."

<span id="fn_168"></span>[169](cc42007.htm#fr_168) <span
id="iv.iv.i-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p25"></span> “<span id="iv.iv.i-p25.1"></span>Car il
yen a plusieurs qui se tourmentent tant et plus, et se meslent de
beaucoup de choses;” — “For there are many that torture themselves on
this occasion and on that, and intermeddle with many things.

<span id="fn_169"></span>[170](cc42007.htm#fr_169) <span
id="iv.iv.i-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p26"></span> “<span id="iv.iv.i-p26.1"></span>Comme
anciennement a Rome ce crier public;” — “As anciently at Rome that
public crier."

<span id="fn_170"></span>[171](cc42007.htm#fr_170) <span
id="iv.iv.i-p27.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p28"></span> “*The Concision--*that is, those who rend
and divide the Church. Compare <span id="iv.iv.i-p28.1"></span>[Rom.
16:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#018)<span id="iv.iv.i-p28.1"></span>.
They gloried in being the <span id="iv.iv.i-p28.2"></span>περιτομὴ *(the
circumcision,)* which name and character St. Paul will not here allow
them, but claims it for Christians in the next words, and calls them the
<span id="iv.iv.i-p28.3"></span>κατατομὴ or *concision,* expressing his
contempt of their pretences, and censure of their *practices.”* —
*Pierce.* — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_171"></span>[172](cc42007.htm#fr_171) <span
id="iv.iv.i-p28.4"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p29"></span> “<span id="iv.iv.i-p29.1"></span>En ses
organes et instrumens c’est a dire ses seruiteurs par lesquels il a
parle;" — “In his organs and instruments, that is to say, his servants,
by whom he has spoken.”

<span id="fn_172"></span>[173](cc42007.htm#fr_172) <span
id="iv.iv.i-p43.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p44"></span> “<span
id="iv.iv.i-p44.1"></span>Circoncis deuement et selon l’ordonnance *et*
les obseruations de la loy;” — “Circumcised duly and according to the
appointment and the observances of the law.”

<span id="fn_173"></span>[174](cc42007.htm#fr_173) <span
id="iv.iv.i-p44.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p45"></span> “<span id="iv.iv.i-p45.1"></span>Il note
la tribu et le chef de la lignee de laquelle il estoit descendu;” — “He
names the tribe and the head of the line from which he was descended.”

<span id="fn_174"></span>[175](cc42007.htm#fr_174) <span
id="iv.iv.i-p45.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p46"></span> See Calvin *on the Corinthians,* vol. 2,
p. 357, 358.

<span id="fn_175"></span>[176](cc42007.htm#fr_175) <span
id="iv.iv.i-p47.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p48"></span> “<span id="iv.iv.i-p48.1"></span>Que les
Pharisiens ont este ainsi nommez, pource qu’ils estoyent separez d’auec
les autres, comme estans saincts;” — “That the Pharisees were so called,
because they were separated from others, as being holy.”

<span id="fn_176"></span>[177](cc42007.htm#fr_176) <span
id="iv.iv.i-p48.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p49"></span> See Calvin On *the Corinthians,* vol. 2,
p. 82.

<span id="fn_177"></span>[178](cc42007.htm#fr_177) <span
id="iv.iv.i-p49.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p50"></span> The reader will find the etymology of the
term *Pharisees,* discussed at considerable length in the *Harmony,*
vol. 1, p. 281, n. 4. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_178"></span>[179](cc42007.htm#fr_178) <span
id="iv.iv.i-p50.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p51"></span> The meaning is, that in interpreting
Scripture, they did not go beyond the bare letter.— Ed.

<span id="fn_179"></span>[180](cc42007.htm#fr_179) <span
id="iv.iv.i-p51.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p52"></span> See *Harmony,* vol. 1, pp. 281, 282, and
vol. 3, p. 74.

<span id="fn_180"></span>[181](cc42007.htm#fr_180) <span
id="iv.iv.i-p53.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p54"></span> “<span id="iv.iv.i-p54.1"></span>Exercez
en l’Ecriture;” — “Exercised in Scripture.”

<span id="fn_181"></span>[182](cc42007.htm#fr_181) <span
id="iv.iv.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p8"></span> “<span id="iv.iv.ii-p8.1"></span>Et que
ie les retrouue en iceluy, *on,* soye trouue en iceluy;” — “And that I
may find them in him, *or,* be found in him.”

<span id="fn_182"></span>[183](cc42007.htm#fr_182) <span
id="iv.iv.ii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p19"></span> *“*<span id="iv.iv.ii-p19.1"></span>Par
son excellence et hautesso;” — “By its excellence and loftiness.”

<span id="fn_183"></span>[184](cc42007.htm#fr_183) <span
id="iv.iv.ii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p24"></span> *Pierce* adduces the two following
instances of the same form of expression as made use of among the
Romans—Plautus says, (Trucul. <span id="iv.iv.ii-p24.1"></span>[Act
2](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#000)<span id="iv.iv.ii-p24.1"></span>, sc
7, ver. 5,) when speaking of one that was chargeable with prodigality —
“<span id="iv.iv.ii-p24.2"></span>Qui bona sua pro *stercore* habet,
foras jubet *ferri,” (“*who counts his goods but *dung,* and orders them
to be carried out of the *house.”)* Thus, also, *Apuleius, (Florid,* c.
14,) speaks of *Crates,* when he turned Cynic: *“*<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p24.3"></span>*Rem* familiarem a.bjicit velut onus
*sterootis,* magis labori quant usui;*”* — *(“*He casts away his goods
as a heap of *dung,* that was more troublesome than useful.”) — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_184"></span>[185](cc42007.htm#fr_184) <span
id="iv.iv.ii-p24.6"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p25"></span> Such is the etymology given by *Suidas,*
<span id="iv.iv.ii-p25.1"></span>τὸ τοῖς κυσὶ βαλλόμενον — “what is
*thrown to dogs.”* — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_185"></span>[186](cc42007.htm#fr_185) <span
id="iv.iv.ii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p29"></span> “<span id="iv.iv.ii-p29.1"></span>Mais
apres que les richesses sont lettees en la mer, il est trouue, pource
qu’il commence a avoir esperance d’eschapper, d’autant que le vaisseau
est allege;” — “But after his riches have been thrown into the sea, he
is found, inasmuch as he begins to have hope of escaping, because the
vessel has been lightened.”

<span id="fn_186"></span>[187](cc42007.htm#fr_186) <span
id="iv.iv.ii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p30"></span> “<span id="iv.iv.ii-p30.1"></span>Le
prouerbe ancien;” — “The ancient proverb.”

<span id="fn_187"></span>[188](cc42007.htm#fr_187) <span
id="iv.iv.ii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p35"></span> “<span id="iv.iv.ii-p35.1"></span>De
l’efficace ou puissance;” — “Of the efficacy or power.”

<span id="fn_188"></span>[189](cc42007.htm#fr_188) <span
id="iv.iv.ii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p41"></span> “<span id="iv.iv.ii-p41.1"></span>Afin
de nous resueiller et aiguiser a nous y addonner de tant plus grande
affection;” — “That it may arouse and stimulate us to devote ourselves
to it with so much greater zeal.”

<span id="fn_189"></span>[190](cc42007.htm#fr_189) <span
id="iv.iv.iii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p4"></span> “<span
id="iv.iv.iii-p4.1"></span>*Comme,* ou*, pour laquelle cause;*” —”As,
or, *for which cause.”*

<span id="fn_190"></span>[191](cc42007.htm#fr_190) <span
id="iv.iv.iii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p23"></span> The participle referred to is <span
id="iv.iv.iii-p23.1"></span>ἐπεκτεινόμενος, which, as is remarked by Dr.
Bloomfield, “is highly appropriate to the *racer,* whether on foot, or
on horseback, or in the chariot; since the racer *stretches his head and
hands forward* in anxiety to reach the goal.” — Ed.

<span id="fn_191"></span>[192](cc42007.htm#fr_191) <span
id="iv.iv.iii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p25"></span> A proverbial expression, founded on the
circumstance that in certain games at Athens the runners had to carry a
lamp, or burning torch, in such a way that it should not go out, and, on
any one of the competitors giving up the contest, he *delivered up the
lamp,* or torch, to his successor, See Auct. ad Herenn. 1. 4, c. 46;
Lucret. I. 2, 5:77 — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_192"></span>[193](cc42007.htm#fr_192) <span
id="iv.iv.iii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p29"></span> The rendering of the Vulgate *(*<span
id="iv.iv.iii-p29.1"></span>*revelavit)* is followed in the Rheims
version — (1582) — hath *revealed.*—*Ed.*

<span id="fn_193"></span>[194](cc42007.htm#fr_193) <span
id="iv.iv.iii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p32"></span> The rendering of Erasmus is as
follows:— “<span id="iv.iv.iii-p32.1"></span>Eadem incedamus regula, *ut
simus concordes;*” — “Let us walk by the same rule, *that we may be of
the same mind.”* The words inserted in the common text <span
id="iv.iv.iii-p32.2"></span>κανόνι τὸ αὐτὸ φρονεῖν *rule*—*mind the same
thing,)* are omitted, as is noticed by Granville Penn, in the *Vat.* and
*Alex.* MSS., the *Copt.* and *Ethiop.* versions, and by Hilary and
Augustine. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_194"></span>[195](cc42007.htm#fr_194) <span
id="iv.iv.iv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p13"></span> “<span id="iv.iv.iv-p13.1"></span>Qui
ont leurs affections enracines en la terre;” — “Who have their
affections rooted in the earth.”

<span id="fn_195"></span>[196](cc42007.htm#fr_195) <span
id="iv.iv.iv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p15"></span> “<span id="iv.iv.iv-p15.1"></span>Perdue
et ruinee;” — “Destroyed and ruined.”

<span id="fn_196"></span>[197](cc42007.htm#fr_196) <span
id="iv.iv.iv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p17"></span> *“*<span id="iv.iv.iv-p17.1"></span>Ne
regardans qu’a eux-mesmes et a leur proufit, font perdre toutela faueur
et la force du ministere;” — “Looking merely to themselves and their own
advantage, undermine all the influence and power of the ministry.”

<span id="fn_197"></span>[198](cc42007.htm#fr_197) <span
id="iv.iv.iv-p19.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p20"></span> Such is Calvin’s rendering of the
passage referred to. See Calvin on the Corinthians, vol. 2, pp. 229,
233.—Ed.

<span id="fn_198"></span>[199](cc42007.htm#fr_198) <span
id="iv.iv.iv-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p23"></span> *“*<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p23.1"></span>*Hardiment* et d’vne grande asseurance;” —
“*Boldly*, and with great confidence.”

<span id="fn_199"></span>[200](cc42007.htm#fr_199) <span
id="iv.iv.iv-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p25"></span> “<span id="iv.iv.iv-p25.1"></span>Pour
esteindre et appaiser le feu des nutres;” — “For the sake of mitigating
and allaying the fire of others.” Calvin’s meaning appears to be, that
they made it their endeavor to screen themselves as far as possible from
the fiery *rage* of those around them. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_200"></span>[201](cc42007.htm#fr_200) <span
id="iv.iv.iv-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p28"></span> “<span id="iv.iv.iv-p28.1"></span>Toutes
leurs inuentions et facons de faire;” — “All their contrivances and
modes of acting.”

<span id="fn_201"></span>[202](cc42007.htm#fr_201) <span
id="iv.iv.iv-p28.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p29"></span> “<span id="iv.iv.iv-p29.1"></span>Que
nous soyons diuisez et separez d’auec eux;” — “That we be divided and
separated from them.”

<span id="fn_202"></span>[203](cc42007.htm#fr_202) <span
id="iv.iv.iv-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p31"></span> <span
id="iv.iv.iv-p31.1"></span>*Politiam* — *a* term corresponding to that
employed in the original,.—Ed.

<span id="fn_203"></span>[204](cc42007.htm#fr_203) <span
id="iv.iv.iv-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p34"></span> “<span id="iv.iv.iv-p34.1"></span>Que
nous soyons occupez et enueloppez en terre;” — “That we should be
occupied and entangled with the earth.”

<span id="fn_204"></span>[205](cc42007.htm#fr_204) <span
id="iv.iv.iv-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p36"></span> <span id="iv.iv.iv-p36.1"></span>*Sursum
corda* Our Author most probably alludes to the circumstance, that this
expression was wont to be made use of among Christians in ancient times,
when the ordinance of the supper was about to be administered. See
Calvin’s *Institutes*, vol. 3, p. 440 — Ed.

<span id="fn_205"></span>[206](cc42007.htm#fr_205) <span
id="iv.iv.iv-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p39"></span> “<span id="iv.iv.iv-p39.1"></span>De sa
Gloire;” — “Of his glory.”

<span id="fn_206"></span>[207](cc42007.htm#fr_206) <span
id="iv.iv.iv-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p41"></span> “<span id="iv.iv.iv-p41.1"></span>Qu’il
leur auoit donne en garde;” — “What he had given to them to keep.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4](cc42008)
