[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc42020)  [Next](cc42022.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 42: Philippians, Colossians, and
Thessalonians*, tr. by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.vi"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p1"></span>CHAPTER 4

<span id="vi.vi.i"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.i-p1"></span><span id="vi.vi.i-p1.1"></span>[1
Thessalonians 4:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#001.md)<span
id="vi.vi.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.i-p2"></span>**1**. Furthermore then we beseech you,
brethren, and exhort *you* by the Lord Jesus, that as ye have received
of us how ye ought to walk and to please God, *so* ye would abound more
and more.

<span id="vi.vi.i-p3"></span>**1**. Ergo quod reliquum est, fratres,
rogamus vos et obsecramus in Domino Iesu, quemadmodum accepistis a
nobis, quomodo oporteat vos ambulare et placere Deo, ut abundetis magis:

<span id="vi.vi.i-p4"></span>**2**. For ye know what commandments we
gave you by the Lord Jesus.

<span id="vi.vi.i-p5"></span>**2**. Nostis enim quae praecepta dederimus
vobis per Dominum Iesum.

<span id="vi.vi.i-p6"></span>**3**. For this is the will of God, *even*
your sanctification, that ye should abstain from fornication:

<span id="vi.vi.i-p7"></span>**3**. Haec enim est voluntas Dei,
sanctificatio vestra: ut vos abstineatis ab omni scortatione.

<span id="vi.vi.i-p8"></span>**4**. That every one of you should know
how to possess his vessel in sanctification and honour;

<span id="vi.vi.i-p9"></span>**4**. Et sciat unusquisque vestrum suum
vas possidere in sanctificatione et honore:

<span id="vi.vi.i-p10"></span>**5**. Not in the lust of concupiscence,
even as the Gentiles which know not God:

<span id="vi.vi.i-p11"></span>**5**. Non in affectu concupiscentiae,
quemadmodum et Gentes, quae non noverunt Deum.

<span id="vi.vi.i-p12"></span> 

<span id="vi.vi.i-p13"></span><span id="vi.vi.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.i-p14"></span>**1** *Furthermore*. This chapter contains
various injunctions, by which he trains up the Thessalonians to a holy
life, or confirms them in the exercise of it. They had previously
learned what was the rule and method of a pious life: he calls this to
their remembrance. *As*, says he, *ye have been taught*. Lest, however,
he should seem to take away from them what he had previously assigned
them, he does not simply exhort them to *walk* in such a manner, but to
*abound more and more*. When, therefore, he urges them to make progress,
he intimates that they are already in the way. The sum is this, that
they should be more especially careful to make progress in the doctrine
which they had received, and this Paul places in contrast with frivolous
and vain pursuits, in which we see that a good part of the world very
generally busy themselves, so that profitable and holy meditation as to
the due regulation of life scarcely obtains a place, even the most
inferior. Paul, accordingly, reminds them in what manner they had been
instructed, and bids them aim at this with their whole might. Now, there
is a law that is here enjoined upon us — that, *forgetting the things
that are behind*, we always aim at farther progress, (<span
id="vi.vi.i-p14.1"></span>[Php
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#013)<span id="vi.vi.i-p14.1"></span>.md)
and pastors ought also to make this their endeavor. Now, as to his
*beseeching*, when he might rightfully enjoin — it is a token of
humanity and modesty which pastors ought to imitate, that they may, if
possible, allure people to kindness, rather than violently compel them.
 <span id="fr_565"></span>[566](#fn_565.md)

<span id="vi.vi.i-p16"></span><span id="vi.vi.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.i-p17"></span>**3** *For this is the will of God*. This
is doctrine of a general nature, from which, as from a fountain, he
immediately deduces special admonitions. When he says that *this is the
will of God*, he means that we have been called by God with this design.
“For this end ye are Christians — this the gospel aims at — that ye may
*sanctify* yourselves to *God*.” The meaning of the term
*sanctification* we have already explained elsewhere in repeated
instances — that renouncing the world, and clearing ourselves from the
pollutions of the flesh, we offer ourselves to God as if in sacrifice,
for nothing can with propriety be offered to Him, but what is pure and
holy.

<span id="vi.vi.i-p18"></span>*That ye abstain*. This is one injunction,
which he derives from the fountain of which he had immediately before
made mention; for nothing is more opposed to holiness than the
defilement of *fornication*, which pollutes the whole man. On this
account he assigns the *lust of concupiscence* to the *Gentiles, who
know not God*. “Where the knowledge of God reigns, lusts must be
subdued.”

<span id="vi.vi.i-p19"></span>By the *lust of concupiscence*, he means
all base lusts of the flesh, but, at the same time, by this manner of
expression, he brands with dishonor all desires that allure us to
pleasure and carnal delights, as in <span id="vi.vi.i-p19.1"></span>[Ro
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#014.md)<span id="vi.vi.i-p19.1"></span>,
he bids us *have no care for the flesh in respect of the lust thereof*.
For when men give indulgence to their appetites, there are no bounds to
lasciviousness.  <span id="fr_566"></span>[567](#fn_566.md) Hence the only
means of maintaining temperance is to bridle all lusts.

<span id="vi.vi.i-p21"></span>As for the expression, *that every one of
you may know to possess his vessel*, some explain it as referring to a
*wife*,  <span id="fr_567"></span>[568](#fn_567.md) as though it had been
said, “Let husbands dwell with their wives in all chastity.” As,
however, he addresses husbands and wives indiscriminately, there can be
no doubt that he employs the term *vessel* to mean *body*. For every one
has his body as a house, as it were, in which he dwells. He would,
therefore, have us keep our body pure from all uncleanness.

<span id="vi.vi.i-p23"></span>*And honor*, that is, honorably, for the
man that prostitutes his body to fornication, covers it with infamy and
disgrace.

<span id="vi.vi.ii"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.ii-p1"></span><span id="vi.vi.ii-p1.1"></span>[1
Thessalonians 4:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#006.md)<span
id="vi.vi.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.ii-p2"></span>**6**. That no *man* go beyond and defraud
his brother in *any* matter: because that the Lord *is* the avenger of
all such, as we also have forewarned you and testified.

<span id="vi.vi.ii-p3"></span>**6**. Ne quis opprimat vel circumveniat
in negotio fratrem suum: quia vindex erit Dominus omnium istorum,
quemadmodum et praediximus vobis, et obtestati sumus.

<span id="vi.vi.ii-p4"></span>**7**. For God hath not called us unto
uncleanness, but unto holiness.

<span id="vi.vi.ii-p5"></span>**7**. Non enim vocavit vos Deus ad
immunditiam, sed ad sanctificationem.

<span id="vi.vi.ii-p6"></span>**8**. He therefore that despiseth,
despiseth not man, but God, who hath also given unto us his Holy Spirit.

<span id="vi.vi.ii-p7"></span>**8**. Itaque qui hoc repudiat, non
hominem repudiat, sed Deum, qui etiam dedit Spiritum suum sanctum in
nos.

<span id="vi.vi.ii-p8"></span> 

<span id="vi.vi.ii-p9"></span><span id="vi.vi.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.ii-p10"></span>**6** *Let no man oppress.* Here we have
another exhortation, which flows, like a stream, from the doctrine of
sanctification. “God,” says he, “has it in view to sanctify us, *that no
man may do injury to his brother*.” For as to Chrysostom’s connecting
this statement with the preceding one, and explaining <span
id="vi.vi.ii-p10.1"></span>ὑπερβαίνειν καὶ πλεονεκτεῖν to mean —
neighing after the wives of others, (<span
id="vi.vi.ii-p10.2"></span>[Jer
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#008)<span id="vi.vi.ii-p10.2"></span>.md)
and eagerly desiring them, is too forced an exposition. Paul,
accordingly, having adduced one instance of unchastity in respect of
lasciviousness and lust, teaches that this also is a department of
holiness — that we conduct ourselves righteously and harmlessly towards
our neighbors. The *former* verb refers to violent oppressions — where
the man that has more power emboldens himself to inflict injury. The
*latter* includes in it all immoderate and unrighteous desires. As,
however, mankind, for the most part, indulge themselves in lust and
avarice, he reminds them of what he had formerly taught — that *God
would be the avenger of all such things*. We must observe, however, what
he says — we have *solemnly testified;*  <span
id="fr_568"></span>[569](#fn_568.md) for such is the sluggishness of
mankind, that, unless they are wounded to the quick, they are touched
with no apprehension of God’s judgment.

<span id="vi.vi.ii-p12"></span><span id="vi.vi.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.ii-p13"></span>**7** *For God hath not called us*. This
appears to be the same sentiment with the preceding one — that *the will
of God is our sanctification*. There is, however, a little difference
between them. For after having discoursed as to the correcting of the
vices of the flesh, he proves, from the end of our calling, that God
desires this. For he sets us apart to himself as his peculiar
possession.  <span id="fr_569"></span>[570](#fn_569.md) Again, that God
calls us to holiness, he proves by contraries, because he rescues us,
and calls us back, from unchastity. From this he concludes, that all
that reject this doctrine *reject not men, but God*, the Author of this
calling, which altogether falls to the ground so soon as this principle
as to newness of life is overthrown. Now, the reason why he rouses
himself so vehemently is, because there are always wanton persons who,
while they fearlessly despise God, treat with ridicule all threatenings
of his judgment, and at the same time hold in derision all injunctions
as to a holy and pious life. Such persons must not be taught, but must
be beaten with severe reproofs as with the stroke of a hammer.

<span id="vi.vi.ii-p15"></span><span id="vi.vi.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.ii-p16"></span>**8** *Who hath also given*. That he may
the more effectually turn away the Thessalonians from such contempt and
obstinacy, he reminds them that they had been endowed with the Spirit of
God, *first*, in order that they may distinguish what proceeds from God;
*secondly*, that they make such a difference as is befitting between
holiness and impurity; and *thirdly*, that, with heavenly authority,
they may pronounce judgment against all manner of unchastity — such as
will fall upon their own heads, unless they keep aloof from contagion.
Hence, however wicked men may treat with ridicule all instructions that
are given as to a holy life and the fear of God, those that are endowed
with the Spirit of God have a very different testimony sealed upon their
hearts. We must therefore take heed, lest we should extinguish or
obliterate it. At the same time, this may refer to Paul and the other
teachers, as though he had said, that it is not from human perception
that they condemn unchastity, but they pronounce from the authority of
God what has been suggested to them by his Spirit. I am inclined,
however, to include both. Some manuscripts have the second person —
*you*, which restricts the gift of the Spirit to the Thessalonians.

<span id="vi.vi.iii"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.iii-p1"></span><span id="vi.vi.iii-p1.1"></span>[1
Thessalonians 4:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#009.md)<span
id="vi.vi.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.iii-p2"></span>**9**. But as touching brotherly love ye
need not that I write unto you: for ye yourselves are taught of God to
love one another.

<span id="vi.vi.iii-p3"></span>**9**. De fraterno autem amore non opus
habetis, ut scribam vobis: ipsi enim vos a Deo estis edocti, ut
diligatis invicem.

<span id="vi.vi.iii-p4"></span>**10**. And indeed ye do it toward all
the brethren which are in all Macedonia: but we beseech you, brethren,
that ye increase more and more;

<span id="vi.vi.iii-p5"></span>**10**. Etenim hoc facitis erga omnes
fratres, qui sunt in tota Macedonia. Hortamur autem vos, fratres, ut
abundetis magis,

<span id="vi.vi.iii-p6"></span>**11**. And that ye study to be quiet,
and to do your own business, and to work with your own hands, as we
commanded you;

<span id="vi.vi.iii-p7"></span>**11**. Et altius contendatis, ut colatis
quietem, et agatis res vestras, et laboretis manibus vestris,
quemadmodum vobis denuntiavimus,

<span id="vi.vi.iii-p8"></span>**12**. That ye may walk honestly toward
them that are without, and *that* ye may have lack of nothing.

<span id="vi.vi.iii-p9"></span>**12**. Ut ambuletis decenter erga
extraneos, et nulla re opus habeatis.

<span id="vi.vi.iii-p10"></span> 

<span id="vi.vi.iii-p11"></span><span id="vi.vi.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.iii-p12"></span>**9** *As to brotherly love*. Having
previously, in lofty terms, commended their love, he now speaks by way
of *anticipation*, saying, *ye need not that I write to you*. He assigns
a reason — *because they had been divinely taught* — by which he means
that love was engraven upon their hearts, so that there was no need of
letters written on paper. For he does not mean simply what John says in
his first Canonical  <span id="fr_570"></span>[571](#fn_570.md) Epistle,
*the anointing will teach you*, (<span id="vi.vi.iii-p13.1"></span>[1Jo
2:27](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#027.md)<span
id="vi.vi.iii-p13.1"></span>) but that their hearts were framed for
love; so that it appears that the Holy Spirit inwardly dictates
efficaciously what is to be done, so that there is no need to give
injunctions in writing. He subjoins an argument from the greater to the
less; for as their love diffuses itself through the whole of Macedonia,
he infers that it is not to be doubted that they *love one another*.
Hence the particle *for* means *likewise*, or *nay more*, for, as I have
already stated, he adds it for the sake of greater intensity.

<span id="vi.vi.iii-p14"></span><span id="vi.vi.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.iii-p15"></span>**10** *And we exhort you*. Though he
declares that they were sufficiently prepared of themselves for all
offices of love, he nevertheless does not cease to exhort them to make
progress, there being no perfection in men. And, unquestionably,
whatever appears in us in a high state of excellence, we must still
desire that it may become better. Some connect the verb <span
id="vi.vi.iii-p15.1"></span>φιλοτιμεῖσζαι with what follows, as if he
exhorted them to strive at the maintaining of peace; but it corresponds
better with the expression that goes before. For after having admonished
them to increase in love, he recommends to them a sacred emulation, that
they may strive among themselves in mutual affection, or at least he
enjoins that each one strive to conquer himself;  <span
id="fr_571"></span>[572](#fn_571.md) and I rather adopt this latter
interpretation. That, therefore, their love may be perfect, he requires
that there be a striving among them, such as is wont to be on the part
of those who eagerly  <span id="fr_572"></span>[573](#fn_572.md) aspire at
victory. This is the best emulation, when each one strives to overcome
himself in doing good. As to my not subscribing to the opinion of those
who render the words, *strive to maintain peace*, this single reason
appears to me to be sufficiently valid — that Paul would not in a thing
of less difficulty have enjoined so arduous a conflict — which suits
admirably well with advancement in love, where so many hindrances
present themselves. Nor would I have any objection to the other meaning
of the verb — that they should exercise liberality generally towards
others.

<span id="vi.vi.iii-p18"></span><span id="vi.vi.iii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.iii-p19"></span>**11** *Maintain Peace.* I have already
stated that this clause must be separated from what goes before, for
this is a new sentence. Now, to *be at peace*, means in this passage —
to act peacefully and without disturbance, as we also say in French —
<span id="vi.vi.iii-p19.1"></span>*sans bruit*, (*without noise*.) In
short, he exhorts them to be peaceable and tranquil. This is the purport
of what he adds immediately afterwards — to *do your own business:* for
we commonly see, that those who intrude themselves with forwardness into
the affairs of others, make great disturbance, and give trouble to
themselves and others. This, therefore, is the best means of a tranquil
life, when every one, intent upon the duties of his own calling,
discharges those duties which are enjoined upon him by the Lord, and
devotes himself to these things: while the husbandman employs himself in
rural labors, the workman carries on his occupation, and in this way
every one keeps within his own limits. So soon as men turn aside from
this, everything is thrown into confusion and disorder. He does not
mean, however, that every one shall *mind his own business* in such a
way as that each one should live apart, having no care for others, but
has merely in view to correct an idle levity, which makes men noisy
bustlers in public, who ought to lead a quiet life in their own houses.

<span id="vi.vi.iii-p20"></span>*Labor with your hands*. He recommends
manual labor on two accounts — that they may have a sufficiency for
maintaining life, and that they may conduct themselves honorably even
before unbelievers. For nothing is more unseemly than a man that is idle
and good for nothing, who profits neither himself nor others, and seems
born only to eat and drink. Farther, this labor or system of working
extends far, for what he says as to *hands* is by way of *synecdoche;*
but there can be no doubt that he includes every useful employment of
human life.

<span id="vi.vi.iv"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.iv-p1"></span><span id="vi.vi.iv-p1.1"></span>[1
Thessalonians 4:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#013.md)<span
id="vi.vi.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.iv-p2"></span>**13**. But I would not have you to be
ignorant, brethren, concerning them which are asleep, that ye sorrow
not, even as others which have no hope.

<span id="vi.vi.iv-p3"></span>**13**. Nolo autem vos ignorare, fratres,
de iis qui obdormierunt, ut ne contristemini, sicut et caeteri qui spem
non habent.

<span id="vi.vi.iv-p4"></span>**14**. For if we believe that Jesus died
and rose again, even so them also which sleep in Jesus will God bring
with him.

<span id="vi.vi.iv-p5"></span>**14**. Nam si credimus, quod Iesus
mortuus est, et resurrexit, ita et Deus eos, qui dormierunt per
Christum, adducet cum eo.

<span id="vi.vi.iv-p6"></span> 

<span id="vi.vi.iv-p7"></span><span id="vi.vi.iv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.iv-p8"></span>**13** *But I would not have you
ignorant*. It is not likely that the hope of a resurrection had been
torn up among the Thessalonians by profane men, as had taken place at
Corinth. For we see how he chastises the Corinthians with severity, but
here he speaks of it as a thing that was not doubtful. It is possible,
however, that this persuasion was not sufficiently fixed in their minds,
and that they accordingly, in bewailing the dead, retained something of
the old superstition. For the sum of the whole is this — that we must
not bewail the dead beyond due bounds, inasmuch as we are all to be
raised up again. For whence comes it, that the mourning of unbelievers
has no end or measure, but because they have no hope of a resurrection?
It becomes not us, therefore, who have been instructed as to a
resurrection, to mourn otherwise than in moderation. He is to discourse
afterwards as to the manner of the resurrection; and he is also on this
account to say something as to *times;* but in this passage he meant
simply to restrain excessive grief, which would never have had such an
influence among them, if they had seriously considered the resurrection,
and kept it in remembrance.

<span id="vi.vi.iv-p9"></span>He does not, however, forbid us altogether
to mourn, but requires moderation in our mourning, for he says, *that ye
may not sorrow, as others who have no hope*. He forbids them to grieve
in the manner of unbelievers, who give loose reins to their grief,
because they look upon death as final destruction, and imagine that
everything that is taken out of the world perishes. As, on the other
hand, believers know that they quit the world, that they may be at last
gathered into the kingdom of God, they have not the like occasion of
grief. Hence the knowledge of a resurrection is the means of moderating
grief. He speaks of the dead as *asleep*, agreeably to the common
practice of Scripture — a term by which the bitterness of death is
mitigated, for there is a great difference between *sleep* and
*destruction*  <span id="fr_573"></span>[574](#fn_573.md) It refers,
however, not to the soul, but to the body, for the dead body lies in the
tomb, as in a couch, until God raise up the man. Those, therefore, act a
foolish part, who infer from this that souls sleep.  <span
id="fr_574"></span>[575](#fn_574.md)

<span id="vi.vi.iv-p12"></span>We are now in possession of Paul’s
meaning — that he lifts up the minds of believers to a consideration of
the resurrection, lest they should indulge excessive grief on occasion
of the death of their relatives, for it were unseemly that there should
be no difference between them and unbelievers, who put no end or measure
to their grief for this reason, that in death they recognize nothing but
destruction.  <span id="fr_575"></span>[576](#fn_575.md) Those that abuse
this testimony, so as to establish among Christians Stoical
indifference, that is, an iron hardness,  <span
id="fr_576"></span>[577](#fn_576.md) will find nothing of this nature in
Paul’s words. As to their objecting that we must not indulge grief on
occasion of the death of our relatives, lest we should resist God, this
would apply in all adversities; but it is one thing to bridle our grief,
that it may be made subject to God, and quite another thing to harden
one’s self so as to be like stones, by casting away human feelings. Let,
therefore, the grief of the pious be mixed with consolation, which may
train them to patience. The hope of a blessed resurrection, which is the
mother of patience, will effect this.

<span id="vi.vi.iv-p15"></span><span id="vi.vi.iv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.iv-p16"></span>**14** *For if we believe*. He assumes
this axiom of our faith, that Christ was raised up from the dead, that
we might be partakers of the same resurrection: from this he infers,
that we shall live with him eternally. This doctrine, however, as has
been stated in <span id="vi.vi.iv-p16.1"></span>[1Co
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#013.md)<span
id="vi.vi.iv-p16.1"></span>, depends on another principle — that it was
not for himself, but for us that Christ died and rose again. Hence those
who have doubts as to the resurrection, do great injury to Christ: nay
more, they do in a manner draw him down from heaven, as is said in <span
id="vi.vi.iv-p16.2"></span>[Ro
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#006.md)<span id="vi.vi.iv-p16.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.iv-p17"></span>To *sleep in Christ*, is to retain in
death the connection that we have with Christ, for those that are by
faith ingrafted into Christ, have death in common with him, that they
may be partakers with him of life. It is asked, however, whether
unbelievers will not also rise again, for Paul does not affirm that
there will be a resurrection, except in the case of Christ’s members. I
answer, that Paul does not here touch upon anything but what suited his
present design. For he did not design to terrify the wicked, but to
correct  <span id="fr_577"></span>[578](#fn_577.md) the immoderate grief of
the pious, and to cure it, as he does, by the medicine of consolation.

<span id="vi.vi.v"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.v-p1"></span><span id="vi.vi.v-p1.1"></span>[1
Thessalonians 4:15-18](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#015.md)<span
id="vi.vi.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.v-p2"></span>**15**. For this we say unto you by the
word of the Lord, that we which are alive *and* remain unto the coming
of the Lord shall not prevent them which are asleep.

<span id="vi.vi.v-p3"></span>**15**. Hoc enim vobis dicimus in sermone
Domini, quod nos, qui vivemus et superstites erimus in adventum Domini,
non praeveniemus eos, qui dormierunt.

<span id="vi.vi.v-p4"></span>**16**. For the Lord himself shall descend
from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the archangel, and with the
trump of God: and the dead in Christ shall rise first:

<span id="vi.vi.v-p5"></span>**16**. Quoniam ipse Dominus cum clamore,
cum voce Archangeli et tuba Dei descendet e cœlo: ac mortui, qui in
Christo sunt, resurgent primum.

<span id="vi.vi.v-p6"></span>**17**. Then we which are alive *and*
remain shall be caught up together with them in the clouds, to meet the
Lord in the air: and so shall we ever be with the Lord.

<span id="vi.vi.v-p7"></span>**17**. Deinde nos qui vivemus, ac residui
erimus, simul cum ipsis rapiemur in nubibus, in occursum Domini in aera:
et sic semper cum Domino erimus.

<span id="vi.vi.v-p8"></span>**18**. Wherefore comfort one another with
these words.

<span id="vi.vi.v-p9"></span>**18**. Itaque consolamini vos mutuo in
sermonibus istis.

<span id="vi.vi.v-p10"></span> 

<span id="vi.vi.v-p11"></span><span id="vi.vi.v-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.v-p12"></span>**15** *For this we say unto you*. He now
briefly explains the manner in which believers will be raised up from
death. Now, as he speaks of a thing that is very great, and is
incredible to the human mind, and also promises what is above the power
and choice of men, he premises that he does not bring forward anything
that is his own, or that proceeds from men, but that the Lord is the
Author of it. It is probable, however, that the *word of the Lord* means
what was taken from his discourses.  <span
id="fr_578"></span>[579](#fn_578.md) For though Paul had learned by
revelation all the secrets of the heavenly kingdom, it was,
nevertheless, more fitted to establish in the minds of believers the
belief of a resurrection, when he related those things that had been
uttered by Christ’s own mouth. “We are not the first witnesses of the
resurrection, but instead of this the Master himself declared it.”
 <span id="fr_579"></span>[580](#fn_579.md)

<span id="vi.vi.v-p15"></span>*We who live.* This has been said by him
with this view — that they might not think that those only would be
partakers of the resurrection who would be alive at the time of Christ’s
coming, and that those would have no part in it who had been previously
taken away by death. “The order of the resurrection,” says he, “will
begin with them:  <span id="fr_580"></span>[581](#fn_580.md) we shall
accordingly not rise without them.” From this it appears that the belief
of a final resurrection had been, in the minds of some, slight and
obscure, and involved in various errors, inasmuch as they imagined that
the dead would be deprived of it; for they imagined that eternal life
belonged to those alone whom Christ, at his last coming, would find
still alive upon the earth. Paul, with the view of remedying these
errors, assigns the first place to the dead, and afterwards teaches that
those will follow who will be at that time remaining in this life.

<span id="vi.vi.v-p17"></span>As to the circumstance, however, that by
speaking in the first person he makes himself, as it were, one of the
number of those who will live until the last day, he means by this to
arouse the Thessalonians to wait for it, nay more, to hold all believers
in suspense, that they may not promise themselves some particular time:
for, granting that it was by a special revelation that he knew that
Christ would come at a somewhat later time,  <span
id="fr_581"></span>[582](#fn_581.md) it was nevertheless necessary that
this doctrine should be delivered to the Church in common, that
believers might be prepared at all times. In the mean time, it was
necessary thus to cut off all pretext for the curiosity of many — as we
shall find him doing afterwards at greater length. When, however, he
says, *we that are alive*, he makes use of the present tense instead of
the future, in accordance with the Hebrew idiom.

<span id="vi.vi.v-p19"></span><span id="vi.vi.v-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.v-p20"></span>**16** *For the Lord himself*. He employs
the term <span id="vi.vi.v-p20.1"></span>κελεύσματος, (*shout*,) and
afterwards adds, *the voice of the archangel*, by way of exposition,
intimating what is to be the nature of that arousing shout — that the
archangel will discharge the office of a herald to summon the living and
the dead to the tribunal of Christ. For though this will be common to
all the angels, yet, as is customary among different ranks, he appoints
one in the foremost place to take the lead of the others. As to the
*trumpet*, however, I leave to others to dispute with greater subtlety,
for I have nothing to say in addition to what I briefly noticed in the
First Epistle to the Corinthians.  <span
id="fr_582"></span>[583](#fn_582.md) The Apostle unquestionably had nothing
farther in view here than to give some taste of the magnificence and
venerable appearance of the Judge, until we shall behold it fully. With
this taste it becomes us in the mean time to rest satisfied.

<span id="vi.vi.v-p22"></span>*The dead who are in Christ*. He again
says that the *dead who are in Christ*, that is, who are included in
Christ’s body, will *rise first*, that we may know that the hope of life
is laid up in heaven for them no less than for the living. He says
nothing as to the reprobate, because this did not tend to the
consolation of the pious, of which he is now treating.

<span id="vi.vi.v-p23"></span>He says that those that survive will be
*carried up together with them*. As to these, he makes no mention of
death: hence it appears as if he meant to say that they would be
exempted from death. Here Augustine gives himself much distress, both in
the twentieth book on the City of God and in his Answer to Dulcitius,
because Paul seems to contradict himself, inasmuch as he says elsewhere,
that *seed cannot spring up again unless it die*. (<span
id="vi.vi.v-p23.1"></span>[1Co
15:36](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#036)<span id="vi.vi.v-p23.1"></span>.md)
The solution, however, is easy, inasmuch as a sudden change will be like
death. Ordinary death, it is true, is the separation of the soul from
the body; but this does not hinder that the Lord may in a moment destroy
this corruptible nature, so as to create it anew by his power, for thus
is accomplished what Paul himself teaches must take place — that
*mortality shall be swallowed up of life*. (<span
id="vi.vi.v-p23.2"></span>[2Co
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#004)<span id="vi.vi.v-p23.2"></span>.md)
What is stated in our Confession,  <span
id="fr_583"></span>[584](#fn_583.md) that “Christ will be the Judge of the
dead and of the living,”  <span id="fr_584"></span>[585](#fn_584.md)
Augustine acknowledges to be true without a figure.  <span
id="fr_585"></span>[586](#fn_585.md) He is only at a loss as to this — how
those that have not died will rise again. But, as I have said, that is a
kind of death, when this flesh is reduced to nothing, as it is now
liable to corruption. The only difference is this — that those who
*sleep*  <span id="fr_586"></span>[587](#fn_586.md) put off the *substance*
of the body for some space of time, but those that will be suddenly
changed will put off nothing but the *quality*

<span id="vi.vi.v-p28"></span><span id="vi.vi.v-p28.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.v-p29"></span>**17** *And so we shall be ever*. To those
who have been once gathered to Christ he promises eternal life with him,
by which statements the reveries of Origen and of the Chiliasts  <span
id="fr_587"></span>[588](#fn_587.md) are abundantly refuted. For the life
of believers, when they have once been gathered into one kingdom, will
have no end any more than Christ’s. Now, to assign to Christ a thousand
years, so that he would afterwards cease to reign, were too horrible to
be made mention of. Those, however, fall into this absurdity who limit
the life of believers to a thousand years, for they must live with
Christ as long as Christ himself will exist. We must observe also what
he says — *we shall be*, for he means that we profitably entertain a
hope of eternal life, only when we hope that it has been expressly
appointed for us.

<span id="vi.vi.v-p31"></span><span id="vi.vi.v-p31.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.v-p32"></span>**18** *Comfort*. He now shews more openly
what I have previously stated — that in the faith of the resurrection we
have good ground of consolation, provided we are members of Christ, and
are truly united to him as our Head. At the same time, the Apostle would
not have each one to seek for himself assuagement of grief, but also to
administer it to others.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_565"></span>[566](cc42021.htm#fr_565.md) <span
id="vi.vi.i-p14.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.i-p15"></span> “<span id="vi.vi.i-p15.1"></span>Que de
les contraindre rudement et d’vne façon violente;” — “Rather than
constrain them rudely and in a violent manner.”

<span id="fn_566"></span>[567](cc42021.htm#fr_566.md) <span
id="vi.vi.i-p19.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.i-p20"></span> “<span id="vi.vi.i-p20.1"></span>Il n’y a
mesure ne fin de desbauchement et dissolution;” — “There is no measure
or end of debauchery and wantonness.”

<span id="fn_567"></span>[568](cc42021.htm#fr_567.md) <span
id="vi.vi.i-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.i-p22"></span> “<span id="vi.vi.i-p22.1"></span>Au
regard du mari;” — “In relation to her husband.”

<span id="fn_568"></span>[569](cc42021.htm#fr_568.md) <span
id="vi.vi.ii-p10.3"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.ii-p11"></span> “<span id="vi.vi.ii-p11.1"></span>Nous
vous auons testifié et comme adjuré;” — “We have testified to you, and,
as it were, adjured.”

<span id="fn_569"></span>[570](cc42021.htm#fr_569.md) <span
id="vi.vi.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.ii-p14"></span> “<span id="vi.vi.ii-p14.1"></span>Comme
pour son propre heritage et particulier;” — “As for his peculiar and
special inheritance.”

<span id="fn_570"></span>[571](cc42021.htm#fr_570.md) <span
id="vi.vi.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.iii-p13"></span> The Epistles of John, along with those
of James, Peter, and Jude, “were termed *Canonical* by Cassiodorus in
the middle of the sixth century, and by the writer of the prologue to
these Epistles, which is erroneously ascribed to Jerome.... Du Pin says
that some Latin writers have called these Epistles *Canonical*, either
confounding the name with Catholic, or to denote that they are a part of
the *Canon* of the books of the New Testament.” —*Horne’s* Introduction,
vol. 4, p. 409. On the origin and import of the epithet *General*, or
*Catholic*, usually applied to these Epistles, the reader will find some
valuable observations in *Brown’s* Expository Discourses on Peter, vol.
1.

<span id="fn_571"></span>[572](cc42021.htm#fr_571.md) <span
id="vi.vi.iii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.iii-p16"></span> “<span id="vi.vi.iii-p16.1"></span>En
cest endroit;” — “In this matter.”

<span id="fn_572"></span>[573](cc42021.htm#fr_572.md) <span
id="vi.vi.iii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.iii-p17"></span> “<span
id="vi.vi.iii-p17.1"></span>Courageusement et d’vn grand desir;” —
“Courageously and wait a great desire.”

<span id="fn_573"></span>[574](cc42021.htm#fr_573.md) <span
id="vi.vi.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.iv-p10"></span> “<span id="vi.vi.iv-p10.1"></span>Entre
dormir, et estre du tout reduit a neant;” — “Between sleeping, and being
altogether reduced to nothing.”

<span id="fn_574"></span>[575](cc42021.htm#fr_574.md) <span
id="vi.vi.iv-p10.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.iv-p11"></span> See Calvin on the Corinthians, vol. 2,
pp. 21, 22.

<span id="fn_575"></span>[576](cc42021.htm#fr_575.md) <span
id="vi.vi.iv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.iv-p13"></span> “<span id="vi.vi.iv-p13.1"></span>Ruine
et destruction;” — “Ruin and destruction.”

<span id="fn_576"></span>[577](cc42021.htm#fr_576.md) <span
id="vi.vi.iv-p13.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.iv-p14"></span> “<span id="vi.vi.iv-p14.1"></span>Pour
introduire et establir entre les Chrestiens ceste façon tant estrange,
que les Stoiciens requeroyent en l’homme, ascauoir qu’il ne fust esmeu
de douleur quelconque, mais qu’il fust comme de fer et stupide sans rien
sentir;” — “For introducing and establishing among Christians that
strange manner of acting, which the Stoics required on the part of an
individual—that he should not be moved by any grief, but should be as it
were of iron, and stupid, so as to be devoid of feeling.”

<span id="fn_577"></span>[578](cc42021.htm#fr_577.md) <span
id="vi.vi.iv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.iv-p18"></span> “<span id="vi.vi.iv-p18.1"></span>Mais
seulement de corriger ou reprimer;” — “But merely to correct or
repress.”

<span id="fn_578"></span>[579](cc42021.htm#fr_578.md) <span
id="vi.vi.v-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.v-p13"></span> “<span id="vi.vi.v-p13.1"></span>Prins
des sermons de Christ;” — “Taken from the sermons of Christ.”

<span id="fn_579"></span>[580](cc42021.htm#fr_579.md) <span
id="vi.vi.v-p13.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.v-p14"></span> “<span id="vi.vi.v-p14.1"></span>L’a
affermee et testifiee assureement par ses propos;” — “Has affirmed and
testified it with certainty in his discourses.”

<span id="fn_580"></span>[581](cc42021.htm#fr_580.md) <span
id="vi.vi.v-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.v-p16"></span> “<span
id="vi.vi.v-p16.1"></span>Commencera par ceux qui seront decedez
auparauant;” — “Will commence with those who shall have previously
departed.”

<span id="fn_581"></span>[582](cc42021.htm#fr_581.md) <span
id="vi.vi.v-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.v-p18"></span> “<span id="vi.vi.v-p18.1"></span>Ne
viendroit si tost;” — “Would not come so soon.”

<span id="fn_582"></span>[583](cc42021.htm#fr_582.md) <span
id="vi.vi.v-p20.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.v-p21"></span> See Calvin on the Corinthians, vol. 2,
pp. 59, 60.

<span id="fn_583"></span>[584](cc42021.htm#fr_583.md) <span
id="vi.vi.v-p23.3"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.v-p24"></span> “<span id="vi.vi.v-p24.1"></span>En la
confession de nostre foy;” — “In the confession of our faith.”

<span id="fn_584"></span>[585](cc42021.htm#fr_584.md) <span
id="vi.vi.v-p24.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.v-p25"></span> Our author manifestly refers here to the
Formula of Confession, commonly called the “Apostles’ Creed,” which the
reader will find explained at considerable length by Calvin in the
“Catechism of the Church of Geneva.” See Calvin’s *Tracts*, vol. 2.

<span id="fn_585"></span>[586](cc42021.htm#fr_585.md) <span
id="vi.vi.v-p25.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.v-p26"></span> “<span id="vi.vi.v-p26.1"></span>Sans
aucune figure;” — “Without any figure.” Our author, in his French
translation, appends the following marginal note: — “<span
id="vi.vi.v-p26.2"></span>C’est a dire sans le prendre comme ceux qui
entendent par ces mots les bons et les mauuais;” — “That is to say,
without taking it as those do, who understand by the words the good and
the bad.”

<span id="fn_586"></span>[587](cc42021.htm#fr_586.md) <span
id="vi.vi.v-p26.3"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.v-p27"></span> “<span id="vi.vi.v-p27.1"></span>Ceux qui
dorment, c’est a dire qui seront morts auant le dernier iour;” — “Those
who sleep, that is to say, who will have died before the last day.”

<span id="fn_587"></span>[588](cc42021.htm#fr_587.md) <span
id="vi.vi.v-p29.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.v-p30"></span> See Calvin’s *Institutes*, vol. 2.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 5](cc42022.md)
