[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc42027)  [Next](cc42029.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 42: Philippians, Colossians, and
Thessalonians*, tr. by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.v"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p1"></span>CHAPTER 3

<span id="vii.v.i"></span>

<span id="vii.v.i-p1"></span><span id="vii.v.i-p1.1"></span>[2
Thessalonians 3:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#001.md)<span
id="vii.v.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v.i-p2"></span>**1**. Finally, brethren, pray for us, that
the word of the Lord may have *free* course, and be glorified, even as
*it is* with you:

<span id="vii.v.i-p3"></span>**1**. Quod reliquum est, orate fratres pro
nobis: ut sermo Domini currat et glorificetur, quemadmodum et apud vos;

<span id="vii.v.i-p4"></span>**2**. And that we may be delivered from
unreasonable and wicked men: for all *men* have not faith.

<span id="vii.v.i-p5"></span>**2**. Et ut liberemur ab importunis et
malignis hominibus: non enim omnium est fides.

<span id="vii.v.i-p6"></span>**3**. But the Lord is faithful, who shall
stablish you, and keep *you* from evil.

<span id="vii.v.i-p7"></span>**3**. Fidelis autem Dominus, qui
confirmabit vos, et custodiet a maligno.

<span id="vii.v.i-p8"></span>**4**. And we have confidence in the Lord
touching you, that ye both do and will do the things which we command
you.

<span id="vii.v.i-p9"></span>**4**. Confidimus autem in Domino de vobis,
quod quae vobis praecipimus, et facitis, et facturi estis.

<span id="vii.v.i-p10"></span>**5**. And the Lord direct your hearts
into the love of God, and into the patient waiting for Christ.

<span id="vii.v.i-p11"></span>**5**. Dominus autem dirigat corda vestra
in dilectionem Dei, et exspectationem Christi.

<span id="vii.v.i-p12"></span> 

<span id="vii.v.i-p13"></span><span id="vii.v.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v.i-p14"></span>**1** *Pray for us*. Though the Lord
powerfully aided him, and though he surpassed all others in earnestness
of prayer, he nevertheless does not despise the prayers of believers, by
which the Lord would have us aided. It becomes us, after his example,
eagerly to desire this aid, and to stir up our brethren to pray for us.

<span id="vii.v.i-p15"></span>When, however, he adds — *that the word of
God may have its course*, he shows that he has not so much concern and
regard for himself personally, as for the entire Church. For why does he
desire to be recommended to the prayers of the Thessalonians? That the
doctrine of the gospel may *have its course*. He does not desire,
therefore, so much that regard should be had to himself individually, as
to the glory of God and the common welfare of the Church. *Course* means
here dissemination;  <span id="fr_691"></span>[692](#fn_691.md) *glory*
means something farther, — that his preaching may have its power and
efficacy for renewing men after the image of God. Hence, holiness of
life and uprightness on the part of Christians is the glory of the
gospel; as, on the other hand, those defame the gospel who make
profession of it with the mouth, while in the meantime they live in
wickedness and baseness. He says — *as among you;* for this should be a
stimulus to the pious, to see all others like them. Hence those that
have already entered into the kingdom of God are exhorted to pray daily
that it may *come*. (<span id="vii.v.i-p16.2"></span>[Mt
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#010)<span id="vii.v.i-p16.2"></span>..md)

<span id="vii.v.i-p17"></span><span id="vii.v.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v.i-p18"></span>**2** *That we may be delivered*. The old
interpreter has rendered it, not unhappily, in my opinion —
*unreasonable*  <span id="fr_692"></span>[693](#fn_692.md) Now, by this
term, as also by that which immediately follows, (<span
id="vii.v.i-p19.2"></span>τῶν πονηρῶν,) *evil*, Paul means wicked and
treacherous men, who lurked in the Church, under the name of Christians,
or at least Jews, who with a mad zeal for the law furiously persecuted
the gospel. He knew, however, how much danger impended over them from
both these classes. Chrysostom, however, thinks that those only are
meant who maliciously oppose the gospel by base doctrines,  <span
id="fr_693"></span>[694](#fn_693.md) — not by weapons of violence, as for
example, Alexander, Hymeneus, and the like; but for my part, I extend it
generally to all kinds of dangers and enemies. He was at that time
proceeding towards Jerusalem, and wrote in the midst of his journeyings.
Now, he had already been divinely forewarned that *imprisonments and
persecutions awaited him there*. (<span id="vii.v.i-p20.2"></span>[Ac
20:23](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#023.md)<span
id="vii.v.i-p20.2"></span>.) He means, however, *deliverance*, so that
he may come off victorious, whether by life or by death.

<span id="vii.v.i-p21"></span>*All have not faith*. This might be
explained to mean, “Faith is not in all.” This expression, however, were
both ambiguous and more obscure. Let us therefore retain Paul’s words,
by which he intimates that faith is a gift of God that is too rare to be
found in all. God, therefore, calls many who do not come to him by
faith. Many pretend to come to him, who have their heart at the farthest
distance from him. Farther, he does not speak of all indiscriminately,
but merely animadverts upon those that belong to the Church: for the
Thessalonians saw that very many held faith in abhorrence;  <span
id="fr_694"></span>[695](#fn_694.md) nay, they saw how small was the number
of believers. Hence it would have been unnecessary to say this as to
strangers; but Paul simply says that all that make a profession of faith
are not such in reality. Should you take in all Jews, they appeared to
have nearness to Christ, for they ought to have recognized him by means
of the law and the prophets. Paul, there can be no question specially
marks out those with whom he would have to do. Now, it is probable that
they were those who, while they had the appearance and honorary title of
piety, were nevertheless very far from the reality. From this came the
conflict.

<span id="vii.v.i-p23"></span>With the view of shewing, therefore, that
it was not groundlessly, or without good reason, that he dreaded
contests with wicked and perverse men, he says that faith is not common
to all, because the wicked and reprobate are always mixed with the good,
as *tares* are with the *good wheat*. (<span
id="vii.v.i-p23.1"></span>[Mt
13:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#025.md)<span
id="vii.v.i-p23.1"></span>.) And this ought to be remembered by us
whenever we have annoyance given us by wicked persons, who nevertheless
desire to be reckoned as belonging to the society of Christians — that
*all men have not faith*. Nay more, when we hear in some instances that
the Church is disturbed by base factions, let this be a shield to us
against offenses of this nature; for we shall not merely inflict injury
upon pious teachers, if we have doubts as to their fidelity, whenever
domestic enemies do them harm, but our faith will from time to time
waver, unless we keep in mind that among those who boast of the name of
Christians there are many that are treacherous.  <span
id="fr_695"></span>[696](#fn_695.md)

<span id="vii.v.i-p25"></span><span id="vii.v.i-p25.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v.i-p26"></span>**3** *But God is faithful*. As it was
possible that their minds, influenced by unfavorable reports, might come
to entertain some doubts as to Paul’s ministry, having taught them that
faith is not always found in men, he now calls them back to God, and
says that he is *faithful*, so as to confirm them against all
contrivances of men, by which they will endeavor to shake them. “They,
indeed, are treacherous, but there is in God a support that is
abundantly secure, so as to keep you from giving way.” He calls the Lord
*faithful*, inasmuch as he adheres to his purpose to the end in
maintaining the salvation of his people, seasonably aids them, and never
forsakes them in dangers, as in <span id="vii.v.i-p26.1"></span>[1Co
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#013.md)<span id="vii.v.i-p26.1"></span>,

<span id="vii.v.i-p27"></span>God is faithful, who will not suffer  
you to be tried above that ye are able to bear.

<span id="vii.v.i-p28"></span>These words, however, themselves shew that
Paul was more anxious as to others than as to himself. Malicious men
directed against him the stings of their malignity; the whole violence
 <span id="fr_696"></span>[697](#fn_696.md) of it fell upon him. In the
mean time, he directs all his anxieties towards the Thessalonians, lest
this temptation should do them any injury.

<span id="vii.v.i-p30"></span>The term *evil* may refer as well to the
thing, that is, malice, as to the persons of the wicked. I prefer,
however, to interpret it of Satan, the head of all the wicked. For it
were a small thing to be delivered from the cunning or violence of men,
if the Lord did not protect us from all spiritual injury.

<span id="vii.v.i-p31"></span><span id="vii.v.i-p31.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v.i-p32"></span>**4** *We have confidence*. By this
preface he prepares the way for proceeding to give the instruction,
which we shall find him immediately afterwards subjoining. For the
confidence which he says he has respecting them, made them much more
ready to obey than if he had required obedience from them in a way of
doubt or distrust. He says, however, that this hope, which he cherished
in reference to them, was founded upon the Lord, inasmuch as it is his
to bind their hearts to obedience, and to keep them in it; or by this
expression, (as appears to me more probable,) he meant to testify, that
it is not his intention to enjoin anything but by the commandment of the
Lord. Here, accordingly, he marks out limits for himself as to
enjoining, and for them as to obeying — that it should be only in the
Lord.  <span id="fr_697"></span>[698](#fn_697.md) All, therefore, that do
not observe this limitation, do to no purpose resort to Paul’s example,
with the view of binding the Church and subjecting it to their laws.
Perhaps he had this also in view, that the respect which was due to his
Apostleship might remain unimpaired among the Thessalonians, however the
wicked might attempt to deprive him of the honor that belonged to him;
for the prayer which he immediately subjoins tends towards this object.
For provided men’s hearts continue to be directed towards *love to God,
and patient waiting for Christ*, other things will be in a desirable
state, and Paul declares that he desires nothing else. From this it is
manifest, how very far he is from seeking dominion for himself
peculiarly. For he is satisfied provided they persevere in love to God,
and in the hope of Christ’s coming. In following up with prayer his
expression of confidence,  <span id="fr_698"></span>[699](#fn_698.md) he
admonishes us that we must not relax in eagerness of prayer on the
ground that we cherish good hope.

<span id="vii.v.i-p35"></span><span id="vii.v.i-p35.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v.i-p36"></span>As, however, he states here in a summary
manner the things that he knew to be most necessary for Christians, let
every one make it his endeavor to make proficiency in these two things,
in so far as he desires to make progress towards perfection. And,
unquestionably, the love of God cannot reign in us unless brotherly love
is also exercised. *Waiting for Christ*, on the other hand, teaches us
to exercise contempt of the world, mortification of the flesh, and
endurance of the cross. At the same time the expression might be
explained as meaning, the *patience of Christ* — that which Christ’s
doctrine begets in us; but I prefer to understand it as referring to the
hope of ultimate redemption. For this is the only thing that sustains us
in the warfare of the present life, that we wait for the Redeemer; and
farther, this waiting requires patient endurance amidst the continual
exercises of the cross.

<span id="vii.v.ii"></span>

<span id="vii.v.ii-p1"></span><span id="vii.v.ii-p1.1"></span>[2
Thessalonians 3:6-10](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#006.md)<span
id="vii.v.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v.ii-p2"></span>**6**. Now we command you, brethren, in
the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye withdraw yourselves from
every brother that walketh disorderly, and not after the tradition which
he received of us.

<span id="vii.v.ii-p3"></span>**6**. Praecipimus autem vobis, fratres in
nomine Domini nostri Iesu Christi, ut vos subducatis ab omni fratre, qui
inordinate ambulet, et non iuxta institutionem, quam accepit a nobis.

<span id="vii.v.ii-p4"></span>**7**. For yourselves know how ye ought to
follow us: for we behaved not ourselves disorderly among you;

<span id="vii.v.ii-p5"></span>**7**. Ipsi enim scitis, quomodo oporteat
nos imitari, quia non inordinate egimus inter vos:

<span id="vii.v.ii-p6"></span>**8**. Neither did we eat any man’s bread
for nought; but wrought with labour and travail night and day, that we
might not be chargeable to any of you:

<span id="vii.v.ii-p7"></span>**8**. Neque gratis panem comedimus a
quoquam, sed cum labore et sudore nocte dieque facientes opus, ne cui
vestrum graves essemus.

<span id="vii.v.ii-p8"></span>**9**. Not because we have not power, but
to make ourselves an ensample unto you to follow us.

<span id="vii.v.ii-p9"></span>**9**. Non quod non habeamus potestatem,
sed ut nos ipsos exemplar proponeremus vobis ad imitandum vos.

<span id="vii.v.ii-p10"></span>**10**. For even when we were with you,
this we commanded you, that if any would not work, neither should he
eat.

<span id="vii.v.ii-p11"></span>**10**. Etenim quum essemus apud vos, hoc
vobis praecepimus, ut, qui laborare non vult, is neque comedat.

<span id="vii.v.ii-p12"></span> 

<span id="vii.v.ii-p13"></span><span id="vii.v.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v.ii-p14"></span>

<span id="vii.v.ii-p15"></span>He now proceeds to the correcting of a
particular fault. As there were some indolent, and at the same time
curious and prattling persons, who, in order that they might scrape
together a living at the expense of others, wandered about from house to
house, he forbids that their indolence should be encouraged by
indulgence,  <span id="fr_699"></span>[700](#fn_699.md) and teaches that
those live holily who procure for themselves the necessaries of life by
honorable and useful labor. And in the first place, he applies the
appellation of *disorderly* persons, not to those that are of a
dissolute life, or to those whose characters are stained by flagrant
crimes, but to indolent and worthless persons, who employ themselves in
no honorable and useful occupation. For this truly is <span
id="vii.v.ii-p16.2"></span>ἀταξία, (*disorder*,  <span
id="fr_700"></span>[701](#fn_700) .md) — not considering for what purpose
we were made, and regulating our life with a view to that end, while it
is only when we live according to the rule prescribed to us by God that
this life is duly regulated. Let this order be set aside, and there is
nothing but confusion in human life. This, also, is worthy to be
noticed, lest any one should take pleasure in exercising himself apart
from a legitimate call from God: for God has distinguished in such a
manner the life of men, in order that every one may lay himself out for
the advantage of others. He, therefore, who lives to himself alone, so
as to be profitable in no way to the human race, nay more, is a burden
to others, giving help to no one, is on good grounds reckoned to be
<span id="vii.v.ii-p17.2"></span>ἄτακτος, (*disorderly*.) Hence Paul
declares that such persons must be put away from the society of
believers, that they may not bring dishonor upon the Church.

<span id="vii.v.ii-p18"></span>**6** *Now we command you in the name*.
Erasmus renders it — “*by* the name,” as if it were an adjuration. While
I do not altogether reject this rendering, I, at the same time, am
rather of opinion that the particle *in* is redundant, as in very many
other passages, and that in accordance with the Hebrew idiom. Thus the
meaning will be, that this commandment ought to be received with
reverence, not as from a mortal man, but as from Christ himself; and
Chrysostom explains it in this manner. This *withdrawment*,  <span
id="fr_701"></span>[702](#fn_701.md) however of which he speaks, relates —
not to public excommunication but to private intercourse. For he simply
forbids believers to have any familiar intercourse with drones of this
sort, who have no honorable means of life, in which they may exercise
themselves. He says, however, expressly — *from every brother*, because
if they profess themselves to be Christians they are above all others
intolerable, inasmuch as they are, in a manner, the pests and stains of
religion.

<span id="vii.v.ii-p20"></span>*Not according to the injunction* —
namely, that which we shall find him shortly afterwards adding — that
food should not be given to the man that refuses to labor. Before coming
to this, however, he states what example he has given them in his own
person. For doctrine obtains much more of credit and authority, when we
impose upon others no other burden than we take upon ourselves. Now he
mentions that he himself was engaged in *working with his hands night
and day*, that he might not burden any one with expense. He had, also,
touched somewhat on this point in the preceding Epistle — to which my
readers must have recourse  <span id="fr_702"></span>[703](#fn_702.md) for
a fuller explanation of this point.

<span id="vii.v.ii-p22"></span>As to his saying, that he *had not eaten
any one’s bread for naught*, he assuredly would not have done this,
though he had not *labored with his hands*. For that which is due in the
way of right, is not a thing that is gratuitous, and the price of the
labor which teachers  <span id="fr_703"></span>[704](#fn_703.md) lay out in
behalf of the Church, is much greater than the food which they receive
from it. But Paul had here in his eye inconsiderate persons, for all
have not so much equity and judgment as to consider what remuneration is
due to the ministers of the word. Nay more, such is the niggardliness of
some, that, though they contribute nothing of their own, they, envy them
their living, as if they were idle men.  <span
id="fr_704"></span>[705](#fn_704.md) He, also, immediately afterwards
declares that he waived his right, when he refrained from taking any
remuneration, by which he intimates, that it is much less to be endured,
that those, who do nothing, shall live on what belongs to others.  <span
id="fr_705"></span>[706](#fn_705.md) When he says, that they *know how they
ought to imitate*, he does not simply mean that his example should be
regarded by them as a law, but the meaning is, that they knew what they
had seen in him that was worthy of imitation, nay more, that the very
thing of which he is at present speaking, has been set before them for
imitation.

<span id="vii.v.ii-p26"></span><span id="vii.v.ii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v.ii-p27"></span>**9** *Not because we have not*. As Paul
wished by his laboring to set an example, that idle persons might not
like drones  <span id="fr_706"></span>[707](#fn_706.md) eat the bread of
others, so he was not willing that this very thing  <span
id="fr_707"></span>[708](#fn_707.md) should do injury to the ministers of
the word, so that the Churches should defraud them of their proper
livelihood. In this we may see his singular moderation and humanity, and
how far removed he was from the ambition of those who abuse their
powers, so as to infringe upon the rights of their brethren. There was a
danger, lest the Thessalonians, having had from the beginning the
preaching of the gospel from Paul’s mouth gratuitously,  <span
id="fr_708"></span>[709](#fn_708.md) should lay it down as a law for the
future as to other ministers; the disposition of mankind being so
niggardly. Paul, accordingly, anticipates this danger, and teaches that
he had a right to more than he had made use of, that others may retain
their liberty unimpaired. He designed by this means to inflict the
greater disgrace, as I have already noticed above, on those that do
nothing, for it is an argument from, the greater to the less.

<span id="vii.v.ii-p31"></span><span id="vii.v.ii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v.ii-p32"></span>**10** *He that will not labor*. From its
being written in <span id="vii.v.ii-p32.1"></span>[Ps
128:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa128.htm#002.md)<span id="vii.v.ii-p32.1"></span>
—

<span id="vii.v.ii-p33"></span>Thou art blessed, eating of the labor of
thy hands,

<span id="vii.v.ii-p34"></span>also in <span
id="vii.v.ii-p34.1"></span>[Pr
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#004.md)<span id="vii.v.ii-p34.1"></span>,

<span id="vii.v.ii-p35"></span>The blessing of the Lord is upon the
hands of him that laboreth,

<span id="vii.v.ii-p36"></span>it is certain that indolence and idleness
are accursed of God. Besides, we know that man was created with this
view, that he might do something. Not only does Scripture testify this
to us, but nature itself taught it to the heathen. Hence it is
reasonable, that those, who wish to exempt themselves from the common
law,  <span id="fr_709"></span>[710](#fn_709.md) should also be deprived of
food, the reward of labor. When, however, the Apostle commanded that
such persons should not eat, he does not mean that he gave commandment
to those persons, but forbade that the Thessalonians should encourage
their indolence by supplying them with food.

<span id="vii.v.ii-p38"></span>It is also to be observed, that there are
different ways of laboring. For whoever aids  <span
id="fr_710"></span>[711](#fn_710.md) the society of men by his industry,
either by ruling his family, or by administering public or private
affairs, or by counseling, or by teaching,  <span
id="fr_711"></span>[712](#fn_711.md) or in any other way, is not to be
reckoned among the idle. For Paul censures those lazy drones who lived
by the sweat of others, while they contribute no service in common for
aiding the human race. Of this sort are our monks and priests who are
largely pampered by doing nothing, excepting that they chant in the
temples, for the sake of preventing weariness. This truly is, (as
Plautus speaks,)  <span id="fr_712"></span>[713](#fn_712.md) to “live
musically.”  <span id="fr_713"></span>[714](#fn_713.md)

<span id="vii.v.iii"></span>

<span id="vii.v.iii-p1"></span><span id="vii.v.iii-p1.1"></span>[2
Thessalonians 3:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#011.md)<span
id="vii.v.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v.iii-p2"></span>**11**. For we hear that there are some
which walk among you disorderly, working not at all, but are busybodies.

<span id="vii.v.iii-p3"></span>**11**. Audimus enim quosdam versantes
inter vos inordinate nihil operis agentes, sed curiose satagentes.

<span id="vii.v.iii-p4"></span>**12**. Now them that are such we command
and exhort by our Lord Jesus Christ, that with quietness they work, and
eat their own bread.

<span id="vii.v.iii-p5"></span>**12**. Talibus autem praecipimus, et
obsecramus  <span id="fr_714"></span>[715](#fn_714.md) per Dominum nos trum
Iesum Christum, ut cum quiete operantes suum ipsorum panem edant.

<span id="vii.v.iii-p7"></span>**13**. But ye, brethren, be not weary in
well doing.

<span id="vii.v.iii-p8"></span>**13**. Vos autem fratres, ne
defatigemini benefaciendo.

<span id="vii.v.iii-p9"></span> 

<span id="vii.v.iii-p10"></span><span id="vii.v.iii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v.iii-p11"></span>**11** *We hear that there are some
among you*. It is probable that this kind of drones were, as it were,
the seed of idle monkhood. For, from the very beginning, there were some
who, under pretext of religion, either made free with the tables of
others, or craftily drew to themselves the substance of the simple. They
had also, even in the time of Augustine, come to prevail so much, that
he was constrained to write a book expressly against idle monks, where
he complains with good reason of their pride, because, despising the
admonition of the Apostle, they not only excuse themselves on the ground
of infirmity, but they wish to appear holier than all others, on the
ground that they are exempt from labors. He inveighs, with good reason,
against this unseemliness, that, while the senators are laborious, the
workman, or person in humble life, does not merely live in idleness,
 <span id="fr_715"></span>[716](#fn_715.md) but would fain have his
indolence pass for sanctity. Such are his views.  <span
id="fr_716"></span>[717](#fn_716.md) In the mean time, however, the evil
has increased to such an extent, that idle bellies occupy nearly the
tenth part of the world, whose only religion is to be well stuffed, and
to have exemption from all annoyance  <span
id="fr_717"></span>[718](#fn_717.md) of labor. And this manner of life they
dignify, sometimes with the name of the Order, sometimes with that of
the Rule, of this or that personage.  <span
id="fr_718"></span>[719](#fn_718.md)

<span id="vii.v.iii-p16"></span>But what does the Spirit say, on the
other hand, by the mouth of Paul? He pronounces them all to be irregular
and *disorderly*, by whatever name of distinction they may be dignified.
It is not necessary to relate here how much the idle life of monks has
invariably displeased persons of sounder judgment. That is a memorable
saying of an old monk, which is recorded by Socrates in the Eighth Book
of the Tripartite History — that he who does not labor with his hands is
like a plunderer.  <span id="fr_719"></span>[720](#fn_719.md) I do not
mention other instances, nor is it necessary. Let this statement of the
Apostle suffice us, in which he declares that they are dissolute, and in
a manner lawless.

<span id="vii.v.iii-p18"></span>*Doing nothing*. In the Greek
participles there is, an elegant (<span
id="vii.v.iii-p18.1"></span>προσωνομασία) *play upon words*, which I
have attempted in some manner to imitate, by rendering it as meaning
that they *do* nothing, but have *enough to do* in the way of curiosity.
 <span id="fr_720"></span>[721](#fn_720.md) He censures, however, a fault
with which idle persons are, for the most part, chargeable, that, by
unseasonably bustling about, they give trouble to themselves and to
others. For we see, that those who have nothing to do are much more
fatigued by doing nothing, than if they were employing themselves in
some very important work; they run hither and thither; wherever they go,
they have the appearance of great fatigue; they gather all sorts of
reports, and they put them in a confused way into circulation. You would
say that they bore the weight of a kingdom upon their shoulders. Could
there be a more remarkable exemplification of this than there is in the
monks? For what class of men have less repose? Where does curiosity
reign more extensively? Now, as this disease has a ruinous effect upon
the public, Paul admonishes that it ought not to be encouraged by
idleness.

<span id="vii.v.iii-p20"></span><span id="vii.v.iii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v.iii-p21"></span>**12** *Now we command such*. He
corrects both of the faults of which he had made mention — a blustering
restlessness, and retirement from useful employment. He accordingly
exhorts them, in the first place, to cultivate repose — that is, to keep
themselves *quietly* within the limits of their calling, or, as we
commonly say, “<span id="vii.v.iii-p21.1"></span>*sans faire bruit*,”
(*without making a noise*.) For the truth is this: those are the most
peaceable of all, that exercise themselves in lawful employments;  <span
id="fr_721"></span>[722](#fn_721.md) while those that have nothing to do
give trouble both to themselves and to others. Further, he subjoins
another precept — that they should *labor*, that is, that they should be
intent upon their calling, and devote themselves to lawful and honorable
employments, without which the life of man is of a wandering nature.
Hence, also, there follows this third injunction — that they should *eat
their own bread;* by which he means, that they should be satisfied with
what belongs to them, that they may not be oppressive or unreasonable to
others.

<span id="vii.v.iii-p23"></span>Drink water, *says Solomon*, from thine
own fountains, and let the streams flow down to neighbors. (<span
id="vii.v.iii-p23.1"></span>[Pr
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#015.md)<span
id="vii.v.iii-p23.1"></span>.)

<span id="vii.v.iii-p24"></span>This is the *first* law of equity, that
no one make use of what belongs to another, but only use what he can
properly call his own. The *second* is, that no one swallow up, like
some abyss, what belongs to him, but that he be beneficent to neighbors,
and that he may relieve their indigence by his abundance.  <span
id="fr_722"></span>[723](#fn_722.md) In the same manner, the Apostle
exhorts those who had been formerly idle to *labor*, not merely that
they may gain for themselves a livelihood, but that they may also be
helpful to the necessities of their brethren, as he also teaches
elsewhere. (<span id="vii.v.iii-p25.2"></span>[Eph
4:28](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#028.md)<span
id="vii.v.iii-p25.2"></span>.)

<span id="vii.v.iii-p26"></span><span id="vii.v.iii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v.iii-p27"></span>**13** *And you, brethren*. Ambrose is
of opinion that this is added lest the rich should, in a niggardly
spirit, refuse to lend their aid to the poor, because he had exhorted
them to *eat every one his own bread*. And, unquestionably, we see how
many are unbefittingly ingenious in catching at a pretext for
inhumanity.  <span id="fr_723"></span>[724](#fn_723.md) Chrysostom explains
it thus — that indolent persons, however justly they may be condemned,
must nevertheless be assisted when in want. I am simply of opinion, that
Paul had it in view to provide against an occasion of offense, which
might arise from the indolence of a few. For it usually happens, that
those that are otherwise particularly ready and on the alert for
beneficence, become cool on seeing that they have thrown away their
favors by misdirecting them. Hence Paul admonishes us, that, although
there are many that are undeserving,  <span
id="fr_724"></span>[725](#fn_724.md) while others abuse our liberality, we
must not on this account leave off helping those that need our aid. Here
we have a statement worthy of being observed — that however ingratitude,
moroseness, pride, arrogance, and other unseemly dispositions on the
part of the poor, may have a tendency to annoy us, or to dispirit us,
from a feeling of weariness, we must strive, nevertheless, never to
leave off aiming at doing good.

<span id="vii.v.iv"></span>

<span id="vii.v.iv-p1"></span><span id="vii.v.iv-p1.1"></span>[2
Thessalonians 3:14-18](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#014.md)<span
id="vii.v.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v.iv-p2"></span>**14**. And if any man obey not our word
by this epistle, note that man, and have no company with him, that he
may be ashamed.

<span id="vii.v.iv-p3"></span>**14**. Si quis autem non obedit sermoni
nostro per epistolam, hunc notate: et ne commisceamini illi,  <span
id="fr_725"></span>[726](#fn_725.md) ut pudefiat:

<span id="vii.v.iv-p5"></span>**15**. Yet count *him* not as an enemy,
but admonish *him* as a brother.

<span id="vii.v.iv-p6"></span>**15**. Et ne tanquam inimicum sentiatis,
sed admonete tanquam fratrem.

<span id="vii.v.iv-p7"></span>**16**. Now the Lord of peace himself give
you peace always by all means. The Lord *be* with you all.

<span id="vii.v.iv-p8"></span>**16**. Ipse autem Deus pacis det vobis
pacem semper omnibus modis. Dominus sit cum omnibus vobis.

<span id="vii.v.iv-p9"></span>**17**. The salutation of Paul with mine
own hand, which is the token in every epistle: so I write.

<span id="vii.v.iv-p10"></span>**17**. Salutatio, mea manu Pauli: quod
est signum in omni epistola.

<span id="vii.v.iv-p11"></span>**18**. The grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ *be* with you all. Amen.

<span id="vii.v.iv-p12"></span>**18**. Gratia Domini nostri Iesu Christi
cum omnibus vobis. Amen.

<span id="vii.v.iv-p13"></span>The second epistle to the Thessalonians
was written from Athens.

<span id="vii.v.iv-p14"></span>Ad Thessalonicenses secunda missa fuit ex
Athenis.

<span id="vii.v.iv-p15"></span> 

<span id="vii.v.iv-p16"></span><span id="vii.v.iv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v.iv-p17"></span>**14** *If any one obeys not*. He has
already declared previously, that he commands nothing but *from the
Lord*. Hence the man, that would not obey, would not be contumacious
against a mere man, but would be rebellious against God himself;  <span
id="fr_726"></span>[727](#fn_726.md) and accordingly he teaches that such
persons ought to be severely chastised. And, in the *first* place, he
desires that they be reported to him, that he may repress them by his
authority; and, *secondly*, he orders them to be excommunicated, that,
being touched with shame, they may repent. From this we infer, that we
must not spare the reputation of those who cannot be arrested otherwise
than by their faults being exposed; but we must take care to make known
their distempers to the physician, that he may make it his endeavor to
cure them.

<span id="vii.v.iv-p19"></span>*Keep no company*. I have no doubt that
he refers to excommunication; for, besides that the (<span
id="vii.v.iv-p19.1"></span>ἀταξία) *disorder* to which he had adverted
deserved a severe chastisement, contumacy is an intolerable vice. He had
said before, *Withdraw yourselves from them*, for they live in a
*disorderly* manner, (<span id="vii.v.iv-p19.2"></span>[2Th
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#006)<span id="vii.v.iv-p19.2"></span>..md)
And now he says, *Keep no company*, for they reject my admonition. He
expresses, therefore, something more by this second manner of expression
than by the former; for it is one thing to withdraw from intimate
acquaintance with an individual, and quite another to keep altogether
aloof from his society. In short, those that do not obey after being
admonished, he excludes from the common society of believers. By this we
are taught that we must employ the discipline of excommunication against
all the obstinate  <span id="fr_727"></span>[728](#fn_727.md) persons who
will not otherwise allow themselves to be brought under subjection, and
must be branded with disgrace, until, having been brought under and
subdued, they learn to obey.

<span id="vii.v.iv-p21"></span>*That he may be ashamed*. There are, it
is true, other ends to be served by excommunication — that contagion may
spread no farther, that the personal wickedness of one individual may
not tend to the common disgrace of the Church, and that the example of
severity may induce others to *fear*, (<span
id="vii.v.iv-p21.1"></span>[1Ti
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#020.md)<span
id="vii.v.iv-p21.1"></span>;) but Paul touches upon this one merely —
that those who have sinned may by shame be constrained to repentance.
For those that please themselves in their vices become more and more
obstinate: thus sin is nourished by indulgence and dissimulation. This,
therefore, is the best remedy — when a feeling of shame is awakened in
the mind of the offender, so that he begins to be displeased with
himself. It would, indeed, be a small point gained to have individuals
made ashamed; but Paul had an eye to farther progress — when the
offender, confounded by a discovery of his own baseness, is led in this
way to a full amendment: for shame, like sorrow, is a useful preparation
for hatred of sin. Hence all that become wanton  <span
id="fr_728"></span>[729](#fn_728.md) must, as I have said, be restrained by
this bridle, lest their audacity should be increased in consequence of
impunity.

<span id="vii.v.iv-p23"></span><span id="vii.v.iv-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v.iv-p24"></span>**15** *Regard him not as an enemy*. He
immediately adds a softening of his rigor; for, as he elsewhere
commands, we must take care that the offender be not *swallowed up with
sorrow*, (<span id="vii.v.iv-p24.1"></span>[2Co
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#007)<span id="vii.v.iv-p24.1"></span>,.md)
which would take place if severity were excessive. Hence we see that the
use of discipline ought to be in such a way as to consult the welfare of
those on whom the Church inflicts punishment. Now, it cannot but be that
severity will fret,  <span id="fr_729"></span>[730](#fn_729.md) when it
goes beyond due bounds. Hence, if we wish to do good, gentleness and
mildness are necessary, that those that are reproved may know that they
are nevertheless loved. In short, excommunication does not tend to drive
men from the Lord’s flock, but rather to bring them back when wandering
and going astray.

<span id="vii.v.iv-p26"></span>We must observe, however, by what sign he
would have brotherly love shewn — not by allurements or flattery, but by
*admonitions*; for in this way it will be, that all that will not be
incurable will feel that concern is felt for their welfare. In the mean
time, excommunication is distinguished from anathema: for as to those
that the Church marks out by the severity of its censure, Paul
admonishes that they should not be utterly cast away, as if they were
cut off from all hope of salvation; but endeavors must be used, that
they may be brought back to a sound mind.

<span id="vii.v.iv-p27"></span><span id="vii.v.iv-p27.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v.iv-p28"></span>**16** *Now the Lord of peace*. This
prayer seems to be connected with the preceding sentence, with the view
of recommending endeavors after concord and mildness. He had forbidden
them to treat even the contumacious  <span
id="fr_730"></span>[731](#fn_730.md) as *enemies*, but rather with a view
to their being brought back to a sound mind  <span
id="fr_731"></span>[732](#fn_731.md) by brotherly admonitions. He could
appropriately, after this, subjoin an injunction as to the cultivation
of peace; but as this is a work that is truly Divine, he betakes himself
to prayer, which, nevertheless, has also the force of a precept. At the
same time, he may also have another thing in view — that God may
restrain unruly persons,  <span id="fr_732"></span>[733](#fn_732.md) that
they may not disturb the peace of the Church.

<span id="vii.v.iv-p33"></span><span id="vii.v.iv-p33.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v.iv-p34"></span>**17** *The salutation, with my own
hand*. Here again he provides against the danger, of which he had
previously made mention — lest epistles falsely ascribed to him should
find their way into the Churches. For this was an old artifice of Satan
— to put forward spurious writings, that he might detract from the
credit of those that are genuine; and farther, under pretended
designations of the Apostles, to disseminate wicked errors with the view
of corrupting sound doctrine. By a singular kindness on the part of God,
it has been brought about that, his frauds being defeated, the doctrine
of Christ has come down to us sound and entire through the ministry of
Paul and others. The concluding prayer explains in what manner God aids
his believing people — by the presence of Christ’s grace.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_691"></span>[692](cc42028.htm#fr_691.md) <span
id="vii.v.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v.i-p16"></span> “<span id="vii.v.i-p16.1"></span>Estendue
et auancement;” — “Extension and advancement.”

<span id="fn_692"></span>[693](cc42028.htm#fr_692.md) <span
id="vii.v.i-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v.i-p19"></span> <span
id="vii.v.i-p19.1"></span>*Importunos*. Wiclif (1380) renders it
*noyous*.—*Ed*.

<span id="fn_693"></span>[694](cc42028.htm#fr_693.md) <span
id="vii.v.i-p19.3"></span>

<span id="vii.v.i-p20"></span> “<span id="vii.v.i-p20.1"></span>Fausses
et peruerses doctrines;” — “False and perverse doctrines.”

<span id="fn_694"></span>[695](cc42028.htm#fr_694.md) <span
id="vii.v.i-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v.i-p22"></span> “<span id="vii.v.i-p22.1"></span>En
horreur et disdain;” — “In horror and disdain.”

<span id="fn_695"></span>[696](cc42028.htm#fr_695.md) <span
id="vii.v.i-p23.2"></span>

<span id="vii.v.i-p24"></span> “<span id="vii.v.i-p24.1"></span>Qu’il y
a beaucoup d’infideles, desloyaux, et traistres;” — “That there are many
that are unbelieving, disloyal, and traitorous.”

<span id="fn_696"></span>[697](cc42028.htm#fr_696.md) <span
id="vii.v.i-p28.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v.i-p29"></span> “<span id="vii.v.i-p29.1"></span>Toute la
violence et impetuosite;” — “The whole violence and impetuosity.”

<span id="fn_697"></span>[698](cc42028.htm#fr_697.md) <span
id="vii.v.i-p32.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v.i-p33"></span> “<span id="vii.v.i-p33.1"></span>Voyci
donc les bournes qu’il limite, et pour soy et pour eux: pour soy, de ne
commander rien que par le Seigneur: a eux, de ne rendre obeissance sinon
au Seigneur;” — “Mark then the limits which he prescribes both for
himself and for them: for himself, not to command anything but by the
Lord: for them, not to render obedience except to the Lord.”

<span id="fn_698"></span>[699](cc42028.htm#fr_698.md) <span
id="vii.v.i-p33.2"></span>

<span id="vii.v.i-p34"></span> “<span id="vii.v.i-p34.1"></span>Quand
apres auoir protesté de sa confiance, il ne laisse pas d’adiouster
encore la priere auec la confiance;” — “When after having declared his
confidence, he omits not to add besides, prayer along with confidence.”

<span id="fn_699"></span>[700](cc42028.htm#fr_699.md) <span
id="vii.v.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v.ii-p16"></span> “<span id="vii.v.ii-p16.1"></span>Il
defend aux Thessaloniciens d’entretenir par leur liberalite ou
dissimulation l’oisiuete de telles gens;” — “He prohibits the
Thessalonians from encouraging by their liberality or dissimulation the
indolence of such persons.”

<span id="fn_700"></span>[701](cc42028.htm#fr_700.md) <span
id="vii.v.ii-p16.3"></span>

<span id="vii.v.ii-p17"></span> “<span
id="vii.v.ii-p17.1"></span>Desordre et grande confusion;” — “Disorder
and great confusion.”

<span id="fn_701"></span>[702](cc42028.htm#fr_701.md) <span
id="vii.v.ii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v.ii-p19"></span> “<span id="vii.v.ii-p19.1"></span>Ceste
separation ou retirement;” — “This separation or withdrawment.”

<span id="fn_702"></span>[703](cc42028.htm#fr_702.md) <span
id="vii.v.ii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v.ii-p21"></span> See Calvin on I Thessalonians; 2:9-12. —
*fj.*

<span id="fn_703"></span>[704](cc42028.htm#fr_703.md) <span
id="vii.v.ii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v.ii-p23"></span> “<span id="vii.v.ii-p23.1"></span>Les
Docteurs et Ministres;” — “Teachers and ministers.”

<span id="fn_704"></span>[705](cc42028.htm#fr_704.md) <span
id="vii.v.ii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="vii.v.ii-p24"></span> “<span id="vii.v.ii-p24.1"></span>Comme
s’ils viuoyent inutiles et oiseux;” — “As if they lived uselessly and
idly.”

<span id="fn_705"></span>[706](cc42028.htm#fr_705.md) <span
id="vii.v.ii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="vii.v.ii-p25"></span> “<span id="vii.v.ii-p25.1"></span>Viuent
du labeur et bien d’autruy;” — “Should live on the labor and substance
of others.”

<span id="fn_706"></span>[707](cc42028.htm#fr_706.md) <span
id="vii.v.ii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v.ii-p28"></span> “<span id="vii.v.ii-p28.1"></span>Ainsi
que les bourdons entre abeilles ne font point de miel, et neantmoins
viuent de celuy des autres;” — “As drones among bees do not make any
honey, and yet live on that of others.”

<span id="fn_707"></span>[708](cc42028.htm#fr_707.md) <span
id="vii.v.ii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="vii.v.ii-p29"></span> “<span id="vii.v.ii-p29.1"></span>Son
exemple;” — “His example.”

<span id="fn_708"></span>[709](cc42028.htm#fr_708.md) <span
id="vii.v.ii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="vii.v.ii-p30"></span> “<span
id="vii.v.ii-p30.1"></span>Gratuitement et sans luy bailler aucuns
gages;” — “Gratuitously, and without giving him any remuneration.”

<span id="fn_709"></span>[710](cc42028.htm#fr_709.md) <span
id="vii.v.ii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v.ii-p37"></span> “<span id="vii.v.ii-p37.1"></span>De la
loy et regle commune;” — “From the common law and rule.”

<span id="fn_710"></span>[711](cc42028.htm#fr_710.md) <span
id="vii.v.ii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v.ii-p39"></span> “<span id="vii.v.ii-p39.1"></span>Aide
et porte proufit;” — “Aids and brings advantage.”

<span id="fn_711"></span>[712](cc42028.htm#fr_711.md) <span
id="vii.v.ii-p39.2"></span>

<span id="vii.v.ii-p40"></span> “<span id="vii.v.ii-p40.1"></span>En
enseignant les autres;” — “By instructing others.”

<span id="fn_712"></span>[713](cc42028.htm#fr_712.md) <span
id="vii.v.ii-p40.2"></span>

<span id="vii.v.ii-p41"></span> The passage alluded to is as follows:
“<span id="vii.v.ii-p41.1"></span>Musice, Hercle, agitis aetatem“ —(“By
Hercules, you pass life musically”) *Plaut. Mostellariae*, Act in. *Sc*.
2, 40. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_713"></span>[714](cc42028.htm#fr_713.md) <span
id="vii.v.ii-p41.2"></span>

<span id="vii.v.ii-p42"></span> “<span id="vii.v.ii-p42.1"></span>Plaute
poete Latin ancien, quand il vent parler de gens qui viuent a leur aise,
il dit qu’ils viuent musicalement, c’est a dire, en chantres. Mais a la
verite on pent bien dire de ceux-ci, en tout sens qu’on le voudra
prendre, qu’ils viuent musicalement;” — “Plautus, the ancient Latin
poet, when he has it in view to speak of persons who live at their ease,
says that they live musically, that is to say, like singers. But truly
it may be well said of those persons, in every sense in which one might
choose to take it, that they live musically.”

<span id="fn_714"></span>[715](cc42028.htm#fr_714.md) <span
id="vii.v.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v.iii-p6"></span> “<span
id="vii.v.iii-p6.1"></span>Prions, *ou*, exhortons;” — “We pray, *or*,
we exhort.”

<span id="fn_715"></span>[716](cc42028.htm#fr_715.md) <span
id="vii.v.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v.iii-p12"></span> “<span id="vii.v.iii-p12.1"></span>Les
senateurs et les nobles ayent la main a la besogne, et cependant les
manouuriers et mechaniques, non seulement viuront en oisiuete;” — “The
senators and the nobles have their hand in the work, and in the mean
time the workmen and mechanics will not only live in idleness.”

<span id="fn_716"></span>[717](cc42028.htm#fr_716.md) <span
id="vii.v.iii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="vii.v.iii-p13"></span> “<span
id="vii.v.iii-p13.1"></span>Voyla que dit S. Augustin;” — “There you
have what St. Augustine says.”

<span id="fn_717"></span>[718](cc42028.htm#fr_717.md) <span
id="vii.v.iii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="vii.v.iii-p14"></span> “<span id="vii.v.iii-p14.1"></span>Et
solicitude;” — “And anxiety.”

<span id="fn_718"></span>[719](cc42028.htm#fr_718.md) <span
id="vii.v.iii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="vii.v.iii-p15"></span> “<span id="vii.v.iii-p15.1"></span>D’vn
tel sainct, ou d’vn tel;” — “Of this saint, or that.”

<span id="fn_719"></span>[720](cc42028.htm#fr_719.md) <span
id="vii.v.iii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v.iii-p17"></span> “<span id="vii.v.iii-p17.1"></span>Vn
vagabond qui va pillant;” — “A vagabond that goes a-plundering.”

<span id="fn_720"></span>[721](cc42028.htm#fr_720.md) <span
id="vii.v.iii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="vii.v.iii-p19"></span> “<span
id="vii.v.iii-p19.1"></span>Nihil eos *agere* operis, sed curiose
*satagere*.”

<span id="fn_721"></span>[722](cc42028.htm#fr_721.md) <span
id="vii.v.iii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="vii.v.iii-p22"></span> “<span id="vii.v.iii-p22.1"></span>Ceux
qui s’exercent a bon escient en quelque labeur licite;” — “Those that
exercise themselves in good earnest in any lawful employment.”

<span id="fn_722"></span>[723](cc42028.htm#fr_722.md) <span
id="vii.v.iii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v.iii-p25"></span> See Calvin on the Corinthians; vol. 2,
p. 286.

<span id="fn_723"></span>[724](cc42028.htm#fr_723.md) <span
id="vii.v.iii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v.iii-p28"></span> “<span
id="vii.v.iii-p28.1"></span>Enuers les poures;” — “Towards the poor.”

<span id="fn_724"></span>[725](cc42028.htm#fr_724.md) <span
id="vii.v.iii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="vii.v.iii-p29"></span> “<span id="vii.v.iii-p29.1"></span>Ne
meritent point qu’on leur face du bien;” — “Do not deserve that any
should do them good.”

<span id="fn_725"></span>[726](cc42028.htm#fr_725.md) <span
id="vii.v.iv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v.iv-p4"></span> “<span id="vii.v.iv-p4.1"></span>N’obeit
a nostre parolle, marquez-le par lettres, et ne conuersez point, *or*,
ni obeit a nostre parolle par *ces* lettres, marquez—le, et ne
conversez;” — “Does not obey our word, mark him by letters, and keep no
company with him; *or*, does not obey our word by *these* letters, mark
him and keep no company.”

<span id="fn_726"></span>[727](cc42028.htm#fr_726.md) <span
id="vii.v.iv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v.iv-p18"></span> “<span id="vii.v.iv-p18.1"></span>Ce
n’eust point contre vn homme mortel qu’il eust addresse son opiniastre
et rebellion;” — “It would not have been against a mortal man that he
had directed his stubbornness and rebellion.”

<span id="fn_727"></span>[728](cc42028.htm#fr_727.md) <span
id="vii.v.iv-p19.3"></span>

<span id="vii.v.iv-p20"></span> “<span id="vii.v.iv-p20.1"></span>Et
endurcis;” — “And hardened.”

<span id="fn_728"></span>[729](cc42028.htm#fr_728.md) <span
id="vii.v.iv-p21.2"></span>

<span id="vii.v.iv-p22"></span> “<span id="vii.v.iv-p22.1"></span>Tous
ceux qui se desbordent et follastrent;” — “All those that break out and
become wanton.”

<span id="fn_729"></span>[730](cc42028.htm#fr_729.md) <span
id="vii.v.iv-p24.2"></span>

<span id="vii.v.iv-p25"></span> “<span id="vii.v.iv-p25.1"></span>Face
entameure et trop grande blessure;” — “Make an incision, and too great a
wound.”

<span id="fn_730"></span>[731](cc42028.htm#fr_730.md) <span
id="vii.v.iv-p28.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v.iv-p29"></span> “<span id="vii.v.iv-p29.1"></span>Mesme
les rebelles et obstinez;” — “Even the rebellious and obstinate.”

<span id="fn_731"></span>[732](cc42028.htm#fr_731.md) <span
id="vii.v.iv-p29.2"></span>

<span id="vii.v.iv-p30"></span> “<span id="vii.v.iv-p30.1"></span>A
repentance et amendment;” — “To repentance and amendment.”

<span id="fn_732"></span>[733](cc42028.htm#fr_732.md) <span
id="vii.v.iv-p30.2"></span>

<span id="vii.v.iv-p31"></span> “<span id="vii.v.iv-p31.1"></span>Ceux
qui sont desobeissans;” — “Those that are disobedient.”

<span id="vii.v.iv-p32"></span> 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Indexes](cc42029.md)
