[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc42018)  [Next](cc42020.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 42: Philippians, Colossians, and
Thessalonians*, tr. by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p1"></span>CHAPTER 2

<span id="vi.iv.i"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i-p1"></span><span id="vi.iv.i-p1.1"></span>[1
Thessalonians 2:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#001.md)<span
id="vi.iv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i-p2"></span>**1**. For yourselves, brethren, know our
entrance in unto you, that it was not in vain:

<span id="vi.iv.i-p3"></span>**1**. Ipsi enim nostis, fratres, quod
ingressus noster ad vos non inanis fuerit:

<span id="vi.iv.i-p4"></span>**2**. But even after that we had suffered
before, and were shamefully entreated, as ye know, at Philippi, we were
bold in our God to speak unto you the gospel of God with much
contention.

<span id="vi.iv.i-p5"></span>**2**. Imo quod persequutionem passi, et
probro affecti Philippis (ut scitis) fiduciam sumpsimus in Deo nostro
proferendi apud vos evangelium Dei, cum multo certamine.

<span id="vi.iv.i-p6"></span>**3**. For our exhortation *was* not of
deceit, nor of uncleanness, nor in guile:

<span id="vi.iv.i-p7"></span>**3**. Nam exhortatio nostra, non ex
impostura, neque ex immunditia, neque in dolo:

<span id="vi.iv.i-p8"></span>**4**. But as we were allowed of God to be
put in trust with the gospel, even so we speak; not as pleasing men, but
God, which trieth our hearts.

<span id="vi.iv.i-p9"></span>**4**. Sed quemadmodum probati fuimus a
Deo, ut crederetur nobis evangelium, sic loquimur, non quasi hominibus
placentes, sed Deo qui probat corda nostra.

<span id="vi.iv.i-p10"></span> 

<span id="vi.iv.i-p11"></span><span id="vi.iv.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i-p12"></span>He now, leaving out of view the testimony
of other Churches, reminds the Thessalonians of what they had themselves
experienced,  <span id="fr_519"></span>[520](#fn_519.md) and explains at
large in what way he, and in like manner the two others, his associates,
had conducted themselves among them, inasmuch as this was of the
greatest importance for confirming their faith. For it is with this view
that he declares his integrity — that the Thessalonians may perceive
that they had been called to the faith, not so much by a mortal man, as
by God himself. He says, therefore, that his *entering in unto them had
not been vain*, as ambitious persons manifest much show, while they have
nothing of solidity; for he employs the word *vain* here as contrasted
with *efficacious*

<span id="vi.iv.i-p14"></span>He proves this by *two* arguments. The
*first* is, that he had suffered persecution and ignominy at Philippi;
the *second* is, that there was a great conflict prepared at
Thessalonica. We know that the minds of men are weakened, nay, are
altogether broken down by means of ignominy and persecutions. It was
therefore an evidence of a Divine work that Paul, after having been
subjected to evils of various kinds and to ignominy, did, as if in a
perfectly sound state, shew no hesitation in making an attempt upon a
large and opulent city, with the view of subjecting the inhabitants of
it to Christ. In this *entering in*, nothing is seen that savors of vain
ostentation. In the *second* department the same Divine power is beheld,
for he does not discharge his duty with applause and favor, but required
to maintain a keen conflict. In the mean time he stood firm and
undaunted, from which it appears that he was held up  <span
id="fr_520"></span>[521](#fn_520.md) by the hand of God; for this is what
he means when he says that he was *emboldened*. And, unquestionably, if
all these circumstances are carefully considered, it cannot be denied
that God there magnificently displayed his power. As to the history, it
is to be found in the sixteenth and seventeenth chapters of the Acts.
\[<span id="vi.iv.i-p15.2"></span>[Ac
16:12-17:15](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#012.md)<span
id="vi.iv.i-p15.2"></span>.\]

<span id="vi.iv.i-p16"></span><span id="vi.iv.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i-p17"></span>**3** *For our exhortation*. He confirms,
by another argument, the Thessalonians in the faith which they had
embraced — inasmuch as they had been faithfully and purely instructed in
the word of the Lord, for he maintains that his doctrine was free from
all deception and uncleanness. And with the view of placing this matter
beyond all doubt, he calls their conscience to witness. The three terms
which he makes use of may, it would seem, be distinguished in this
manner: *imposture* may refer to the substance of doctrine,
*uncleanness* to the affections of the heart, *guile* to the manner of
acting. In the *first* place, therefore, he says that they had not been
deluded or imposed upon by fallacies, when they embraced the kind of
doctrine that had been delivered to them by him. *Secondly*, he declares
his integrity, inasmuch as he had not come to them under the influence
of any impure desire, but actuated solely by upright disposition.
*Thirdly*, he says that he had done nothing fraudulently or maliciously,
but had, on the contrary, manifested a simplicity befitting a minister
of Christ. As these things were well known to the Thessalonians, they
had a sufficiently firm foundation for their faith.

<span id="vi.iv.i-p18"></span><span id="vi.iv.i-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i-p19"></span>**4** *As we have been approved*. He goes
even a step higher, for he appeals to God as the Author of his
apostleship, and he reasons in this manner: “God, when he assigned me
this office, bore witness to me as a faithful servant; there is no
reason, therefore, why men should have doubts as to my fidelity, which
they know to have been *approved of by God*. Paul, however, does not
glory in having been *approved of*, as though he were such of himself;
for he does not dispute here as to what he had by nature, nor does he
place his own power in collision with the grace of God, but simply says
that the Gospel had been committed to him as a faithful and *approved*
servant. Now, God approves of those whom he has formed for himself
according to his own pleasure.

<span id="vi.iv.i-p20"></span>*Not as pleasing men*. What is meant by
*pleasing men* has been explained in the Epistle to the Galatians,
(<span id="vi.iv.i-p20.1"></span>[Ga
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#010)<span id="vi.iv.i-p20.1"></span>.md)
and this passage, also, shews it admirably. For Paul contrasts
*pleasing* men, and *pleasing* God, as things that are opposed to each
other. Farther, when he says — *God, who trieth our hearts*, he
intimates, that those who endeavor to obtain the favor of men, are not
influenced by an upright conscience, and do nothing from the heart. Let
us know, therefore, that true ministers of the gospel ought to make it
their aim to devote to God their endeavors, and to do it from the heart,
not from any outward regard to the world, but because conscience tells
them that it is right and proper. Thus it will be secured that they will
not make it their aim to *please men*, that is, that they will not act
under the influence of ambition, with a view to the favor of men.

<span id="vi.iv.ii"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii-p1"></span><span id="vi.iv.ii-p1.1"></span>[1
Thessalonians 2:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#005.md)<span
id="vi.iv.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii-p2"></span>**5**. For neither at any time used we
flattering words, as ye know, nor a cloke of covetousness; God *is*
witness:

<span id="vi.iv.ii-p3"></span>**5**. Neque enim unquam in sermone
adulationis fuimus, quemadmodum nostis, neque in occasione avaritiae:
Deus testis.

<span id="vi.iv.ii-p4"></span>**6**. Nor of men sought we glory, neither
of you, nor *yet* of others, when we might have been burdensome, as the
apostles of Christ.

<span id="vi.iv.ii-p5"></span>**6**. Nec quaesivimus ab hominibus
gloriam, neque a vobis, neque ab aliis.

<span id="vi.iv.ii-p6"></span>**7**. But we were gentle among you, even
as a nurse cherisheth her children:

<span id="vi.iv.ii-p7"></span>**7**. Quum possemus in pondere esse
tanquam Christi Apostoli, facti tamen sumus mites in medio vestri,
perinde acsi nutrix aleret filios suos.

<span id="vi.iv.ii-p8"></span>**8**. So being affectionately desirous of
you, we were willing to have imparted unto you, not the gospel of God
only, but also our own souls, because ye were dear unto us.

<span id="vi.iv.ii-p9"></span>**8**. Ita erga vos affecti, libenter
voluissemus distribuere vobis non solum Evangelium Dei, sed nostras
ipsorum animas, propterea quod cari nobis facti estis.

<span id="vi.iv.ii-p10"></span> 

<span id="vi.iv.ii-p11"></span><span id="vi.iv.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii-p12"></span>**5** *For neither have we ever*. It is
not without good reason that he repeats it so frequently, that the
Thessalonians knew that what he states is true. For there is not a surer
attestation, than the experience of those with whom we speak. And this
was of the greatest importance to them, because Paul relates with what
integrity he had conducted himself, with no other intention, than that
his doctrine may have the greater respect, for the building up of their
faith. It is, however, a confirmation of the foregoing statement, for he
that is desirous to *please men*, must of necessity stoop shamefully to
flattery, while he that is intent upon duty with an earnest and upright
disposition, will keep at a distance from all appearance of flattery.

<span id="vi.iv.ii-p13"></span>When he adds, *nor for an occasion of
covetousness*, he means that he had not, in teaching among them, been in
quest of anything in the way of personal gain. <span
id="vi.iv.ii-p13.1"></span>Πρόφασις is employed by the Greeks to mean
both *occasion* and *pretext*, but the former signification suits better
with the passage, so as to be, as it were, a trap.  <span
id="fr_521"></span>[522](#fn_521.md) “I have not abused the gospel so as to
make it an occasion of catching at gain.” As, however, the malice of men
has so many winding retreats, that avarice and ambition frequently lie
concealed, he on this account calls God to witness. Now, he makes
mention here of two vices, from which he declares himself to be exempt,
and, in doing so, teaches that the servants of Christ should stand aloof
from them. Thus, if we would distinguish the genuine servants of Christ
from those that are pretended and spurious, they must be tried according
to this rule, and every one that would serve Christ aright must also
conform his aims and his actions to the same rule. For where avarice and
ambition reign, innumerable corruptions follow, and the whole man passes
away into vanity, for these are the two sources from which the
corruption of the whole ministry takes its rise.

<span id="vi.iv.ii-p15"></span><span id="vi.iv.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii-p16"></span> **6** *When we might have exercised
authority*. Some interpret it—*when we might have been burdensome*, that
is, might have loaded you with expense, but the connection requires that
<span id="vi.iv.ii-p16.2"></span>τὸ βαρὺ should be taken to mean
*authority*. For Paul says that he was so far removed from vain pomp,
from boasting, from arrogance, that he even waived his just claim, so
far as the maintenance of authority was concerned. For inasmuch as he
was an Apostle of Christ, he deserved to be received with a higher
degree of respect, but he had refrained from all show of dignity,  <span
id="fr_522"></span>[523](#fn_522.md) as though he had been some minister of
the common rank. From this it appears how far removed he was from
haughtiness.  <span id="fr_523"></span>[524](#fn_523.md)

<span id="vi.iv.ii-p19"></span><span id="vi.iv.ii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii-p20"></span>What we have rendered *mild*, the old
translator renders <span id="vi.iv.ii-p20.1"></span>*Fuimus parvuli*,
(*we have been little*,)  <span id="fr_524"></span>[525](#fn_524.md) but
the reading which I have followed is more generally received among the
Greeks; but whichever you may take, there can be no doubt that he makes
mention of his voluntary abasement.  <span
id="fr_525"></span>[526](#fn_525.md)

<span id="vi.iv.ii-p23"></span>*As if a nurse*. In this comparison he
takes in two points that he had touched upon — that he had sought
neither glory nor gain among the Thessalonians. For a mother in nursing
her infant shews nothing of power or dignity. Paul says that he was
such, inasmuch as he voluntarily refrained from claiming the honor that
was due to him, and with calmness and modesty stooped to every kind of
office. *Secondly*, a mother in nursing her children manifests a certain
rare and wonderful affection, inasmuch as she spares no labor and
trouble, shuns no anxiety, is wearied out by no assiduity, and even with
cheerfulness of spirit gives her own blood to be sucked. In the same
way, Paul declares that he was so disposed towards the Thessalonians,
that he was prepared to lay out his life for their benefit. This,
assuredly, was not the conduct of a man that was sordid or avaricious,
but of one that exercised a disinterested affection, and he expresses
this in the close — *because ye were dear unto us* In the mean time, we
must bear in mind, that all that would be ranked among true pastors must
exercise this disposition of Paul—to have more regard to the welfare of
the Church than to their own life, and not be impelled to duty by a
regard to their own advantage, but by a sincere love to those to whom
they know that they are conjoined, and laid under obligation.  <span
id="fr_526"></span>[527](#fn_526.md)

<span id="vi.iv.iii"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iii-p1"></span><span id="vi.iv.iii-p1.1"></span>[1
Thessalonians 2:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#009.md)<span
id="vi.iv.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iii-p2"></span>**9**. For ye remember, brethren, our
labour and travail: for labouring night and day, because we would not be
chargeable unto any of you, we preached unto you the gospel of God.

<span id="vi.iv.iii-p3"></span>**9**. Memoria enim tenetis, fratres,
laborem nostrum et sudorem: nam die ac nocte opus facientes, ne
gravaremus quenquam vestrum, praedicavimus apud vos Evangelium Dei.

<span id="vi.iv.iii-p4"></span>**10**. Ye *are* witnesses, and God
*also*, how holily and justly and unblameably we behaved ourselves among
you that believe:

<span id="vi.iv.iii-p5"></span>**10**. Vos testes estis et Deus, ut
sancte, et iuste, et sine querela vobis, qui creditis, fuerimus.

<span id="vi.iv.iii-p6"></span>**11**. As ye know how we exhorted and
comforted and charged every one of you, as a father *doth* his children,

<span id="vi.iv.iii-p7"></span>**11**. Quemadmodum nostis, ut
unumquemque vestrum, quasi pater suos liberos,

<span id="vi.iv.iii-p8"></span>**12**. That ye would walk worthy of God,
who hath called you unto his kingdom and glory.

<span id="vi.iv.iii-p9"></span>**12**. Exhortati simus, et monuerimus et
obtestati simus, ut ambularetis digne Deo, qui vocavit vos in suum
regnum et gloriam.

<span id="vi.iv.iii-p10"></span> 

<span id="vi.iv.iii-p11"></span><span id="vi.iv.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iii-p12"></span>**9** *For ye remember*. These things
tend to confirm what he had stated previously — that to spare them he
did not spare himself. He must assuredly have burned with a wonderful
and more than human zeal, inasmuch as, along with the labor of teaching,
he labors with his hand as an operative, with the view of earning a
livelihood, and in this respect, also, refrained from exercising his
right. For it is the law of Christ, as he also teaches elsewhere, (<span
id="vi.iv.iii-p12.2"></span>[1Co
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#014.md)<span
id="vi.iv.iii-p12.2"></span>) that every church furnish its ministers
with food and other necessaries. Paul, therefore, in laying no burden
upon the Thessalonians, does something more than could, from the
requirements of his office, have been required from him. In addition to
this, he does not merely refrain from incurring public expense, but
avoids burdening any one individually. Farther, there can be no doubt,
that he was influenced by some good and special consideration in thus
refraining from exercising his right,  <span
id="fr_527"></span>[528](#fn_527.md) for in other churches he exercised,
equally with others, the liberty allowed him.  <span
id="fr_528"></span>[529](#fn_528.md) He received nothing from the
Corinthians, lest he should give the false apostles a handle for
glorying as to this matter. In the mean time, he did not hesitate to ask
 <span id="fr_529"></span>[530](#fn_529.md) from other churches, what was
needed by him, for he writes that, while he bestowed labor upon the
Corinthians, free of charge, he *robbed* the Churches that he did not
serve. (<span id="vi.iv.iii-p15.1"></span>[2Co
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#008.md)<span
id="vi.iv.iii-p15.1"></span>)  <span id="fr_530"></span>[531](#fn_530.md)
Hence, although the reason is not expressed here, we may, nevertheless,
conjecture that the ground on which Paul was unwilling that his
necessities should be ministered to, was — lest such a thing should put
any hindrance in the way of the gospel. For this, also, ought to be
matter of concern to good pastors — that they may not merely run with
alacrity in their ministry, but may, so far as is in their power, remove
all hindrances in the way of their course.

<span id="vi.iv.iii-p17"></span><span id="vi.iv.iii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iii-p18"></span>**10** *Ye are witnesses*. He again
calls God and them to witness, with the view of affirming his integrity,
and cites, on the one hand, God as a witness of his conscience, and
them,  <span id="fr_531"></span>[532](#fn_531.md) on the other hand, as
witnesses of what they had known by experience. *How holily*, says he,
*and justly*, that is, with how sincere a fear of God, and with what
fidelity and blamelessness towards men; and thirdly, *unreproachably*,
by which he means that he had given no occasion of complaint or obloquy.
For the servants of Christ cannot avoid calumnies, and unfavorable
reports; for being hated by the world, they must of necessity be
evil-spoken of among the wicked. Hence he restricts this to *believers*,
who judge uprightly and sincerely, and do not revile malignantly and
groundlessly.

<span id="vi.iv.iii-p20"></span><span id="vi.iv.iii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iii-p21"></span>**11** *Every one as a father*. He
insists more especially on those things which belong to his office. He
has compared himself to a *nurse:* he now compares himself to a
*father*. What he means is this — that he was concerned in regard to
them, just as a *father* is wont to be as to his sons, and that he had
exercised a truly paternal care in instructing and admonishing them.
And, unquestionably, no one will ever be a good pastor, unless he shews
himself to be a *father* to the Church that is committed to him. Nor
does he merely declare himself to be such to the entire body,  <span
id="fr_532"></span>[533](#fn_532.md) but even to the individual members.
For it is not enough that a pastor in the pulpit teach all in common, if
he does not add also particular instruction, according as necessity
requires, or occasion offers. Hence Paul himself, in <span
id="vi.iv.iii-p22.2"></span>[Ac
20:26](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#026.md)<span
id="vi.iv.iii-p22.2"></span>, declares himself to be *free from the
blood of all men*, because he did not cease to admonish all publicly,
and also individually in private in their own houses. For instruction
given in common is sometimes of little service, and some cannot be
corrected or cured without particular medicine.

<span id="vi.iv.iii-p23"></span><span id="vi.iv.iii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iii-p24"></span>**12** *Exhorted*. He shews with what
earnestness he devoted himself to their welfare, for he relates that in
preaching to them respecting piety towards God and the duties of the
Christian life, it had not been merely in a perfunctory way,  <span
id="fr_533"></span>[534](#fn_533.md) but he says that he had made use of
exhortations and *adjurations*. It is a lively preaching of the gospel,
when persons are not merely told what is right, but are *pricked* (<span
id="vi.iv.iii-p25.2"></span>[Ac
2:37](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#037.md)<span
id="vi.iv.iii-p25.2"></span>) by exhortations, and are called to the
judgment-seat of God, that they may not fall asleep in their vices, for
this is what is properly meant by *adjuring*. But if pious men, whose
promptitude Paul so highly commends, stood in absolute need of being
stimulated by stirring exhortations, nay, *adjurations*, what must be
done with us, in whom sluggishness  <span
id="fr_534"></span>[535](#fn_534.md) of the flesh does more reign? In the
mean time, as to the wicked, whose obstinacy is incurable, it is
necessary to denounce upon them the horrible vengeance of God, not so
much from hope of success, as in order that they may be rendered
inexcusable.

<span id="vi.iv.iii-p27"></span>Some render the participle <span
id="vi.iv.iii-p27.1"></span>παραμυθουμένοι, *comforted*. If we adopt
this rendering, he means that he made use of consolations in dealing
with the afflicted, who need to be sustained by the grace of God, and
refreshed by tasting of heavenly blessings,  <span
id="fr_535"></span>[536](#fn_535.md) that they may not lose heart or become
impatient. The other meaning, however, is more suitable to the context,
that he *admonished*; for the three verbs, it is manifest, refer to the
same thing.

<span id="vi.iv.iii-p29"></span>*That ye might walk*. He presents in a
few words the sum and substance of his exhortations, that, in magnifying
the mercy of God, he admonished them not to fail as to their calling.
His commendation of the grace of God is contained in the expression,
*who hath called us into his kingdom*. For as our salvation is founded
upon God’s gracious adoption, every blessing that Christ has brought us
is comprehended in this one term. It now remains that we answer God’s
call, that is, that we shew ourselves to be such children to him as he
is a Father to us. For he who lives otherwise than as becomes a child of
God, deserves to be cut off from God’s household.

<span id="vi.iv.iv"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv-p1"></span><span id="vi.iv.iv-p1.1"></span>[1
Thessalonians 2:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#013.md)<span
id="vi.iv.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv-p2"></span>**13**. For this cause also thank we God
without ceasing, because, when ye received the word of God which ye
heard of us, ye received *it* not *as* the word of men, but as it is in
truth, the word of God, which effectually worketh also in you that
believe.

<span id="vi.iv.iv-p3"></span>**13** Quapropter nos quoque indesinenter
gratias agimus Deo, quod, quum sermonem Dei praedicatum a nobis
percepistis, amplexi estis, non ut sermonem hominum, sed quemadmodum
revera est, sermonem Dei: qui etiam efficaciter agit in vobis
credentibus.

<span id="vi.iv.iv-p4"></span>**14**. For ye, brethren, became followers
of the churches of God which in Judea are in Christ Jesus: for ye also
have suffered like things of your own countrymen, even as they *have* of
the Jews:

<span id="vi.iv.iv-p5"></span>**14**. Vos enim imitatores facti estis,
fratres, Ecclesiarum Dei, quae sunt in Iudaea in Christo Iesu: quia
eadem passi estis et vos a propriis tribulibus, quemadmodum et ipsi a
Iudaeis.

<span id="vi.iv.iv-p6"></span>**15**. Who both killed the Lord Jesus,
and their own prophets, and have persecuted us; and they please not God,
and are contrary to all men:

<span id="vi.iv.iv-p7"></span>**15**. Qui Dominum Iesum occiderunt, et
proprios Prophetas, et nos persequuti sunt, et Deo non placent, et
cunctis hominibus adversi sunt:

<span id="vi.iv.iv-p8"></span>**16**. Forbidding us to speak to the
Gentiles that they might be saved, to fill up their sins alway: for the
wrath is come upon them to the uttermost.

<span id="vi.iv.iv-p9"></span>**16**. Qui obsistunt ne Gentibus
loquamur, ut salvae fiant, ut compleantur eorum peccata semper: pervenit
enim in eos ira usque in finem.

<span id="vi.iv.iv-p10"></span> 

<span id="vi.iv.iv-p11"></span><span id="vi.iv.iv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv-p12"></span>**13** *Wherefore we give thanks*. Having
spoken of his ministry, he returns again to address the Thessalonians,
that he may always commend that mutual harmony of which he has
previously made mention.  <span id="fr_536"></span>[537](#fn_536.md) He
says, therefore, that he gives thanks to God, because they had *embraced
the word of God which they heard from his mouth, as the word of God, as
it truly was.* Now, by these expressions he means, that it has been
received by them reverently, and with the obedience with which it ought.
For so soon as this persuasion has gained a footing, it is impossible
but that a feeling of obligation to obey takes possession of our minds.
 <span id="fr_537"></span>[538](#fn_537.md) For who would not shudder at
the thought of resisting God? Who would not regard contempt of God with
detestation? The circumstance, therefore, that the word of God is
regarded by many with such contempt, that it is scarcely held in any
estimation — that many are not at all actuated by fear, arises from
this, that they do not consider that they have to do with God.

<span id="vi.iv.iv-p15"></span>Hence we learn from this passage what
credit ought to be given to the gospel — such as does not depend on the
authority of men, but, resting on the sure and ascertained truth of God,
raises itself above the world; and, in fine, is as far above mere
opinion, as heaven is above earth:  <span
id="fr_538"></span>[539](#fn_538.md) and, *secondly*, such as produces of
itself reverence, fear, and obedience, inasmuch as men, touched with a
feeling of Divine majesty, will never allow themselves to sport with it.
Teachers  <span id="fr_539"></span>[540](#fn_539.md) are, in their turn,
admonished to beware of bringing forward anything but the pure word of
God, for if this was not allowable for Paul, it will not be so for any
one in the present day. He proves, however, from the effect produced,
that it was the word of God that he had delivered, inasmuch as it had
produced that fruit of heavenly doctrine which the Prophets celebrate,
(<span id="vi.iv.iv-p17.2"></span>[Isa.
55:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#011.md),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#013.md)<span id="vi.iv.iv-p17.2"></span>;
<span id="vi.iv.iv-p17.3"></span>[Jer
23:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#029.md)<span
id="vi.iv.iv-p17.3"></span>) in renewing their life,  <span
id="fr_540"></span>[541](#fn_540.md) for the doctrine of men could
accomplish no such thing. The relative pronoun may be taken as referring
either to *God* or to his *word*, but whichever way you choose, the
meaning will come all to one, for as the Thessalonians felt in
themselves a Divine energy, which proceeded from faith, they might rest
assured that what they had heard was not a mere sound of the human voice
vanishing into air, but the living and efficacious doctrine of God.

<span id="vi.iv.iv-p19"></span>As to the expression, *the word of the
preaching of God*, it means simply, as I have rendered it, *the word of
God preached by man.* For Paul meant to state expressly that they had
not looked upon the doctrine as contemptible, although it had proceeded
from the mouth of a mortal man, inasmuch as they recognized God as the
author of it. He accordingly praises the Thessalonians, because they did
not rest in mere regard for the minister. but lifted up their eyes to
God, that they might receive his word. Accordingly, I have not hesitated
to insert the particle <span id="vi.iv.iv-p19.1"></span>*ut*, (*that*,)
which served to make the meaning more clear. There is a mistake on the
part of Erasmus in rendering it, “the word of the hearing of God,” as if
Paul meant that God had been manifested. He afterwards changed it thus,
“the word by which you learned God,” for he did not advert to the Hebrew
idiom.  <span id="fr_541"></span>[542](#fn_541.md)

<span id="vi.iv.iv-p21"></span><span id="vi.iv.iv-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv-p22"></span>**14** *For ye became imitators*. If you
are inclined to restrict this to the clause in immediate connection with
it, the meaning will be, that the power of God, or of his word, shews
itself in their patient endurance, while they sustain persecutions with
magnanimity and undaunted courage. I prefer, however, to view it as
extending to the whole of the foregoing statement, for he confirms what
he has stated, that the Thessalonians had in good earnest embraced the
gospel, as being presented to them by God, inasmuch as they courageously
endured the assaults which Satan made upon them, and did not refuse to
suffer anything rather than leave off obedience to it. And,
unquestionably, this is no slight test of faith when Satan, by all his
machinations, has no success in moving us away from the fear of God.

<span id="vi.iv.iv-p23"></span>In the mean time, he prudently provides
against a dangerous temptation which might prostrate or harass them; for
they endured grievous troubles from that nation which was the only one
in the world that gloried in the name of God.

<span id="vi.iv.iv-p24"></span>This, I say, might occur to their minds:
“If this is the true religion, why do the Jews, who are the sacred
people of God, oppose it with such inveterate hostility?” With the view
of removing this occasion of offense,  <span
id="fr_542"></span>[543](#fn_542.md) he, in the *first* place, shews them
that they have this in common with the first *Churches that were in
Judea:* afterwards, he says that the Jews are determined enemies of God
and of all sound doctrine. For although, when he says that they suffered
from *their own countrymen*, this may be explained as referring to
others rather than to the Jews, or at least ought not to be restricted
to the Jews exclusively, yet as he insists farther in describing their
obstinacy and impiety, it is manifest that these same persons are
adverted to by him from the beginning. It is probable, that at
Thessalonica some from that nation were converted to Christ. It appears,
however, from the narrative furnished in the Acts, that *there*, no less
than in Judea, the Jews were persecutors of the gospel. I accordingly
take this as being said indiscriminately of Jews as well as of Gentiles,
inasmuch as both endured great conflicts and fierce attacks from *their
own countrymen*

<span id="vi.iv.iv-p26"></span><span id="vi.iv.iv-p26.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv-p27"></span>**15** *Who killed the Lord Jesus*. As
that people had been distinguished by so many benefits from God, in
consequence of the glory of the ancient fathers, the very name  <span
id="fr_543"></span>[544](#fn_543.md) was of great authority among many.
Lest this disguise should dazzle the eyes of any one, he strips the Jews
of all honor, so as to leave them nothing but odium and the utmost
infamy.

<span id="vi.iv.iv-p29"></span>“Behold,” says he, “the virtues for which
they deserve praise among the good and pious! — they killed their own
prophets and at last the Son of God, they have persecuted me his
servant, they wage war with God, they are detested by the whole world,
they are hostile to the salvation of the Gentiles; in fine, they are
destined to everlasting destruction.”

<span id="vi.iv.iv-p30"></span>It is asked, why he says that Christ and
the prophets were killed by the same persons? I answer, that this refers
to the entire body,  <span id="fr_544"></span>[545](#fn_544.md) for Paul
means that there is nothing new or unusual in their resisting God, but
that, on the contrary, they are, in this manner, *filling up the measure
of their fathers*, as Christ speaks. (<span
id="vi.iv.iv-p31.2"></span>[Mt
23:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#032.md)<span
id="vi.iv.iv-p31.2"></span>)

<span id="vi.iv.iv-p32"></span><span id="vi.iv.iv-p32.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv-p33"></span>**16** *Who hinder us from speaking to
the Gentiles*. It is not without good reason that, as has been observed,
he enters so much into detail in exposing the malice of the Jews.  <span
id="fr_545"></span>[546](#fn_545.md) For as they furiously opposed the
Gospel everywhere, there arose from this a great stumblingblock, more
especially as they exclaimed that the gospel was profaned by Paul, when
he published it among the Gentiles. By this calumny they made divisions
in the Churches, they took away from the Gentiles the hope of salvation,
and they obstructed the progress of the gospel. Paul, accordingly,
charges them with this crime — that they regard the salvation of the
Gentiles with envy, but adds, that matters are so, in order that their
*sins may be filled up*, that he may take away from them all reputation
for piety; just as in saying previously, that they *pleased not God*,
(<span id="vi.iv.iv-p34.2"></span>[1Th
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#015)<span id="vi.iv.iv-p34.2"></span>.md)
he meant, that they were unworthy to be reckoned among the worshippers
of God. The manner of expression, however, must be observed, implying
that those who persevere in an evil course fill up by this means the
measure of their judgment,  <span id="fr_546"></span>[547](#fn_546.md)
until they come to make it a heap. This is the reason why the punishment
of the wicked is often delayed — because their impieties, so to speak,
are not yet ripe. By this we are warned that we must carefully take heed
lest, in the event of our adding from time to time  <span
id="fr_547"></span>[548](#fn_547.md) sin to sin, as is wont to happen
generally, the heap at last reaches as high as heaven.

<span id="vi.iv.iv-p37"></span>*For wrath has come*. He means that they
are in an utterly hopeless state, inasmuch as they are vessels of the
Lord’s wrath. “The just vengeance of God presses upon them and pursues
them, and will not leave them until they perish — as is the case with
all the reprobate, who rush on headlong to death, to which they are
destined.” The Apostle, however, makes this declaration as to the entire
body of the people, in such a manner as not to deprive the elect of
hope. For as the greater proportion resisted Christ, he speaks, it is
true, of the whole nation generally, but we must keep in view the
exception which he himself makes in <span id="vi.iv.iv-p37.1"></span>[Ro
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#005.md)<span id="vi.iv.iv-p37.1"></span>,
— that the Lord will always have some seed remaining. We must always
keep in view Paul’s design — that believers must carefully avoid the
society of those whom the just vengeance of God pursues, until they
perish in their blind obstinacy. *Wrath*, without any additional term,
means the judgment of God, as in <span id="vi.iv.iv-p37.2"></span>[Ro
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#015.md)<span id="vi.iv.iv-p37.2"></span>,
— *the law worketh* wrath; also in <span id="vi.iv.iv-p37.3"></span>[Ro
12:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#019.md)<span
id="vi.iv.iv-p37.3"></span>, — *neither give place unto* wrath

<span id="vi.iv.v"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v-p1"></span><span id="vi.iv.v-p1.1"></span>[1
Thessalonians 2:17-20](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#017.md)<span
id="vi.iv.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v-p2"></span>**17**. But we, brethren, being taken from
you for a short time in presence, not in heart, endeavoured the more
abundantly to see your face with great desire.

<span id="vi.iv.v-p3"></span>**17**. Nos vero, fratres, orbati vobis ad
tempus horae  <span id="fr_548"></span>[549](#fn_548.md) aspectu, non
corde, abundantius studuimus faciem vestram videre in multo desiderio.

<span id="vi.iv.v-p5"></span>**18**. Wherefore we would have come unto
you, even I Paul, once and again; but Satan hindered us.

<span id="vi.iv.v-p6"></span>**18**. Itaque voluimus venire ad vos, ego
quidem Paulus, et semel et bis, et obstitit nobis Satan.

<span id="vi.iv.v-p7"></span>**19**. For what *is* our hope, or joy, or
crown of rejoicing? *Are* not even ye in the presence of our Lord Jesus
Christ at his coming?

<span id="vi.iv.v-p8"></span>**19**. Quae enim nostra spes, vel gaudium,
vel corona gloriationis? annon etiam vos coram Domino nostro Iesu
Christo in eius adventu?

<span id="vi.iv.v-p9"></span>**20**. For ye are our glory and joy.

<span id="vi.iv.v-p10"></span>**20**. Vos enim estis gloria nostra et
gaudium.

<span id="vi.iv.v-p11"></span> 

<span id="vi.iv.v-p12"></span><span id="vi.iv.v-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v-p13"></span>**17** *But we, brethren, bereaved of
you*. This excuse has been appropriately added, lest the Thessalonians
should think that Paul had deserted them while so great an emergency
demanded his presence. He has spoken of the persecutions which they
endured from their own people: he, in the mean time, whose duty it was
above all others to assist them, was absent. He has formerly called
himself a *father;* now, it is not the part of a *father* to desert his
children in the midst of such distresses. He, accordingly, obviates all
suspicion of contempt and negligence, by saying, that it was from no
want of inclination, but because he had not opportunity. Nor does he say
simply, “I was desirous to come to you, but my way was obstructed;” but
by the peculiar terms that he employs he expresses the intensity of his
affection: “When,” says he, “I was *bereaved* of you.”  <span
id="fr_549"></span>[550](#fn_549.md) By the word *bereaved*, he declares
how sad and distressing a thing it was to him to be absent from them.
 <span id="fr_550"></span>[551](#fn_550.md) This is followed by a fuller
expression of his feeling of desire — that it was with difficulty that
he could endure their absence for a short time. It is not to be
wondered, if length of time should occasion weariness or sadness; but we
must have a strong feeling of attachment when we find it difficult to
wait even a single hour. Now, by the *space of an hour*, he means — a
small space of time.

<span id="vi.iv.v-p16"></span>This is followed by a correction — that he
had been separated from them in *appearance, not in heart*, that they
may know that distance of place does not by any means lessen his
attachment. At the same time, this might not less appropriately be
applied to the Thessalonians, as meaning that they, on their part, had
felt united in *mind* while absent in *body;* for it was of no small
importance for the point in hand that he should state how fully assured
he was of their affection towards him in return. He shews, however, more
fully his affection, when he says that he *endeavored the more
abundantly;* for he means that his affection was so far from being
diminished by his leaving them, that it had been the more inflamed. When
he says, *we would once and again*, he declares that it was not a sudden
heat, that quickly cooled, (as we see sometimes happen,) but that he had
been steadfast in this purpose,  <span id="fr_551"></span>[552](#fn_551.md)
inasmuch as he sought various opportunities.

<span id="vi.iv.v-p18"></span><span id="vi.iv.v-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v-p19"></span>**18** *Satan hindered us*. Luke relates
that Paul was in one instance hindered, (<span
id="vi.iv.v-p19.1"></span>[Ac
20:3](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#003)<span id="vi.iv.v-p19.1"></span>.md)
inasmuch as the Jews laid an ambush for him in the way. The same thing,
or something similar, may have occurred frequently. It is not without
good reason, however, that Paul ascribes the whole of this to Satan,
for, as he teaches elsewhere, (<span id="vi.iv.v-p19.2"></span>[Eph
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#012)<span id="vi.iv.v-p19.2"></span>.md)
we have to

<span id="vi.iv.v-p20"></span>wrestle not with flesh and blood, but with
principalities of the air, and spiritual wickednesses, *etc.*

<span id="vi.iv.v-p21"></span>For, whenever the wicked molest us, they
fight under Satan’s banner, and are his instruments for harassing us.
More especially, when our endeavors are directed to the work of the
Lord, it is certain that everything that hinders proceeds from Satan;
and would to God that this sentiment were deeply impressed upon the
minds of all pious persons — that Satan is continually contriving, by
every means, in what way he may hinder or obstruct the edification of
the Church! We would assuredly be more careful to resist him; we would
take more care to maintain sound doctrine, of which that enemy strives
so keenly to deprive us. We would also, whenever the course of the
gospel is retarded, know whence the hindrance proceeds. He says
elsewhere, (<span id="vi.iv.v-p21.1"></span>[Ro
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#013)<span id="vi.iv.v-p21.1"></span>.md)
that God had not permitted him, but both are true: for although Satan
does his part, yet God retains supreme authority, so as to open up a way
for us, as often as he sees good, against Satan’s will, and in spite of
his opposition. Paul accordingly says truly that God does not permit,
although the hindrance comes from Satan.

<span id="vi.iv.v-p22"></span><span id="vi.iv.v-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v-p23"></span>**19** *For what is our hope*. He confirms
that ardor of desire, of which he had made mention, inasmuch as he has
his happiness in a manner treasured up in them. “Unless I forget myself,
I must necessarily desire your presence, *for ye are our glory and
joy*.” Farther, when he calls them his *hope and the crown of his
glory*, we must not understand this as meaning that he gloried in any
one but God alone, but because we are allowed to glory in all God’s
favors, in their own place, in such a manner that he is always our
object of aim, as I have explained more at large in the *first* Epistle
to the Corinthians.  <span id="fr_552"></span>[553](#fn_552.md) We must,
however, infer from this, that Christ’s ministers will, on the last day,
according as they have individually promoted his kingdom, be partakers
of glory and triumph. Let them therefore now learn to rejoice and glory
in nothing but the prosperous issue of their labors, when they see that
the glory of Christ is promoted by their instrumentality. The
consequence will be, that they will be actuated by that spirit of
affection to the Church with which they ought. The particle *also*
denotes that the Thessalonians were not the only persons in whom Paul
triumphed, but that they held a place among many. The causal particle
<span id="vi.iv.v-p24.3"></span>γάρ, (*for*,) which occurs almost
immediately afterwards, is employed here not in its strict sense, by way
of affirmation—”*assuredly* you are.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_519"></span>[520](cc42019.htm#fr_519.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i-p13"></span> “<span id="vi.iv.i-p13.1"></span>Veuës et
esprouuez;” — “Seen and experienced.”

<span id="fn_520"></span>[521](cc42019.htm#fr_520.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i-p15"></span> “<span id="vi.iv.i-p15.1"></span>Soustenu
et fortifié;” — “Sustained and strengthened.”

<span id="fn_521"></span>[522](cc42019.htm#fr_521.md) <span
id="vi.iv.ii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii-p14"></span> “<span
id="vi.iv.ii-p14.1"></span>Tellement que ce soit vne ruse ou finesse,
semblable a celle de ceux qui tendent les filets pour prendre les
oiseaux;” — “So that it is a trick or artifice, similar to that of those
who set traps for catching birds.”

<span id="fn_522"></span>[523](cc42019.htm#fr_522.md) <span
id="vi.iv.ii-p16.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii-p17"></span> “<span id="vi.iv.ii-p17.1"></span>De
toute apparence de preeminence et maieste;” — “From all appearance of
preeminence and majesty.”

<span id="fn_523"></span>[524](cc42019.htm#fr_523.md) <span
id="vi.iv.ii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii-p18"></span> “<span id="vi.iv.ii-p18.1"></span>De
toute hautesse et presomption;” — “From all haughtiness and
presumption.”

<span id="fn_524"></span>[525](cc42019.htm#fr_524.md) <span
id="vi.iv.ii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii-p21"></span> The rendering of Wicliff (1380) is, as
usual, in accordance with the Vulgate— “we weren made litil.” —*Ed*.

<span id="fn_525"></span>[526](cc42019.htm#fr_525.md) <span
id="vi.iv.ii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii-p22"></span> “Abaissement et humilite;” — “Abasement
and humility.”

<span id="fn_526"></span>[527](cc42019.htm#fr_526.md) <span
id="vi.iv.ii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii-p24"></span> “Pour vne vraye amour et non feinte
qu’ils portent a ceux, ausquels ils scauent que Dieu les a conionts et
liez ou obligez;” — “From a true and unfeigned love which they bear to
those, to whom they know that God has conjoined, and tied, or bound
them.”

<span id="fn_527"></span>[528](cc42019.htm#fr_527.md) <span
id="vi.iv.iii-p12.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iii-p13"></span> “Entre les Thessaloniciens;” — “Among
the Thessalonians.”

<span id="fn_528"></span>[529](cc42019.htm#fr_528.md) <span
id="vi.iv.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iii-p14"></span> “La liberte que Dieu donne;” — “The
liberty that God gives.”

<span id="fn_529"></span>[530](cc42019.htm#fr_529.md) <span
id="vi.iv.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iii-p15"></span> “Il n’a point fait de conscience de
prendre lors des autres Eglises;” — “He made no scruple to take at that
time from other Churches.”

<span id="fn_530"></span>[531](cc42019.htm#fr_530.md) <span
id="vi.iv.iii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iii-p16"></span> See Calvin on the Corinthians, vol. 2,
p. 347.

<span id="fn_531"></span>[532](cc42019.htm#fr_531.md) <span
id="vi.iv.iii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iii-p19"></span> “<span id="vi.iv.iii-p19.1"></span>Les
Thessaloniciens;” — “The Thessalonians.”

<span id="fn_532"></span>[533](cc42019.htm#fr_532.md) <span
id="vi.iv.iii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iii-p22"></span> “<span id="vi.iv.iii-p22.1"></span>Tout
le corps de ceste Eglise-la;” — “The whole body of the Church there.”

<span id="fn_533"></span>[534](cc42019.htm#fr_533.md) <span
id="vi.iv.iii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iii-p25"></span> “<span id="vi.iv.iii-p25.1"></span>Il
n’y a point este par acquit, comme on dit;” — “It had not been in the
mere performance of a task, as they say.”

<span id="fn_534"></span>[535](cc42019.htm#fr_534.md) <span
id="vi.iv.iii-p25.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iii-p26"></span> “<span id="vi.iv.iii-p26.1"></span>La
paresse et nonchalance de la chair;” — “Indolence and negligence of the
flesh.”

<span id="fn_535"></span>[536](cc42019.htm#fr_535.md) <span
id="vi.iv.iii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iii-p28"></span> “<span
id="vi.iv.iii-p28.1"></span>Fortifiez ou soulagez en leur rafrechissant
le goust des biens celestes;” — “Strengthened or comforted in the way of
refreshing their taste with heavenly blessings.”

<span id="fn_536"></span>[537](cc42019.htm#fr_536.md) <span
id="vi.iv.iv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv-p13"></span> Calvin refers here to the harmony which
happily subsisted between the preaching of Paul and the faith of the
Thessalonians.—*Ed*.

<span id="fn_537"></span>[538](cc42019.htm#fr_537.md) <span
id="vi.iv.iv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv-p14"></span> “<span id="vi.iv.iv-p14.1"></span>Il ne
se pent faire que nous ne venions quant et quant a auoir vne saincte
affection d’obeir;” — “It cannot but be that we come at the same time to
have a holy disposition to obey.”

<span id="fn_538"></span>[539](cc42019.htm#fr_538.md) <span
id="vi.iv.iv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv-p16"></span> “<span id="vi.iv.iv-p16.1"></span>Aussi
lois d’vne opinion, ou d’vn cuider;” — “As far above opinion, or
imagination.”

<span id="fn_539"></span>[540](cc42019.htm#fr_539.md) <span
id="vi.iv.iv-p16.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv-p17"></span> “<span id="vi.iv.iv-p17.1"></span>Les
Docteurs, c’est a dire ceux qui ont la charge d’enseigner;” — “Teachers,
that is to say, those that have the task of instructing.”

<span id="fn_540"></span>[541](cc42019.htm#fr_540.md) <span
id="vi.iv.iv-p17.4"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv-p18"></span> “<span id="vi.iv.iv-p18.1"></span>En
renouelant et reformant la vie des Thessaloniciens;” — “In renewing and
reforming the life of the Thessalonians.”

<span id="fn_541"></span>[542](cc42019.htm#fr_541.md) <span
id="vi.iv.iv-p19.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv-p20"></span> “<span id="vi.iv.iv-p20.1"></span>Car il
n’a pas prins garde que c’estoit yci vne façon de parler prinse de la
langue Hebraique;” — “For he did not take notice that it was a manner of
expression taken from the Hebrew language.”

<span id="fn_542"></span>[543](cc42019.htm#fr_542.md) <span
id="vi.iv.iv-p24.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv-p25"></span> “<span id="vi.iv.iv-p25.1"></span>Aux
Thessaloniciens;” — “To the Thessalonians.”

<span id="fn_543"></span>[544](cc42019.htm#fr_543.md) <span
id="vi.iv.iv-p27.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv-p28"></span> “<span id="vi.iv.iv-p28.1"></span>De
Juif;” — “Of Jew.”

<span id="fn_544"></span>[545](cc42019.htm#fr_544.md) <span
id="vi.iv.iv-p30.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv-p31"></span> “<span id="vi.iv.iv-p31.1"></span>A tout
le corps du peuple;” — “To the whole body of the people.”

<span id="fn_545"></span>[546](cc42019.htm#fr_545.md) <span
id="vi.iv.iv-p33.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv-p34"></span> “<span id="vi.iv.iv-p34.1"></span>Il
insiste si longuement a deschiffrer et toucher au vif la malice des
Juifs;” — “He insists to so great a length in distinctly unfolding and
touching to the quick the malice of the Jews.”

<span id="fn_546"></span>[547](cc42019.htm#fr_546.md) <span
id="vi.iv.iv-p34.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv-p35"></span> “<span id="vi.iv.iv-p35.1"></span>Et
condemnation;” — “And condemnation.”

<span id="fn_547"></span>[548](cc42019.htm#fr_547.md) <span
id="vi.iv.iv-p35.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv-p36"></span> “<span id="vi.iv.iv-p36.1"></span>Chacun
iour;” — “Every day.”

<span id="fn_548"></span>[549](cc42019.htm#fr_548.md) <span
id="vi.iv.v-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v-p4"></span> “<span id="vi.iv.v-p4.1"></span>Pour vn
moment du temps;” — “For a moment of time.”

<span id="fn_549"></span>[550](cc42019.htm#fr_549.md) <span
id="vi.iv.v-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v-p14"></span> “The original word is here very
emphatical. It is an allusion to that grief, anxiety, and reluctance of
heart, with which dying, affectionate parents take leave of their own
children, when they are just going to leave them helpless orphans,
exposed to the injuries of a merciless and wicked world, or that sorrow
of heart with which poor destitute orphans close the eyes of their dying
parents.” —*Benson*.—*Ed*.

<span id="fn_550"></span>[551](cc42019.htm#fr_550.md) <span
id="vi.iv.v-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v-p15"></span> “<span id="vi.iv.v-p15.1"></span>Le mot
Grec signifie l’estat d’vn pere qui a perdu ses enfans, ou des enfans
qui ont perdu leur pere;” — “The Greek word denotes the condition of a
father that has lost his children, or of children that have lost their
father.”

<span id="fn_551"></span>[552](cc42019.htm#fr_551.md) <span
id="vi.iv.v-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v-p17"></span> <span id="vi.iv.v-p17.1"></span>Hujus
propositi tenacem. See Hor. Od. 3, 3. 1. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_552"></span>[553](cc42019.htm#fr_552.md) <span
id="vi.iv.v-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v-p24"></span> “<span id="vi.iv.v-p24.1"></span>Sur la
premiere aux Corinth., chap. 1, d. 31;” — “On <span
id="vi.iv.v-p24.2"></span>[1Co
1:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#031.md)<span id="vi.iv.v-p24.2"></span>.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3](cc42020.md)
