[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc42023)  [Next](cc42025.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 42: Philippians, Colossians, and
Thessalonians*, tr. by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.i"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p1"></span>THE AUTHOR’S DEDICATORY EPISTLE.

<span id="vii.i-p2"></span> 

<span id="vii.i-p3"></span> 

<span id="vii.i-p4"></span>TO THAT DISTINGUISHED MAN

<span id="vii.i-p5"></span> 

<span id="vii.i-p6"></span>BENEDICT TEXTOR, PHYSICIAN.

<span id="vii.i-p7"></span>While you are reckoned to excel in the
knowledge of your profession by those who are competent judges in that
matter, I, for my part, have always regarded as a very high excellence
that strict fidelity and diligence which you are accustomed to exercise,
both in attending upon the sick, and in giving advice. But more
especially in either restoring or establishing my own health, I have
observed you to be so carefully intent, that it was easy to perceive
that you were influenced not so much by regard to a particular
individual, as by anxiety and concern for the common welfare of the
Church. Another, perhaps, might think, that the kindness was smaller
from its not having been shewn simply to himself as an individual; but
as for me, I think myself on the contrary to be under a double
obligation to you, on the ground, that while you omitted nothing
whatever in discharging the office of a friend, you were at the same
time equally concerned as to my ministry, too, which ought to be dearer
to me than my life. The remembrance, besides, of my departed wife
reminds me daily how much I owe you, not only because she was frequently
through your assistance raised up, and was in one instance restored from
a serious and dangerous distemper, but that even in that last disease,
which took her away from us, you left nothing undone in the way of
industry, labor, and effort, with a view to her assistance. Farther, as
you do not allow me to give you any other remuneration, I have thought
of inscribing your name upon this Commentary, in order that there may be
some token of my good wishes towards you in return.

<span id="vii.i-p8"></span>Geneva, 1st July 1550.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Argument](cc42025.md)
