[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc42010)  [Next](cc42012.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 42: Philippians, Colossians, and
Thessalonians*, tr. by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.ii"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 1

<span id="v.ii.i"></span>

<span id="v.ii.i-p1"></span><span id="v.ii.i-p1.1"></span>[Colossians
1:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#001.md)<span id="v.ii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.i-p2"></span>**1**. Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ by
the will of God, and Timotheus *our* brother,

<span id="v.ii.i-p3"></span>**1**. Paulus apostolus Iesu Christi, per
voluntatem Dei, et Timotheus frater,

<span id="v.ii.i-p4"></span>**2**. To the saints and faithful brethren
in Christ which are at Colosse: Grace *be* unto you, and peace, from God
our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="v.ii.i-p5"></span>**2**. Sanctis qui sunt Colossis, et
fidelibus fratribus in Christo; gratia vobis et pax a Deo et Patre
nostro, et Domino Iesu Christo.

<span id="v.ii.i-p6"></span>**3**. We give thanks to God and the Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ, praying always for you,

<span id="v.ii.i-p7"></span>**3**. Gratias agimus Deo et Patri Domini
nostri Iesu Christi, semper pro vobis orantes,

<span id="v.ii.i-p8"></span>**4**. Since we heard of your faith in
Christ Jesus, and of the love *which ye have* to all the saints,

<span id="v.ii.i-p9"></span>**4**. Audita fide vestra, quae est in
Christo Iesu, et caritate erga omnes sanctos,

<span id="v.ii.i-p10"></span>**5**. For the hope which is laid up for
you in heaven, whereof ye heard before in the word of the truth of the
gospel;

<span id="v.ii.i-p11"></span>**5**. Propter spem repositam vobis in
coelis, de qua prius audistis, per sermonem veritatis, nempe Evangelii,

<span id="v.ii.i-p12"></span>**6**. Which is come unto you, as *it is*
in all the world; and bringeth forth fruit, as *it doth* also in you,
since the day ye heard *of it*, and knew the grace of God in truth:

<span id="v.ii.i-p13"></span>**6**. Quod ad vos pervenit: quemadmodum et
in universo mundo fructificat et propagatur, sicut etiam in vobis, ex
quo die audistis, et cognovistis gratiam Dei in veritate.

<span id="v.ii.i-p14"></span>**7**. As ye also learned of Epaphras our
dear fellowservant, who is for you a faithful minister of Christ;

<span id="v.ii.i-p15"></span>**7**. Quemadmodum et didicistis ab
Epaphra, dilecto converso nostro, qui est fidelis erga vos minister
Christi:

<span id="v.ii.i-p16"></span>**8**. Who also declared unto us your love
in the Spirit.

<span id="v.ii.i-p17"></span>**8**. Qui etiam nobis manifestavit
caritatem vestram in Spiritu.

<span id="v.ii.i-p18"></span> 

<span id="v.ii.i-p19"></span><span id="v.ii.i-p19.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.i-p20"></span>**1** *Paul an Apostle.* I have already, in
repeated instances, explained the design of such inscriptions. As,
however, the Colossians had never seen him, and on that account his
authority was not as yet so firmly established among them as to make his
private name  <span id="fr_277"></span>[278](#fn_277.md) by itself
sufficient, he premises that he is an Apostle of Christ set apart by the
will of God. From this it followed, that he did not act rashly in
writing to persons that were not known by him, inasmuch as he was
discharging an embassy with which God had intrusted him. For he was not
bound to one Church merely, but his Apostleship extended to all. The
term *saints* which he applies to them is more honorable, but in calling
them *faithful brethren,* he allures them more willingly to listen to
him. As for other things, they may be found explained in the foregoing
Epistles.

<span id="v.ii.i-p22"></span><span id="v.ii.i-p22.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.i-p23"></span>**3.** *We give thanks to God.* He praises
the faith and love of the Colossians, that it may encourage them the
more to alacrity and constancy of perseverance. Farther, by shewing that
he has a persuasion of this kind respecting them, he procures their
friendly regards, that they may be the more favourably inclined and
teachable for receiving his doctrine. We must always take notice that he
makes use of thanksgiving in place of congratulation, by which he
teaches us, that in all our joys we must readily call to remembrance the
goodness of God, inasmuch as everything that is pleasant and agreeable
to us is a kindness conferred by him. Besides, he admonishes us, by his
example, to acknowledge with gratitude not merely those things which the
Lord confers upon us, but also those things which he confers upon
others.

<span id="v.ii.i-p24"></span>But for what things does he give thanks to
the Lord? For the *faith* and *love* of the Colossians. He acknowledges,
therefore, that both are conferred by God: otherwise the gratitude were
pretended. And what have we otherwise than through his liberality? If,
however, even the smallest favors come to us from that source, how much
more ought this same acknowledgment to be made in reference to those two
gifts, in which the entire sum of our excellence consists?

<span id="v.ii.i-p25"></span>*To the God and Father.*  <span
id="fr_278"></span>[279](#fn_278.md) Understand the expression thus — *To*
*God* *who* *is* *the* *Father* *of* *Christ*. For it is not lawful for
us to acknowledge any other God than him who has manifested himself to
us in his Son. And this is the only key for opening the door to us, if
we are desirous to have access to the true God. For on this account,
also, is he a Father to us, because he has embraced us in his only
begotten Son, and in him also sets forth his paternal favor for our
contemplation.

<span id="v.ii.i-p27"></span>*Always for you,* Some explain it thus — We
*give* *thanks* *to* *God* *always* *for* *you*, that is, *continually*.
Others explain it to mean — *Praying* *always* *for* *you*. It may also
be interpreted in this way, “Whenever we pray for you, we at the same
time give thanks to God;” and this is the simple meaning, “We give
thanks to God, and we at the same time pray.” By this he intimates, that
the condition of believers is never in this world perfect, so as not to
have, invariably, something wanting. For even the man who has begun
admirably well, may fall short in a hundred instances every day; and we
must ever be making progress while we are as yet on the way. Let us
therefore bear in mind that we must rejoice in the favors that we have
already received, and give thanks to God for them in such a manner, as
to seek at the same time from him perseverance and advancement.

<span id="v.ii.i-p28"></span><span id="v.ii.i-p28.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.i-p29"></span>**4***. Having heard of your faith.* This
was a means of stirring up his love towards them, and his concern for
their welfare, when he heard it that they were distinguished by *faith*
and *love.* And, unquestionably, gifts of God that are so excellent
ought to have such an effect upon us as to stir us up to love them
wherever they appear. He uses the expression, *faith in Christ*, that we
may always bear in mind that Christ is the proper object of faith.

<span id="v.ii.i-p30"></span>He employs the expression, *love* *towards*
*the* *saints*, not with the view of excluding others, but because, in
proportion as any one is joined to us in God, we ought to embrace him
the more closely with special affection. True love, therefore, will
extend to mankind universally, because they all are our flesh, and
*created* *in* *the* *image* *of* *God*, (<span
id="v.ii.i-p30.1"></span>[Ge 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#006.md)<span
id="v.ii.i-p30.1"></span>;) but in respect of degrees, it will begin
with those who are of the *household* *of* *faith*. (<span
id="v.ii.i-p30.2"></span>[Ga 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#010.md)<span
id="v.ii.i-p30.2"></span>.)

<span id="v.ii.i-p31"></span><span id="v.ii.i-p31.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.i-p32"></span>**5.** *For the hope which is laid up for
you in heaven.* For the *hope* of eternal life will never be inactive in
us, so as not to produce *love* in us. For it is of necessity, that the
man who is fully persuaded that a treasure of life is laid up for him in
heaven will aspire thither, looking down upon this world. Meditation,
however, upon the heavenly life stirs up our affections both to the
worship of God, and to exercises of love. The Sophists pervert this
passage for the purpose of extolling the merits of works, as if the hope
of salvation depended on works. The reasoning, however, is futile. For
it does not follow, that because hope stimulates us to aim at upright
living, it is therefore founded upon works, inasmuch as nothing is more
efficacious for this purpose than God’s unmerited goodness, which
utterly overthrows all confidence in works.

<span id="v.ii.i-p33"></span>There is, however, an instance of
*metonymy* in the use of the term *hope,* as it is taken for the thing
hoped for. For the hope that is in our hearts is the glory which we hope
for in heaven. At the same time, when he says, that there is a *hope*
that is *laid up for us in heaven*, he means, that believers ought to
feel assured as to the promise of eternal felicity, equally as though
they had already a treasure laid up  <span
id="fr_279"></span>[280](#fn_279.md) in a particular place.

<span id="v.ii.i-p35"></span>*Of which ye heard before.* As eternal
salvation is a thing that surpasses the comprehension of our
understanding, he therefore adds, that the assurance of it had been
brought to the Colossians by means of the gospel; and at the same time
he says in the outset,  <span id="fr_280"></span>[281](#fn_280.md) that he
is not to bring forward anything new, but that he has merely in view to
confirm them in the doctrine which they had previously received. Erasmus
has rendered — *it* *the* *true* *word* *of* *the* *gospel*. I am also
well aware that, according to the Hebrew idiom, the genitive is often
made use of by Paul in place of an epithet; but the words of Paul here
are more emphatic.  <span id="fr_281"></span>[282](#fn_281.md) For he calls
the gospel, <span id="v.ii.i-p37.2"></span>καψ ἐξοχήν, (*by* *way* *of*
*eminence*,) *the word of truth*, with the view of putting honor upon
it, that they may more steadfastly and firmly adhere to the revelation
which they have derived from that source. Thus the term *gospel* is
introduced by way of *apposition*  <span
id="fr_282"></span>[283](#fn_282.md)

<span id="v.ii.i-p39"></span><span id="v.ii.i-p39.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.i-p40"></span>**6** *As also in all the world it brings
forth fruit.* This has a tendency both to confirm and to comfort the
pious — to see the effect of the gospel far and wide in gathering many
to Christ. The faith of it does not, it is true, depend on its success,
as though *we* should believe it on the ground that *many* believe it.
Though the whole world should fail, though heaven itself should fall,
the conscience of a pious man must not waver, because God, on whom it is
founded, does nevertheless remain true. This, however, does not hinder
our faith from being confirmed, whenever it perceives God’s excellence,
which undoubtedly shews itself with more power in proportion to the
number of persons that are gained over to Christ.

<span id="v.ii.i-p41"></span>In addition to this, in the multitude of
the believers at that time there was beheld an accomplishment of the
many predictions which extend the reign of Christ from the East to the
West. Is it a trivial or common aid to faith, to see accomplished before
our eyes what the Prophets long since predicted as to the extending of
the kingdom of Christ through all countries of the world? What I speak
of, there is no believer that does not experience in himself. Paul
accordingly had it in view to encourage the Colossians the more by this
statement, that, by seeing in various places the fruit and progress of
the gospel, they might embrace it with more eager zeal. <span
id="v.ii.i-p41.1"></span>Αὐξανόμενον, which I have rendered <span
id="v.ii.i-p41.2"></span>*propagatur*, (*is* *propagated*,) does not
occur in some copies; but, from its suiting better with the context, I
did not choose to omit it. It also appears front the commentaries of the
ancients that this reading was always the more generally received.
 <span id="fr_283"></span>[284](#fn_283.md)

<span id="v.ii.i-p43"></span>*Since the day ye heard it, and knew the
grace.* Here he praises them on account of their docility, inasmuch as
they immediately embraced sound doctrine; and he praises them on account
of their constancy, inasmuch as they persevered in it. It is also with
propriety that the faith of the gospel is called the *knowledge of God’s
grace*; for no one has ever tasted of the gospel but the man that knew
himself to be reconciled to God, and took hold of the salvation that is
held forth in Christ.

<span id="v.ii.i-p44"></span>*In truth* means *truly* and *without*
*pretense*; for as he had previously declared that the gospel is
undoubted truth, so he now adds, that it had been purely administered by
them, and that *by* *Epaphras*. For while all boast that they preach the
gospel, and yet at the same time there are many *evil* *workers*, (<span
id="v.ii.i-p44.1"></span>[Php 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#002.md)<span
id="v.ii.i-p44.1"></span>,) through whose ignorance, or ambition, or
avarice, its purity is adulterated, it is of great importance that
faithful ministers should be distinguished from the less upright. For it
is not enough to hold the term gospel, unless we know that this is the
true gospel — what was preached by Paul and Epaphras. Hence Paul
confirms the doctrine of Epaphras by giving it his approbation, that he
may induce the Colossians to adhere to it, and may, by the same means,
call them back from those profligates who endeavored to introduce
strange doctrines. He at the same time dignifies Epaphras with a special
distinction, that he may have more authority among them; and lastly, he
presents him to the Colossians in an amiable aspect, by saying that he
had borne testimony to him of their love. Paul everywhere makes it his
particular aim, that he may, by his recommendation, render those who he
knows serve Christ faithfully, very dear to the Churches; as, on the
other hand, the ministers of Satan are wholly intent on alienating, by
unfavourable representations,  <span id="fr_284"></span>[285](#fn_284.md)
the minds of the simple from faithful pastors.

<span id="v.ii.i-p46"></span><span id="v.ii.i-p46.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.i-p47"></span>*Love in the Spirit* I take to mean,
*spiritual* *love*, according to the view of Chrysostom, with whom,
however, I do not agree in the interpretation of the preceding words.
Now, *spiritual* *love* is of such a nature as has no view to the world,
but is consecrated to the service of piety,  <span
id="fr_285"></span>[286](#fn_285.md) and has, as it were, an internal root,
while carnal friendships depend on external causes.

<span id="v.ii.ii"></span>

<span id="v.ii.ii-p1"></span><span id="v.ii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Colossians
1:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#009.md)<span id="v.ii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.ii-p2"></span>**9**. For this cause we also, since the
day we heard *it*, do not cease to pray for you, and to desire that ye
might be filled with the knowledge of his will in all wisdom and
spiritual understanding;

<span id="v.ii.ii-p3"></span>**9**. Propterea nos quoque, ex quo die
audivimus, non cessamus pro vobis orare, et petere ut impleamini
cognitione voluntatis ipsius, in omni sapientia et prudentia  <span
id="fr_286"></span>[287](#fn_286.md) spirituali:

<span id="v.ii.ii-p5"></span>**10**. That ye might walk worthy of the
Lord unto all pleasing, being fruitful in every good work, and
increasing in the knowledge of God;

<span id="v.ii.ii-p6"></span>**10**. Ut ambuletis digne Deo, in omne
obsequium, in omni bono opere fructificantes, et crescentes in
cognitione Dei:

<span id="v.ii.ii-p7"></span>**11**. Strengthened with all might,
according to his glorious power, unto all patience and longsuffering
with joyfulness;

<span id="v.ii.ii-p8"></span>**11**. Omni robore roborati, secundum
potentiam gloriae ipsius, in omnem tolerantiam et patientiam, cum
gaudio.

<span id="v.ii.ii-p9"></span> 

<span id="v.ii.ii-p10"></span><span id="v.ii.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.ii-p11"></span>**9.** *For this cause we also.* As he has
previously shewn his affection for them in his thanksgivings, so he now
shews it still farther in the earnestness of his prayers in their
behalf.  <span id="fr_287"></span>[288](#fn_287.md) And, assuredly, the
more that the grace of God is conspicuous in any, we ought in that
proportion specially to love and esteem them, and to be concerned as to
their welfare. But what does he pray for in their behalf? That they may
know God more fully; by which he indirectly intimates, that something is
still wanting in them, that he may prepare the way for imparting
instruction to them, and may secure their attention to a fuller
statement of doctrine. For those who think that they have already
attained everything that is worthy of being known, despise and disdain
everything farther that is presented to them. Hence he removes from the
Colossians an impression of this nature, lest it should be a hinderance
in the way of their cheerfully making progress, and allowing what had
been begun in them to receive an additional polish. But what knowledge
does he desire in their behalf? The knowledge of *the divine will*, by
which expression he sets aside all inventions of men, and all
speculations that are at variance with the word of God. For his will is
not to be sought anywhere else than in his word.

<span id="v.ii.ii-p13"></span>He adds — *in all wisdom;* by which he
intimates that the will of God, of which he had made mention, was the
only rule of right knowledge. For if any one is desirous simply to know
those things which it has pleased God to reveal, that is the man who
accurately knows what it is to be truly wise. If we desire anything
beyond that, this will be nothing else than to be foolish, by not
keeping within due bounds. By the word <span
id="v.ii.ii-p13.1"></span>συνέσεως which we render <span
id="v.ii.ii-p13.2"></span>*prudentiam*, (prudence,) I understand — that
discrimination which proceeds from intelligence. Both are called
*spiritual* by Paul, because they are not attained in any other way than
by the guidance of the Spirit.

<span id="v.ii.ii-p14"></span>For the animal man does not perceive the
things that are of God.  
(<span id="v.ii.ii-p14.2"></span>[1Co
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#014)<span id="v.ii.ii-p14.2"></span>..md)

<span id="v.ii.ii-p15"></span>So long as men are regulated by their own
carnal perceptions, they have also their own wisdom, but it is of such a
nature as is mere vanity, however much they may delight themselves in
it. We see what sort of theology there is under the Papacy, what is
contained in the books of philosophers, and what wisdom profane men hold
in estimation. Let us, however, bear in mind, that the wisdom which is
alone commended by Paul is comprehended in the *will of God.*

<span id="v.ii.ii-p16"></span><span id="v.ii.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.ii-p17"></span>**10.** *That ye may walk worthy of God.*
In the *first* place he teaches, what is the end of *spiritual
understanding*, and for what purpose we ought to make proficiency in
God’s school — that we may *walk worthy of God*, that is, that it may be
manifest in our life, that we have not in vain been taught by God.
Whoever they may be that do not direct their endeavors towards this
object, may possibly toil and labor much, but they do nothing better
than wander about in endless windings, without making any progress.
 <span id="fr_288"></span>[289](#fn_288.md) Farther, he admonishes us, that
if we would *walk worthy of God*, we must above all things take heed
that we regulate our whole course of life according to the will of God,
renouncing our own understanding, and bidding farewell to all the
inclinations of our flesh.

<span id="v.ii.ii-p19"></span>This also he again confirms by saying —
*unto all obedience*, or, as they commonly say, *well-pleasing*. Hence
if it is asked, what kind of life is *worthy of God*, let us always keep
in view this definition of Paul — that it is such a life as, leaving the
opinions of men, and leaving, in short, all carnal inclination, is
regulated so as to be in subjection to God alone. From this follow good
works, which are the fruits that God requires from us.

<span id="v.ii.ii-p20"></span>*Increasing, in the knowledge of God.* He
again repeats, that they have not arrived at such perfection as not to
stand in need of farther increase; by which admonition he prepares them,
and as it were leads them by the hand, to an eagerness for proficiency,
that they may shew themselves ready to listen, and teachable. What is
here said to the Colossians, let all believers take as said to
themselves, and draw from this a common exhortation that we must always
make progress in the doctrine of piety until death.

<span id="v.ii.ii-p21"></span><span id="v.ii.ii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.ii-p22"></span>**11.** *Strengthened with all might.* As
he has previously prayed that they might have both a sound understanding
and the right use of it, so also now he prays that they may have courage
and constancy. In this manner he puts them in mind of their own
weakness, for he says, that they will not be strong otherwise than by
the Lord’s help; and not only so, but with the view of magnifying this
exercise of grace the more, he adds, *according to his glorious power.*
“So far from any one being able to stand, through dependence on his own
strength, the power of God shews itself illustriously in helping our
infirmity.” Lastly, he shews in what it is that the strength of
believers ought to display itself — *in all patience and
long-suffering.* For they are constantly, while in this world, exercised
with the cross, and a thousand temptations daily present themselves, so
as to weigh them down, and they see nothing of what God has promised.
They must, therefore, arm themselves with an admirable patience, that
what Isaiah says may be accomplished,

<span id="v.ii.ii-p23"></span>In hope and in silence shall be your
strength.  <span id="fr_289"></span>[290](#fn_289.md)  
(<span id="v.ii.ii-p24.2"></span>[Isa
30:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#015.md)<span
id="v.ii.ii-p24.2"></span>.)

<span id="v.ii.ii-p25"></span>It is preferable to connect with this
sentence the clause, *with* *joy*. For although the other reading is
more commonly to be met with in the Latin versions, *this* is more in
accordance with the Greek manuscripts, and, unquestionably, patience is
not sustained otherwise than by alacrity of mind, and will never be
maintained with fortitude by any one that is not satisfied with his
condition.

<span id="v.ii.iii"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p1"></span><span
id="v.ii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Colossians
1:12-17](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#012.md)<span
id="v.ii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p2"></span>**12**. Giving thanks unto the Father,
which hath made us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the saints
in light:

<span id="v.ii.iii-p3"></span>**12**. Gratias agentes Deo et Patri,
 <span id="fr_290"></span>[291](#fn_290.md) qui nos fecit idoneos ad
participationem hereditatis sanctorum in lumine.

<span id="v.ii.iii-p5"></span>**13**. Who hath delivered us from the
power of darkness, and hath translated *us* into the kingdom of his dear
Son:

<span id="v.ii.iii-p6"></span>**13**. Qui eripuit nos ex potestate
tenebrarum, et transtulit in regnum Filii sui dilecti:

<span id="v.ii.iii-p7"></span>**14**. In whom we have redemption through
his blood, *even* the forgiveness of sins:

<span id="v.ii.iii-p8"></span>**14**. In quo habemus redemptionem per
sanguinem eius, remissionem peccatorum:

<span id="v.ii.iii-p9"></span>**15**. Who is the image of the invisible
God, the firstborn of every creature:

<span id="v.ii.iii-p10"></span>**15**. Qui est imago Dei invisibilis,
primogenitus universae creaturae.

<span id="v.ii.iii-p11"></span>**16**. For by him were all things
created, that are in heaven, and that are in earth, visible and
invisible, whether *they be* thrones, or dominions, or principalities,
or powers: all things were created by him, and for him:

<span id="v.ii.iii-p12"></span>**16**. Quoniam in ipso creata sunt
omnia, tum quae in coelis sunt, tum quae super terram; visibilia et
invisibilia; sive throni, sive dominationes, sive principatus, sive
potestates.

<span id="v.ii.iii-p13"></span>**17**. And he is before all things, and
by him all things consist.

<span id="v.ii.iii-p14"></span>**17**. Omnia per ipsum, et in ipsum
creata sunt: et ipse est ante omnia, et omnia in ipso constant.

<span id="v.ii.iii-p15"></span> 

<span id="v.ii.iii-p16"></span><span id="v.ii.iii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p17"></span>**12.** *Giving thanks.* Again he returns
to thanksgiving, that he may take this opportunity of enumerating the
blessings which had been conferred upon them through Christ, and thus he
enters upon a full delineation of Christ. For this was the only remedy
for fortifying the Colossians against all the snares, by which the false
Apostles endeavored to entrap them — to understand accurately what
Christ was. For how comes it that we are *carried* *about* *with* *so*
*many* *strange* *doctrines*, (<span id="v.ii.iii-p17.1"></span>[Heb
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#009)<span id="v.ii.iii-p17.1"></span>.md)
but because the excellence of Christ is not perceived by us? For Christ
alone makes all other things suddenly vanish. Hence there is nothing
that Satan so much endeavors to accomplish as to bring on mists with the
view of obscuring Christ, because he knows, that by this means the way
is opened up for every kind of falsehood. This, therefore, is the only
means of retaining, as well as restoring pure doctrine — to place Christ
before the view such as he is with all his blessings, that his
excellence may be truly perceived.

<span id="v.ii.iii-p18"></span>The question here is not as to the name.
Papists in common with us acknowledge one and the same Christ; yet in
the mean time how great a difference there is between us and them,
inasmuch as they, after confessing Christ to be the Son of God, transfer
his excellence to others, and scatter it hither and thither, and thus
leave him next to empty,  <span id="fr_291"></span>[292](#fn_291.md) or at
least rob him of a great part of his glory, so that he is called, it is
true, by them the Son of God, but, nevertheless, he is not such as the
Father designed he should be towards us. If, however, Papists would
cordially embrace what is contained in this chapter, we would soon be
perfectly agreed, but the whole of Popery would fall to the ground, for
it cannot stand otherwise than through ignorance of Christ. This will
undoubtedly be acknowledged by every one that will but consider the main
article  <span id="fr_292"></span>[293](#fn_292.md) of this first chapter;
for his grand object here is that we may know that Christ is the
beginning, middle, and end — that it is from him that all things must be
sought — that nothing is, or can be found, apart from him. Now,
therefore, let the readers carefully and attentively observe in what
colors Paul depicts Christ to us.

<span id="v.ii.iii-p21"></span>*Who hath made us meet.* He is still
speaking of the *Father*, because he is the beginning, and efficient
cause (as they speak) of our salvation. As the term *God* is more
distinctly expressive of majesty, so the term *Father* conveys the idea
of clemency and benevolent disposition. It becomes us to contemplate
both as existing in God, that his majesty may inspire us with fear and
reverence, and that his fatherly love may secure our full confidence.
Hence it is not without good reason that Paul has conjoined these two
things, if, after all, you prefer the rendering which the old
interpreter has followed, and which accords with some very ancient Greek
manuscripts.  <span id="fr_293"></span>[294](#fn_293.md) At the same time
there will be no inconsistency in saying, that he contents himself with
the single term, *Father.* Farther, as it is necessary that his
incomparable grace should be expressed by the term *Father*, so it is
also not less necessary that we should, by the term *God*, be roused up
to admiration of so great goodness, that he, who is God, has
condescended thus far.  <span id="fr_294"></span>[295](#fn_294.md)

<span id="v.ii.iii-p24"></span>But for what kindness does he give thanks
to God? For his having *made* him, and others, *meet to be partakers of
the inheritance of the saints.* For we are born children of wrath,
exiles from God’s kingdom. It is God’s adoption that alone *makes us
meet*. Now, adoption depends on an unmerited election. The Spirit of
regeneration is the seal of adoption. He adds, *in light,* that there
might be a contrast — as opposed to the darkness of Satan’s kingdom.
 <span id="fr_295"></span>[296](#fn_295.md)

<span id="v.ii.iii-p26"></span><span id="v.ii.iii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p27"></span>**13.** *Who hath delivered us.* Mark,
here is the beginning of our salvation — when God delivers us from the
depth of ruin into which we were plunged. For wherever his grace is not,
*there* is darkness,  <span id="fr_296"></span>[297](#fn_296.md) as it is
said in <span id="v.ii.iii-p28.2"></span>[Isa
60:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#002.md)<span id="v.ii.iii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p29"></span>Behold darkness shall cover the earth,
and thick darkness the nations; but the Lord shall arise upon thee, and
his glory shall be seen upon thee.

<span id="v.ii.iii-p30"></span>In the first place, we ourselves are
called darkness, and afterwards the whole world, and Satan, the Prince
of darkness,  <span id="fr_297"></span>[298](#fn_297.md) under whose
tyranny we are held captive, until we are set free by Christ’s hand.
 <span id="fr_298"></span>[299](#fn_298.md) From this you may gather that
the whole world, with all its pretended wisdom and righteousness, is
regarded as nothing but darkness in the sight of God, because, apart
from the kingdom of Christ, there is no light.

<span id="v.ii.iii-p33"></span>*Hath translated us into the kingdom.*
These form already the beginnings of our blessedness — when we are
*translated into the kingdom* of Christ, because we *pass* *from*
*death* *into* *life*. (<span id="v.ii.iii-p33.1"></span>[1Jo
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#014.md)<span
id="v.ii.iii-p33.1"></span>.) This, also, Paul ascribes to the grace of
God, that no one may imagine that he can attain so great a blessing by
his own efforts. As, then, our deliverance from the slavery of sin and
death is the work of God, so also our passing into the kingdom of
Christ. He calls Christ the Son of his love, or the Son that is beloved
by God the Father, because it is in him alone that his soul takes
pleasure, as we read in <span id="v.ii.iii-p33.2"></span>[Mt
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#005.md)<span id="v.ii.iii-p33.2"></span>,
and in whom all others are beloved. For we must hold it as a settled
point, that we are not acceptable to God otherwise than through Christ.
Nor can it be doubted, that Paul had it in view to censure indirectly
the mortal enmity that exists between men and God, until love shines
forth in the Mediator.

<span id="v.ii.iii-p34"></span><span id="v.ii.iii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p35"></span>**14.** *In whom we have redemption.* He
now proceeds to set forth in order, that all parts of our salvation are
contained in Christ, and that he alone ought to shine forth, and to be
seen conspicuous above all creatures, inasmuch as he is the beginning
and end of all things. In the *first* place, he says that we have
*redemption*  <span id="fr_299"></span>[300](#fn_299.md) and immediately
explains it as meaning the *remission* *of* *sins*; for these two things
agree together by *apposition*  <span id="fr_300"></span>[301](#fn_300.md)
For, unquestionably, when God remits our transgressions, he exempts us
from condemnation to eternal death. This is our liberty, this our
glorying in the face of death — that our sins are not imputed to us. He
says that this redemption was procured through the *blood of Christ*,
for by the sacrifice of his death all the sins of the world have been
expiated. Let us, therefore, bear in mind, that this is the sole price
of reconciliation, and that all the trifling of Papists as to
satisfactions is blasphemy.  <span id="fr_301"></span>[302](#fn_301.md)

<span id="v.ii.iii-p39"></span><span id="v.ii.iii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p40"></span>**15.** *Who is the image of the
invisible God.* He mounts up higher in discoursing as to the glory of
Christ. He calls him the *image of the invisible God,* meaning by this,
that it is in him alone that God, who is otherwise invisible, is
manifested to us, in accordance with what is said in <span
id="v.ii.iii-p40.1"></span>[Joh
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018.md)<span id="v.ii.iii-p40.1"></span>,

<span id="v.ii.iii-p41"></span>— No man hath ever seen God: the only
begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, hath himself manifested
him to us.

<span id="v.ii.iii-p42"></span>I am well aware in what manner the
ancients were accustomed to explain this; for having a contest to
maintain with Arians, they insist upon the equality of the Son with the
Father, and his (<span id="v.ii.iii-p42.1"></span>ὁμοουσίαν) *identity*
*of* *essence*,  <span id="fr_302"></span>[303](#fn_302.md) while in the
mean time they make no mention of what is the chief point — in what
manner the Father makes himself known to us in Christ. As to
Chrysostom’s laying the whole stress of his defense on the term *image,*
by contending that the creature cannot be said to be the *image* of the
Creator, it is excessively weak; nay more, it is set aside by Paul in
<span id="v.ii.iii-p43.2"></span>[1Co
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#007.md)<span id="v.ii.iii-p43.2"></span>,
whose words are — *The* *man* *is* *the* IMAGE *and* *glory* *of* *God*

<span id="v.ii.iii-p44"></span>That, therefore, we may not receive
anything but what is solid, let us take notice, that the term *image* is
not made use of in reference to essence, but has a reference to us; for
Christ is called the *image of God* on this ground — that he makes God
in a manner visible to us. At the same time, we gather also from this
his (<span id="v.ii.iii-p44.1"></span>ὁμοουσία) identity of essence, for
Christ would not truly represent God, if he were not the essential Word
of God, inasmuch as the question here is not as to those things which by
communication are suitable also to creatures, but the question is as to
the perfect wisdom, goodness, righteousness, and power of God, for the
representing of which no creature were competent. We shall have,
therefore, in this term, a powerful weapon in opposition to the Arians,
but, notwithstanding, we must begin with that reference  <span
id="fr_303"></span>[304](#fn_303.md) that I have mentioned; we must not
insist upon the essence alone. The sum is this — that God in himself,
that is, in his naked majesty, is invisible, and that not to the eyes of
the body merely, but also to the understandings of men, and that he is
revealed to us in Christ alone, that we may behold him as in a mirror.
For in Christ he shews us his righteousness, goodness, wisdom, power, in
short, his entire self. We must, therefore, beware of seeking him
elsewhere, for everything that would set itself off as a representation
of God, apart from Christ, will be an idol.

<span id="v.ii.iii-p46"></span>*The first-born of every creature.* The
reason of this appellation is immediately added — *For in him all things
are created*, as he is, three verses afterwards, called the
*first-begotten from the dead*, because by him we all rise again. Hence,
he is not called the *first-born*, simply on the ground of his having
preceded all creatures in point of time, but because he was begotten by
the Father, that they might be created by him, and that he might be, as
it were, the substance or foundation of all things. It was then a
foolish part that the Arians acted, who argued from this that he was,
consequently, a creature. For what is here treated of is, not what he is
in himself, but what he accomplishes in others.

<span id="v.ii.iii-p47"></span><span id="v.ii.iii-p47.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p48"></span>**16.** *Visible and invisible*. Both of
these kinds were included in the foregoing distinction of *heavenly* and
*earthly* things; but as Paul meant chiefly to make that affirmation in
reference to Angels, he now makes mention of things invisible. Not only,
therefore, have those heavenly creatures which are visible to our eyes,
but spiritual creatures also, been created by the Son of God. What
immediately follows, *whether* *thrones*, *etc.*, is as though he had
said — “by whatever name they are called.”

<span id="v.ii.iii-p49"></span>By *thrones* some understand *Angels*. I
am rather, however, of opinion, that the heavenly palace of God’s
majesty is meant by the term, which we are not to imagine to be such as
our mind can conceive of, but such as is suitable to God himself. We see
the sun and moon, and the whole adorning of heaven, but the glory of
God’s kingdom is hid from our perception, because it is spiritual, and
above the heavens. In fine, let us understand by the term *thrones* that
seat of blessed immortality which is exempted from all change.

<span id="v.ii.iii-p50"></span>By the other terms he undoubtedly
describes the angels. He calls them *powers, principalities,* and
*dominions,* not, as if they swayed any separate kingdom, or were
endowed with peculiar power,  <span id="fr_304"></span>[305](#fn_304.md)
but because they are the ministers of Divine power and dominion.  <span
id="fr_305"></span>[306](#fn_305.md) It is customary, however, that, in so
far as God manifests his power in creatures, his names are, in that
proportion, transferred to them. Thus he is himself alone *Lord* and
*Father*, but those are also called *lords* and *fathers* whom he
dignifies with this honor. Hence it comes that angels, as well as
judges, are called *gods*.  <span id="fr_306"></span>[307](#fn_306.md)
Hence, in this passage also, angels are signalized by magnificent
titles, which intimate, not what they can do of themselves, or apart
from God, but what God does by them, and what functions he has assigned
to them. These things it becomes us to understand in such a manner as to
detract nothing from the glory of God alone; for he does not communicate
his power to angels as to lessen his own; he does not work by them in
such a manner as to resign his power to them; he does not desire that
his glory should shine forth in them, so as to be obscured in himself.
Paul, however, designedly extols the dignity of angels in terms thus
magnificent, that no one may think that it stands in the way of Christ
alone having the pre-eminence over them. He makes use, therefore, of
these terms, as it were by way of concession, as though he had said,
that all their excellence detracts nothing from Christ,  <span
id="fr_307"></span>[308](#fn_307.md) however honorable the titles with
which they are adorned. As for those who philosophize on these terms
with excessive subtlety, that they may draw from them the different
orders of angels, let them regale themselves with their dainties, but
they are assuredly very remote from Paul’s design.

<span id="v.ii.iii-p55"></span><span id="v.ii.iii-p55.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p56"></span>**17.** *All things were created by him,
and for him.* He places angels in subjection to Christ, that they may
not obscure his glory, for *four* reasons: In the *first* place, because
they were *created* *by* *him*; *secondly*, because their creation ought
to be viewed as having a relation *to* him, as their legitimate end;
*thirdly*, because he himself existed always, prior to their creation;
*fourthly*, because he sustains them by his power, and upholds them in
their condition. At the same time, he does not affirm this merely as to
angels, but also as to the whole world. Thus he places the Son of God in
the Highest seat of honor, that he may have the *pre-eminence* over
angels as well as men, and may bring under control all creatures in
heaven and in earth.

<span id="v.ii.iv"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iv-p1"></span><span id="v.ii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Colossians
1:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#018.md)<span id="v.ii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iv-p2"></span>**18**. And he is the head of the body, the
church: who is the beginning, the firstborn from the dead; that in all
*things* he might have the preeminence:

<span id="v.ii.iv-p3"></span>**18**. Et ipse est caput corporis
Ecclesiae, ipse principium, primogenitus mortuis, ut sit in omnibus ipse
primas tenens:

<span id="v.ii.iv-p4"></span>**19**. For it pleased *the Father* that in
him should all fulness dwell;

<span id="v.ii.iv-p5"></span>**19**. Quoniam in ipso placuit omnem
plenitudinem inhabitare.

<span id="v.ii.iv-p6"></span>**20**. And, having made peace through the
blood of his cross, by him to reconcile all things unto himself; by him,
*I say,* whether *they be* things in earth, or things in heaven.

<span id="v.ii.iv-p7"></span>**20**. Et per ipsum reconciliare omnia
sibi, pacificando per sanguinem crucis eius, per ipsum, tam quae sunt
super terram, quam quae sunt in coelis.

<span id="v.ii.iv-p8"></span> 

<span id="v.ii.iv-p9"></span><span id="v.ii.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iv-p10"></span>**18.** *The head of the body.* Having
discoursed in a general way of Christ’s excellence, and of his sovereign
dominion over all creatures, he again returns to those things which
relate peculiarly to the Church. Under the term *head* some consider
many things to be included. And, unquestionably, he makes use
afterwards, as we shall find, of the same metaphor in this sense — that
as in the human body it serves as a root, from which vital energy is
diffused through all the members, so the life of the Church flows out
from Christ, etc. (<span id="v.ii.iv-p10.1"></span>[Col
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#019)<span id="v.ii.iv-p10.1"></span>..md)
Here, however, in my opinion, he speaks chiefly of government. He shews,
therefore, that it is Christ that alone has authority to govern the
Church, that it is he to whom alone believers ought to have an eye, and
on whom alone the unity of the body depends.

<span id="v.ii.iv-p11"></span>Papists, with the view of supporting the
tyranny of their idol, allege that the Church would be (<span
id="v.ii.iv-p11.1"></span>ἀκέφαλον) *without* *a* *head*,  <span
id="fr_308"></span>[309](#fn_308.md) if the Pope did not, as a head,
exercise rule in it. Paul, however, does not allow this honor even to
angels, and yet he does not maim the Church, by depriving her of her
head; for as Christ claims for himself this title, so he truly exercises
the office. I am also well aware of the cavil by which they attempt to
escape — that the Pope is a ministerial head. The name, however, of
*head* is too august to be rightfully transferred to any mortal man,
 <span id="fr_309"></span>[310](#fn_309.md) under any pretext, especially
without the command of Christ. Gregory shews greater modesty, who says
(in his 92nd Epistle, 4th Book) that Peter was indeed one of the chief
members of the Church, but that he and the other Apostles were members
under one head.

<span id="v.ii.iv-p14"></span>*He is the beginning.* As <span
id="v.ii.iv-p14.1"></span>ἀρχὴ is sometimes made use of among the Greeks
to denote the end, to which all things bear a relation, we might
understand it as meaning, that Christ is in this sense (<span
id="v.ii.iv-p14.2"></span>ἀρχὴ) *the* *end*. I prefer, however, to
explain Paul’s words thus — that he is the *beginning*, because he is
the *first-born from the dead*; for in the resurrection there is a
restoration of all things, and in this manner the commencement of the
second and new creation, for the former had fallen to pieces in the ruin
of the first man. As, then, Christ in rising again had made a
commencement of the kingdom of God, he is on good grounds called the
*beginning*; for *then* do we truly begin to have a being in the sight
of God, when we are renewed, so as to be new creatures. He is called the
*first-begotten from the dead*, not merely because he was the first that
rose again, but because he has also restored life to others, as he is
elsewhere called the *first-fruits* *of* *those* *that* *rise* *again*.
(<span id="v.ii.iv-p14.3"></span>[1Co
15:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#020.md)<span
id="v.ii.iv-p14.3"></span>.)

<span id="v.ii.iv-p15"></span>*That he may in all things*. From this he
concludes, that supremacy belongs to him in all things. For if he is the
Author and Restorer of all things, it is manifest that this honor is
justly due to him. At the same time the phrase <span
id="v.ii.iv-p15.1"></span>*in* *omnibus* (*in all things*) may be taken
in two ways — either *over* *all* *creatures*, or, *in* *everything*.
This, however, is of no great importance, for the simple meaning is,
that all things are subjected to his sway.

<span id="v.ii.iv-p16"></span><span id="v.ii.iv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iv-p17"></span>**19.** *Because it hath pleased the
Father that in him.* With the view of confirming what he has declared
respecting Christ, he now adds, that it was so arranged in the
providence of God. And, unquestionably, in order that we may with
reverence adore this mystery, it is necessary that we should be led back
to that fountain. “This,” says he, “has been in accordance with the
counsel of God, that *all fullness may dwell in him*.” Now, he means a
fullness of righteousness, wisdom, power, and every blessing. For
whatever God has he has conferred upon his Son, that he may be glorified
in him, as is said in <span id="v.ii.iv-p17.1"></span>[Joh
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#020.md)<span id="v.ii.iv-p17.1"></span>.
He shews us, however, at the same time, that we must draw from the
fullness of Christ everything good that we desire for our salvation,
because such is the determination of God — not to communicate himself,
or his gifts to men, otherwise than by his Son. “Christ is all things to
us: apart from him we have nothing.” Hence it follows, that all that
detract from Christ, or that impair his excellence, or rob him of his
offices, or, in fine, take away a drop from his fullness, overturn, so
far as is in their power, God’s eternal counsel.

<span id="v.ii.iv-p18"></span><span id="v.ii.iv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iv-p19"></span>**20.** *And by him to reconcile all
things to himself.* This, also, is a magnificent commendation of Christ,
that we cannot be joined to God otherwise than through him. In the first
place, let us consider that our happiness consists in our cleaving to
God, and that, on the other hand, there is nothing more miserable than
to be alienated from him. He declares, accordingly, that we are blessed
through Christ alone, inasmuch as he is the bond of our connection with
God, and, on the other hand, that, apart from him, we are most
miserable, because we are shut out from God.  <span
id="fr_310"></span>[311](#fn_310.md) Let us, however, bear in mind, that
what he ascribes to Christ belongs peculiarly to him, that no portion of
this praise may be transferred to any other.  <span
id="fr_311"></span>[312](#fn_311.md) Hence we must consider the contrasts
to these things to be understood — that if this is Christ’s prerogative,
it does not belong to others. For of set purpose he disputes against
those who imagined that the angels were pacificators, through whom
access to God might be opened up.

<span id="v.ii.iv-p22"></span>*Making peace through the blood of his
cross.* He speaks of the Father, — that he has been made propitious to
his creatures by the blood of Christ. Now he calls it the *blood* *of*
*the* *cross*, inasmuch as it was the pledge and price of the making up
of our peace with God, because it was poured out upon the cross. For it
was necessary that the Son of God should be an expiatory victim, and
endure the punishment of sin, that we might be *the* *righteousness*
*of* *God* *in* *him*. (<span id="v.ii.iv-p22.1"></span>[2Co
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#021)<span id="v.ii.iv-p22.1"></span>..md)
The *blood of the cross,* therefore, means the blood of the sacrifice
which was offered upon the cross for appeasing the anger of God.

<span id="v.ii.iv-p23"></span>In adding *by him,* he did not mean to
express anything new, but to express more distinctly what he had
previously stated, and to impress it still more deeply on their minds —
that Christ alone is the author of reconciliation, as to exclude all
other means. For there is no other that has been crucified for us. Hence
it is he alone, by whom and for whose sake we have God propitious to us.

<span id="v.ii.iv-p24"></span>*Both upon earth and in heaven.* If you
are inclined to understand this as referring merely to rational
creatures, it will mean, men and angels. There were, it is true, no
absurdity in extending it to all without exception; but that I may not
be under the necessity of philosophizing with too much subtlety, I
prefer to understand it as referring to angels and men; and as to the
latter, there is no difficulty as to their having need of a peace maker
in the sight of God. As to angels, however, there is a question not easy
of solution. For what occasion is there for reconciliation, where there
is no discord or hatred? Many, influenced by this consideration, have
explained the passage before us in this manner — that angels have been
brought into agreement with men, and that by this means heavenly
creatures have been restored to favor with earthly creatures. Another
meaning, however, is conveyed by Paul’s words, *that* *God* *hath*
*reconciled* *to* *himself*. That explanation, therefore, is forced.

<span id="v.ii.iv-p25"></span>It remains, that we see what is the
reconciliation of angels and men. I say that men have been reconciled to
God, because they were previously alienated from him by sin, and because
they would have had him as a Judge to their ruin,  <span
id="fr_312"></span>[313](#fn_312.md) had not the grace of the Mediator
interposed for appeasing his anger. Hence the nature of the peace making
between God and men was this, that enmities have been abolished through
Christ, and thus God becomes a Father instead of a Judge.

<span id="v.ii.iv-p27"></span>Between God and angels the state of
matters is very different, for there was *there*  <span
id="fr_313"></span>[314](#fn_313.md) no revolt, no sin, and consequently no
separation. It was, however, necessary that angels, also, should be made
to be at peace with God, for, being creatures, they were not beyond the
risk of falling, had they not been confirmed by the grace of Christ.
This, however, is of no small importance for the perpetuity of peace
with God, to have a fixed standing in righteousness, so as to have no
longer any fear of fall or revolt. Farther, in that very obedience which
they render to God, there is not such absolute perfection as to give
satisfaction to God in every respect, and without the need of pardon.
And this beyond all doubt is what is meant by that statement in <span
id="v.ii.iv-p28.2"></span>[Job
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#018.md)<span id="v.ii.iv-p28.2"></span>,
He *will* *find* *iniquity* *in* *his* *angels*. For if it is explained
as referring to the devil, what mighty thing were it? But the Spirit
declares there, that the greatest purity is vile,  <span
id="fr_314"></span>[315](#fn_314.md) if it is brought into comparison with
the righteousness of God. We must, therefore, conclude, that there is
not on the part of angels so much of righteousness as would suffice for
their being fully joined with God. They have, therefore, need of a peace
maker, through whose grace they may wholly cleave to God. Hence it is
with propriety that Paul declares, that the grace of Christ does not
reside among mankind alone, and on the other hand makes it common also
to angels. Nor is there any injustice done to angels, in sending them to
a Mediator, that they may, through his kindness, have a well grounded
peace with God.

<span id="v.ii.iv-p30"></span>Should any one, on the pretext of the
universality of the expression,  <span id="fr_315"></span>[316](#fn_315.md)
move a question in reference to devils, whether Christ be their peace
maker also? I answer, No, not even of wicked men: though I confess that
there is a difference, inasmuch as the benefit of redemption is offered
to the latter, but not to the former.  <span
id="fr_316"></span>[317](#fn_316.md) This, however, has nothing to do with
Paul’s words, which include nothing else than this, that it is through
Christ alone, that, all creatures, who have any connection at all with
God, cleave to him.

<span id="v.ii.v"></span>

<span id="v.ii.v-p1"></span><span id="v.ii.v-p1.1"></span>[Colossians
1:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#021.md)<span id="v.ii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.v-p2"></span>**21**. And you, that were sometime
alienated and enemies in *your* mind by wicked works, yet now hath he
reconciled

<span id="v.ii.v-p3"></span>**21**. Et vos quum aliquando essetis
alienati, et inimici cogitatione in operibus malis,

<span id="v.ii.v-p4"></span>**22**. In the body of his flesh through
death, to present you holy and unblameable and unreproveable in his
sight:

<span id="v.ii.v-p5"></span>**22**. Nunc reconciliavit in corpore carnis
suae per mortem; ut sisteret vos sanctos et irreprehensibiles in
conspectu suo:

<span id="v.ii.v-p6"></span>**23**. If ye continue in the faith grounded
and settled, and *be* not moved away from the hope of the gospel, which
ye have heard, *and* which was preached to every creature which is under
heaven; whereof I Paul am made a minister;

<span id="v.ii.v-p7"></span>**23**. Si quidem permanetis fide fundati et
firmi, et non dimoveamini a spe Evangelii quod audistis: quod
praedicatum est apud universam creaturam, quae sub coelo est: cuius
factus sum ego Paulus minister.

<span id="v.ii.v-p8"></span> 

<span id="v.ii.v-p9"></span><span id="v.ii.v-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.v-p10"></span>**21.** *And whereas ye were formerly.* The
general doctrine which he had set forth he now applies particularly to
them, that they may feel that they are guilty of very great ingratitude,
if they allow themselves to be drawn away from Christ to new inventions.
And this arrangement must be carefully observed, because the particular
application of a doctrine, so to speak, affects the mind more
powerfully. Farther, he leads their views to experience, that they may
recognize in themselves the benefit of that redemption of which he had
made mention. “You are yourselves a sample  <span
id="fr_317"></span>[318](#fn_317.md) of that grace which I declare to have
been offered to mankind through Christ. For ye were *alienated*, that
is, from God. Ye were *enemies*; now ye are received into favor: whence
comes this? It is because God, being appeased by the death of Christ,
has become reconciled to you.” At the same time, there is in this
statement a change of person, for what he has previously declared as to
the Father, he now affirms respecting Christ; for we must necessarily
explain it thus, in *the* *body* *of* HIS *flesh*

<span id="v.ii.v-p12"></span>The term <span
id="v.ii.v-p12.1"></span>διανοίας (thought) I explain, as employed by
way of amplification, as though he had said, that they were altogether,
and in the whole of their mental system, *alienated from God*, that no
one may imagine, after the manner of philosophers, that the alienation
is merely in a particular part, as Popish theologians restrict it to the
lower appetites. “Nay,” says Paul, “what made you odious to God, had
taken possession of your whole mind.” In fine, he meant to intimate,
that man, whatever he may be, is wholly at variance with God, and is an
enemy to him. The old interpreter renders it (<span
id="v.ii.v-p12.2"></span>*sensum*) *sense*. Erasmus renders it <span
id="v.ii.v-p12.3"></span>*mentem*, (*mind*.) I have made use of the term
<span id="v.ii.v-p12.4"></span>*cogitationis*, to denote what the French
call intention. For such is the force of the Greek word, and Paul’s
meaning requires that it should be rendered so.

<span id="v.ii.v-p13"></span>Farther, while the term *enemies* has a
passive as well as active signification, it is well suited to us in both
respects, so long as we are apart from Christ. For we are born children
of wrath, and every thought of the flesh is enmity against God. (<span
id="v.ii.v-p13.1"></span>[Ro 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#007.md)<span
id="v.ii.v-p13.1"></span>.)

<span id="v.ii.v-p14"></span>*In wicked works.* He shews from its
effects the inward hatred which lies hid in the heart. For as mankind
endeavor to free themselves from all blame, until they have been openly
convicted, God shews them their impiety by outward works, as is more
amply treated of in <span id="v.ii.v-p14.1"></span>[Ro
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#019.md)<span id="v.ii.v-p14.1"></span>.
Farther, what is told us here as to the Colossians, is applicable to us
also, for we differ nothing in respect of nature. There is only this
difference, that some are called from their mother’s womb, whose malice
God anticipates, so as to prevent them from breaking forth into open
fruits, while others, after having wandered during a great part of their
life, are brought back to the fold. We all, however, stand in need of
Christ as our peace maker, because we are the slaves of sin, and where
sin is, there is enmity between God and men.

<span id="v.ii.v-p15"></span><span id="v.ii.v-p15.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.v-p16"></span>**22.** *In the body of his flesh.* The
expression is in appearance absurd, but the *body of his flesh* means
that human body, which the Son of God had in common with us. He meant,
therefore, to intimate, that the Son of God had put on the same nature
with us, that he took upon him this vile earthly body, subject to many
infirmities, that he might be our Mediator. When he adds, *by* *death*,
he again calls us back to sacrifice. For it was necessary that the Son
of God should become man, and be a partaker of our flesh, that he might
be our brother: it was necessary that he should by dying become a
sacrifice, that he might make his Father propitious to us.

<span id="v.ii.v-p17"></span>*That he might present us holy.* Here we
have the second and principal part of our salvation — newness of life.
For the entire blessing of redemption consists mainly in these two
things, remission of sins, and spiritual regeneration. (<span
id="v.ii.v-p17.1"></span>[Jer
31:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#033)<span id="v.ii.v-p17.1"></span>..md)
What he has already spoken of was a great matter, that righteousness has
been procured for us through the death of Christ, so that, our sins
being remitted, we are acceptable to God. Now, however, he teaches us,
that there is in addition to this another benefit equally distinguished
— the gift of the Holy Spirit, by which we are renewed in the image of
God. This, also, is a passage worthy of observation, as shewing that a
gratuitous righteousness is not conferred upon us in Christ, without our
being at the same time regenerated by the Spirit to the obedience of
righteousness, as he teaches us elsewhere, that

<span id="v.ii.v-p18"></span>Christ is made to us righteousness and
sanctification.  
(<span id="v.ii.v-p18.2"></span>[1Co
1:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#030)<span id="v.ii.v-p18.2"></span>..md)

<span id="v.ii.v-p19"></span>The *former* we obtain by a gratuitous
acceptance;  <span id="fr_318"></span>[319](#fn_318.md) and the *latter* by
the gift of the Holy Spirit, when we are made new creatures. There is
however an inseparable connection between these two blessings of grace.

<span id="v.ii.v-p21"></span>Let us, however, take notice, that this
holiness is nothing more than begun in us, and is indeed every day
making progress, but will not be perfected until Christ shall appear for
the restoration of all things. For the Cœlestinians  <span
id="fr_319"></span>[320](#fn_319.md) and the Pelagians in ancient times
mistakingly perverted this passage, so as to shut out the gracious
benefit of the remission of sins. For they conceived of a perfection in
this world which could satisfy the judgment of God, so that mercy was
not needed. Paul, however, does not by any means shew us here what is
accomplished in this world, but what is the end of our calling, and what
blessings are brought to us by Christ.

<span id="v.ii.v-p23"></span><span id="v.ii.v-p23.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.v-p24"></span>**23.** *If ye continue.* Here we have an
exhortation to perseverance, by which he admonishes them that all the
grace that had been conferred upon them hitherto would be vain, unless
they persevered in the purity of the gospel. And thus he intimates, that
they are still only making progress, and have not yet reached the goal.
For the stability of their faith was at that time exposed to danger
through the stratagems of the false apostles. Now he paints in lively
colors assurance of faith when he bids the Colossians be *grounded and
settled* in it. For faith is not like mere opinion, which is shaken by
various movements, but has a firm steadfastness, which can withstand all
the machinations of hell. Hence the whole system of Popish theology will
never afford even the slightest taste of true faith, which holds it as a
settled point, that we must always be in doubt respecting the present
state of grace, as well as respecting final perseverance. He afterwards
takes notice also of a relationship  <span
id="fr_320"></span>[321](#fn_320.md) which subsists between faith and the
gospel, when he says that the Colossians will be *settled* in the faith
only in the event of their not falling back from the *hope of the
gospel*; that is, the hope which shines forth upon us through means of
the gospel, for where the gospel is, *there* is the hope of everlasting
salvation. Let us, however, bear in mind, that the sum of all is
contained in Christ. Hence he enjoins it upon them here to shun all
doctrines which lead away from Christ, so that the minds of men are
otherwise occupied.

<span id="v.ii.v-p26"></span>*Which ye have heard.* As the false
apostles themselves, who tear and rend Christ in pieces, are accustomed
proudly to glory in the name of the gospel, and as it is a common
artifice of Satan to trouble men’s consciences under a false pretext of
the gospel, that the truth of the gospel may be brought into confusion,
 <span id="fr_321"></span>[322](#fn_321.md) Paul, on this account,
expressly declares, that *that* was the genuine,  <span
id="fr_322"></span>[323](#fn_322.md) *that* the undoubted gospel, which the
Colossians had heard, namely, from Epaphras, that they might not lend an
ear to doctrines at variance with it. He adds, besides, a confirmation
of it, that it is the very same as was preached over the whole world. It
is, I say, no ordinary confirmation when they hear that they have the
whole Church agreeing with them, and that they follow no other doctrine
than what the Apostles had alike taught and was everywhere received.

<span id="v.ii.v-p29"></span>It is, however, a ridiculous boasting of
Papists, in respect of their impugning our doctrine by this argument,
that it is not preached everywhere with approbation and applause,
inasmuch as we have few that assent to it. For though they should burst,
they will never deprive us of this — that we at this day teach nothing
but what was preached of old by Prophets and Apostles, and is obediently
received by the whole band of saints. For Paul did not mean that the
gospel should be approved of by the consent of all ages  <span
id="fr_323"></span>[324](#fn_323.md) in such a way that, if it were
rejected, its authority would be shaken. He had, on the contrary, an eye
to that commandment of Christ,

<span id="v.ii.v-p31"></span>Go, preach the gospel to every creature;
(<span id="v.ii.v-p31.1"></span>[Mr
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#015)<span id="v.ii.v-p31.1"></span>;.md)

<span id="v.ii.v-p32"></span>which commandment depends on so many
predictions of the Prophets, foretelling that the kingdom of Christ
would be spread over the whole world. What else then does Paul mean by
these words than that the Colossians had also been watered by those
*living* *streams*, which, *springing* *forth* *from* *Jerusalem*, were
to flow out through the whole world? (<span
id="v.ii.v-p32.1"></span>[Zec
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#008)<span id="v.ii.v-p32.1"></span>..md)

<span id="v.ii.v-p33"></span>We also do not glory in vain, or without
remarkable fruit and consolation,  <span
id="fr_324"></span>[325](#fn_324.md) that we have the same gospel, which is
preached among all nations by the commandment of the Lord, which is
received by all the Churches, and in the profession of which all pious
persons have lived and died. It is also no common help for fortifying us
against so many assaults, that we have the consent of the whole Church —
such, I mean, as is worthy of so distinguished a title. We also
cordially subscribe to the views of Augustine, who refutes the Donatists
 <span id="fr_325"></span>[326](#fn_325.md) by this argument particularly,
that they bring forward a gospel that is in all the Churches unheard of
and unknown. This truly is said on good grounds, for if it is a true
gospel that is brought forward, while not ratified by any approbation on
the part of the Church, it follows, that vain and false are the many
promises in which it is predicted that the preaching of the gospel will
be carried through the whole world, and which declare that the *sons*
*of* *God* *shall* *be* *gathered* *from all nations and countries,
etc.* (<span id="v.ii.v-p35.1"></span>[Ho
1:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#010.md)<span
id="v.ii.v-p35.1"></span>.) But what do Papists do? Having bid farewell
to Prophets and Apostles, and passing by the ancient Church, they would
have their revolt from the gospel be looked upon as the consent of the
universal Church. Where is the resemblance? Hence, when there is a
dispute as to the consent of the Church, let us return to the Apostles
and their preaching, as Paul does here. Farther, lest any one should
explain too rigidly the term denoting universality,  <span
id="fr_326"></span>[327](#fn_326.md) Paul means simply, that it had been
preached everywhere far and wide.

<span id="v.ii.v-p37"></span>*Of which I am made.* He speaks also of
himself personally, and this was very necessary, for we must always take
care, that we do not rashly intrude ourselves into the office of
teaching.  <span id="fr_327"></span>[328](#fn_327.md) He accordingly
declares, that this office was appointed him, that he may secure for
himself right and authority. And, indeed, he so connects his apostleship
with their faith, that they may not have it in their power to reject his
doctrine otherwise than by abandoning the gospel which they had
embraced.

<span id="v.ii.vi"></span>

<span id="v.ii.vi-p1"></span><span id="v.ii.vi-p1.1"></span>[Colossians
1:24-29](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#024.md)<span id="v.ii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.vi-p2"></span>**24**. Who now rejoice in my sufferings
for you, and fill up that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ
in my flesh for his body’s sake, which is the church:

<span id="v.ii.vi-p3"></span>**24**. Nunc gaudeo in passionibus pro
vobis, et adimpleo ea quae desunt afflictionibus Christi in carne mea,
pro corpore eius, quod est Ecclesia:

<span id="v.ii.vi-p4"></span>**25**. Whereof I am made a minister,
according to the dispensation of God which is given to me for you, to
fulfil the word of God;

<span id="v.ii.vi-p5"></span>**25**. Cuius factus sum minister, secundum
dispensationem Dei, quae mihi data est erga vos, ad implendum sermonem
Dei:

<span id="v.ii.vi-p6"></span>**26** *Even* the mystery which hath been
hid from ages and from generations, but now is made manifest to his
saints:

<span id="v.ii.vi-p7"></span>**26**. Mysterium reconditum a saeculis et
generationibus, quod nunc revelatum est sanctis eius.

<span id="v.ii.vi-p8"></span>**27**. To whom God would make known what
*is* the riches of the glory of this mystery among the Gentiles; which
is Christ in you, the hope of glory:

<span id="v.ii.vi-p9"></span>**27**. Quibus voluit Deus patefacere, quae
sint divitiae gloriae mysterii huius in Gentibus, qui est Christus in
vobis, spes gloriae:

<span id="v.ii.vi-p10"></span>**28**. Whom we preach, warning every man,
and teaching every man in all wisdom; that we may present every man
perfect in Christ Jesus:

<span id="v.ii.vi-p11"></span>**28**. Quem nos praedicamus, admonentes
omnem hominem, et docentes omnem hominem in omni sapientia, ut sistamus
omnem hominem perfectum in Christo Iesu.

<span id="v.ii.vi-p12"></span>**29**. Whereunto I also labour, striving
according to his working, which worketh in me mightily.

<span id="v.ii.vi-p13"></span>**29**. In quam rem etiam laboro,
decertans secundum potentiam eius, quae operatur in me potenter.

<span id="v.ii.vi-p14"></span> 

<span id="v.ii.vi-p15"></span><span id="v.ii.vi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.vi-p16"></span>**24.** *I now rejoice.* He has previously
claimed for himself authority on the ground of his calling. Now,
however, he provides against the honor of his apostleship being
detracted from by the bonds and persecutions, which he endured for the
sake of the gospel. For Satan, also, perversely turns these things into
occasions of rendering the servants of God the more contemptible.
Farther, he encourages them by his example not to be intimidated by
persecutions, and he sets forth to their view his zeal, that he may have
greater weight.  <span id="fr_328"></span>[329](#fn_328.md) Nay more, he
gives proof of his affection towards them by no common pledge, when he
declares that he willingly bears for their sake the afflictions which he
endures. “But whence,” some one will ask, “arises this *joy*?” From his
seeing the fruit that springs from it. “The affliction that I endure on
your account is pleasant to me, because I do not suffer it in vain.”
 <span id="fr_329"></span>[330](#fn_329.md) In the same manner, in his
First Epistle to the Thessalonians, he says, that he *rejoiced* *in*
*all* *necessities* *and* *afflictions*, on the ground of what he had
heard as to their faith. (<span id="v.ii.vi-p18.2"></span>[1 Thess.
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#006.md),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#007)<span id="v.ii.vi-p18.2"></span>..md)

<span id="v.ii.vi-p19"></span>*And fill up what is wanting.* The
particle *and* I understand as meaning *for*, for he assigns a reason
why he is joyful in his sufferings, because he is in this thing a
partner with Christ, and nothing happier can be desired than this
partnership.  <span id="fr_330"></span>[331](#fn_330.md) He also brings
forward a consolation common to all the pious, that in all tribulations,
especially in so far as they suffer anything for the sake of the gospel,
they are partakers of the cross of Christ, that they may enjoy
fellowship with him in a blessed resurrection.

<span id="v.ii.vi-p21"></span>Nay more, he declares that there is thus
*filled up what is wanting in the affliction of Christ.* For as he
speaks in <span id="v.ii.vi-p21.1"></span>[Ro
8:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#029.md)<span id="v.ii.vi-p21.1"></span>,

<span id="v.ii.vi-p22"></span>Whom God elected, he also hath
predestinated to be conformed to the image of Christ, that he may be the
first-born among the brethren.

<span id="v.ii.vi-p23"></span>Farther, we know that there is so great a
unity between Christ and his members, that the name of *Christ*
sometimes includes the whole body, as in <span
id="v.ii.vi-p23.1"></span>[1Co
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#012.md)<span id="v.ii.vi-p23.1"></span>,
for while discoursing there respecting the Church, he comes at length to
the conclusion, that in Christ the same thing holds as in the human
body. As, therefore, Christ has suffered *once* in his own person, so he
suffers *daily* in his members, and in this way there are *filled* *up*
those sufferings which the Father hath appointed for his body by his
decree.  <span id="fr_331"></span>[332](#fn_331.md) Here we have a *second*
consideration, which ought to bear up our minds and comfort them in
afflictions, that it is thus fixed and determined by the providence of
God, that we must be conformed to Christ in the endurance of the cross,
and that the fellowship that we have with him extends to this also.

<span id="v.ii.vi-p25"></span>He adds, also, a *third* reason — that his
sufferings are advantageous, and that not merely to a few, but to the
whole Church. He had previously stated that he suffered in behalf of the
Colossians, and he now declares still farther, that the advantage
extends to the whole Church. This advantage has been spoken of in <span
id="v.ii.vi-p25.1"></span>[Php
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#012.md)<span id="v.ii.vi-p25.1"></span>.
What could be clearer, less forced, or more simple, than this
exposition, that Paul is joyful in persecution, because he considers, in
accordance with what he writes elsewhere, that we must

<span id="v.ii.vi-p26"></span>carry about with us in our body the
mortification of Christ, that his life may be manifested in us? (<span
id="v.ii.vi-p26.1"></span>[2Co
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#010)<span id="v.ii.vi-p26.1"></span>..md)

<span id="v.ii.vi-p27"></span>He says also in Timothy,

<span id="v.ii.vi-p28"></span>If we suffer with him, we shall also reign
with him: if we die with him, we shall also live with him, (<span
id="v.ii.vi-p28.1"></span>[2Ti
2:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#011.md)<span
id="v.ii.vi-p28.1"></span>)

<span id="v.ii.vi-p29"></span> and thus the issue will be blessed and
glorious. *Farther*, he considers that we must not refuse the condition
which God has appointed for his Church, that the members of Christ may
have a suitable correspondence with the head; and, *thirdly*, that
afflictions must be cheerfully endured, inasmuch as they are profitable
to all the pious, and promote the welfare of the whole Church, by
adorning the doctrine of the gospel.

<span id="v.ii.vi-p30"></span>Papists, however, disregarding and setting
aside all these things,  <span id="fr_332"></span>[333](#fn_332.md) have
struck out a new contrivance in order that they may establish their
system of indulgences. They give the name of *indulgences* to a
remission of punishments, obtained by us through the merits of the
martyrs. For, as they deny that there is a gratuitous remission of sins,
and allege that they are redeemed by *satisfactory* deeds, when the
*satisfactions* do not fill up the right measure, they call into their
help the blood of the martyrs, that it may, along with the blood of
Christ, serve as an expiation in the judgment of God. And this mixture
they call the *treasure* *of* *the* *Church*  <span
id="fr_333"></span>[334](#fn_333.md) , the keys of which they afterwards
intrust to whom they think fit. Nor are they ashamed to wrest this
passage, with the view of supporting so execrable a blasphemy, as if
Paul here affirmed that his sufferings are of avail for expiating the
sins of men.

<span id="v.ii.vi-p33"></span>They urge in their support the term <span
id="v.ii.vi-p33.1"></span>ὑστερήματα, (*things* *wanting*,) as if Paul
meant to say, that the sufferings which Christ has endured for the
redemption of men were insufficient. There is no one, however, that does
not see that Paul speaks in this manner, because it is necessary, that
by the afflictions of the pious, the body of the Church should be
brought to its perfection, inasmuch as the members are conformed to
their head.  <span id="fr_334"></span>[335](#fn_334.md) I should also be
afraid of being suspected of calumny in repeating things so monstrous,
 <span id="fr_335"></span>[336](#fn_335.md) if their books did not bear
witness that I impute nothing to them groundlessly. They urge, also,
what Paul says, that he suffers *for* the Church. It is surprising that
this refined interpretation had not occurred to any of the ancients, for
they all interpret it as we do, to mean, that the saints suffer *for*
the Church, inasmuch as they confirm the faith of the Church. Papists,
however, gather from this that the saints are redeemers, because they
shed their blood for the expiation of sins. That my readers, however,
may perceive more clearly their impudence, allow that the martyrs, as
well as Christ, *suffered* *for* the Church, but in different ways, as I
am inclined to express in Augustine’s words rather than in my own. For
he writes thus in his 84th treatise on John: “Though we brethren die for
brethren, yet there is no blood of any martyr that is poured out for the
remission of sins. This Christ did for us. Nor has he in this conferred
upon us matter of imitation, but ground of thanksgiving.” Also, in the
fourth book to Bonifacius: “As the only Son of God became the Son of
man, that he might make us sons of God, so he has alone, without
offense, endured punishment for us, that we may through him, without
merit, obtain undeserved favor.” Similar to these is the statement of
Leo Bishop of Rome; “The righteous *received* crowns, did not give them;
and for the fortitude of believers there have come forth *examples* *of*
*patience*, *not* *gifts* *of* *righteousness*. For their deaths were
for themselves, and no one by his latter end paid the debt of another.”
 <span id="fr_336"></span>[337](#fn_336.md)

<span id="v.ii.vi-p37"></span>Now, that this is the meaning of Paul’s
words is abundantly manifest from the context, for he adds, that he
suffers *according to the dispensation that was given to him.* And we
know that the ministry was committed to him, not of *redeeming* the
Church, but of *edifying* it; and he himself immediately afterwards
expressly acknowledges this. This is also what he writes to Timothy,

<span id="v.ii.vi-p38"></span>that he endures all things for the sake of
the elect, that they may obtain the salvation which is in Christ
Jesus.  
(<span id="v.ii.vi-p38.2"></span>[2Ti
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#010)<span id="v.ii.vi-p38.2"></span>..md)

<span id="v.ii.vi-p39"></span>Also, in <span
id="v.ii.vi-p39.1"></span>[2Co
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#004.md)<span id="v.ii.vi-p39.1"></span>,
 <span id="fr_337"></span>[338](#fn_337.md) that

<span id="v.ii.vi-p41"></span>he willingly endures all things for their
consolation and salvation.

<span id="v.ii.vi-p42"></span>Let, therefore, pious readers learn to
hate and detest those profane sophists, who thus deliberately corrupt
and adulterate the Scriptures, in order that they may give some color to
their delusions.

<span id="v.ii.vi-p43"></span><span id="v.ii.vi-p43.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.vi-p44"></span>**25.** *Of which I am made a minister.*
Mark under what character he suffers for the Church — as being a
*minister*, not to *give* the price of redemption, (as Augustine
dexterously and piously expresses himself,) but to *proclaim* it. He
calls himself, however, in this instance, a minister of the Church on a
different ground from that on which he called himself elsewhere, (<span
id="v.ii.vi-p44.1"></span>[1Co
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#001)<span id="v.ii.vi-p44.1"></span>,.md)
a *minister* *of* *God*, and a little ago, (<span
id="v.ii.vi-p44.2"></span>[Col
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#023)<span id="v.ii.vi-p44.2"></span>,.md)
a *minister* *of* *the* *gospel*. For the Apostles serve God and Christ
for the advancement of the glory of both: they serve the Church, and
administer the gospel itself, with a view to promote salvation. There
is, therefore, a different reason for the ministry in these expressions,
but the one cannot subsist without the other. He says, however,
*towards* *you*, that they may know that his office has a connection
also with them.

<span id="v.ii.vi-p45"></span>*To fulfill the word.* He states the end
of his ministry — that the word of God may be effectual, as it is, when
it is obediently received. For this is the excellence of the gospel,
that it is the

<span id="v.ii.vi-p46"></span>power of God unto salvation to every one
that believeth.  
(<span id="v.ii.vi-p46.2"></span>[Ro
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#016)<span id="v.ii.vi-p46.2"></span>..md)

<span id="v.ii.vi-p47"></span>God, therefore, gives efficacy and
influence to his word through means of the Apostles. For although
preaching itself, whatever may be its issue, is the fulfilling of the
word, yet it is the fruit that shews at length  <span
id="fr_338"></span>[339](#fn_338.md) that the seed has not been sown in
vain.

<span id="v.ii.vi-p49"></span><span id="v.ii.vi-p49.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.vi-p50"></span>**26.** *Hidden mystery.* Here we have a
commendation of the gospel — that it is a wonderful secret of God. It is
not without good reason that Paul so frequently extols the gospel by
bestowing upon it the highest commendations in his power; for he saw
that it was

<span id="v.ii.vi-p51"></span>a stumblingblock to the Jews, and
foolishness to the Greeks.  
(<span id="v.ii.vi-p51.2"></span>[1Co
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#023)<span id="v.ii.vi-p51.2"></span>..md)

<span id="v.ii.vi-p52"></span>We see also at this day, in what hatred it
is held by hypocrites, and how haughtily it is contemned by the world.
Paul, accordingly, with the view of setting aside judgments so unfair
and perverse, extols in magnificent terms the dignity of the gospel as
often as an opportunity presents itself, and for that purpose he makes
use of various arguments, according to the connection of the passage.
Here he calls it a *sublime* *secret*, which was *hid from ages and
generations,* that is, from the beginning of the world, through so many
revolutions of ages.  <span id="fr_339"></span>[340](#fn_339.md) Now, that
it is of the gospel that he speaks, is evident from <span
id="v.ii.vi-p53.2"></span>[Ro
16:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#025.md)<span id="v.ii.vi-p53.2"></span>,
<span id="v.ii.vi-p53.3"></span>[Eph
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#009.md)<span id="v.ii.vi-p53.3"></span>,
and other similar passages.

<span id="v.ii.vi-p54"></span>The reason, however, why it is so called,
is demanded. Some, in consequence of Paul’s making express mention of
the calling of the Gentiles, are of opinion, that the sole reason why it
is so called is, that the Lord had, in a manner, contrary to all
expectation, poured out his grace upon the Gentiles, whom he had
appeared to have shut out for ever from participation in eternal life.
Any one, however, that will examine the whole passage more narrowly,
will perceive that this is the *third* reason, not the *only* one, in so
far, I mean, as relates to the passage before us, and that other in the
Romans, to which I have referred. For the *first* is — that whereas God
had, previously to the advent of Christ, governed his Church under dark
coverings, both of words and of ceremonies, he has suddenly shone forth
in full brightness by means of the doctrine of the gospel. The *second*
is — that whereas nothing was previously seen but external figures,
Christ has been exhibited, bringing with him the full truth, which had
lain concealed. The *third* *is*, what I have mentioned — that the whole
world, which had up to this time been estranged from God, is called to
the hope of salvation, and the same inheritance of eternal life is
offered to all. An attentive consideration of these things constrains us
to reverence and adore this *mystery* which Paul proclaims, however it
may be held in contempt by the world, or even in derision.

<span id="v.ii.vi-p55"></span>*Which is now revealed*. Lest any one
should turn aside to another meaning the term *mystery,* as though he
were speaking of a thing that was still secret and unknown, he adds,
that it has now at length been published,  <span
id="fr_340"></span>[341](#fn_340.md) that it might be known by mankind.
What, therefore, was in its own nature secret, has been made manifest by
the will of God. Hence, there is no reason why its obscurity should
alarm us, after the revelation that God has made of it. He adds,
however, *to the saints*, for *God*’*s arm* has not been *revealed* *to*
all, (<span id="v.ii.vi-p56.2"></span>[Isa
53:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001)<span id="v.ii.vi-p56.2"></span>,.md)
that they might understand his counsel.

<span id="v.ii.vi-p57"></span><span id="v.ii.vi-p57.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.vi-p58"></span>**27.** *To whom God was pleased to make
known.* Here he puts a bridle upon the presumption of men, that they may
not allow themselves to be wise, or to inquire beyond what they ought,
but may learn to rest satisfied with this one thing that it has so
pleased God. For the good pleasure of God ought to be perfectly
sufficient for us as a reason. This, however, is said principally for
the purpose of commending the grace of God; for Paul intimates, that
mankind did by no means furnish occasion for God’s making them
participants of this secret, when he teaches that he was led to this of
his own accord, and because he *was* *pleased* to do so. For it is
customary for Paul to place the good pleasure of God in opposition to
all human merits and external causes.

<span id="v.ii.vi-p59"></span>*What are the riches.* We must always take
notice, in what magnificent terms he speaks in extolling the dignity of
the gospel. For he was well aware that the ingratitude of men is so
great, that notwithstanding that this treasure is inestimable, and the
grace of God in it is so distinguished, they, nevertheless, carelessly
despise it, or at least think lightly of it. Hence, not resting
satisfied with the term *mystery*, he adds *glory,* and that, too, not
trivial or common. For *riches*, according to Paul, denote, as is well
known, amplitude.  <span id="fr_341"></span>[342](#fn_341.md) He states
particularly, that those *riches* have been manifested among the
Gentiles; for what is more wonderful than that the Gentiles, who had
during so many ages been sunk in death, so as to appear to be utterly
ruined, are all on a sudden reckoned among the sons of God, and receive
the inheritance of salvation?

<span id="v.ii.vi-p61"></span>*Which is Christ in you.* What he had said
as to the Gentiles generally he applies to the Colossians themselves,
that they may more effectually recognize in themselves the grace of God,
and may embrace it with greater reverence. He says, therefore, *which is
Christ,* meaning by this, that all that secret is contained in Christ,
and that all the riches of heavenly wisdom are obtained by them when
they have Christ, as we shall find him stating more openly a little
afterwards. He adds, *in you*, because they now possess Christ, from
whom they were lately so much estranged, that nothing could exceed it.
Lastly, he calls Christ the *hope of glory*, that they may know that
nothing is wanting to them for complete blessedness when they have
obtained Christ. This, however, is a wonderful work of God, that in
*earthen* and frail *vessels* (<span id="v.ii.vi-p61.1"></span>[2Co
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#007)<span id="v.ii.vi-p61.1"></span>.md)
the hope of heavenly glory resides.

<span id="v.ii.vi-p62"></span><span id="v.ii.vi-p62.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.vi-p63"></span>**28.** *Whom we preach.* Here he applies
to his own preaching everything that he has previously declared as to
the wonderful and adorable secret of God; and thus he explains what he
had already touched upon as to the *dispensation* which had been
committed to him; for he has it in view to adorn his apostleship, and to
claim authority for his doctrine: for after having extolled the gospel
in the highest terms, he now adds, that it is that divine secret which
he preaches. It was not, however, without good reason that he had taken
notice a little before, that Christ is the sum of that secret, that they
might know that nothing can be taught that has more of perfection than
Christ.

<span id="v.ii.vi-p64"></span>The expressions that follow have also
great weight. He represents himself as the teacher of all men; meaning
by this, that no one is so eminent in respect of wisdom as to be
entitled to exempt himself from tuition. “God has placed me in a lofty
position, as a public herald of his secret, that the whole world,
without exception, may learn from me.”

<span id="v.ii.vi-p65"></span>*In all wisdom.* This expression is
equivalent to his affirming that his doctrine is such as to conduct a
man to a wisdom that is perfect, and has nothing wanting; and this is
what he immediately adds, that all that shew themselves to be true
disciples will become *perfect*. See the second chapter of First
Corinthians. (<span id="v.ii.vi-p65.1"></span>[1Co
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#006)<span id="v.ii.vi-p65.1"></span>..md)
Now, what better thing can be desired than what confers upon us the
highest perfection? He again repeats, *in Christ*, that they may not
desire to know anything but Christ alone. From this passage, also, we
may gather a definition of true wisdom — that by which we are presented
perfect in the sight of God, and that *in* *Christ*, and nowhere else.
 <span id="fr_342"></span>[343](#fn_342.md)

<span id="v.ii.vi-p67"></span><span id="v.ii.vi-p67.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.vi-p68"></span>**29.** *For which thing.* He enhances, by
two circumstances, the glory of his apostleship and of his doctrine. In
the *first* place, he makes mention of his aim,  <span
id="fr_343"></span>[344](#fn_343.md) which is a token of the difficulty
that he felt; for those things are for the most part the most excellent
that are the most difficult. The *second* has more strength, inasmuch as
he mentions that the power of God shines forth in his ministry. He does
not speak, however, merely of the success of his preaching, (though in
that too the blessing of God appears,) but also of the efficacy of the
Spirit, in which God manifestly shewed himself; for on good grounds he
ascribes his endeavors, inasmuch as they exceeded human limits, to the
power of God, which, he declares, is seen *working* *powerfully* in this
matter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_277"></span>[278](cc42011.htm#fr_277.md) <span
id="v.ii.i-p20.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.i-p21"></span> “<span id="v.ii.i-p21.1"></span>Son simple
et priué nom;” — “His simple and private name.”

<span id="fn_278"></span>[279](cc42011.htm#fr_278.md) <span
id="v.ii.i-p25.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.i-p26"></span> “<span id="v.ii.i-p26.1"></span>A Dieu qui
est le Pere. Il y auroit mot a mot, A Dieu et Pere;” — “To God who is
the Father. It were literally, To God and Father.”

<span id="fn_279"></span>[280](cc42011.htm#fr_279.md) <span
id="v.ii.i-p33.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.i-p34"></span> “<span id="v.ii.i-p34.1"></span>Vn tresor
en seure garde;” — “A treasure in safe keeping.”

<span id="fn_280"></span>[281](cc42011.htm#fr_280.md) <span
id="v.ii.i-p35.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.i-p36"></span> “<span id="v.ii.i-p36.1"></span>Il dit
auant que passer plus outre;” — “He says before proceeding farther.”

<span id="fn_281"></span>[282](cc42011.htm#fr_281.md) <span
id="v.ii.i-p36.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.i-p37"></span> “<span id="v.ii.i-p37.1"></span>Ont yci
plus grande signifiance, et emportent plus;” — “Have here more
significancy, and are more emphatic.”

<span id="fn_282"></span>[283](cc42011.htm#fr_282.md) <span
id="v.ii.i-p37.3"></span>

<span id="v.ii.i-p38"></span> The term *apposition*, in grammar,
signifies the putting of two nouns in the same case. — Ed.

<span id="fn_283"></span>[284](cc42011.htm#fr_283.md) <span
id="v.ii.i-p41.3"></span>

<span id="v.ii.i-p42"></span> “This” (<span id="v.ii.i-p42.1"></span>καὶ
αὐξανόμενον) “is the reading of the Vatican and all the most ancient
authorities.” — *Penn*. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_284"></span>[285](cc42011.htm#fr_284.md) <span
id="v.ii.i-p44.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.i-p45"></span> “<span id="v.ii.i-p45.1"></span>Par faux
rapports et calomnies;” — “By false reports and calumnies.”

<span id="fn_285"></span>[286](cc42011.htm#fr_285.md) <span
id="v.ii.i-p47.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.i-p48"></span> “<span id="v.ii.i-p48.1"></span>Mais est
commencee et comme consacree a l’adueu de la piete et cognoissance de
Dieu;” — “But is commenced and, as it were, consecrated to the service
of piety and the knowledge of God.”

<span id="fn_286"></span>[287](cc42011.htm#fr_286.md) <span
id="v.ii.ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.ii-p4"></span> “<span id="v.ii.ii-p4.1"></span>Prudence,
ou intelligence;” — “prudence, or understanding.”

<span id="fn_287"></span>[288](cc42011.htm#fr_287.md) <span
id="v.ii.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.ii-p12"></span> “<span id="v.ii.ii-p12.1"></span>Comme il
a ci dessus demonstré l’amour qu’il auoit enuers eux, en protestant
qu’il s’esiouit de leurs auancemens, et en rend graces a Dieu, aussi le
fait — il maintenant en son affection vehemente, et continuation de
prier;” — “As he has already shewn the love which he cherished towards
them, by declaring that he rejoices in their proficiency, and gives
thanks to God for it, so he does the same now by his intense eagerness
and perseverance in prayer.”

<span id="fn_288"></span>[289](cc42011.htm#fr_288.md) <span
id="v.ii.ii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.ii-p18"></span> “<span id="v.ii.ii-p18.1"></span>Mais ils
ne feront que tracasser çà et là, et tourner a l’entour du pot (comme on
dit) sans s’auancer;” — “But they will do nothing else than hurry hither
and thither, and go about the bush (as they say) without making
progress.”

<span id="fn_289"></span>[290](cc42011.htm#fr_289.md) <span
id="v.ii.ii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.ii-p24"></span> Lowth’s rendering of the passage is
similar: “In silence, and in pious confidence, shall be your strength.”
— *Ed*.

<span id="fn_290"></span>[291](cc42011.htm#fr_290.md) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p4"></span> “<span id="v.ii.iii-p4.1"></span>*A Dieu
et Pere, qui nous a faits*, ou, au Pere, qui nous a faits;” — “*To God
and the Father, who hath made us*, or, to the Father, who hath made us.”

<span id="fn_291"></span>[292](cc42011.htm#fr_291.md) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p19"></span> ”<span id="v.ii.iii-p19.1"></span>Ils le
laissent quasi vuide et inutile;” — “They leave him in a manner empty
and useless.”

<span id="fn_292"></span>[293](cc42011.htm#fr_292.md) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p20"></span> <span
id="v.ii.iii-p20.1"></span>*Statum* The term is commonly employed among
the Latins like <span id="v.ii.iii-p20.2"></span>στάσις among the
Greeks, to mean the point at issue. See Cic. Top. 25. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_293"></span>[294](cc42011.htm#fr_293.md) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p22"></span> It is stated by Beza, that some Greek
manuscripts have <span id="v.ii.iii-p22.1"></span>τῷ Θεῷ καὶ Πατρὶ, (to
God and the Father,) and that this is the reading in some copies of the
Vulgate. Wiclif (1380) reads, “To God and to the Fadir.” Rheims (1582)
“To God and the Father.” — *Ed*

<span id="fn_294"></span>[295](cc42011.htm#fr_294.md) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p23"></span> “<span id="v.ii.iii-p23.1"></span>S’est
abbaisé iusques là de vouloir estre nostre Pere;” — “Has abased himself
so far as to be willing to be our Father.”

<span id="fn_295"></span>[296](cc42011.htm#fr_295.md) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p25"></span> “<span id="v.ii.iii-p25.1"></span>Afin
qu’il y eust vne opposition entre les tenebres du royaume de Satan, et
la lumiere du royaume de Dieu;” — “That there might be a contrast
between the darkness of Satan’s kingdom, and the light of God’s
kingdom.”

<span id="fn_296"></span>[297](cc42011.htm#fr_296.md) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p28"></span> “<span id="v.ii.iii-p28.1"></span>Là il
n’y a que tenebres;” — “There is nothing but darkness.”

<span id="fn_297"></span>[298](cc42011.htm#fr_297.md) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p31"></span> “One of the names which the Jews gave to
Satan was <span id="v.ii.iii-p31.1"></span>חש — darkness” — Illustrated
Commentary. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_298"></span>[299](cc42011.htm#fr_298.md) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p31.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p32"></span> “<span
id="v.ii.iii-p32.1"></span>Iusqu’a ce que nons soyons deliurez et
affranchis par la puissance de Christ;” — “Until we are delivered and
set free by the power of Christ.”

<span id="fn_299"></span>[300](cc42011.htm#fr_299.md) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p36"></span> “<span
id="v.ii.iii-p36.1"></span>Redemption et deliurance;” — “Redemption and
deliverance.”

<span id="fn_300"></span>[301](cc42011.htm#fr_300.md) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p36.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p37"></span> The following explanation of the meaning
of the term *apposition* is furnished in a marginal note in our author’s
French version: “<span id="v.ii.iii-p37.2"></span>C’est quand deux noms
substantifs appartenans a vne mesme chose, sont mis ensemble sans
conionction, comme par declaration l’vn et l’autre;” — “This is when two
substantive nouns, relating to the same thing, are placed together
without being conjoined, as if by way of explanation, the one and the
other.”

<span id="fn_301"></span>[302](cc42011.htm#fr_301.md) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p37.3"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p38"></span> “<span
id="v.ii.iii-p38.1"></span>Blasphemes execrables;” — “Execrable
blasphemies.”

<span id="fn_302"></span>[303](cc42011.htm#fr_302.md) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p42.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p43"></span> See Calvin on the Corinthians, vol. 1,
p. 196, n. 1.

<span id="fn_303"></span>[304](cc42011.htm#fr_303.md) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p44.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p45"></span> “<span
id="v.ii.iii-p45.1"></span>Relation et correspondance;” — “Reference and
correspondence.”

<span id="fn_304"></span>[305](cc42011.htm#fr_304.md) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p50.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p51"></span> “<span id="v.ii.iii-p51.1"></span>Ayent
vertu ou puissance d’eux — mesmes;” — “Have power or authority of
themselves.”

<span id="fn_305"></span>[306](cc42011.htm#fr_305.md) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p51.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p52"></span> “<span id="v.ii.iii-p52.1"></span>Sont
executeurs de la puissance Diuine, et ministres de sa domination;” —
“Are the executors of God’s power, and ministers of his dominion.”

<span id="fn_306"></span>[307](cc42011.htm#fr_306.md) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p52.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p53"></span> See Calvin on John, vol. 1: p. 419.

<span id="fn_307"></span>[308](cc42011.htm#fr_307.md) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p53.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p54"></span> “<span id="v.ii.iii-p54.1"></span>N’oste
rien a la gloire de Christ;” — “Takes nothing from the glory of Christ.”

<span id="fn_308"></span>[309](cc42011.htm#fr_308.md) <span
id="v.ii.iv-p11.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iv-p12"></span> See Institutes, vol. 2, p. 11.

<span id="fn_309"></span>[310](cc42011.htm#fr_309.md) <span
id="v.ii.iv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iv-p13"></span> “<span id="v.ii.iv-p13.1"></span>Est si
honorable et magnifique qu’il ne pent estre transferé a homme mortel;” —
“Is so honorable and magnificent, that it cannot be transferred to a
mortal man.”

<span id="fn_310"></span>[311](cc42011.htm#fr_310.md) <span
id="v.ii.iv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iv-p20"></span> “<span id="v.ii.iv-p20.1"></span>Bannis
de la compagnie de Dieu;” — “Banished from the society of God.”

<span id="fn_311"></span>[312](cc42011.htm#fr_311.md) <span
id="v.ii.iv-p20.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iv-p21"></span> “<span id="v.ii.iv-p21.1"></span>Tant
excellent soit-il;” — “However excellent he may be.”

<span id="fn_312"></span>[313](cc42011.htm#fr_312.md) <span
id="v.ii.iv-p25.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iv-p26"></span> “<span id="v.ii.iv-p26.1"></span>A leur
confusion et ruine;” — “To their confusion and ruin.”

<span id="fn_313"></span>[314](cc42011.htm#fr_313.md) <span
id="v.ii.iv-p27.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iv-p28"></span> “<span id="v.ii.iv-p28.1"></span>En eux;”
— “Among them.”

<span id="fn_314"></span>[315](cc42011.htm#fr_314.md) <span
id="v.ii.iv-p28.3"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iv-p29"></span> “<span id="v.ii.iv-p29.1"></span>Que la
plus grande purete qu’on pourroit trouuer, ne sera que vilenie et
ordure;” — “That the greatest purity that could be found will be nothing
but filth and pollution.”

<span id="fn_315"></span>[316](cc42011.htm#fr_315.md) <span
id="v.ii.iv-p30.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iv-p31"></span> “<span id="v.ii.iv-p31.1"></span>Sous
ombre de ce mot, Toutes choses;” — “Under the pretext of this word, All
things.”

<span id="fn_316"></span>[317](cc42011.htm#fr_316.md) <span
id="v.ii.iv-p31.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iv-p32"></span> “<span id="v.ii.iv-p32.1"></span>Est
offert aux meschans et reprouuez, et non pas aix diables;” — “Is offered
to the wicked and reprobate, but not to devils.”

<span id="fn_317"></span>[318](cc42011.htm#fr_317.md) <span
id="v.ii.v-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.v-p11"></span> “<span id="v.ii.v-p11.1"></span>Vn
miroir;” — “A mirror.”

<span id="fn_318"></span>[319](cc42011.htm#fr_318.md) <span
id="v.ii.v-p19.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.v-p20"></span> “<span id="v.ii.v-p20.1"></span>Par
l’acceptation gratuite de Dieu, c’est a dire pource qu’il nous accepte
et ha agreables;” — “By God’s gratuitous acceptance, that is, because he
accepts of us, and regards us with favor.”

<span id="fn_319"></span>[320](cc42011.htm#fr_319.md) <span
id="v.ii.v-p21.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.v-p22"></span> The followers of Cœlestius, who, along
with Pelagius, held views subversive of the doctrine of original sin,
the necessity of divine grace, and other doctrines of a kindred
character. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_320"></span>[321](cc42011.htm#fr_320.md) <span
id="v.ii.v-p24.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.v-p25"></span> “<span id="v.ii.v-p25.1"></span>Vne
relation et correspondence mutuelle;” — “A mutual relationship and
correspondence.”

<span id="fn_321"></span>[322](cc42011.htm#fr_321.md) <span
id="v.ii.v-p26.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.v-p27"></span> “<span id="v.ii.v-p27.1"></span>Demeure en
confus, et qu’on ne scache que c’est;” — “May remain in confusion, and
it may not be known what it is.”

<span id="fn_322"></span>[323](cc42011.htm#fr_322.md) <span
id="v.ii.v-p27.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.v-p28"></span> “<span id="v.ii.v-p28.1"></span>Vray et
naturel;” — “True and genuine.”

<span id="fn_323"></span>[324](cc42011.htm#fr_323.md) <span
id="v.ii.v-p29.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.v-p30"></span> “<span id="v.ii.v-p30.1"></span>Car Sainct
Paul n’ a pas voulu dire que l’approbation de l’Euangile dependist du
consentement de tous siecles;” — “For St. Paul did not mean to say, that
the approbation of the Gospel depended on the consent of all ages.”

<span id="fn_324"></span>[325](cc42011.htm#fr_324.md) <span
id="v.ii.v-p33.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.v-p34"></span> “<span id="v.ii.v-p34.1"></span>Ne sans vn
fruit singulier et consolation merueilleuse;” — “Not without remarkable
fruit, and wonderful consolation.”

<span id="fn_325"></span>[326](cc42011.htm#fr_325.md) <span
id="v.ii.v-p34.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.v-p35"></span> The *Donatists* were a sect that sprung up
in Africa during the fourth century, and were, vigorously opposed by
Augustine. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_326"></span>[327](cc42011.htm#fr_326.md) <span
id="v.ii.v-p35.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.v-p36"></span> “<span id="v.ii.v-p36.1"></span>Ce mot,
*Toute*;” — “This word, *All*.”

<span id="fn_327"></span>[328](cc42011.htm#fr_327.md) <span
id="v.ii.v-p37.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.v-p38"></span> “<span id="v.ii.v-p38.1"></span>De
prescher et enseigner;” — “Of preaching and teaching.”

<span id="fn_328"></span>[329](cc42011.htm#fr_328.md) <span
id="v.ii.vi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.vi-p17"></span> “<span id="v.ii.vi-p17.1"></span>Et
monstre le grand zele qu’il auoit, afin qu’il y ait plus de poids et
authorite en ce qu’il dit;” — “And shews the great zeal that he had,
that there may be greater weight and authority in what he says.”

<span id="fn_329"></span>[330](cc42011.htm#fr_329.md) <span
id="v.ii.vi-p17.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.vi-p18"></span> “<span id="v.ii.vi-p18.1"></span>M’est
douce et gracieuse, pouree qu’elle n’est point inutile;” — “Is sweet and
agreeable to me, because it is not unprofitable.”

<span id="fn_330"></span>[331](cc42011.htm#fr_330.md) <span
id="v.ii.vi-p19.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.vi-p20"></span> “<span id="v.ii.vi-p20.1"></span>Ceste
societe et conionction;” — “This fellowship and connection.”

<span id="fn_331"></span>[332](cc42011.htm#fr_331.md) <span
id="v.ii.vi-p23.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.vi-p24"></span> “It is worthy of remark, that the Apostle
does not say <span id="v.ii.vi-p24.1"></span>παθηματα, the *passion* of
Christ, but simply <span id="v.ii.vi-p24.2"></span>θλιψεις, the
*aff1ictions*; such as are common to all good men who bear a testimony
against the ways and fashions of a wicked world. In these the Apostle
had his share, in the passion of Christ he could have none.” — Dr. A.
Clarke. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_332"></span>[333](cc42011.htm#fr_332.md) <span
id="v.ii.vi-p30.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.vi-p31"></span> “<span id="v.ii.vi-p31.1"></span>Mais
quoy? Les Papistes laissans tout ceci;” — “But what? Papists leaving all
this.”

<span id="fn_333"></span>[334](cc42011.htm#fr_333.md) <span
id="v.ii.vi-p31.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.vi-p32"></span> See Calvin’S *Institutes*, vol. 2, p.
237, and Calvin on Corinthians, vol. 1, p. 68.

<span id="fn_334"></span>[335](cc42011.htm#fr_334.md) <span
id="v.ii.vi-p33.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.vi-p34"></span> “We are not to suppose that our Lord left
any sufferings to be endured by Paul, or any one else, as the expiation
of the sins or the ransom of the souls of his people... The filling up
spoken of by the Apostle is not the supplementing Christ’s personal
sufferings, but it is the completing that share allotted to himself as
one of the members of Christ, as sufferings which, from the intimacy of
union between the head and the members, may be called his sufferings.
Christ lived in Paul, spoke in Paul, wrought in Paul, suffered in Paul;
and in a similar sense, the sufferings of every Christian for Christ are
the sufferings of Christ.” — Brown’s Expository Discourses on Peter,
vol. 3, pp. 69, 70. — Ed.

<span id="fn_335"></span>[336](cc42011.htm#fr_335.md) <span
id="v.ii.vi-p34.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.vi-p35"></span> “<span id="v.ii.vi-p35.1"></span>Tels
blasphemes horribles;” — “Such horrible blasphemies.”

<span id="fn_336"></span>[337](cc42011.htm#fr_336.md) <span
id="v.ii.vi-p35.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.vi-p36"></span> The reader will find the same passage as
above quoted by Calvin in the Institutes, vol. 2, pp. 238, 239. See also
Calvin on the Corinthians, vol. 1, p. 69, n. 1. — Ed.

<span id="fn_337"></span>[338](cc42011.htm#fr_337.md) <span
id="v.ii.vi-p39.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.vi-p40"></span> The reference would seem to be more
appropriately directed towards <span id="v.ii.vi-p40.1"></span>[2Co
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#006.md)<span id="v.ii.vi-p40.1"></span> —
probably a typesetting error in the original text. — *fj.*

<span id="fn_338"></span>[339](cc42011.htm#fr_338.md) <span
id="v.ii.vi-p47.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.vi-p48"></span> “<span
id="v.ii.vi-p48.1"></span>Toutesfois c’est a proprement parler, le fruit
qui monstre en fin;” — “Yet it is, properly speaking, the fruit that
shews at last.”

<span id="fn_339"></span>[340](cc42011.htm#fr_339.md) <span
id="v.ii.vi-p52.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.vi-p53"></span> “<span id="v.ii.vi-p53.1"></span>D’annees
et sieclcs;” — “Of years and ages.”

<span id="fn_340"></span>[341](cc42011.htm#fr_340.md) <span
id="v.ii.vi-p55.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.vi-p56"></span> “<span id="v.ii.vi-p56.1"></span>Publié
et manifesté;” — “Published and manifested.”

<span id="fn_341"></span>[342](cc42011.htm#fr_341.md) <span
id="v.ii.vi-p59.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.vi-p60"></span> “<span
id="v.ii.vi-p60.1"></span>Signifient magnificence;” — “Denote
magnificence.”

<span id="fn_342"></span>[343](cc42011.htm#fr_342.md) <span
id="v.ii.vi-p65.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.vi-p66"></span> “<span id="v.ii.vi-p66.1"></span>Et non
en autre;” — “And not in another.”

<span id="fn_343"></span>[344](cc42011.htm#fr_343.md) <span
id="v.ii.vi-p68.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.vi-p69"></span> “<span id="v.ii.vi-p69.1"></span>Son
travaille et peine;” — “His labor and trouble.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](cc42012.md)
