[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc42017)  [Next](cc42019) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 42: Philippians, Colossians, and
Thessalonians*, tr. by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p1"></span>COMMENTARY ON

<span id="vi.iii-p2"></span>THE FIRST EPISTLE OF PAUL TO THE
THESSALONIANS.

<span id="vi.iii-p3"></span>CHAPTER 1

<span id="vi.iii.i"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i-p1"></span><span id="vi.iii.i-p1.1"></span>[1
Thessalonians 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#001)<span
id="vi.iii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i-p2"></span>**1**. Paul, and Silvanus, and Timotheus,
unto the Church of the Thessalonians *which is* in God the Father and
*in* the Lord Jesus Christ: Grace *be* unto you, and peace, from God our
Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="vi.iii.i-p3"></span>**1**. Paulus et Silvanus et Timotheus
Ecclesiae Thessalonicensium, in Deo Patre, et Domino Iesu Christo,
gratia vobis et pax a Deo Patre nostro, et Domino Iesu Christo.

<span id="vi.iii.i-p4"></span> 

<span id="vi.iii.i-p5"></span><span id="vi.iii.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i-p6"></span>The brevity of the inscription clearly
shews that Paul’s doctrine had been received with reverence among the
Thessalonians, and that without controversy they all rendered to him the
honor that he deserved. For when in other Epistles he designates himself
an Apostle, he does this for the purpose of claiming for himself
authority. Hence the circumstance, that he simply makes use of his own
name without any title of honor, is an evidence that those to whom he
writes voluntarily acknowledged him to be such as he was. The ministers
of Satan, it is true, had endeavored to trouble this Church also, but it
is evident that their machinations were fruitless. He associates,
however, two others along with himself, as being, in common with
himself, the authors of the Epistle. Nothing farther is stated here that
has not been explained elsewhere, excepting that he says, “the Church
*in God the Father, and in Christ*;” by which terms (if I mistake not)
he intimates, that there is truly among the Thessalonians a Church of
God. This mark, therefore, is as it were an approval of a true and
lawful Church. We may, however, at the same time infer from it, that a
Church is to be sought for only where God presides, and where Christ
reigns, and that, in short, there is no Church but what is founded upon
God, is gathered under the auspices of Christ, and is united in his
name.

<span id="vi.iii.ii"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p1"></span><span id="vi.iii.ii-p1.1"></span>[1
Thessalonians 1:2-5](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#002)<span
id="vi.iii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p2"></span>**2**. We give thanks to God always for
you all, making mention of you in our prayers;

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p3"></span>**2**. Gratias agimus Deo semper de
omnibus vobis, memoriam vestri facientes in precibus nostris,

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p4"></span>**3**. Remembering without ceasing your
work of faith, and labour of love, and patience of hope in our Lord
Jesus Christ, in the sight of God and our Father;

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p5"></span>**3**. Indesinenter  <span
id="fr_487"></span>[488](#fn_487) memores vestri, propter opus fidei, et
laborem caritatis,  <span id="fr_488"></span>[489](#fn_488) et
patientiam spei Domini nostri Iesu Christi coram Deo et Patre nostro,

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p8"></span>**4**. Knowing, brethren beloved, your
election of God.

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p9"></span>**4**. Scientes, fratres dilecti,  <span
id="fr_489"></span>[490](#fn_489) a Deo esse electionem vestram.

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p11"></span>**5**. For our gospel came not unto you
in word only, but also in power, and in the Holy Ghost, and in much
assurance; as ye know what manner of men we were among you for your
sake.

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p12"></span>**5**. Quia Evangelium nostrum non fuit
erga vos in sermone solum, sed in potentia, et in Spiritu sancto, et in
certitudine multa: quemadmodum nostis quales fuerimus in vobis propter
vos.

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p13"></span> 

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p14"></span><span id="vi.iii.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p15"></span>**2** *We give thanks to God*. He
praises, as he is wont, their faith and other virtues, not so much,
however, for the purpose of praising them, as to exhort them to
perseverance. For it is no small excitement to eagerness of pursuit,
when we reflect that God has adorned us with signal endowments, that he
may finish what he has begun, and that we have, under his guidance and
direction, advanced in the right course, in order that we may reach the
goal. For as a vain confidence in those virtues, which mankind foolishly
arrogate to themselves, puffs them up with pride, and makes them
careless and indolent for the time to come, so a recognition of the
gifts of God humbles pious minds, and stirs them up to anxious concern.
Hence, instead of congratulations, he makes use of *thanksgivings*, that
he may put them in mind, that everything in them that he declares to be
worthy of praise, is a kindness from God.  <span
id="fr_490"></span>[491](#fn_490) He also turns immediately to the
future, in making mention of his *prayers*. We thus see for what purpose
he commends their previous life.

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p17"></span><span id="vi.iii.ii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p18"></span>**3** *Unceasingly remembering you*.
While the adverb *unceasingly* might be taken in connection with what
goes before, it suits better to connect it in this manner. What follows
might also be rendered in this way: *Remembering your work of faith and
labor of love, etc.* Nor is it any objection to this that there is an
article interposed between the pronoun <span
id="vi.iii.ii-p18.1"></span>ὑμῶν and the noun <span
id="vi.iii.ii-p18.2"></span>ἔργου,  <span
id="fr_491"></span>[492](#fn_491) for this manner of expression is
frequently made use of by Paul. I state this, lest any one should charge
the old translator with ignorance, from his rendering it in this manner.
 <span id="fr_492"></span>[493](#fn_492) As, however, it matters little
as to the main point  <span id="fr_493"></span>[494](#fn_493) which you
may choose, I have retained the rendering of Erasmus.  <span
id="fr_494"></span>[495](#fn_494)

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p23"></span>He assigns a reason, however, why he
cherishes so strong an affection towards them, and prays diligently in
their behalf — because he perceived in them those gifts of God which
should stir him up to cherish towards them love and respect. And,
unquestionably, the more that any one excels in piety and other
excellences, so much the more ought we to hold him in regard and esteem.
For what is more worthy of love than God? Hence there is nothing that
should tend more to excite our love to individuals, than when the Lord
manifests himself in them by the gifts of his Spirit. This is the
highest commendation of all among the pious — this the most sacred bond
of connection, by which they are more especially bound to each other. I
have said, accordingly, that it is of little importance, whether you
render it *mindful of your faith*, or *mindful of you on account of your
faith*.

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p24"></span>*Work of faith* I understand as meaning
the *effect* of it. This effect, however, may be explained in two ways —
*passively* or *actively*, either as meaning that faith was in itself a
signal token of the power and efficacy of the Holy Spirit, inasmuch as
he has wrought powerfully in the exciting of it, or as meaning that it
afterwards produced outwardly its fruits. I reckon the effect to be in
the root of faith rather than in its fruits — “A rare energy of faith
has strewn itself powerfully in you.”

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p25"></span>He adds *labor of love*, by which he
means that in the cultivation of love they had grudged no trouble or
labor. And, assuredly, it is known by experience, how laborious love is.
That age, however, more especially afforded to believers a manifold
sphere of labor, if they were desirous to discharge the offices of love.
The Church was marvelously pressed down by a great multitude of
afflictions:  <span id="fr_495"></span>[496](#fn_495) many were stripped
of their wealth, many were fugitives from their country, many were
thrown destitute of counsel, many were tender and weak.  <span
id="fr_496"></span>[497](#fn_496) The condition of almost all was
involved. So many cases of distress did not allow *love* to be inactive.

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p28"></span>To *hope* he assigns *patience*, as it
is always conjoined with it, for *what we hope for, we in patience wait
for*, (<span id="vi.iii.ii-p28.1"></span>[Ro
8:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#024)<span
id="vi.iii.ii-p28.1"></span>) and the statement should be explained to
mean, that Paul remembers their patience in hoping for the coming of
Christ. From this we may gather a brief definition of true Christianity
— that it is a faith that is lively and full of vigor, so that it spares
no labor, when assistance is to be given to one’s neighbors, but, on the
contrary, all the pious employ themselves diligently in offices of love,
and lay out their efforts in them, so that, intent upon the hope of the
manifestation of Christ, they despise everything else, and, armed with
patience, they rise superior to the wearisomeness of length of time, as
well as to all the temptations of the world.

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p29"></span>The clause, *before our God and Father*,
may be viewed as referring to Paul’s remembrance, or to the three things
spoken immediately before. I explain it in this way. As he had spoken of
his *prayers*, he declares that as often as he raises his thoughts to
the kingdom of God, he, at the same time, recalls to his remembrance the
*faith, hope*, and *patience*, of the Thessalonians, but as all mere
presence must vanish when persons come into the presence of God, this is
added,  <span id="fr_497"></span>[498](#fn_497) in order that the
affirmation may have more weight. Farther, by this declaration of his
goodwill towards them he designed to make them more teachable and
prepared to listen.  <span id="fr_498"></span>[499](#fn_498)

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p32"></span><span id="vi.iii.ii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p33"></span>**4** *Knowing, brethren beloved*. The
participle *knowing* may apply to Paul as well as to the Thessalonians.
Erasmus refers it to the Thessalonians. I prefer to follow Chrysostom,
who understands it of Paul and his colleagues, for it is (as it appears
to me) a more ample confirmation of the foregoing statement. For it
tended in no small degree to recommend them — that God himself had
testified by many tokens, that they were acceptable and dear to him.

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p34"></span>*Election of God*. I am not altogether
dissatisfied with the interpretation given by Chrysostom — that God had
made the Thessalonians illustrious, and had established their
excellence. Paul, however, had it in view to express something farther;
for he touches upon their calling, and as there had appeared in it no
common marks of God’s power, he infers from this that they had been
specially called with evidences of a sure *election*. For the reason is
immediately added — that it was not a bare preaching that had been
brought to them, but such as was conjoined with the efficacy of the Holy
Spirit, that it might obtain entire credit among them.

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p35"></span>When he says, *in power, and in the Holy
Spirit*, it is, in my opinion, as if he had said — in the power *of* the
Holy Spirit, so that the latter term is added as explanatory of the
former. *Assurance*, to which he assigned the third place, was either in
the thing itself, or in the disposition of the Thessalonians. I am
rather inclined to think that the meaning is, that Paul’s gospel had
been confirmed by solid proofs,  <span id="fr_499"></span>[500](#fn_499)
as though God had shewn from heaven that he had ratified their calling.
 <span id="fr_500"></span>[501](#fn_500) When, however, Paul brings
forward the proofs by which he had felt assured that the calling of the
Thessalonians was altogether from God, he takes occasion at the same
time to recommend his ministry, that they may themselves, also,
recognize him and his colleagues as having been raised up by God.

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p38"></span>By the term *power* some understand
miracles. I extend it farther, as referring to spiritual energy of
doctrine. For, as we had occasion to see in the First Epistle to the
Corinthians, Paul places it in contrast with *speech*  <span
id="fr_501"></span>[502](#fn_501) — the voice of God, as it were, living
and conjoined with effect, as opposed to an empty and dead eloquence of
men. It is to be observed, however, that the election of God, which is
in itself hid, is manifested by its marks—when he gathers to himself the
lost sheep and joins them to his flock, and holds out his hand to those
that were wandering and estranged from him. Hence a knowledge of our
election must be sought from this source. As, however, the secret
counsel of God is a labyrinth to those who disregard his calling, so
those act perversely who, under pretext of *faith* and *calling*, darken
this first grace, from which faith itself flows. “By faith,” say they,
“we obtain salvation: there is, therefore, no eternal predestination of
God that distinguishes between us and reprobates.” It is as though they
said — “Salvation is of faith: there is, therefore, no grace of God that
illuminates us in faith.” Nay rather, as gratuitous election must be
conjoined with calling, as with its effect, so it must necessarily, in
the mean time, hold the first place. It matters little as to the sense,
whether you connect <span id="vi.iii.ii-p39.2"></span>ὑπὸ with the
participle *beloved* or with the term *election*  <span
id="fr_502"></span>[503](#fn_502)

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p41"></span><span id="vi.iii.ii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p42"></span>**5** *As ye know*. Paul, as I have said
before, has it as his aim, that the Thessalonians, influenced by the
same considerations, may entertain no doubt that they were elected by
God. For it had been the design of God, in honoring Paul’s ministry,
that he might manifest to them their adoption. Accordingly, having said
that they *know what manner of persons they had been*,  <span
id="fr_503"></span>[504](#fn_503) he immediately adds that he was such
*for their sake*, by which he means that all this had been given them,
in order that they might be fully persuaded that they were loved by God,
and that their election was beyond all controversy.

<span id="vi.iii.iii"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii-p1"></span><span id="vi.iii.iii-p1.1"></span>[1
Thessalonians 1:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#006)<span
id="vi.iii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii-p2"></span>**6**. And ye became followers of us,
and of the Lord, having received the word in much affliction, with joy
of the Holy Ghost:

<span id="vi.iii.iii-p3"></span>**6**. Et vos imitatores nostri facti
estis et Domini, dum sermonem amplexi estis in tribulatione multa, cum
gaudio Spiritus sancti:

<span id="vi.iii.iii-p4"></span>**7**. So that ye were ensamples to all
that believe in Macedonia and Achaia.

<span id="vi.iii.iii-p5"></span>**7**. Ita ut fueritis exemplaria
omnibus credentibus in Macedonia et in Achaia.

<span id="vi.iii.iii-p6"></span>**8**. For from you sounded out the word
of the Lord not only in Macedonia and Achaia, but also in every place
your faith to God-ward is spread abroad; so that we need not to speak
any thing.

<span id="vi.iii.iii-p7"></span>**8**. A vobis enim personuit sermo
Domini: nec in Macedonia tantum et in Achaia, sed etiam in omni loco,
fides vestra quae in Deum est manavit: ita ut non opus habeamus quicquam
loqui.

<span id="vi.iii.iii-p8"></span> 

<span id="vi.iii.iii-p9"></span><span id="vi.iii.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii-p10"></span>**6** *And ye became imitators*. With
the view of increasing their alacrity, he declares that there is a
mutual agreement, and harmony, as it were, between his preaching and
their faith. For unless men, on their part, answer to God, no
proficiency will follow from the grace that is offered to them — not as
though they could do this of themselves, but inasmuch as God, as he
begins our salvation by calling us, perfects it also by fashioning our
hearts to obedience. The sum, therefore, is this — that an evidence of
Divine election shewed itself not only in Paul’s ministry, in so far as
it was furnished with the power of the Holy Spirit, but also in the
faith of the Thessalonians, so that this conformity is a powerful
attestation of it. He says, however, “Ye were imitators *of God and of
us*,” in the same sense in which it is said, that *the people believed
God and his servant Moses*, (<span id="vi.iii.iii-p10.1"></span>[Ex
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#013)<span
id="vi.iii.iii-p10.1"></span>  <span id="fr_504"></span>[505](#fn_504) )
not as though Paul and Moses had anything different from God, but
because he wrought powerfully by them, as his ministers and instruments.
 <span id="fr_505"></span>[506](#fn_505) *While ye embraced.* Their
readiness in receiving the gospel is called an *imitation* of God, for
this reason, that as God had presented himself to the Thessalonians in a
liberal spirit, so they had, on their part, voluntarily come forward to
meet him.

<span id="vi.iii.iii-p13"></span>He says, *with the joy of the Holy
Spirit*, that we may know that it is not by the instigation of the
flesh, or by the promptings of their own nature, that men will be ready
and eager to obey God, but that this is the work of God’s Spirit. The
circumstance, that *amidst much tribulation* they had embraced the
gospel, serves by way of amplification. For we see very many, not
otherwise disinclined to the gospel, who, nevertheless, avoid it, from
being intimidated through fear of the cross. Those, accordingly, who do
not hesitate with intrepidity to embrace along with the gospel the
afflictions that threaten them, furnish in this an admirable example of
magnanimity. And from this it is so much the more clearly apparent, how
necessary it is that the Spirit should aid us in this. For the gospel
cannot be properly, or sincerely received, unless it be with a joyful
heart. Nothing, however, is more at variance with our natural
disposition, than to rejoice in afflictions.

<span id="vi.iii.iii-p14"></span><span id="vi.iii.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii-p15"></span>**7** *So that ye were*. Here we have
another amplification — that they had stirred up even believers by their
example; for it is a great thing to get so decidedly the start of those
who had entered upon the course before us, as to furnish assistance to
them for prosecuting their course. *Typus* (the word made use of by
Paul) is employed by the Greeks in the same sense as <span
id="vi.iii.iii-p15.1"></span>*Exemplar* is among the Latins, and <span
id="vi.iii.iii-p15.2"></span>*Patron* among the French. He says, then,
that the courage of the Thessalonians had been so illustrious, that
other believers had borrowed from them a rule of constancy. I preferred,
however, to render it *patterns*, that I might not needlessly make any
change upon the Greek phrase made use of by Paul; and farther, because
the plural number expresses, in my opinion, something more than if he
had said that that Church as a body had been set forward for imitation,
for the meaning is, that there were as many *patterns* as there were
individuals.

<span id="vi.iii.iii-p16"></span><span id="vi.iii.iii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii-p17"></span>**8** *For from you sounded forth*.
Here we have an elegant metaphor, by which he intimates that their faith
was so lively,  <span id="fr_506"></span>[507](#fn_506) that it did, as
it were, by its *sound*, arouse other nations. For he says that the word
of God *sounded forth* from them, inasmuch as their faith was *sonorous*
 <span id="fr_507"></span>[508](#fn_507) for procuring credit for the
gospel. He says that this had not only occurred in neighboring places,
but this *sound* had also extended far and wide, and had been distinctly
heard, so that the matter did not require to be published by him.  <span
id="fr_508"></span>[509](#fn_508)

<span id="vi.iii.iv"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iv-p1"></span><span id="vi.iii.iv-p1.1"></span>[1
Thessalonians 1:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#009)<span
id="vi.iii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iv-p2"></span>**9**. For they themselves shew of us
what manner of entering in we had unto you, and how ye turned to God
from idols to serve the living and true God;

<span id="vi.iii.iv-p3"></span>**9**. Ipsi enim de vobis annuntiant,
qualem habuerimus ingressum ad vos: et quomodo conversi fueritis ad Deum
ab idolis, ut serviretis Deo viventi et vero:

<span id="vi.iii.iv-p4"></span>**10** And to wait for his Son from
heaven, whom he raised from the dead, *even* Jesus, which delivered us
from the wrath to come.

<span id="vi.iii.iv-p5"></span>**10**. Et exspectaretis e cælis Filium
eius, quem excitavit a mortuis, Iesum qui nos liberat ab ira ventura.

<span id="vi.iii.iv-p6"></span> 

<span id="vi.iii.iv-p7"></span><span id="vi.iii.iv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iv-p8"></span>He says that the report of their
conversion had obtained great renown everywhere. What he mentions as to
his *entering in among them*, refers to that power of the Spirit, by
which God had signalized his gospel.  <span
id="fr_509"></span>[510](#fn_509) He says, however, that both things are
freely reported among other nations, as things worthy of being made
mention of. In the detail which follows, he shews, first, what the
condition of mankind is, before the Lord enlightens them by the doctrine
of his gospel; and farther, for what end he would have us instructed,
and what is the fruit of the gospel. For although all do not worship
idols, all are nevertheless addicted to idolatry, and are immersed in
blindness and madness. Hence, it is owing to the kindness of God, that
we are exempted from the impostures of the devil, and every kind of
superstition. Some, indeed, he converts earlier, others later, but as
alienation is common to all, it is necessary that we be converted to
God, before we can serve God. From this, also, we gather the essence and
nature of true faith, inasmuch as no one gives due credit to God but the
man, who renouncing the vanity of his own understanding, embraces and
receives the pure worship of God.

<span id="vi.iii.iv-p10"></span>**9** *To the living God*. This is the
end of genuine conversion. We see, indeed, that many leave off
superstitions, who, nevertheless, after taking this step, are so far
from making progress in piety, that they fall into what is worse. For
having thrown off all regard to God, they give themselves up to a
profane and brutal contempt.  <span id="fr_510"></span>[511](#fn_510)
Thus, in ancient times, the superstitions of the vulgar were derided by
Epicurus, Diogenes the Cynic, and the like, but in such a way that they
mixed up the worship of God so as to make no difference between it and
absurd trifles. Hence we must take care, lest the pulling down of errors
be followed by the overthrow of the building of faith. Farther, the
Apostle, in ascribing to God the epithets *true and living*, indirectly
censures idols as being dead and worthless inventions, and as being
falsely called gods. He makes the end of conversion to be what I have
noticed — that they might *serve God*. Hence the doctrine of the gospel
tends to this, that it may induce us to serve and obey God. For so long
as we are the *servants of sin*, we are *free from righteousness*,
(<span id="vi.iii.iv-p11.2"></span>[Ro
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#020)<span
id="vi.iii.iv-p11.2"></span>) inasmuch as we sport ourselves, and wander
up and down, exempt from any yoke. No one, therefore, is properly
converted to God, but the man who has learned to place himself wholly
under subjection to him.

<span id="vi.iii.iv-p12"></span>As, however, it is a thing that is more
than simply difficult, in so great a corruption of our nature, he shews
at the same time, what it is that retains and confirms us in the fear of
God and obedience to him — *waiting for Christ.* For unless we are
stirred up to the hope of eternal life, the world will quickly draw us
to itself. For as it is only confidence in the Divine goodness that
induces us to serve God, so it is only the expectation of final
redemption that keeps us from giving way.  <span
id="fr_511"></span>[512](#fn_511) Let every one, therefore, that would
persevere in a course of holy life, apply his whole mind to a
expectation of Christ’s coming. It is also worthy of notice, that he
uses the expression *waiting for Christ*, instead of the hope of
everlasting salvation. For, unquestionably, without Christ we are ruined
and thrown into despair, but when Christ shews himself, life and
prosperity do at the same time shine forth upon us.  <span
id="fr_512"></span>[513](#fn_512) Let us bear in mind, however, that
this is said to believers exclusively, for as for the wicked, as he will
come to be their Judge, so they can do nothing but tremble in looking
for him.

<span id="vi.iii.iv-p15"></span>This is what he afterwards subjoins —
that Christ *delivereth us from the wrath to come*. For this is felt by
none but those who, being reconciled to God by faith, have conscience
already pacified; otherwise,  <span id="fr_513"></span>[514](#fn_513)
his name is dreadful. Christ, it is true, delivered us by his death from
the anger of God, but the import of that deliverance will become
apparent on the last day.  <span id="fr_514"></span>[515](#fn_514) This
statement, however, consists of two departments. The *first* is, that
the wrath of God and everlasting destruction are impending over the
human race, inasmuch as *all have sinned, and come short of the glory of
God*. (<span id="vi.iii.iv-p17.2"></span>[Ro
3:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#023)<span
id="vi.iii.iv-p17.2"></span>) The *second* is, that there is no way of
escape but through the grace of Christ; for it is not without good
grounds that Paul assigns to him this office. It is, however, an
inestimable gift, that the pious, whenever mention is made of judgment,
know that Christ will come as a Redeemer to them.

<span id="vi.iii.iv-p18"></span>In addition to this, he says
emphatically, *the wrath to come*, that he may rouse up pious minds,
lest they should fail from looking at the present life. For as faith is
a *looking at things that do not appear*, (<span
id="vi.iii.iv-p18.1"></span>[Heb
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#001)<span
id="vi.iii.iv-p18.1"></span>) nothing is less befitting than that we
should estimate the wrath of God, according as any one is afflicted in
the world; as nothing is more absurd than to take hold of the transient
blessings which we enjoy, that we may from them form an estimate of
God’s favor. While, therefore, on the one hand, the wicked sport
themselves at their ease, and we, on the other hand, languish in misery,
let us learn to fear the vengeance of God, which is hid from the eyes of
flesh, and take our satisfaction in the secret delights of the spiritual
life.  <span id="fr_515"></span>[516](#fn_515)

<span id="vi.iii.iv-p20"></span><span id="vi.iii.iv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iv-p21"></span>**10** *Whom he raised up*. He makes
mention here of Christ’s resurrection, on which the hope of our
resurrection is founded, for death everywhere besets us. Hence, unless
we learn to look to Christ, our minds will give way at every turn. By
the same consideration, he admonishes them that Christ is to be *waited
for from heaven*, because we will find nothing in the world to bear us
up,  <span id="fr_516"></span>[517](#fn_516) while there are innumerable
trials to overwhelm us. Another circumstance must be noticed;  <span
id="fr_517"></span>[518](#fn_517) for as Christ rose for this end — that
he might make us all at length, as being his members, partakers of the
same glory with himself, Paul intimates that his resurrection would be
vain, unless he again appeared as their Redeemer, and extended to the
whole body of the Church the fruit and effect of that power which he
manifested in himself.  <span id="fr_518"></span>[519](#fn_518)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_487"></span>[488](cc42018.htm#fr_487) <span
id="vi.iii.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p6"></span> “<span id="vi.iii.ii-p6.1"></span>En nos
prieres, sans cesse ayans souuenance; *ou*, En nos prieres sans cesse,
Ayans souuenance;” — “In our prayers, without ceasing having
remembrance; *or*, In our prayers without ceasing, Having remembrance.”

<span id="fn_488"></span>[489](cc42018.htm#fr_488) <span
id="vi.iii.ii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p7"></span> “<span id="vi.iii.ii-p7.1"></span>De
vous pour l’œuure de la foy, et pour le trauail de vostre charite; *ou*,
de l’effect de vostre foy, et du trauail de vostre charite;” — “Of you
for the work of faith, or for the labor of your love; *or*, of the
effect of your faith, or of the labor of your love.”

<span id="fn_489"></span>[490](cc42018.htm#fr_489) <span
id="vi.iii.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p10"></span> “<span
id="vi.iii.ii-p10.1"></span>Freres bien—aimez, vostre election estre de
Dieu; *ou*, freres bien—aimez de Dieu, vostre election; *ou*, vostre
election, qui est de Dieu;” — “Brethren beloved, your election to be of
God; or, brethren beloved of God, your election; *or*, your election,
which is of God.”

<span id="fn_490"></span>[491](cc42018.htm#fr_490) <span
id="vi.iii.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p16"></span> “<span id="vi.iii.ii-p16.1"></span>Est
vn benefice procedant de la liberalite de Dieu;” —”Is a kindness
proceeding from God’s liberality.”

<span id="fn_491"></span>[492](cc42018.htm#fr_491) <span
id="vi.iii.ii-p18.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p19"></span> The words are <span
id="vi.iii.ii-p19.1"></span>ὑμῶν τοῦ ἔργου. —*Ed*

<span id="fn_492"></span>[493](cc42018.htm#fr_492) <span
id="vi.iii.ii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p20"></span> The rendering of the Vulgate is as
follows: “<span id="vi.iii.ii-p20.1"></span>*Sine intermissione memores
operis fidei vestrae*.” Wiclif (1380) renders as follows: “With outen
ceeysynge hauynge mynde of the werk of youre feithe.” Cranmer, (1539,)
on the other hand, renders thus: “And call you to remembrance because of
the work of your faith—*Ed*.

<span id="fn_493"></span>[494](cc42018.htm#fr_493) <span
id="vi.iii.ii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p21"></span> “<span
id="vi.iii.ii-p21.1"></span>Quant a la substance du propos;” — “As to
the substance of the matter.”

<span id="fn_494"></span>[495](cc42018.htm#fr_494) <span
id="vi.iii.ii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p22"></span> The rendering of Erasmus is as follows:
“<span id="vi.iii.ii-p22.1"></span>Memores vestri propter opus fidei;” —
“Mindful of you on account of your work of faith.”

<span id="fn_495"></span>[496](cc42018.htm#fr_495) <span
id="vi.iii.ii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p26"></span> “<span
id="vi.iii.ii-p26.1"></span>D’afflictions quasi sans nombre;” — “By
afflictions, as it were, without number.”

<span id="fn_496"></span>[497](cc42018.htm#fr_496) <span
id="vi.iii.ii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p27"></span> “<span
id="vi.iii.ii-p27.1"></span>Foibles et debiles en la foy;” — “Weak and
feeble in faith.”

<span id="fn_497"></span>[498](cc42018.htm#fr_497) <span
id="vi.iii.ii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p30"></span> “<span id="vi.iii.ii-p30.1"></span>Ce
poinct a nommeement este adiouste par Sainct Paul;” — “This point has
been expressly added by St. Paul.”

<span id="fn_498"></span>[499](cc42018.htm#fr_498) <span
id="vi.iii.ii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p31"></span> “<span id="vi.iii.ii-p31.1"></span>Car
ce n’estoit vne petite consideration pour inciter St. Paul et les
autres, a auoir les Thessaloniciens pour recommandez, et en faire
esteme;” — “For it was no slight motive to induce St. Paul and others to
hold the Thessalonians in estimation, and to regard them with esteem.”

<span id="fn_499"></span>[500](cc42018.htm#fr_499) <span
id="vi.iii.ii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p36"></span> “<span id="vi.iii.ii-p36.1"></span>A
l’este comme seellé et ratifié par bons tesmoignages et approbations
suffisantes;” — “Had been there, as it were, sealed and ratified by good
testimonies and sufficient attestations.”

<span id="fn_500"></span>[501](cc42018.htm#fr_500) <span
id="vi.iii.ii-p36.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p37"></span> “<span id="vi.iii.ii-p37.1"></span>Et
en estoit l’autheur;” — “And was the author of it.”

<span id="fn_501"></span>[502](cc42018.htm#fr_501) <span
id="vi.iii.ii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p39"></span> See Calvin on the Corinthians, vol. 1,
pp. 100, 101.

<span id="fn_502"></span>[503](cc42018.htm#fr_502) <span
id="vi.iii.ii-p39.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p40"></span> “<span id="vi.iii.ii-p40.1"></span>Au
reste, les mots de ceste sentence sont ainsi couchez au texte Grec de
Sainct Paul, Scachans freres bien-aimez de Dieu, vostre election:
tellement que ce mot *de Dieu*, pent estre rapporté a deux endroits,
ascauoir Bien-aimez de Dieu, ou vostre election estre de Dieu: mais
c’est tout vn comment on le prene quant au sens;” — “Farther, the words
of this sentence are thus placed in the Greek text of St. Paul; knowing,
brethren beloved of God, your election: in such a way, that this phrase
*of God* may be taken as referring to two things, as meaning beloved of
God, or, your election to be of God; but it is all one as to the sense
in what way you take it.”

<span id="fn_503"></span>[504](cc42018.htm#fr_503) <span
id="vi.iii.ii-p42.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p43"></span> “<span
id="vi.iii.ii-p43.1"></span>Quels auoyent este St. Paul et ses
compagnons;” — “What manner of persons St. Paul and his associates had
been.”

<span id="fn_504"></span>[505](cc42018.htm#fr_504) <span
id="vi.iii.iii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii-p11"></span> This is what the original text reads;
however, (<span id="vi.iii.iii-p11.1"></span>[Ex
14:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#031)<span
id="vi.iii.iii-p11.1"></span> would seem to be a more appropriate
reference. — *fj.*

<span id="fn_505"></span>[506](cc42018.htm#fr_505) <span
id="vi.iii.iii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii-p12"></span> See Calvin on the Corinthians, vol. 2,
p. 288.

<span id="fn_506"></span>[507](cc42018.htm#fr_506) <span
id="vi.iii.iii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii-p18"></span> “<span id="vi.iii.iii-p18.1"></span>Si
viue et vertueuse;” — “So lively and virtuous.”

<span id="fn_507"></span>[508](cc42018.htm#fr_507) <span
id="vi.iii.iii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii-p19"></span> “<span
id="vi.iii.iii-p19.1"></span>Auoit resonné haut et clair;” — “Had
resounded loud and clear.”

<span id="fn_508"></span>[509](cc42018.htm#fr_508) <span
id="vi.iii.iii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii-p20"></span> “<span
id="vi.iii.iii-p20.1"></span>Tellement que la chose n’ha point besoin
d’estre par luy diuulgee et magnifiee d’auantage;” — “So that the matter
does not need to be farther published and extolled by him.”

<span id="fn_509"></span>[510](cc42018.htm#fr_509) <span
id="vi.iii.iv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iv-p9"></span> “<span id="vi.iii.iv-p9.1"></span>Par
laquelle Dieu auoit orné et magnifiquement authorizé son Euangile;” —
“By which God had adorned and magnificently attested his gospel.”

<span id="fn_510"></span>[511](cc42018.htm#fr_510) <span
id="vi.iii.iv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iv-p11"></span> “<span id="vi.iii.iv-p11.1"></span>De
toute religion;” — “Of all religion.”

<span id="fn_511"></span>[512](cc42018.htm#fr_511) <span
id="vi.iii.iv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iv-p13"></span> “<span id="vi.iii.iv-p13.1"></span>Que
ne nous lassions et perdions courage;” — “That we do not give way and
lose heart.”

<span id="fn_512"></span>[513](cc42018.htm#fr_512) <span
id="vi.iii.iv-p13.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iv-p14"></span> “<span
id="vi.iii.iv-p14.1"></span>Jettent sur nous leurs rayons;” — “Cast upon
us their rays.”

<span id="fn_513"></span>[514](cc42018.htm#fr_513) <span
id="vi.iii.iv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iv-p16"></span> “<span id="vi.iii.iv-p16.1"></span>Aux
autres;” — “To others.”

<span id="fn_514"></span>[515](cc42018.htm#fr_514) <span
id="vi.iii.iv-p16.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iv-p17"></span> “<span
id="vi.iii.iv-p17.1"></span>Mais’au dernier iour sera veu a l’oeil le
fruit de ceste deliurance, et de quelle importance elle est;” — “But on
the last day will be visible to the eye the fruit of that deliverance,
and of what importance it is.”

<span id="fn_515"></span>[516](cc42018.htm#fr_515) <span
id="vi.iii.iv-p18.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iv-p19"></span> “<span id="vi.iii.iv-p19.1"></span>En
delices et plaisirs de la vie spirituelle, lesquels nous ne voyons
point;” — “In the delights and pleasures of the spiritual life which we
do not see.”

<span id="fn_516"></span>[517](cc42018.htm#fr_516) <span
id="vi.iii.iv-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iv-p22"></span> “<span id="vi.iii.iv-p22.1"></span>Et
faire demeurer fermes;” — “And make us remain firm.”

<span id="fn_517"></span>[518](cc42018.htm#fr_517) <span
id="vi.iii.iv-p22.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iv-p23"></span> “<span id="vi.iii.iv-p23.1"></span>A
laquelle ceci se rapporte;” — “To what this refers.”

<span id="fn_518"></span>[519](cc42018.htm#fr_518) <span
id="vi.iii.iv-p23.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iv-p24"></span> “<span
id="vi.iii.iv-p24.1"></span>Laquelle il a vne fois monstree en sa
personne;” — “Which he once shewed in his own person.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](cc42019)
