[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc42021)  [Next](cc42023.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 42: Philippians, Colossians, and
Thessalonians*, tr. by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.vii"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 5

<span id="vi.vii.i"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.i-p1"></span><span id="vi.vii.i-p1.1"></span>[1
Thessalonians 5:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#001.md)<span
id="vi.vii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.i-p2"></span>**1**. But of the times and the seasons,
brethren, ye have no need that I write unto you.

<span id="vi.vii.i-p3"></span>**1**. Porro de temporibus et articulis
temporum non opus habetis, ut vobis scribatur.

<span id="vi.vii.i-p4"></span>**2**. For yourselves know perfectly that
the day of the Lord so cometh as a thief in the night.

<span id="vi.vii.i-p5"></span>**2**. Ipsi enim optime scitis, quod dies
Domini tanquam fur in nocte sic veniet.

<span id="vi.vii.i-p6"></span>**3**. For when they shall say, Peace and
safety, then sudden destruction cometh upon them, as travail upon a
woman with child; and they shall not escape.

<span id="vi.vii.i-p7"></span>**3**. Quando enim dixerint, Pax et
securitas, tunc repentinus ipsis superveniet interitus, quasi dolor
partus mulieri praegnanti, nec effugient.

<span id="vi.vii.i-p8"></span>**4**. But ye, brethren, are not in
darkness, that that day should overtake you as a thief.

<span id="vi.vii.i-p9"></span>**4**. Vos autem, fratres, non estis in
tenebris, ut dies ille vos quasi fur opprimat.

<span id="vi.vii.i-p10"></span>**5**. Ye are all the children of light,
and the children of the day: we are not of the night, nor of darkness.

<span id="vi.vii.i-p11"></span>**5**. Omnes vos filii lucis estis, et
filii diei: non sumus noctis, neque tenebrarum.

<span id="vi.vii.i-p12"></span> 

<span id="vi.vii.i-p13"></span><span id="vi.vii.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.i-p14"></span>**1** *But as to times*. He now, in the
third place, calls them back from a curious and unprofitable inquiry as
to *times*, but in the mean time admonishes them to be constantly in a
state of preparation for receiving Christ.  <span
id="fr_588"></span>[589](#fn_588.md) He speaks, however, by way of
*anticipation*, saying, that they have no need that he should write as
to those things which the curious desire to know. For it is an evidence
of excessive incredulity not to believe what the Lord foretells, unless
he marks out the day by certain circumstances, and as it were points it
out with the finger. As, therefore, those waver between doubtful
opinions who require that moments of time should be marked out for them,
as if they would draw a conjecture  <span
id="fr_589"></span>[590](#fn_589.md) from some plausible demonstration, he
accordingly says that discussions of this nature are not necessary for
the pious. There is also another reason — that believers do not desire
to know more than they are permitted to learn in God’s school. Now
Christ designed that the day of his coming should be hid from us, that,
being in suspense, we might be as it were upon watch.

<span id="vi.vii.i-p17"></span><span id="vi.vii.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.i-p18"></span>**2** *Ye know perfectly*. He places
exact knowledge in contrast with an anxious desire of investigation. But
what is it that he says the Thessalonians know accurately?  <span
id="fr_590"></span>[591](#fn_590.md) It is, that the day of Christ will
come suddenly and unexpectedly, so as to take unbelievers by surprise,
as a thief does those that are asleep. This, however, is opposed to
evident tokens, which might portend afar off his coming to the world.
Hence it were foolish to wish to determine the time precisely from
presages or prodigies.

<span id="vi.vii.i-p20"></span><span id="vi.vii.i-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.i-p21"></span>**3** *For when they shall say*. Here we
have an explanation of the similitude, *the day of the Lord will be like
a thief in the night*. Why so? because it will come suddenly to
unbelievers, when not looked for, so that it will take them by surprise,
as though they were asleep. But whence comes that sleep? Assuredly from
deep contempt of God. The prophets frequently reprove the wicked on
account of this supine negligence, and assuredly they await in a spirit
of carelessness not merely that last judgment, but also such as are of
daily occurrence. Though the Lord threatens destruction,  <span
id="fr_591"></span>[592](#fn_591.md) they do not hesitate to promise
themselves peace and every kind of prosperity. And the reason why they
fall into this destructive indolence  <span
id="fr_592"></span>[593](#fn_592.md) is, because they do not see those
things immediately accomplished, which the Lord declares will take
place, for they reckon that to be fabulous that does not immediately
present itself before their eyes. For this reason the Lord, in order
that he may avenge this carelessness, which is full of obstinacy, comes
all on a sudden, and contrary to the expectation of all, precipitates
the wicked from the summit of felicity. He sometimes furnishes tokens of
this nature of a sudden advent, but that will be the principal one, when
Christ will come down to judge the world, as he himself testifies,
(<span id="vi.vii.i-p23.2"></span>[Mt
24:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#037.md)<span
id="vi.vii.i-p23.2"></span>) comparing that time to the age of Noe,
inasmuch as all will give way to excess, as if in the profoundest
repose.

<span id="vi.vii.i-p24"></span>*As the pains of child-bearing.* Here we
have a most apt similitude, inasmuch as there is no evil that seizes
more suddenly, and that presses more keenly and more violently on the
very first attack; besides this, a woman that is with child carries in
her womb occasion of grief without feeling it, until she is seized
amidst feasting and laughter, or in the midst of sleep.

<span id="vi.vii.i-p25"></span><span id="vi.vii.i-p25.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.i-p26"></span>**4** *But ye, brethren*. He now
admonishes them as to what is the duty of believers, that they look
forward in hope to that day, though it be remote. And this is what is
intended in the metaphor of *day* and *light*. The coming of Christ will
take by surprise those that are carelessly giving way to indulgence,
because, being enveloped in darkness, they see nothing, for no darkness
is more dense than ignorance of God. We, on the other hand, on whom
Christ has shone by the faith of his gospel, differ much from them, for
that saying of Isaiah is truly accomplished in us, that

<span id="vi.vii.i-p27"></span>while darkness covers the earth, the Lord
arises upon us, and his glory is seen in us. (<span
id="vi.vii.i-p27.1"></span>[Isa
60:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#002)<span id="vi.vii.i-p27.1"></span>.md)

<span id="vi.vii.i-p28"></span>He admonishes us, therefore, that it were
an unseemly thing that we should be caught by Christ asleep, as it were,
or seeing nothing, while the full blaze of light is shining forth upon
us. He calls them *children of light*, in accordance with the Hebrew
idiom, as meaning — furnished with light; as also *children of the day*,
meaning — those who enjoy the light of day.  <span
id="fr_593"></span>[594](#fn_593.md) And this he again confirms, when he
says that we are *not of the night nor of darkness*, because the Lord
has rescued us from it. For it is as though he had said, that we have
not been enlightened by the Lord with a view to our walking in darkness.

<span id="vi.vii.ii"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.ii-p1"></span><span id="vi.vii.ii-p1.1"></span>[1
Thessalonians 5:6-10](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#006.md)<span
id="vi.vii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.ii-p2"></span>**6**. Therefore let us not sleep, as
*do* others; but let us watch and be sober.

<span id="vi.vii.ii-p3"></span>**6**. Ergo ne dormiamus ut reliqui, sed
vigilemus, et sobrii simus.

<span id="vi.vii.ii-p4"></span>**7**. For they that sleep sleep in the
night; and they that be drunken are drunken in the night.

<span id="vi.vii.ii-p5"></span>**7**. Qui enim dormiunt, nocte dormiunt:
et qui ebrii sunt, nocte ebrii sunt.

<span id="vi.vii.ii-p6"></span>**8**. But let us, who are of the day, be
sober, putting on the breastplate of faith and love; and for an helmet,
the hope of salvation.

<span id="vi.vii.ii-p7"></span>**8**. Nos autem qui sumus diei, sobrii
simus, induti thorace fidei et caritatis, et galea, spe salutis:

<span id="vi.vii.ii-p8"></span>**9**. For God hath not appointed us to
wrath, but to obtain salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ,

<span id="vi.vii.ii-p9"></span>**9**. Quia non constituit nos Deus in
iram, sed in acquisitionem salutis, per Dominum nostrum Iesum Christum:

<span id="vi.vii.ii-p10"></span>**10**. Who died for us, that, whether
we wake or sleep, we should live together with him.

<span id="vi.vii.ii-p11"></span>**10**. Qui mortuus est pro nobis. ut
sive vigilemus, sive dormiamus, simul cum ipso vivamus.

<span id="vi.vii.ii-p12"></span> 

<span id="vi.vii.ii-p13"></span><span id="vi.vii.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.ii-p14"></span>**6** *Therefore let us not sleep*. He
adds other metaphors closely allied to the preceding one. For as he
lately shewed that it were by no means seemly that they should be blind
in the midst of light, so he now admonishes that it were dishonorable
and disgraceful to sleep or be drunk in the middle of the day. Now, as
he gives the name of *day* to the doctrine of the gospel, by which the
Christ, the *Sun of righteousness* (<span
id="vi.vii.ii-p14.1"></span>[Mal
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#002)<span id="vi.vii.ii-p14.1"></span>.md)
is manifested to us, so when he speaks of sleep and drunkenness, he does
not mean natural sleep, or drunkenness from wine, but stupor of mind,
when, forgetting God and ourselves, we regardlessly indulge our vices.
*Let us not sleep*, says he; that is, let us not, sunk in indolence,
become senseless in the world. *As others*, that is, unbelievers,  <span
id="fr_594"></span>[595](#fn_594.md) from whom ignorance of God, like a
dark night, takes away understanding and reason. *But let us watch*,
that is, let us look to the Lord with an attentive mind. *And be sober*,
that is, casting away the cares of the world, which weigh us down by
their pressure, and throwing off base lusts, mount to heaven with
freedom and alacrity. For this is spiritual sobriety, when we use this
world so sparingly and temperately that we are not entangled with its
allurements.

<span id="vi.vii.ii-p16"></span><span id="vi.vii.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.ii-p17"></span>**8** *Having put on the breastplate*.
He adds this, that he may the more effectually shake us out of our
stupidity, for he calls us as it were to arms, that he may shew that it
is not a time to sleep. It is true that he does not make use of the term
*war;* but when he arms us with a *breastplate* and a *helmet*, he
admonishes us that we must maintain a warfare. Whoever, therefore, is
afraid of being surprised by the enemy, must keep awake, that he may be
constantly on watch. As, therefore, he has exhorted to vigilance, on the
ground that the doctrine of the gospel is like the light of day, so he
now stirs us up by another argument — that we must wage war with our
enemy. From this it follows, that idleness is too hazardous a thing. For
we see that soldiers, though in other situations they may be
intemperate, do nevertheless, when the enemy is near, from fear of
destruction, refrain from gluttony  <span
id="fr_595"></span>[596](#fn_595.md) and all bodily delights, and are
diligently on watch so as to be upon their guard. As, therefore, Satan
is on the alert against us, and tries a thousand schemes, we ought at
least to be not less diligent and watchful.  <span
id="fr_596"></span>[597](#fn_596.md)

<span id="vi.vii.ii-p20"></span>It is, however, in vain, that some seek
a more refined exposition of the names of the kinds of armor, for Paul
speaks here in a different way from what he does in <span
id="vi.vii.ii-p20.1"></span>[Eph
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#014.md)<span id="vi.vii.ii-p20.1"></span>
for there he makes *righteousness* the *breastplate*. This, therefore,
will suffice for understanding his meaning, that he designs to teach,
that the life of Christians is like a perpetual warfare, inasmuch as
Satan does not cease to trouble and molest them. He would have us,
therefore, be diligently prepared and on the alert for resistance:
farther, he admonishes us that we have need of arms, because unless we
be well armed we cannot withstand so powerful  <span
id="fr_597"></span>[598](#fn_597.md) an enemy. He does not, however,
enumerate *all the parts of armor*, (<span
id="vi.vii.ii-p21.2"></span>πανοπλίαν,) but simply makes mention of two,
the *breastplate* and the *helmet*. In the mean time, he omits nothing
of what belongs to spiritual armor, for the man that is provided with
*faith*, *love*, and *hope*, will be found in no department unarmed.

<span id="vi.vii.ii-p22"></span><span id="vi.vii.ii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.ii-p23"></span>**9** *For God hath not appointed us*.
As he has spoken of the *hope of salvation,* he follows out that
department, and says that God has appointed us to this — that we *may
obtain salvation through Christ*. The passage, however, might be
explained in a simple way in this manner — that we must *put on the
helmet of salvation*, because God wills not that we should perish, but
rather that we should be saved. And this, indeed, Paul means, but, in my
opinion, he has in view something farther. For as the day of Christ is
for the most part regarded with alarm,  <span
id="fr_598"></span>[599](#fn_598.md) having it in view to close with the
mention of it, he says that we are *appointed to salvation*

<span id="vi.vii.ii-p25"></span>The Greek term <span
id="vi.vii.ii-p25.1"></span>περιποίησις means *enjoyment*, (as they
speak,) as well as *acquisition*. Paul, undoubtedly, does not mean that
God has called us, that we may procure salvation for ourselves, but that
we may obtain it, as it has been acquired for us by Christ. Paul,
however, encourages believers to fight strenuously, setting before them
the certainty of victory; for the man who fights timidly and
hesitatingly is half-conquered. In these words, therefore, he had it in
view to take away the dread which arises from distrust. There cannot,
however, be a better assurance of salvation gathered, than from the
decree  <span id="fr_599"></span>[600](#fn_599.md) of God. The term
*wrath*, in this passage, as in other instances, is taken to mean the
judgment or vengeance of God against the reprobate.

<span id="vi.vii.ii-p27"></span><span id="vi.vii.ii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.ii-p28"></span>**10** *Who died*. From the design of
Christ’s death he confirms what he has said, for if he died with this
view — that he might make us partakers of his life, there is no reason
why we should be in doubt as to our salvation. It is doubtful, however,
what he means now by *sleeping* and *waking*, for it might seem as if he
meant *life* and *death*, and this meaning would be more complete. At
the same time, we might not unsuitably interpret it as meaning ordinary
sleep. The sum is this — that Christ died with this view, that he might
bestow upon us his life, which is perpetual and has no end. It is not to
be wondered, however, that he affirms that we now *live with Christ*,
inasmuch as we have, by entering through faith into the kingdom of
Christ, *passed from death into life*. (<span
id="vi.vii.ii-p28.1"></span>[Joh
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#024.md)<span
id="vi.vii.ii-p28.1"></span>) Christ himself, into whose body we are
ingrafted, quickens us by his power, and the Spirit that dwelleth in us
is *life, because of justification*  <span
id="fr_600"></span>[601](#fn_600.md)

<span id="vi.vii.iii"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.iii-p1"></span><span id="vi.vii.iii-p1.1"></span>[1
Thessalonians 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#011.md)<span
id="vi.vii.iii-p1.1"></span>—14

<span id="vi.vii.iii-p2"></span>**11**. Wherefore comfort yourselves
together, and edify one another, even as also ye do.

<span id="vi.vii.iii-p3"></span>**11**. Quare exhortamini (*vel,
consolamini*) vos invicem, et aedificate singuli singulos, sicut et
facitis.

<span id="vi.vii.iii-p4"></span>**12**. And we beseech you, brethren, to
know them which labour among you, and are over you in the Lord, and
admonish you;

<span id="vi.vii.iii-p5"></span>**12**. Rogamus autem vos, fratres, ut
agnoscatis eos, qui laborant in vobis, et praesunt vobis in Domino, et
admonent vos:

<span id="vi.vii.iii-p6"></span>**13**. And to esteem them very highly
in love for their work’s sake. *And* be at peace among yourselves.

<span id="vi.vii.iii-p7"></span>**13**. Ut eos habeatis in summo pretio
cum caritate propter opus ipsorum: pacem habete cum ipsis, (*vel, inter
vos.*)

<span id="vi.vii.iii-p8"></span>**14**. Now we exhort you, brethren,
warn them that are unruly, comfort the feebleminded, support the weak,
be patient toward all *men*

<span id="vi.vii.iii-p9"></span>**14**. Hortamur autem vos, fratres,
monete inordinatos, consolamini pusillanimos, suscipite infirmos,
patientes estote erga omnes.

<span id="vi.vii.iii-p10"></span> 

<span id="vi.vii.iii-p11"></span><span id="vi.vii.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.iii-p12"></span>**11** *Exhort*. It is the same word
that we had in the close of the preceding chapter, and which we rendered
*comfort*, because the context required it, and the same would not suit
ill with this passage also. For what he has treated of previously
furnishes matter of both — of *consolation* as well as of *exhortation*.
He bids them, therefore, communicate to one another what has been given
them by the Lord. He adds, that they may *edify one another* — that is,
may confirm each other in that doctrine. Lest, however, it might seem as
if he reproved them for carelessness, he says at the same time that they
of their own accord did what he enjoins. But, as we are slow to what is
good, those that are the most favourably inclined of all, have always,
nevertheless, need to be stimulated.

<span id="vi.vii.iii-p13"></span><span id="vi.vii.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.iii-p14"></span>**12** *And we beseech you*. Here we
have an admonition that is very necessary. For as the kingdom of God is
lightly esteemed, or at least is not esteemed suitably to its dignity,
there follows also from this, contempt of pious teachers. Now, the most
of them, offended with this ingratitude, not so much because they see
themselves despised, as because they infer from this, that honor is not
rendered to their Lord, are rendered thereby more indifferent, and God
also, on just grounds, inflicts vengeance upon the world, inasmuch as he
deprives it of good ministers,  <span id="fr_601"></span>[602](#fn_601.md)
to whom it is ungrateful. Hence, it is not so much for the advantage of
ministers as of the whole Church, that those who faithfully preside over
it should be held in esteem. And it is for this reason that Paul is so
careful to recommend them. To *acknowledge* means here to *have regard*
or respect; but Paul intimates that the reason why less honor is shewn
to teachers themselves than is befitting, is because their labor is not
ordinarily taken into consideration.

<span id="vi.vii.iii-p16"></span>We must observe, however, with what
titles of distinction he honors pastors. In the *first* place, he says
that they *labor*. From this it follows, that all idle bellies are
excluded from the number of pastors. Farther, he expresses the kind of
labor when he adds, *those that admonish*, or instruct, *you*. It is to
no purpose, therefore, that any, that do not discharge the office of an
instructor, glory in the name of pastors. The Pope, it is true, readily
admits such persons into his catalogue, but the Spirit of God expunges
them from *his*. As, however, they are held in contempt in the world, as
has been said, he honors them at the same time, with the distinction of
presidency.

<span id="vi.vii.iii-p17"></span>Paul would have such as devote
themselves to teaching, and preside with no other end in view than that
of serving the Church, be held in no ordinary esteem. For he says
literally — *let them be more than abundantly honored,* and not without
good ground, for we must observe the reason that he adds immediately
afterwards — *on account of their work*. Now, this *work* is the
edification of the Church, the everlasting salvation of souls, the
restoration of the world, and, in fine, the kingdom of God and Christ.
The excellence and dignity of this work are inestimable: hence those
whom God makes ministers in connection with so great a matter, ought to
be held by us in great esteem. We may, however, infer from Paul’s words,
that judgment is committed to the Church, that it may distinguish true
pastors.  <span id="fr_602"></span>[603](#fn_602.md) For to no purpose were
these marks pointed out, if he did not mean that they should be taken
notice of by believers. And while he commands that honor be given to
those that *labor*, and to those that by teaching  <span
id="fr_603"></span>[604](#fn_603.md) govern properly and faithfully, he
assuredly does not bestow any honor upon those that are idle and wicked,
nor does he mark them out as deserving of it.

<span id="vi.vii.iii-p20"></span>*Preside in the Lord.* This seems to be
added to denote spiritual government. For although kings and magistrates
also preside by the appointment of God, yet as the Lord would have the
government of the Church to be specially recognized as *his*, those that
govern the Church in the name and by the commandment of Christ, are for
this reason spoken of particularly as *presiding in the Lord.* We may,
however, infer from this, how very remote those are from the rank of
pastors and prelates who exercise a tyranny altogether opposed to
Christ. Unquestionably, in order that any one may be ranked among lawful
pastors, it is necessary that he should shew that he *presides* in the
Lord, and has nothing apart from him. And what else is this, but that by
pure doctrine he puts Christ in his own seat, that he may be the only
Lord and Master?

<span id="vi.vii.iii-p21"></span><span id="vi.vii.iii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.iii-p22"></span>**13** *With love.* Others render it
*by* *love;* for Paul says *in love*, which, according to the Hebrew
idiom, is equivalent to *by* or *with*. I prefer, however, to explain it
thus — as meaning that he exhorts them not merely to respect them,
 <span id="fr_604"></span>[605](#fn_604.md) but also love them. For as the
doctrine of the gospel is lovely, so it is befitting that the ministers
of it should be loved. It were, however, rather stiff to speak of
*having in esteem by* *love*, while the connecting together of love with
honor suits well.

<span id="vi.vii.iii-p24"></span>*Be at peace*. While this passage has
various readings, even among the Greeks, I approve rather of the
rendering which has been given by the old translator, and is followed by
Erasmus — <span id="vi.vii.iii-p24.1"></span>*Pacem habete cum eis, vel
colite* — (*Have* or *cultivate peace with them*.)  <span
id="fr_605"></span>[606](#fn_605.md) For Paul, in my opinion, had in view
to oppose the artifices of Satan, who ceases not to use every endeavor
to stir up either quarrels, or disagreements, or enmities, between
people and pastor. Hence we see daily how pastors are hated by their
Churches for some trivial reason, or for no reason whatever, because
this desire for the cultivation of peace, which Paul recommends so
strongly, is not exercised as it ought.

<span id="vi.vii.iii-p26"></span><span id="vi.vii.iii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.iii-p27"></span>**14** *Admonish the unruly.* It is a
common doctrine — that the welfare of our brethren should be the object
of our concern. This is done by *teaching*, admonishing, correcting, and
arousing; but, as the dispositions of men are various, it is not without
good reason that the Apostle commands that believers accommodate
themselves to this variety. He commands, therefore, that the *unruly*
 <span id="fr_606"></span>[607](#fn_606.md) be admonished, that is, those
who *live dissolutely*. The term *admonition*, also, is employed to mean
sharp reproof, such as may bring them back into the right way, for they
are deserving of greater severity, and they cannot be brought to
repentance by any other remedy.

<span id="vi.vii.iii-p29"></span>Towards the *faint-hearted* another
system of conduct must be pursued, for they have need of consolation.
The *weak* must also be assisted. By *faint-hearted,* however, he means
those that are of a broken and afflicted spirit. He accordingly favors
them, and the *weak*, in such a way as to desire that the *unruly*
should be restrained with some degree of sternness. On the other hand,
he commands that the *unruly* should be admonished sharply, in order
that the weak may be treated with kindness and humanity, and that the
*faint-hearted* may receive consolation. It is therefore to no purpose
that those that are obstinate and intractable demand that they be
soothingly caressed, inasmuch as remedies must be adapted to diseases.

<span id="vi.vii.iii-p30"></span>He recommends, however, *patience
towards all*, for severity must be tempered with some degree of lenity,
even in dealing with the *unruly*. This *patience*, however, is,
properly speaking, contrasted with a feeling of irksomeness,  <span
id="fr_607"></span>[608](#fn_607.md) for nothing are we more prone to than
to feel wearied out when we set ourselves to cure the diseases of our
brethren. The man who has once and again comforted a person who is
*faint-hearted*, if he is called to do the same thing a third time, will
feel I know not what vexation, nay, even indignation, that will not
permit him to persevere in discharging his duty. Thus, if by admonishing
or reproving, we do not immediately do the good that is to be desired,
we lose all hope of future success. Paul had in view to bridle
impatience of this nature, by recommending to us moderation towards all.

<span id="vi.vii.iv"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.iv-p1"></span><span id="vi.vii.iv-p1.1"></span>[1
Thessalonians 5:15-22](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#015.md)<span
id="vi.vii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.iv-p2"></span>**15**. See that none render evil for
evil unto any *man*; but ever follow that which is good, both among
yourselves, and to all *men*

<span id="vi.vii.iv-p3"></span>**15**. Videte, ne quis malum pro malo
cuiquam reddat: sed semper benignitatem sectamini, et mutuam inter vos,
et in omnes.

<span id="vi.vii.iv-p4"></span>**16**. Rejoice evermore.

<span id="vi.vii.iv-p5"></span>**16**. Semper gaudete.

<span id="vi.vii.iv-p6"></span>**17**. Pray without ceasing.

<span id="vi.vii.iv-p7"></span>**17**. Indesinenter orate.

<span id="vi.vii.iv-p8"></span>**18**. In everything give thanks: for
this is the will of God in Christ Jesus concerning you.

<span id="vi.vii.iv-p9"></span>**18**. In omnibus gratias agite: haec
enim Dei voluntas in Christo Iesu erga vos.

<span id="vi.vii.iv-p10"></span>**19**. Quench not the Spirit.

<span id="vi.vii.iv-p11"></span>**19**. Spiritum ne extinguatis.

<span id="vi.vii.iv-p12"></span>**20**. Despise not prophesyings.

<span id="vi.vii.iv-p13"></span>**20**. Prophetias ne contemnatis.

<span id="vi.vii.iv-p14"></span>**21**. Prove all things: hold fast that
which is good.

<span id="vi.vii.iv-p15"></span>**21**. Omnia probate, quod bonum est
tenete.

<span id="vi.vii.iv-p16"></span>**22** Abstain from all appearance of
evil.

<span id="vi.vii.iv-p17"></span>**22**. Ab omni specie mala abstinete.

<span id="vi.vii.iv-p18"></span> 

<span id="vi.vii.iv-p19"></span><span id="vi.vii.iv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.iv-p20"></span>**15** *See that no one render evil for
evil*. As it is difficult to observe this precept, in consequence of the
strong bent of our nature to revenge, he on this account bids us take
care to be on our guard. For the word *see* denotes anxious care. Now,
although he simply forbids us to strive with each other in the way of
inflicting injuries, there can, nevertheless, be no doubt that he meant
to condemn, at the same time, every disposition to do injury. For if it
is unlawful to *render evil for evil*, every disposition to injure is
culpable. This doctrine is peculiar to Christians — not to retaliate
injuries, but to endure them patiently. And lest the Thessalonians
should think that revenge was prohibited only towards their brethren, he
expressly declares that they are to *do evil to no one*. For particular
excuses are wont to be brought forward in some cases. “What! why should
it be unlawful for me to avenge myself on one that is so worthless, so
wicked, and so cruel?” But as vengeance is forbidden us in every case,
without exception, however wicked the man that has injured us may be, we
must refrain from inflicting injury.

<span id="vi.vii.iv-p21"></span>*But always follow benignity.* By this
last clause he teaches that we must not merely refrain from inflicting
vengeance, when any one has injured us, but must cultivate beneficence
towards all. For although he means that it should in the first instance
be exercised among believers mutually, he afterwards extends it to all,
however undeserving of it, that we may make it our aim to *overcome evil
with good*, as he himself teaches elsewhere. (<span
id="vi.vii.iv-p21.1"></span>[Ro
12:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#021.md)<span
id="vi.vii.iv-p21.1"></span>) The first step, therefore, in the exercise
of patience, is, not to revenge injuries; the second is, to bestow
favors even upon enemies.

<span id="vi.vii.iv-p22"></span><span id="vi.vii.iv-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.iv-p23"></span>**16** *Rejoice always*. I refer this to
moderation of spirit, when the mind keeps itself in calmness under
adversity, and does not give indulgence to grief. I accordingly connect
together these three things — *to rejoice always, to pray without
ceasing, and to give thanks to God in all things*. For when he
recommends constant praying, he points out the way of rejoicing
perpetually, for by this means we ask from God alleviation in connection
with all our distresses. In like manner, in <span
id="vi.vii.iv-p23.1"></span>[Php
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#004.md)<span id="vi.vii.iv-p23.1"></span>,
having said,

<span id="vi.vii.iv-p24"></span>Rejoice in the Lord always; again I say,
Rejoice. Let your moderation be known to all. Be not anxious as to
anything. The Lord is at hand.

<span id="vi.vii.iv-p25"></span>He afterwards points out the means of
this—

<span id="vi.vii.iv-p26"></span>but in every prayer let your requests be
made known to God, with giving of thanks.

<span id="vi.vii.iv-p27"></span>In that passage, as we see, he presents
as a source of joy a calm and composed mind, that is not unduly
disturbed by injuries or adversities. But lest we should be borne down
by grief, sorrow, anxiety, and fear, he bids us repose in the providence
of God. And as doubts frequently obtrude themselves as to whether God
cares for us, he also prescribes the remedy — that by prayer we
disburden our anxieties, as it were, into his bosom, as David commands
us to do in <span id="vi.vii.iv-p27.1"></span>[Ps
37:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#005.md)<span id="vi.vii.iv-p27.1"></span>
and <span id="vi.vii.iv-p27.2"></span>[Ps
55:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#022.md)<span
id="vi.vii.iv-p27.2"></span>; and Peter also, after his example. (<span
id="vi.vii.iv-p27.3"></span>[1Pe
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#007.md)<span
id="vi.vii.iv-p27.3"></span>.) As, however, we are unduly precipitate in
our desires, he imposes a check upon them — that, while we desire what
we are in need of, we at the same time do not cease to give thanks.

<span id="vi.vii.iv-p28"></span>He observes, here, almost the same
order, though in fewer words. For, in the first place, he would have us
hold God’s benefits in such esteem, that the recognition of them and
meditation upon them shall overcome all sorrow. And, unquestionably, if
we consider what Christ has conferred upon us, there will be no
bitterness of grief so intense as may not be alleviated, and give way to
spiritual joy. For if this joy does not reign in us, the kingdom of God
is at the same time banished from us, or we from it.  <span
id="fr_608"></span>[609](#fn_608.md) And very ungrateful is that man to
God, who does not set so high a value on the righteousness of Christ and
the hope of eternal life, as to rejoice in the midst of sorrow. As,
however, our minds are easily dispirited, until they give way to
impatience, we must observe the remedy that he subjoins immediately
afterwards. For on being cast down and laid low we are raised up again
by prayers, because we lay upon God what burdened us. As, however, there
are every day, nay, every moment, many things that may disturb our
peace, and mar our joy, he for this reason bids us *pray without
ceasing*. Now, as to this constancy in prayer, we have spoken of
elsewhere.  <span id="fr_609"></span>[610](#fn_609.md) *Thanksgiving*, as I
have said, is added as a limitation. For many pray in such a manner, as
at the same time to murmur against God, and fret themselves if he does
not immediately gratify their wishes. But, on the contrary, it is
befitting that our desires should be restrained in such a manner that,
contented with what is given us, we always mingle thanksgiving with our
desires. We may lawfully, it is true, ask, nay, sigh and lament, but it
must be in such a way that the will of God is more acceptable to us than
our own.

<span id="vi.vii.iv-p31"></span><span id="vi.vii.iv-p31.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.iv-p32"></span>**18** *For this is the will of God* —
that is, according to Chrysostom’s opinion — that we *give thanks*. As
for myself, I am of opinion that a more ample meaning is included under
these terms — that God has such a disposition towards us in Christ, that
even in our afflictions we have large occasion of thanksgiving. For what
is fitter or more suitable for pacifying us, than when we learn that God
embraces us in Christ so tenderly, that he turns to our advantage and
welfare everything that befalls us? Let us, therefore, bear in mind,
that this is a special remedy for correcting our impatience — to turn
away our eyes from beholding present evils that torment us, and to
direct our views to a consideration of a different nature — how God
stands affected towards us in Christ.

<span id="vi.vii.iv-p33"></span><span id="vi.vii.iv-p33.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.iv-p34"></span>**19** *Quench not the Spirit*. This
metaphor is derived from the power and nature of the Spirit; for as it
is the proper office of the Spirit to illuminate the understandings of
men, and as he is on this account called our light, it is with propriety
that we are said to *quench* him, when we make void his grace. There are
some that think that it is the same thing that is said in this clause
and the succeeding one. Hence, according to them, to *quench the Spirit*
is precisely the same as to *despise prophesyings*. As, however, the
Spirit is *quenched* in various ways, I make a distinction between these
two things—that of a *general* statement, and a *particular*. For
although *contempt of prophesying* is a *quenching of the Spirit*, yet
those also *quench the Spirit* who, instead of stirring up, as they
ought, more and more, by daily progress, the sparks that God has kindled
in them, do, by their negligence, make void the gifts of God. This
admonition, therefore, as to not *quenching the Spirit*, has a wider
extent of meaning than the one that follows as to not *despising
prophesyings*. The meaning of the *former* is: “Be enlightened by the
Spirit of God. See that you do not lose that light through your
ingratitude.” This is an exceedingly useful admonition, for we see that
those who have been *once enlightened*, (<span
id="vi.vii.iv-p34.1"></span>[Heb
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#004)<span id="vi.vii.iv-p34.1"></span>.md)
when they reject so precious a gift of God, or, shutting their eves,
allow themselves to be hurried away after the vanity of the world, are
struck with a dreadful blindness, so as to be an example to others. We
must, therefore, be on our guard against indolence, by which the light
of God is choked in us.

<span id="vi.vii.iv-p35"></span>Those, however, who infer from this that
it is in man’s option either to *quench* or to *cherish* the light that
is presented to him, so that they detract from the efficacy of grace,
and extol the powers of free will, reason on false grounds. For although
God works efficaciously in his elect, and does not merely present the
light to them, but causes them to see, opens the eyes of their heart,
and keeps them open, yet as the flesh is always inclined to indolence,
it has need of being stirred up by exhortations. But what God commands
by Paul’s mouth, He himself accomplishes inwardly. In the mean time, it
is our part to ask from the Lord, that he would furnish oil to the lamps
which he has lighted up, that he may keep the wick pure, and may even
increase it.

<span id="vi.vii.iv-p36"></span><span id="vi.vii.iv-p36.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.iv-p37"></span>**20** *Despise not prophesyings*. This
sentence is appropriately added to the preceding one, for as the Spirit
of God illuminates us chiefly by doctrine, those who give not teaching
its proper place, do, so far as in them lies, *quench the Spirit*, for
we must always consider in what manner or by what means God designs to
communicate himself to us. Let every one, therefore, who is desirous to
make progress under the direction of the Holy Spirit, allow himself to
be taught by the ministry of prophets.

<span id="vi.vii.iv-p38"></span>By the term *prophecy*, however, I do
not understand the gift of foretelling the future, but as in <span
id="vi.vii.iv-p38.1"></span>[1Co
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#003.md)<span
id="vi.vii.iv-p38.1"></span>, the science of interpreting Scripture,
 <span id="fr_610"></span>[611](#fn_610.md) so that a *prophet* is an
interpreter of the will of God. For Paul, in the passage which I have
quoted, assigns to *prophets teaching for edification, exhortation*, and
*consolation*, and enumerates, as it were, these departments. Let,
therefore, prophecy in this passage be understood as meaning —
interpretation made suitable to present use.  <span
id="fr_611"></span>[612](#fn_611.md) Paul prohibits us from *despising* it,
if we would not choose of our own accord to wander in darkness.

<span id="vi.vii.iv-p41"></span>The statement, however, is a remarkable
one, for the commendation of external preaching. It is the dream of
fanatics, that those are children who continue to employ themselves in
the reading of the Scripture, or the hearing of the word, as if no one
were spiritual, unless he is a despiser of doctrine. They proudly,
therefore, despise the ministry of man, nay, even Scripture itself, that
they may attain the Spirit. Farther, whatever delusions Satan suggests
to them,  <span id="fr_612"></span>[613](#fn_612.md) they presumptuously
set forth as secret revelations of the Spirit. Such are the Libertines,
 <span id="fr_613"></span>[614](#fn_613.md) and other furies of that stamp.
And the more ignorant that any one is, he is puffed up and swollen out
with so much the greater arrogance. Let us, however, learn from the
example of Paul, to conjoin the Spirit with the voice of men, which is
nothing else than his organ.  <span id="fr_614"></span>[615](#fn_614.md)

<span id="vi.vii.iv-p45"></span><span id="vi.vii.iv-p45.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.iv-p46"></span>**21** *Prove all things*. As rash men
and deceiving spirits frequently pass off their trifles under the name
of *prophecy, prophecy* might by this means be rendered suspicious or
even odious, just as many in the present day feel almost disgusted with
the very name of *preaching*, as there are so many foolish and ignorant
persons that from the pulpit blab out their worthless contrivances,
 <span id="fr_615"></span>[616](#fn_615.md) while there are others, also,
that are wicked and sacrilegious persons, who babble forth execrable
blasphemies.  <span id="fr_616"></span>[617](#fn_616.md) As, therefore,
through the fault of such persons it might be, that *prophecy* was
regarded with disdain, nay more, was scarcely allowed to hold a place,
Paul exhorts the Thessalonians to *prove all things*, meaning, that
although all do not speak precisely according to set rule, we must,
nevertheless, form a judgment, before any doctrine is condemned or
rejected.

<span id="vi.vii.iv-p49"></span>As to this, there is a twofold error
that is wont to be fallen into, for there are some who, from having
either been deceived by a false pretext of the name of God, or from
their knowing that many are commonly deceived in this way, reject every
kind of doctrine indiscriminately, while there are others that by a
foolish credulity embrace, without distinction, everything that is
presented to them in the name of God. Both of these ways are faulty, for
the former class, saturated with a presumptuous prejudice of that
nature, close up the way against their making progress, while the other
class rashly expose themselves to all *winds* of errors. (<span
id="vi.vii.iv-p49.1"></span>[Eph
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#014.md)<span
id="vi.vii.iv-p49.1"></span>.) Paul admonishes the Thessalonians to keep
the middle path between these two extremes, while he prohibits them from
condemning anything without first examining it; and, on the other hand,
he admonishes them to exercise judgment, before receiving, what may be
brought forward, as undoubted truth. And unquestionably, this respect,
at least, ought to be shewn to the name of God — that we do not *despise
prophecy*, which is declared to have proceeded from him. As, however,
examination or discrimination ought to precede rejection, so it must,
also, precede the reception of true and sound doctrine. For it does not
become the pious to shew such lightness, as indiscriminately to lay hold
of what is false equally with what is true. From this we infer, that
they have the spirit of judgment conferred upon them by God, that they
may discriminate, so as not to be imposed upon by the impostures of men.
For if they were not endowed with discrimination, it were in vain that
Paul said — *Prove: hold fast that which is good*. If, however, we feel
that we are left destitute of the power of *proving* aright; it must be
sought by us from the same Spirit, who speaks by his prophets. But the
Lord declares in this place by the mouth of Paul, that the course of
doctrine ought not, by any faults of mankind, or by any rashness, or
ignorance, or, in fine, by any abuse, to be hindered from being always
in a vigorous state in the Church. For as the abolition of prophecy is
the ruin of the Church, let us allow heaven and earth to be commingled,
rather than that prophecy should cease.

<span id="vi.vii.iv-p50"></span>Paul, however, may seem here to give too
great liberty in teaching, when he would have *all things proved;* for
things must be heard by us, that they may be *proved*, and by this means
a door would be opened to impostors for disseminating their falsehoods.
I answer, that in this instance he does not by any means require that an
audience should be given to false teachers, whose *mouth* he elsewhere
teaches (<span id="vi.vii.iv-p50.1"></span>[Titus
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#011.md)<span
id="vi.vii.iv-p50.1"></span>) *must be stopped*, and whom he so rigidly
shuts out, and does not by any means set aside the arrangement, which he
elsewhere recommends so highly (<span id="vi.vii.iv-p50.2"></span>[1Ti
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#002)<span id="vi.vii.iv-p50.2"></span>.md)
in the election of teachers. As, however, so great diligence can never
be exercised as that there should not sometimes be persons prophesying,
who are not so well instructed as they ought to be, and that sometimes
good and pious teachers fail to hit the mark, he requires such
moderation on the part of believers, as, nevertheless, not to refuse to
hear. For nothing is more dangerous, than that moroseness, by which
every kind of doctrine is rendered disgusting to us, while we do not
allow ourselves to *prove* what is right.  <span
id="fr_617"></span>[618](#fn_617.md)

<span id="vi.vii.iv-p52"></span><span id="vi.vii.iv-p52.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.iv-p53"></span>**22** *From every evil appearance*.
Some think that this is a universal statement, as though he commanded to
abstain from all things that bear upon their front an *appearance of
evil*. In that case the meaning would be, that it is not enough to have
an internal testimony of conscience, unless regard be at the same time
had to brethren, so as to provide against occasions of offense, by
avoiding every thing that can have the appearance of evil.

<span id="vi.vii.iv-p54"></span>Those who explain the word <span
id="vi.vii.iv-p54.1"></span>*speciem* after the manner of dialecticians
as meaning the subdivision of a general term, fall into an exceedingly
gross blunder. For he  <span id="fr_618"></span>[619](#fn_618.md) has
employed the term <span id="vi.vii.iv-p55.2"></span>*speciem* as meaning
what we commonly term *appearance*. It may also be rendered either—*evil
appearance*, or *appearance of evil*. The meaning, however, is the same.
I rather prefer Chrysostom and Ambrose, who connect this sentence with
the foregoing one. At the same time, neither of them explains Paul’s
meaning, and perhaps have not altogether hit upon what he intends. I
shall state briefly my view of it.

<span id="vi.vii.iv-p56"></span>In the first place, the phrase
*appearance of evil*, or *evil appearance*, I understand to mean — when
falsity of doctrine has not yet been discovered in such a manner, that
it can on good grounds be rejected; but at the same time an unhappy
suspicion is left upon the mind, and fears are entertained, lest there
should be some poison lurking. He, accordingly, commands us to abstain
from that kind of doctrine, which has an appearance of being evil,
though it is not really so — not that he allows that it should be
altogether rejected, but inasmuch as it ought not to be received, or to
obtain belief. For why has he previously commanded that *what is good*
should be *held fast*, while he now desires that we should *abstain* not
simply from evil, but from *all appearance of evil?* It is for this
reason, that, when truth has been brought to light by careful
examination, it is assuredly becoming in that case to give credit to it.
When, on the other hand, there is any fear of false doctrine, or when
the mind is involved in doubt, it is proper in that case to retreat, or
to suspend our step, as they say, lest we should receive anything with a
doubtful and perplexed conscience. In short, he shews us in what way
*prophecy* will be useful to us without any danger — in the event of our
being attentive in *proving all things*, and our being free from
lightness and haste.

<span id="vi.vii.v"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.v-p1"></span><span id="vi.vii.v-p1.1"></span>[1
Thessalonians 5:23-28](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#023.md)<span
id="vi.vii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.v-p2"></span>**23**. And the very God of peace sanctify
you wholly; and *I pray God* your whole spirit and soul and body be
preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="vi.vii.v-p3"></span>**23**. Ipse autem Deus pacis sanctificet
vos totos: et integer spiritus vester, et anima et corpus sine
reprehensione in adventu Domini nostri Iesu Christi custodiatur:

<span id="vi.vii.v-p4"></span>**24**. Faithful *is* he that calleth you,
who also will do *it*

<span id="vi.vii.v-p5"></span>**24**. Fidelis qui vos vocavit, qui et
faciet.

<span id="vi.vii.v-p6"></span>**25**. Brethren, pray for us.

<span id="vi.vii.v-p7"></span>**25**. Fratres, orate pro nobis.

<span id="vi.vii.v-p8"></span>**26**. Greet all the brethren with an
holy kiss.

<span id="vi.vii.v-p9"></span>**26**. Salutate fratres omnes in osculo
sancto.

<span id="vi.vii.v-p10"></span>**27**. I charge you by the Lord that
this epistle be read unto all the holy brethren.

<span id="vi.vii.v-p11"></span>**27**. Adiuro vos per Dominum, ut
legatur epistola omnibus sanctis fratribus.

<span id="vi.vii.v-p12"></span>**28**. The grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ *be* with you. Amen.

<span id="vi.vii.v-p13"></span>**28**. Gratia Domini nostri Iesu Christi
vobiscum. Amen.

<span id="vi.vii.v-p14"></span>The first epistle unto the Thessalonians
was written from Athens.

<span id="vi.vii.v-p15"></span>Ad Thessalonicenses prima scripta fuit ex
Athenis.

<span id="vi.vii.v-p16"></span> 

<span id="vi.vii.v-p17"></span><span id="vi.vii.v-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.v-p18"></span>**23** *Now the God of peace himself*.
Having given various injunctions, he now proceeds to prayer. And
unquestionably doctrine is disseminated in vain,  <span
id="fr_619"></span>[620](#fn_619.md) unless God implant it in our minds.
From this we see how preposterously those act who measure the strength
of men by the precepts of God. Paul, accordingly, knowing that all
doctrine is useless until God engraves it, as it were, with his own
finger upon our hearts, beseeches God that he would *sanctify* the
Thessalonians. Why he calls him here the *God of peace*, I do not
altogether apprehend, unless you choose to refer it to what goes before,
where he makes mention of brotherly agreement, and patience, and
equanimity.  <span id="fr_620"></span>[621](#fn_620.md)

<span id="vi.vii.v-p21"></span>We know, however, that under the term
*sanctification* is included the entire renovation of the man. The
Thessalonians, it is true, had been in part renewed, but Paul desires
that God would perfect what is remaining. From this we infer, that we
must, during our whole life, make progress in the pursuit of holiness.
 <span id="fr_621"></span>[622](#fn_621.md) But if it is the part of God to
renew the whole man, there is nothing left for free will. For if it had
been our part to co-operate with God, Paul would have spoken thus — “May
God aid or promote your sanctification.” But when he says, *sanctify you
wholly*, he makes him the sole Author of the entire work.

<span id="vi.vii.v-p23"></span>*And your entire spirit*. This is added
by way of exposition, that we may know what the *sanctification of the
whole man* is, when he is kept *entire*, or pure, and unpolluted, in
spirit, soul, and body, until the day of Christ. As, however, so
complete an entireness is never to be met with in this life, it is
befitting that some progress be daily made in purity, and something be
cleansed away from our pollutions, so long as we live in the world.

<span id="vi.vii.v-p24"></span>We must notice, however, this division of
the constituent parts of a man; for in some instances a man is said to
consist simply of *body* and *soul*, and in that case the term *soul*
denotes the immortal spirit, which resides in the body as in a dwelling.
As the *soul*, however, has two principal faculties — the understanding
and the will — the Scripture is accustomed in some cases to mention
these two things separately, when designing to express the power and
nature of the *soul;* but in that case the term *soul* is employed to
mean the seat of the affections, so that it is the part that is opposed
to the *spirit*. Hence, when we find mention made here of the term
*spirit*, let us understand it as denoting reason or intelligence, as on
the other hand by the term soul, is meant the will and all the
affections.

<span id="vi.vii.v-p25"></span>I am aware that many explain Paul’s words
otherwise, for they are of opinion that by the term *soul* is meant
vital motion, and by the *spirit* is meant that part of man which has
been renewed; but in that case Paul’s prayer were absurd. Besides, it is
in another way, as I have said, that the term is wont to be made use of
in Scripture. When Isaiah says,

<span id="vi.vii.v-p26"></span>“My soul hath desired thee in the
night,  
my spirit hath thought of thee,” (<span id="vi.vii.v-p26.2"></span>[Isa
26:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#009)<span id="vi.vii.v-p26.2"></span>.md)

<span id="vi.vii.v-p27"></span>no one doubts that he speaks of his
understanding and affection, and thus enumerates two departments of the
*soul*. These two terms are conjoined in the Psalms in the same sense.
This, also, corresponds better with Paul’s statement. For how is the
whole man *entire*, except when his thoughts are pure and holy, when all
his affections are right and properly regulated, when, in fine, the body
itself lays out its endeavors and services only in good works? For the
faculty of understanding is held by philosophers to be, as it were, a
mistress: the affections occupy a middle place for commanding; the body
renders obedience. We see now how well everything corresponds. For then
is the man pure and entire, when he thinks nothing in his mind, desires
nothing in his heart, does nothing with his body, except what is
approved by God. As, however, Paul in this manner commits to God the
keeping of the whole man, and all its parts, we must infer from this
that we are exposed to innumerable dangers, unless we are protected by
his guardianship.

<span id="vi.vii.v-p28"></span><span id="vi.vii.v-p28.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.v-p29"></span>**24** *Faithful is he that hath called
you*. As he has shewn by his prayer what care he exercised as to the
welfare of the Thessalonians, so he now confirms them in an assurance of
Divine grace. Observe, however, by what argument he promises them the
never-failing aid of God — because he has *called* them; by which words
he means, that when the Lord has once adopted us as his sons, we may
expect that his grace will continue to be exercised towards us. For he
does not promise to be a Father to us merely for one day, but adopts us
with this understanding, that he is to cherish us ever afterwards. Hence
our *calling* ought to be held by us as an evidence of everlasting
grace, for he *will not leave the work of his hands incomplete*. (<span
id="vi.vii.v-p29.1"></span>[Ps
138:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#008.md)<span
id="vi.vii.v-p29.1"></span>) Paul, however, addresses believers, who had
not been merely called by outward preaching, but had been effectually
brought by Christ to the Father, that they might be of the number of his
sons.

<span id="vi.vii.v-p30"></span><span id="vi.vii.v-p30.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.v-p31"></span>**26** *Salute all the brethren with an
holy kiss*. As to the *kiss*, it was a customary token of salutation, as
has been stated elsewhere.  <span id="fr_622"></span>[623](#fn_622.md) In
these words, however, he declares his affection towards all the saints.

<span id="vi.vii.v-p33"></span><span id="vi.vii.v-p33.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.v-p34"></span>**27** *I adjure you by the Lord*. It is
not certain whether he feared that, as often happened, spiteful and
envious persons would suppress the Epistle, or whether he wished to
provide against another danger — lest by a mistaken prudence and caution
on the part of some, it should be kept among a few.  <span
id="fr_623"></span>[624](#fn_623.md) For there will always be found some
who say that it is of no advantage to publish generally things that
otherwise they recognize as very excellent. At least, whatever artifice
or pretext Satan may have at that time contrived, in order that the
Epistle might not come to the knowledge of all, we may gather from
Paul’s words with what earnestness and keenness he sets himself in
opposition to it. For it is no light or frivolous thing to *adjure by
the name of God.* We find, therefore, that the Spirit of God would have
those things which he had set forth in this Epistle, through the
ministry of Paul, to be published throughout the whole Church. Hence it
appears, that those are more refractory than even devils themselves, who
in the present day prohibit the people of God from reading the writings
of Paul, inasmuch as they are no way moved by so strict an adjuration.

<span id="vi.vii.v-p36"></span>END OF THE COMMENTARY ON THE FIRST
EPISTLE TO THE THESSALONIANS.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_588"></span>[589](cc42022.htm#fr_588.md) <span
id="vi.vii.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.i-p15"></span> “<span id="vi.vii.i-p15.1"></span>Quand
il viendra en iugement;” — “When he will come to judgment.”

<span id="fn_589"></span>[590](cc42022.htm#fr_589.md) <span
id="vi.vii.i-p15.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.i-p16"></span> “<span id="vi.vii.i-p16.1"></span>De ce
qu’ils en doyuent croire;” — “Of what they must believe.”

<span id="fn_590"></span>[591](cc42022.htm#fr_590.md) <span
id="vi.vii.i-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.i-p19"></span> “<span
id="vi.vii.i-p19.1"></span>Plenement et certainement;” — “Fully and
certainly.”

<span id="fn_591"></span>[592](cc42022.htm#fr_591.md) <span
id="vi.vii.i-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.i-p22"></span> “<span id="vi.vii.i-p22.1"></span>Leur
denonce ruine et confusion;” — “Threatens them with ruin and confusion.”

<span id="fn_592"></span>[593](cc42022.htm#fr_592.md) <span
id="vi.vii.i-p22.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.i-p23"></span> “<span id="vi.vii.i-p23.1"></span>Ceste
paresse tant dangereuse et mortelle;” — “This indolence so dangerous and
deadly.”

<span id="fn_593"></span>[594](cc42022.htm#fr_593.md) <span
id="vi.vii.i-p28.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.i-p29"></span> “It is ‘day’ with them. It is not only
‘day’ *round about* them, (so it is wherever the gospel is afforded to
men,) but God hath made it ‘day’ *within*.” —*Howe’s Works*, (Lond.
1822,) vol. 6, p. 294. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_594"></span>[595](cc42022.htm#fr_594.md) <span
id="vi.vii.ii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.ii-p15"></span> “The *refuse*, as the word <span
id="vi.vii.ii-p15.1"></span>λοιποὶ emphatically signifies, or the
reprobate and worst of men.... The word <span
id="vi.vii.ii-p15.2"></span>καθεύδωμεν, signifies a deeper or a more
intense sleep. It is the word that is used in the Septuagint to signify
the sleep of death.” (<span id="vi.vii.ii-p15.3"></span>[Da
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#002.md)<span
id="vi.vii.ii-p15.3"></span>)—*Howe’s Works*, (Lond. 1822,) vol. 6, p.
290. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_595"></span>[596](cc42022.htm#fr_595.md) <span
id="vi.vii.ii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.ii-p18"></span> “<span id="vi.vii.ii-p18.1"></span>Et
yurognerie;” — “And drunkenness.”

<span id="fn_596"></span>[597](cc42022.htm#fr_596.md) <span
id="vi.vii.ii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.ii-p19"></span> “<span id="vi.vii.ii-p19.1"></span>Pour
le moins ne deuons—nous pas estre aussi vigilans que les gendarmes?” —
“Should we not at least be as vigilant as soldiers are?”

<span id="fn_597"></span>[598](cc42022.htm#fr_597.md) <span
id="vi.vii.ii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.ii-p21"></span> “<span id="vi.vii.ii-p21.1"></span>Si
puissant et si fort;” — “So powerful and so strong.”

<span id="fn_598"></span>[599](cc42022.htm#fr_598.md) <span
id="vi.vii.ii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.ii-p24"></span> “<span
id="vi.vii.ii-p24.1"></span>D’autant que volontiers nous auons en
horreur et craignons le iour du Seigneur;” — “Inasmuch as we naturally
regard with horror, and view with dread the day of the Lord.”

<span id="fn_599"></span>[600](cc42022.htm#fr_599.md) <span
id="vi.vii.ii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.ii-p26"></span> “<span id="vi.vii.ii-p26.1"></span>Du
decret et ordonnance de Dieu;” — “From the decree and appointment of
God.”

<span id="fn_600"></span>[601](cc42022.htm#fr_600.md) <span
id="vi.vii.ii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.ii-p29"></span> “<span
id="vi.vii.ii-p29.1"></span>Comme il est dit en l’Epistre aux <span
id="vi.vii.ii-p29.2"></span>[Romans
8](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#000.md)<span id="vi.vii.ii-p29.2"></span>.
b. 10;” — “As is stated in the Epistle to the Romans <span
id="vi.vii.ii-p29.3"></span>[Ro
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#010.md)<span
id="vi.vii.ii-p29.3"></span>.”

<span id="fn_601"></span>[602](cc42022.htm#fr_601.md) <span
id="vi.vii.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.iii-p15"></span> “<span
id="vi.vii.iii-p15.1"></span>Fideles ministres de la parolle;” —
“Faithful ministers of the word.”

<span id="fn_602"></span>[603](cc42022.htm#fr_602.md) <span
id="vi.vii.iii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.iii-p18"></span> “<span id="vi.vii.iii-p18.1"></span>Et
les ministres fideles;” — “And faithful ministers.”

<span id="fn_603"></span>[604](cc42022.htm#fr_603.md) <span
id="vi.vii.iii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.iii-p19"></span> “<span id="vi.vii.iii-p19.1"></span>Et
admonestant;” — “And admonishing.”

<span id="fn_604"></span>[605](cc42022.htm#fr_604.md) <span
id="vi.vii.iii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.iii-p23"></span> “<span id="vi.vii.iii-p23.1"></span>De
porter honneur aux fideles ministres;” — “To do honor to faithful
ministers.”

<span id="fn_605"></span>[606](cc42022.htm#fr_605.md) <span
id="vi.vii.iii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.iii-p25"></span> Wiclif (1380) renders as follows:
“Haue ye pees with hem.”

<span id="fn_606"></span>[607](cc42022.htm#fr_606.md) <span
id="vi.vii.iii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.iii-p28"></span> “The whole phraseology of this verse
is military... ᾿Ατάκτους — those who are *out of their ranks*, and are
neither in a *disposition* nor *situation* to perform the work and duty
of a soldier: those who will not do the work prescribed, and who will
meddle with what is not commanded.” —*Dr. A. Clarke*.—*Ed*

<span id="fn_607"></span>[608](cc42022.htm#fr_607.md) <span
id="vi.vii.iii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.iii-p31"></span> “<span id="vi.vii.iii-p31.1"></span>A
l’ennuy qu’on conçoit aiseement en tels affaires;” — “To the irksomeness
which one readily feels in such matters.”

<span id="fn_608"></span>[609](cc42022.htm#fr_608.md) <span
id="vi.vii.iv-p28.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.iv-p29"></span> “<span
id="vi.vii.iv-p29.1"></span>N’est point en nous, ou pour mieux dire,
nous en sommes hors;” — “Is not in us, or as we may rather say, we are
away from it.”

<span id="fn_609"></span>[610](cc42022.htm#fr_609.md) <span
id="vi.vii.iv-p29.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.iv-p30"></span> Our author probably refers here to what
he has said on this subject when commenting on <span
id="vi.vii.iv-p30.2"></span>[Ephesians
6:18](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#018.md)<span
id="vi.vii.iv-p30.2"></span>. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_610"></span>[611](cc42022.htm#fr_610.md) <span
id="vi.vii.iv-p38.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.iv-p39"></span> See Calvin on the Corinthians, vol. 1,
p. 415, 436.

<span id="fn_611"></span>[612](cc42022.htm#fr_611.md) <span
id="vi.vii.iv-p39.3"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.iv-p40"></span> “<span
id="vi.vii.iv-p40.1"></span>Interpretation de l’Escriture applicquee
proprement selon le temps, les personnes, et les choses presentes;” —
“Interpretation of Scripture properly applied, according to time,
persons, and things present.”

<span id="fn_612"></span>[613](cc42022.htm#fr_612.md) <span
id="vi.vii.iv-p41.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.iv-p42"></span> “<span id="vi.vii.iv-p42.1"></span>Leur
souffle aux aureilles;” — “Breathes into their ears.”

<span id="fn_613"></span>[614](cc42022.htm#fr_613.md) <span
id="vi.vii.iv-p42.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.iv-p43"></span> See Calvin on the Corinthians, vol. 2,
p. 7, n. 3.

<span id="fn_614"></span>[615](cc42022.htm#fr_614.md) <span
id="vi.vii.iv-p43.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.iv-p44"></span> “<span
id="vi.vii.iv-p44.1"></span>L’organe et instrument d’celuy;” — “His
organ and instrument.”

<span id="fn_615"></span>[616](cc42022.htm#fr_615.md) <span
id="vi.vii.iv-p46.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.iv-p47"></span> “<span
id="vi.vii.iv-p47.1"></span>Leurs speculations ridicules;” — “Their
ridiculous speculations.”

<span id="fn_616"></span>[617](cc42022.htm#fr_616.md) <span
id="vi.vii.iv-p47.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.iv-p48"></span> “<span
id="vi.vii.iv-p48.1"></span>Horribles et execrables;” — “Horrible and
execrable.”

<span id="fn_617"></span>[618](cc42022.htm#fr_617.md) <span
id="vi.vii.iv-p50.3"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.iv-p51"></span> “<span
id="vi.vii.iv-p51.1"></span>Tellement que nostre impatience ou chagrin
nous empesche d’esprouuer qui est la vraye ou la fausse;” — “So that our
impatience or chagrin keeps us from proving what is true or false.”

<span id="fn_618"></span>[619](cc42022.htm#fr_618.md) <span
id="vi.vii.iv-p54.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.iv-p55"></span> “<span id="vi.vii.iv-p55.1"></span>S.
Paul;” —”St. Paul.”

<span id="fn_619"></span>[620](cc42022.htm#fr_619.md) <span
id="vi.vii.v-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.v-p19"></span> “<span id="vi.vii.v-p19.1"></span>Que
proufitera-on de prescher la doctrine?” — “What profit will be derived
from preaching doctrine?”

<span id="fn_620"></span>[621](cc42022.htm#fr_620.md) <span
id="vi.vii.v-p19.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.v-p20"></span> “<span id="vi.vii.v-p20.1"></span>Repos
d’esprit;” — “Repose of mind.”

<span id="fn_621"></span>[622](cc42022.htm#fr_621.md) <span
id="vi.vii.v-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.v-p22"></span> “<span id="vi.vii.v-p22.1"></span>En
l’estude et exercice de sainctete;” — “In the study and exercise of
holiness.”

<span id="fn_622"></span>[623](cc42022.htm#fr_622.md) <span
id="vi.vii.v-p31.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.v-p32"></span> See Calvin on the Corinthians, vol. 2,
p. 78.

<span id="fn_623"></span>[624](cc42022.htm#fr_623.md) <span
id="vi.vii.v-p34.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.v-p35"></span> “<span
id="vi.vii.v-p35.1"></span>Qu’aucuns par vne prudence indiscrete, la
communicassent seulement a quelque petit nombre sans en faire les autres
participans;” — “That some by an ill-advised prudence, would communicate
it only to some small number without making others participate in it.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Commentary on Second Thessalonians](cc42023.md)
