[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc42012)  [Next](cc42014.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 42: Philippians, Colossians, and
Thessalonians*, tr. by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p1"></span>CHAPTER 3

<span id="v.iv.i"></span>

<span id="v.iv.i-p1"></span><span id="v.iv.i-p1.1"></span>[Colossians
3:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#001.md)<span id="v.iv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.i-p2"></span>**1.** If ye then be risen with Christ, seek
those things which are above, where Christ sitteth on the right hand of
God.

<span id="v.iv.i-p3"></span>**1.** Ergo si consurrexistis cum Christo,
quae sursum sunt quaerite, ubi Christus est in dextera Dei sedens:

<span id="v.iv.i-p4"></span>**2.** Set your affection on things above,
not on things on the earth.

<span id="v.iv.i-p5"></span>**2.** Quae sursum sunt cogitate, non quae
super terram.

<span id="v.iv.i-p6"></span>**3.** For ye are dead, and your life is hid
with Christ in God.

<span id="v.iv.i-p7"></span>**3.** Mortui enim estis, et vita nostra
abscondita est cum Christo in Deo.

<span id="v.iv.i-p8"></span>**4.** When Christ, *who is* our life, shall
appear, then shall ye also appear with him in glory.

<span id="v.iv.i-p9"></span>**4.** Ubi autem Christus apparuerit, vita
vestra, tunc etiam vos cum ipso apparebitis in gloria.

<span id="v.iv.i-p10"></span> 

<span id="v.iv.i-p11"></span><span id="v.iv.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.i-p12"></span>To those fruitless exercises which the
false apostles urged,  <span id="fr_428"></span>[429](#fn_428.md) as though
perfection consisted in them, he opposes those true exercises in which
it becomes Christians to employ themselves; and this has no slight
bearing upon the point in hand; for when we see what God would have us
do, we afterwards easily despise the inventions of men. When we
perceive, too, that what God recommends to us is much more lofty and
excellent than what men inculcate, our alacrity of mind increases for
following God, so as to disregard men. Paul here exhorts the Colossians
to meditation upon the heavenly life. And what as to his opponents? They
were desirous to retain their childish rudiments. This doctrine,
therefore, makes the ceremonies be the more lightly esteemed. Hence it
is manifest that Paul, in this passage, exhorts in such a manner as to
confirm the foregoing doctrine; for, in describing solid piety and
holiness of life, his aim is, that those vain *shows* of human
traditions may vanish.  <span id="fr_429"></span>[430](#fn_429.md) At the
same time, he anticipates an objection with which the false apostles
might assail him. What then? “Wouldst thou rather have men be idle than
addict themselves to such exercises, of whatever sort they may be?”
When, therefore, he bids Christians apply themselves to exercises of a
greatly superior kind, he cuts off the handle for this calumny; nay
more, he loads them with no small odium, on the ground that they impede
the right course of the pious by worthless amusements.  <span
id="fr_430"></span>[431](#fn_430.md)

<span id="v.iv.i-p16"></span>**1.** *If ye are risen with Christ.*
Ascension follows resurrection: hence, if we are the members of Christ
we must ascend into heaven, because he, on being raised up from the
dead, was *received* *up* *into* *heaven*, (<span
id="v.iv.i-p16.1"></span>[Mr
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#019)<span id="v.iv.i-p16.1"></span>,.md)
that he might draw us up with him. Now, we *seek those things which are
above*, when in our minds  <span id="fr_431"></span>[432](#fn_431.md) we
are truly sojourners in this world, and are not bound to it. The word
rendered *think* *upon* expresses rather assiduity and intensity of aim:
“Let your whole meditation be as to this: to this apply your intellect —
to this your mind.” But if we ought to think of nothing but of what is
heavenly, because Christ is in heaven, how much less becoming were it to
seek Christ upon the earth. Let us therefore bear in mind that *that* is
a true and holy *thinking* as to Christ, which forthwith bears us up
into heaven, that we may there adore him, and that our minds may dwell
with him.

<span id="v.iv.i-p18"></span>As to the *right hand of God*, it is not
confined to heaven, but fills the whole world. Paul has made mention of
it here to intimate that Christ encompasses us by his power, that we may
not think that distance of place is a cause of separation between us and
him, and that at the same time his majesty may excite us wholly to
reverence him.

<span id="v.iv.i-p19"></span><span id="v.iv.i-p19.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.i-p20"></span>**2.** *Not the things that are on earth.*
He does not mean, as he does a little afterwards, depraved appetites,
which reign in earthly men, nor even riches, or fields, or houses, nor
any other things of the present life, which we must

<span id="v.iv.i-p21"></span>use, as though we did not use them,  
(<span id="v.iv.i-p21.2"></span>[1 Cor.
7:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#030.md),
[31](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#031)<span id="v.iv.i-p21.2"></span>.md)
 <span id="fr_432"></span>[433](#fn_432.md)

<span id="v.iv.i-p23"></span>but is still following out his discussion
as to ceremonies, which he represents as resembling entanglements which
constrain us to creep upon the ground. “Christ,” says he, “calls us
upwards to himself, while these draw us downwards.” For this is the
winding-up and exposition of what he had lately touched upon as to the
abolition of ceremonies through the death of Christ. “The ceremonies are
dead to you through the death of Christ, and you to them, in order that,
being raised up to heaven with Christ, you may think only of those
things that are above. Leave off therefore earthly things.” I shall not
contend against others who are of a different mind; but certainly the
Apostle appears to me to go on step by step, so that, in the first
instance, he places traditions as to trivial matters in contrast with
meditation on the heavenly life, and afterwards, as we shall see, goes a
step farther.

<span id="v.iv.i-p24"></span><span id="v.iv.i-p24.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.i-p25"></span>**3.** *For ye are dead.* No one can rise
again with Christ, if he has not first died with him. Hence he draws an
argument from *rising* *again* to *dying*, as from a consequent to an
antecedent,  <span id="fr_433"></span>[434](#fn_433.md) meaning that we
must be dead to the world that we may live to Christ. Why has he taught,
that we must *seek those things that are above*? It is because the life
of the pious is *above*. Why does he now teach, that the things which
are on earth are to be left off? Because they are dead to the world.
“Death goes before that resurrection, of which I have spoken. Hence both
of them must be seen in you.”

<span id="v.iv.i-p27"></span>It is worthy of observation, that our
*life* is said to be *hid*, that we may not murmur or complain if our
life, being buried under the ignominy of the cross, and under various
distresses, differs nothing from death, but may patiently wait for the
day of revelation. And in order that our waiting may not be painful, let
us observe those expressions, *in God*, and *with Christ*, which
intimate that our life is out of danger, although it does not appear.
For, in the *first* place, God is faithful, and therefore will not deny
what has been *committed* to him, (<span id="v.iv.i-p27.1"></span>[2Ti
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#012)<span id="v.iv.i-p27.1"></span>,.md)
nor deceive in the guardianship which he has undertaken; and,
*secondly*, the fellowship of Christ brings still greater security. For
what is to be more desired by us than this — that our life remain with
the very fountain of life. Hence there is no reason why we should be
alarmed if, on looking around on every side, we nowhere see life. For we
are

<span id="v.iv.i-p28"></span>saved by hope. But those things which are
already seen with our eyes are not hoped for. (<span
id="v.iv.i-p28.1"></span>[Ro 8:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#024.md)<span
id="v.iv.i-p28.1"></span>.)

<span id="v.iv.i-p29"></span>Nor does he teach that our life is hid
merely in the opinion of the world, but even as to our own view, because
this is the true and necessary trial of our hope, that being
encompassed, as it were, with death, we may seek life somewhere else
than in the world.

<span id="v.iv.i-p30"></span><span id="v.iv.i-p30.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.i-p31"></span>**4.** *But when Christ, our life, shall
appear*. Here we have a choice consolation — that the coming of Christ
will be the manifestation of our life. And, at the same time, he
admonishes us how unreasonable were the disposition of the man, who
should refuse to bear up  <span id="fr_434"></span>[435](#fn_434.md) until
that day. For if our life is shut up in Christ, it must be *hid*, until
he shall *appear*

<span id="v.iv.ii"></span>

<span id="v.iv.ii-p1"></span><span id="v.iv.ii-p1.1"></span>[Colossians
3:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#005.md)<span id="v.iv.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.ii-p2"></span>**5.** Mortify therefore your members which
are upon the earth; fornication, uncleanness, inordinate affection, evil
concupiscence, and covetousness, which is idolatry:

<span id="v.iv.ii-p3"></span>**5.** Mortificate igitur membra vestra,
quae sunt super terram, scortationem, immunditiem, mollitiem,
concupiscentiam malam, et avaritiam, quae est idololatria.

<span id="v.iv.ii-p4"></span>**6.** For which things’ sake the wrath of
God cometh on the children of disobedience:

<span id="v.iv.ii-p5"></span>**6.** Propter quae venit ira Dei in filios
inobedientiae;

<span id="v.iv.ii-p6"></span>**7.** In the which ye also walked some
time, when ye lived in them.

<span id="v.iv.ii-p7"></span>**7.** In quibus vos quoque ambulabatis
aliquando, quum viveretis in illis.

<span id="v.iv.ii-p8"></span>**8.** But now ye also put off all these;
anger, wrath, malice, blasphemy, filthy communication out of your mouth.

<span id="v.iv.ii-p9"></span>**8.** Nunc autem deponite et vos omnia,
iram, indignationem, malitiam, maledicentiam, turpiloquentiam ex ore
vestro.

<span id="v.iv.ii-p10"></span> 

<span id="v.iv.ii-p11"></span><span id="v.iv.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.ii-p12"></span>**5.** *Mortify therefore*. Hitherto he
has been speaking of contempt of the world. He now proceeds further, and
enters upon a higher philosophy, as to the *mortification of the flesh*.
That this may be the better understood, let us take notice that there is
a twofold *mortification*. The former relates to those things that are
around us. Of this he has hitherto treated. The other is inward — that
of the understanding and will, and of the whole of our corrupt nature.
He makes mention of certain vices which he calls, not with strict
accuracy, but at the same time elegantly, *members*. For he conceives of
our nature as being, as it were, a mass made up of different vices. They
are, therefore, our *members*, inasmuch as they in a manner stick close
to us. He calls them also *earthly*, alluding to what he had said —
*not* *the* *things* *that* *are* *on* *earth*, (<span
id="v.iv.ii-p12.1"></span>[Col
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#002)<span id="v.iv.ii-p12.1"></span>,.md)
but in a different sense. “I have admonished you, that earthly things
are to be disregarded: you must, however, make it your aim to mortify
those vices which detain you on the earth.” He intimates, however, that
we are earthly, so long as the vices of our flesh are vigorous in us,
and that we are made heavenly by the renewing of the Spirit.

<span id="v.iv.ii-p13"></span>After *fornication* he adds *uncleanness*,
by which term he expresses all kinds of wantonness, by which lascivious
persons pollute themselves. To these is added, <span
id="v.iv.ii-p13.1"></span>πάθος that is, *lust*, which includes all the
allurements of unhallowed desire. This term, it is true, denotes mental
perturbations of other kinds, and disorderly motions contrary to reason;
but *lust* is not an unsuitable rendering of this passage. As to the
reason why *covetousness* is here spoken of as a worshipping of
*images*,  <span id="fr_435"></span>[436](#fn_435.md) consult the Epistle
to the Ephesians, that I may not say the same thing twice.

<span id="v.iv.ii-p15"></span><span id="v.iv.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.ii-p16"></span>**6.** *On account of which things the
wrath of God cometh*. I do not find fault with the rendering of Erasmus
— <span id="v.iv.ii-p16.1"></span>*solet* *venire* — (*is* *wont* *to*
*come*,) but as the present tense is often taken in Scripture instead of
the future, according to the idiom of the Hebrew language, I have
preferred to leave the rendering undecided, so that it might be
accommodated to either meaning. He warns the Colossians, then, either of
the ordinary judgments of God, which are seen daily, or of the vengeance
which he has once denounced upon the wicked, and which impends over
them, but will not be manifested until the last day. I willingly,
however, admit the former meaning — that God, who is the perpetual Judge
of the world, is accustomed to punish the crimes in question.

<span id="v.iv.ii-p17"></span>He says, however, expressly, that the
wrath of God will come, or is wont to come, upon the unbelieving or
disobedient, instead of threatening them with anything of this nature.
 <span id="fr_436"></span>[437](#fn_436.md) For God would rather that we
should see his wrath upon the reprobate, than feel it in ourselves. It
is true, that when the promises of grace are set before us, every one of
the pious ought to embrace them equally as though they were designed for
himself particularly; but, on the other hand, let us dread the
threatenings of wrath and destruction in such a manner, that those
things which are suitable for the reprobate, may serve as a lesson to
us. God, it is true, is often said to be angry even with his children,
and sometimes chastens their sins with severity. Paul speaks here,
however, of eternal destruction, of which a mirror is to be seen only in
the reprobate. In short, whenever God threatens, he shews, as it were,
indirectly the punishment, that, beholding it in the reprobate, we may
be deterred from sinning.

<span id="v.iv.ii-p19"></span><span id="v.iv.ii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.ii-p20"></span>**7.** *In which ye walked.* Erasmus
mistakingly refers this to men, rendering it, “<span
id="v.iv.ii-p20.1"></span>*inter* *quos*,” (“among *whom*,”) for there
can be no doubt that Paul had in view the vices, in which he, says that
the Colossians had walked, during the time that they lived in them. For
*living* and *walking* differ from each other, as power does from
action. *Living* holds the first place: *walking* comes afterwards, as
in <span id="v.iv.ii-p20.2"></span>[Ga
5:25](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#025.md)<span id="v.iv.ii-p20.2"></span>,

<span id="v.iv.ii-p21"></span>If ye live in the SPIRIT, WALK also in the
Spirit.

<span id="v.iv.ii-p22"></span>By these words he intimates, that it were
an unseemly thing that they should addict themselves any more to the
vices, to which they had died through Christ. See the sixth chapter of
the Epistle to the Romans. It is an argument from a withdrawment of the
cause to a withdrawment of the effect.

<span id="v.iv.ii-p23"></span><span id="v.iv.ii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.ii-p24"></span>**8.** *But now* — that is, after having
ceased to *live* *in* *the* *flesh*. For the power and nature of
*mortification* are such, that all corrupt affections are extinguished
in us, lest sin should afterwards produce in us its wonted fruits. What
I have rendered <span id="v.iv.ii-p24.1"></span>*indignationem*,
(*indignation*,) is in the Greek <span id="v.iv.ii-p24.2"></span>θυμός —
a term, which denotes a more impetuous passionateness than <span
id="v.iv.ii-p24.3"></span>ὀργὴ, (*anger*.) Here, however, he enumerates,
as may easily be perceived, forms of vice that were different from those
previously mentioned.

<span id="v.iv.iii"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iii-p1"></span><span
id="v.iv.iii-p1.1"></span>[Colossians
3:9-13](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#009.md)<span id="v.iv.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iii-p2"></span>**9.** Lie not one to another, seeing that
ye have put off the old man with his deeds;

<span id="v.iv.iii-p3"></span>**9.** Ne mentiamini alii diversus alios,
postquam exuistis veterem hominem cum actionibus suis:

<span id="v.iv.iii-p4"></span>**10.** And have put on the new *man*,
which is renewed in knowledge after the image of him that created him:

<span id="v.iv.iii-p5"></span>**10.** Et induistis novum, qui renovatur
in agnitionem, secundum imaginem eius, qui creavit eum:

<span id="v.iv.iii-p6"></span>**11.** Where there is neither Greek nor
Jew, circumcision nor uncircumcision, Barbarian, Scythian, bond *nor*
free: but Christ *is* all, and in all.

<span id="v.iv.iii-p7"></span>**11.** Ubi non est Graecus nec Judaeus,
circumcisio nec praeputium, barbarus, Scytha, servus, liber: sed omnia
et in omnibus Christus.

<span id="v.iv.iii-p8"></span>**12.** Put on therefore, as the elect of
God, holy and beloved, bowels of mercies, kindness, humbleness of mind,
meekness, longsuffering;

<span id="v.iv.iii-p9"></span>**12.** Induite igitur, tanquam electi Dei
sancti et dilecti, viscera miserationum, comitatem, humilitatem,
mansuetudinem, tolerantiam,

<span id="v.iv.iii-p10"></span>**13.** Forbearing one another, and
forgiving one another, if any man have a quarrel against any: even as
Christ forgave you, so also *do* ye.

<span id="v.iv.iii-p11"></span>**13.** Sufferentes vos mutuo, et
condonantes si quis adversus alium litem habeat: quemadmodum Christus
condonavit vobis, ita et vos.

<span id="v.iv.iii-p12"></span> 

<span id="v.iv.iii-p13"></span><span id="v.iv.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iii-p14"></span>**9.** *Lie not*. When he forbids
*lying*, he condemns every sort of cunning, and all base artifices of
deception. For I do not understand the term as referring merely to
calumnies, but I view it as contrasted in a general way with sincerity.
Hence it might be allowable to render it more briefly, and I am not sure
but that it might also be a better rendering, thus: *Lie not one to
another*. He follows out, however, his argument as to the fellowship,
which believers have in the death and resurrection of Christ, but
employs other forms of expression.

<span id="v.iv.iii-p15"></span>The *old man* denotes — whatever we bring
from our mother’s womb, and whatever we are by nature.  <span
id="fr_437"></span>[438](#fn_437.md) It is *put off* by all that are
renewed by Christ. The *new man*, on the other hand, is that which is
renewed by the Spirit of Christ to the obedience of righteousness, or it
is nature restored to its true integrity by the same Spirit. The *old
man*, however, comes first in order, because we are first born from
Adam, and afterwards are born again through Christ. And as what we have
from Adam becomes old,  <span id="fr_438"></span>[439](#fn_438.md) and
tends towards ruin, so what we obtain through Christ remains for ever,
and is not frail; but, on the contrary, tends towards immortality. This
passage is worthy of notice, inasmuch as a definition of regeneration
may be gathered from it. For it contains two parts — the *putting off*
of the *old man*, and the *putting on* of the *new*, and of these Paul
here makes mention. It is also to be noticed, that the *old man* is
distinguished by his works, as a tree is by its fruits. Hence it
follows, that the depravity that is innate in us is denoted by the term
*old man*

<span id="v.iv.iii-p18"></span><span id="v.iv.iii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iii-p19"></span>**10.** *Which is renewed in knowledge.*
He shews in the *first* place, that newness of life consists in
*knowledge* — not as though a simple and bare knowledge were sufficient,
but he speaks of the illumination of the Holy Spirit, which is lively
and effectual, so as not merely to enlighten the mind by kindling it up
with the light of truth, but transforming the whole man. And this is
what he immediately adds, that we are *renewed after the image of God*.
Now, the *image of God* resides in the whole of the soul, inasmuch as it
is not the reason merely that is rectified, but also the will. Hence,
too, we learn, on the one hand, what is the end of our regeneration,
that is, that we may be made like God, and that his glory may shine
forth in us; and, on the other hand, what is the image of God, of which
mention is made by Moses in <span id="v.iv.iii-p19.1"></span>[Ge
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#006.md)<span id="v.iv.iii-p19.1"></span>,
 <span id="fr_439"></span>[440](#fn_439.md) the rectitude and integrity of
the whole soul, so that man reflects, like a mirror, the wisdom,
righteousness, and goodness of God. He speaks somewhat differently in
the Epistle to the Ephesians, but the meaning is the same. See the
passage — <span id="v.iv.iii-p20.4"></span>[Eph
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#024.md)<span id="v.iv.iii-p20.4"></span>.
Paul, at the same time, teaches, that there is nothing more excellent at
which the Colossians can aspire, inasmuch as this is our highest
perfection and blessedness to bear the image of God.

<span id="v.iv.iii-p21"></span><span id="v.iv.iii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iii-p22"></span>**11.** *Where there is neither Jew*. He
has added this intentionally, that he may again draw away the Colossians
from ceremonies. For the meaning of the statement is this, that
Christian perfection does not stand in need of those outward
observances, nay, that they are things that are altogether at variance
with it. For under the distinction of *circumcision* and
*uncircumcision*, of *Jew* and *Greek*, he includes, by *synecdoche*,
 <span id="fr_440"></span>[441](#fn_440.md) all outward things. The terms
that follow, *barbarian, Scythian*,  <span
id="fr_441"></span>[442](#fn_441.md) *bond, free*, are added by way of
amplification.

<span id="v.iv.iii-p25"></span>*Christ is all, and in all*, that is,
Christ alone holds, as they say, the *prow* and the *stern* — the
beginning and the end. Farther, by *Christ*, he means the spiritual
righteousness of Christ, which puts an end to ceremonies, as we have
formerly seen. They are, therefore, superfluous in a state of true
perfection, nay more, they ought to have no place, inasmuch as injustice
would otherwise be done to Christ, as though it were necessary to call
in those helps for making up his deficiencies.

<span id="v.iv.iii-p26"></span><span id="v.iv.iii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iii-p27"></span>**13.** *Put on therefore*. As he has
enumerated some parts of the *old man*, so he now also enumerates some
parts of the *new. “Then*,” says he, “will it appear that ye are renewed
by Christ, when ye are *merciful* and *kind*. For these are the effects
and evidences of renovation.” Hence the exhortation depends on the
second clause, and, accordingly, he keeps up the metaphor in the word
rendered *put on*

<span id="v.iv.iii-p28"></span>He mentions, first, *bowels of mercy*, by
which expression he means an earnest affection, with yearnings, as it
were, of the *bowels*: Secondly, he makes mention of *kindness*, (for in
this manner I have chosen to render <span
id="v.iv.iii-p28.1"></span>χρηστότητα,) by which we make ourselves
amiable. To this he adds *humility*, because no one will be kind and
gentle but the man who, laying aside haughtiness, and high mindedness,
brings himself down to the exercise of modesty, claiming nothing for
himself.

<span id="v.iv.iii-p29"></span>*Gentleness* — the term which follows —
has a wider acceptation than *kindness*, for that is chiefly in look and
speech, while this is also in inward disposition. As, however, it
frequently happens, that we come in contact with wicked and ungrateful
men, there is need of patience, that it may cherish mildness in us. He
at length explains what he meant by *long-suffering* — that we embrace
each other indulgently, and forgive also where any offense has been
given. As, however, it is a thing that is hard and difficult, he
confirms this doctrine by the example of Christ, and teaches, that the
same thing is required from us, that as we, who have so frequently and
so grievously offended, have nevertheless been received into favor, we
should manifest the same kindness towards our neighbors, by forgiving
whatever offenses they have committed against us. Hence he says, *if any
one have a quarrel against another.* By this he means, that even just
occasions of quarrel, according to the views of men, ought not to be
followed out.

<span id="v.iv.iii-p30"></span>*As the chosen of God. Elect* I take here
to mean, set apart. “God has *chosen* you to himself, has sanctified
you, and received you into his love on this condition, that ye be
merciful, etc. To no purpose does the man that has not these excellences
boast that he is holy, and beloved of God; to no purpose does he reckon
himself among the number of believers.”

<span id="v.iv.iv"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iv-p1"></span><span id="v.iv.iv-p1.1"></span>[Colossians
3:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#014.md)<span id="v.iv.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iv-p2"></span>**14.** And above all these things *put on*
charity, which is the bond of perfectness.

<span id="v.iv.iv-p3"></span>**14.** Propter omnia haec caritatem, quae
est vinculum perfectionis:

<span id="v.iv.iv-p4"></span>**15.** And let the peace of God rule in
your hearts, to the which also ye are called in one body; and be ye
thankful.

<span id="v.iv.iv-p5"></span>**15.** Et pax Dei palmam obtineat  <span
id="fr_442"></span>[443](#fn_442.md) in cordibus vestris, ad quam etiam
estis vocati in uno corpore, et grati sitis.

<span id="v.iv.iv-p7"></span>**16.** Let the word of Christ dwell in you
richly in all wisdom; teaching and admonishing one another in psalms and
hymns and spiritual songs, singing with grace in your hearts to the
Lord.

<span id="v.iv.iv-p8"></span>**16.** Sermo Christi inhabiter in vobis
opulente in omni sapientia, docendo et commonefaciendo vos psalmis,
hymnis, et canticis spiritualibus cum gratia, canentes in cordibus
vestris Domino.

<span id="v.iv.iv-p9"></span>**17.** And whatsoever ye do in word or
deed, *do* all in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God and
the Father by him.

<span id="v.iv.iv-p10"></span>**17.** Et quiquid feceritis sermone vel
opere, omnia in nomine Domini Iesu, gratiae agentes Deo et Patri, per
ipsum.

<span id="v.iv.iv-p11"></span> 

<span id="v.iv.iv-p12"></span><span id="v.iv.iv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iv-p13"></span>**14.** *On account of all these things.*
The rendering that has been given by others, “<span
id="v.iv.iv-p13.1"></span>*super* omnia haec,” (*above* all these
things,) instead of <span id="v.iv.iv-p13.2"></span>*insuper*, (*over*
*and* *above*,) is, in my opinion, meagre. It would be more suitable to
render it, *Before* all these things. I have chosen, however, the more
ordinary signification of the word <span id="v.iv.iv-p13.3"></span>ἐπί.
For as all the things that he has hitherto enumerated flow from *love*,
he now on good grounds exhorts the Colossians to cherish *love* among
themselves, for the sake of these things — that they may be merciful,
gentle, ready to forgive, as though he had said, that they would be such
only in the event of their having *love*. For where *love* is wanting,
all these things are sought for in vain. That he may commend it the
more, he calls it the *bond of perfection*, meaning by this, that the
troop of all the virtues  <span id="fr_443"></span>[444](#fn_443.md) is
comprehended under it. For this truly is the rule of our whole life, and
of all our actions, so that everything that is not regulated according
to it is faulty, whatever attractiveness it may otherwise possess. This
is the reason why it is called here the *bond of perfection*; because
there is nothing in our life that is well regulated if it be not
directed towards it, but everything that we attempt is mere waste.

<span id="v.iv.iv-p15"></span>The Papists, however, act a ridiculous
part in abusing this declaration, with the view of maintaining
justification by works. “*Love*,” say they, “is the *bond of
perfection*: now perfection is righteousness; therefore we are justified
by *love*.” The answer is twofold; for Paul here is not reasoning as to
the manner in which men are made perfect in the sight of God, but as to
the manner in which they may live perfectly among themselves. For the
genuine exposition of the passage is this — that other things will be in
a desirable state as to our life, if *love* be exercised among us. When,
however, we grant that *love* is righteousness, they groundlessly and
childishly take occasion from this to maintain, that we are justified by
*love*, for where will perfect love be found? We, however, do not say
that men are justified by faith alone, on the ground that the observance
of the law is not righteousness, but rather on this ground, that as we
are all transgressors of the law, we are, in consequence of our being
destitute of any righteousness of our own, constrained to borrow
righteousness from Christ. There remains nothing, therefore, but the
righteousness of faith, because perfect love is nowhere to be found.

<span id="v.iv.iv-p16"></span><span id="v.iv.iv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iv-p17"></span>**15.** *And the peace of God*. He gives
the name of the *peace of God* to that which God has established among
us, as will appear from what follows. He would have it *reign* in our
hearts.  <span id="fr_444"></span>[445](#fn_444.md) He employs, however, a
very appropriate metaphor; for as among wrestlers,  <span
id="fr_445"></span>[446](#fn_445.md) he who has vanquished all the others
carries off the palm, so he would have the *peace of God* be superior to
all carnal affections, which often hurry us on to contentions,
disagreements, quarrels, secret grudges. He accordingly prohibits us
from giving loose reins to corrupt affections of this kind. As, however
it is difficult to restrain them, he points out also the remedy, that
the *peace of* *God* may carry the victory, because it must be a bridle,
by which carnal affections may be restrained. Hence he says, *in our
hearts;* because we constantly feel *there* great conflicts, while the
*flesh* *lusteth* *against* *the* *Spirit*. (<span
id="v.iv.iv-p19.2"></span>[Ga
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#017)<span id="v.iv.iv-p19.2"></span>..md)

<span id="v.iv.iv-p20"></span>The clause, *to which ye are called*,
intimates what manner of *peace* this is — that unity which Christ has
consecrated among us under his own direction.  <span
id="fr_446"></span>[447](#fn_446.md) For God has *reconciled* *us* *to*
*himself* in Christ, (<span id="v.iv.iv-p21.2"></span>[2Co
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#018)<span id="v.iv.iv-p21.2"></span>,.md)
with this view, that we may live in entire harmony among ourselves. He
adds, *in one body*, meaning by this, that we cannot be in a state of
agreement with God otherwise than by being united among ourselves as
members of one body. When he bids us be *thankful*, I do not take this
as referring so much to the remembrance of favors, as to sweetness of
manners. Hence, with the view of removing ambiguity, I prefer to render
it, “Be amiable.” At the same time I acknowledge that, if gratitude
takes possession of our minds,  <span id="fr_447"></span>[448](#fn_447.md)
we shall without fail be inclined to cherish mutual affection among
ourselves.

<span id="v.iv.iv-p23"></span><span id="v.iv.iv-p23.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iv-p24"></span>**16.** *Let the word of Christ dwell.* He
would have the doctrine of the gospel be familiarly known by them. Hence
we may infer by what spirit those are actuated in the present day, who
cruelly  <span id="fr_448"></span>[449](#fn_448.md) interdict the Christian
people from making use of it, and furiously vociferate, that no
pestilence is more to be dreaded, than that the reading of the
Scriptures should be thrown open to the common people. For,
unquestionably, Paul here addresses men and women of all ranks; nor
would he simply have them take a slight taste merely of the *word of
Christ*, but exhorts that it should *dwell in them*; that is, that it
should have a settled abode, and that *largely*, that they may make it
their aim to advance and increase more and more every day. As, however,
the desire of learning is extravagant on the part of many, while they
pervert the word of the Lord for their own ambition, or for vain
curiosity, or in some way corrupt it, he on this account adds, *in all
wisdom* — that, being instructed by it, we may be wise as we ought to
be.

<span id="v.iv.iv-p26"></span>Farther, he gives a short definition of
this wisdom — that the Colossians *teach one another* *Teaching* is
taken here to mean profitable instruction, which tends to edification,
as in <span id="v.iv.iv-p26.1"></span>[Ro
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#007.md)<span id="v.iv.iv-p26.1"></span> —
*He* *that* *teacheth*, *on* *teaching*; also in Timothy — “All
Scripture is profitable for *teaching*.” (<span
id="v.iv.iv-p26.2"></span>[2Ti
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#016)<span id="v.iv.iv-p26.2"></span>..md)
This is the true use of Christ’s word. As, however, doctrine is
sometimes in itself cold, and, as one says,  <span
id="fr_449"></span>[450](#fn_449.md) when it is simply shewn what is right,
virtue is praised  <span id="fr_450"></span>[451](#fn_450.md) and left to
starve,  <span id="fr_451"></span>[452](#fn_451.md) he adds at the same
time admonition, which is, as it were, a confirmation of doctrine and
incitement to it. Nor does he mean that the *word of Christ* ought to be
of benefit merely to individuals, that they may teach themselves, but he
requires mutual teaching and admonition.

<span id="v.iv.iv-p30"></span>*Psalms, hymns*. He does not restrict the
*word* *of* *Christ* to these particular departments, but rather
intimates that all our communications should be adapted to edification,
that even those which tend to hilarity may have no empty savor. “*Leave*
to unbelievers that foolish delight which they take from ludicrous and
frivolous jests and witticisms;  <span id="fr_452"></span>[453](#fn_452.md)
and let your communications, not merely those that are grave, but those
also that are joyful and exhilarating, contain something profitable. In
place of their obscene, or at least barely modest and *decent*, songs,
it *becomes* you to make use of hymns and songs that sound forth God’s
praise.” Farther, under these three terms he includes all kinds of
songs. They are commonly distinguished in this way — that a *psalm* is
that, in the singing of which some musical instrument besides the tongue
is made use of: a *hymn* is properly a song of praise, whether it be
sung simply with the voice or otherwise; while an *ode* contains not
merely praises, but exhortations and other matters. He would have the
songs of Christians, however, to be *spiritual*, not made up of
frivolities and worthless trifles. For this has a connection with his
argument.

<span id="v.iv.iv-p32"></span>The clause, *in grace*, Chrysostom
explains in different ways. I, however, take it simply, as also
afterwards, in <span id="v.iv.iv-p32.1"></span>[Col
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#006.md)<span id="v.iv.iv-p32.1"></span>,
where he says, “Let your speech be seasoned with salt, *in grace*,” that
is, by way of a dexterity that may be agreeable, and may please the
hearers by its profitableness, so that it may be opposed to buffoonery
and similar trifles.

<span id="v.iv.iv-p33"></span>*Singing in your hearts.* This relates to
disposition; for as we ought to stir up others, so we ought also to sing
from the heart, that there may not be merely an external sound with the
mouth. At the same time, we must not understand it as though he would
have every one sing inwardly to himself, but he would have both
conjoined, provided the heart goes before the tongue.

<span id="v.iv.iv-p34"></span><span id="v.iv.iv-p34.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iv-p35"></span>**17***. And whatsoever ye do.* We have
already explained these things, and what goes before, in the Epistle to
the Ephesians, where the same things are said almost word for word. As
he had already begun to discourse in reference to different parts of the
Christian life, and had simply touched upon a few precepts, it would
have been too tedious a thing to follow out the rest one by one, he
therefore concludes in a summary way, that life must be regulated in
such a manner, that whatever we say or do may be wholly governed by the
authority of Christ, and may have an eye to his glory as the mark.
 <span id="fr_453"></span>[454](#fn_453.md) For we shall fitly comprehend
under this term the two following things — that all our aims  <span
id="fr_454"></span>[455](#fn_454.md) may set out with invocation of Christ,
and may be subservient to his glory. From invocation follows the act of
blessing God, which supplies us with matter of thanksgiving. It is also
to be observed, that he teaches that we must give thanks to the Father
*through* *Christ*, as we obtain through him every good thing that God
confers upon us.

<span id="v.iv.v"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v-p1"></span><span id="v.iv.v-p1.1"></span>[Colossians
3:18-25](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#018.md)<span id="v.iv.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v-p2"></span>**18.** Wives, submit yourselves unto your
own husbands, as it is fit in the Lord.

<span id="v.iv.v-p3"></span>**18.** Mulieres, subditae estote propriis
maritis, quemadmodum decet in Domino.

<span id="v.iv.v-p4"></span>**19.** Husbands, love *your* wives, and be
not bitter against them.

<span id="v.iv.v-p5"></span>**19.** Viri, diligite uxores, et ne amari
sitis adversus illas.

<span id="v.iv.v-p6"></span>**20.** Children, obey *your* parents in all
things: for this is well pleasing unto the Lord.

<span id="v.iv.v-p7"></span>**20.** Filii, obedite parentibus vestris
per omnia: hoc enim placet Domino.

<span id="v.iv.v-p8"></span>**21.** Fathers, provoke not your children
*to anger*, lest they be discouraged.

<span id="v.iv.v-p9"></span>**21.** Patres, ne provocetis liberos
vestros, ne deiiciantur animis.

<span id="v.iv.v-p10"></span>**22.** Servants, obey in all things *your*
masters according to the flesh; not with eyeservice, as menpleasers; but
in singleness of heart, fearing God:

<span id="v.iv.v-p11"></span>**22.** Servi, obedite per omnia iis, qui
secundum carnem sunt domini: non exhibitis ad oculum obsequiis, tanquam
hominibus placere studentes, sed in simplicitate cordis, ut qui timeatis
Deum.

<span id="v.iv.v-p12"></span>**23.** And whatsoever ye do, do *it*
heartily, as to the Lord, and not unto men;

<span id="v.iv.v-p13"></span>**23.** Et quicquid feceritis, ex animo
facite, tanquam Domino, et non hominibus:

<span id="v.iv.v-p14"></span>**24.** Knowing that of the Lord ye shall
receive the reward of the inheritance: for ye serve the Lord Christ.

<span id="v.iv.v-p15"></span>**24.** Scientes quod a Domino recipietis
mercedem hereditatis, nam Domino Christo servitis.

<span id="v.iv.v-p16"></span>**25.** But he that doeth wrong shall
receive for the wrong which he hath done: and there is no respect of
persons.

<span id="v.iv.v-p17"></span>**25.** Qui autem iniuste egerit, mercedem
reportabit suae iniquitatis: et non est personarum acceptio. (<span
id="v.iv.v-p17.1"></span>[De
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#017)<span id="v.iv.v-p17.1"></span>..md)

<span id="v.iv.v-p18"></span> 

<span id="v.iv.v-p19"></span><span id="v.iv.v-p19.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v-p20"></span>**18** *Wives, be subject.* Now follow
particular duties, as they are called,  <span
id="fr_455"></span>[456](#fn_455.md) which depend on the calling of
individuals. In handling these it were superfluous to take up many
words, inasmuch as I have already stated in the Epistle to the Ephesians
 <span id="fr_456"></span>[457](#fn_456.md) almost everything that was
necessary. Here I shall only add briefly such things as are more
particularly suited to an exposition of the passage before us.

<span id="v.iv.v-p23"></span>He commands *wives* to be *subject*. This
is clear, but what follows is of doubtful signification — *as it is fit
in the Lord.* For some connect it thus — “Be subject in the Lord, as it
is fit.” I, however, view it rather differently, — *As* *it is fit in
the Lord*, that is, according to the appointment of the Lord, so that he
confirms the subjection of wives by the authority of God. He requires
*love* on the part of *husbands,* and *that they be not bitter*, because
there is a danger lest they should abuse their authority in the way of
tyranny.

<span id="v.iv.v-p24"></span><span id="v.iv.v-p24.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v-p25"></span>**20** *Children, obey your parents.* He
enjoins it upon *children* to obey their parents,  <span
id="fr_457"></span>[458](#fn_457.md) without any exception. But what if
parents  <span id="fr_458"></span>[459](#fn_458.md) should feel disposed to
constrain them to anything that is unlawful; will they in that case,
too, obey without any reservation? Now it were worse than unreasonable,
that the, authority of men should prevail at the expense of neglecting
God. I answer, that here, too, we must understand as implied what he
expresses elsewhere, (<span id="v.iv.v-p27.2"></span>[Eph
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#001)<span id="v.iv.v-p27.2"></span>.md) —
*in* *the* *Lord*. But for what purpose does he employ a term of
universality? I answer again, that it is to shew, that obedience must be
rendered not merely to just commands, but also to such as are
unreasonable.  <span id="fr_459"></span>[460](#fn_459.md) For many make
themselves compliant with the wishes of their parents only where the
command is not grievous or inconvenient. But, on the other hand, this
one thing ought to be considered by children — that whoever may be their
parents, they have been allotted to them by the providence of God, who
by his appointment makes children subject to their parents.

<span id="v.iv.v-p29"></span>*In all things,* therefore, that they may
not refuse anything, however difficult or disagreeable — *in all
things*, that in things indifferent they may give deference to the
station which their parents occupy — *in all things*, that they may not
put themselves on a footing of equality with their parents, in the way
of questioning and debating, or disputing, it being always understood
that conscience is not to be infringed upon.  <span
id="fr_460"></span>[461](#fn_460.md) He prohibits parents from exercising
an immoderate harshness, lest their children should be so disheartened
as to be incapable of receiving any honorable training; for we see, from
daily experience, the advantage of a liberal education.

<span id="v.iv.v-p31"></span><span id="v.iv.v-p31.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v-p32"></span>**22** *Servants, be obedient.* Anything
that is stated here respecting *servants* requires no exposition, as it
has been already expounded in commenting on <span
id="v.iv.v-p32.2"></span>[Ephesians
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#001.md)<span id="v.iv.v-p32.2"></span>,
with the exception of these two expressions, — *For we serve the Lord
Christ*; and, *He that will act unjustly will receive the reward of his
iniquity.*

<span id="v.iv.v-p33"></span>By the former statement he means, that
service is done to men in such a way that Christ at the same time holds
supremacy of dominion, and is the supreme master. Here, truly, is choice
consolation for all that are under subjection, inasmuch as they are
informed that, while they willingly serve their masters, their services
are acceptable to Christ, as though they had been rendered to him. From
this, also, Paul gathers, that they will *receive* from him *a reward*,
but it is the *reward of inheritance*, by which he means that the very
thing that is bestowed in reward of works is freely given to us by God,
for *inheritance* comes from adoption.

<span id="v.iv.v-p34"></span>In the second clause he again comforts
*servants*, by saying that, if they are oppressed by the unjust cruelty
of their masters, God himself will take vengeance, and will not, on the
ground that they are *servants,* overlook the injuries inflicted upon
them, inasmuch as there is *no respect of persons with him*. For this
consideration might diminish their courage, if they imagined that God
had no regard for them, or no great regard, and that their miseries gave
him no concern. Besides, it often happens that servants themselves
endeavor to avenge injurious and cruel treatment. He obviates,
accordingly, this evil, by admonishing them to wait patiently the
judgment of God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_428"></span>[429](cc42013.htm#fr_428.md) <span
id="v.iv.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.i-p13"></span> “<span
id="v.iv.i-p13.1"></span>Recommandoyent estroittement;” — “Urgently
recommended.”

<span id="fn_429"></span>[430](cc42013.htm#fr_429.md) <span
id="v.iv.i-p13.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.i-p14"></span> “<span id="v.iv.i-p14.1"></span>S’en
aillent en fumee;” — “May vanish into smoke.”

<span id="fn_430"></span>[431](cc42013.htm#fr_430.md) <span
id="v.iv.i-p14.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.i-p15"></span> “<span id="v.iv.i-p15.1"></span>Par des
amusemens plus que pueriles;” — “By worse than childish amusements.”

<span id="fn_431"></span>[432](cc42013.htm#fr_431.md) <span
id="v.iv.i-p16.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.i-p17"></span> “<span id="v.iv.i-p17.1"></span>De cœur et
esprit;” — “In heart and spirit.”

<span id="fn_432"></span>[433](cc42013.htm#fr_432.md) <span
id="v.iv.i-p21.3"></span>

<span id="v.iv.i-p22"></span> See Calvin on the Corinthians, vol. 1, p.
257.

<span id="fn_433"></span>[434](cc42013.htm#fr_433.md) <span
id="v.iv.i-p25.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.i-p26"></span> “<span id="v.iv.i-p26.1"></span>C’est a
dire de ce qui suit a ce qui va deuant;” — “That is to say, from what
follows to what comes before.”

<span id="fn_434"></span>[435](cc42013.htm#fr_434.md) <span
id="v.iv.i-p31.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.i-p32"></span> “<span id="v.iv.i-p32.1"></span>D’endurer
et attendre;” — “To endure and wait.”

<span id="fn_435"></span>[436](cc42013.htm#fr_435.md) <span
id="v.iv.ii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.ii-p14"></span> “<span id="v.iv.ii-p14.1"></span>Est
appelee Idolatrie;” — “Is called Idolatry.”

<span id="fn_436"></span>[437](cc42013.htm#fr_436.md) <span
id="v.iv.ii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.ii-p18"></span> “<span id="v.iv.ii-p18.1"></span>Plustot
que de menacer les Colossiens de telles choses;” — “Instead of
threatening the Colossians with such things.”

<span id="fn_437"></span>[438](cc42013.htm#fr_437.md) <span
id="v.iv.iii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iii-p16"></span> See Calvin on the Romans, p. 224; also
Calvin on the Corinthians, vol. 1, p. 188.

<span id="fn_438"></span>[439](cc42013.htm#fr_438.md) <span
id="v.iv.iii-p16.3"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iii-p17"></span> “<span
id="v.iv.iii-p17.1"></span>Deuient vieil et caduque;” — “Becomes old and
frail.”

<span id="fn_439"></span>[440](cc42013.htm#fr_439.md) <span
id="v.iv.iii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iii-p20"></span> “<span id="v.iv.iii-p20.1"></span>De
laquelle Moyse fait mention au <span id="v.iv.iii-p20.2"></span>[Genesis
1](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#000.md)<span id="v.iv.iii-p20.2"></span>,
chap. c. 26, et 9, b. 6;” — “Of which Moses makes mention in <span
id="v.iv.iii-p20.3"></span>[Gen. 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#026.md),
[Gen. 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#006.md)<span
id="v.iv.iii-p20.3"></span>.”

<span id="fn_440"></span>[441](cc42013.htm#fr_440.md) <span
id="v.iv.iii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iii-p23"></span> Synecdoche, a figure of speech, by which
a part is taken for the whole. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_441"></span>[442](cc42013.htm#fr_441.md) <span
id="v.iv.iii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iii-p24"></span> Howe supposes that Paul “may possibly
refer here to a Scythian who, having an inclination to learning, betook
himself to Athens, to study the principles of philosophy that were
taught there. But meeting one day with a person that very insolently
upbraided him on the account of his country, he gave him this smart
repartee: ‘True indeed it is, my country is a reproach to me; but you,
for your part, are a reproach to your country.’” — Howe’s Works, (Lond.
1822,) vol. 5, p. 497. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_442"></span>[443](cc42013.htm#fr_442.md) <span
id="v.iv.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iv-p6"></span> “<span id="v.iv.iv-p6.1"></span>*Regne*,
ou, *gouerne*;” — “*Reign*, or, *rule*.”

<span id="fn_443"></span>[444](cc42013.htm#fr_443.md) <span
id="v.iv.iv-p13.4"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iv-p14"></span> <span id="v.iv.iv-p14.1"></span>Virtutum
omnium chorum. See Cic. 50:3, Offic. c. ult. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_444"></span>[445](cc42013.htm#fr_444.md) <span
id="v.iv.iv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iv-p18"></span> “Rule in your hearts, (<span
id="v.iv.iv-p18.1"></span>βραβεύετο.) Let the peace of Christ judge,
decide, and govern in your hearts, as the brabeus, or judge, does in the
Olympic contests... While peace rules, all is safe.” — Dr. A. Clarke. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_445"></span>[446](cc42013.htm#fr_445.md) <span
id="v.iv.iv-p18.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iv-p19"></span> “<span id="v.iv.iv-p19.1"></span>Le mot
Grec signifie aucunesfois, Enclins a rendre graces, et recognoistre les
benefices que nous receuons;” — “The Greek word means sometimes — having
a disposition to give thanks, and to acknowledge the favors that we
receive.”

<span id="fn_446"></span>[447](cc42013.htm#fr_446.md) <span
id="v.iv.iv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iv-p21"></span> “<span id="v.iv.iv-p21.1"></span>En son
nom et authorite;” — “In his own name and authority.”

<span id="fn_447"></span>[448](cc42013.htm#fr_447.md) <span
id="v.iv.iv-p21.3"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iv-p22"></span> “<span id="v.iv.iv-p22.1"></span>Si nous
auons les cœurs et les sens abbreuuez de ceste affection de n’estre
point ingrats;” — “If we have our hearts and minds thoroughly imbued
with this disposition of being not unthankful.”

<span id="fn_448"></span>[449](cc42013.htm#fr_448.md) <span
id="v.iv.iv-p24.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iv-p25"></span> “<span id="v.iv.iv-p25.1"></span>Si
estroitement et auec si grande cruaute;” — “So strictly and with such
great cruelty.”

<span id="fn_449"></span>[450](cc42013.htm#fr_449.md) <span
id="v.iv.iv-p26.3"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iv-p27"></span> “<span id="v.iv.iv-p27.1"></span>Comme a
dit anciennement vn poëte Latin; — “As a Latin poet has anciently said.”

<span id="fn_450"></span>[451](cc42013.htm#fr_450.md) <span
id="v.iv.iv-p27.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iv-p28"></span> “<span id="v.iv.iv-p28.1"></span>Probitas
laudatur et alget;” — “Virtue is praised and starves,” — that is, is
slighted. See Juv. 1:74. — Ed.

<span id="fn_451"></span>[452](cc42013.htm#fr_451.md) <span
id="v.iv.iv-p28.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iv-p29"></span> “<span id="v.iv.iv-p29.1"></span>Il se
trouue assez de gens qui louënt vertu, mais cependant elle se morfond:
c’est a dire, il n’y en a gueres qui se mettent a l’ensuyure;” — “There
are persons enough who praise virtue, but in the mean time it starves;
that is to say, there are scarcely any of them that set themselves to
pursue it.”

<span id="fn_452"></span>[453](cc42013.htm#fr_452.md) <span
id="v.iv.iv-p30.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iv-p31"></span> “<span
id="v.iv.iv-p31.1"></span>Plaisanteries pleines de vanite et niaiserie;”
— “Pleasantries full of vanity and silliness.”

<span id="fn_453"></span>[454](cc42013.htm#fr_453.md) <span
id="v.iv.iv-p35.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iv-p36"></span> “<span id="v.iv.iv-p36.1"></span>Comme a
son but principal;” — “As to its chief aim.”

<span id="fn_454"></span>[455](cc42013.htm#fr_454.md) <span
id="v.iv.iv-p36.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iv-p37"></span> “<span id="v.iv.iv-p37.1"></span>Toutes
nos œuures et entreprinses;” — “All our works and enterprises.”

<span id="fn_455"></span>[456](cc42013.htm#fr_455.md) <span
id="v.iv.v-p20.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v-p21"></span> “<span id="v.iv.v-p21.1"></span>Les
enseignemens concernans le deuoir particulier d’vn chacun;” —
“Instructions relating to the particular duty of each individual.”

<span id="fn_456"></span>[457](cc42013.htm#fr_456.md) <span
id="v.iv.v-p21.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v-p22"></span> I believe Calvin is referring to his
commentary on <span id="v.iv.v-p22.1"></span>[Eph
5:21-6:9](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#021.md)<span
id="v.iv.v-p22.1"></span>, — v.41 p. 317. — *fj.*

<span id="fn_457"></span>[458](cc42013.htm#fr_457.md) <span
id="v.iv.v-p25.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v-p26"></span> “<span id="v.iv.v-p26.1"></span>Leurs
peres et meres;” — “Their fathers and mothers.”

<span id="fn_458"></span>[459](cc42013.htm#fr_458.md) <span
id="v.iv.v-p26.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v-p27"></span> “<span id="v.iv.v-p27.1"></span>Les peres
ou les meres;” — “Fathers or mothers.”

<span id="fn_459"></span>[460](cc42013.htm#fr_459.md) <span
id="v.iv.v-p27.3"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v-p28"></span> “<span id="v.iv.v-p28.1"></span>C’est a
dire, fascheux et rigoureux;” — “That is to say, grievous and rigorous.”

<span id="fn_460"></span>[461](cc42013.htm#fr_460.md) <span
id="v.iv.v-p29.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v-p30"></span> “<span id="v.iv.v-p30.1"></span>Ou entrant
en dispute auec eux, comme compagnon a compagnon, ainsi qu’on dit.
Toutesfois, que ce soit tant que faire se pourra sans offenser Dieu;” —
“Or entering into dispute with them, as associate with associate, as
they say. At the same time, let it be only in so far as it can be done
without offending God.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4](cc42014.md)
