[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc42009)  [Next](cc42011) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 42: Philippians, Colossians, and
Thessalonians*, tr. by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.i"></span>

<span id="v.i-p1"></span>THE ARGUMENT

<span id="v.i-p2"></span>ON THE EPISTLE OF PAUL TO THE COLOSSIANS.

<span id="v.i-p3"></span>There were three neighboring cities in Phrygia,
as made mention of by Paul in this Epistle — Laodicea, Hierapolis, and
Colosse which, as *Orosius*  <span id="fr_261"></span>[262](#fn_261)
informs us, were overthrown  <span id="fr_262"></span>[263](#fn_262) by
an earthquake in the times of the emperor *Nero*. Accordingly, not long
after this Epistle was written, three Churches of great renown perished
by a mournful as well as horrible occurrence — a bright mirror truly of
divine judgment, if we had but eyes to see it. The Colossians had been,
not indeed by Paul, but with fidelity and purity by Epaphras and other
ministers, instructed in the gospel; but immediately afterwards, Satan
had, with his *tares*, crept in, (<span id="v.i-p5.2"></span>[Mt
13:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#025)<span id="v.i-p5.2"></span>,)
 <span id="fr_263"></span>[264](#fn_263) according to his usual and
invariable manner, that he might there pervert the right faith.  <span
id="fr_264"></span>[265](#fn_264)

<span id="v.i-p8"></span>Some are of opinion that there were two classes
of men that endeavored to draw aside the Colossians from the purity of
the gospel; — that, on the one hand, the philosophers, by disputing in
reference to stars, fate, and trifles of a like nature, and that the
Jews, on the other hand, by urging the observance of their ceremonies,
had raised up many mists with the view of throwing Christ into the
shade.  <span id="fr_265"></span>[266](#fn_265) Those, however, who are
of this opinion are influenced by a conjecture of exceedingly little
weight — on the ground that PAUL makes mention of *thrones*, and
*powers*, and heavenly creatures. For as to their adding also the term
*elements*,  <span id="fr_266"></span>[267](#fn_266) it is worse than
ridiculous. As, however, it is not my intention to refute the opinions
of others, I shall simply state what appears to me to be the truth, and
what may be inferred by sound reasoning.

<span id="v.i-p11"></span>In the first place, it is abundantly evident,
from Paul’s words, that those profligates were intent upon this — that
they might mix up Christ with Moses, and might retain the shadows of the
law along with the gospel. Hence it is probable that they were Jews. As,
however, they coloured over their fallacies with specious disguises,
 <span id="fr_267"></span>[268](#fn_267) Paul, on this account, calls it
a *vain* *philosophy*. (<span id="v.i-p12.2"></span>[Col
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#008)<span id="v.i-p12.2"></span>) At
the same time, in employing that term, he had in his eye, in my opinion,
the speculations with which they amused themselves, which were subtle,
it is true, but at the same time useless and profane: for they contrived
a way of access to God through means of angels, and put forth many
speculations of that nature, such as are contained in the books of
Dionysius on the Celestial Hierarchy,  <span
id="fr_268"></span>[269](#fn_268) drawn from the school of the
Platonists. This, therefore, is the principal object at which he aims —
to teach that all things are in Christ, and that he alone ought to be
reckoned amply sufficient by the Colossians.

<span id="v.i-p14"></span>The order, however, which he follows is this:
— After the inscription usually employed by him, he commends them, with
the view of leading them to listen to him more attentively. He then,
with the view of shutting up the way against all new and strange
contrivances, bears testimony to the doctrine which they had previously
received from Epaphras. Afterwards, in entreating that the Lord would
increase their faith, he intimates that something is still wanting to
them, that he may pave the way for imparting to them more solid
instruction. On the other hand, he extols with suitable commendations
the grace of God towards them, that they may not lightly esteem it. Then
follows the instruction, in which he teaches that all parts of our
salvation are to be found in Christ alone, that they may not seek
anything elsewhere; and he puts them in mind that it was in Christ that
they had obtained every blessing that they possessed, in order that they
might the more carefully make it their aim to retain him to the end.
 <span id="fr_269"></span>[270](#fn_269) And, truly, even this one
article were of itself perfectly sufficient to lead us to reckon this
Epistle, short as it is, to be an inestimable treasure; for what is of
greater importance in the whole system of heavenly doctrine than to have
Christ drawn to the life, that we may distinctly behold  <span
id="fr_270"></span>[271](#fn_270) his excellence, his office, and all
the fruits that arise to us from it.

<span id="v.i-p17"></span>For in this respect especially we differ from
Papists, that while we are both of us called Christians, and profess to
believe in Christ, they picture to themselves one that is torn,
disfigured, divested of his excellence, denuded of his office, in fine,
such as to be a spectre  <span id="fr_271"></span>[272](#fn_271) rather
than Christ himself: we, on the other hand, embrace him such as he is
here described by Paul — loving and efficacious. This Epistle,
therefore, to express it in one word, distinguishes the true Christ from
a fictitious one  <span id="fr_272"></span>[273](#fn_272) — than which
nothing better or more excellent can be desired. Towards the end of the
*First* *Chapter* he again endeavors to secure authority for himself
from the station assigned him,  <span id="fr_273"></span>[274](#fn_273)
and in magnificent terms extols the dignity of the gospel.

<span id="v.i-p21"></span>In the *Second* *Chapter* he opens up more
distinctly than he had done the reason which had induced him to write —
that he might provide against the danger which he saw to be impending
over them, while he touches, in passing, on the affection which he
cherishes towards them, that they may know that their welfare is the
object of his concern. From this he proceeds to exhortation, by which he
applies the foregoing doctrine, as it were, to present use;  <span
id="fr_274"></span>[275](#fn_274) for he bids them rest in Christ alone,
and brands as vanity everything that is apart from Christ.  <span
id="fr_275"></span>[276](#fn_275) He speaks particularly of
circumcision, abstinence from food, and of other outward exercises — in
which they mistakingly made the service of God to consist; and also of
the absurd worship of angels, whom they put in Christ’s room. Having
made mention of circumcision, he takes occasion to notice also, in
passing, what is the office, and what is the nature of ceremonies — from
which he lays it down as a settled point that they have been abrogated
by Christ. These things are treated of till the end of the *Second*
*Chapter*.

<span id="v.i-p24"></span>In the *Third* *Chapter*, in opposition to
those vain prescriptions, to the observance of which the false apostles
were desirous to bind believers, he makes mention of those true offices
of piety in which the Lord would have us employ ourselves; and he begins
with the very *spring-head* — that is, mortification of the flesh and
newness of life. From this he derives the *streams* — that is,
particular exhortations, some of which apply to all Christians alike,
while others relate more especially to particular individuals, according
to the nature of their calling.

<span id="v.i-p25"></span>In the beginning of the *Fourth* *Chapter* he
follows out the same subject: afterwards, having commended himself to
their prayers, he shews by many tokens  <span
id="fr_276"></span>[277](#fn_276) how much he loves them, and is
desirous to promote their welfare.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_261"></span>[262](cc42010.htm#fr_261) <span
id="v.i-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p4"></span> Orosius, (Paulus,) a “Spanish presbyter, a
native of Tarragona, flourished under Arcadius and Honorius.” — Smith’s
Dictionary of Greek Biography and Mythology. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_262"></span>[263](cc42010.htm#fr_262) <span
id="v.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p5"></span> “<span id="v.i-p5.1"></span>Toutes trois
furent destructes et renversees;” — “They were, all the three, destroyed
and overthrown.”

<span id="fn_263"></span>[264](cc42010.htm#fr_263) <span
id="v.i-p5.3"></span>

<span id="v.i-p6"></span> “<span id="v.i-p6.1"></span>Satan y estoit
entré cauteleusement auec son yuroye;” — “Satan had entered in there
craftily with his tares.”

<span id="fn_264"></span>[265](cc42010.htm#fr_264) <span
id="v.i-p6.2"></span>

<span id="v.i-p7"></span> “<span id="v.i-p7.1"></span>Pour y corrompre
et peruertir la vraye foy;” — “That he might there corrupt and pervert
the true faith.”

<span id="fn_265"></span>[266](cc42010.htm#fr_265) <span
id="v.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p9"></span> “<span id="v.i-p9.1"></span>Auoyent comme fait
leuer beaucoup de brouillars pour offusquer la clarte de Christ, voire
pour la suffoquer;” — “Had, as it were, raised up many mists with the
view of darkening Christ’s brightness; nay, more, with the view of
choking it.”

<span id="fn_266"></span>[267](cc42010.htm#fr_266) <span
id="v.i-p9.2"></span>

<span id="v.i-p10"></span> “<span id="v.i-p10.1"></span>Car quant au mot
d’elemens, sur lequel aussi ils fondent leur opinion;” — “For as to the
word elements, on which also they found their opinion.”

<span id="fn_267"></span>[268](cc42010.htm#fr_267) <span
id="v.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p12"></span> “<span id="v.i-p12.1"></span>Pource qu’ils
couuroyent de belles couleurs leurs fallaces et tromperies, et fardoyent
leur doctrine;” — “As they covered over their fallacies and deceptions
with beautiful colors, and painted their doctrine.”

<span id="fn_268"></span>[269](cc42010.htm#fr_268) <span
id="v.i-p12.3"></span>

<span id="v.i-p13"></span> See Calvin on the Corinthians, vol. 2, p.
370, n. 3.

<span id="fn_269"></span>[270](cc42010.htm#fr_269) <span
id="v.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p15"></span> “<span id="v.i-p15.1"></span>Et pour les
faire plus songneux de la retenir iusqu’a la fin, et s’arrester
tousiours en luy, il recite que par Christ ils sont entrez en
participation de tout bien et benediction;” — “And with the view of
making them more careful to retain him unto the end, and remain always
in him, he reminds them that it is through Christ that they have begun
to participate of every benefit and blessing.”

<span id="fn_270"></span>[271](cc42010.htm#fr_270) <span
id="v.i-p15.2"></span>

<span id="v.i-p16"></span> “<span id="v.i-p16.1"></span>Afin que nous
puissions aiseement veoir et contempler;” — “That we may be able easily
to perceive and contemplate.”

<span id="fn_271"></span>[272](cc42010.htm#fr_271) <span
id="v.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p18"></span> “<span id="v.i-p18.1"></span>Tel, que c’est
plustost vn phantasme qu’ vn vray Christ;” — “Such, that it is rather a
phantasm than a true Christ.”

<span id="fn_272"></span>[273](cc42010.htm#fr_272) <span
id="v.i-p18.2"></span>

<span id="v.i-p19"></span> “<span id="v.i-p19.1"></span>Imaginatif, ou
faict a plaiser;” — “Imaginary, or fictitious.”

<span id="fn_273"></span>[274](cc42010.htm#fr_273) <span
id="v.i-p19.2"></span>

<span id="v.i-p20"></span> “<span id="v.i-p20.1"></span>Pour estre plus
authorizé entr’ eux, il fait derechef mention de la charge qu’il auoit
receuë de Dieu;” — “That he may have more authority among them, he again
makes mention of the charge which he had received from God.”

<span id="fn_274"></span>[275](cc42010.htm#fr_274) <span
id="v.i-p21.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p22"></span> “<span id="v.i-p22.1"></span>A son propos, et
a ce dont ils auoyent affaire;” — “To his subject, and to what they had
to do with.”

<span id="fn_275"></span>[276](cc42010.htm#fr_275) <span
id="v.i-p22.2"></span>

<span id="v.i-p23"></span> “<span id="v.i-p23.1"></span>Monstrant, que
tout ce qui hors Christ, n’est que vanite;” — “Shewing that everything
that is apart from Christ is mere vanity.”

<span id="fn_276"></span>[277](cc42010.htm#fr_276) <span
id="v.i-p25.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p26"></span> “<span id="v.i-p26.1"></span>Par plusieurs
signes et tesmoignages;” — “By many signs and evidences.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 1](cc42011)
