[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc42004)  [Next](cc42006) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 42: Philippians, Colossians, and
Thessalonians*, tr. by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p1"></span>COMMENTARY ON

<span id="iv.ii-p2"></span>THE EPISTLE OF PAUL TO THE PHILIPPIANS.

<span id="iv.ii-p3"></span>CHAPTER 1

<span id="iv.ii.i"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.i-p1"></span><span id="iv.ii.i-p1.1"></span>[Philippians
1:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#001)<span id="iv.ii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.i-p2"></span>**1**. Paul and Timotheus, the servants of
Jesus Christ, to all the saints in Christ Jesus which are at Philippi,
with the bishops and deacons:

<span id="iv.ii.i-p3"></span>**1**. Paulus et Timotheus, servi Iesu
Christi, omnibus sanctis in Christo Iesu, qui sunt Philippis, cum
Episcopis et Diaconis

<span id="iv.ii.i-p4"></span>**2**. Grace *be* unto you, and peace, from
God our Father, and *from* the Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p5"></span>**2**. Gratia vobis et pax a Deo Patre
nostro, et Domino Iesu Christo.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p6"></span>**3**. I thank my God upon every
remembrance of you,

<span id="iv.ii.i-p7"></span>**3**. Gratias ago Deo meo in omni memoria
vestri.  <span id="fr_22"></span>[23](#fn_22)

<span id="iv.ii.i-p9"></span>**4**. Always in every prayer of mine for
you all making request with joy,

<span id="iv.ii.i-p10"></span>**4**. Semper in omni precatione mea pro
vobis omnibus cum gaudio precationem faciens,

<span id="iv.ii.i-p11"></span>**5**. For your fellowship in the gospel
from the first day until now;

<span id="iv.ii.i-p12"></span>**5**. Super communicatione vestra in
Evangelium, a primo die hucusque;

<span id="iv.ii.i-p13"></span>**6**. Being confident of this very thing,
that he which hath begun a good work in you will perform *it* until the
day of Jesus Christ.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p14"></span>**6**. Hoc ipsum persuasus, quod qui cœpit
in vobis opus bonum, perficiet usque in diem Iesu Christi.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p15"></span> 

<span id="iv.ii.i-p16"></span><span id="iv.ii.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.i-p17"></span>**1** *Paul and Timotheus, servants of
Jesus Christ* While Paul is accustomed, in the inscription of his
epistles, to employ titles of distinction, with the view of procuring
credit for himself and his ministry, there was no need of lengthened
commendations in writing to the Philippians, who had known him by
experience as a true Apostle of Christ, and still acknowledged him as
such beyond all controversy. For they had persevered in the calling of
God steadfastly, and in an even tenor.  <span
id="fr_23"></span>[24](#fn_23)

<span id="iv.ii.i-p19"></span>*Bishops* He names the *pastors*
separately, for the sake of honor. We may, however, infer from this,
that the name of *bishop* is common to all the ministers of the Word,
inasmuch as he assigns several *bishops* to one Church. The titles,
therefore, of *bishop* and *pastor*, are synonymous. And this is one of
the passages which Jerome quotes for proving this in his epistle to
Evagrius,  <span id="fr_24"></span>[25](#fn_24) and in his exposition of
the Epistle to Titus.  <span id="fr_25"></span>[26](#fn_25) Afterwards
 <span id="fr_26"></span>[27](#fn_26) there crept in the custom of
applying the name of *bishop* exclusively to the person whom the
presbyters in each church appointed over their company.  <span
id="fr_27"></span>[28](#fn_27) It originated, however, in a human
custom, and rests on no Scripture authority. I acknowledge, indeed,
that, as the minds and manners of men are, there cannot be order
maintained among the ministers of the word, without one presiding over
the others. I speak of particular bodies,  <span
id="fr_28"></span>[29](#fn_28) not of whole provinces, much less of the
whole world. Now, although we must not contend for words, it were at the
same time better for us in speaking to follow the Holy Spirit, the
author of tongues, than to change for the worse forms of speech which
are dictated to us by Him. For from the corrupted signification of the
word this evil has resulted, that, as if all the presbyters  <span
id="fr_29"></span>[30](#fn_29) were not colleagues, called to the same
office, one of them, under the pretext of a new appellation, usurped
dominion over the others.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p26"></span>*Deacons*. This term may be taken in two
ways — either as meaning administrators, and curators of the poor, or
for elders, who were appointed for the regulation of morals. As,
however, it is more generally made use of by Paul in the former sense, I
understand it rather as meaning stewards, who superintended the
distributing and receiving of alms. On the other points consult the
preceding commentaries.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p27"></span><span id="iv.ii.i-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.i-p28"></span>**3** *I give thanks*. He begins with
thanksgiving  <span id="fr_30"></span>[31](#fn_30) on two accounts —
*first*, that he may by this token shew his love to the Philippians; and
secondly, that, by commending them as to the past, he may exhort them,
also, to perseverance in time to come. He adduces, also, another
evidence of his love — the anxiety which he exercised in supplications.
It is to be observed, however, that, whenever he makes mention of things
that are joyful, he immediately breaks forth into thanksgiving — a
practice with which we ought also to be familiar. We must, also, take
notice, what things they are for which he gives thanks to God, — the
fellowship of the Philippians in the gospel of Christ; for it follows
from this, that it ought to be ascribed to the grace of God. When he
says, *upon every remembrance of you*, he means, “As often as I remember
you.”

<span id="iv.ii.i-p30"></span><span id="iv.ii.i-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.i-p31"></span>**4** *Always in every prayer*. Connect
the words in this manner: “*Always presenting prayer for you all in
every prayer of mine.*” For as he had said before, that the remembrance
of them was an occasion of joy to him, so he now subjoins, that they
come into his mind as often as he prays. He afterwards adds, that it is
*with joy* that he presents prayer in their behalf. *Joy* refers to the
past; *prayer* to the future. For he rejoiced in their auspicious
beginnings, and was desirous of their perfection. Thus it becomes us
always to rejoice in the blessings received from God in such a manner,
as to remember to ask from him those things that we are still in need
of.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p32"></span><span id="iv.ii.i-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.i-p33"></span>**5** *For your fellowship*. He now,
passing over the other clause, states the ground of his joy — that they
had come into the *fellowship of the gospel*, that is, had become
partakers of the gospel, which, as is well known, is accomplished by
means of faith; for the gospel appears as nothing to us, in respect of
any enjoyment of it, until we have received it by faith. At the same
time the term *fellowship* may be viewed as referring to the common
society of the saints, as though he had said that they had been
associated with all the children of God in the faith of the gospel. When
he says, *from the first day*, he commends their promptitude in having
shewn themselves teachable immediately upon the doctrine being set
before them. The phrase *until now* denotes their perseverance. Now we
know how rare an excellence it is, to follow God immediately upon his
calling us, and also to persevere steadfastly unto the end. For many are
slow and backward to obey, while there are still more that fall short
through fickleness and inconstancy.  <span
id="fr_31"></span>[32](#fn_31)

<span id="iv.ii.i-p35"></span><span id="iv.ii.i-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.i-p36"></span>**6** *Persuaded of this very thing.* An
additional ground of joy is furnished in his confidence in them for the
time to come.  <span id="fr_32"></span>[33](#fn_32) But some one will
say, why should men dare to assure themselves for to-morrow amidst so
great an infirmity of nature, amidst so many impediments, ruggednesses,
and precipices?  <span id="fr_33"></span>[34](#fn_33) Paul, assuredly,
did not derive this confidence from the steadfastness or excellence of
men, but simply from the fact, that God had manifested his love to the
Philippians. And undoubtedly this is the true manner of acknowledging
God’s benefits — when we derive from them occasion of hoping well as to
the future.  <span id="fr_34"></span>[35](#fn_34) For as they are tokens
at once of his goodness, and of his fatherly benevolence towards us,
what ingratitude were it to derive from this no confirmation of hope and
good courage! In addition to this, God is not like men, so as to be
wearied out or exhausted by conferring kindness.  <span
id="fr_35"></span>[36](#fn_35) Let, therefore, believers exercise
themselves in constant meditation upon the favors which God confers,
that they may encourage and confirm hope as to the time to come, and
always ponder in their mind this syllogism: God does not forsake the
work which his own hands have begun, as the Prophet bears witness,
(<span id="iv.ii.i-p40.2"></span>[Ps
138:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#008)<span id="iv.ii.i-p40.2"></span>;
<span id="iv.ii.i-p40.3"></span>[Isa
64:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#008)<span id="iv.ii.i-p40.3"></span>;)
we are the work of his hands; therefore he will complete what he has
begun in us. When I say that we are the work of his hands, I do not
refer to mere creation, but to the calling by which we are adopted into
the number of his sons. For it is a token to us of our election, that
the Lord has called us effectually to himself by his Spirit.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p41"></span>It is asked, however, whether any one can
be certain as to the salvation of others, for Paul here is not speaking
of himself but of the Philippians. I answer, that the assurance which an
individual has respecting his own salvation, is very different from what
he has as to that of another. For the Spirit of God is a witness to me
of my calling, as he is to each of the elect. As to others, we have no
testimony, except from the outward efficacy of the Spirit; that is, in
so far as the grace of God shews itself in them, so that we come to know
it. There is, therefore, a great difference, because the assurance of
faith remains inwardly shut up, and does not extend itself to others.
But wherever we see any such tokens of Divine election as can be
perceived by us, we ought immediately to be stirred up to entertain good
hope, both in order that we may not be envious  <span
id="fr_36"></span>[37](#fn_36) towards our neighbors, and withhold from
them an equitable and kind judgment of charity; and also, that we may be
grateful to God.  <span id="fr_37"></span>[38](#fn_37) This, however, is
a general rule both as to ourselves and as to others — that, distrusting
our own strength, we depend entirely upon God alone.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p44"></span>*Until the day of Jesus Christ* The chief
thing, indeed, to be understood here is — until the termination of the
conflict. Now the conflict is terminated by death. As, however, the
Spirit is accustomed to speak in this manner in reference to the last
coming of Christ, it were better to extend the advancement of the grace
of Christ to the resurrection of the flesh. For although those who have
been freed from the mortal body do no longer contend with the lusts of
the flesh, and are, as the expression is, beyond the reach of a single
dart,  <span id="fr_38"></span>[39](#fn_38) yet there will be no
absurdity in speaking of them as in the way of advancement,  <span
id="fr_39"></span>[40](#fn_39) inasmuch as they have not yet reached the
point at which they aspire, — they do not yet enjoy the felicity and
glory which they have hoped for; and in fine, the day has not yet shone
which is to discover the treasures which lie hid in hope. And in truth,
when hope is treated of, our eyes must always be directed forward to a
blessed resurrection, as the grand object in view.

<span id="iv.ii.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p1"></span><span
id="iv.ii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Philippians
1:7-11](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#007)<span id="iv.ii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p2"></span>**7**. Even as it is meet for me to think
this of you all, because I have you in my heart; inasmuch as both in my
bonds, and in the defence and confirmation of the gospel, ye all are
partakers of my grace.

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p3"></span>**7**. Sicuti iustum est mihi hoc de vobis
omnibus sentire, propterea quod in corde vos habeam, esse omnes
participes gratiæ meæ, et in vinculis meis, et in defensione, et
confirmatione Evangelii.

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p4"></span>**8**. For God is my record, how greatly I
long after you all in the bowels of Jesus Christ.

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p5"></span>**8**. Testis enim mihi est Deus, ut
desiderem vos omnes in visceribus  <span id="fr_40"></span>[41](#fn_40)
Iesu Christi.

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p7"></span>**9**. And this I pray, that your love may
abound yet more and more in knowledge and *in* all judgment;

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p8"></span>**9**. Et hoc precor, ut caritas vestra
adhue magis ac magis abundet cum agnitione, omnique intelligentia:

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p9"></span>**10**. That ye may approve things that
are excellent; that ye may be sincere, and without offence till the day
of Christ;

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p10"></span>**10**. Ut probetis quæ utilia sunt, qno
sitis sinceri, et inoffensi usque in diem Christi.

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p11"></span>**11**. Being filled with the fruits of
righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ, unto the glory and praise of
God.

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p12"></span>**11**. Impleti fructibus iustitiae, qui
sunt per Iesum Christum, in gloriam et laudem Dei.

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p13"></span> 

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p14"></span><span id="iv.ii.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p15"></span>**7** *As it is reasonable*. For we are
envious  <span id="fr_41"></span>[42](#fn_41) valuators of the gifts of
God if we do not reckon as children of God those in whom there shine
forth those true tokens of piety, which are the marks by which the
Spirit of adoption manifests himself. Paul accordingly says, that equity
itself dictates to him,  <span id="fr_42"></span>[43](#fn_42) that he
should hope well of the Philippians in all time to come, inasmuch as he
sees them to be associated with himself in participation of grace. It is
not without due consideration that I have given a different rendering of
this passage from that of Erasmus, as the judicious reader will easily
perceive. For he states what opinion he has of the Philippians, which
was the ground of his hoping well respecting them. He says, then, that
they are *partakers with him of the same grace* in his *bonds*, and in
the *defense of the gospel.*

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p18"></span>To *have them in his heart* is to reckon
them as such in the inmost affection of his heart. For the Philippians
had always assisted Paul according to their ability, so as to connect
themselves with him as associates for maintaining the cause of the
gospel, so far as was in their power. Thus, although they were absent in
body, yet, on account of the pious disposition which they shewed by
every service in their power, he recognises them as in bonds along with
him. “*I have you*, therefore, *in my heart;*” this is, sincerely and
without any pretense, assuredly, and with no slight or doubtful opinion
— as what? as *partakers of grace* — in what? *in my bonds*, by which
the gospel is defended. As he acknowledged them to be such, it was
reasonable that he should hope well respecting them.

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p19"></span>*Of my grace and in the bonds.* It were a
ludicrous thing in the view of the world to reckon a prison to be a
benefit from God, but if we estimate the matter aright, it is no common
honor that God confers upon us, when we suffer persecution for the sake
of his truth. For it was not in vain that it was said,

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p20"></span>Blessed shall ye be, when men shall
afflict and harass you with all kinds of reproaches for my name’s sake.
(<span id="iv.ii.ii-p20.1"></span>[Mt
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#011)<span id="iv.ii.ii-p20.1"></span>)

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p21"></span>Let us therefore bear in remembrance
also, that we must with readiness and alacrity embrace the fellowship of
the cross of Christ as a special favor from God. In addition to *bonds*
he subjoins the *defense and confirmation of the gospel,* that he may
express so much the better the honourableness of the service which God
has enjoined upon us in placing us in opposition to his enemies, so as
to bear testimony to his gospel. For it is as though he had entrusted us
with the defense of his gospel. And truly it was when armed with this
consideration, that the martyrs were prepared to contemn all the rage of
the wicked, and to rise superior to every kind of torture. And would
that this were present to the mind of all that are called to make a
confession of their faith, that they have been chosen by Christ to be as
advocates to plead his cause! For were they sustained by such
consolation they would be more courageous than to be so easily turned
aside into a perfidious revolt.  <span id="fr_43"></span>[44](#fn_43)

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p23"></span>Here, however, some one will inquire,
whether the *confirmation of the gospel* depends on the steadfastness of
men. I answer, that the truth of God is in itself too firm to require
that it should have support from any other quarter; for though we should
all of us be found liars, God, nevertheless, remains true. (<span
id="iv.ii.ii-p23.1"></span>[Ro
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#004)<span id="iv.ii.ii-p23.1"></span>.)
There is, however, no absurdity in saying, that weak consciences are
confirmed in it by such helps. That kind of confirmation, therefore, of
which Paul makes mention, has a relation to men, as we learn from our
own experience that the slaughter of so many martyrs has been attended
at least with this advantage, that they have been as it were so many
seals, by which the gospel has been sealed in our hearts. Hence that
saying of Tertullian, that “the blood of the martyrs is the seed of the
Church,” — which I have imitated in a certain poem: “But that sacred
blood,  <span id="fr_44"></span>[45](#fn_44) the maintainer of God’s
honor, will be like seed for producing offspring.”  <span
id="fr_45"></span>[46](#fn_45)

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p29"></span><span id="iv.ii.ii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p30"></span>**8.** *For God is my witness.* He now
declares more explicitly his affection for them, and, with the view of
giving proof of it, he makes use of an oath, and that on good grounds,
because we know how dear in the sight of God is the edification of his
Church. It was, too, more especially of advantage, that Paul’s affection
should be thoroughly made known to the Philippians. For it tends in no
small degree to secure credit for the doctrine, when the people are
persuaded that they are beloved by the teacher. He calls God as a
witness to the truth, inasmuch as he alone is the Truth, and as a
witness of his affection, inasmuch as he alone is the searcher of
hearts. In the word rendered *long after*, a particular term is made use
of instead of a general, and it is a token of affection, inasmuch as we
*long after* those things which are dear to us.

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p31"></span>*In the bowels* He places the *bowels of
Christ* in opposition to carnal affection, to intimate that his
affection is holy and pious. For the man that loves according to the
flesh has respect to his own advantage, and may from time to time change
his mind according to the variety of circumstances and seasons. In the
meantime he instructs us by what rule the affections of believers ought
to be regulated, so that, renouncing their own will, they may allow
Christ to sit at the helm. And, unquestionably, true love can flow from
no other source than from the *bowels of Christ*, and this, like a goad,
ought to affect us not a little — that Christ in a manner opens his
*bowels*, that by them he may cherish mutual affection between us.
 <span id="fr_46"></span>[47](#fn_46)

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p33"></span><span id="iv.ii.ii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p34"></span>**9** *This I pray that your love* He
returns to the prayer, which he had simply touched upon in one word in
passing. He states, accordingly, the sum of those things which he asked
from God in their behalf, that they also may learn to pray after his
example, and may aspire at proficiency in those gifts. The view taken by
some, as though the *love of the Philippians* denoted the Philippians
themselves, as illiterate persons are accustomed very commonly to say,
“Your reverence,” — “Your paternity,” is absurd. For no instance of such
an expression occurs in the writings of Paul, nor had such fooleries
come into use. Besides, the statement would be less complete, and,
independently of this, the simple and natural meaning of the words suits
admirably well. For the true attainments of Christians are when they
make progress in *knowledge*, and *understanding*, and afterwards in
*love*. Accordingly the particle *in*, according to the idiom of the
Hebrew tongue, is taken here to mean *with*, as I have also rendered it,
unless perhaps one should prefer to explain it as meaning *by*, so as to
denote the instrument or formal cause. For, the greater proficiency we
make in *knowledge*, so much the more ought our *love* to increase. The
meaning in that case would be, “That your love may increase according to
the measure of knowledge.” *All knowledge*, means what is full and
complete — not a knowledge of all things.  <span
id="fr_47"></span>[48](#fn_47)

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p36"></span><span id="iv.ii.ii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p37"></span>**10** *That ye may approve the things
that are* Here we have a definition of Christian wisdom — to know what
is advantageous or expedient — not to torture the mind with empty
subtleties and speculations. For the Lord does not wish that his
believing people should employ themselves fruitlessly in learning what
is of no profit: From this you may gather in what estimation the
Sorbonnic theology ought to be held, in which you may spend your whole
life, and yet not derive more of edification from it in connection with
the hope of a heavenly life, or more of spiritual advantage, than from
the demonstrations of Euclid. Unquestionably, although it taught nothing
false, it well deserves to be execrable, on the ground that it is a
pernicious profanation of spiritual doctrine. For *Scripture is useful*,
as Paul says, in <span id="iv.ii.ii-p37.1"></span>[2Ti
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#016)<span id="iv.ii.ii-p37.1"></span>,
but *there* you will find nothing but cold subtleties of words.

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p38"></span>*That ye may be sincere.* This is the
advantage which we derive from *knowledge* — not that every one may
artfully consult his own interests, but that we may live in pure
conscience in the sight of God.

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p39"></span>It is added — *and without offense* The
Greek word <span id="iv.ii.ii-p39.1"></span>ἀπροσκοποι is ambiguous.
Chrysostom explains it in an *active* sense — that as he had desired
that they should be pure and upright in the sight of God, so he now
desires that they should lead an honorable life in the sight of men,
that they may not injure their neighbors by any evil examples. This
exposition I do not reject: the *passive* signification, however, is
better suited to the context, in my opinion. For he desires wisdom for
them, with this view — that they may with unwavering step go forward in
their calling *until the day of Christ*, as on the other hand it happens
through ignorance,  <span id="fr_48"></span>[49](#fn_48) that we
frequently slip our foot, stumble, and turn aside. And how many
stumbling blocks Satan from time to time throws in our way, with the
view of either stopping our course altogether, or impeding it, every one
of us knows from his own experience.

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p41"></span><span id="iv.ii.ii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p42"></span>**11** *Filled with the fruits of
righteousness*. This now belongs to the outward life, for a good
conscience produces its fruits by means of works. Hence he desires that
they may be fruitful in good works for the glory of God. Such fruits, he
says, are by Christ, because they flow from the grace of Christ. For the
beginning of our well-doing is, when we are sanctified by his Spirit,
for he rested upon him, that we might all receive of his fullness.
(<span id="iv.ii.ii-p42.1"></span>[Joh
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#016)<span
id="iv.ii.ii-p42.1"></span>.) And as Paul here derives a similitude from
trees, we are *wild olive-trees,* (<span id="iv.ii.ii-p42.2"></span>[Ro
11:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#024)<span
id="iv.ii.ii-p42.2"></span>,) and unproductive, until we are ingrafted
into Christ, who by his living root makes us fruitbearing trees, in
accordance with that saying, (<span id="iv.ii.ii-p42.3"></span>[Joh
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#001)<span
id="iv.ii.ii-p42.3"></span>,) *I am the vine, ye are the branches.* He
at the same time shews the end — that we may promote the glory of God.
For no life is so excellent in appearance as not to be corrupted and
become offensive in the view of God, if it is not directed towards this
object.

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p43"></span>Paul’s speaking here of works under the
term *righteousness*, is not at all inconsistent with the gratuitous
righteousness of faith. For it does not immediately follow that there is
righteousness wherever there are the fruits of righteousness, inasmuch
as there is no righteousness in the sight of God, unless there be a full
and complete obedience to the law, which is not found in any one of the
saints, though, nevertheless, they bring forth, according to the
measure, the good and pleasant  <span id="fr_49"></span>[50](#fn_49)
fruits of righteousness, and for this reason, that, as God begins
righteousness in us, through the regeneration of the Spirit, so what is
wanting is amply supplied through the remission of sins, in such a way
that all righteousness, nevertheless, depends upon faith.

<span id="iv.ii.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p1"></span><span
id="iv.ii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Philippians
1:12-17](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#012)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p2"></span>**12**. But I would ye should understand,
brethren, that the things *which happened* unto me have fallen out
rather unto the furtherance of the gospel;

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p3"></span>**12**. Scire autem vos volo, fratres,
quod, quae mihi acciderunt, magis in profectum cesserunt Evangelii,

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p4"></span>**13**. So that my bonds in Christ are
manifest in all the palace, and in all other *places*;

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p5"></span>**13**. Ut vincula mea in Christo
illustria fuerint in toto praetorio, et reliquis omnibus locis:

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p6"></span>**14**. And many of the brethren in the
Lord, waxing confident by my bonds, are much more bold to speak the word
without fear.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p7"></span>**14**. Et multi ex fratribus in Domino,
vinculis meis confisi, uberius ausi fuerint absque timore sermonem Dei
loqui.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p8"></span>**15**. Some indeed preach Christ even of
envy and strife; and some also of good will:

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p9"></span>**15**. Nonnulli quidem per invidiam et
contentionem, alii autem etiam per benevolentiam, Christum praedicant.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p10"></span>**16**. The one preach Christ of
contention, not sincerely, supposing to add affliction to my bonds:

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p11"></span>**16**. Alii, inquam, ex contentione
Christum annuntiant, non pure, existimantes afflictionem se suscitare
meis vinculis:

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p12"></span>**17**. But the other of love, knowing
that I am set for the defence of the gospel.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p13"></span>**17**. Alii autem ex caritate, scientes
quod in defensionem Evangelii positus sim.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p14"></span> 

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p15"></span><span id="iv.ii.iii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p16"></span>**12** *But I wish you to know* We all
know from our own experience, how much the flesh is wont to be offended
by the abasement of the cross. We allow, indeed, Christ crucified to be
preached to us; but when he appears in connection with his cross, then,
as though we were thunderstruck at the novelty of it,  <span
id="fr_50"></span>[51](#fn_50) we either avoid him or hold him in
abhorrence, and that not merely in our own persons, but also in the
persons of those who deliver to us the gospel. It may have happened to
the Philippians, that they were in some degree discouraged in
consequence of the persecution of their Apostle. We may also very
readily believe, that those bad workmen  <span
id="fr_51"></span>[52](#fn_51) who eagerly watched every occasion,
however small, of doing injury, did not refrain from triumphing over the
calamity of this holy man, and by this means making his gospel
contemptible. If, however, they were not successful in this attempt,
they might very readily calumniate him by representing him as hated by
the whole world; and at the same time leading the Philippians to dread,
lest, by an unfortunate association with him,  <span
id="fr_52"></span>[53](#fn_52) they should needlessly incur great
dislike among all; for such are the usual artifices of Satan. The
Apostle provides against this danger, when he states that the gospel had
been promoted by means of his bonds. The design, accordingly, of this
detail is, to encourage the Philippians, that they may not feel deterred
 <span id="fr_53"></span>[54](#fn_53) by the persecution endured by him.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p21"></span><span id="iv.ii.iii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p22"></span>**13** *So that my bonds* He employs the
expression — *in Christ*, to mean, in the *affairs,* or in the *cause*
of Christ, for he intimates that his bonds had become illustrious, so as
to promote the honor of Christ.  <span id="fr_54"></span>[55](#fn_54)
The rendering given by some — *through Christ*, seems forced. I have
also employed the word <span id="iv.ii.iii-p23.2"></span>*illustria*
*(illustrious)* in preference to <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p23.3"></span>*manifesta*, *(manifest,)* — as having
ennobled the gospel by their fame.  <span id="fr_55"></span>[56](#fn_55)
“Satan, indeed, has attempted it, and the wicked have thought that it
would turn out so, that the gospel would be destroyed; but God has
frustrated both the attempts of the former and the expectations of the
latter,  <span id="fr_56"></span>[57](#fn_56) and that in two ways, for
while the gospel was previously obscure and unknown, it has come to be
well known, and not only so, but has even been rendered honorable in the
<span id="iv.ii.iii-p25.2"></span>*Praetorium*, no less than in the rest
of the city.” By the <span id="iv.ii.iii-p25.3"></span>*praetorium* I
understand the hall and palace of Nero, which Fabius  <span
id="fr_57"></span>[58](#fn_57) and writers of that age call <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p26.5"></span>*Augustale*, (*the Augustal.*) For as the
name <span id="iv.ii.iii-p26.6"></span>praetor was at first a general
term, and denoted all magistrates who held the chief sway, (hence it
came that the dictator was called the sovereign praetor,  <span
id="fr_58"></span>[59](#fn_58) ) it, consequently, became customary to
employ the term <span id="iv.ii.iii-p27.2"></span>*praetorium* in war to
mean the tent, either of the consul,  <span
id="fr_59"></span>[60](#fn_59) or of the person who *presided*,  <span
id="fr_60"></span>[61](#fn_60) while in the city it denoted the palace
of Caesar,  <span id="fr_61"></span>[62](#fn_61) from the time that the
Cesars took possession of the monarchy.  <span
id="fr_62"></span>[63](#fn_62) Independently of this, the bench of
praetor is also called the <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p31.2"></span>*praetorium*  <span
id="fr_63"></span>[64](#fn_63)

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p33"></span><span id="iv.ii.iii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p34"></span>**14** *Many of the brethren*. By this
instance we are taught that the tortures of the saints, endured by them
in behalf of the gospel, are a ground of confidence  <span
id="fr_64"></span>[65](#fn_64) to us. It were indeed a dreadful
spectacle, and such as might tend rather to dishearten us, did we see
nothing but the cruelty and rage of the persecutors. When, however, we
see at the same time the hand of the Lord, which makes his people
unconquerable,  <span id="fr_65"></span>[66](#fn_65) under the infirmity
of the Cross, and causes them to triumph, relying upon this,  <span
id="fr_66"></span>[67](#fn_66) we ought to venture farther than we had
been accustomed, having now a pledge of our victory in the persons of
our brethren. The knowledge of this ought to overcome our fears, that we
may speak boldly in the midst of dangers.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p38"></span><span id="iv.ii.iii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p39"></span>**15** *Some indeed*. Here is another
fruit of Paul’s bonds, that not only were the brethren stirred up to
confidence by his example — some by maintaining their position, others
by becoming more eager to teach — but even those who wished him evil
were on another account stirred up to publish the gospel.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p40"></span><span id="iv.ii.iii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p41"></span>**16** *Some, I say, from contention*.
Here we have a lengthened detail, in which he explains more fully the
foregoing statement; for he repeats that there are two classes of men
that are stirred up by his bonds to preach Christ — the one influenced
by contention, that is, by depraved affection — the other by pious zeal,
as being desirous to maintain along with him the defense of the gospel.
The former, he says, do not *preach Christ purely*, because it was not a
right zeal.  <span id="fr_67"></span>[68](#fn_67) For the term does not
apply to doctrine, because it is possible that the man who teaches most
purely, may, nevertheless, not be of a sincere mind.  <span
id="fr_68"></span>[69](#fn_68) Now, that this impurity was in the mind,
and did not shew itself in doctrine, may be inferred from the context.
Paul assuredly would have felt no pleasure in seeing the gospel
corrupted; yet he declares that he rejoices in the preaching of those
persons, while it was not simple or sincere.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p44"></span>It is asked, however, how such preaching
could be injurious to him? I answer, that many occasions are unknown to
us, inasmuch as we are not acquainted with the circumstances of the
times. It is asked farther, “Since the gospel cannot be preached but by
those that understand it, what motive induced those persons to persecute
the doctrine of which they approved?” I answer, that ambition is blind,
nay, it is a furious beast. Hence it is not to be wondered if false
brethren snatch a weapon from the gospel for harassing good and pious
pastors.  <span id="fr_69"></span>[70](#fn_69) Paul, assuredly, says
nothing here  <span id="fr_70"></span>[71](#fn_70) of which I have not
myself had experience. For there are living at this very day those who
have preached the gospel with no other design, than that they might
gratify the rage of the wicked by persecuting pious pastors. As to
Paul’s enemies, it is of importance to observe, if they were Jews, how
mad their hatred was, so as even to forget on what account they hated
him. For while they made it their aim to destroy him, they exerted
themselves to promote the gospel, on account of which they were hostile
to him; but they imagined, no doubt, that the cause of Christ would
stand or fall  <span id="fr_71"></span>[72](#fn_71) in the person of one
individual. If, however, there were envious persons,  <span
id="fr_72"></span>[73](#fn_72) who were thus hurried away by ambition,
we ought to acknowledge the wonderful goodness of God, who,
notwithstanding, gave such a prosperous issue to their depraved
affections.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p49"></span><span id="iv.ii.iii-p49.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p50"></span>**17** *That for the defense*. Those who
truly loved Christ reckoned that it would be a disgrace to them if they
did not associate themselves with Paul as his companions, when
maintaining the cause of the gospel; and we must act in such a manner,
as to give a helping hand, as far as possible, to the servants of Christ
when in difficulty.  <span id="fr_73"></span>[74](#fn_73) Observe,
again, this expression — *for the defense of the gospel* For since
Christ confers upon us so great an honor, what excuse shall we have, if
we shall be traitors to his cause,  <span id="fr_74"></span>[75](#fn_74)
or what may we expect, if we betray it by our silence, but that *he*
shall in return desert our cause, who is our sole *Advocate*, or Patron,
*with the Father?*  <span id="fr_75"></span>[76](#fn_75) (<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p53.2"></span>[1Jo
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#001)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p53.2"></span>.)

<span id="iv.ii.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p1"></span><span
id="iv.ii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Philippians
1:18-21](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#018)<span
id="iv.ii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p2"></span>**18**. What then? notwithstanding, every
way, whether in pretence, or in truth, Christ is preached; and I therein
do rejoice, yea, and will rejoice.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p3"></span>**18**. Quid enim? Caeterum quovis modo,
sive per occasionem, sive per veritatem, Christus annuntiatur: atque in
hoc gaudeo, quin etiam gaudebo.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p4"></span>**19**. For I know that this shall turn to
my salvation through your prayer, and the supply of the Spirit of Jesus
Christ,

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p5"></span>**19**. Novi enim quod hoc mihi cedet in
salutem per vestram precationem, et subministrationem Spiritus Iesu
Christi,

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p6"></span>**20**. According to my earnest
expectation and *my* hope, that in nothing I shall be ashamed, but
*that* with all boldness, as always, *so* now also Christ shall be
magnified in my body, whether *it be* by life, or by death.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p7"></span>**20**. Secundum expectationem et spem
meam, quod in nullo re pudefiam, sed cum omni fiducia, quemadmodum
semper, ita et nunc magnificabitur Christus in corpore meo, sive per
vitam, sive per mortem.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p8"></span>**21**. For to me to live *is* Christ, and
to die *is* gain.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p9"></span>**21**. Mihi enim vivendo Christus est, et
moriendo lucrum.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p10"></span> 

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p11"></span><span id="iv.ii.iv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p12"></span>**18** *But in every way*. As the wicked
disposition of those of whom he has spoken might detract from the
acceptableness of the doctrine,  <span id="fr_76"></span>[77](#fn_76) he
says that this ought to be reckoned of great importance, that they
nevertheless promoted the cause of the gospel, whatever their
disposition might be. For God sometimes accomplishes an admirable work
by means of wicked and depraved instruments. Accordingly, he says that
he rejoices in a happy result of this nature; because this one thing
contented him — if he saw the kingdom of Christ increasing — just as we,
on hearing that that impure dog Carolus  <span
id="fr_77"></span>[78](#fn_77) was scattering the seeds of pure doctrine
at Avignon and elsewhere, we gave thanks to God because he had made use
of that most profligate and worthless villain for his glory: and at this
day we rejoice that the progress of the gospel is advanced by many who,
nevertheless, had another design in view. But though Paul rejoiced in
the advancement of the gospel, yet, had the matter been in his hand, he
would never have ordained such persons as ministers. We ought,
therefore, to rejoice if God accomplishes anything that is good by means
of wicked persons; but they ought not on that account to be either
placed by us in the ministry, or looked upon as Christ’s lawful
ministers.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p15"></span><span id="iv.ii.iv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p16"></span>**19** *For I know that* As some
published the gospel with the view of rendering Paul odious, in order
that they might kindle up against him the more the rage of his enemies,
he tells them beforehand that their wicked attempts will do him no harm,
because the Lord will turn them to a contrary design. “Though they plot
my destruction, yet I trust that all their attempts will have no other
effect but that Christ will be glorified in me — which is a thing most
salutary to me.” For it is evident from what follows, that he is not
speaking of the safety of the body. But whence this confidence on the
part of Paul? It is from what he teaches elsewhere, (<span
id="iv.ii.iv-p16.1"></span>[Ro
8:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#028)<span
id="iv.ii.iv-p16.1"></span>,) — that all things contribute to the
advantage of God’s true worshippers, even though the whole world, with
the devil, its prince, should conspire together for their ruin.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p17"></span>*Through your prayer* That he may stir
them up to pray more ardently, he declares that he is confident that the
Lord will give them an answer to their prayers. Nor does he use
dissimulation: for he who depends for help on the prayers of the saints
relies on the promise of God. In the mean time, nothing is detracted
from the unmerited goodness of God, on which depend our prayers, and
what is obtained by means of them.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p18"></span>*And the supply*. Let us not suppose,
that because he joins these two things in one connection, they are
consequently alike. The statement must, therefore, be explained in this
manner: — “I know that all this will turn out to my advantage, through
the administration of the Spirit, you also helping by prayer,” — so that
the supply of the Spirit is the efficient cause, while prayer is a
subordinate help. We must also observe the propriety of the Greek term,
for <span id="iv.ii.iv-p18.1"></span>ἐπιχορηγία is employed to mean the
furnishing of what is wanting,  <span id="fr_78"></span>[79](#fn_78)
just as the Spirit of God pours into us everything of which we are
destitute.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p20"></span>He calls him, too, the *Spirit of Jesus
Christ*, to intimate, that if we are Christians, he is common to all of
us, inasmuch as he was poured upon him with all fullness, that,
according to the measure of his grace, he might give out, so far as is
expedient, to each of his members.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p21"></span><span id="iv.ii.iv-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p22"></span>**20** *According to my expectation*.
Should any one object, “From what do you derive that knowledge?” he
answers, “From hope.” For as it is certain that God does not by any
means design to frustrate our hope, hope itself ought not to be
wavering. Let then the pious reader carefully observe this adverb <span
id="iv.ii.iv-p22.1"></span>*secundum*, (*according to*,) that he may be
fully assured in his own mind, that it is impossible but that the Lord
will fulfill our expectation, inasmuch as it is founded on his own word.
Now, he has promised that he will never be wanting to us even in the
midst of all tortures, if we are at any time called to make confession
of his name. Let, therefore, all the pious entertain hope after Paul’s
example, and they will not be put to shame.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p23"></span>*With all confidence* We see that, in
cherishing hope, he does not give indulgence to carnal desires, but
places his hope in subjection to the promise of God. “*Christ*,” says
he, “*will be magnified in my body, whether by life or by death* ” By
making express mention, however, of the body, he intimates that, amongst
the conflicts of the present life, he is in no degree doubtful as to the
issue, for we are assured as to this by God. If, accordingly, giving
ourselves up to the good pleasure of God, and having in our life the
same object in view as Paul had, we expect, in whatever way it may be, a
prosperous issue, we shall no longer have occasion to fear lest any
adversity should befall us; for if we live and die to him, we are his in
life and in death. (<span id="iv.ii.iv-p23.1"></span>[Ro
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#008)<span
id="iv.ii.iv-p23.1"></span>.) He expresses the way in which *Christ will
be magnified* — by full assurance. Hence it follows, that through our
fault he is cast down and lowered, so far as it is in our power to do
so, when we give way through fear. Do not those then feel ashamed who
reckon it a light offense to tremble,  <span
id="fr_79"></span>[80](#fn_79) when called to make confession of the
truth? But how much ashamed ought those to feel, who are so shamelessly
impudent as to have the hardihood even to excuse renunciation?

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p25"></span>He adds, *as always*, that they may
confirm their faith from past experience of the grace of God. Thus, in
<span id="iv.ii.iv-p25.1"></span>[Ro
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#004)<span id="iv.ii.iv-p25.1"></span>,
he says, *Experience begets hope.*

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p26"></span><span id="iv.ii.iv-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p27"></span>**21** *For to me to live*. Interpreters
have hitherto, in my opinion, given a wrong rendering and exposition to
this passage; for they make this distinction, that Christ was life to
Paul, and death was gain. I, on the other hand, make Christ the subject
of discourse in both clauses, so that he is declared to be gain in him
both in life and in death; for it is customary with the Greeks to leave
the word <span id="iv.ii.iv-p27.2"></span>πρός to be understood. Besides
that this meaning is less forced, it also corresponds better with the
foregoing statement, and contains more complete doctrine. He declares
that it is indifferent to him, and is all one, whether he lives or dies,
because, having Christ, he reckons both to be *gain*. And assuredly it
is Christ alone that makes us happy both in death and in life;
otherwise, if death is miserable, life is in no degree happier; so that
it is difficult to determine whether it is more advantageous to live or
to die *out of Christ*. On the other hand, let Christ be with us, and he
will bless our life as well as our death, so that both will be happy and
desirable for us.

<span id="iv.ii.v"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.v-p1"></span><span id="iv.ii.v-p1.1"></span>[Philippians
1:22-26](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#022)<span id="iv.ii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.v-p2"></span>**22**. But if I live in the flesh, this
*is* the fruit of my labour: yet what I shall choose I wot not.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p3"></span>**22**. Quodsi vivere in carne operae
pretium mihi est, etiam quid eligam ignoro.  <span
id="fr_80"></span>[81](#fn_80)

<span id="iv.ii.v-p5"></span>**23**. For I am in a strait betwixt two,
having a desire to depart, and to be with Christ; which is far better:

<span id="iv.ii.v-p6"></span>**23**. Coarctor enim ex duobus cupiens
dissolvi et esse cum Christo: multo enim hoc melius.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p7"></span>**24**. Nevertheless to abide in the flesh
*is* more needful for you.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p8"></span>**24**. Manere vero in carne, magis
necessarium propter vos.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p9"></span>**25**. And having this confidence, I know
that I shall abide and continue with you all for your furtherance and
joy of faith;

<span id="iv.ii.v-p10"></span>**25**. Atque hoc confisus novi, quod
manebo et permanebo cum omnibus vobis, in vestrum profectum et gaudium
fidei,

<span id="iv.ii.v-p11"></span>**26**. That your rejoicing may be more
abundant in Jesus Christ for me by my coming to you again.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p12"></span>**26**. Ut gloriatio vestra exsuperet in
Christo Iesu de me, per meum rursus adventum ad vos.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p13"></span> 

<span id="iv.ii.v-p14"></span><span id="iv.ii.v-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.v-p15"></span>**22** *But if to live in the flesh*. As
persons in despair feel in perplexity as to whether they ought to
prolong their life any farther in miseries, or to terminate their
troubles by death, so Paul, on the other hand, says that he is, in a
spirit of contentment, so well prepared for death or for life, because
the condition of believers, both in the one case and in the other, is
blessed, so that he is at a loss which to choose. *If it is worth
while;* that is, “If I have reason to believe that there will be greater
advantage from my life than from my death, I do not see which of them I
ought to prefer.” *To live in the flesh*, is an expression which he has
made use of in contempt, from comparing it with a better life.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p16"></span><span id="iv.ii.v-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.v-p17"></span>**23** *For I am in a strait* Paul did not
desire to live with any other object in view that that of promoting the
glory of Christ, and doing good to the brethren. Hence he does not
reckon that he has any other advantage from living than the welfare of
the brethren. But so far as concerns himself personally, it were, he
acknowledges, better for him to die soon, because he would be *with
Christ.* By his choice, however, he shews what ardent love glowed in his
breast. There is nothing said here as to earthly advantages, but as to
spiritual benefit, which is on good grounds supremely desirable in the
view of the pious. Paul, however, as if forgetful of himself, does not
merely hold himself undetermined, lest he should be swayed by a regard
to his own benefit rather than that of the Philippians, but at length
concludes that a regard to them preponderates in his mind. And assuredly
this is in reality to live and die to Christ, when, with indifference as
to ourselves, we allow ourselves to be carried and borne away
withersoever Christ calls us.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p18"></span>*Having a desire to be set free and to be
with Christ* These two things must be read in connection. For death of
itself will never be desired, because such a desire is at variance with
natural feeling, but is desired for some particular reason, or with a
view to some other end. Persons in despair have recourse to it from
having become weary of life; believers, on the other hand, willingly
hasten forward to it, because it is a deliverance from the bondage of
sin, and an introduction into the kingdom of heaven. What Paul now says
is this; “I desire to die, because I will, by this means, come into
immediate connection with Christ.” In the mean time, believers do not
cease to regard death with horror, but when they turn their eyes to that
life which follows death, they easily overcome all dread by means of
that consolation. Unquestionably, every one that believes in Christ
ought to be so courageous as to *lift up his head* on mention being made
of death, delighted to have intimation of his *redemption*. (<span
id="iv.ii.v-p18.1"></span>[Lu
21:28](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#028)<span
id="iv.ii.v-p18.1"></span>.) From this we see how many are Christians
only in name, since the greater part, on hearing mention made of death,
are not merely alarmed, but are rendered almost lifeless through fear,
as though they had never heard a single word respecting Christ. O the
worth and value of a good conscience! Now faith is the foundation of a
good conscience; nay more, it is itself goodness of conscience.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p19"></span>*To be set free* This form of expression
is to be observed. Profane persons speak of death as the destruction of
man, as if he altogether perished. Paul here reminds us, that death is
the separation of the soul from the body. And this he expresses more
fully immediately afterwards, explaining as to what condition awaits
believers after death — that of *dwelling with Christ* We are *with
Christ* even in this life, inasmuch as the *kingdom of God is within
us*, (<span id="iv.ii.v-p19.1"></span>[Lu
17:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#021)<span
id="iv.ii.v-p19.1"></span>,) and *Christ dwells in us by faith,* (<span
id="iv.ii.v-p19.2"></span>[Eph
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#017)<span id="iv.ii.v-p19.2"></span>,)
and has promised that he *will be with us even unto the end of the
world*, (<span id="iv.ii.v-p19.3"></span>[Mt
28:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#020)<span
id="iv.ii.v-p19.3"></span>,) but that presence we enjoy only in hope.
Hence as to our feeling, we are said to be at present at a *distance*
from him. See <span id="iv.ii.v-p19.4"></span>[2Co
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#006)<span id="iv.ii.v-p19.4"></span>.
This passage is of use for setting aside the mad fancy of those who
dream that souls sleep when separated from the body, for Paul openly
declares that we enjoy Christ’s presence on being set free from the
body.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p20"></span><span id="iv.ii.v-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.v-p21"></span>**25** *And having this confidence*. Some,
reckoning it an inconsistent thing that the Apostle  <span
id="fr_81"></span>[82](#fn_81) should acknowledge himself to have been
disappointed of his expectation, are of opinion that he was afterwards
freed from bonds, and went over many countries of the world. Their
fears, however, as to this are groundless, for the saints are accustomed
to regulate their expectations according to the word of God, so as not
to promise themselves more than God has promised. Thus, when they have a
sure token of God’s will, they in that case place their reliance also
upon a sure persuasion, which admits of no hesitation. Of this nature is
a persuasion respecting a perpetual remission of sins, respecting the
aid of the Spirit for the grace of final perseverance, (as it is
called,) and respecting the resurrection of the flesh. Of this nature,
also, was the assurance of the Prophets respecting their prophecies. As
to other things, they expect nothing except conditionally, and hence
they subject all events to the providence of God, who, they allow, sees
more distinctly than they. To *remain*, means here, to stay for a little
while: to *continue*, means, to remain for a long time.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p23"></span><span id="iv.ii.v-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.v-p24"></span>**26** *That your glorying*. The
expression which he employs, <span id="iv.ii.v-p24.1"></span>ἐν ἐμόι, I
have rendered <span id="iv.ii.v-p24.2"></span>*de me* *(as to me,)*
because the preposition is made use of twice, but in different senses.
No one assuredly will deny that I have faithfully brought out Paul’s
mind. The rendering given by some — <span id="iv.ii.v-p24.3"></span>*per
Christum, (through Christ,)* I do not approve of. For *in Christ* is
employed in place of <span id="iv.ii.v-p24.4"></span>*Secundum Christum,
(According to Christ,)* or <span id="iv.ii.v-p24.5"></span>*Christiane,
(Christianly,)* to intimate that it was a holy kind of *glorying*. For
otherwise we are commanded to *glory in God alone*. (<span
id="iv.ii.v-p24.6"></span>[1Co
1:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#031)<span id="iv.ii.v-p24.6"></span>.)
Hence malevolent persons might meet Paul with the objection, How is it
allowable for the Philippians to glory as to thee? He anticipates this
calumny by saying that they will do this *according to Christ* —
glorying in a servant of Christ, with a view to the glory of his Lord,
and that with an eye to the doctrine rather than to the individual, and
in opposition to the false apostles, just as David, by comparing himself
with hypocrites, boasts of his righteousness. (<span
id="iv.ii.v-p24.7"></span>[Ps 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#008)<span
id="iv.ii.v-p24.7"></span>.)

<span id="iv.ii.vi"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p1"></span><span
id="iv.ii.vi-p1.1"></span>[Philippians
1:27-30](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#027)<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p2"></span>**27**. Only let your conversation be as
it becometh the gospel of Christ: that whether I come and see you, or
else be absent, I may hear of your affairs, that ye stand fast in one
spirit, with one mind striving together for the faith of the gospel;

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p3"></span>**27**. Tantum digne Evangelio Christi
conversamini: ut sive veniens videam vos, sive absens, audiam de vobis,
quod stetis in uno spiritu, una anima, concertantes fide Evangelii.

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p4"></span>**28**. And in nothing terrified by your
adversaries: which is to them an evident token of perdition, but to you
of salvation, and that of God.

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p5"></span>**28**. Nec ulla in re terreamini ab
adversariis, quae illis est demonstratio exitii: vobis autem salutis,
idque a Deo.

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p6"></span>**29**. For unto you it is given in the
behalf of Christ, not only to believe on him, but also to suffer for his
sake;

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p7"></span>**29**. Quia vobis donatum est pro
Christo, non tantum ut in illum credatis, sed etiam ut pro ipso
patiamini:

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p8"></span>**30**. Having the same conflict which ye
saw in me, and now hear *to be* in me.

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p9"></span>**30**. Idem habentes certamen, quale
vidistis in me, et nunc auditis de me.

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p10"></span> 

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p11"></span><span id="iv.ii.vi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p12"></span>**27** *Only in a manner worthy of the
gospel*. We make use of this form of expression, when we are inclined to
pass on to a new subject. Thus it is as though he had said, “But as for
me, the Lord will provide, but as for you, etc., whatever may take place
as to me, let it be your care, nevertheless, to go forward in the right
course.” When he speaks of a pure and honorable conversation as being
worthy of the gospel, he intimates, on the other hand, that those who
live otherwise do injustice to the gospel.

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p13"></span>*That whether I come* As the Greek phrase
made use of by Paul is elliptical, I have made use of <span
id="iv.ii.vi-p13.1"></span>*videam, (I see,)* instead of <span
id="iv.ii.vi-p13.2"></span>*videns* *(seeing.)* If this does not appear
satisfactory, you may supply the principal verb <span
id="iv.ii.vi-p13.3"></span>*Intelligam, (I may learn,)* in this sense:
“Whether, when I shall come and see you, or whether I shall, when
absent, hear respecting your condition, I may learn in both ways, both
by being present and by receiving intelligence, that ye *stand in one
spirit.*” We need not, however, feel anxiety as to particular terms,
when the meaning is evident.

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p14"></span>*Stand in one spirit* This, certainly, is
one of the main excellences of the Church, and hence this is one means
of preserving it in a sound state, inasmuch as it is torn to pieces by
dissensions. But although Paul was desirous by means of this antidote to
provide against novel and strange doctrines, yet he requires a twofold
unity — of *spirit* and *soul*. The *first* is, that we have like views;
the *second*, that we be united in heart. For when these two terms are
connected together, <span id="iv.ii.vi-p14.1"></span>*spiritus*
*(spirit)* denotes the *understanding*, while <span
id="iv.ii.vi-p14.2"></span>*anima* *(soul)* denotes the *will*. Farther,
agreement of views comes first in order; and then from it springs union
of inclination.

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p15"></span>*Striving together for the faith* This is
the strongest bond of concord, when we have to fight together under the
same banner, for this has often been the occasion of reconciling even
the greatest enemies. Hence, in order that he may confirm the more the
unity that existed among the Philippians, he calls them to notice that
they are fellow-soldiers, who, having a common enemy and a common
warfare, ought to have their minds united together in a holy agreement.
The expression which Paul has made use of in the Greek (<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p15.1"></span>συναθλοῦντες τὣ πίστει) is ambiguous. The old
interpreter renders it <span id="iv.ii.vi-p15.2"></span>*Collaborantes
fidei, (laboring together with the faith.)*  <span
id="fr_82"></span>[83](#fn_82) Erasmus renders it <span
id="iv.ii.vi-p16.1"></span>*Adiuvantes fidem, (Helping the faith,)* as
if meaning, that they gave *help* to the *faith* to the utmost of their
power. As, however, the dative in Greek is made use of instead of the
ablative of instrumentality, (that language having no ablative,) I have
no doubt that the Apostle’s meaning is this: “Let the faith of the
gospel unite you together, more especially as that is a common armory
against one and the same enemy.” In this way the particle <span
id="iv.ii.vi-p16.2"></span>σύν, which others refer to *faith*, I take as
referring to the Philippians, and with greater propriety, if I am not
mistaken. In the first place, every one is aware how effectual an
inducement it is to concord, when we have to maintain a conflict
together; and farther, we know that in the spiritual warfare we are
armed with the *shield of faith*, (<span id="iv.ii.vi-p16.3"></span>[Eph
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#016)<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p16.3"></span>,) for repelling the enemy; nay, more, faith
is both our panoply and our victory. Hence he added this clause, that he
might shew what is the end of a pious connection. The wicked, too,
conspire together for evil, but their agreement is accursed: let us,
therefore, contend with one mind under the banner of faith.

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p17"></span><span id="iv.ii.vi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p18"></span>**28** *And in nothing terrified*. The
second thing which he recommends to the Philippians is fortitude of
mind,  <span id="fr_83"></span>[84](#fn_83) that they may not be thrown
into confusion by the rage of their adversaries. At that time the most
cruel persecutions raged almost everywhere, because Satan strove with
all his might to impede the commencement of the gospel, and was the more
enraged in proportion as Christ put forth powerfully the grace of his
Spirit. He exhorts, therefore, the Philippians to stand forward
undaunted, and not be thrown into alarm.

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p20"></span>*Which is to them a manifest proof*. This
is the proper meaning of the Greek word, and there was no consideration
that made it necessary for others to render it *cause.* For the wicked,
when they wage war against the Lord, do already by a trial-fight, as it
were, give a token of their ruin, and the more fiercely they insult over
the pious, the more do they prepare themselves for ruin. The Scripture,
assuredly, nowhere teaches, that the afflictions which the saints endure
from the wicked are the *cause* of their salvation, but Paul in another
instance, too, speaks of them as a *manifest token* or *proof*, (<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p20.1"></span>[2Th
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#005)<span id="iv.ii.vi-p20.1"></span>,)
and instead of <span id="iv.ii.vi-p20.2"></span>ἔνδειξιν, which we have
here, he in that passage makes use of the term <span
id="iv.ii.vi-p20.3"></span>ἔνδειγμα  <span
id="fr_84"></span>[85](#fn_84) This, therefore, is a choice consolation,
that when we are assailed and harassed by our enemies, we have an
evidence of our salvation.  <span id="fr_85"></span>[86](#fn_85) For
persecutions are in a manner seals of adoption to the children of God,
if they endure them with fortitude and patience: the wicked give a token
of their condemnation, because they stumble against a stone by which
they shall be bruised to pieces. (<span id="iv.ii.vi-p22.2"></span>[Mt
21:44](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#044)<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p22.2"></span>.)

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p23"></span>*And that from God*. This is restricted
to the last clause, that a taste of the grace of God may allay the
bitterness of the cross. No one will naturally perceive the cross a
token or evidence of salvation, for they are things that are contrary in
appearance. Hence Paul calls the attention of the Philippians to another
consideration — that God by his blessing turns into an occasion of
welfare things that might otherwise seem to render us miserable. He
proves it from this, that the endurance of the cross is the gift of God.
Now it is certain, that all the gifts of God are salutary to us. *To
you*, says he, *it is given, not only to believe in Christ, but also to
suffer for him.* Hence even the sufferings themselves are evidences of
the grace of God; and, since it is so, you have from this source a token
of salvation. Oh, if this persuasion were effectually inwrought in our
minds — that persecutions  <span id="fr_86"></span>[87](#fn_86) are to
be reckoned among God’s benefits, what progress would be made in the
doctrine of piety!  <span id="fr_87"></span>[88](#fn_87) And yet, what
is more certain, than that it is the highest honor that is conferred
upon us by Divine grace, that we suffer for his name either reproach, or
imprisonment, or miseries, or tortures, or even death, for in that case
he adorns us with his marks of distinction.  <span
id="fr_88"></span>[89](#fn_88) But more will be found that will rather
bid God retire with gifts of that nature, than embrace with alacrity the
cross when it is presented to them. Alas, then, for our stupidity!
 <span id="fr_89"></span>[90](#fn_89)

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p28"></span><span id="iv.ii.vi-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p29"></span>**29.** *To believe*. He wisely conjoins
faith with the cross by an inseparable connection, that the Philippians
may know that they have been called to the faith of Christ on this
condition — that they endure persecutions on his account, as though he
had said that their adoption can no more be separated from the cross,
than Christ can be torn asunder from himself. Here Paul clearly
testifies, that faith, as well as constancy in enduring persecutions,
 <span id="fr_90"></span>[91](#fn_90) is an unmerited gift of God. And
certainly the knowledge of God is a wisdom that is too high for our
attaining it by our own acuteness, and our weakness shews itself in
daily instances in our own experience, when God withdraws his hand for a
little while. That he may intimate the more distinctly that both are
unmerited, he says expressly — for Christ’s sake, or at least that they
are given to us on the ground of Christ’s grace; by which he excludes
every idea of merit.

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p31"></span>This passage is also at variance with the
doctrine of the schoolmen, in maintaining that gifts of grace latterly
conferred are rewards of our merit, on the ground of our having made a
right use of those which had been previously bestowed. I do not deny,
indeed, that God rewards the right use of his gifts of grace by
bestowing grace more largely upon us, provided only you do not place
merit, as they do, in opposition to his unmerited liberality and the
merit of Christ.

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p32"></span><span id="iv.ii.vi-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p33"></span>**30** *Having the same conflict*. He
confirms, also, by his own example what he had said, and this adds no
little authority to his doctrine. By the same means, too, he shews them,
that there is no reason why they should feel troubled on account of his
bonds, when they behold the issue of the conflict.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_22"></span>[23](cc42005.htm#fr_22) <span
id="iv.ii.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.i-p8"></span> “<span id="iv.ii.i-p8.1"></span>Toutes les
fois que i’ay souuenance de vous, *ou*, auec entiere souuenance de
vous;” — “Every time that I have remembrance of you, *or*, with constant
remembrance of you.”

<span id="fn_23"></span>[24](cc42005.htm#fr_23) <span
id="iv.ii.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.i-p18"></span> “<span id="iv.ii.i-p18.1"></span>Sans se
desbaucher;” — “Without corrupting themselves.”

<span id="fn_24"></span>[25](cc42005.htm#fr_24) <span
id="iv.ii.i-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.i-p20"></span> “*Evagrius*, a native of Antioch, and a
presbyter apparently of the Church of Antioch. He traveled into the west
of Europe, and was acquainted with Jerome, who describes him as a man
<span id="iv.ii.i-p20.1"></span>*acris ac ferventis ingenii*, (*of a
keen and warm temper.*)” — *Smith’s* Dictionary of Greek Biography and
Mythology. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_25"></span>[26](cc42005.htm#fr_25) <span
id="iv.ii.i-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.i-p21"></span> The reader will find both of the passages
referred to quoted at full length in the *Institutes*, vol. iii. pp. 75,
76. — Ed.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[27](cc42005.htm#fr_26) <span
id="iv.ii.i-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.i-p22"></span> “<span id="iv.ii.i-p22.1"></span>Depuis
les temps de l’Apostre;” — “After the times of the Apostle.”

<span id="fn_27"></span>[28](cc42005.htm#fr_27) <span
id="iv.ii.i-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.i-p23"></span> “<span
id="iv.ii.i-p23.1"></span>Ordonnoyent conducteur de leur congregation;”
— “Appointed leader of their congregation.”

<span id="fn_28"></span>[29](cc42005.htm#fr_28) <span
id="iv.ii.i-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.i-p24"></span> “<span id="iv.ii.i-p24.1"></span>De
chacun corps d’Eglise en particulier;” — “Of each body of the Church in
particular.”

<span id="fn_29"></span>[30](cc42005.htm#fr_29) <span
id="iv.ii.i-p24.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.i-p25"></span> “<span id="iv.ii.i-p25.1"></span>Tous
prestres et pasteurs;” — “All priests and pastors.”

<span id="fn_30"></span>[31](cc42005.htm#fr_30) <span
id="iv.ii.i-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.i-p29"></span> “<span id="iv.ii.i-p29.1"></span>Vne
protestation, qu’il est ioyeux de leur bien;” — “A protestation, that he
is delighted on account of their welfare.”

<span id="fn_31"></span>[32](cc42005.htm#fr_31) <span
id="iv.ii.i-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.i-p34"></span> “<span id="iv.ii.i-p34.1"></span>Qui se
reuoltent ou defaillent en chemin par legerete;” — “Who revolt or fall
back in the way through fickleness.”

<span id="fn_32"></span>[33](cc42005.htm#fr_32) <span
id="iv.ii.i-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.i-p37"></span> “<span id="iv.ii.i-p37.1"></span>Qu’il se
confioit d’eux qu’ils perseuereroyent de reste de leur vie;” — “That he
had confidence in them that they would persevere during the remainder of
their life.”

<span id="fn_33"></span>[34](cc42005.htm#fr_33) <span
id="iv.ii.i-p37.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.i-p38"></span> “<span id="iv.ii.i-p38.1"></span>Entre
tant d’empeschemens, mauuais passages et fascheuses rencontres, voire
mesme des dangers de tomber tout a plat en perdition;” — “Amidst so many
impediments, hard passes, and disagreeable collisions, nay, even so many
hazards of falling headlong into perdition.”

<span id="fn_34"></span>[35](cc42005.htm#fr_34) <span
id="iv.ii.i-p38.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.i-p39"></span> See CALVIN on the Corinthians, vol. 2, p.
121.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[36](cc42005.htm#fr_35) <span
id="iv.ii.i-p39.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.i-p40"></span> “<span id="iv.ii.i-p40.1"></span>Il ne se
lasse point en bien faisant, et son thresor ne diminue point;” — “He
does not weary himself in doing good, and does not diminish his
treasure.”

<span id="fn_36"></span>[37](cc42005.htm#fr_36) <span
id="iv.ii.i-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.i-p42"></span> “<span id="iv.ii.i-p42.1"></span>Enuieux
et desdaigneux;” — “Envious and disdainful.”

<span id="fn_37"></span>[38](cc42005.htm#fr_37) <span
id="iv.ii.i-p42.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.i-p43"></span> “<span id="iv.ii.i-p43.1"></span>Pour
recognoistre le bien que Dieu leur a fait, et n’estre point ingrats
enuers luy;” — “That we may acknowledge the kindness which God has shewn
them, and may not be ungrateful to him.”

<span id="fn_38"></span>[39](cc42005.htm#fr_38) <span
id="iv.ii.i-p44.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.i-p45"></span> “<span id="iv.ii.i-p45.1"></span>Extra
teli jactum“ — Virgil makes use of a corresponding phrase — “<span
id="iv.ii.i-p45.2"></span>intra jactum teli;” — “Within the reach of a
dart.” Virg. Æn. 11:608. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_39"></span>[40](cc42005.htm#fr_39) <span
id="iv.ii.i-p45.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.i-p46"></span> “<span id="iv.ii.i-p46.1"></span>En voye
de proufiter, ou auancer;” — “In the way of making progress, or
advancement.”

<span id="fn_40"></span>[41](cc42005.htm#fr_40) <span
id="iv.ii.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p6"></span> “<span id="iv.ii.ii-p6.1"></span>Aux
entrailles de Jesus Christ, *ou*, Es cordiale affection de Jesus
Christ;” — “In the bowels of Jesus Christ, *or*, In the cordial
affection of Jesus Christ.”

<span id="fn_41"></span>[42](cc42005.htm#fr_41) <span
id="iv.ii.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p16"></span> “<span
id="iv.ii.ii-p16.1"></span>Maigres et desdaigneux;” — “Miserable and
disdainful.”

<span id="fn_42"></span>[43](cc42005.htm#fr_42) <span
id="iv.ii.ii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p17"></span> “<span id="iv.ii.ii-p17.1"></span>Raison
mesme et equite luy disent;” — “Even reason and equity tell him.”

<span id="fn_43"></span>[44](cc42005.htm#fr_43) <span
id="iv.ii.ii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p22"></span> “<span id="iv.ii.ii-p22.1"></span>Ils
seroyent si constans et fermes, qu’ils ne pourroyent estre aiseement
induits a se reuolter laschement et desloyaument;” — “They would be so
steadfast and firm, that they could not be easily induced to revolt in a
cowardly and disloyal manner.”

<span id="fn_44"></span>[45](cc42005.htm#fr_44) <span
id="iv.ii.ii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p24"></span> <span id="iv.ii.ii-p24.1"></span>Sanctus
at ille cruor, divini assertor honoris,  
<span id="iv.ii.ii-p24.3"></span>Gignendam ad sobolem seminis instar
erit

<span id="fn_45"></span>[46](cc42005.htm#fr_45) <span
id="iv.ii.ii-p24.4"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p25"></span> “<span id="iv.ii.ii-p25.1"></span>A
l’imitation duquel au chant de victoire composé par moy en Latin en
l’honneur de Jesus Christ, 1541, et lequel depuis a este reduit en rime
Francois, i’ay dit: —

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p26"></span>‘<span id="iv.ii.ii-p26.1"></span>Or le
sang precieux par martyre espandu  
Pour auoir a son Dieu tesmoignage rendu,  
A l’Eglise de Dieu seruira de semence  
Dont enfans sorteront remplis d’intelligence.’“

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p27"></span>“In imitation of which, in the song of
victory composed by me in Latin in honor of Jesus Christ, in 1541, and
which has since that time been rendered into French rhyme, I have said:
—

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p28"></span>‘But the precious blood shed by martyrs  
That it might be as a testimony rendered to its God,  
Will in the Church of God serve as seed  
From which children shall come forth, filled with understanding.’“

<span id="fn_46"></span>[47](cc42005.htm#fr_46) <span
id="iv.ii.ii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p32"></span> *Beza*, when commenting on the
expression, *in the bowels of Jesus Christ*, observes, “<span
id="iv.ii.ii-p32.1"></span>Alibi solet dicere, *In Christo*. Ut autem
significet ex quo fonte promanet affectus iste, et quo etiam feratur,
additum *visceribus* nomen magnum pondus addit sententiæ, ut intimus
amor significetur. Solent enim Hebraei <span
id="iv.ii.ii-p32.2"></span>רחמים, *rachamim*, <span
id="iv.ii.ii-p32.3"></span>id est, *viscera* omnes teneros ac veluti
maternos affectus vocare;” — “He is accustomed in other cases to say,
*In Christ*. But to intimate from what fountain that affection flows,
and in what direction also it tends, the addition of the term *bowels*
adds great weight to the statement, so as to express intimate affection.
For the Hebrews are accustomed to employ the term <span
id="iv.ii.ii-p32.4"></span>רחמים *rachamim*, that is, *bowels*, to
denote all tender and as it were motherly affections.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_47"></span>[48](cc42005.htm#fr_47) <span
id="iv.ii.ii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p35"></span> “The word rendered *judgment* is capable
of being rendered *sense* (<span id="iv.ii.ii-p35.1"></span>πάσὟ
αἰσθήσει) *in all sense.* ‘I pray that you may have your spiritual
senses in excerise — that you may have a judicious distinguishing
sense.’ For what? Why, ‘that ye may approve things that are excellent,’
— so it follows, or, as the words there may be read, to ‘distinguish
things that differ.’“ — *Howe’s* Works, (Lond. 1822,) vol. 5, p. 145. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_48"></span>[49](cc42005.htm#fr_48) <span
id="iv.ii.ii-p39.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p40"></span> “<span id="iv.ii.ii-p40.1"></span>Par
ignorance et faute de prudence;” — “Through ignorance and want of
prudence.”

<span id="fn_49"></span>[50](cc42005.htm#fr_49) <span
id="iv.ii.ii-p43.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p44"></span> “<span id="iv.ii.ii-p44.1"></span>Bons
et aimables;” — “Good and amiable.”

<span id="fn_50"></span>[51](cc42005.htm#fr_50) <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p17"></span> “<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p17.1"></span>Estans estonnez comme d’vne chose nouuelle
et non ouye;” — “Being astonished as at a thing new and unheard of.”

<span id="fn_51"></span>[52](cc42005.htm#fr_51) <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p18"></span> “<span id="iv.ii.iii-p18.1"></span>Et
faux apostres;” — “And false apostles.”

<span id="fn_52"></span>[53](cc42005.htm#fr_52) <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p19"></span> “<span id="iv.ii.iii-p19.1"></span>En
prenant ceste dangereuse accointance de S. Paul;” — “By contracting this
dangerous acquaintance with St. Paul.”

<span id="fn_53"></span>[54](cc42005.htm#fr_53) <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p20"></span> “<span id="iv.ii.iii-p20.1"></span>Afin
qu’ils ne soyent point destournex;” — “That they may not be turned
aside.”

<span id="fn_54"></span>[55](cc42005.htm#fr_54) <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p23"></span> “<span id="iv.ii.iii-p23.1"></span>Ses
liens ont este rendus celebres, et ont excellement serui a auancer la
gloire de Christ;” — “His bonds had become celebrated, and had admirably
contributed to advance the glory of Christ.”

<span id="fn_55"></span>[56](cc42005.htm#fr_55) <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p23.4"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p24"></span> “<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p24.1"></span>Pource qu’il entend que le bruit qui auoit
este de ses liens, auoit donné grand bruit a l’Euangile;” — “Because he
means that the fame, which had arisen from his bonds, had given great
fame to the gospel.”

<span id="fn_56"></span>[57](cc42005.htm#fr_56) <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p25"></span> “<span id="iv.ii.iii-p25.1"></span>Dieu
a aneanti les efforts malicieux de Satan, et a frustré les meschans de
leur attente;” — “God has made void the malicious efforts of Satan, and
has disappointed the wicked of their expectation.”

<span id="fn_57"></span>[58](cc42005.htm#fr_57) <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p25.4"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p26"></span> Our author has most probably in view an
expression which occurs in the writings of *Quinctilian*, (Instit.
Orator., lib. 8, 2, 8,) — “<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p26.1"></span>tabernaculum ducis Augustale;” — (“a
general’s tent is called the Augustal.”) In the best editions of
Quinctilian, however, the reading of <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p26.2"></span>*Augurale*, as synonymous with <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p26.3"></span>*auguraculum*, or <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p26.4"></span>*auguratorium*; — (*an apartment for the
augur’s taking omens.*) — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_58"></span>[59](cc42005.htm#fr_58) <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p26.7"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p27"></span> The dictator is called by *Livey*,
“<span id="iv.ii.iii-p27.1"></span>*praetor maximus;*” — “*the highest
praetor.*” — (*Liv*. 7:3.) — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_59"></span>[60](cc42005.htm#fr_59) <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p27.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p28"></span> “<span id="iv.ii.iii-p28.1"></span>La
tente ou du consul, ou de celuy qui estoit chef de l’armee, quelque nom
qu’on luy donast;” — “The tent of the consul, or of the person who was
head of the army, whatever name was applied to him.”

<span id="fn_60"></span>[61](cc42005.htm#fr_60) <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p29"></span> “<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p29.1"></span>*Praeibat* ” — There is manifestly an
allusion here to the etymology of praetor, as being derived from
*praeire*, to *go before*, or *preside*. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_61"></span>[62](cc42005.htm#fr_61) <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p30"></span> “At Rome it “(the term <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p30.1"></span>*praetorium*)” signified the public hall
where causes were tried by the praetor; but more usually it denoted the
camp or quarters of the praetorian cohorts without the city ..... The
name of <span id="iv.ii.iii-p30.2"></span>*praetorium* was, in the
provinces, given to the palace of the governors, both because they
administered justice, and had their guards stationed in their residence.
Hence it is inferred that, although the Apostle was at Rome when he
wrote this, and although the circumstances to which he refers occurred
in that city, yet, writing to persons residing in the provinces, he uses
the word *praetorium* in the provincial sense, and means by it the
*emperor’s palace*.” — *Illustrated Commentary*. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_62"></span>[63](cc42005.htm#fr_62) <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p30.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p31"></span> “<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p31.1"></span>Depuis que les empereurs usurperent la
monarchie;” — “From the time that the emperors usurped the monarchy.”

<span id="fn_63"></span>[64](cc42005.htm#fr_63) <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p31.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p32"></span> “<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p32.1"></span>Pretoire signifioit aussi le lieu ou le
preteur tenoit la cour, et exerçoit sa iurisdiction;” — “The praetorium
signified also the place where the praetor held his court, and exercised
jurisdiction.”

<span id="fn_64"></span>[65](cc42005.htm#fr_64) <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p35"></span> “<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p35.1"></span>Confiance et asseurance;” — “Confidence and
assurance.”

<span id="fn_65"></span>[66](cc42005.htm#fr_65) <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p35.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p36"></span> “<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p36.1"></span>Courageux et inuincibles;” — “Courageous and
unconquerable.”

<span id="fn_66"></span>[67](cc42005.htm#fr_66) <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p36.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p37"></span> “<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p37.1"></span>Estans assuerez sur ceste main et puissance
du Seigneur;” — “Confidently relying upon this hand and power of the
Lord.”

<span id="fn_67"></span>[68](cc42005.htm#fr_67) <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p42"></span> “<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p42.1"></span>Pource que leur zele n’estoit pas pur;” —
“Because their zeal was not pure.”

<span id="fn_68"></span>[69](cc42005.htm#fr_68) <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p42.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p43"></span> “<span id="iv.ii.iii-p43.1"></span>Il
se pent bien faire, que celuy qui enseignera vne doctrine pure et saine,
aura toutesfois vne mauvaise affection;” — “It may quite well happen,
that the man who teaches pure and sound doctrine, will have,
nevertheless, an evil disposition.”

<span id="fn_69"></span>[70](cc42005.htm#fr_69) <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p44.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p45"></span> “<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p45.1"></span>Certes le sainct Apostre ne dit rien yci;” —
“Certainly the holy Apostle says nothing here.”

<span id="fn_70"></span>[71](cc42005.htm#fr_70) <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p45.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p46"></span> “<span id="iv.ii.iii-p46.1"></span>Il
ne se faut esbahir si les faux-freres prenent occasion de l’evangile, et
s’ils s’en forgent des bastons pour tormenter les bons et fideles
pasteurs;” — “It ought not to appear surprising, if false brethren take
occasion from the gospel, and contrive weapons for themselves for
torturing good and faithful pastors.”

<span id="fn_71"></span>[72](cc42005.htm#fr_71) <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p46.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p47"></span> “<span id="iv.ii.iii-p47.1"></span>Mais
voyla: il leur sembloit que la doctrine consistoit ou tomboit bas;” —
“But mark! it seemed to them that doctrine stood or fell.”

<span id="fn_72"></span>[73](cc42005.htm#fr_72) <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p47.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p48"></span> “<span id="iv.ii.iii-p48.1"></span>Que
si c’estoit d’autres que Juifs, ascauoir quelques enuieux de Sainct
Paul;” — “But if there were other than Jews — some that were envious of
St. Paul.”

<span id="fn_73"></span>[74](cc42005.htm#fr_73) <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p50.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p51"></span> “<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p51.1"></span>Estans en quelque necessite;” — “When they
are in any emergency.”

<span id="fn_74"></span>[75](cc42005.htm#fr_74) <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p51.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p52"></span> “<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p52.1"></span>*Praevaricatores* ” The term is employed by
classical writers in the sense of betraying the cause of one’s client,
and by neglect or collusion assisting his opponent. See Quinct. 9:2. —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[76](cc42005.htm#fr_75) <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p52.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p53"></span> “<span id="iv.ii.iii-p53.1"></span>Si
nous nous entendons auec la partie aduerse d’iceluy;” — “If we should
connect ourselves with the party opposed to him.”

<span id="fn_76"></span>[77](cc42005.htm#fr_76) <span
id="iv.ii.iv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p13"></span> “<span
id="iv.ii.iv-p13.1"></span>Pouuoit diminuer l’authorite de la doctrine;”
— “Might diminish the authority of the doctrine.”

<span id="fn_77"></span>[78](cc42005.htm#fr_77) <span
id="iv.ii.iv-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p14"></span> Our Author appears to refer here to
Peter Carolus, of whom the reader will find particular mention made by
Beza in his Life of CALVIN. — CALVIN’S *Tracts*, vol. 1, pp. 30, 31. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_78"></span>[79](cc42005.htm#fr_78) <span
id="iv.ii.iv-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p19"></span> “The word <span
id="iv.ii.iv-p19.1"></span>ἐπιχορηγία which we translate *supply*,
signifies also *furnishing whatever is necessary.”* — *Dr. A. Clarke.* —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_79"></span>[80](cc42005.htm#fr_79) <span
id="iv.ii.iv-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p24"></span> “<span id="iv.ii.iv-p24.1"></span>De
varier et chanceler;” — “To shift and waver.”

<span id="fn_80"></span>[81](cc42005.htm#fr_80) <span
id="iv.ii.v-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.v-p4"></span> “<span id="iv.ii.v-p4.1"></span>Or encore
que viure en chair me fust proufitable, ie ne scay lequel ie doy eslire,
*ou*, Or si viure en chair me est proufitable, et que c’est qu’ie doy
eslire, ie ne scay rien;” — “But although to live in the flesh would not
be profitable to me, I know not what I ought to choose; *or*, But if to
live in the flesh is profitable to me, and that it is what I ought to
choose, I know not.”

<span id="fn_81"></span>[82](cc42005.htm#fr_81) <span
id="iv.ii.v-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.v-p22"></span> “<span id="iv.ii.v-p22.1"></span>Vn tel
sainct Apostre;” — “So holy an Apostle.”

<span id="fn_82"></span>[83](cc42005.htm#fr_82) <span
id="iv.ii.vi-p15.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p16"></span> In accordance with the Vulgate, Wiclif
(1380) renders as follows: “traueilynge to gidre to the feith of the
gospel.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_83"></span>[84](cc42005.htm#fr_83) <span
id="iv.ii.vi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p19"></span> “<span id="iv.ii.vi-p19.1"></span>La
force et constance de courage;” —”Strength and constancy of courage.”

<span id="fn_84"></span>[85](cc42005.htm#fr_84) <span
id="iv.ii.vi-p20.4"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p21"></span> “<span id="iv.ii.vi-p21.1"></span>Là où
il vse d’vn mot qui descend d’vn mesme verbe que celuy dont il vse yci;”
—”Where he makes use of a word which comes from the same verb as that
which he employs here.”

<span id="fn_85"></span>[86](cc42005.htm#fr_85) <span
id="iv.ii.vi-p21.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p22"></span> “<span id="iv.ii.vi-p22.1"></span>Cela
nous est vne demonstrance et tesmoignage de nostre salut;” —”This is to
us a clear proof and token of our salvation.”

<span id="fn_86"></span>[87](cc42005.htm#fr_86) <span
id="iv.ii.vi-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p24"></span> “<span id="iv.ii.vi-p24.1"></span>Les
afflictions et persecutions;” — “Afflictions and persecutions.”

<span id="fn_87"></span>[88](cc42005.htm#fr_87) <span
id="iv.ii.vi-p24.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p25"></span> “<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p25.1"></span>Combien aurions — nous proufité en la
doctrine de vraye religion;” —”How much progress we would make in the
doctrine of true religion.”

<span id="fn_88"></span>[89](cc42005.htm#fr_88) <span
id="iv.ii.vi-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p26"></span> “<span id="iv.ii.vi-p26.1"></span>Il
nous vest de sa liuree;” — “He arrays us in his livery.”

<span id="fn_89"></span>[90](cc42005.htm#fr_89) <span
id="iv.ii.vi-p26.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p27"></span> “<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p27.1"></span>Maudite donc soit nostre stupidite;” —
“Accursed, then, be our stupidity.”

<span id="fn_90"></span>[91](cc42005.htm#fr_90) <span
id="iv.ii.vi-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p30"></span> “<span id="iv.ii.vi-p30.1"></span>Les
afflictions et persecutions;” — “Afflictions and persecutions.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](cc42006)
