[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc42025)  [Next](cc42027.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 42: Philippians, Colossians, and
Thessalonians*, tr. by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.iii"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 1

<span id="vii.iii.i"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.i-p1"></span><span id="vii.iii.i-p1.1"></span>[2
Thessalonians 1:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#001.md)<span
id="vii.iii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.i-p2"></span>**1**. Paul, and Silvanus, and Timotheus,
unto the church of the Thessalonians in God our Father and the Lord
Jesus Christ:

<span id="vii.iii.i-p3"></span>**1**. Paulus et Silvanus et Timotheus
Ecclesiae Thessalonicensium in Deo Patre nostro et Domino Iesu Christo,

<span id="vii.iii.i-p4"></span>**2**. Grace unto you, and peace, from
God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="vii.iii.i-p5"></span>**2**. Gratia vobis et pax a Deo Patre
nostro et Domino Iesu Christo.

<span id="vii.iii.i-p6"></span>**3**. We are bound to thank God always
for you, brethren, as it is meet, because that your faith groweth
exceedingly, and the charity of every one of you all toward each other
aboundeth;

<span id="vii.iii.i-p7"></span>**3**. Gratias agere debemus Deo semper
de vobis, fratres, quemadmodum dignum est, quia vehementer augescit
fides vestra, et exuberat caritas mutua uniuscuiusque omnium vestrum;

<span id="vii.iii.i-p8"></span>**4**. So that we ourselves glory in you
in the churches of God for your patience and faith in all your
persecutions and tribulations that ye endure:

<span id="vii.iii.i-p9"></span>**4**. Ut nos ipsi de vobis gloriemur in
Ecclesia Dei, de tolerantia vestra et fide in omnibus persequutionibus
vestris et afflictionibus quas sustinetis,

<span id="vii.iii.i-p10"></span>**5** *Which is* a manifest token of the
righteous judgment of God, that ye may be counted worthy of the kingdom
of God, for which ye also suffer:

<span id="vii.iii.i-p11"></span>**5**. Ostensionem iusti iudicii Dei: ut
digni habeamini regno Dei, pro quo et patimini.

<span id="vii.iii.i-p12"></span>**6**. Seeing *it is* a righteous thing
with God to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you;

<span id="vii.iii.i-p13"></span>**6**. Siquidem iustum est apud Deum
reddere iis, qui vos affligunt, afflictionem:

<span id="vii.iii.i-p14"></span>**7**. And to you who are troubled rest
with us.

<span id="vii.iii.i-p15"></span>**7**. Et vobis, qui affligimini,
relaxationem nobiscum.

<span id="vii.iii.i-p16"></span> 

<span id="vii.iii.i-p17"></span><span id="vii.iii.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.i-p18"></span>**1** *To the Church of the
Thessalonians which is in God*. As to the form of salutation, it were
superfluous to speak. This only it is necessary to notice — that by a
*Church in God and Christ* is meant one that has not merely been
gathered together under the banner of faith, for the purpose of
worshipping one God the Father, and confiding in Christ, but is the work
and building as well of the Father as of Christ, because while God
adopts us to himself, and regenerates us, we from him begin to be in
Christ. (<span id="vii.iii.i-p18.1"></span>[1Co
1:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#030.md)<span
id="vii.iii.i-p18.1"></span>)

<span id="vii.iii.i-p19"></span><span id="vii.iii.i-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.i-p20"></span>**3** *To give thanks*. He begins with
commendation, that he may have occasion to pass on to exhortation, for
in this way we have more success among those who have already entered
upon the course, when without passing over in silence their former
progress, we remind them how far distant they are as yet from the goal,
and stir them up to make progress. As, however, he had in the former
Epistle commended their faith and love, he now declares the increase of
both. And, unquestionably, this course ought to be pursued by all the
pious — to examine themselves daily, and see how far they have advanced.
This, therefore, is the true commendation of believers — their *growing*
daily in *faith* and *love*. When he says *always*, he means that he is
constantly supplied with new occasion. He had previously given thanks to
God on their account. He says that he has now occasion to do so again,
on the ground of daily progress. When, however, he gives thanks to God
on this account, he declares that the enlargements, no less than the
beginnings, of faith and love are from him, for if they proceeded from
the power of men, thanksgiving would be pretended, or at least
worthless. Farther, he shews that their proficiency was not trivial, or
even ordinary, but most abundant. So much the more disgraceful is our
slowness, inasmuch as we scarcely advance one foot during a long space
of time.

<span id="vii.iii.i-p21"></span>*As is meet*. In these words Paul shews
that we are bound to give thanks to God, not only when he does us good,
but also when we take into view the favors bestowed by him upon our
brethren. For wherever the goodness of God shines forth, it becomes us
to extol it. Farther, the welfare of our brethren ought to be so dear to
us, that we ought to reckon among our own benefits everything that has
been conferred upon them. Nay more, if we consider the nature and
sacredness of the unity of Christ’s body, such a mutual fellowship will
have place among us, that we shall reckon the benefits conferred upon an
individual member as gain to the whole Church. Hence, in extolling God’s
benefits, we must always have an eye to the whole body of the Church.

<span id="vii.iii.i-p22"></span><span id="vii.iii.i-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.i-p23"></span>**4** *So that we ourselves glory in
you*. He could not have bestowed higher commendation upon them, than by
saying that he sets them forward before other Churches as a pattern, for
such is the meaning of those words: — *We glory in you in the presence
of other Churches*. For Paul did not boast of the faith of the
Thessalonians from a spirit of ambition, but inasmuch as his
commendation of them might be an incitement to make it their endeavor to
imitate them. He does not say, however, that he glories in their faith
and love, but in their *patience* and *faith*. Hence it follows, that
*patience* is the fruit and evidence of *faith*. These words ought,
therefore, to be explained in this manner: — “We glory in the patience
which springs from faith, and we bear witness that it eminently shines
forth in you;” otherwise the context would not correspond. And,
undoubtedly, there is nothing that sustains us in tribulations as faith
does; which is sufficiently manifest from this, that we altogether sink
down so soon as the promises of God leave us. Hence, the more
proficiency any one makes in faith, he will be so much the more endued
with patience for enduring all things with fortitude, as on the other
hand, softness and impatience under adversity betoken unbelief on our
part; but more especially when persecutions are to be endured for the
gospel, the influence of faith in that case discovers itself.

<span id="vii.iii.i-p24"></span><span id="vii.iii.i-p24.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.i-p25"></span>**5** *A demonstration of the righteous
judgment of God*. Without mentioning the exposition given by others, I
am of opinion that the true meaning is this — that the injuries and
persecutions which innocent and pious persons endure from the wicked and
abandoned, shew clearly, as in a mirror, that God will one day be the
judge of the world. And this statement is quite at antipodes with that
profane notion, which we are accustomed to entertain, whenever it goes
well with the good and ill with the wicked. For we think that the world
is under the regulation of mere chance, and we leave God no control.
Hence it is that impiety and contempt take possession of men’s hearts,
as Solomon speaks, (<span id="vii.iii.i-p25.1"></span>[Ec
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#003)<span id="vii.iii.i-p25.1"></span>.md)
for those that suffer anything undeservedly either throw the blame upon
God, or do not think that he concerns himself as to the affairs of men.
We hear what Ovid says, — “I am tempted to think that there are no
gods.”  <span id="fr_625"></span>[626](#fn_625.md) Nay more, David
confesses (<span id="vii.iii.i-p26.4"></span>[Ps
73:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#001.md)<span
id="vii.iii.i-p26.4"></span>) that, because he saw things in so confused
a state in the world, he had well-nigh lost his footing, as in a
slippery place. On the other hand, the wicked become more insolent
through occasion of prosperity, as if no punishment of their crimes
awaited them; just as Dionysius, when making a prosperous voyage,  <span
id="fr_626"></span>[627](#fn_626.md) boasted that the gods favored the
sacrilegious.  <span id="fr_627"></span>[628](#fn_627.md) In fine, when we
see that the cruelty of the wicked against the innocent walks abroad
with impunity, carnal sense concludes that there is no judgment of God,
that there are no punishments of the wicked, that there is no reward of
righteousness.

<span id="vii.iii.i-p29"></span>Paul, however, declares on the other
hand, that as God thus spares the wicked for a time, and winks at the
injuries inflicted upon his people, His judgment to come is shewn us as
in a mirror. For he takes for granted that it cannot but be that God,
inasmuch as he is a just Judge, will one day restore peace to the
miserable, who are now unjustly harassed, and will pay to the oppressors
of the pious the reward that they have merited. Hence, if we hold this
principle of faith, that God is the just Judge of the world, and that it
is his office to render to every one a recompense according to his
works, this second principle will follow incontrovertibly — that the
present *disorderly state of matters* (<span
id="vii.iii.i-p29.1"></span>ἀταξίαν) is a *demonstration* of the
judgment, which does not yet appear. For if God is the righteous Judge
of the world, those things that are now confused must, of necessity, be
restored to order. Now, nothing is more disorderly than that the wicked,
with impunity, give molestation to the good, and walk abroad with
unbridled violence, while the good are cruelly harassed without any
fault on their part. From this it may be readily inferred, that God will
one day ascend the judgment-seat, that he may remedy the state of
matters in the world, so as to bring them into a better condition.

<span id="vii.iii.i-p30"></span>Hence the statement which he subjoins —
that it is *righteous with God to appoint affliction*, *etc*., is the
groundwork of this doctrine — that God furnishes tokens of a judgment to
come when he refrains, for the present, from exercising the office of
judge. And unquestionably, if matters were now arranged in a tolerable
way, so that the judgment of God might be recognized as having been
fully exercised, an adjustment of this nature would detain us upon
earth. Hence God, in order that he may stir us up to the hope of a
judgment to come, does, for the present, only to some extent judge the
world. He furnishes, it is true, many tokens of his judgment, but it is
in such a manner as to constrain us to extend our hope farther. A
remarkable passage truly, as teaching us in what manner our minds ought
to be raised up above all the impediments of the world, whenever we
suffer any adversity — that the righteous judgment of God may present
itself to our mind, which will raise us above this world. Thus death
will be an image of life.

<span id="vii.iii.i-p31"></span>*May be accounted worthy*. There are no
persecutions that are to be reckoned of such value as to make us *worthy
of the kingdom of God*, nor does Paul dispute here as to the ground of
worthiness, but simply takes the common doctrine of Scripture — that God
destroys in us those things that are of the world, that he may restore
in us a better life; and farther, that by means of afflictions he shews
us the value of eternal life. In short, he simply points out the manner
in which believers are prepared and, as it were, polished under God’s
anvil, inasmuch as, by afflictions, they are taught to renounce the
world and to aim at God’s heavenly kingdom. Farther, they are confirmed
in the hope of eternal life while they fight for it. For this is the
entrance of which Christ discoursed to his disciples. (<span
id="vii.iii.i-p31.1"></span>[Mt
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#013.md)<span
id="vii.iii.i-p31.1"></span>; <span id="vii.iii.i-p31.2"></span>[Lu
13:24](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#024.md)<span
id="vii.iii.i-p31.2"></span>)

<span id="vii.iii.i-p32"></span><span id="vii.iii.i-p32.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.i-p33"></span>**6** *To appoint affliction*. We have
already stated why it is that he makes mention of the vengeance of God
against the wicked — that we may learn to rest in the expectation of a
judgment to come, because God does not as yet avenge the wicked, while
it is, nevertheless, necessary that they should suffer the punishment of
their crimes. Believers, however, at the same time, understand by this
that there is no reason why they should envy the momentary and
evanescent felicity of the wicked, which will ere long be exchanged for
a dreadful destruction. What he adds as to the *rest* of the pious,
accords with the statement of Paul, (<span
id="vii.iii.i-p33.1"></span>[Ac
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#020.md)<span
id="vii.iii.i-p33.1"></span>,) where he calls the day of the last
judgment the *day of refreshing*

<span id="vii.iii.i-p34"></span>In this declaration, however, as to the
good and the bad, he designed to shew more clearly how unjust and
confused the government of the world would be, if God did not defer
punishments and rewards till another judgment, for in this way the name
of God were a thing that was dead.  <span
id="fr_628"></span>[629](#fn_628.md) Hence he is deprived of his office and
power by all that are not intent on that righteousness of which Paul
speaks.

<span id="vii.iii.i-p36"></span>He adds *with us*, that he may gain
credit to his doctrine from his experience of belief in his own mind;
for he shews that he does not philosophize as to things unknown, by
putting himself into the same condition, and into the same rank with
them. We know, however, how much more authority is due to those who
have, by long practice, been exercised in those things which they teach,
and do not require from others anything but what they are themselves
prepared to do. Paul, therefore, does not, while himself in the shade,
give instructions to the Thessalonians as to how they should fight in
the heat of the sun, but, fighting vigorously, exhorts them to the same
warfare.  <span id="fr_629"></span>[630](#fn_629.md)

<span id="vii.iii.ii"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p1"></span><span id="vii.iii.ii-p1.1"></span>[2
Thessalonians 1:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#007.md)<span
id="vii.iii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p2"></span>**7**. When the Lord Jesus shall be
revealed from heaven with his mighty angels,

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p3"></span>**7**. Quum manifestabitur Dominus Iesus
e coelo cum angelis potentiae suae,

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p4"></span>**8**. In flaming fire taking vengeance
on them that know not God, and that obey not the gospel of our Lord
Jesus Christ:

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p5"></span>**8**. In igne flammanti, qui ultionem
infliget iis, qui non noverunt Deum, et non obediunt evangelio Domini
nostri Iesu Christi:

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p6"></span>**9** Who shall be punished with
everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the
glory of his power;

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p7"></span>**9**. Qui poenam dabunt interitum
aeternum a facie Domini, et a gloria potentiae ipsius,

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p8"></span>**10**. When he shall come to be
glorified in his saints, and to be admired in all them that believe
(because our testimony among you was believed) in that day.

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p9"></span>**10**. Quum venerit ut sanctificetur in
sanctis suis, et admirabilis reddatur in omnibus, qui credunt (quia
fides habita sit testimonio nostro erga vos) in illa die.

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p10"></span> 

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p11"></span><span id="vii.iii.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p12"></span>**7** *When the Lord shall be
manifested*. Here we have a confirmation of the foregoing statement. For
as it is one of the articles of our faith, that Christ will come from
heaven, and will not come in vain, faith ought to seek the end of his
coming. Now this is — that he may come as a Redeemer to his own people;
nay more, that he may judge the whole world. The description which
follows has a view to this — that the pious may understand that God is
so much the more concerned as to their afflictions in proportion to the
dreadfulness of the judgment that awaits his enemies. For the chief
occasion of grief and distress is this — that we think that God is but
lightly affected with our calamities. We see into what complaints David
from time to time breaks forth, while he is consumed by the pride and
insolence of his enemies. Hence he has brought forward all this for the
consolation of believers, while he represents the tribunal of Christ as
full of horror,  <span id="fr_630"></span>[631](#fn_630.md) that they may
not be disheartened by their present oppressed condition, while they see
themselves proudly and disdainfully trampled upon by the wicked.

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p14"></span>What is to be the nature of that
*fire*, and of what materials, I leave to the disputations of persons of
foolish curiosity. I am contented with holding what Paul had it in view
to teach — that Christ will be a most strict avenger of the injuries
which the wicked inflict upon us. The metaphor, however, of *flame* and
*fire*, is abundantly common in Scripture, when the anger of God is
treated of.

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p15"></span>By the *angels of his power*, he means
those in whom he will exercise his power; for he will bring the angels
with him for the purpose of displaying the glory of his kingdom. Hence,
too, they are elsewhere called the *angels of his majesty*

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p16"></span><span id="vii.iii.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p17"></span>**8** *Who will inflict vengeance*.
That he may the better persuade believers that the persecutions which
they endure will not go unpunished, he teaches that this also involves
the interests of God himself, inasmuch as the same persons that
persecute the pious are guilty of rebellion against God. Hence it is
necessary that God should inflict vengeance upon them not merely with a
view to our salvation, but also for the sake of his own glory. Farther,
this expression, *who will inflict vengeance*, relates to Christ, for
Paul intimates that this office is assigned to him by God the Father. It
may be asked, however, whether it is lawful for us to desire vengeance,
for Paul promises it, as though it could be lawfully desired. I answer,
that it is not lawful to desire vengeance upon any one, inasmuch as we
are commanded to wish well to all. Besides, although we may in a general
way desire vengeance upon the wicked, yet, as we do not as yet
discriminate them, we ought to desire the welfare of all. In the mean
time, the ruin of the wicked may be lawfully looked forward to with
desire, provided there reigns in our hearts a pure and duly regulated
zeal for God, and there is no feeling of inordinate desire.

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p18"></span>*Who know not*. He distinguishes
unbelievers by these two marks — that they *know not God*, and *obey not
the gospel of Christ*. For if obedience is not rendered to the gospel
through faith, as he teaches in the *first* and in the *last* chapters
of the Epistle to the Romans, \[<span id="vii.iii.ii-p18.1"></span>[Rom.
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#018.md), [Rom.
16:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#017.md)<span
id="vii.iii.ii-p18.1"></span>,\] unbelief is the occasion of resistance
to it. He charges them at the same time with ignorance of God, for a
lively acquaintance with God produces of itself reverence towards him.
Hence unbelief is always blind, not as though unbelievers were
altogether devoid of light and intelligence, but because they have the
understanding darkened in such a manner, that *seeing they do not see.*
(<span id="vii.iii.ii-p18.2"></span>[Mt
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#013.md)<span
id="vii.iii.ii-p18.2"></span>.) It is not without good grounds that
Christ declares that *this is life eternal, to know the true God, etc.*
(<span id="vii.iii.ii-p18.3"></span>[Joh
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#003.md)<span
id="vii.iii.ii-p18.3"></span>.) Accordingly, from the want of this
salutary knowledge, there follows contempt of God, and in fine, death.
On this point I have treated more fully in commenting on the first
chapter of First Corinthians.  <span id="fr_631"></span>[632](#fn_631.md)

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p20"></span><span id="vii.iii.ii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p21"></span>**9***. Everlasting destruction from
the face*. He shews, by apposition, what is the nature of the punishment
of which he had made mention — destruction without end, and an undying
death. The perpetuity of the death is proved from the circumstance, that
it has the glory of Christ as its opposite. Now, this is eternal, and
has no end. Accordingly, the influence of that death will never cease.
From this also the dreadful severity of the punishment may be inferred,
inasmuch as it will be great in proportion to the glory and majesty of
Christ.

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p22"></span><span id="vii.iii.ii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p23"></span>**10** *When he shall come to be
sanctified*. As he has hitherto discoursed as to the punishment of the
wicked, he now returns to the pious, and says that Christ will come,
that he may be *glorified* in them; that is, that he may irradiate them
with his glory, and that they may be partakers of it. “Christ will not
have this glory for himself individually; but it will be common to all
the saints.” This is the crowning and choice consolation of the pious,
that when the Son of God will be manifested in the glory of his kingdom,
he will gather them into the same fellowship with himself.  <span
id="fr_632"></span>[633](#fn_632.md) There is, however, an implied contrast
between the present condition in which believers labor and groan, and
that final restoration. For they are *now* exposed to the reproaches of
the world, and are looked upon as vile and worthless; but *then* they
will be precious, and full of dignity, when Christ will pour forth his
glory upon them. The end of this is, that the pious may as it were, with
closed eyes, pursue the brief journey of this earthly life, having their
minds always intent upon the future manifestation of Christ’s kingdom.
For to what purpose does he make mention of His coming in power, but in
order that they may in hope leap forward to that blessed resurrection
which is as yet hid?

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p25"></span>It is also to be observed, that after
having made use of the term *saints*, he adds, by way of explanation —
*those that believe*, by which he intimates that there is no holiness in
men without faith, but that all are profane. In the close he again
repeats the terms — *in that day,* for that expression is connected with
this sentence. Now, he repeats it with this view, that he may repress
the desires of believers, lest they should hasten forward beyond due
bounds.

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p26"></span>*Because credit was given* What he had
said in a general way as to saints, he now applies to the Thessalonians,
that they may not doubt that they are of that number.

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p27"></span>“Because,” says he, “my preaching has
obtained credit among you, Christ has already enrolled you in the number
of his own people, whom he will make partakers of his glory.”

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p28"></span>He calls his doctrine a *testimony*,
because the Apostles are Christ’s *witnesses*. (<span
id="vii.iii.ii-p28.1"></span>[Ac
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#008.md)<span
id="vii.iii.ii-p28.1"></span>.) Let us learn, therefore, that the
promises of God are ratified in us, when they gain credit with us.

<span id="vii.iii.iii"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.iii-p1"></span><span id="vii.iii.iii-p1.1"></span>[2
Thessalonians 1:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#011.md)<span
id="vii.iii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.iii-p2"></span>**11**. Wherefore also we pray always
for you, that our God would count you worthy of *this* calling, and
fulfil all the good pleasure of *his* goodness, and the work of faith
with power:

<span id="vii.iii.iii-p3"></span>**11**. In quam rem etiam oramus semper
pro vobis: ut vos habeat dignos vocatione Deus noster, et impleat omne
beneplacitum bonitatis, et opus fidei cum potentia  <span
id="fr_633"></span>[634](#fn_633.md)

<span id="vii.iii.iii-p5"></span>**12**. That the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ may be glorified in you, and ye in him, according to the grace of
our God and the Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="vii.iii.iii-p6"></span>**12**. Quo glorificetur nomen Domini
nostri Iesu Christi in vobis, et vos in ipso, secundum gratiam Dei
nostri, et Domini Iesu Christi.

<span id="vii.iii.iii-p7"></span> 

<span id="vii.iii.iii-p8"></span><span id="vii.iii.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.iii-p9"></span>**11** *On which account we pray
always*. That they may know that they need continual help from God, he
declares that he prays in their behalf. When he says *on this account*,
he means, in order that they may reach that final goal of their course,
as appears from the succeeding context, *that he would fulfill all the
good pleasure*, etc. It may seem, however, as if what he has mentioned
first were unnecessary, for God had already *accounted them worthy of
his calling*. He speaks, however, as to the end or completion, which
depends on perseverance. For as we are liable to give way, our *calling*
would not fail, so far as we are concerned, to prove sooner or later
vain, if God did not confirm it. Hence he is said to *account us
worthy*, when he conducts us to the point at which we aimed.

<span id="vii.iii.iii-p10"></span>*And fulfill*. Paul goes to an amazing
height in extolling the grace of God, for not contenting himself with
the term *good pleasure*, he says that it flows from his goodness,
unless perhaps any one should prefer to consider the beneficence  <span
id="fr_634"></span>[635](#fn_634.md) as arising from this *good pleasure*,
which amounts to the same thing. When, however, we are instructed that
the *gracious purpose* of God is the cause of our salvation, and that
*that* has its foundation in the *goodness* of the same God, are we not
worse than mad, if we venture to ascribe anything, however small, to our
own merits? For the words are in no small degree emphatic. He might have
said in one word, *that your faith may be fulfilled*, but he terms it
*good pleasure*. Farther, he expresses the idea still more distinctly by
saying, that God was prompted by nothing else than his own goodness, for
he finds nothing in us but misery.

<span id="vii.iii.iii-p12"></span>Nor does Paul ascribe to the grace of
God merely the beginning of our salvation, but all departments of it.
Thus that contrivance of the Sophists is set aside, that we are, indeed,
anticipated by the grace of God, but that it is helped by subsequent
merits. Paul, on the other hand, recognizes in the whole progress of our
salvation nothing but the pure grace of God. As, however, the *good
pleasure* of God has been already accomplished in him, referring in the
term subsequently employed by him to the effect which appears in us, he
explains his meaning when he says — *and work of faith*. And he calls it
a *work*, with regard to God, who works or produces faith in us, as
though he had said — “that he may complete the building of faith which
he has begun.”

<span id="vii.iii.iii-p13"></span>It is, also, not without good reason,
that he says *with power*, for he intimates that the perfecting of faith
is an arduous matter, and one of the greatest difficulty. This, also, we
know but too well from experience; and the reason, too, is not far to
seek, if we consider how great our weakness is, how various are the
hindrances that obstruct us on every side, and how severe are the
assaults of Satan. Hence, unless the power of God afford us help in no
ordinary degree, faith will never rise to its full height. For it is no
easier task to bring faith to perfection in an individual, than to rear
upon water a tower that may by its firmness withstand all storms and
fury of tempests, and may surmount the clouds in height, for we are not
less fluid than water, and it is necessary that the height of faith
reach as high as heaven.

<span id="vii.iii.iii-p14"></span><span id="vii.iii.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.iii-p15"></span>**12** *That the name of our Lord
Jesus Christ may be glorified*. He calls us back to the chief end of our
whole life — that we may promote the Lord’s glory. What he adds,
however, is more especially worthy of notice, that those who have
advanced the glory of Christ will also in their turn be glorified in
him. For in this, first of all, the wonderful goodness of God shines
forth — that he will have his glory be conspicuous in us who are covered
over with ignominy. This, however, is a twofold miracle, that he
afterwards irradiates us with his glory, as though he would do the same
to us in return. On this account he adds, *according to the grace of God
and Christ*. For there is nothing here that is ours either in the action
itself, or in the effect or fruit, for it is solely by the guidance of
the Holy Spirit that our life is made to contribute to the glory of God.
And the circumstance that so much fruit arises from this ought to be
ascribed to the great mercy of God. In the mean time, if we are not
worse than stupid, we must aim with all our might at the advancement of
the glory of Christ, which is connected with ours. I deem it unnecessary
to explain at present in what sense he represents the glory as belonging
to God and Christ in common, as I have explained this elsewhere.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_625"></span>[626](cc42026.htm#fr_625.md) <span
id="vii.iii.i-p25.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.i-p26"></span> “<span
id="vii.iii.i-p26.1"></span>Solicitor nullos esse putare deos.” — *Ovid*
in. <span id="vii.iii.i-p26.2"></span>[Am.
9:36](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#036.md)<span
id="vii.iii.i-p26.2"></span>. In order to see the appropriateness of the
quotation, it is necessary to notice the connection of the words “<span
id="vii.iii.i-p26.3"></span>Cum rapiant mala fata bonos.... Solicitor,”
*etc.*; — “When misfortunes overtake the good, I am tempted,” *etc.* —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_626"></span>[627](cc42026.htm#fr_626.md) <span
id="vii.iii.i-p26.5"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.i-p27"></span> “<span
id="vii.iii.i-p27.1"></span>Comme Denys le tyran, apres auoir pillé vn
temple, s’estant mis sur le mer, et voyant qu’il auoit bon vent;” — “As
Dionysius the tyrant, after he had plundered a temple, having embarked
upon the sea, and observing that he had a favorable wind.”

<span id="fn_627"></span>[628](cc42026.htm#fr_627.md) <span
id="vii.iii.i-p27.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.i-p28"></span> Our author alludes to a saying of
Dionysius the younger, tyrant of Sicily, on occasion of his plundering
the temple of Proserpine. See Calvin on the Psalms, vol. 1, p. 141, vol.
3, p. 126, and vol. 5, p. 114.—*Ed*.

<span id="fn_628"></span>[629](cc42026.htm#fr_628.md) <span
id="vii.iii.i-p34.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.i-p35"></span> “<span
id="vii.iii.i-p35.1"></span>Morte et sans vertu;” — “Dead and
powerless.”

<span id="fn_629"></span>[630](cc42026.htm#fr_629.md) <span
id="vii.iii.i-p36.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.i-p37"></span> “<span id="vii.iii.i-p37.1"></span>S.
Paul, donc, enseignant les Thessaloniciens comment ils doyuent combattre
au milieu des afflictions, ne parle point comme vn gendarme qui estant
en l’ombre et a son aise, accourageroit les autres a faire leur deuoir a
la campagne au milieu de la poussiere et a la chaleur du soleil: mais
combattant luy—mesme vaillamment, il les exhorte a combattre de mesme;”
— “St Paul, therefore, instructing the Thessalonians how they ought to
fight in the midst of afflictions, does not speak like a soldier who,
while in the shade and at his ease, would encourage others to do their
duty in the campaign in the midst of dust, and in the heat of the sun;
but, while fighting himself valiantly, he exhorts them to contend in
like manner.”

<span id="fn_630"></span>[631](cc42026.htm#fr_630.md) <span
id="vii.iii.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p13"></span> “<span
id="vii.iii.ii-p13.1"></span>Plein d’horreur et d’espouvantement;”
—”Full of horror and terror.”

<span id="fn_631"></span>[632](cc42026.htm#fr_631.md) <span
id="vii.iii.ii-p18.4"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p19"></span> See Calvin on the Corinthians, vol. 1,
pp. 84-86.

<span id="fn_632"></span>[633](cc42026.htm#fr_632.md) <span
id="vii.iii.ii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p24"></span> “<span id="vii.iii.ii-p24.1"></span>Il
les recueillera en plene conionction, et les fera ses consors;” — “He
will gather them in full union, and will make them his partners.”

<span id="fn_633"></span>[634](cc42026.htm#fr_633.md) <span
id="vii.iii.iii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.iii-p4"></span> “<span
id="vii.iii.iii-p4.1"></span>Auec puissance, ou puissamment;” — “With
power, or powerfully.”

<span id="fn_634"></span>[635](cc42026.htm#fr_634.md) <span
id="vii.iii.iii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.iii-p11"></span> “<span
id="vii.iii.iii-p11.1"></span>Ceste *bonté* et beneficence;” — “This
*goodness* and beneficence.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](cc42027.md)
