[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc42001)  [Next](cc42003) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 42: Philippians, Colossians, and
Thessalonians*, tr. by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii"></span>

<span id="iii-p1"></span>TO THE VVORSHIPFVL

<span id="iii-p2"></span>and reuerende fathers maister Noel,

<span id="iii-p3"></span>Deane of Poules, M. Mullins Archdeacon of
London,

<span id="iii-p4"></span>Maister D. Walker, Archdeacon Of Essex, &
Maister Towers Professor Of Diuinity, His Singuler Good Friends And
Patrons, R. V. Wi-Sheth All Health.

<span id="iii-p5"></span>Many in the dedications of their trauails are
accustomed to set forth the praises of such persons as they do dedicate
the same vnto. And surely I thinke it not amisse if flattery be absent.
For who is ignorant that <span id="iii-p5.1"></span>virtus lauduta
crescit, praise virtue, and it shall encrease. I speake not this, right
worshipful and reuerende fathers, to the ende that I meane to do the
like to you, although no man that knoweth you but he will say you
worthelye deserue the same: for if I shoulde either praise your learning
or diligence in your vocation which euery where is knowen, or your godly
conuersation which vnto your nighest frendes is well tried, or your
liberality which all those that haue neede, but spetially the Godly
poore haue found and daily to fynde, who might iustly reprehend me: but
letting passe these thinges to the consideration of vpright iudges, I
purpose to shew and that very brieflye what hath moued me to dedicate
this present booke vnto your worshippes. You knowe that I receaued at
your handes (that worthye man maister D. Watts beynge then aliue, whom
with reuerence I remember) that liuinge which I haue: and althoughe you
sell not your benefices (as manye in these dayes do) yet reason woulde
that I should not remaine vnthankefull for the same, though it were a
greate deale lesse then it is. And wheras want of abilitye vvould not
suffer me to recompence othervvyse your good will, yet rather then still
I should continue vnthankeful, I chose this litle commentary of that
worthye father M. Caluine to supply that which els might be left vndon:
rvherin I vvish that my hart lay open to be vievved: then vvould you not
more regard the thinge it selfe, vvhich no doubt is vvorthy the
accepting, then the good vvil of him that presenteth the same vnto you.
Fare you vvel. At high Easter the first of Nouember.

<span id="iii-p6"></span>Yours to command  
R. V.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Commentary on Philippians](cc42003)
