[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc42003)  [Next](cc42005) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 42: Philippians, Colossians, and
Thessalonians*, tr. by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p1"></span>THE ARGUMENT

<span id="iv.i-p2"></span>ON

<span id="iv.i-p3"></span>THE EPISTLE OF PAUL TO THE PHILIPPIANS

<span id="iv.i-p4"></span>It is generally know that PHILIPPI was a city
of Macedonia, situated on the confines of Thrace, on the plains of which
*Pompey* was conquered by *Caesar;*  <span
id="fr_13"></span>[14](#fn_13) and *Brutus* and *Cassius* were
afterwards conquered by *Antony* and *Octavius*.  <span
id="fr_14"></span>[15](#fn_14) Thus Roman insurrections rendered this
place illustrious by two memorable engagements. When PAUL was called
into Macedonia by an express revelation,  <span
id="fr_15"></span>[16](#fn_15) he first founded a Church in that city,
(as is related by LUKE in <span id="iv.i-p7.2"></span>[Ac
16:12](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#012)<span id="iv.i-p7.2"></span>,)
which did not merely persevere steadfastly in the faith, but was also,
in process of time, as this Epistle bears evidence, enlarged both in the
number of individuals, and in their proficiency in respect of
attainments.

<span id="iv.i-p8"></span>The occasion of Paul’s writing to the
Philippians was this, — As they had sent to him by Epaphroditus, their
pastor, such things as were needed by him when in prison, for sustaining
life, and for other more than ordinary expenses, there can be no doubt
that Epaphroditus explained to him at the same time the entire condition
of the Church, and acted the part of an adviser in suggesting those
things, respecting which they required to be admonished. It appears,
however, that attempts had been made upon them by false apostles,  <span
id="fr_16"></span>[17](#fn_16) who wandered hither and thither, with the
view of spreading corruptions of sound doctrine; but as they had
remained steadfast in the truth, the Apostle commends their
steadfastness. Keeping, however, in mind human frailty, and having,
perhaps, been instructed by Epaphroditus that they required to be
seasonably confirmed, lest they should in process of time fall away, he
subjoins such admonitions as he knew to be suitable to them.

<span id="iv.i-p10"></span>And having, first of all, with the view of
securing their confidence, declared the pious attachment of his mind
towards them, he proceeds to treat of himself and of his bonds, lest
they should feel dismayed on seeing him a prisoner, and in danger of his
life. He shews them, accordingly, that the glory of the gospel is so far
from being lessened by this means, that it is rather an argument in
confirmation of its truth, and he at the same time stirs them up by his
own example to be prepared for every event.  <span
id="fr_17"></span>[18](#fn_17) He at length concludes the *First
Chapter* with a short exhortation to unity and patience.

<span id="iv.i-p12"></span>As, however, ambition is almost invariably
the mother of dissensions, and comes, on this account, to open a door
for new and strange doctrines, he, in the commencement of the *Second
Chapter*, entreats them, with great earnestness, to hold nothing more
highly in esteem than humility and modesty. With this view he makes use
of various arguments. And that he may the better retain them,  <span
id="fr_18"></span>[19](#fn_18) he promises to send Timothy to them
shortly, nay more, he expresses a hope of being able to visit them
himself. He afterwards assigns a reason for delay on the part of
Epaphroditus.  <span id="fr_19"></span>[20](#fn_19)

<span id="iv.i-p15"></span>In the *Third Chapter* he inveighs against
the false apostles, and sets aside both their empty boastings and the
doctrine of circumcision, which they eagerly maintained.  <span
id="fr_20"></span>[21](#fn_20) To all their contrivances he opposes the
simple doctrine of Christ. To their arrogance  <span
id="fr_21"></span>[22](#fn_21) he opposes his former life and present
course of conduct, in which a true image of Christian piety shone forth.
He shews, also, that the summit of perfection, at which we must aim
during our whole life, is this — to have fellowship with Christ in his
death and resurrection; and this he establishes by his own example.

<span id="iv.i-p18"></span>He begins the *Fourth Chapter* with
particular admonitions, but proceeds afterwards to those of a general
nature. He concludes the Epistle with a declaration of his gratitude to
the PHILIPPIANS, that they may not think that what they had laid out for
relieving his necessities had been ill bestowed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_13"></span>[14](cc42004.htm#fr_13) <span
id="iv.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p5"></span> Caesar’s celebrated victory over Pompey took
place on the plains of Pharsalia, in Thessaly, with which Philippi in
Macedonia is sometimes confounded by the poets. (See Virg. G. I. 490,
Juvenal, 8:242.) Their being sometimes confounded with each other
appears to have arisen from the circumstance that there was near
Pharsalos, in Thessaly, a town named Philippi, the original name of
which was Thebae, distinguished from Thebae in Bœotia by its being
called Thebae *Thessaliae*, or *Phthioticae*, but having fallen under
the power of Philip, King of Macedon, was in honor of the conqueror
called *Philippi*, or *Philippopolis*. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_14"></span>[15](cc42004.htm#fr_14) <span
id="iv.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p6"></span> The decisive engagement referred to was, as
Dio Cassius observes, the most important of all that were fought during
the civil wars, as it determined the fate of Roman liberty, so that the
contest thenceforward was not for freedom, but — what master the Romans
should serve. From its having been fought on the plains of Philippi, it
is called by Suetonius <span id="iv.i-p6.1"></span>*Philippense bellum*,
(*the battle of Philippi*,) *Suet.* Aug. 13; and by Pliny, <span
id="iv.i-p6.2"></span>*Philippense praelium,* (*the engagement at
Philippi*.*)* — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_15"></span>[16](cc42004.htm#fr_15) <span
id="iv.i-p6.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p7"></span> “<span id="iv.i-p7.1"></span>Vne vision
enuoyee de Dieu;” — “A vision sent from God.”

<span id="fn_16"></span>[17](cc42004.htm#fr_16) <span
id="iv.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p9"></span> “<span id="iv.i-p9.1"></span>Auoyent essayer
les esbranler;” — “Had attempted to shake them.”

<span id="fn_17"></span>[18](cc42004.htm#fr_17) <span
id="iv.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p11"></span> “<span id="iv.i-p11.1"></span>De s’apprestre
a tout ce qu’il plaira a Dieu leur enuoyer;” — “To be prepared for
everything that it shall please God to send upon them.”

<span id="fn_18"></span>[19](cc42004.htm#fr_18) <span
id="iv.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p13"></span> “<span id="iv.i-p13.1"></span>Et pour leur
donner courage, afin qu’ils ne se laissent cependant abuser;” — “And
with the view of encouraging them, that they may not allow themselves in
the meantime to go astray.”

<span id="fn_19"></span>[20](cc42004.htm#fr_19) <span
id="iv.i-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p14"></span> “<span id="iv.i-p14.1"></span>Il excuse
Epaphrodite de ce qu’il auoit tant demeuré sans retourner vers eux;” —
“He excuses Epaphroditus for having remained so long, instead of
returning to them.”

<span id="fn_20"></span>[21](cc42004.htm#fr_20) <span
id="iv.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p16"></span> “<span id="iv.i-p16.1"></span>Pour laquelle
ils debatoyent, voulans qu’elle fust obseruee;” — “For which they
contended, being desirous that it should be observed.”

<span id="fn_21"></span>[22](cc42004.htm#fr_21) <span
id="iv.i-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p17"></span> “<span id="iv.i-p17.1"></span>Arrogance et
vanterie;” — “Arrogance and boasting.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 1](cc42005)
