[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](rpdi06)  [Next](rpdi08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Religious Practices of the Diegueño Indians*, by T.T. Waterman,
\[1910\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### BOYS’ ADOLESCENCE CEREMONY.

The boys’ puberty or toloache ceremony among the Diegueño is similar to
the corresponding ceremony <span id="fr_56"></span>[52a](#fn_56)
performed by the Luiseño. The songs are partly sung in the Luiseño
language. The accounts of the Diegueño ceremony obtained by the present
writer differ from each other in a number of minor details. They also
differ somewhat from the published accounts of the Luiseño rite. In the
matter of the so-called ground-painting or sand picture made for the
instruction of the initiates, the Diegueño and Luiseño usages seem
especially to differ.

With the Diegueño, as with the Luiseño, the ceremony is essentially an
initiation. It begins with the administration of an intoxicating extract
of the jimson-weed, *Datura meteloides*, Spanish toloache, Diegueño
kusī. The boys and men who have drunk this decoction may take part
subsequently in certain ceremonies. These practices are never
participated in by outsiders. Besides this actual privilege, the
initiates theoretically obtain at the time certain magic or shamanistic
powers. There exist a number of tricks, such as dancing on the fire or
killing an eagle by witchcraft, which are passed along to all the
initiates. Those who have undergone the ceremony may almost be said to
be bound into a fraternity by the possession of these secrets.

<span id="page_294">p. 294</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Although these
tricks are usually quite transparent to the outside observer, they form
real capital among the medicine-men even at the present day.

The toloache ceremony is undergone but once by each individual. The
recurrent rites which are performed at varying periods by all who have
undergone the toloache initiation, include those described in the
following pages as the War dance or ho<span class="sc">r</span><span
class="sc">l</span>oi, the awik mourning ceremonies (not to be confused
with the Keruk mourning ceremony, which is thought to be the older), and
the Eagle dance.

The administration of the jimson-weed extract or kusī is superintended
by officials called the kaponai<span class="sc">l</span>, corresponding
to the Luiseño paha. Their number is given variously as four, and as a
good many—five or six. These men go at night to the house, kwusitcnyawa,
where the ceremonial objects are kept. A quantity of jimson-weed root
has already been gathered and dried for use in this rite. They break
some of this root up, and put it in a small ceremonial mortar, kalmo
([pl. 21, fig. 2](rpdi27.htm#img_pl21)), which is kept for the purpose.
This kalmo is said to have been freshly painted each time in vertical
red and black stripes. The red used was the iron rust, or oxide of iron,
precipitated by the iron springs of the region. The black seems from the
description to have been graphite. This substance is found in places on
the desert east of the Diegueño country proper. One man takes the mortar
and prepares to pound. Another puts his closed fist to his mouth,
tubelike, and makes a long-drawn sound like "u-u-u-u-i-i-i-i." As long
as this sound continues, the first man pounds the root in the mortar. As
he strikes, the others chant:

<div align="center">

|                                              |                                                                               |
|----------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| <span class="small">tcoki-a! tcoki-a!</span> | <span class="small">pound! pound! <span id="fr_57"></span>[53](#fn_57)</span> |

</div>

 

When the long-drawn sound ceases the pounding stops, and the mortar is
passed to one of the other men. Then the first man repeats the sound and
the pounding goes on. When the root gets broken up into small pieces
they chant:

<div align="center">

|                                            |                                        |
|--------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------|
| <span class="small">yoki-a! yoki-a!</span> | <span class="small">fine! fine!</span> |

</div>

When it is almost fine enough for use they chant:

<div align="center">

|                                          |                                        |
|------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------|
| <span class="small">wesi-a wesi-a</span> | <span class="small">ready ready</span> |

</div>

<span id="page_295">p. 295</span>

Several accounts are given of the way in which the drug was
administered. In the vicinity of Mesa Grande they seem to have poured
hot water on the powder in the mortar itself. They allowed it to stand
for awhile to steep. Then the young boys were brought in and allowed to
drink directly from the mortar. One of the kaponai<span
class="sc">l</span> slipped his hand under each boy's forehead and
pulled his head up when he seemed to have taken enough. One informant at
Santa Ysabel <span id="fr_58"></span>[54](#fn_58) told the writer that
they boiled the powder in a small jar of pottery, and strained the juice
into basketry cups. As cups they used the close-woven basketry caps,
npu<span class="sc">r</span><span class="sc">l</span>. In the southern
part of the Diegueño region they put the powder on a flat basket,
sūngū<span class="sc">l</span>k, and poured hot water over it, catching
the resulting liquid in a large deep basket, xapitu<span
class="sc">l</span>. They then dipped small cups of pottery into the
large basket and gave the boys each a drink.

In the meantime a large fire has been built in the dance-circle, himak,
and all the people have assembled there. When the boys have each drunk
the liquid, the kaponai<span class="sc">l</span> lead them in a group to
the dance-circle. When the people see them coming they begin to sing:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">kwisi maimoni  
maino xaiko<span class="it">v</span>era nita</span>

</div>

As the boys enter the dance-circle a number of the old men of the
village go up and each take charge of a boy. These men are thereafter
"sponsors", nyuxut, for such boys. They guide them through the entire
ceremony and teach them how to dance.

On this first night, each nyuxut stands behind his protege, as they all
stand in a circle around the fire. The men hold the boys under the
armpits. Then the kwaipai leads the company in a song, and they march or
push the boys around the fire, swaying them from side to side. The song
is as follows:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">hayompa hayom <span id="fr_59"></span>[55](#fn_59)  
hayompa hayom</span>

</div>

and is said to mean "look at your son, look at your son". The

<span id="page_296">p. 296</span>

initiates soon begin to feel the effects of the drug, and to have
difficulty in keeping their feet. The people vary this first chant by
singing the songs of the war dance, ho<span class="sc">r</span><span
class="sc">l</span>oi. When one informant took the drink, he recalls
that they sang this song:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">anoson a<span class="it">r</span>a<span
class="it">r</span>owi  
anomai wikma<span class="it">r</span>owi</span>

</div>

When the boys can no longer keep their feet and move about, they are led
or carried outside of the dance circle and put somewhere to sleep off
the effects. During this sleep or unconsciousness they are expected to
have a vision or dream which is to be important for them in their future
life. This vision often takes the form of a dream about some animal. For
instance, an old man of Mesa Grande, when as a boy he took the drug, saw
Grouse sitting on the ground. Grouse said:

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="327"><p><span class="small">kamīyowai-ī<br />
enyak arsa<br />
awik arsa<br />
arca-texo<br />
komilai</span></p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="327"><p><span class="small">I am singing<br />
eastern bird<br />
western bird<br />
grouse<br />
I-am-a-man</span></p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

After this experience, the man took this song for his own. The grouse
was thereafter "his" bird to the extent that he would never kill one or
injure one of the species. The feeling is so vague, however, that the
words "totemism" or "fetishism" cannot properly be used in connection
with it. <span id="fr_60"></span>[56](#fn_60) After all the initiates
have "fallen about" helpless from the effects of the drug and been
carried outside, the grown people continue to dance the War dance till
daybreak.

The drug is given soon after dark, and the subjects do not regain full
consciousness until late the next morning. The first precaution on their
awakening is to give them large draughts of warm water to free their
systems of the drug. Otherwise they "swell up" and are in danger of
dying. Even grown men have died from the effects of the ceremony. <span
id="fr_61"></span>[57](#fn_61) Each boy is then given a bath or a swim.
They are then painted black from head to foot with straw charcoal. Some
of the men thereupon chew

<span id="page_297">p. 297</span>

white clay (soapstone?) and blow the powder over the boys, making them
part white. <span id="fr_62"></span>[58](#fn_62) This painting is
expected to make them live long, or, as another informant said, to keep
the east wind from making them cold after the drugging. <span
id="fr_63"></span>[59](#fn_63)

For one day after the administration of the kusī they are allowed no
food of any sort. At the close of that period a bowl of sage-seed mush,
Spanish "atole," is offered each one. As he puts out his hand to take
it, however, the kaponai<span class="sc">l</span> yell, "awi! awi!"
(rattlesnake! rattlesnake!) and jerk the bowl away. If the boy is quick
enough he grabs a handful or two. Otherwise he gets nothing at all. For
six days after the drugging they are given no meat, and but very little
mush. <span id="fr_64"></span>[59a](#fn_64)

To ease the pangs of actual starvation during this period, they are
given belts, inyip, made of tule. These are about four inches wide and
made to tie in front. They are tightened from time to time toward the
close of the six-day fast.

The probability is that the boys are extremely ill on the first of these
six days. No exertion is required of them, at any rate, until the
afternoon of the second day. At that time the boys, together with the
kaponai<span class="sc">l</span>, walk to a second and smaller enclosure
distant about one hundred yards from the dance-circle. From this
enclosure they crawl back in a group to the dance-circle on their hands
and knees. The kaponai<span class="sc">l</span> walk beside them, each
dragging a long pole. The whole company stop three times on the way for
a short period. While in motion they keep up a continual grunting, which
sounds like "a-ha-ha-ha, a-ha-ha-ha". This procession is made every day
for three days.

At the end of that time the sponsors, nyuxut, take the boys in charge
early every night, and teach them to dance. After dancing all night they
are led away in the morning by the kaponai<span class="sc">l</span> to a
house chosen for the purpose, to be fed a little and

<span id="page_298">p. 298</span>

put to sleep. As they leave the dance-circle they always sing the
following chant:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">kwisi maimoni <span id="fr_65"></span>[60](#fn_65)  
maino kaiko<span class="it">v</span>i<span class="it">r</span>a  
nizo kwaikora</span>

</div>

When they have gone one hundred yards from the dance-circle they stop
singing and walk to the chosen house in an irregular crowd.

After the first six days, visitors are expected from each of the
neighboring villages to teach them other dances. Such visitors always
come in groups, and halt when about one hundred yards from the
dance-circle, until one of the kaponai<span class="sc">l</span> goes out
and "tells them that all is in readiness". Then they begin grunting
"a-ha-ha-ha, a-ha-ha-ha", and approach the circle where the tribe waits
in silence. Room is made in the center of the enclosure, and each
stranger, taking a boy in charge, teaches him dances and songs until
daylight. Each boy in this way learns a number of songs which are
different from those sung in his home village. A sort of proprietorship
was held and recognized over songs. Certain men know songs which they
learned from their fathers, or which other men have "given" them. The
people never sing such songs unless the "owner" is present to lead them.
This giving away of songs may account for the fact that the Diegueño
sing a great many Luiseño songs, since there has been, first and last, a
good deal of intercourse between the two peoples.

After the first three days the boys are painted with broad stripes of
white powdered soapstone. These stripes cross on the breast, pass over
each shoulder, and meet on the back. [Pl. 26, fig.
2](rpdi27.htm#img_pl26), representing a man prepared for the Whirligig
dance or Tapakwirp, shows the general appearance of this white paint.
One side of the face in the case of the boys is painted white, the other
red. The feet during about the first week are striped transversely in
black and white; after the first week, in black and red. The food given
is gradually increased in quantity from day

<span id="page_299">p. 299</span>

to day after the first three days. It consists exclusively, however, of
unsalted acorn or sage-seed mush. At the end of a mouth the initiates
are taken to some creek about a mile away from the village. Here the
head of each candidate is carefully freed of lice. <span
id="fr_66"></span>[61](#fn_66) The tule hunger-belts are then removed,
sunk in the creek, and weighted down with rocks. In the course of time a
certain bush, ipewi, it is said, grows up out of these belts, in the
water. Under ordinary circumstances this bush grows, it is thought, only
on the tops of high mountains away from the water.

After the burying of the belts, all the party, men and boys, join in a
footrace, mutpikwi<span class="sc">l</span>, to the dance-circle. The
first to arrive is held to be a "high-bred man", and if it chances to be
a boy, his relatives throw baskets and the like in the air for other
people to pick up. This does not often occur, however. Men hide in the
bushes and grass along the race-course, and as the straining youths pass
by in the race, these fresh men join in and easily beat them. They do
this "for a joke". If a boy runs good and fast on this occasion, he will
always be fleet of foot.

The first half of each night during the following month is spent in
dancing. The boys are given all the acorn mush they can eat. The purpose
of the fasting which precedes is to accustom them to get along in after
life on little food. Toward the end of the period the boys are each
given by his sponsor a plume of owl or crow feathers, and in addition to
that a painted stick to carry in the dances. This stick is flat, pointed
at one end, and sometimes inlaid with abalone shell. It is similar to
the "hechicero" stick, kotat, Luiseño paviut, carried by the old
dancers, but has no "medicine-stone" or flint fastened in the end. Figs.
[1](#img_fig01) and [2](rpdi08.htm#img_fig02) show such hechicero
sticks. This stick is sometimes decorated with yellowhammer feathers and
eagle down. The following song is sung by the women when the boys are
given the feather plumes and painted sticks:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">neros<span class="it">v</span>ita  
nikwam mimaino  
miyip notomyara</span>

</div>

<span id="page_300">p. 300</span>

At the close of this period a sacred painting of the world is made on
the ground.

<span id="img_fig01"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Figure 1.Four
ceremonial wands is possession of Mr. E. H. Davis. Nos. 1, 2, from a
cave in the desert. Painted red. Inlay lost from No. 1. No. 3, Diegueño
from Mesa Grande. No. 4, Luiseño from La Jolla.](tn/fig01.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig01.jpg)  
Figure 1.—Four ceremonial wands is possession of Mr. E. H. Davis. Nos.
1, 2, from a cave in the desert. Painted red. Inlay lost from No. 1. No.
3, Diegueño from Mesa Grande. No. 4, Luiseño from La Jolla.  
</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_56"></span>[293:52a](rpdi07.htm#fr_56) *Ibid*., pp. 77,
176; Sparkman, p. 221.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[294:53](rpdi07.htm#fr_57) University of
California phonograph record 739. Cf. DuBois, op. cit., p. 78, note 12.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[295:54](rpdi07.htm#fr_58) Manuel Lachuso.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[295:55](rpdi07.htm#fr_59) University of
California phonograph record 740(<sup>1</sup>). Said by a Luiseño, when
the record was played for him, to be in the language of the north, San
Gabriel, like most his own people's songs connected with the toloache
cult.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[296:56](rpdi07.htm#fr_60) See below under the
account of the Tapakwirp.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[296:57](rpdi07.htm#fr_61) Grown men who had
never taken the drug were sometimes initiated.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[297:58](rpdi07.htm#fr_62) Similarly the Mohave
medicine-men blow frothy saliva over their patients.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[297:59](rpdi07.htm#fr_63) Manuel Lachuso at
Santa Ysabel is the authority for the statement that the painting was
done by young women especially chosen for the purpose. If true at Santa
Ysabel, it seems not to have been the case elsewhere.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[297:59a](rpdi07.htm#fr_64) The corresponding
ceremony among the Luiseño has been called mani. This root *mani* means
to abstain.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[298:60](rpdi07.htm#fr_65) University of
California phonograph record 740(<sup>2</sup>). Compare the song given
on page [295](#page_295).

<span id="fn_66"></span>[299:61](rpdi07.htm#fr_66) See above, in the
Introduction.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Ground-Painting](rpdi08)
