[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0050034)  [Next](0050036) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  Epistle X.<sup>[1](footnote/fn49.htm#P4935_1499401)</sup>

To the Martyrs and Confessors Who Sought that Peace Should Be Granted to
the Lapsed.

1\. Cyprian to the martyrs and confessors, his beloved brethren,
greeting. The anxiety of my situation and the fear of the Lord constrain
me, my brave and beloved brethren, to admonish you in my letters, that
those who so devotedly and bravely maintain the faith of the Lord should
also maintain the law and discipline of the Lord. For while it behoves
all Christ's soldiers to keep the precepts of their commander; to you it
is more especially fitting that you should obey His precepts, inasmuch
as you have been made an example to others, both of valour and of the
fear of God. And I had indeed believed that the presbyters and deacons
who are there present with you would admonish and instruct you more
fully concerning the law of the Gospel, as was the case always in time
past under my predecessors; so that the deacons passing in and out of
the prison controlled the wishes of the martyrs by their counsels, and
by the Scripture precepts. But now, with great sorrow of mind, I gather
that not only the divine precepts are not suggested to you by them, but
that they are even rather restrained, so that those things which are
done by you yourselves, both in respect of God with caution, and in
respect of God's priest<sup>[3](footnote/fn49.htm#P4941_1501372)</sup>
with honour, are relaxed by certain presbyters, who consider neither the
fear of God nor the honour of the bishop. Although you sent letters to
me in which you ask that your wishes should be examined, and that peace
should be granted to certain of the lapsed as soon as with the end of
the persecution we should have begun to meet with our clergy, and to be
gathered together once more; those presbyters, contrary to the Gospel
law, contrary also to your respectful petition, before penitence was
fulfilled, before confession even of the gravest and most heinous sin
was made, before hands were placed upon the repentant by the bishops and
clergy, dare to offer on their behalf, and to give them the eucharist,
that is, to profane the sacred body of the Lord, although it is written,
"Whosoever shall eat the bread and drink the cup of the Lord unworthily,
shall be guilty of the body and blood of the
Lord."<sup>[4](footnote/fn49.htm#P4942_1502404)</sup>

2\. And to the lasped indeed pardon may be granted in respect of this
thing. For what dead person would not hasten to be made alive? Who would
not be eager to attain to his own salvation? But it is the duty of those
placed over them to keep the ordinance, and to instruct those that are
either hurrying or ignorant, that those who ought to be shepherds of the
sheep may not become their butchers. For to concede those things which
tend to destruction is to deceive. Nor is the lapsed raised in this
manner, but, by offending God, he is more urged on to ruin. Let them
learn, therefore, even from you, what they ought to have taught; let
them reserve your petitions and wishes for the
bishops,<sup>[5](footnote/fn49.htm#P4944_1503114)</sup> and let them
wait for ripe and peaceable times to give peace at your requests. The
first thing is, that the Mother should first receive peace from the
Lord, and then, in accordance with your wishes, that the peace of her
children should be considered.

3\. And since I hear, most brave and beloved brethren, that you are
pressed by the shamelessness of some, and that your modesty suffers
violence; I beg you with what entreaties I may, that, as mindful of the
Gospel, and considering what and what sort of things in past time your
predecessors the martyrs conceded, how careful they were in all
respects, you also should anxiously and cautiously weigh the wishes of
those who petition you, since, as friends of the Lord, and hereafter to
exercise judgment with Him, you must inspect both the conduct and the
doings and the deserts of each one. You must consider also the kinds and
qualities of their sins, lest, in the event of anything being abruptly
and unworthily either promised by you or done by me, our
Church<sup>[6](footnote/fn49.htm#P4946_1504246)</sup> should begin to
blush, even before the very Gentiles. For we are visited and chastened
frequently, and we are admonished, that the commandments of the Lord may
be kept without corruption or violation, which I find does not cease to
be the case there among you so as to prevent the divine judgment from
instructing very many of you also in the discipline of the Church. Now
this can all be done, if you will regulate those things that are asked
of you with a careful consideration of religion, perceiving and
restraining those who, by accepting persons, either make favours in
distributing your benefits, or seek to make a profit of an unlawful
trade.

4\. Concerning this I have written both to the clergy and to the people,
both of which letters I have directed to be read to you. But you ought
also to bring back and amend that matter according to your diligence, in
such a way as to designate those by name to whom you desire that peace
should be granted. For I hear that certificates are so given to some as
that it is said, "Let such a one be received to communion along with his
friends," which was never in any case done by the martyrs so that a
vague and blind petition should by and by heap reproach upon us. For it
opens a wide door to say, "Such a one with his friends; "and twenty or
thirty or more, may be presented to us, who may be asserted to be
neighbours and connections, and freedmen and servants, of the man who
receives the certificate. And for this reason I beg you that you will
designate by name in the certificate those whom you yourselves see, whom
you have known, whose penitence you see to be very near to full
satisfaction, and so direct to us letters in conformity with faith and
discipline. I bid you, very brave and beloved brethren, ever heartily in
the Lord farewell; and have me in remembrance. Fare ye well.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle XI.](0050036)
