[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0050049)  [Next](0050051) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  Epistle XXV.<sup>[1](footnote/fn51.htm#P5148_1562887)</sup>

Moyses, Maximus, Nicostratus, and the Other Confessors Answer the
Foregoing Letter. a.d. 250.

1\. To Caecilius Cyprian, bishop of the church of the Carthaginians,
Moyses and Maximus, presbyters, and Nicostratus and Rufinus, deacons,
and the other confessors persevering in the faith of the truth, in God
the Father, and in His Son Jesus Christ our Lord, and in the Holy
Spirit, greeting. Placed, brother, as we are among various and manifold
sorrows, on account of the present desolations of many brethren
throughout almost the whole
world,<sup>[2](footnote/fn51.htm#P5153_1563874)</sup> this chief
consolation has reached us, that we have been lifted up by the receipt
of your letter, and have gathered some alleviation for the griefs of our
saddened spirit. From which we can already perceive that the grace of
divine providence wished to keep us so long shut up in the prison
chains, perhaps for no other reason than that, instructed and more
vigorously animated by your letter, we might with a more earnest will
attain to the destined crown. For your letter has shone upon us as a
calm in the midst of a tempest, and as the longed-for tranquillity in
the midst of a troubled sea, and as repose in labours, as health in
dangers and pains, as in the densest darkness, the bright and glowing
light. Thus we drank it up with a thirsty spirit, and received it with a
hungry desire; so that we rejoice to find ourselves by it sufficiently
fed and strengthened for encounter with the foe. The Lord will reward
you for that love of yours, and will restore you the fruit due to this
so good work; for he who exhorts is not less worthy of the reward of the
crown than he who suffers; not less worthy of praise is he who has
taught, than he who has acted also; he is not less to be honoured who
has warned, than he who has fought; except that sometimes the weight of
glory more redounds to him who trains, than to him who has shown himself
a teachable learner; for the latter, perchance, would not have bad what
he has practised, unless the former had taught him.

2\. Therefore, again, we say, brother Cyprian, we have received great
joy, great comfort, great refreshment, especially in that you have
described, with glorious and deserved praises, the glorious, I will not
say, deaths, but immortalities of martyrs. For such departures should
have been proclaimed with such words, that the things which were related
might be told in such manner as they were done. Thus, from your letter,
we saw those glorious triumphs of the martyrs; and with our eyes in some
sort have followed them as they went to heaven, and have contemplated
them seated among angels, and the powers and dominions of heaven.
Moreover, we have in some manner perceived with our ears the Lord giving
them the promised testimony in the presence of the Father. It is this,
then, which also raises our spirit day by day, and inflames us to the
following of the track of such dignity.

3\. For what more glorious, or what more blessed, can happen to any man
from the divine condescension, than to confess the Lord God, in death
itself, before his very executioners? Than among the raging and varied
and exquisite tortures of worldly power, even when the body is racked
and torn and cut to pieces, to confess Christ the Son of God with a
spirit still free, although departing? Than to have mounted to heaven
with the world left behind? Than, having forsaken men, to stand among
the angels? Than, all worldly impediments being broken through, already
to stand free in the sight of God? Than to enjoy the heavenly kingdom
without any delay? Than to have become an associate of Christ's passion
in Christ's name? Than to have become by the divine condescension the
judge of one's own judge? Than to have brought off an unstained
conscience from the confession of His name? Than to have refused to obey
human and sacrilegious laws against the faith? Than to have borne
witness to the truth with a public testimony? Than, by dying, to have
subdued death itself, which is dreaded by all? Than, by death itself, to
have attained immortality? Than when torn to pieces, and tortured by all
the instruments of cruelty, to have overcome the torture by the tortures
themselves? Than by strength of mind to have wrestled with all the
agonies of a mangled body? Than not to have shuddered at the flow of
one's own blood? Than to have begun to love one's punishments, after
having faith to bear
them?<sup>[3](footnote/fn51.htm#P5156_1567821)</sup> Than to think it an
injury to one's life not to have left it?

4\. For to this battle our Lord, as with the trumpet of His Gospel,
stimulates us when He says, "He that loveth father or mother more than
me is not worthy of me: and he that loveth his own soul more than me is
not worthy of me. And he that taketh not his cross, and followeth after
me, is not worthy of me."<sup>[4](footnote/fn51.htm#P5158_1568234)</sup>
And again, "Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness'
sake: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed shall ye be, when men
shall persecute you, and hate you. Rejoice, and be exceeding glad: for
so did their fathers persecute the prophets which were before
you."<sup>[5](footnote/fn51.htm#P5159_1568535)</sup> And again," Because
ye shall stand before kings and powers, and the brother shall deliver up
the brother to death, and the father the son, and he that endureth to
the end shall be saved; "<sup>[6](footnote/fn51.htm#P5160_1568743)</sup>
and "To him that overcometh will I give to sit on my throne, even as I
also overcame and am set down on the throne of my
Father."<sup>[7](footnote/fn51.htm#P5161_1568893)</sup> Moreover the
apostle: "Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall
tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or
peril, or sword? (As it is written, For thy sake are we killed all the
day long; we are accounted as sheep for the slaughter.) Nay, in all
these things we are more than conquerors for Him who hath loved
us."<sup>[8](footnote/fn51.htm#P5162_1569264)</sup>

5\. When we read these
things,<sup>[9](footnote/fn51.htm#P5164_1569312)</sup> and things of the
like kind, brought together in the Gospel, and feel, as it were, torches
placed under us, with the Lord's words to inflame our faith, we not only
do not dread, but we even
provoke<sup>[10](footnote/fn51.htm#P5165_1569595)</sup> the enemies of
the truth; and we have already conquered the opponents of God, by the
very fact of our not yielding to them, and have subdued their nefarious
laws against the truth. And although we have not yet shed our blood, we
are prepared to shed it. Let no one think that this delay of our
departure<sup>[11](footnote/fn51.htm#P5166_1569953)</sup> is any
clemency; for it obstructs us, it makes a hindrance to our glory, it
puts off heaven, it withholds the glorious sight of God. For in a
contest of this kind, and in the kind of contest when faith is
struggling in the encounter, it is not true clemency to put off martyrs
by delay. Entreat therefore, beloved Cyprian, that of His mercy the Lord
will every day more and more arm and adorn every one of us with greater
abundance and readiness, and will confirm and strengthen us by the
strength of His power; and, as a good captain, will at length bring
forth His soldiers, whom He has hitherto trained and proved in the camp
of our prison, to the field of the battle set before them. May He hold
forth to us the divine arms, those weapons that know not how to be
conquered,-the breastplate of righteousness, which is never accustomed
to be broken,-the shield of faith, which cannot be pierced through,-the
helmet of salvation, which cannot be shattered,-and the sword of the
Spirit, which has never been wont to be injured. For to whom should we
rather commit these things for him to ask for us, than to our so
reverend bishop,<sup>[12](footnote/fn51.htm#P5167_1571118)</sup> as
destined victims asking help of the priest?

6\. Behold another joy of ours, that, in the duty of your episcopate,
although in the meantime you have been, owing to the condition of the
times, divided from your brethren, you have frequently confirmed the
confessors by your letters; that you have ever afforded necessary
supplies from your own just acquisitions; that in all things you have
always shown yourself in some sense present; that in no part of your
duty have you hung behind as a
deserter.<sup>[13](footnote/fn51.htm#P5169_1571684)</sup> But what more
strongly stimulated us to a greater joy we cannot be silent upon, but
must describe with all the testimony of our voice. For we observe that
you have both rebuked with fitting censure, and worthily, those who,
unmindful of their sins, had, with hasty and eager desire, extorted
peace from the presbyters in your absence, and those who, without
respect for the Gospel, had with profane facility granted the
*holiness*<sup>[14](footnote/fn51.htm#P5170_1572219)</sup> of the Lord
unto dogs, and pearls to swine; although a great crime, and one which
has extended with incredible destructiveness almost over the whole
earth, ought only, as you yourself write, to be treated cautiously and
with moderation, with the advice of all the bishops, presbyters,
deacons, confessors, and even the laymen who abide
fast,<sup>[15](footnote/fn51.htm#P5171_1572621)</sup> as in your letters
you yourself also testify; so that, while wishing unseasonably to bring
repairs to the ruins, we may not appear to be bringing about other and
greater destruction, for where is the divine word left, if pardon be so
easily granted to sinners? Certainly their spirits are to be cheered and
to be nourished up to the season of their maturity, and they are to be
instructed from the Holy Scriptures how great and surpassing a sin they
have committed. Nor let them be animated by the fact that they are many,
but rather let them be checked by the fact that they are not
few.<sup>[16](footnote/fn51.htm#P5172_1573302)</sup> An unblushing
number has never been accustomed to have weight in extenuation of a
crime; but shame, modesty, patience, discipline, humility, and
subjection, waiting for the judgment of others upon itself, and bearing
the sentence of others upon its own judgment,-this it is which proves
penitence; this it is which skins over a deep wound; this it is which
raises up the ruins of the fallen spirit and restores them, which quells
and restrains the burning vapour of their raging sins. For the physician
will not give to the sick the food of healthy bodies, lest the
unseasonable nourishment, instead of repressing, should stimulate the
power of the raging disease,-that is to say, lest what might have been
sooner diminished by abstinence, should, through impatience, be
prolonged by growing indigestion.

7\. Hands, therefore, polluted with impious
sacrifices<sup>[17](footnote/fn51.htm#P5174_1574254)</sup> must be
purified with good works, and wretched mouths defiled with accursed
food<sup>[18](footnote/fn51.htm#P5175_1574425)</sup> must be purged with
words of true penitence, and the spirit must be renewed and consecrated
in the recesses of the faithful heart. Let the frequent groanings of the
penitents be heard; let faithful tears be shed from the eyes not once
only, but again and again, so that those very eyes which wickedly looked
upon idols may wash away, with tears that satisfy God, the unlawful
things that they had done. Nothing is necessary for diseases but
patience: they who are weary and weak wrestle with their pain; and so at
length hope for health, if, by tolerating it, they can overcome their
suffering; for unfaithful is the scar which the physician has too
quickly produced; and the healing is undone by any little casualty, if
the remedies be not used faithfully from their very slowness. The flame
is quickly recalled again to a conflagration, unless the material of the
whole fire be extinguished even to the extremest spark; so that men of
this kind should justly know that even they themselves are more
advantaged by the very delay, and that more trusty remedies are applied
by the necessary postponement. Besides, where shall it be said that they
who confess Christ are shut up in the keeping of a squalid prison, if
they who have denied Him are in no peril of their faith? Where, that
they are bound in the cincture of chains in God's name, if they who have
not kept the confession of God are not deprived of communion? Where,
that the imprisoned martyrs lay down their glorious lives, if those who
have forsaken the faith do not feel the magnitude of their dangers and
their sins? But if they betray too much impatience, and demand communion
with intolerable eagerness, they vainly utter with petulant and
unbridled tongues those querulous and invidious reproaches which avail
nothing against the truth, since they might have retained by their own
right what now by a necessity, which they of their own free will have
sought, they are compelled to sue
for.<sup>[19](footnote/fn51.htm#P5176_1576415)</sup> For the faith which
could confess Christ, could also have been kept by Christ in communion.
We bid you, blessed and most glorious father, ever heartily farewell in
the Lord; and have us in remembrance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle XXVI.](0050051)
