[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0050122)  [Next](0050124) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  Elucidations.

I

On the unity of the Church, p. 421.

The epistles have already been elucidated as the best exposition of this
treatise. Little need be added. But, to illustrate the bearings of this
treatise upon the history of Christian unity, we need only refer to the
manner in which the subject was treated as soon as the papacy was
created by Nicholas I. Thus, he astounded the Greeks by his consummate
audacity (a.d. 860) in the matter of the disputed succession in
Constantinople.<sup>[826](footnote/fn92)</sup> "*It is our will*," he
says, "that Ignatius should appear before our envoys," etc. He declares
it the rule of the Fathers, that, "without the consent of the Roman See
and the Roman pontiff, nothing should be decided." Also, he affirms,
"The Creator of all things has established the Princedom of the Divine
Power, which He granted to His chosen apostles. He has firmly
established it on the firm faith of the Prince of the Apostles,-that is
to say, Peter,-to whom he pre-eminently granted the first See," etc. He
was now speaking on the strength of the forged Decretals, to which he
appeals, and which he succeeded in making law for the West. He thus
created the lasting schism with the Easterns, who had never heard the
like before his time.

Obviously, therefore, had Cyprian entertained such ideas, his treatise
could never have been written; for it is a masterly exposition of a
curious point, viz., the fact that (1) the Apostle Peter received the
first grant alone, and yet (2) all the apostles received precisely the
same; while (1) Peter had thus a primacy of honour, but (2) in no
respect any power or authority over his brethren. On these admitted
facts he constructs his theory of unity, expounding by it the actual
state of the Church's constitution. Peter's memory he honours, but
without any less reverence for all the apostolic Sees, which over and
over again he maintains to be of equal authority and sanctity. That the
Church was founded on Stephen any more than on the Bishop of Carthage,
he never imagines; for it is one thing to allow that a bishop has
succeeded an apostle at the place of his last labours, and quite another
to assume that therefore such a bishop is virtually the apostle himself.
Yet this assumption is the ground of all Roman doctrine on this
point.<sup>[827](footnote/fn92.htm#P9287_2908768)</sup>

Had such been Cyprian's idea, his *Treatise on Unity* must have
proceeded thus: (1) "Our Lord said to Peter only, I will give unto thee
the keys; (2) to the rest of the apostles He gave only an inferior and
subject authority; (3) to the successor of Peter, therefore, at Rome,
all other bishops and churches must be subject; for (4) in this
subjection the law of unity consists; and (5) if even all the other
apostles were alive to this day, they would be subject to Stephen, as
Prince of the Apostles, or would be rebels against Christ."

Compare this treatise of Cyprian, then, with any authorized treatise on
the subject proceeding from modern Rome, and it will be seen that the
two systems are irreconcilable. Thus, in few words, says the
Confession<sup>[828](footnote/fn92.htm#P9290_2909722)</sup> of Pius IV.:
"I acknowledge the Holy Catholic Apostolic *Roman* Church for the mother
and mistress of all churches; and I promise true obedience to the Bishop
of Rome, successor to St. Peter, Prince of the Apostles, and Vicar of
Jesus Christ." This is the voice of Italy in the ninth century; but
Cyprian speaks for Oecumenical Christendom in the third, and the two
systems are as contrary as darkness and light.

II

Falsifying of the text, p. 422.

Cyprian

Interpolated

Loquitur Dominus ad Petrum, Ego tibi dico Tu es Petrus,
etc.<sup>(a)</sup>

<sup>(a)</sup> Et iterum eidem, post ressurectionem suam dicit, Pasce
oves meas.

Super unum<sup>(b)</sup> ædificat ecclesiam.

<sup>(b)</sup> Super *ilium* unum ... et illi pascendas mandat oves
suas.

Hoc erant utique et cæteri apostoli quot fuit Petrus, qui consortio
præediti et honois et potestatis, sed exordium ab unitate
proficisitur,<sup>(c)</sup> ut<sup>(d)</sup> Christi
ecclesia<sup>(e)</sup> una monstretur.<sup>(f)</sup>

<sup>(c)</sup> Et priQui Ecclesiæ resistitur et resistit,<sup>(g)</sup>
in ecclesia se esse confidit?

<sup>(g)</sup> Qui cathedram Petri, super quem fundata est ecclesia
deserit, etc.

Cyprian is often innocently quoted by Romanist controvertists against
the very principles of Cyprian himself, of his life and his writings.
This is due to the fact that they have in their hands vitiated and
interpolated copies. Thus, take a famous passage as follows:-

This is but a specimen of the way in which Cyprian has been "doctored,"
in order to bring him into a shape capable of being misinterpreted. But
you will say where is the proof of such interpolations? The greatly
celebrated Benedictine edition reads as the interpolated column does,
and who would not credit Baluzius? Now note, Baluzius rejected these
interpolations and others; but, dying (a.d. 1718) with his work
unfinished, the completion of the task was assigned to a nameless monk,
who confesses that he corrupted the work of Baluzius, or rather glories
in the exploit.<sup>[829](footnote/fn93)</sup> "Nay, further," he says,
"it was necessary to alter not a few things in the notes of Baluzius;
and more would have been altered if *it could have been done
conveniently*." Yet the edition came forth, and passes as the genuine
work of the erudite Baluzius himself.

An edition of this treatise, with valuable annotations, appeared (a.d.
1852) from the press of Burlington, N.J., under the very creditable
editorship of Professor Hyde, who was soon after called to depart this
life. It exhibits the interpolations, and gives a useful catalogue of
codices and of editions. Though its typographical execution is
imperfect, I know not where so much condensed information on the subject
is to be had at so little
cost.<sup>[830](footnote/fn93.htm#P9311_2912403)</sup> I am grateful for
the real advantage I derived from it on its first appearance.

III

If ye do not forgive, etc., p. 454.

The Jewish liturgies contained the petitions of the Lord's Prayer
essentially; but our divine Lord framed this comprehensive and sublime
compend, and gave it to His children for ever, with His own seal upon it
in the exceptional petition which imparts to it the impress of His own
cross and passion. In the Gospel of St.
Matthew<sup>[831](footnote/fn93.htm#P9316_2913064)</sup> we find our
Master commenting on the fifth petition in a very striking manner, as if
it were the essence of the whole prayer; and, indeed, it is so, regarded
as its evangelical feature, i.e., something added to the law in the
spirit of the Atonement. As such, it surprised the apostles; and He who
knew their thoughts instantly anticipated their inquiries: "For if ye
forgive men," etc.

From the criticism of a very able editorial
hand,<sup>[832](footnote/fn93.htm#P9318_2913521)</sup> I feel it a
privilege to insert the following valuable comments:-

> "The petitions of the Lord's Prayer, as is well known, are to be found
> for the most part in the Talmud and Jewish liturgies. In the latter we
> have frequently the phrases, \`our Father, our King, '\`our Father,
> Father of mercies, 'and \`our Father that art in heaven.' The third
> petition in the *Shemone esre* is, \`Let us hallow the Name in the
> world as it is hallowed in the high heaven. We will hallow Thee, and
> Thy praise, O God, shall not leave our mouth for ever and ever; since
> Thou, O God, art a great and holy King. Praised be Thou, O Lord, thou
> holy God. Thou art holy, and Thy name is holy, and holy men praise
> Thee everlastingly every day.' The ineffable name of God represented
> all His attributes, and is consequently frequently substituted for
> Him. The end of the first petition in the Kaddish prayer runs thus:
> \`May He extend His kingdom in your days, and in those of the whole
> house of Israel very soon.' In Berakhoth (29 *b) we have, \`What is a
> short prayer? Rabbi Eliezer said, "Thy will be done in heaven, and
> peace of heart be unto those who fear Thee on earth."' The same tract
> gives another prayer: \`The needs of Thy people Israel are many, but
> its discernment is small. Do Thou, O everlasting One, our God, give to
> each man what he needs for his support, and what his body wants; but
> do what seemeth Thee good.' In the Mekhilta we read that Rabbi Eliezer
> of Modin, near Jerusalem, said: \`Whosoever has enough for the day to
> eat, and says, What shall I eat to-morrow? is of little faith.' This
> passage seems to illustrate the meaning of the Greek* *e0piou/sion.
> The third petition in the Shemone esre* runs \`Forgive us, O our
> Father, for we have sinned; forgive us, O our King, for we have
> transgressed: since Thou art He that forgiveth and pardoneth.' In
> reference to this the Midrash Shemoth (par. 31) states, \`There is no
> creature who does not owe thanks to the Lord; but He is pitiful and
> long-suffering, and remitteth old debts.' The daily morning prayer of
> the Jews contains this petition: \`Lead us not into the power of sin,
> of transgression and crime, of temptation and shame. Let not passion
> have dominion over us, and keep us far from wicked men and evil
> Company.' In one of the prayers composed in Aramaic for the rabbis and
> leading men of the Jewish community, the passage occurs, \`Defend and
> deliver them from all evil, and from all evil hap, 'which may be
> compared with the petition, \`Deliver us from evil.' The Doxology at
> the end of the Lord's Prayer has equally Jewish parallels. Thus, one
> of the daily evening prayers concludes with the words, \`For Thine is
> the kingdom; 'i.e., God alone is ruler of the world. The words \`the
> power and the glory' seem to come from 1 Chronicles 29:11, which is
> quoted in the Talmud; and the Mishna Berakhoth (ix. 5) states, \`In
> the temple all blessings did not end with "Amen," but with the words
> "for ever and ever"' When the heretics multiplied, however, there was
> only one world; so the concluding formula became \`from everlasting to
> everlasting.'"

IV

Lift up your hearts, p. 455.

It is demonstrated by Sir William Palmer that the *Sursum Corda* is of a
date to which no history runneth contrary, and is to be found in all the
primitive liturgies of whatever family. For a very early example of its
use, I must refer to the Alexandrian liturgy cited by
Bunsen;<sup>[833](footnote/fn93.htm#P9324_2916955)</sup> and, in short,
I beg to refer the reader to all the resources of the fourth volume of
his *Hippolytus*. Little as I can approve of the magisterial air with
which Dr. Bunsen undertakes to decide all questions, and little as I
sympathize with his abnormal religion, which seems to coincide with that
of no existing church or sect in the world, I feel grateful for his
industry in collecting materials, and am always interested in the
ingenuity with which he works them into his theories. Although he
possesses some touchstone unknown to the rest of mankind, by which he
reaches and utters pontifical decisions as to what is genuine and what
is corrupt, I must record my doubts as to many of his facts, and my
dissent from most of his inferences. But, unwilling to refer to Anglican
authorities on points so much disputed, I cordially turn to the learned
Chevalier, and to the treasures he has collected. See the Greek forms on
p. 335 of his fourth volume, followed by the preface on p. 336, and the
*Tersanctus* on p. 337: "$Agioj, a$$gioj, a$$gioj, ku/rie Sabaw/q k.t.l.

V

To pray and give thanks, p. 457.

Here comes into view that reference of the
apostle<sup>[834](footnote/fn93.htm#P9329_2918141)</sup> to the usages
of the primitive assemblies: "How shall he that occupieth the room of
the unlearned say *Amen* at thy giving of thanks." Though Cyprian omits
the final *Amen* from his express commentary, it is to be noted that our
Lord makes it virtually part of this prayer, by His precept (John 16:23,
24), to ask in His name. Now, He makes this word *Amen* one of His own
names<sup>[835](footnote/fn93.htm#P9330_2918537)</sup> in the
Apocalypse; throwing back a new character upon His frequent use of it,
especially in St. John's Gospel, and giving it as a sort of
appropriation of 2 Corinthians 1:20, when He calls Himself "The Amen,
the faithful and true Witness." He thus makes it infinitely dear to
Christians.<sup>[836](footnote/fn93.htm#P9331_2918846)</sup> As in the
Jewish usages,<sup>[837](footnote/fn93.htm#P9332_2918962)</sup> with
which the disciples were familiar, it was a matter of course, we may
suppose they added *Amen* in reciting this prayer, but not with their
subsequent knowledge that it implies the merits, and claims the
mediation, of the Great Intercessor. Revelation 5:8, 8:3, 8:4; John
17:8.

Tertullian<sup>[838](footnote/fn93.htm#P9334_2919362)</sup> refers to
the responsive "Hallelujah" as "enriched prayer," and the *Amen* usually
accompanied this ejaculation.

VI

Its failing estate, p. 458.

Hippolytus<sup>[839](footnote/fn93.htm#P9339_2919562)</sup> foresaw the
democratic age into which the feudal era of iron should pass, corroding
in the toes by contact with the miry clay of the despised *plebs*, "the
seed of men." No lasting strength was to be imparted to imperialism by
the plebiscite (Daniel 2:43); and the prophet might almost be supposed
to have the epoch of *dynamite* in his sight, as he speaks of the
unwillingness of the people to cleave to the effete system of empire.
Now, then, if "the failing estate" of the world was apparent in the days
of Philip and Decius, how much more in our own! Sixteen human lives span
the gulf of time between us and them, for we have many centenarians
among us; and with the Lord "a thousand years are as one day." Compare 2
Peter 3:9. And, putting such Scriptures together, is it not clear that
"the last time" (i.e., the last of the seven *times* of the Gentiles) is
drawing to its close? The *three and a half* times of Daniel extend to
the convulsive epoch of Mohammed; the second moiety (of the seven) to
our own age. See Faber, *Sacred
Calendar*<sup>[840](footnote/fn93.htm#P9340_2920615)</sup> vol. i. cap.
iii. pp. 308, 309, etc.

VII

Peter, upon whom, etc., p. 486.

Launoi, the eminent Gallican, found but *seventeen* of the Fathers and
Doctors of the Church (among whom he reckons "Fathers" down to the
twelfth century) who understand St. Peter to be "the rock," and he cites
*forty* of the contrary
opinion.<sup>[841](footnote/fn93.htm#P9345_2921009)</sup> Yet of the
"seventeen," most of them speak only rhetorically, and with justifiable
freedom. I have often done the same myself, on the principle which the
same apostle applies to *all* Christians: "Ye also as lively
*stones*,"<sup>[842](footnote/fn93.htm#P9346_2921270)</sup> etc. But it
is quite noteworthy that the Council of Trent itself momentarily adopts
the prevailing patristic and therefore the Catholic interpretation,
speaking of the Nicene
Creed:<sup>[843](footnote/fn93.htm#P9347_2921558)</sup> "In quo omnes
qui fidem Christi profitentur necessario conveniunt, ac *fundamentum*
firmum et *unicum*, contra quod portaeinferi nunquam praevalebunt
(Matthew 16:18)." Thus, *the faith* of Peter is confessed the only
foundation, in a direct exposition of the text so often quoted with
another intent. In spite of all this, the Creed of Pius IV. was enjoined
as soon as that council closed; and every member of the late Vatican
Council was made to profess the same verbally before any other business
was undertaken. Now, even this spurious creed forced them to swear
concerning the Holy Scriptures," I will never take and interpret them
otherwise than according to the *unanimous consent* of the Fathers."
Obviously, according to this rule, there is no Catholic doctrine on the
subject; much less any Catholic teaching to the effect that the modern
bishops of Rome are "the rock," as really as St. Peter himself.

VIII

The Eucharist carried in it, p. 488.

The modern usage of the Latin churches is for the priest to put the
wafer into the communicant's mouth, an ordinance dating no farther back
than a.d. 880. A new doctrine having been forged, and faith in the
*corporal* presence of Christ being forced upon the conscience, a change
of ceremonial followed, which indicates the novelty of the idea.
Contrast the teaching of St. Cyril of
Jerusalem,<sup>[844](footnote/fn93.htm#P9352_2922961)</sup> informing
his catechumens how they should receive, as follows:-

"Approaching, therefore, come not with thy wrists extended, or thy
fingers open; but make thy left hand a sort of cushion for thy right,
which is about to receive the King. And having hollowed thy palm,
receive the Body of Christ, saying after it, *Amen*." "*Not discerning*
the Lord's body," etc., is the language of Scripture; but, had the
apostles taught transubstantiation, this could not be said, for
everybody can discern the host when it is uplifted. The Lord's Body is
therefore discerned *by faith*, and so taken and received.

IX

Which should be greatest, p. 493.

How differently our Lord must have settled this inquiry had He given the
supremacy to one of the Apostles, or had He designed the supremacy of
any single pastor to be perpetual in His Church! "Who should be
greatest? "ask this question of any Romanist theologian, and he answers,
in the words of the Creed of Plus IV., "the Bishop of Rome, successor to
St. Peter, Prince of the Apostles, and Vicar of Christ." But why was no
such answer given by our Lord? And why does St. Peter know nothing of it
when he says, "The elders who are among you I exhort, who am also an
eider ... feed the flock of God, taking the oversight ... not as being
lords over God's heritage," etc. So also in the Council of Jerusalem,
how humbly he sits under the presidency of
James,<sup>[845](footnote/fn93.htm#P9358_2924360)</sup> and gain how
cheerfully he permits the apostles to send him forth, and "give him
mission" to Samaria!<sup>[846](footnote/fn93.htm#P9359_2924482)</sup>
St. Paul, moreover, who was "not a whit behind the chiefest of the
Apostles,"<sup>[847](footnote/fn93.htm#P9360_2924582)</sup> overrules
him, and reforms his
judgment.<sup>[848](footnote/fn93.htm#P9361_2924687)</sup>

If I have forborne in these notes to refer frequently to the Treatise of
Bishop Sage, who often elucidates our author in a very learned manner,
it is because he is almost wholly a controvertist, and therefore not to
my purpose in this work. For his
*Cyprian*,<sup>[849](footnote/fn93.htm#P9363_2924970)</sup> however, I
entertain a sincere respect; and, as it might seem otherwise should I
omit all reference to that work, I place its title in the footnote.
Profoundly do I feel what another Scottish
Doctor<sup>[850](footnote/fn93.htm#P9364_2925259)</sup> has beautifully
said, "It is a loss, even to those that oppose errors and divisions,
that they are forced to he busied that way."

X

From the slender twig, my son, thou hast ascended, p. 513.

The text of Cyprian<sup>[851](footnote/fn93.htm#P9369_2925534)</sup> is:
"Catulus leonis Juda, de *frutice* fill mi ascendisti, recubans
obdormisti velut leo, et velut catulus leonis." Now, with this compare
the comment of Calmet, citing the Septuagint (e0k blastou= = e germine),
and rendering by metaphrase, "*e medio plantarum*, sive herbarum
germinantium, ascendisti."

Here, then, we have the idea precisely equivalent to Jeremiah 49:19:
"Ecce *quasi leo ascendet* de superbia Jordanis." The lion is recumbent
among the sprouting twigs (*frutice*, or foliage) of the Jordan's banks
in the springtime. The swelling of the river, which the melting of snows
from Lebanon causes to overflow, rouses the reposing creature; and he
goes up into the mountains. But Cyprian had in hand the old
African,<sup>[852](footnote/fn93.htm#P9371_2926278)</sup> which seems to
follow the LXX., and St. Jerome's vulgate did not; and this word
*frutice* animates Cyprian's poetic genius. Its spring-tide imagery
corresponding with
Easter,<sup>[853](footnote/fn93.htm#P9372_2926507)</sup> he *reads into
it* all the New Testament fulfilment: "Thou layedst down and sleepedst
as a lion, and as a lion's whelp-*but, from the shooting of the first
verdure in spring, thou hast gone up on high*-thou hast ascended." "Quis
excitabit illum" is separated from this in the Paris text, and in the
Septuagint, which the Old Latin followed, and so I have pointed it,
though the Edinburgh reads: "and as a lion's whelp; who shall stir him
up? "

XI

Third Book ... religious teaching of our school, p. 528.

Quirinus, Cyprian's "son" in the Gospel, seems to me to have been a
catechumen of the *competent* class, i.e., preparing for baptism at
Easter; or possibly of the higher sort, preparing for the first
communion. Many tokens lead me to surmise that he may have been of
Jewish birth; and, if so, he was probably baptized *Quirinus* after Luke
2:2, as St. Paul borrowed his Roman name from Sergius
Paulus.<sup>[854](footnote/fn93.htm#P9377_2927495)</sup> The use of the
word *secta*, here rendered "school," suggests to me that the Vulgate
got it (and so our English version) out of the old African Latin in Acts
28:22. If Quirinus was a Hebrew, there is a playful irony in Cyprian's
use of the word in expounding the pure morality of "the *sect*"
everywhere spoken against.

Origen's treatise *Against Celsus* shows how cunningly the adversaries
of the Gospel could assume a Jewish position against
it;<sup>[855](footnote/fn93.htm#P9379_2927961)</sup> and the first two
books of that work are designed to establish a perfect harmony between
the Old Testament and the New, proving Christ to be the substance and
sum of both. Cyprian may have foreseen the perils menacing the Church
from the school of Plotinus, already rising, and which soon sent forth
the venomous Porphyry. He was but a presbyter when he wrote this
excellent defence of the faith; and his earnest pastoral care for his
pupil is shown by his addition of a third book, entirely practical. The
catechetical system of St. Luke's
day<sup>[856](footnote/fn93.htm#P9380_2928530)</sup> had become a
developed feature of the Church (St. Cyril's lectures in the succeeding
century show how it was further expanded), and it also illustrates the
purity of her moral teaching. Our author harmonizes faith and works, and
presents her simple scriptural precepts in marked contrast with the
putrid casuistry<sup>[857](footnote/fn93.htm#P9381_2928870)</sup> which
Pascal exposes, and which grew up in the West with the enforcement of
auricular confession by Innocent III., a.d. 1215. The theory of
transubstantiation was also made a dogma at the same time, and operated,
with the other, to the total extinguishment of the primitive discipline
and worship. The withholding of the chalice in the Holy Communion
followed, a.d. 1415.

XII

Good works and mercy, p. 528.

Clement was able to remind the heathen, half a century
before,<sup>[858](footnote/fn93.htm#P9386_2929486)</sup> that Christ had
"*already* made the universe an ocean of blessings." Here we have the
moral canons of Christianity reflecting the Light of the World, and they
show us how practically it operated. As I have noted, the first
Christian hospital was founded (a.d. 350) by Ephraem Syrus. His example
was followed by St. Basil, who also rounded another for lepers. The
founding of hostels as refuges for travellers was an institution of the
Nicene period. "In the time of Chrysostom," says one not too well
disposed towards the
Gospel,<sup>[859](footnote/fn93.htm#P9387_2930050)</sup> "the church of
Antioch supported three thousand widows and virgins, besides strangers
and sick. Legacies for the poor became common; and it was not infrequent
for men and women who desired to live a life of especial sanctity, and
especially for priests who attained the episcopacy, as a first act, to
bestow their properties in charity. A Christian, it was maintained,
should devote at least one-tenth of his profits to the poor. A priest
named Thalasius collected blind beggars in an asylum on the banks of the
Euphrates. A merchant named Apollinus founded on Mount Nitria a
gratuitous dispensary."So here our author's canons enforce (1) works of
mercy; (2) almsdeeds; (3) brotherly love; (4) mutual support; (5)
forgiveness of injuries; (6) the example of Christ's holy living; (7)
forbearance; (8) suppression of idle talk; (9) love of enemies; (10)
abhorrence of usury, (11) and avarice, (12) and carnal impurity: also,
(13) obedience to parents; (14) parental love; (15) consideration of
servants; (16) respect for the aged; (17) moderation, even in use of
things lawful; (18) control of the tongue; (19) abstinence from
detraction; (20) to visit the sick; (21) care of widows and orphans;
(22) not to flatter; (23) to practise the Golden Rule; and (24) to
abstain from bloodshed. In short, we have here the outgrowth of the
Sermon on the Mount, and of St. Paul's epitome, "Whatsoever things are
true," etc.<sup>[860](footnote/fn93.htm#P9388_2931569)</sup>

XIII

In the thirteenth Psalm, p. 546.

The note says that the Oxford edition gives it as the *fourteenth*,
while in our English Bibles it is the *fifteenth*. As I find that some
of the readers of these works are puzzled by such confusions, I note
*retrospectively*, as well as for future reference, the origin of such
apparent blunders.

1\. Our English version follows the Hebrew numbering, which is reputed
the most accurate. By that a psalm is cited in the New Testament as if
the numbering itself were important, and the product of inspired
wisdom.<sup>[861](footnote/fn93.htm#P9394_2932131)</sup>

2\. But the Greek Psalter differs from the Hebrew; Psalms 9. and Psalms
10. being made into one, as confessedly their material suggests. The
Seventy joined also Psalms 114. and Psalms 115. But they divided Psalms
116., and also Psalms 142.

3\. The Vulgate Latin follows the LXX.; and our Ante-Nicene Fathers
usually quote the Septuagint, or else the Old Latin, by which the
Vulgate was probably governed. In the Vulgate, also, the Hebrew prefaces
are often numbered as if they were verses, which is another source of
confusion.

4\. By the fusion of Psalms 9. and Psalms 10., our Psalms 15. becomes
the Psalms 14., and so the Vulgate gives it; and the Oxford translators
follow that.

5\. But our text says "Psalms 13.," and for this it is not easy to
account. The Oxford editors regard it as a mere corruption of the text,
and change it accordingly.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Seventh Council of Carthage Under Cyprian.](0050124)
