[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0050050)  [Next](0050052) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  Epistle XXVI.<sup>[1](footnote/fn51.htm#P5181_1576763)</sup>

Cyprian to the Lapsed.

1\. Our Lord, whose precepts and admonitions we ought to observe,
describing the honour of a
bishop<sup>[2](footnote/fn51.htm#P5186_1577343)</sup> and the order of
His Church, speaks in the Gospel, and says to Peter: "I say unto thee,
That thou art Peter, and upon this rock will I build my Church; and the
gates of hell shall not prevail against it. And I will give unto thee
the keys of the kingdom of heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt bind on
earth shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever thou shall loose on earth
shall be loosed in
heaven."<sup>[3](footnote/fn51.htm#P5187_1577874)</sup> Thence, through
the changes of times and successions, the ordering of bishops and the
plan of the Church flow onwards; so that the Church is founded upon the
bishops, and every act of the Church is controlled by these same
rulers.<sup>[4](footnote/fn51.htm#P5188_1578123)</sup> Since this, then,
is founded on the divine law, I marvel that some, with daring temerity,
have chosen to write to me as if they wrote in the name of the Church;
when the Church is established in the bishop and the clergy, and all who
stand *fast in the faith*. For far be it from the mercy of God and His
uncontrolled might to suffer the number of the lapsed to be called the
Church; since it is written, "God is not the God of the dead, but of the
living."<sup>[5](footnote/fn51.htm#P5189_1578644)</sup> For we indeed
desire that all may be made alive; and we pray that, by our
supplications and groans, they may be restored to their original state.
But if certain lapsed ones claim to be the Church, and if the Church be
among them and in them, what is left but for us to ask of these very
persons that they would deign to admit us into the Church? Therefore it
behoves them to be submissive and quiet and modest, as those who ought
to appease God, in remembrance of their sin, and not to write letters in
the name of the Church, when they should rather be aware that they are
writing to the Church.

2\. But some who are of the lapsed have lately written to me, and are
humble and meek and trembling and fearing God, and who have always
laboured in the Church gloriously and liberally, and who have never made
a boast of their labour to the Lord, knowing that He has said, "When ye
shall have done all these things, say, We are unprofitable servants: we
have done that which was our duty to
do."<sup>[6](footnote/fn51.htm#P5191_1579654)</sup> Thinking of which
things, and although they had received certificates from the martyrs,
nevertheless, that their satisfaction might be admitted by the Lord,
these persons beseeching have written to me that they acknowledge their
sin, and are truly repentant, and do not hurry rashly or importunately
to secure peace; but that they are waiting for my presence, saying that
even peace itself, if they should receive it when I was present, would
be sweeter to them. How greatly I congratulate these, the Lord is my
witness, who hath condescended to tell what such, and such sort of
servants deserve of His kindness. Which letters, as I lately received,
and now read that yon have written very differently, I beg that you will
discriminate between your wishes; and whoever you are who have sent this
letter, add your names to the certificate, and transmit the certificate
to me with your several names. For I must first know to whom I have to
reply; then I will respond to each of the matters that you have written,
having regard to the mediocrity of my place and conduct. I bid you,
beloved brethren, ever heartily farewell, and live quietly and
tranquilly according to the Lord's discipline. Fare ye well.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle XXVII.](0050052)
