[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0050070)  [Next](0050072) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  Epistle XLVI.<sup>[1](footnote/fn54)</sup>

Cyprian's Answer to Cornelius, Congratulating Him on the Return of the
Confessors from Schism.

1\. Cyprian to Cornelius his brother, greeting. I profess that I both
have rendered and do render the greatest thanks without ceasing, dearest
brother, to God the Father Almighty, and to His Christ the Lord and our
God and Saviour, that the Church is thus divinely protected, and its
unity and holiness is not constantly nor altogether corrupted by the
obstinacy of perfidy and heretical wickedness. For we have read your
letter, and have exultingly received the greatest joy from *the
fulfilment of* our common desire; to wit, that Maximus the presbyter,
and Urbanus, the confessors, with Sidonius and Macarius, have re-entered
into the Catholic Church, that is, that they have laid aside their
error, and given up their schismatical, nay, their heretical madness,
and have sought again in the soundness of faith the home of unity and
truth; that whence they had gone forth to glory, thither they might
gloriously return; and that they who had confessed Christ should not
afterwards desert the camp of Christ, and that they might not tempt the
faith of their charity and
unity,<sup>[2](footnote/fn55.htm#P5504_1679551)</sup> who had not been
overcome in strength and courage. Behold the safe and unspotted
integrity of their praise; behold the uncorrupted and substantial
dignity of these confessors, that they have departed from the deserters
and fugitives, that they have left the betrayers of the faith, and the
impugners of the Catholic Church. With reason did both the people and
the brotherhood receive them when they returned, as you write, with the
greatest joy; since in the glory of confessors who had maintained their
glory, and returned to unity, there is none who does not reckon himself
a partner and a sharer.

2\. We can estimate the joy of that
day<sup>[3](footnote/fn55.htm#P5506_1680265)</sup> from our own
feelings. For if, in this place, the whole number of the brethren
rejoiced at your letter which you sent concerning their confession, and
received this tidings of common rejoicing with the greatest alacrity,
what must have been the joy there when the matter itself, and the
general gladness, was carried on tinder the eyes of all? For since the
Lord in His Gospel says that there is the highest "joy in heaven over
one sinner that
repenteth,"<sup>[4](footnote/fn55.htm#P5507_1680765)</sup> how much
greater is the joy in earth, no less than in heaven, over confessors who
return with their glory and with praise to the Church of God, and make a
way of returning for others by the faith and approval of their example?
For this error had led away certain of our brethren, so that they
thought they were following the communion of confessors. When this error
was removed, light was infused into the breasts of all, and the Catholic
Church has been shown to be one, and to be able neither to be cut nor
divided. Nor can any one now be easily deceived by the talkative words
of a raging schismatic, since it has been proved that good and glorious
soldiers of Christ could not long be detained without the Church by the
deceitfulness and perfidy of others. I bid you, dearest brother, ever
heartily farewell.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle XLVII.](0050072)
