[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0050107)  [Next](0050109) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  Elucidations.

I

The presbyterate and the priesthood, p. 268.

Here is an instance of a usage just becoming common to the East and
West,-to give the name of *priesthood* to the chief ministry as
distinguished from the presbyterate. So in Chrysostom *passim*, but
notably in his treatise peri i0erwsu/nhj. The scriptural warrant for
this usage is derived, dialectically, from the universal priesthood of
Christians (1 Peter 2:5), front the Old-Testament prophecies of the
Christian ministry (Isaiah 66:21), and from the culmination of the
*sacerdotium* in the chief ministry of St. Paul. Over and against the
Mosaic priesthood he is supposed to assert his own priestly *charisma*
in the Epistle to the Romans,<sup>[5](footnote/fn66)</sup> where he
says, "I have therefore my glorying in Christ Jesus" (i.e., the Great
High Priest), "in things pertaining to God; "that is (according to the
Hebrews 5:1), "as a high priest taken from among men, *in things
pertaining to God*, that he may offer both gifts and sacrifices for
sins." He asserts himself, therefore, as a better priest than those of
the Law, "because of the grace that was given me of God, that I should
be a minister of Christ Jesus unto the Gentiles, ministering *in
sacrifice*<sup>[6](footnote/fn66.htm#P6659_2151250)</sup> the Gospel of
God." He then (according to this theory) adopts the language and the
idea of Malachi, and adds, "that the oblation of the Gentiles might be
acceptable," etc.; i.e., the pure *ninchah*, or oblation of bread and
wine, commemorative of the one "and only propitiatory sacrifice of
Calvary."

These ideas run through all the primitive
liturgies,<sup>[7](footnote/fn66.htm#P6661_2151666)</sup> which we are
soon to reach in this series. It is no part of my plan to vindicate
them, but only to state them. It will be felt by many that these were at
least exaggerated views of the apostle's ministry,-of the principle
underlying his phrase, ei0j to einnai me leitourgo n ... i9erurgou=nta
to e0uagge/lion; but let nobody *read into* these primitive expressions
concerning a commemoration of the *one only propitiatory* sacrifice
"once offered," the monstrous doctrine of the Council of Trent, which,
reduced to its mildest
form,<sup>[8](footnote/fn66.htm#P6662_2152239)</sup> is as follows: "The
sacrifice of the Mass is, and ought to be considered, *one and the same
sacrifice with that of the Cross* ... which being the case, *it must be
taught*, without arty hesitation, that (as the holy Council of Trent
hath moreover explained) the sacred and holy sacrifice of the Mass is
not only a sacrifice of praise and eucharist, or a mere commemoration of
the sacrifice effected on the Cross, but also truly *a propitiatory
sacrifice, by which God is appeased, and rendered propitious to us*."
That such was not the doctrine of the Latin churches, even in the ninth
century, sufficiently appears from the treatise of Ratramn; but it is
not less apparent from the ancient liturgies themselves, and even from
many primitive features which glitter like gold-dust amid the dross of
the Roman missal itself.

II

To do nothing on my own private opinion, p. 283.

Note this golden principle which runs through all the epistles and
treatises of our large-minded and free-spirited author, "A primordio
episcopatus mei statuerim nihil, sine consilio vestro, *et sine consensu
plebis meoe* privata sententia gerere." When, in the midst of
persecution, he could not convoke his council, he apologizes, as will
appear hereafter,<sup>[9](footnote/fn66.htm#P6667_2153514)</sup> even
for taking measures requisite to the emergency without such counsel.
Such was *his duty* according to the primitive discipline, no doubt; but
our author knew well that a relaxing of discipline in exceptional
circumstances is the fruitful source of corruption. He is jealous
against himself:-

Will rush into the *Church*."

It is instructive to find the views of Baxter harmonizing with those of
Cyprian. He speaks for himself and his brethren as not opposed to
episcopacy, but only to "the engrossing (by prelates) of *the sole
power* of ordination and jurisdiction ... *excluding wholly the pastors*
of particular churches *from all share in it*." This is a sound
Cyprianic remonstrance;<sup>[10](footnote/fn66.htm#P6672_2154306)</sup>
but Cyprian always includes the *plebs* as well as the "pastors." In
short, if Ignatius, his Gamaliel, teaches primarily, "Do nothing without
the bishop," he not less reiterates his own maxim, "Let bishops do
nothing without the presbytery and the people."

Here it must be noted, however, that the primitive Fathers never speak
of *the episcopate* as a development of *the presbyterate*, as do the
Middle-Age writers and the schoolmen. It was the policy of these to
write down the bishops to mere presbyters, for the purpose of exalting
the papacy, which they made the only episcopate and the universal
apostolate. The Universal Bishop might, then, appoint presbyters to be
*his local vicars*, and to bear a *titular* episcopate, as such,-the
name of an *office*, and not an *order*. The episcopate was no longer,
as with Ignatius and Cyprian, the apostolic office from which the
presbyterate and diaconate were *precipitated*, but, rather, an
ecclesiastical *sublimate* of the presbyterate. By this theory no bishop
in the Latin communion can deal with the Bishop of Rome as Cyprian
did,-on terms of equality, and as a co-bishop or colleague in a common
episcopate. Such is the school doctrine: and the Council of Trent made
it dogma, abolishing the *order* of bishops as such, and defining that
there are only three Holy Orders; viz., presbyters, deacons, and
sub-deacons.<sup>[11](footnote/fn66.htm#P6674_2155824)</sup> The order
of bishops is thus reduced to a merely ecclesiastical order in "the
hierarchy," a vicariate of the papacy.

III

According to the Lord's discipline, p. 292.

Here he lays down, as a divine constitution for the Church, the
principle exemplified in the Acts of the Apostles (Acts 15:4, 22, 23).
Compare Epistle xiv, where he speaks of some presbyters and deacons as
"too little mindful of discipline," and of his instructions to the laity
to maintain the same. Observe his language in the exceptional case
referred to in the previous elucidation. "In ordinations of the clergy,
beloved brethren" (he writes to "presbyters, deacons, *and the whole
people*"), "we usually consult you beforehand, and weigh (the matter)
with *the general advice*."

It is surprising that the learned and pious Dr. Pusey, always influenced
by his essential Gallicanism, and too little devoted to the *primitive*
discipline, hastily committed himself, in his work on *The Councils of
the Church*, to an erroneous statement of the historic
facts<sup>[12](footnote/fn66.htm#P6680_2156901)</sup> as to the
participation of the laity in synods. In reply, that American Cyprian,
Whittingham of Maryland, called the Doctor's attention to an example he
had evidently overlooked, in words worthy of note from so profound a
patristic scholar. He says, "It occurred in the middle of the period to
which Dr. Pusey's book is limited, and, *as nearly as can be known*,
during the episcopate of Cyprian." He adds, "I doubt whether there is
another equally particular relation of the circumstances of an episcopal
election within the first four centuries." It is given in the life of
Gregory Thaumaturgus, by his namesake Gregory of
Nyssa.<sup>[13](footnote/fn66.htm#P6681_2157562)</sup> The whole of
Bishop Whittingham's searching
reviewal<sup>[14](footnote/fn66.htm#P6682_2157690)</sup> of Dr. Pusey's
positions is an honour to American scholarship, and ought to be
consulted by the student of primitive antiquity.

IV

Common consultation, p. 294.

Again, we have our author's testimony to the free spirit of primitive
councils, in which I exult as a Christian believer, and as a loyal
supporter of constitutional liberty, i.e., freedom regulated by law.
Concerning which, note the saying of Franklin, . To primitive discipline
and to these free councils of the Cyprianic age the world is indebted
for all its free constitutions; and when narrow-minded men presume to
assert the contrary, because of mediaeval feudalism in the West, let
them be reminded that not till the Church's constitutions were
superseded by the forged Decretals, was the Western Church so deprived
of its freedom as to be made the tool of despotism in violating the
liberty of Christians. The last council of the whole West that retained
anything of the primitive spirit was that of Frankfort, a.d. 794: but
its spirit survived, and not infrequently asserted itself in "the
Gallican maxims," so called; while in England it was never smothered,
but always survived in the parliaments until the usurpations of the
papacy were abolished in the Church and realm. This was done by a
*practical re-assertion of Cyprianic principles*. It is well to remind
such reckless critics as Draper and Lecky that the Christian Church is
responsible only for her own Catholic legislation; not at all for what
has been done under the fraudulent pretexts of the Decretals, in
defiance of her whole system, which is embodied in the Ante-Nicene
Fathers and the Nicene Constitutions.

V

Counsel and judgment of all ... a common cause, p. 296.

The language here is indicative of the whore spirit of Catholic canons,
to which that of the Latin canonists affords such a contrast after the
Isidorian forgeries had been made, by Nicholas, the system of the West.
Note the words which our author addresses to his clergy, *omni plebe
adstante*: "Quaeres cum omnium nostrum consilium et sententiam specter,
praejudicare ego, et soli mihi rem communem vindicare, non audeo." In
other words, "What concerns all, ought by all to be considered and
decided."<sup>[15](footnote/fn66.htm#P6691_2159932)</sup>

The fifteenth chapter of Bishop Wordsworth's *History of the Church*
(vol. i.) deals with the ante-Nicene councils, and expounds their spirit
and organization in a very able and concise manner.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Elucidations, cont.](0050109)
