[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0050063)  [Next](0050065) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  Epistle XXXIX.<sup>[1](footnote/fn53)</sup>

To the People, Concerning Five Schismatic Presbyters of the Faction of
Felicissimus.

1\. Cyprian to the whole people, greeting. Although, dearest brethren,
Virtius,<sup>[2](footnote/fn53.htm#P5386_1639214)</sup> a most faithful
and upright presbyter, and also Rogatianus and Numidicus, presbyters,
confessors, and illustrious by the glory of the divine condescension,
and also the deacons, good men and devoted to the ecclesiastical
administration in all its duties, with the other ministers, afford you
the full attention of their presence, and do not cease to confirm
individuals by their assiduous exhortations, and, moreover, to govern
and reform the minds of the lapsed by their wholesome counsels, yet, as
much as I can, I admonish, and as I can, I visit you with my letters. By
my letters I say, dearest brethren; for the malignity and treachery of
certain of the presbyters has accomplished this, that I should not be
allowed to come to you before Easter-day; since mindful of their
conspiracy, and retaining that ancient venom against my episcopate, that
is, against your suffrage and God's judgment, they renew their old
attack upon me, and once more begin their sacrilegious machinations with
their accustomed craft. And, indeed, of God's providence, neither by our
wish nor desire, nay, although we were forgiving and silent, they have
suffered the punishment which they had deserved; so that, not cast out
by us, they of their own accord have cast themselves out. They
themselves, before their own conscience, have passed sentence on
themselves in accordance with your suffrages and the divine. These
conspirators and evil men of their own accord have driven themselves
from the Church.

2\. Now it has appeared whence came the faction of Felicissimus; on what
root and by what strength it stood. These men supplied in former times
encouragements and exhortations to certain confessors, not to agree with
their bishop, not to maintain the ecclesiastical discipline with faith
and quietness according to the Lord's precepts, not to keep the glory of
their confession with an uncorrupt and unspotted conversation. And lest
it should be too little to have corrupted the minds of certain
confessors, and to have wished to arm a portion of our broken fraternity
against God's priesthood, they have now turned their attention with
their envenomed deceitfulness to the ruin of the lapsed, to turn away
from the healing of their wound the sick and the wounded, and those who,
by the misfortune of their fall, are less fit and less sturdy to take
stronger counsel; and invite them, by the falsehood of a fallacious
peace, to a fatal rashness, leaving off prayers and supplications,
whereby, with long and continual satisfaction, the Lord is to be
appeased.

3\. But I pray you, brethren, watch against the snares of the devil,
and, taking care for your own salvation, be diligently on your guard
against this death-bearing fallacy. This is another persecution and
another temptation. Those five presbyters are none other than the five
leaders who were lately associated with the magistrates in an edict,
that they might overthrow our faith, that they might turn away the
feeble hearts of the brethren to their deadly nets by the prevarication
of the truth. Now the same scheme, the same overturning, is again
brought about by the five presbyters, linked with Felicissimus, to the
destruction of salvation, that God should not be besought, and that he
who has denied Christ should not appeal for mercy to the same Christ
whom he had denied; that after the fault of the crime, repentance also
should be taken away; and that the Lord should not be appeased through
bishops and priests, but that the Lord's priests being. forsaken, a new
tradition of a sacrilegious appointment should arise, contrary to the
evangelical discipline. And although it was once arranged as well by us
as by the confessors and the
city<sup>[3](footnote/fn53.htm#P5389_1642949)</sup> clergy, and moreover
by all the bishops appointed either in our province or beyond the
sea,<sup>[4](footnote/fn53.htm#P5390_1643210)</sup> that no novelty
should be introduced in respect of the case of the lapsed unless we all
assembled into one place, and our counsels being compared, should decide
upon a moderate sentence, tempered alike with discipline and with
mercy;-against this our counsel they have rebelled, and all priestly
authority and power is destroyed by factious conspiracies.

4\. What sufferings do I now endure, dearest brethren, that I myself am
not able to come to you at the present juncture, that I myself cannot
approach you each one, that I myself cannot exhort you according to the
teaching of the Lord and of His Gospel! An exile of, now, two
years<sup>[5](footnote/fn53.htm#P5392_1643953)</sup> was not sufficient,
and a mournful separation from you, from your countenance, and from your
sight,-continual grief and lamentation, which, in my loneliness without
you, breaks me to pieces with my constant mourning, nor my tears flowing
day and night, that there is not even an opportunity for the priest,
whom you made with so much love and eagerness, to greet you, nor to be
enfolded in your embraces. This greater grief is added to my worn
spirit, that in the midst of so much solicitude and necessity I am not
able myself to hasten to you, since, by the threats and by the snares of
perfidious men, we are anxious that on our coming a greater tumult may
not arise there; and so, although the bishop ought to be careful for
peace and tranquillity in all things, he himself should seem to have
afforded material for sedition, and to have embittered persecution anew.
Hence, however, beloved brethren, I not only admonish but counsel you,
not rashly to trust to mischievous words, nor to yield an easy consent
to deceitful sayings, nor to take darkness for light, night for day,
hunger for food, thirst for drink, poison for medicine, death for
safety. Let not the age nor the authority deceive you of those who,
answering to the ancient wickedness of the two
elders;<sup>[6](footnote/fn53.htm#P5393_1645270)</sup> as they attempted
to corrupt and violate the chaste
Susannah,<sup>[7](footnote/fn53.htm#P5394_1645534)</sup> are thus also
attempting, with their adulterous doctrines, to corrupt the chastity of
the Church and violate the truth of the Gospel.

5\. The Lord cries aloud, saying, "Hearken not unto the words of the
false prophets, for the visions of their own hearts deceive them. They
speak, but not out of the mouth of the Lord. They say to them that
despise the word of the Lord, Ye shall have
peace."<sup>[8](footnote/fn53.htm#P5396_1645948)</sup> They are now
offering peace who have not peace themselves. They are promising to
bring back and recall the lapsed into the Church, who themselves have
departed from the Church. There is one God, and Christ is one, and there
is one Church, and one chair founded upon the rock by the word of the
Lord.<sup>[9](footnote/fn53.htm#P5397_1646271)</sup> Another altar
cannot be constituted nor a new priesthood be made, except the one altar
and the one priesthood. Whosoever gathereth elsewhere, scattereth.
Whatsoever is appointed by human madness, so that the divine disposition
is violated, is adulterous, is impious, is sacrilegious. Depart far from
the contagion of men of this kind. and flee from their words, avoiding
them as a cancer and a plague, as the Lord warns you and says, "They are
blind leaders of the blind. But if the blind lead the blind, they shall
both fall into the
ditch."<sup>[10](footnote/fn53.htm#P5398_1646994)</sup> They intercept
your prayers, which you pour forth with us to God day and night, to
appease Him with a righteous satisfaction. They intercept your tears
with which you wash away the guilt of the sin you have committed; they
intercept the peace which you truly and faithfully ask from the mercy of
the Lord; and they do not know that it is written, "And that prophet, or
that dreamer of dreams, that hath spoken to turn you away from the Lord
your God, shall be put to
death."<sup>[11](footnote/fn53.htm#P5399_1647488)</sup> Let no one,
beloved brethren, make you to err from the ways of the Lord; let no one
snatch you, Christians, from the Gospel of Christ; let no one take sons
of the Church away from the Church; let them perish alone for themselves
who have wished to perish; let them remain outside the Church alone who
have departed from the Church; let them anoia be without bishops who
have rebelled against bishops; let them alone undergo the penalties of
their conspiracies who formerly, according to your votes, and now
according to God's judgment, have deserved to undergo the sentence of
their own conspiracy and malignity.

6\. The Lord warns us in His Gospel, saying, "Ye reject the commandment
of God, that ye may establish your own
tradition."<sup>[12](footnote/fn54.htm#P5401_1648242)</sup> Let them who
reject the commandment of God and endeavour to keep their own tradition
be bravely and firmly rejected by you; let one downfall be sufficient
for the lapsed; let no one by his fraud hurl down those who wish to
rise; let no one cast down more deeply and depress those who are down,
on whose behalf we pray that they may be raised up by God's hand and
arm; let no one turn away from all hope of safety those who are half
alive and entreating that they may receive their former health; let no
one extinguish every light of the way of salvation to those that are
wavering in the darkness of their lapse. The apostle instructs us,
saying, "If any man teach otherwise, and consent not to the wholesome
words of our Lord Jesus Christ and His doctrine, he is lifted up with
foolishness: from such withdraw
thyself."<sup>[13](footnote/fn54.htm#P5402_1649081)</sup> And again he
says, "Let no man deceive you with vain words; for because of these
things cometh the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience. Be not
ye therefore partakers with
them."<sup>[14](footnote/fn54.htm#P5403_1649291)</sup> There is no
reason that you should be deceived with vain words, and begin to be
partakers of their depravity. Depart from such, I entreat you, and
acquiesce in our counsels, who daily pour out for you continual prayers
to the Lord, who desire that you should be recalled to the Church by the
clemency of the Lord, who pray for the fullest peace from God, first for
the mother, and then for her children. Join also your petitions and
prayers with our prayers and petitions; mingle your tears with our
wailings. Avoid the wolves who separate the sheep from the shepherd;
avoid the envenomed tongue of the devil, who from the beginning of the
world, always deceitful and lying, lies that he may deceive, cajoles
that he may injure, promises good that he may give evil, promises life
that he may put to death. Now also his words are evident, and his
poisons are plain. He promises peace, in order that peace may not
possibly be attained; he promises salvation, that he who has sinned may
not come to salvation; he promises a Church, when he so contrives that
he who believes him may utterly perish apart from the Church.

7\. It is now the occasion, dearly beloved brethren, both for you who
stand fast to persevere bravely, and to maintain your glorious
stability, which you kept in persecution with a continual firmness; and
if any of you by the circumvention of the adversary have fallen, that in
this second temptation you should faithfully take counsel for your hope
and your peace; and in order that the Lord may pardon you, that you
should not depart from the priests of the Lord, since it is written,
"And the man that will do presumptuously, and will not hearken unto the
priest or unto the judge that shall be in those days, even that man
shall die."<sup>[15](footnote/fn54.htm#P5405_1651064)</sup> Of this
persecution this is the latest and final temptation, which itself also,
by the Lord's protection, shall quickly pass away; so that I shall be
again presented to you after Easter-day with my colleagues, who, being
present, we shall be able as well to arrange as to complete the matters
which require to be done according to your judgment and to the general
advice of all of us as it has been decided
before.<sup>[16](footnote/fn54.htm#P5406_1651500)</sup> But if anybody,
refusing to repent and to make satisfaction to God, shall yield to the
party of Felicissimus and his satellites, and shall join himself to the
heretical faction, let him know that he cannot afterwards return to the
Church and communicate with the bishops and the people of Christ. I bid
you, dearest brethren, ever heartily farewell, and that you plead with
me in continual prayer that the mercy of God may be entreated.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle XL.](0050065)
