[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0050146)  [Next](0050148) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  Introductory Notice Anonymous Treatise on Re-Baptism.<sup>[78](footnote/fn107.htm#P10706_3371910)</sup>

--------

The following treatise on Re-baptism has been attributed by some
authorities to the pen of one
Ursinus,<sup>[79](footnote/fn107.htm#P10709_3372067)</sup> a monk, who
is said to have written in the fourth century. But internal evidence
seems to point to a bishop as having been the
writer;<sup>[80](footnote/fn107.htm#P10710_3372243)</sup> and it seems
very probable that it was written while the baptismal controversy was
still agitating the Church, from the manner in which he refers to it.
Moreover, the bitter attack contained in the first
chapter<sup>[81](footnote/fn107.htm#P10711_3372503)</sup> was probably
levelled against Cyprian, as the leader of the party in favour of the
re-baptism of heretics. And this would hardly have been the case, at
least the attack would not have been characterized by the same rancour,
if Cyprian had already suffered martyrdom, and the controversy had lost
its acrimony and intensity.

Rigaltius, who first edited the treatise, among his notes to the works
of Cyprian, judged that it was written about the time of that Father.
And Fell, Cave, Tillemont, and Galland, are of the same opinion. The two
latter, indeed, conjecture that it was actually intended against
Cyprian.

The difficulty arising to the translator from a loose and rambling
style, and very involved argument, has been enhanced by a text
singularly uncertain; but he ventures to think that there are points in
the treatment of the subject which will not be without interest to the
theological student of the present day, although its immediate purpose
has passed away.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: A Treatise on Re-Baptism by an Anonymous Writer.](0050148)
