[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0050028)  [Next](0050030) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  Epistle IV.

To the Presbyters and Deacons.<sup>[1](footnote/fn47)</sup>

1\. Cyprian to the presbyters and deacons, his beloved brethren,
greeting. Being by the grace of God in safety, dearest brethren, I
salute you, rejoicing that I am informed of the prosperity of all things
in respect of your safety also; and as the condition of the
place<sup>[2](footnote/fn47.htm#P4795_1451714)</sup> does not permit me
to be with you now, I beg you, by your faith and your religion, to
discharge there both your own office and mine, that there may be nothing
wanting either to discipline or diligence. In respect of means,
moreover, for meeting the expenses, whether for those who, having
confessed their Lord with a glorious voice, have been put in prison, or
for those who are labouring in poverty and want, and still stand fast in
the Lord, I entreat that nothing be wanting, since the whole of the
small sum which was collected there was distributed among the clergy for
cases of that kind, that many might have means whence they could assist
the necessities and burthens of individuals.

2\. I beg also that there may be no lack, on your parts, of wisdom and
carefulness to preserve peace. For although from their affection the
brethren are eager to approach and to visit those good confessors, on
whom by their glorious beginnings the divine consideration has already
shed a brightness, yet I think that this eagerness must be cautiously
indulged, and not in crowds,-not in numbers collected together at once',
lest from this very thing ill-will be aroused, and the means of access
be denied, and thus, while we insatiably wish for all, we lose all. Take
counsel, therefore, and see that this may be more safely managed with
moderation, so that the presbyters also, who there
offer<sup>[3](footnote/fn47.htm#P4797_1453175)</sup> with the
confessors, may one by one take turns with the deacons individually;
because, by thus changing the persons and varying the people that come
together, suspicion is diminished. For, meek and humble in all things,
as befits the servants of God, we ought to accommodate ourselves to the
times, and to provide for quietness, and to have regard to the people. I
bid you, brethren, beloved and dearly longed-for, always heartily
farewell; and have me in remembrance. Greet all the brotherhood. Victor
the deacon, and those who are with me, greet you.Farewell!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle V.](0050030)
