[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0050051)  [Next](0050053) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  Epistle XXVII.<sup>[1](footnote/fn51)</sup>

To the Presbyters and Deacons.

1\. Cyprian to the presbyters and deacons, his brethren, greeting. You
have done uprightly and with discipline, beloved brethren, that, by the
advice of my colleagues who were present, you have decided not to
communicate with Gaius the presbyter of Didda, and his deacon; who, by
communicating with the lapsed, and offering their
oblations,<sup>[2](footnote/fn52.htm#P5201_1581661)</sup> have been
frequently taken in their wicked errors; and who once and again, as you
wrote to me, when warned by my colleagues not to do this, have persisted
obstinately, in their presumption and audacity, deceiving certain
brethren also from among our people, whose benefit we desire with all
humility to consult, and whose salvation we take care for, not with
affected adulation, but with sincere faith, that they may supplicate the
Lord with true penitence and groaning and sorrow, since it is written,
"Remember from whence thou art fallen, and
repent."<sup>[3](footnote/fn52.htm#P5202_1582308)</sup> And again, the
divine Scripture says, "Thus saith the Lord, When thou shalt be
converted and lament, then thou shalt be saved, and shall know where
thou hast been."<sup>[4](footnote/fn52.htm#P5203_1582488)</sup>

2\. Yet how can those mourn and repent, whose groanings and tears some
of the presbyters obstruct when they rashly think that they may be
communicated with, not knowing that it is written, "They who call you
happy<sup>[5](footnote/fn52.htm#P5205_1582718)</sup> cause you to err,
and destroy the path of your feet?
"<sup>[6](footnote/fn52.htm#P5206_1582806)</sup> Naturally, our
wholesome and true counsels have no success, whilst the salutary truth
is hindered by mischievous blandishments and flatteries, and the wounded
and unhealthy mind of the lapsed suffers what those also who are bodily
diseased and sick often suffer; that while they refuse wholesome food
and beneficial drink as bitter and distasteful, and crave those things
which seem to please them and to be sweet for the present, they are
inviting to themselves mischief and death by their recklessness and
intemperance. Nor does the true remedy of the skilful physician avail to
their safety, whilst the sweet enticement is deceiving with its charms.

3\. Do you, therefore, according to my letters, take counsel about this
faithfully and wholesomely, and do not recede from better counsels; and
be careful to read these same letters to my colleagues also, if there
are any present, or if any should come to you; that, with unanimity and
concord, we may maintain a healthful plan for soothing and healing the
wounds of the lapsed, intending to deal very fully with all when, by the
Lord's mercy, we shall begin to assemble together. In the meantime, if
any unrestrained and impetuous person, whether of our presbyters or
deacons or of strangers, should dare, before our decree, to communicate
with the lapsed, let him be expelled from our communion, and plead the
cause of his rashness before all of us when, by the Lord's permission,
we shall assemble together
again.<sup>[7](footnote/fn52.htm#P5208_1584291)</sup> Moreover, you
wished me to reply what I thought concerning Philumenus and Fortunatus,
sub-deacons, and Favorinus, an acolyte, who retired in the midst of the
time of trial, and have now returned. Of which thing I cannot make
myself sole judge, since many of the clergy are still absent, and have
not considered, even thus late, that they should return to their place;
and this case of each one must be considered separately and fully
investigated, not only with my colleagues, but also with the whole of
the people themselves.<sup>[8](footnote/fn52.htm#P5209_1584938)</sup>
For a matter which hereafter may constitute an example as regards the
ministers of the Church must be weighed and adjudged with careful
deliberation. In the meanwhile, let them only abstain from the monthly
division,<sup>[9](footnote/fn52.htm#P5210_1585275)</sup> not so as to
seem to be deprived of the ministry of the Church, but that all matters
being in a sound state, they may be reserved till my coming. I bid you,
beloved brethren, ever heartily farewell.Greet all the brotherhood, and
fare ye well.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle XXVIII.](0050053)
