[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](ric02)  [Next](ric04.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_327">p. 327</span>

## SHAMANISM.

Shamanism, the supposed individual control of the supernatural through a
personally acquired power of communication with the spirit world, rests
upon much the same basis in California as elsewhere in North America. In
general among uncivilized tribes the simpler the stage of culture the
more important the shaman. It is as if he constituted an element that
remained nearly constant in quantity of effect, as it is fundamentally
unvarying in form, through all successive periods of civilization to the
highest; but that as increase in degree of civilization brought with it
ever more and more new elements, religious and otherwise, and these
unfolded in ever expanding complexity, he became, relatively to the
total mass of thought and action of a people, less and less important.
Certainly the difference is marked between the Eskimo, whose religion
consists of little else than shamanism, and the much more highly
organized Indians of the North Pacific Coast, where shamanism is but one
of several and by no means the most important religious factor, even
though it may be the most deep seated. The same contrast is found
between the rude simple-minded Indians of California as compared with
those of the Plains and of the Southwest, where the supremacy of the
shaman is rather obscured by that of the priest conversant with a
ceremony. Even within California the difference holds good. In the
Northwest, where the native civilization reached on the whole its
greatest complexity, the shaman is less prominent than anywhere else in
the state. In the south, where the culture is also more developed than
in the Central part of the state, the shaman is certainly as much
dreaded as there; but that his province is more restricted is shown by
the fact that in Southern California the shamans in their capacity as
such do not seem to form associations, perform public ceremonies, or
directly participate in the tribal dances.

The power of the shaman being directly dependent upon his personal
acquisition of a connection with the supernatural world, an
understanding of the method by which this acquisition takes place
generally furnishes also a pretty accurate idea of the nature of his
functions and influence. The most common way of acquiring

<span id="page_328">p. 328</span>

shamanistic power in California, as in so many other parts of the world,
is by dreaming. A spirit, be it that of an animal, a place, the sun or
another natural object, a deceased relative, or an entirely unimbodied
spirit, visits the future medicine-man in his dreams, and the connection
thus established between them is the source and basis of the latter's
power. This spirit becomes his guardian spirit or "personal." From it he
receives the song or rite or knowledge of the charm and the
understanding which enable him to cause or remove disease and to do and
endure what other men cannot. In California, with a few special
exceptions, the idea does not seem so prevalent as elsewhere that this
guardian spirit is an animal. Occasionally it is the ghost of a person
who has once lived, usually a relative. Perhaps most frequently it is
merely a spirit as such, not connected with any tangible embodiment or
form, either human, animate, or inanimate. The belief that the shaman
acquires the spirits most frequently in dreaming is prevalent through
the whole Sierra Nevada region and in many other parts of the state.

In certain regions another important method, that of the waking vision
and trance, is recognized. The person is in a wild desolate place,
perhaps hunting. Suddenly there is an appearance before him. He becomes
unconscious and while in this state receives his supernatural power. On
his return to his people he is for a time demented or physically
affected. After he again becomes normal he has control of his
supernatural influences. Such beliefs prevail in part among the Yuki and
Athabascans of the Coast Range and the Maidu of the Sacramento valley,
and no doubt occur more or less sporadically in other regions.

Finally, the shaman sometimes acquires his powers through seeking for
them rather than by having them thrust upon him during a dream or
vision. This of course is a common procedure in the Plains and in part
on the North Pacific Coast. Among the Yurok of the lower Klamath, for
instance, the person whom the spirits have visited in dreams, ascends
high peaks where he spends one or more nights until he has acquired his
powers. Among the Wiyot of Humboldt Bay there are similar beliefs. In
the same Northwestern region a man who wishes to be fierce, strong, and
invulnerable swims at night in lakes inhabited by

<span id="page_329">p. 329</span>

monsters or thunders. From these, if his courage is sufficient to await
and endure their presence, he receives the desired powers. This practice
of bathing in lonely lakes closely recalls the custom prevalent along
the Pacific slope for some distance northward, and within California it
is probably not strictly confined to the Northwestern culture area. On
the whole, however, this deliberate method of acquiring shamanistic
power is not common, nor, as has already been stated, would it be in
accord with the generally lower intensity of religious feeling among the
California Indians as compared with those of most other parts of the
continent.

The Northwestern area is not only exceptional in being the principal one
within the state where this deliberate seeking of shamanistic power is
prevalent. The conception of a guardian spirit is much less clearly
defined among the Northwestern tribes, with whom the possession of
"pains," the small material objects which cause disease, rather than of
true spirits, seems to be what is generally associated with shamanistic
power. As already stated, shamanism forms a much less important part of
religion as a whole in the Northwestern area than elsewhere, and it is
in accord with this fact that the majority of the shamans, and those
supposed to be most powerful, are women.

In parts of Southern California also the idea of the guardian spirit
does not seem to be well developed. Here the method of acquiring
shamanistic power is almost exclusively by dreams; but among the Mohave
and probably other Colorado river tribes, myths, and not a personal
meeting or communion with an individual spirit, constitute the subject
of the dreams. The Mohave shamans believe that they were present at the
beginning of the world, More mankind had separated into tribes. They
were with the great leader and almost creator, Mastamho. They saw him
singing, blowing, and rubbing over the body of a sick man, if their own
power be that of curing disease, and from Mastamho they thus learned the
actions and speeches which constitute their power. Before him they
showed what they had learned from him, and by him were designated those
who had seen and learned most and those of less power. Each man saw only
the shamanistic actions relating, to his particular power, whether these
had

<span id="page_330">p. 330</span>

reference to the curing of disease, to love, to war, or to some other
activity. The Mohave universally speak of having dreamed these scenes,
just as each narrator affirms his knowledge of non-shamanistic myths and
of ceremonies to have been individually derived from dreaming them. It
is probable that to a certain extent this is true. That it is not
entirely true becomes evident when the Mohave with equal unanimity state
that these dreams were dreamed by them before birth. In other words,
their statement that they have dreamed such experiences is to be
interpreted mainly as a belief that they as individuals were present in
spirit form at the beginning of the world, at the time when it took
shape and everything was ordained, and when all power, shamanistic and
otherwise, was established and allotted. It is obvious that with this
conception as the basis of their whole religion, there is, but little
room for any beliefs as to guardian spirits of the usual form.

Of course there is nothing that limits the shaman to one spirit, and
among many or most tribes, such as the Maidu, a powerful medicine-man
may possess a great number.

Frequently in Central and Northwestern California there is some more or
less public ceremony at which a new shaman is, so to speak, initiated
before he practices his powers. The body of initiated shamans do not
form a definite society or association. The ceremony is rather an
occasion that marks the first public appearance of the novice, in which
he receives for his own good, and presumably for that of the community
also, the assistance of the more experienced persons of his profession.
Commonly it is thought that the novice cannot receive and exercise the
full use of his powers without this assistance. The ceremony is usually
held in the ceremonial chamber and is accompanied by dancing. The
efforts of the older shamans are directed toward giving the initiate a
firm and permanent control of the spirits which have only half attached
themselves to him and which are thought to be still more or less
rebellious. Of course exhibitions of magic and of the physical effects
of the presence of the spirits are a prominent feature of these
ceremonies. This initiation of doctors is found among the Northwestern
tribes and in the Central region among the Maidu and Wintun and probably
other groups.

<span id="page_331">p. 331</span>

A special class of shamans found to a greater or less extent among
probably all the Central tribes, though they are wanting both in the
Northwest and the South, are the so-called bear doctors, shamans who
have received power from grizzly bears, often by being taken into the
abode of these animals--which appear there in human form,--and who after
their return to mankind possess many of the qualities of the grizzly
bear, especially his apparent invulnerability to fatal attack. The bear
shamans can not only assume the form of bears, as they do in order to
inflict vengeance on their enemies, but it is believed that they can be
killed an indefinite number of times when in this form and each time
return to life. In some regions, as among the Pomo and Yuki, the bear
shaman was not thought as elsewhere to actually become a bear, but to
remain a man who clothed himself in the skin of a bear to his complete
disguisement, and by his malevolence, rapidity, fierceness, and
resistance to wounds to be capable of inflicting greater injury than a
true bear. Whether any bear shamans actually attempted to disguise
themselves in this way to accomplish their ends is doubtful. It is
certain that all the members of some tribes believed it to be in their
power.

The rattlesnake doctor, who cured or prevented the bite of the
rattlesnake, was usually distinct from other medicine-men. Among the
Yuki his power, as that of the rattlesnake, was associated with the sun,
among the Maidu with the thunder. Among the Yokuts the rattlesnake
shamans annually held a public ceremony designed to prevent rattlesnake
bites among the tribe. On this occasion they displayed their power over
the snakes by handling them in a manner analogous to that of the Hopi,
and by even allowing themselves to be bitten.

As everywhere else, the practice of shamanism in California centers
about disease and death. It is probably more narrowly limited to this
phase than in most other portions of North America. Being an essentially
unwarlike even though a revengeful people, it is natural that the
supernatural power personally acquired by the California Indian should
not often be directed toward success in battle. Success in love is also
less often the result of such personal power than for instance on the
Plains,

<span id="page_332">p. 332</span>

perhaps because in the latter region the custom which made virtually
every young man seek shamanistic power, resulted in a condition where
those whose proclivities were not toward medicine or war, desired and
received their powers in this direction. Influence over game and over
nature's yield of vegetable products was sometimes attributed to shamans
in California, but on the whole their powers in this respect were not
very much insisted upon except in Southern California, favorable or
adverse conditions of this kind being attributed rather to the tribal
ceremonies, and in the Northwest connected with the all-important
formulae. The causing and prevention of disease and death were therefore
even more largely the predominant functions of the person who had
acquired personal supernatural power in California than elsewhere in
America.

That the medicine-men who could cure diseases were also the ones who
must cause it, unless it were the direct consequence of an infraction of
some religious observance or prohibition, was the almost universal
belief, which was probably adhered to with greater definiteness than in
most portions of North America. The killing of medicine-men was
therefore of frequent occurrence. Among some tribes, as the Yokuts, the
medicine-man who had lost several patients was held responsible for
their death by their relatives. Among the Mohave also murder seems to
have been the normal end of the medicine-man. In the Northwestern region
the shaman who failed to cure was forced to return the fee received in
advance. If he refused to attend a patient when summoned, he was
compelled to pay, in the event of the latter's death, ail amount of
property equal that proffered him for his services. So completely was
the shaman regarded as the cause of disease and death, as well as of
their prevention, that one hears very little among the California
Indians of witchcraft, that is to say, of malevolent practices performed
by persons, often very old or very young people, who are not believed to
be endowed with the shaman's power of curing.

Disease, as among most primitive peoples the world over, was usually
held to be caused by small material objects which had in a supernatural
way been caused to enter the body. The determination and extraction of
these was the principal office of the

<span id="page_333">p. 333</span>

medicine-man and, also as elsewhere, was most frequently accomplished by
sucking. In certain regions, especially the South, the tubular pipe was
brought into requisition for this purpose, the disease-object being
supposed to be sucked into the doctor's mouth through it. Among such
tribes the pipe was also smoked by the medicine-man as part of his
ritual. In other cases the sucking was performed directly with the
mouth, but, just as the disease-causing object had by supernatural means
entered the body without causing or leaving an opening, so it was
extracted by the medicine-man without an incision or a trace of its
passage. This object might be a bit of hair, a stick, an insect or small
reptile, a piece of bone, deer sinew, or almost any other material. In
the greater part of northern California, including the Northwestern
region, it was not an ordinary physical object working mischief by its
mere presence in the body or by the supernatural properties with which
the shaman or his spirits had endowed it, but an object itself
supernatural and called a "pain." These pains are variously described,
frequently as being sharp at both ends and clear as ice. They possessed
the power of moving even after extracted, and were able to fly through
the air to the intended victim at the command of the person who had sent
them. The medicine-man after extracting the disease-object or pain
almost always exhibited it. It was then either destroyed by him or kept
by him for his own use. In Northwestern California he sometimes
swallowed it, the degree of his power being thought to be dependent upon
the number of pains he kept in his body, both those which he received
upon his becoming a shaman, when they were "cooked" before a great fire
in the doctor-initiation dance, and those which he subsequently secured
in doctoring his patients. The rattlesnake's bite was regarded as being
dangerous on account of its injection into the victim's body of a
material animate object, which the rattlesnake shaman must extract if
death was not to ensue. Among the Yuki this object was a small snake;
among the Yokuts a rodent's tooth or other object supposed to have
formed part of the animals upon which the snake subsisted. In some cases
two classes of medicine-men were distinguished, one diagnosing, the
other treating the patient. Among the Wiyot or Wishosk the former by
dancing before the

<span id="page_334">p. 334</span>

patient saw in a vision the nature and location of the disease-object
and determined what had caused it to enter the body. Somewhat similar
though varying distinctions between shamans whose power consists of
knowledge, and those who have practical capacity as well, occurred among
other tribes. Sucking is not always resorted to. The Mohave principally
blow or spit over their patients and stroke or rub or knead their
bodies, which actions are supposed by them to drive out the disease.
Medicines and drugs are but little used, or if so, in a manner that
gives an opportunity for their physiological efficacy. Four or five
drops--the number varying according to the ceremonial number of the
tribe--of a weak decoction may be given to the patient or even only
applied to him externally. It is natural that where the magic effect of
the drug as used in a certain ritual is believed in, the quantity so
used is not an essential consideration. It is the supernatural qualities
connected with the plant that bring about the desired result, and these
are as inherent in a drop placed upon the forehead as in a basketful
taken internally. Perhaps the most-used medicinal plant throughout the
state is the angelica root, probably principally on account of its
fragrance. Tobacco is considerably employed by shamans, but is of equal
importance in other aspects of religion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Public Ceremonies](ric04.md)
