[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](ric00)  [Next](ric02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_319">p. 319</span>

# THE RELIGION OF THE INDIANS OF CALIFORNIA

### BY

## A. L. KROEBER.

Fundamentally the religion of the Indians of California was very similar
to that of savage and uncivilized races the world over. Like all such
peoples, the California Indians were in an animistic state of mind, in
which they attributed life, intelligence, and especially supernatural
power, to virtually all living and lifeless things. They lacked no less
the ideas and practices of shamanism, the universal accompaniment of
animism: namely, the belief that certain men, through communication with
the animate supernatural world, had the power to accomplish what was
contrary to, or rather above, the events of daily ordinary experience,
which latter in so far as they were distinguished from the happenings
caused by supernatural agencies, were of natural, meaningless, and, as
it were, accidental origin. As in most parts of the world, belief in
shamanistic power was centered most strongly about disease and death,
which among most tribes were not only believed to be dispellable but to
be entirely caused by shamans. In common with the other American
Indians, those of California made dancing, and with it always singing, a
conspicuous part of nearly all their ceremonies that were of a public or
tribal nature. They differed from almost all other tribes of North
America in showing a much weaker development of the ritualism, and
symbolism shading into pictography, that constitute perhaps the most
distinctive feature of the religion of the Americans as a whole.
Practically all the approaches to a system

<span id="page_320">p. 320</span>

of writing devised in North America, whether in Mexico, Yucatan, or
among the tribes of the United States and Canada, are the direct outcome
of a desire of religious expression. The California Indians however were
remarkably free from even traces of this tendency, equally in their
religion and in the more practical aspects of their life. In many parts
of North America, and more often where the culture was considerably
developed than where it was rude, there was a considerable amount of
fetishism, not of the crass and so to speak superstitious type of
Africa, but rather as an accompaniment and result of over-symbolism.
This fetishistic tendency was very slightly developed in California, and
this in spite of--or as in Americanist could more properly say on
account of--the generally rude and primitive condition of culture. By
contrast, as the action and the visible symbol were a less important
means of religious expression, the word, both spoken and sung, was of
greater significance in California. The weakness of the ritualistic
tendency is however again marked in the circumstance that the exact form
of religious speech was frequently less regarded than its substance. In
this aspect the Indians of California differed widely from such nations
as the Egyptians and the peoples of Asia, where the efficacy of the word
and speech used for a religious purpose was usually directly dependent
upon the accuracy of their external and audible rendering, even to their
pronunciation and intonation.

As an ethnographic province the greater part of California plainly forms
a unit. There are, however, two portions of the present political state
that showed much cultural distinctness in times of native life and that
must usually be kept apart in all matters of ethnological and religious
consideration. One of these divergent culture areas comprised the
extreme northwestern corner of the state, in the drainage of the lower
Klamath and about Humboldt Bay. The other consisted of what is now
usually known as Southern California, extending from the Tehachapi pass
and mountains in the interior, and from Point Conception on the coast,
southward to the Mexican boundary. The religion of the Indians of the
peninsula of Lower California is very little known from literature, and
the people themselves are almost extinct. It is probable that it was
more or less different from the

<span id="page_321">p. 321</span>

forms of religion occurring in Southern California, that is to say, the
southern part of the American state of California. Ethnographically
Southern California was considerably diversified. The tribes of the
plains and mountains near the sea must be distinguished on the one hand
from those of the desert interior and of the valley of the Colorado
river, and on the other from those of the Santa Barbara archipelago and
the adjacent coast of the mainland to the north. The latter island group
of tribes has become entirely extinct without leaving more than the
merest trace of records of its religion. The two other groups, the
seaward and the interior, apparently presented a much greater uniformity
in religion than in their material and social life, so much so that in
the present connection all the tribes of Southern California of whom
anything is known may be regarded as constituting a single ethnographic
province. The culture of the small Northwestern area was in every way,
and that of the larger Southern province at least in some respects, more
highly organized and complex than that of the still larger and principal
Central region, which comprised at least two-thirds of the state and
which, if such a selection is to be made, must be considered as the most
typically Californian.

The religious practices of the Indians of California fall into three
well marked divisions: (1) such observances as are followed and executed
by individuals, although their perpetuation is traditionary and tribal;
that is to say, customary observances; (2) individual practices resting
upon a direct personal communication of an individual with the
supernatural world; in other words, shamanism; (3) observances and
practices which are not only the common property of the tribe by
tradition, but in which the entire tribe or community directly or
indirectly participates; in other words, ceremonies.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Customary Observances by Individuals](ric02)
