[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sof09)  [Next](sof11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="08"></span>

<div>

<span id="img_head08.png"></span> ![Header Chapter
VIII.](img/head08.png.md)

## VIII.

### The Travelling Freemasons of the Middle Ages.

The first of these points to which I refer is the establishment of a
body of architects, widely disseminated throughout Europe during the
middle ages under the avowed name of *Travelling Freemasons*. This
association of workmen, said to have been the descendants of the Temple
Masons, may be traced by the massive monuments of their skill at as
early a period as the ninth or tenth century; although, according to the
authority of Mr. Hope, who has written elaborately on the subject, some
historians have found the evidence of their existence in the seventh
century, and have traced a peculiar masonic language in the reigns of
Charlemagne of France and Alfred of England.

It is to these men, to their preeminent skill in architecture, and to
their well-organized system as a class of workmen, that the world is
indebted for those magnificent edifices which sprang up in such
undeviating principles of architectural form during the middle ages.

"Wherever they came," says Mr. Hope, "in the suite of missionaries, or
were called by the natives, or arrived of their own accord, to seek
employment, they appeared headed by a chief surveyor, who governed the
whole troop, and named one man out of every ten, under the name of
warden, to overlook the nine others, set themselves to building
temporary huts [35](sof37.htm#xref_35.md) for their habitation around the
spot where the work was to be carried on, regularly organized their
different departments, fell to work, sent for fresh supplies of their
brethren as the object demanded, and, when all was finished, again
raised their encampment, and went elsewhere to undertake other jobs."
 [36](sof37.htm#xref_36.md)

This society continued to preserve the commingled features of operative
and speculative masonry, as they had been practised at the temple of
Solomon. Admission to the community was not restricted to professional
artisans, but men of eminence, and particularly ecclesiastics, were
numbered among its members. "These latter," says Mr. Hope, "were
especially anxious, themselves, to direct the improvement and erection
of their churches and monasteries, and to manage the expenses of their
buildings, and became members of an establishment which had so high and
sacred a destination, was so entirely exempt from all local, civil
jurisdiction, acknowledged the pope alone as its direct chief, and only
worked under his immediate authority; and thence we read of so many
ecclesiastics of the highest rank--abbots, prelates, bishops--conferring
additional weight and respectability on the order of Freemasonry by
becoming its members--themselves giving the designs and superintending
the construction of their churches, and employing the manual labor of
their own monks in the edification of them."

Thus in England, in the tenth century, the Masons are said to have
received the special protection of King Athelstan; in the eleventh
century, Edward the Confessor declared himself their patron; and in the
twelfth, Henry I. gave them his protection.

Into Scotland the Freemasons penetrated as early as the beginning of the
twelfth century, and erected the Abbey of Kilwinning, which afterwards
became the cradle of Scottish Masonry under the government of King
Robert Bruce.

Of the magnificent edifices which they erected, and of their exalted
condition under both ecclesiastical and lay patronage in other
countries, it is not necessary to give a minute detail. It is sufficient
to say that in every part of Europe evidences are to be found of the
existence of Freemasonry, practised by an organized body of workmen, and
with whom men of learning were united; or, in other words, of a combined
operative and speculative institution.

What the nature of this speculative science continued to be, we may
learn from that very curious, if authentic, document, dated at Cologne,
in the year 1535, and hence designated as the "Charter of Cologne." In
that instrument, which purports to have been issued by the heads of the
order in nineteen different and important cities of Europe, and is
addressed to their brethren as a defence against the calumnies of their
enemies, it is announced that the order took its origin at a time "when
a few adepts, distinguished by their life, their moral doctrine, and
their sacred interpretation of the arcanic truths, withdrew themselves
from the multitude in order more effectually to preserve uncontaminated
the moral precepts of that religion which is implanted in the mind of
man."

We thus, then, have before us an aspect of Freemasonry as it existed in
the middle ages, when it presents itself to our view as both operative
and speculative in its character. The operative element that had been
infused into it by the Dionysiac artificers of Tyre, at the building of
the Solomonic temple, was not yet dissevered from the pure speculative
element which had prevailed in it anterior to that period.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IX. Disseverance of the Operative Element](sof11.md)

</div>
