[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sof13)  [Next](sof15.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="12"></span>

<div>

<span id="img_head12.png"></span> ![Header Chapter XII.](img/head12.png.md)

## XII.

### The Symbolism of Solomon's Temple.

I have said that the operative art is symbolized--that is to say, used
as a symbol--in the speculative science. Let us now inquire, as the
subject of the present essay, how this is done in reference to a system
of symbolism dependent for its construction on types and figures derived
from the temple of Solomon, and which we hence call the "Temple
Symbolism of Freemasonry."

Bearing in mind that speculative Masonry dates its origin from the
building of King Solomon's temple by Jewish and Tyrian
artisans, [53](sof37.htm#xref_53.md) the first important fact that attracts
the attention is, that the operative masons at Jerusalem were engaged in
the construction of an earthly and material temple, to be dedicated to
the service and worship of God--a house in which Jehovah was to dwell
visibly by his Shekinah, and whence he was, by the Urim and Thummim, to
send forth his oracles for the government and direction of his chosen
people.

Now, the operative art having, *for us*, ceased, we, as speculative
Masons, symbolize the labors of our predecessors by engaging in the
construction of a spiritual temple in our hearts, pure and spotless, fit
for the dwelling-place of Him who is the author of purity--where God is
to be worshipped in spirit and in truth, and whence every evil thought
and unruly passion is to be banished, as the sinner and the Gentile were
excluded from the sanctuary of the Jewish temple.

This spiritualizing of the temple of Solomon is the first, the most
prominent and most pervading of all the symbolic instructions of
Freemasonry. It is the link that binds the operative and speculative
divisions of the order. It is this which gives it its religious
character. Take from Freemasonry its dependence on the temple, leave out
of its ritual all reference to that sacred edifice, and to the legends
connected with it, and the system itself must at once decay and die, or
at best remain only as some fossilized bone, imperfectly to show the
nature of the living body to which it once belonged.

Temple worship is in itself an ancient type of the religious sentiment
in its progress towards spiritual elevation. As soon as a nation
emerged, in the world's progress, out of Fetichism, or the worship of
visible objects,--the most degraded form of idolatry,--its people began
to establish a priesthood and to erect temples. [54](sof37.htm#xref_54.md)
The Scandinavians, the Celts, the Egyptians, and the Greeks, however
much they may have differed in the ritual and the objects of their
polytheistic worship, all were possessed of priests and temples. The
Jews first constructed their tabernacle, or portable temple, and then,
when time and opportunity permitted, transferred their monotheistic
worship to that more permanent edifice which is now the subject of our
contemplation. The mosque of the Mohammedan and the church or the chapel
of the Christian are but embodiments of the same idea of temple worship
in a simpler form.

The adaptation, therefore, of the material temple to a science of
symbolism would be an easy, and by no means a novel task, to both the
Jewish and the Tyrian mind. Doubtless, at its original conception, the
idea was rude and unembellished, to be perfected and polished only by
future aggregations of succeeding intellects. And yet no biblical
scholar will venture to deny that there was, in the mode of building,
and in all the circumstances connected with the construction of King
Solomon's temple, an apparent design to establish a foundation for
symbolism. [55](sof37.htm#xref_55.md)

I propose now to illustrate, by a few examples, the method in which the
speculative Masons have appropriated this design of King Solomon to
their own use.

To construct his earthly temple, the operative mason followed the
architectural designs laid down on the *trestle-board*, or
tracing-board, or book of plans of the architect. By these he hewed and
squared his materials; by these he raised his walls; by these he
constructed his arches; and by these strength and durability, combined
with grace and beauty, were bestowed upon the edifice which he was
constructing.

The trestle-board becomes, therefore, one of our elementary symbols. For
in the masonic ritual the speculative Mason is reminded that, as the
operative artist erects his temporal building, in accordance with the
rules and designs laid down on the trestle-board of the master-workman,
so should he erect that spiritual building, of which the material is a
type, in obedience to the rules and designs, the precepts and commands,
laid down by the grand Architect of the universe, in those great books
of nature and revelation, which constitute the spiritual trestle-board
of every Freemason.

The trestle-board is, then, the symbol of the natural and moral law.
Like every other symbol of the order, it is universal and tolerant in
its application; and while, as Christian Masons, we cling with
unfaltering integrity to that explanation which makes the Scriptures of
both dispensations our trestle-board, we permit our Jewish and
Mohammedan brethren to content themselves with the books of the Old
Testament, or the Koran. Masonry does not interfere with the peculiar
form or development of any one's religious faith. All that it asks is,
that the interpretation of the symbol shall be according to what each
one supposes to be the revealed will of his Creator. But so rigidly
exacting is it that the symbol shall be preserved, and, in some rational
way, interpreted, that it peremptorily excludes the Atheist from its
communion, because, believing in no Supreme Being, no divine Architect,
he must necessarily be without a spiritual trestle-board on which the
designs of that Being may be inscribed for his direction.

But the operative mason required materials wherewith to construct his
temple. There was, for instance, the *rough ashlar*--the stone in its
rude and natural state--unformed and unpolished, as it had been lying in
the quarries of Tyre from the foundation of the earth. This stone was to
be hewed and squared, to be fitted and adjusted, by simple, but
appropriate implements, until it became a *perfect ashlar*, or
well-finished stone, ready to take its destined place in the building.

Here, then, again, in these materials do we find other elementary
symbols. The rough and unpolished stone is a symbol of man's natural
state--ignorant, uncultivated, and, as the Roman historian expresses it,
"grovelling to the earth, like the beasts of the field, and obedient to
every sordid appetite;"  [56](sof37.htm#xref_56.md) but when education has
exerted its salutary influences in expanding his intellect, in
restraining his hitherto unruly passions, and purifying his life, he is
then represented by the perfect ashlar, or finished stone, which, under
the skilful hands of the workman, has been smoothed, and squared, and
fitted for its appropriate place in the building.

Here an interesting circumstance in the history of the preparation of
these materials has been seized and beautifully appropriated by our
symbolic science. We learn from the account of the temple, contained in
the First Book of Kings, that "The house, when it was in building, was
built of stone, made ready before it was brought thither, so that there
was neither hammer nor axe, nor any tool of iron, heard in the house
while it was in building."  [57](sof37.htm#xref_57.md)

Now, this mode of construction, undoubtedly adopted to avoid confusion
and discord among so many thousand workmen, [58](sof37.htm#xref_58.md) has
been selected as an elementary symbol of concord and harmony--virtues
which are not more essential to the preservation and perpetuity of our
own society than they are to that of every human association.

The perfect ashlar, therefore,--the stone thus fitted for its
appropriate position in the temple,--becomes not only a symbol of human
perfection (in itself, of course, only a comparative term), but also,
when we refer to the mode in which it was prepared, of that species of
perfection which results from the concord and union of men in society.
It is, in fact, a symbol of the social character of the institution.

There are other elementary symbols, to which I may hereafter have
occasion to revert; the three, however, already described,--the rough
ashlar, the perfect ashlar, and the trestle-board,--and which, from
their importance, have received the name of "jewels," will be sufficient
to give some idea of the nature of what may be called the "symbolic
alphabet" of Masonry. Let us now proceed to a brief consideration of the
method in which this alphabet of the science is applied to the more
elevated and abstruser portions of the system, and which, as the temple
constitutes its most important type, I have chosen to call the "Temple
Symbolism of Masonry."

Both Scripture and tradition inform us that, at the building of King
Solomon's temple, the masons were divided into different classes, each
engaged in different tasks. We learn, from the Second Book of
Chronicles, that these classes were the bearers of burdens, the hewers
of stones, and the overseers, called by the old masonic writers the *Ish
sabal*, the *Ish chotzeb*, and the *Menatzchim*. Now, without pretending
to say that the modern institution has preserved precisely the same
system of regulations as that which was observed at the temple, we shall
certainly find a similarity in these divisions to the Apprentices,
Fellow Crafts and Master Masons of our own day. At all events, the three
divisions made by King Solomon, in the workmen at Jerusalem, have been
adopted as the types of the three degrees now practised in speculative
Masonry; and as such we are, therefore, to consider them. The mode in
which these three divisions of workmen labored in constructing the
temple, has been beautifully symbolized in speculative Masonry, and
constitutes an important and interesting part of temple symbolism.

Thus we know, from our own experience among modern workmen, who still
pursue the same method, as well as from the traditions of the order,
that the implements used in the quarries were few and simple, the work
there requiring necessarily, indeed, but two tools, namely, the
*twenty-four inch gauge*, or two foot rule, and the *common gavel*, or
stone-cutter's hammer. With the former implement, the operative mason
took the necessary dimensions of the stone he was about to prepare, and
with the latter, by repeated blows, skilfully applied, he broke off
every unnecessary protuberance, and rendered it smooth and square, and
fit to take its place in the building.

And thus, in the first degree of speculative Masonry, the Entered
Apprentice receives these simple implements, as the emblematic working
tools of his profession, with their appropriate symbolical instruction.
To the operative mason their mechanical and practical use alone is
signified, and nothing more of value does their presence convey to his
mind. To the speculative Mason the sight of them is suggestive of far
nobler and sublimer thoughts; they teach him to measure, not stones, but
time; not to smooth and polish the marble for the builder's use, but to
purify and cleanse his heart from every vice and imperfection that would
render it unfit for a place in the spiritual temple of his body.

In the symbolic alphabet of Freemasonry, therefore, the twenty-four inch
gauge is a symbol of time well employed; the common gavel, of the
purification of the heart.

Here we may pause for a moment to refer to one of the coincidences
between Freemasonry and those *Mysteries* [59](sof37.htm#xref_59.md) which
formed so important a part of the ancient religions, and which
coincidences have led the writers on this subject to the formation of a
well-supported theory that there was a common connection between them.
The coincidence to which I at present allude is this: in all these
Mysteries--the incipient ceremony of initiation--the first step taken by
the candidate was a lustration or purification. The aspirant was not
permitted to enter the sacred vestibule, or take any part in the secret
formula of initiation, until, by water or by fire, he was emblematically
purified from the corruptions of the world which he was about to leave
behind. I need not, after this, do more than suggest the similarity of
this formula, in principle, to a corresponding one in Freemasonry, where
the first symbols presented to the apprentice are those which inculcate
a purification of the heart, of which the purification of the body in
the ancient Mysteries was symbolic.

We no longer use the bath or the fountain, because in our philosophical
system the symbolization is more abstract, if I may use the term; but we
present the aspirant with the *lamb-skin apron*, the *gauge*, and the
*gavel*, as symbols of a spiritual purification. The design is the same,
but the mode in which it is accomplished is different.

Let us now resume the connected series of temple symbolism.

At the building of the temple, the stones having been thus prepared by
the workmen of the lowest degree (the Apprentices, as we now call them,
the aspirants of the ancient Mysteries), we are informed that they were
transported to the site of the edifice on Mount Moriah, and were there
placed in the hands of another class of workmen, who are now technically
called the Fellow Crafts, and who correspond to the Mystes, or those who
had received the second degree of the ancient Mysteries. At this stage
of the operative work more extensive and important labors were to be
performed, and accordingly a greater amount of skill and knowledge was
required of those to whom these labors were intrusted. The stones,
having been prepared by the Apprentices [60](sof37.htm#xref_60.md) (for
hereafter, in speaking of the workmen of the temple, I shall use the
equivalent appellations of the more modern Masons), were now to be
deposited in their destined places in the building, and the massive
walls were to be erected. For these purposes implements of a higher and
more complicated character than the gauge and gavel were necessary. The
*square* was required to fit the joints with sufficient accuracy, the
*level* to run the courses in a horizontal line, and the *plumb* to
erect the whole with due regard to perfect perpendicularity. This
portion of the labor finds its symbolism in the second degree of the
speculative science, and in applying this symbolism we still continue to
refer to the idea of erecting a spiritual temple in the heart.

The necessary preparations, then, having been made in the first degree,
the lessons having been received by which the aspirant is taught to
commence the labor of life with the purification of the heart, as a
Fellow Craft he continues the task by cultivating those virtues which
give form and impression to the character, as well adapted stones give
shape and stability to the building. And hence the "working tools" of
the Fellow Craft are referred, in their symbolic application, to those
virtues. In the alphabet of symbolism, we find the square, the level,
and the plumb appropriated to this second degree. The square is a symbol
denoting morality. It teaches us to apply the unerring principles of
moral science to every action of our lives, to see that all the motives
and results of our conduct shall coincide with the dictates of divine
justice, and that all our thoughts, words, and deeds shall harmoniously
conspire, like the well-adjusted and rightly-squared joints of an
edifice, to produce a smooth, unbroken life of virtue.

The plumb is a symbol of rectitude of conduct, and inculcates that
integrity of life and undeviating course of moral uprightness which can
alone distinguish the good and just man. As the operative workman erects
his temporal building with strict observance of that plumb-line, which
will not permit him to deviate a hair's breadth to the right or to the
left, so the speculative Mason, guided by the unerring principles of
right and truth inculcated in the symbolic teachings of the same
implement, is steadfast in the pursuit of truth, neither bending beneath
the frowns of adversity nor yielding to the seductions of
prosperity. [61](sof37.htm#xref_61.md)

The level, the last of the three working tools of the operative
craftsman, is a symbol of equality of station. Not that equality of
civil or social position which is to be found only in the vain dreams of
the anarchist or the Utopian, but that great moral and physical equality
which affects the whole human race as the children of one common Father,
who causes his sun to shine and his rain to fall on all alike, and who
has so appointed the universal lot of humanity, that death, the leveller
of all human greatness, is made to visit with equal pace the prince's
palace and the peasant's hut. [62](sof37.htm#xref_62.md)

Here, then, we have three more signs or hieroglyphics added to our
alphabet of symbolism. Others there are in this degree, but they belong
to a higher grade of interpretation, and cannot be appropriately
discussed in an essay on temple symbolism only.

We now reach the third degree, the Master Masons of the modern science,
and the Epopts, or beholders of the sacred things in the ancient
Mysteries.

In the third degree the symbolic allusions to the temple of Solomon, and
the implements of Masonry employed in its construction, are extended and
fully completed. At the building of that edifice, we have already seen
that one class of the workmen was employed in the preparation of the
materials, while another was engaged in placing those materials in their
proper position. But there was a third and higher class,--the master
workmen,--whose duty it was to superintend the two other classes, and to
see that the stones were not only duly prepared, but that the most exact
accuracy had been observed in giving to them their true juxtaposition in
the edifice. It was then only that the last and finishing
labor [63](sof37.htm#xref_63.md) was performed, and the cement was applied
by these skilful workmen, to secure the materials in their appropriate
places, and to unite the building in one enduring and connected mass.
Hence the *trowel*, we are informed, was the most important, though of
course not the only, implement in use among the master builders. They
did not permit this last, indelible operation to be performed by any
hands less skilful than their own. They required that the craftsmen
should prove the correctness of their work by the square, level, and
plumb, and test, by these unerring instruments, the accuracy of their
joints; and, when satisfied of the just arrangement of every part, the
cement, which was to give an unchangeable union to the whole, was then
applied by themselves.

Hence, in speculative Masonry, the trowel has been assigned to the third
degree as its proper implement, and the symbolic meaning which
accompanies it has a strict and beautiful reference to the purposes for
which it was used in the ancient temple; for as it was there employed
"to spread the cement which united the building in one common mass," so
is it selected as the symbol of brotherly love--that cement whose object
is to unite our mystic association in one sacred and harmonious band of
brethren.

Here, then, we perceive the first, or, as I have already called it, the
elementary form of our symbolism--the adaptation of the terms, and
implements, and processes of an operative art to a speculative science.
The temple is now completed. The stones having been hewed, squared, and
numbered in the quarries by the apprentices,--having been properly
adjusted by the craftsmen, and finally secured in their appropriate
places, with the strongest and purest cement, by the master
builders,--the temple of King Solomon presented, in its finished
condition, so noble an appearance of sublimity and grandeur as to well
deserve to be selected, as it has been, for the type or symbol of that
immortal temple of the body, to which Christ significantly and
symbolically alluded when he said, "Destroy this temple, and in three
days I will raise it up."

This idea of representing the interior and spiritual man by a material
temple is so apposite in all its parts as to have occurred on more than
one occasion to the first teachers of Christianity. Christ himself
repeatedly alludes to it in other passages, and the eloquent and
figurative St. Paul beautifully extends the idea in one of his Epistles
to the Corinthians, in the following language: "Know ye not that ye are
the temple of God, and that the spirit of God dwelleth in you?" And
again, in a subsequent passage of the same Epistle, he reiterates the
idea in a more positive form: "What, know ye not that your body is the
temple of the Holy Ghost which is in you, which ye have of God, and ye
are not your own?" And Dr. Adam Clarke, while commenting on this latter
passage, makes the very allusions which have been the topic of
discussion in the present essay. "As truly," says he, "as the living God
dwelt in the Mosaic tabernacle and in the temple of Solomon, so truly
does the Holy Ghost dwell in the souls of genuine Christians; and as the
temple and all its *utensils* were holy, separated from all common and
profane uses, and dedicated alone to the service of God, so the bodies
of genuine Christians are holy, and should be employed in the service of
God alone."

The idea, therefore, of making the temple a symbol of the body, is not
exclusively masonic; but the mode of treating the symbolism by a
reference to the particular temple of Solomon, and to the operative art
engaged in its construction, is peculiar to Freemasonry. It is this
which isolates it from all other similar associations. Having many
things in common with the secret societies and religious Mysteries of
antiquity, in this "temple symbolism" it differs from them all.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XIII. The Form of the Lodge](sof15.md)

</div>
