[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sof14)  [Next](sof16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="13"></span>

<div>

<span id="img_head13.png"></span> ![Header Chapter
XIII.](img/head13.png)

## XIII.

### The Form of the Lodge.

In the last essay, I treated of that symbolism of the masonic system
which makes the temple of Jerusalem the archetype of a lodge, and in
which, in consequence, all the symbols are referred to the connection of
a speculative science with an operative art. I propose in the present to
discourse of a higher and abstruser mode of symbolism; and it may be
observed that, in coming to this topic, we arrive, for the first time,
at that chain of resemblances which unites Freemasonry with the ancient
systems of religion, and which has given rise, among masonic writers, to
the names of Pure and Spurious Freemasonry--the pure Freemasonry being
that system of philosophical religion which, coming through the line of
the patriarchs, was eventually modified by influences exerted at the
building of King Solomon's temple, and the spurious being the same
system as it was altered and corrupted by the polytheism of the nations
of heathendom. [64](sof37.htm#xref_64)

As this abstruser mode of symbolism, if less peculiar to the masonic
system, is, however, far more interesting than the one which was treated
in the previous essay,--because it is more philosophical,--I propose to
give an extended investigation of its character. And, in the first
place, there is what may be called an elementary view of this abstruser
symbolism, which seems almost to be a corollary from what has already
been described in the preceding article.

As each individual mason has been supposed to be the symbol of a
spiritual temple,--"a temple not made with hands, eternal in the
heavens,"--the lodge or collected assemblage of these masons, is adopted
as a symbol of the world. [65](sof37.htm#xref_65)

It is in the first degree of Masonry, more particularly, that this
species of symbolism is developed. In its detail it derives the
characteristics of resemblance upon which it is founded, from the form,
the supports, the ornaments, and general construction and internal
organization of a lodge, in all of which the symbolic reference to the
world is beautifully and consistently sustained.

The form of a masonic lodge is said to be a parallelogram, or oblong
square; its greatest length being from east to west, its breadth from
north to south. A square, a circle, a triangle, or any other form but
that of an *oblong square*, would be eminently incorrect and unmasonic,
because such a figure would not be an expression of the symbolic idea
which is intended to be conveyed.

Now, as the world is a globe, or, to speak more accurately, an oblate
spheroid, the attempt to make an oblong square its symbol would seem, at
first view, to present insuperable difficulties. But the system of
masonic symbolism has stood the test of too long an experience to be
easily found at fault; and therefore this very symbol furnishes a
striking evidence of the antiquity of the order. At the Solomonic
era--the era of the building of the temple at Jerusalem--the world, it
must be remembered, was supposed to have that very oblong
form, [66](sof37.htm#xref_66) which has been here symbolized. If, for
instance, on a map of the world we should inscribe an oblong figure
whose boundary lines would circumscribe and include just that portion
which was known to be inhabited in the clays of Solomon, these lines,
running a short distance north and south of the Mediterranean Sea, and
extending from Spain in the west to Asia Minor in the east, would form
an oblong square, including the southern shore of Europe, the northern
shore of Africa, and the western district of Asia, the length of the
parallelogram being about sixty degrees from east to west, and its
breadth being about twenty degrees from north to south. This oblong
square, thus enclosing the whole of what was then supposed to be the
habitable globe, [67](sof37.htm#xref_67) would precisely represent what
is symbolically said to be *the form of the lodge*, while the Pillars of
Hercules in the west, on each side of the straits of Gades or Gibraltar,
might appropriately be referred to the two pillars that stood at the
porch of the temple.

<div>

<span id="img_illus01.png"></span> ![Map of Mediterranean Sea and
surrounding area.](img/illus01.png)  
Map of Mediterranean Sea and surrounding area.

</div>

A masonic lodge is, therefore, a symbol of the world.

This symbol is sometimes, by a very usual figure of speech, extended, in
its application, and the world and the universe are made synonymous,
when the lodge becomes, of course, a symbol of the universe. But in this
case the definition of the symbol is extended, and to the ideas of
length and breadth are added those of height and depth, and the lodge is
said to assume the form of a double cube. [68](sof37.htm#xref_68) The
solid contents of the earth below and the expanse of the heavens above
will then give the outlines of the cube, and the whole created
universe [69](sof37.htm#xref_69) will be included within the symbolic
limits of a mason's lodge.

By always remembering that the lodge is the symbol, in its form and
extent, of the world, we are enabled, readily and rationally, to explain
many other symbols, attached principally to the first degree; and we are
enabled to collate and compare them with similar symbols of other
kindred institutions of antiquity, for it should be observed that this
symbolism of the world, represented by a place of initiation, widely
pervaded all the ancient rites and mysteries.

It will, no doubt, be interesting to extend our investigations on this
subject, with a particular view to the method in which this symbolism of
the world or the universe was developed, in some of its most prominent
details; and for this purpose I shall select the mystical explanation of
the *officers* of a lodge, its *covering*, and a portion of its
*ornaments*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XIV. The Officers of a Lodge](sof16)

</div>
