[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sof25)  [Next](sof27) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="24"></span>

<div>

<span id="img_head24.png"></span> ![Header Chapter
XXIV.](img/head24.png)

## XXIV.

### The Ineffable Name.

Another important symbol is the Ineffable Name, with which the series of
ritualistic symbols will be concluded.

The Tetragrammaton, [122](sof37.htm#xref_122) or Ineffable Word,--the
Incommunicable Name,--is a symbol--for rightly-considered it is nothing
more than a symbol--that has more than any other (except, perhaps, the
symbols connected with sun-worship), pervaded the rites of antiquity. I
know, indeed, of no system of ancient initiation in which it has not
some prominent form and place.

But as it was, perhaps, the earliest symbol which was corrupted by the
spurious Freemasonry of the pagans, in their secession from the
primitive system of the patriarchs and ancient priesthood, it will be
most expedient for the thorough discussion of the subject which is
proposed in the present paper, that we should begin the investigation
with an inquiry into the nature of the symbol among the Israelites.

That name of God, which we, at a venture, pronounce Jehovah,--although
whether this is, or is not, the true pronunciation can now never be
authoritatively settled,--was ever held by the Jews in the most profound
veneration. They derived its origin from the immediate inspiration of
the Almighty, who communicated it to Moses as his especial appellation,
to be used only by his chosen people; and this communication was made at
the Burning Bush, when he said to him, "Thus shalt thou say unto the
children of Israel: Jehovah, the God of your fathers, the God of
Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, hath sent me unto you:
this \[Jehovah\] is my name forever, and this is my memorial unto all
generations."  [123](sof37.htm#xref_123) And at a subsequent period he
still more emphatically declared this to be his peculiar name: "I am
*Jehovah*; and I appeared unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Jacob, by
the name of *El Shaddai*; but by my name *Jehovah* was I not known unto
them."  [124](sof37.htm#xref_124)

It will be perceived that I have not here followed precisely the
somewhat unsatisfactory version of King James's Bible, which, by
translating or anglicizing one name, and not the other, leaves the whole
passage less intelligible and impressive than it should be. I have
retained the original Hebrew for both names. El Shaddai, "the Almighty
One," was the name by which he had been heretofore known to the
preceding patriarchs; in its meaning it was analogous to Elohim, who is
described in the first chapter of Genesis as creating the world. But his
name of Jehovah was now for the first time to be communicated to his
people.

Ushered to their notice with all the solemnity and religious
consecration of these scenes and events, this name of God became
invested among the Israelites with the profoundest veneration and awe.
To add to this mysticism, the Cabalists, by the change of a single
letter, read the passage, "This is my name forever," or, as it is in the
original, *Zeh shemi l'olam*, זה שמי לעלם as if written *Zeh shemi
l'alam*, זה שמי לאלם that is to say, "This is my name to be concealed."

This interpretation, although founded on a blunder, and in all
probability an intentional one, soon became a precept, and has been
strictly obeyed to this day. [125](sof37.htm#xref_125) The word
*Jehovah* is never pronounced by a pious Jew, who, whenever he meets
with it in Scripture, substitutes for it the word *Adonai* or *Lord*--a
practice which has been followed by the translators of the common
English version of the Bible with almost Jewish scrupulosity, the word
"Jehovah" in the original being invariably translated by the word
"Lord."  [126](sof37.htm#xref_126) The pronunciation of the word, being
thus abandoned, became ultimately lost, as, by the peculiar construction
of the Hebrew language, which is entirely without vowels, the letters,
being all consonants, can give no possible indication, to one who has
not heard it before, of the true pronunciation of any given word.

To make this subject plainer to the reader who is unacquainted with the
Hebrew, I will venture to furnish an explanation which will, perhaps, be
intelligible.

The Hebrew alphabet consists entirely of consonants, the vowel sounds
having always been inserted orally, and never marked in writing until
the "vowel points," as they are called, were invented by the Masorites,
some six centuries after the Christian era. As the vowel sounds were
originally supplied by the reader, while reading, from a knowledge which
he had previously received, by means of oral instruction, of the proper
pronunciation of the word, he was necessarily unable to pronounce any
word which had never before been uttered in his presence. As we know
that *Dr.* is to be pronounced *Doctor*, and *Mr. Mister*, because we
have always heard those peculiar combinations of letters thus
enunciated, and not because the letters themselves give any such sound;
so the Jew knew from instruction and constant practice, and not from the
power of the letters, how the consonants in the different words in daily
use were to be vocalized. But as the four letters which compose the word
*Jehovah*, as we now call it, were never pronounced in his presence, but
were made to represent another word, *Adonai*, which was substituted for
it, and as the combination of these four consonants would give no more
indication for any sort of enunciation than the combinations *Dr.* or
*Mr.* give in our language, the Jew, being ignorant of what vocal sounds
were to be supplied, was unable to pronounce the word, so that its true
pronunciation was in time lost to the masses of the people.

There was one person, however, who, it is said, was in possession of the
proper sound of the letters and the true pronunciation of the word. This
was the high priest, who, receiving it from his predecessor, preserved
the recollection of the sound by pronouncing it three times, once a
year, on the day of the atonement, when he entered the holy of holies of
the tabernacle or the temple.

If the traditions of Masonry on this subject are correct, the kings,
after the establishment of the monarchy, must have participated in this
privilege; for Solomon is said to have been in possession of the word,
and to have communicated it to his two colleagues at the building of the
temple.

This is the word which, from the number of its letters, was called the
"tetragrammaton," or four-lettered name, and, from its sacred
inviolability, the "ineffable" or unutterable name.

The Cabalists and Talmudists have enveloped it in a host of mystical
superstitions, most of which are as absurd as they are incredible, but
all of them tending to show the great veneration that has always been
paid to it. [127](sof37.htm#xref_127) Thus they say that it is possessed
of unlimited powers, and that he who pronounces it shakes heaven and
earth, and inspires the very angels with terror and astonishment.

The Rabbins called it "shem hamphorash," that is to say, "the name that
is declaratory," and they say that David found it engraved on a stone
while digging into the earth.

From the sacredness with which the name was venerated, it was seldom, if
ever, written in full, and, consequently, a great many symbols, or
hieroglyphics, were invented to express it. One of these was the letter
י or *Yod*, equivalent nearly to the English I, or J, or Y, which was
the initial of the word, and it was often inscribed within an
equilateral triangle, thus:

<div>

<span id="img_illus02.png"></span> ![Yod inside equilateral
triangle](img/illus02.png)  
Yod inside equilateral triangle

</div>

the triangle itself being a symbol of Deity.

This symbol of the name of God is peculiarly worthy of our attention,
since not only is the triangle to be found in many of the ancient
religions occupying the same position, but the whole symbol itself is
undoubtedly the origin of that hieroglyphic exhibited in the second
degree of Masonry, where, the explanation of the symbolism being the
same, the form of it, as far as it respects the letter, has only been
anglicized by modern innovators. In my own opinion, the letter *G*,
which is used in the Fellow Craft's degree, should never have been
permitted to intrude into Masonry; it presents an instance of absurd
anachronism, which would never have occurred if the original Hebrew
symbol had been retained. But being there now, without the possibility
of removal, we have only to remember that it is in fact but the symbol
of a symbol. [128](sof37.htm#xref_128)

Widely spread, as I have already said, was this reverence for the name
of God; and, consequently, its symbolism, in some peculiar form, is to
be found in all the ancient rites.

Thus the Ineffable Name itself, of which we have been discoursing, is
said to have been preserved in its true pronunciation by the Essenes,
who, in their secret rites, communicated it to each other only in a
whisper, and in such form, that while its component parts were known,
they were so separated as to make the whole word a mystery.

Among the Egyptians, whose connection with the Hebrews was more
immediate than that of any other people, and where, consequently, there
was a greater similarity of rites, the same sacred name is said to have
been used as a password, for the purpose of gaining admission to their
Mysteries.

In the Brahminic Mysteries of Hindostan the ceremony of initiation was
terminated by intrusting the aspirant with the sacred, triliteral name,
which was AUM, the three letters of which were symbolic of the creative,
preservative, and destructive principles of the Supreme Deity,
personified in the three manifestations of Bramah, Siva, and Vishnu.
This word was forbidden to be pronounced aloud. It was to be the subject
of silent meditation to the pious Hindoo.

In the rites of Persia an ineffable name was also communicated to the
candidate after his initiation. [129](sof37.htm#xref_129) Mithras, the
principal divinity in these rites, who took the place of the Hebrew
Jehovah, and represented the sun, had this peculiarity in his name--that
the numeral value of the letters of which it was composed amounted to
precisely 365, the number of days which constitute a revolution of the
earth around the sun, or, as they then supposed, of the sun around the
earth.

In the Mysteries introduced by Pythagoras into Greece we again find the
ineffable name of the Hebrews, obtained doubtless by the Samian Sage
during his visit to Babylon. [130](sof37.htm#xref_130) The symbol
adopted by him to express it was, however, somewhat different, being ten
points distributed in the form of a triangle, each side containing four
points, as in the annexed figure.

<div>

<span id="img_illus03.png"></span> ![ten points distributed in the form
of a triangle](img/illus03.png)  
ten points distributed in the form of a triangle

</div>

The apex of the triangle was consequently a single point then followed
below two others, then three; and lastly, the base consisted of four.
These points were, by the number in each rank, intended, according to
the Pythagorean system, to denote respectively the *monad*, or active
principle of nature; the *duad*, or passive principle; the *triad*, or
world emanating from their union; and the *quaterniad*, or intellectual
science; the whole number of points amounting to ten, the symbol of
perfection and consummation. This figure was called by Pythagoras the
*tetractys*--a word equivalent in signification to the *tetragrammaton*;
and it was deemed so sacred that on it the oath of secrecy and fidelity
was administered to the aspirants in the Pythagorean
rites. [131](sof37.htm#xref_131)

Among the Scandinavians, as among the Jewish Cabalists, the Supreme God
who was made known in their mysteries had twelve names, of which the
principal and most sacred one was *Alfader*, the Universal Father.

Among the Druids, the sacred name of God was
*Hu* [132](sof37.htm#xref_132)--a name which, although it is supposed,
by Bryant, to have been intended by them for Noah, will be recognized as
one of the modifications of the Hebrew tetragrammaton. It is, in fact,
the masculine pronoun in Hebrew, and may be considered as the
symbolization of the male or generative principle in nature--a sort of
modification of the system of Phallic worship.

This sacred name among the Druids reminds me of what is the latest, and
undoubtedly the most philosophical, speculation on the true meaning, as
well as pronunciation, of the ineffable tetragrammaton. It is from the
ingenious mind of the celebrated Lanci; and I have already, in another
work, given it to the public as I received it from his pupil, and my
friend, Mr. Gliddon, the distinguished archaeologist. But the results
are too curious to be omitted whenever the tetragrammaton is discussed.

Elsewhere I have very fully alluded to the prevailing sentiment among
the ancients, that the Supreme Deity was bisexual, or hermaphrodite,
including in the essence of his being the male and female principles,
the generative and prolific powers of nature. This was the universal
doctrine in all the ancient religions, and was very naturally developed
in the symbol of the *phallus* and *cteis* among the Greeks, and in the
corresponding one of the *lingam* and *yoni* among the Orientalists;
from which symbols the masonic *point within a circle* is a legitimate
derivation. They all taught that God, the Creator, was both male and
female.

Now, this theory is undoubtedly unobjectionable on the score of
orthodoxy, if we view it in the spiritual sense, in which its first
propounders must necessarily have intended it to be presented to the
mind, and not in the gross, sensual meaning in which it was subsequently
received. For, taking the word *sex*, not in its ordinary and colloquial
signification, as denoting the indication of a particular physical
organization, but in that purely philosophical one which alone can be
used in such a connection, and which simply signifies the mere
manifestation of a power, it is not to be denied that the Supreme Being
must possess in himself, and in himself alone, both a generative and a
prolific power. This idea, which was so extensively prevalent among all
the nations of antiquity, [133](sof37.htm#xref_133) has also been traced
in the tetragrammaton, or name of Jehovah, with singular ingenuity, by
Lanci; and, what is almost equally as interesting, he has, by this
discovery, been enabled to demonstrate what was, in all probability, the
true pronunciation of the word.

In giving the details of this philological discovery, I will endeavor to
make it as comprehensible as it can be made to those who are not
critically acquainted with the construction of the Hebrew language;
those who are will at once appreciate its peculiar character, and will
excuse the explanatory details, of course unnecessary to them.

The ineffable name, the tetragrammaton, the shem hamphorash,--for it is
known by all these appellations,--consists of four letters, *yod, heh,
vau*, and *heh*, forming the word יהוה. This word, of course, in
accordance with the genius of the Hebrew language, is read, as we would
say, backward, or from right to left, beginning with *yod* \[י\], and
ending with *heh* \[ה\].

Of these letters, the first, *yod* \[י\], is equivalent to the English
*i* pronounced as *e* in the word *machine*.

The second and fourth letter, *heh* \[ה\], is an aspirate, and has here
the sound of the English *h*.

And the third letter, *vau* \[ו\], has the sound of open *o*.

Now, reading these four letters, י, or I, ה, or H, ו, or O, and ה, or H,
as the Hebrew requires, from right to left, we have the word יהוה, יהוה,
which is really as near to the pronunciation as we can well come,
notwithstanding it forms neither of the seven ways in which the word is
said to have been pronounced, at different times, by the
patriarchs. [134](sof37.htm#xref_134)

But, thus pronounced, the word gives us no meaning, for there is no such
word in Hebrew as *ihoh*; and, as all the Hebrew names were
significative of something, it is but fair to conclude that this was not
the original pronunciation, and that we must look for another which will
give a meaning to the word. Now, Lanci proceeds to the discovery of this
true pronunciation, as follows:--

In the Cabala, a hidden meaning is often deduced from a word by
transposing or reversing its letters, and it was in this way that the
Cabalists concealed many of their mysteries.

Now, to reverse a word in English is to read its letters from *right to
left*, because our normal mode of reading is from *left to right*. But
in Hebrew the contrary rule takes place, for there the normal mode of
reading is from *right to left*; and therefore, to reverse the reading
of a word, is to read it from *left to right*.

Lanci applied this cabalistic mode to the tetragrammaton, when he found
that IH-OH, being read reversely, makes the word
HO-HI. [135](sof37.htm#xref_135)

But in Hebrew, *ho* is the masculine pronoun, equivalent to the English
*he*; and *hi* is the feminine pronoun, equivalent to *she*; and
therefore the word HO-HI, literally translated, is equivalent to the
English compound HE-SHE; that is to say, the Ineffable Name of God in
Hebrew, being read cabalistically, includes within itself the male and
female principle, the generative and prolific energy of creation; and
here we have, again, the widely-spread symbolism of the phallus and the
cteis, the lingam and the yoni, or their equivalent, the point within a
circle, and another pregnant proof of the connection between Freemasonry
and the ancient Mysteries.

And here, perhaps, we may begin to find some meaning for the hitherto
incomprehensible passage in Genesis (i. 27): "So God created man *in his
own image; in the image of God* created he him; *male and female*
created he them." They could not have been "in the image" of IHOH, if
they had not been "male and female."

The Cabalists have exhausted their ingenuity and imagination in
speculations on this sacred name, and some of their fancies are really
sufficiently interesting to repay an investigation. Sufficient, however,
has been here said to account for the important position that it
occupies in the masonic system, and to enable us to appreciate the
symbols by which it has been represented.

The great reverence, or indeed the superstitious veneration, entertained
by the ancients for the name of the Supreme Being, led them to express
it rather in symbols or hieroglyphics than in any word at length.

We know, for instance, from the recent researches of the archaeologists,
that in all the documents of the ancient Egyptians, written in the
demotic or common character of the country, the names of the gods were
invariably denoted by symbols; and I have already alluded to the
different modes by which the Jews expressed the tetragrammaton. A
similar practice prevailed among the other nations of antiquity.
Freemasonry has adopted the same expedient, and the Grand Architect of
the Universe, whom it is the usage, even in ordinary writing, to
designate by the initials G.A.O.T.U., is accordingly presented to us in
a variety of symbols, three of which particularly require attention.
These are the letter *G*, the equilateral triangle, and the All-Seeing
Eye.

Of the letter *G* I have already spoken. A letter of the English
alphabet can scarcely be considered an appropriate symbol of an
institution which dates its organization and refers its primitive
history to a period long anterior to the origin of that language. Such a
symbol is deficient in the two elements of antiquity and universality
which should characterize every masonic symbol. There can, therefore, be
no doubt that, in its present form, it is a corruption of the old Hebrew
symbol, the letter *yod*, by which the sacred name was often expressed.
This letter is the initial of the word *Jehovah*, or *Ihoh*, as I have
already stated, and is constantly to be met with in Hebrew writings as
the symbol or abbreviature of *Jehovah*, which word, it will be
remembered, is never written at length. But because *G* is, in like
manner, the initial of *God*, the equivalent of *Jehovah*, this letter
has been incorrectly, and, I cannot refrain from again saying, most
injudiciously, selected to supply, in modern lodges, the place of the
Hebrew symbol.

Having, then, the same meaning and force as the Hebrew *yod*, the letter
*G* must be considered, like its prototype, as the symbol of the
life-giving and life-sustaining power of God, as manifested in the
meaning of the word Jehovah, or Ihoh, the generative and prolific energy
of the Creator.

The *All-Seeing Eye* is another, and a still more important, symbol of
the same great Being. Both the Hebrews and the Egyptians appear to have
derived its use from that natural inclination of figurative minds to
select an organ as the symbol of the function which it is intended
peculiarly to discharge. Thus the foot was often adopted as the symbol
of swiftness, the arm of strength, and the hand of fidelity. On the same
principle, the open eye was selected as the symbol of watchfulness, and
the eye of God as the symbol of divine watchfulness and care of the
universe. The use of the symbol in this sense is repeatedly to be found
in the Hebrew writers. Thus the Psalmist says (Ps. xxxiv. 15), "The eyes
of the Lord are upon the righteous, and his ears are open to their cry,"
which explains a subsequent passage (Ps. cxxi. 4), in which it is said,
"Behold, he that keepeth Israel shall neither slumber nor sleep."
 [136](sof37.htm#xref_136)

On the same principle, the Egyptians represented Osiris, their chief
deity, by the symbol of an open eye, and placed this hieroglyphic of him
in all their temples. His symbolic name, on the monuments, was
represented by the eye accompanying a throne, to which was sometimes
added an abbreviated figure of the god, and sometimes what has been
called a hatchet, but which, I consider, may as correctly be supposed to
be a representation of a square.

The All-Seeing Eye may, then, be considered as a symbol of God
manifested in his omnipresence--his guardian and preserving
character--to which Solomon alludes in the Book of Proverbs (xv. 3),
when he says, "The eyes of Jehovah are in every place, beholding (or as
it might be more faithfully translated, watching) the evil and the
good." It is a symbol of the Omnipresent Deity.

The *triangle* is another symbol which is entitled to our consideration.
There is, in fact, no other symbol which is more various in its
application or more generally diffused throughout the whole system of
both the Spurious and the Pure Freemasonry.

The equilateral triangle appears to have been adopted by nearly all the
nations of antiquity as a symbol of the Deity.

Among the Hebrews, it has already been stated that this figure, with a
*yod* in the centre, was used to represent the tetragrammaton, or
ineffable name of God.

The Egyptians considered the equilateral triangle as the most perfect of
figures, and a representative of the great principle of animated
existence, each of its sides referring to one of the three departments
of creation--the animal, the vegetable, and the mineral.

The symbol of universal nature among the Egyptians was the right-angled
triangle, of which the perpendicular side represented Osiris, or the
male principle; the base, Isis, or the female principle; and the
hypothenuse, their offspring, Horus, or the world emanating from the
union of both principles.

All this, of course, is nothing more nor less than the phallus and
cteis, or lingam and yoni, under a different form.

The symbol of the right-angled triangle was afterwards adopted by
Pythagoras when he visited the banks of the Nile; and the discovery
which he is said to have made in relation to the properties of this
figure, but which he really learned from the Egyptian priests, is
commemorated in Masonry by the introduction of the forty-seventh problem
of Euclid's First Book among the symbols of the third degree. Here the
same mystical application is supplied as in the Egyptian figure, namely,
that the union of the male and female, or active and passive principles
of nature, has produced the world. For the geometrical proposition being
that the squares of the perpendicular and base are equal to the square
of the hypothenuse, they may be said to produce it in the same way as
Osiris and Isis are equal to, or produce, the world.

Thus the perpendicular--Osiris, or the active, male principle--being
represented by a line whose measurement is 3; and the base--Isis, or the
passive, female principle--by a line whose measurement is 4; then their
union, or the addition of the squares of these numbers, will produce a
square whose root will be the hypothenuse, or a line whose measurement
must be 5. For the square of 3 is 9, and the square of 4 is 16, and the
square of 5 is 25; but 9 added to 16 is equal to 25; and thus, out of
the addition, or coming together, of the squares of the perpendicular
and base, arises the square of the hypothenuse, just as, out of the
coming together, in the Egyptian system, of the active and passive
principles, arises, or is generated, the world.

In the mediaeval history of the Christian church, the great ignorance of
the people, and their inclination to a sort of materialism, led them to
abandon the symbolic representations of the Deity, and to depict the
Father with the form and lineaments of an aged man, many of which
irreverent paintings, as far back as the twelfth century, are to be
found in the religious books and edifices of
Europe. [137](sof37.htm#xref_137) But, after the period of the
renaissance, a better spirit and a purer taste began to pervade the
artists of the church, and thenceforth the Supreme Being was represented
only by his name--the tetragrammaton--inscribed within an equilateral
triangle, and placed within a circle of rays. Didron, in his invaluable
work on Christian Iconography, gives one of these symbols, which was
carved on wood in the seventeenth century, of which I annex a copy.

<div>

<span id="img_illus04.png"></span> ![tetragrammaton inscribed with an
equilateral triangle and placed within a circle of
rays](img/illus04.png)  
tetragrammaton inscribed with an equilateral triangle and placed within
a circle of rays

</div>

But even in the earliest ages, when the Deity was painted or sculptured
as a personage, the nimbus, or glory, which surrounded the head of the
Father, was often made to assume a triangular form. Didron says on this
subject, "A nimbus, of a triangular form, is thus seen to be the
exclusive attribute of the Deity, and most frequently restricted to the
Father Eternal. The other persons of the trinity sometimes wear the
triangle, but only in representations of the trinity, and because the
Father is with them. Still, even then, beside the Father, who has a
triangle, the Son and the Holy Ghost are often drawn with a circular
nimbus only."  [138](sof37.htm#xref_138)

The triangle has, in all ages and in all religions, been deemed a symbol
of Deity.

The Egyptians, the Greeks, and the other nations of antiquity,
considered this figure, with its three sides, as a symbol of the
creative energy displayed in the active and passive, or male and female,
principles, and their product, the world; the Christians referred it to
their dogma of the trinity as a manifestation of the Supreme God; and
the Jews and the primitive masons to the three periods of existence
included in the signification of the tetragrammaton--the past, the
present, and the future.

In the higher degrees of Masonry, the triangle is the most important of
all symbols, and most generally assumes the name of the *Delta*, in
allusion to the fourth letter of the Greek alphabet, which is of the
same form and bears that appellation.

The Delta, or mystical triangle, is generally surrounded by a circle of
rays, called a "glory." When this glory is distinct from the figure, and
surrounds it in the form of a circle (as in the example just given from
Didron), it is then an emblem of God's eternal glory. When, as is most
usual in the masonic symbol, the rays emanate from the centre of the
triangle, and, as it were, enshroud it in their brilliancy, it is
symbolic of the Divine Light. The perverted ideas of the pagans referred
these rays of light to their Sun-god and their Sabian worship.

But the true masonic idea of this glory is, that it symbolizes that
Eternal Light of Wisdom which surrounds the Supreme Architect as with a
sea of glory, and from him, as a common centre, emanates to the universe
of his creation, and to which the prophet Ezekiel alludes in his
eloquent description of Jehovah: "And I saw as the color of amber, as
the appearance of fire round about within it, from the appearance of his
loins even upward, and from his loins even downward, I saw, as it were,
the appearance of fire, and it had brightness round about." (Chap. 1,
ver. 27.)

Dante has also beautifully described this circumfused light of Deity:--

> "There is in heaven a light whose goodly shine  
> Makes the Creator visible to all  
> Created, that in seeing him, alone  
> Have peace; and in a circle spreads so far,  
> That the circumference were too loose a zone  
> To girdle in the sun."

On a recapitulation, then, of the views that have been advanced in
relation to these three symbols of the Deity which are to be found in
the masonic system, we may say that each one expresses a different
attribute.

The letter *G* is the symbol of the self-existent Jehovah.

The *All-Seeing Eye* is the symbol of the omnipresent God.

The *triangle* [139](sof37.htm#xref_139) is the symbol of the Supreme
Architect of the Universe--the Creator; and when surrounded by rays of
glory, it becomes a symbol of the Architect and Bestower of Light.

And now, after all, is there not in this whole prevalence of the name of
God, in so many different symbols, throughout the masonic system,
something more than a mere evidence of the religious proclivities of the
institution? Is there not behind this a more profound symbolism, which
constitutes, in fact, the very essence of Freemasonry? "The names of
God," said a learned theologian at the beginning of this century, "were
intended to communicate the knowledge of God himself. By these, men were
enabled to receive some scanty ideas of his essential majesty, goodness,
and power, and to know both whom we are to believe, and what we are to
believe of him."

And this train of thought is eminently applicable to the admission of
the name into the system of Masonry. With us, the name of God, however
expressed, is a symbol of DIVINE TRUTH, which it should be the incessant
labor of a Mason to seek.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXV. The Legends of Freemasonry](sof27)

</div>
