[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sof28)  [Next](sof30.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="27"></span>

<div>

<span id="img_head27.png"></span> ![Header Chapter
XXVII.](img/head27.png.md)

## XXVII.

### The Legend of the Third Degree.

The most important and significant of the legendary symbols of
Freemasonry is, undoubtedly, that which relates to the fate of Hiram
Abif, commonly called, "by way of excellence," the Legend of the Third
Degree.

The first written record that I have been able to find of this legend is
contained in the second edition of Anderson's Constitutions, published
in 1738, and is in these words:--

"It (the temple) was finished in the short space of seven years and six
months, to the amazement of all the world; when the cape-stone was
celebrated by the fraternity with great joy. But their joy was soon
interrupted by the sudden death of their dear master, Hiram Abif, whom
they decently interred, in the lodge near the temple, according to
ancient dusage."  [157](sof37.htm#xref_157.md)

In the next edition of the same work, published in 1756, a few
additional circumstances are related, such as the participation of King
Solomon in the general grief, and the fact that the king of Israel
"ordered his obsequies to be conducted with great solemnity and
decency."  [158](sof37.htm#xref_158.md) With these exceptions, and the
citations of the same passages, made by subsequent authors, the
narrative has always remained unwritten, and descended, from age to age,
through the means of oral tradition.

The legend has been considered of so much importance that it has been
preserved in the symbolism of every masonic rite. No matter what
modifications or alterations the general system may have undergone,--no
matter how much the ingenuity or the imagination of the founders of
rites may have perverted or corrupted other symbols, abolishing the old
and substituting new ones,--the legend of the Temple Builder has ever
been left untouched, to present itself in all the integrity of its
ancient mythical form.

What, then, is the signification of this symbol, so important and so
extensively diffused? What interpretation can we give to it that will
account for its universal adoption? How is it that it has thus become so
intimately interwoven with Freemasonry as to make, to all appearances, a
part of its very essence, and to have been always deemed inseparable
from it?

To answer these questions, satisfactorily, it is necessary to trace, in
a brief investigation, the remote origin of the institution of
Freemasonry, and its connection with the ancient systems of initiation.

It was, then, the great object of all the rites and mysteries which
constituted the "Spurious Freemasonry" of antiquity to teach the
consoling doctrine of the immortality of the
soul. [159](sof37.htm#xref_159.md) This dogma, shining as an almost
solitary beacon-light in the surrounding gloom of pagan darkness, had
undoubtedly been received from that ancient people or
priesthood [160](sof37.htm#xref_160.md) what has been called the system of
"Pure Freemasonry," and among whom it probably existed only in the form
of an abstract proposition or a simple and unembellished tradition. But
in the more sensual minds of the pagan philosophers and mystics, the
idea, when presented to the initiates in their Mysteries, was always
conveyed in the form of a scenic
representation. [161](sof37.htm#xref_161.md) The influence, too, of the
early Sabian worship of the sun and heavenly bodies, in which the solar
orb was adored, on its resurrection, each morning, from the apparent
death of its evening setting, caused this rising sun to be adopted in
the more ancient Mysteries as a symbol of the regeneration of the soul.

Thus in the Egyptian Mysteries we find a representation of the death and
subsequent regeneration of Osiris; in the Phœnician, of Adonis; in the
Syrian, of Dionysus; in all of which the scenic apparatus of initiation
was intended to indoctrinate the candidate into the dogma of a future
life.

It will be sufficient here to refer simply to the fact, that through the
instrumentality of the Tyrian workmen at the temple of King Solomon, the
spurious and pure branches of the masonic system were united at
Jerusalem, and that the same method of scenic representation was adopted
by the latter from the former, and the narrative of the temple builder
substituted for that of Dionysus, which was the myth peculiar to the
mysteries practised by the Tyrian workmen.

The idea, therefore, proposed to be communicated in the myth of the
ancient Mysteries was the same as that which is now conveyed in the
masonic legend of the Third Degree.

Hence, then, Hiram Abif is, in the masonic system, the symbol of human
nature, as developed in the life here and the life to come; and so,
while the temple was, as I have heretofore shown, the visible symbol of
the world, its builder became the mythical symbol of man, the dweller
and worker in that world.

Now, is not this symbolism evident to every reflective mind?

Man, setting forth on the voyage of life, with faculties and powers
fitting him for the due exercise of the high duties to whose performance
he has been called, holds, if he be "a curious and cunning workman,"
 [162](sof37.htm#xref_162.md) skilled in all moral and intellectual
purposes (and it is only of such men that the temple builder can be the
symbol), within the grasp of his attainment the knowledge of all that
divine truth imparted to him as the heirloom of his race--that race to
whom it has been granted to look, with exalted countenance, on
high; [163](sof37.htm#xref_163.md) which divine truth is symbolized by the
WORD.

Thus provided with the word of life, he occupies his time in the
construction of a spiritual temple, and travels onward in the faithful
discharge of all his duties, laying down his designs upon the
trestle-board of the future and invoking the assistance and direction of
God.

But is his path always over flowery meads and through pleasant groves?
Is there no hidden foe to obstruct his progress? Is all before him clear
and calm, with joyous sunshine and refreshing zephyrs? Alas! not so.
"Man is born to trouble, as the sparks fly upward." At every "gate of
life"--as the Orientalists have beautifully called the different
ages--he is beset by peril. Temptations allure his youth, misfortunes
darken the pathway of his manhood, and his old age is encumbered with
infirmity and disease. But clothed in the armor of virtue he may resist
the temptation; he may cast misfortunes aside, and rise triumphantly
above them; but to the last, the direst, the most inexorable foe of his
race, he must eventually yield; and stricken down by death, he sinks
prostrate into the grave, *and is buried in the rubbish* of his sin and
human frailty.

Here, then, in Masonry, is what was called the
*aphanism* [164](sof37.htm#xref_164.md) in the ancient Mysteries. The
bitter but necessary lesson of death has been imparted. The living soul,
with the lifeless body which encased it, has disappeared, and *can
nowhere be found*. All is darkness--confusion-- despair. Divine
truth--the WORD--for a time is lost, and the Master Mason may now say,
in the language of Hutchinson, "I prepare my sepulchre. I make my grave
in the pollution of the earth. I am under the shadow of death."

But if the mythic symbolism ended here, with this lesson of death, then
were the lesson incomplete. That teaching would be vain and idle--nay,
more, it would be corrupt and pernicious--which should stop short of the
conscious and innate instinct for another existence. And hence the
succeeding portions of the legend are intended to convey the sublime
symbolism of a resurrection from the grave and a new birth into a future
life. The discovery of the body, which, in the initiations of the
ancient Mysteries, was called the *euresis*, [165](sof37.htm#xref_165.md)
and its removal, from the polluted grave into which it had been cast, to
an honored and sacred place within the precincts of the temple, are all
profoundly and beautifully symbolic of that great truth, the discovery
of which was the object of all the ancient initiations, as it is almost
the whole design of Freemasonry, namely, that when man shall have passed
the gates of life and have yielded to the inexorable fiat of death, he
shall then (not in the pictured ritual of an earthly lodge, but in the
realities of that eternal one, of which the former is but an antitype)
be raised, at the omnific word of the Grand Master of the Universe, from
time to eternity; from the tomb of corruption to the chambers of hope;
from the darkness of death to the celestial beams of life; and that his
disembodied spirit shall be conveyed as near to the holy of holies of
the divine presence as humanity can ever approach to Deity.

Such I conceive to be the true interpretation of the symbolism of the
legend of the Third Degree.

I have said that this mythical history of the temple builder was
universal in all nations and all rites, and that in no place and at no
time had it, by alteration, diminution, or addition, acquired any
essentially new or different form: the myth has always remained the
same.

But it is not so with its interpretation. That which I have just given,
and which I conceive to be the correct one, has been very generally
adopted by the Masons of this country. But elsewhere, and by various
writers, other interpretations have been made, very different in their
character, although always agreeing in retaining the general idea of a
resurrection or regeneration, or a restoration of something from an
inferior to a higher sphere or function.

Thus some of the earlier continental writers have supposed the myth to
have been a symbol of the destruction of the Order of the Templars,
looking upon its restoration to its original wealth and dignities as
being prophetically symbolized.

In some of the high philosophical degrees it is taught that the whole
legend refers to the sufferings and death, with the subsequent
resurrection, of Christ. [166](sof37.htm#xref_166.md)

Hutchinson, who has the honor of being the earliest philosophical writer
on Freemasonry in England, supposes it to have been intended to embody
the idea of the decadence of the Jewish religion, and the substitution
of the Christian in its place and on its
ruins. [167](sof37.htm#xref_167.md)

Dr. Oliver--"clarum et venerabile nomen"--thinks that it is typical of
the murder of Abel by Cain, and that it symbolically refers to the
universal death of our race through Adam, and its restoration to life in
the Redeemer, [168](sof37.htm#xref_168.md) according to the expression of
the apostle, "As in Adam we all died, so in Christ we all live."

Ragon makes Hiram a symbol of the sun shorn of its vivifying rays and
fructifying power by the three winter months, and its restoration to
generative heat by the season of spring. [169](sof37.htm#xref_169.md)

And, finally, Des Etangs, adopting, in part, the interpretation of
Ragon, adds to it another, which he calls the moral symbolism of the
legend, and supposes that Hiram is no other than eternal reason, whose
enemies are the vices that deprave and destroy
humanity. [170](sof37.htm#xref_170.md)

To each of these interpretations it seems to me that there are important
objections, though perhaps to some less so than to others.

As to those who seek for an astronomical interpretation of the legend,
in which the annual changes of the sun are symbolized, while the
ingenuity with which they press their argument cannot but be admired, it
is evident that, by such an interpretation, they yield all that Masonry
has gained of religious development in past ages, and fall back upon
that corruption and perversion of Sabaism from which it was the object,
even of the Spurious Freemasonry of antiquity, to rescue its disciples.

The Templar interpretation of the myth must at once be discarded if we
would avoid the difficulties of anachronism, unless we deny that the
legend existed before the abolition of the Order of Knights Templar, and
such denial would be fatal to the antiquity of
Freemasonry. [171](sof37.htm#xref_171.md)

And as to the adoption of the Christian reference, Hutchinson, and after
him Oliver, profoundly philosophical as are the masonic speculations of
both, have, I am constrained to believe, fallen into a great error in
calling the Master Mason's degree a Christian institution. It is true
that it embraces within its scheme the great truths of Christianity upon
the subject of the immortality of the soul and the resurrection of the
body; but this was to be presumed, because Freemasonry is truth, and
Christianity is truth, and all truth must be identical. But the origin
of each is different; their histories are dissimilar. The institution of
Freemasonry preceded the advent of Christianity. Its symbols and its
legends are derived from the Solomonic temple, and from the people even
anterior to that. Its religion comes from the ancient priesthood. Its
faith was that primitive one of Noah and his immediate descendants. If
Masonry were simply a Christian institution, the Jew and the Moslem, the
Brahmin and the Buddhist, could not conscientiously partake of its
illumination; but its universality is its boast. In its language
citizens of every nation may converse; at its altar men of all religions
may kneel; to its creed disciples of every faith may subscribe.

Yet it cannot be denied, that since the advent of Christianity a
Christian element has been almost imperceptibly infused into the masonic
system, at least among Christian Masons. This has been a necessity; for
it is the tendency of every predominant religion to pervade with its
influences all that surrounds it, or is about it, whether religious,
political, or social. This arises from a need of the human heart. To the
man deeply imbued with the spirit of his religion there is an almost
unconscious desire to accommodate and adapt all the business and the
amusements of life, the labors and the employments of his every-day
existence, to the indwelling faith of his soul.

The Christian Mason, therefore, while acknowledging and justly
appreciating the great doctrines taught in Masonry, and while grateful
that these doctrines were preserved in the bosom of his ancient order at
a time when they were unknown to the multitudes of the surrounding
nations, is still anxious to give to them a Christian character, to
invest them, in some measure, with the peculiarities of his own creed,
and to bring the interpretation of their symbolism more nearly home to
his own religious sentiments.

The feeling is an instinctive one, belonging to the noblest aspirations
of our human nature; and hence we find Christian masonic writers
indulging in it almost to an unwarrantable excess, and by the extent of
their sectarian interpretations materially affecting the cosmopolitan
character of the institution.

This tendency to Christianization has, in some instances, been so
universal, and has prevailed for so long a period, that certain symbols
and myths have been, in this way, so deeply and thoroughly imbued with
the Christian element as to leave those who have not penetrated into the
cause of this peculiarity, in doubt whether they should attribute to the
symbol an ancient or a modern and Christian origin.

As an illustration of the idea here advanced, and as a remarkable
example of the result of a gradually Christianized interpretation of a
masonic symbol, I will refer to the subordinate myth (subordinate, I
mean, to the great legend of the Builder), which relates the
circumstances connected with the grave upon "*the brow of a small hill
near Mount Moriah.*"

Now, the myth or legend of a grave is a legitimate deduction from the
symbolism of the ancient Spurious Masonry. It is the analogue of the
*Pastos*, *Couch*, or *Coffin*, which was to be found in the ritual of
all the pagan Mysteries. In all these initiations, the aspirant was
placed in a cell or upon a couch, in darkness, and for a period varying,
in the different rites, from the three days of the Grecian Mysteries to
the fifty of the Persian. This cell or couch, technically called the
"pastos," was adopted as a symbol of the being whose death and
resurrection or apotheosis, was represented in the legend.

The learned Faber says that this ceremony was doubtless the same as the
descent into Hades, [172](sof37.htm#xref_172.md) and that, when the
aspirant entered into the mystic cell, he was directed to lay himself
down upon the bed which shadowed out the tomb of the Great Father, or
Noah, to whom, it will be recollected, that Faber refers all the ancient
rites. "While stretched upon the holy couch," he continues to remark,
"in imitation of his figurative deceased prototype, he was said to be
wrapped in the deep sleep of death. His resurrection from the bed was
his restoration to life or his regeneration into a new world."

Now, it is easy to see how readily such a symbolism would be seized by
the Temple Masons, and appropriated at once to *the grave at the brow of
the hill*. At first, the interpretation, like that from which it had
been derived, would be cosmopolitan; it would fit exactly to the general
dogmas of the resurrection of the body and the immortality of the soul.

But on the advent of Christianity, the spirit of the new religion being
infused into the old masonic system, the whole symbolism of the grave
was affected by it. The same interpretation of a resurrection or
restoration to life, derived from the ancient "pastos," was, it is true,
preserved; but the facts that Christ himself had come to promulgate to
the multitudes the same consoling dogma, and that Mount Calvary, "the
place of a skull," was the spot where the Redeemer, by his own death and
resurrection, had testified the truth of the doctrine, at once suggested
to the old Christian Masons the idea of Christianizing the ancient
symbol.

Let us now examine briefly how that idea has been at length developed.

In the first place, it is necessary to identify the spot where the
"newly-made grave" was discovered with Mount Calvary, the place of the
sepulchre of Christ. This can easily be done by a very few but striking
analogies, which will, I conceive, carry conviction to any thinking
mind.

1\. Mount Calvary was a *small hill*. [173](sof37.htm#xref_173.md)

2\. It was situated in a *westward direction* from the temple, and *near
Mount Moriah*.

3\. It was on the direct road from Jerusalem to Joppa, and is thus the
very spot where a *weary brother*, travelling on that road, would find
it convenient to *sit down to rest and refresh
himself*. [174](sof37.htm#xref_174.md)

4\. It was *outside* the gate of the temple.

5\. It has at least *one cleft in the rock*, or cave, which was the
place which subsequently became the sepulchre of our Lord. But this
coincidence need scarcely to be insisted on, since the whole
neighborhood abounds in rocky clefts, which meet at once the conditions
of the masonic legend.

But to bring this analogical reasoning before the mind in a more
expressive mode, it may be observed that if a party of persons were to
start forth from the temple at Jerusalem, and travel in a westward
direction towards the port of Joppa, Mount Calvary would be the first
hill met with; and as it may possibly have been used as a place of
sepulture, which its name of Golgotha [175](sof37.htm#xref_175.md) seems to
import, we may suppose it to have been the very spot alluded to in the
Third Degree, as the place where the craftsmen, on their way to Joppa,
discovered the evergreen acacia.

Having thus traced the analogy, let us look a little to the symbolism.

Mount Calvary has always retained an important place in the legendary
history of Freemasonry, and there are many traditions connected with it
that are highly interesting in their import.

One of these traditions is, that it was the burial-place of Adam, in
order, says the old legend, that where he lay, who effected the ruin of
mankind, there also might the Savior of the world suffer, die, and be
buried. Sir R. Torkington, who published a pilgrimage to Jerusalem in
1517, says that "under the Mount of Calvary is another chapel of our
Blessed Lady and St. John the Evangelist, that was called Golgotha; and
there, right under the mortise of the cross, was found the head of our
forefather, Adam."  [176](sof37.htm#xref_176.md) Golgotha, it will be
remembered, means, in Hebrew, "the place of a skull;" and there may be
some connection between this tradition and the name of Golgotha, by
which the Evangelists inform us, that in the time of Christ Mount
Calvary was known. Calvary, or Calvaria, has the same signification in
Latin.

Another tradition states, that it was in the bowels of Mount Calvary
that Enoch erected his nine-arched vault, and deposited on the
foundation-stone of Masonry that Ineffable Name, whose investigation, as
a symbol of divine truth, is the great object of Speculative Masonry.

A third tradition details the subsequent discovery of Enoch's deposit by
King Solomon, whilst making excavations in Mount Calvary, during the
building of the temple.

On this hallowed spot was Christ the Redeemer slain and buried. It was
there that, rising on the third day from his sepulchre, he gave, by that
act, the demonstrative evidence of the resurrection of the body and the
immortality of the soul.

And it was on this spot that the same great lesson was taught in
Masonry--the same sublime truth--the development of which evidently
forms the design of the Third or Master Mason's degree.

There is in these analogies a sublime beauty as well as a wonderful
coincidence between the two systems of Masonry and Christianity, that
must, at an early period, have attracted the attention of the Christian
Masons.

Mount Calvary is consecrated to the Christian as the place where his
crucified Lord gave the last great proof of the second life, and fully
established the doctrine of the resurrection which he had come to teach.
It was the sepulchre of him

> "Who captive led captivity,  
> Who robbed the grave of victory,  
> And took the sting from death."

It is consecrated to the Mason, also, as the scene of the *euresis*, the
place of the discovery, where the same consoling doctrines of the
resurrection of the body and the immortality of the soul are shadowed
forth in profoundly symbolic forms.

These great truths constitute the very essence of Christianity, in which
it differs from and excels all religious systems that preceded it; they
constitute, also, the end, aim, and object of all Freemasonry, but more
especially that of the Third Degree, whose peculiar legend, symbolically
considered, teaches nothing more nor less than that there is an immortal
and better part within us, which, as an emanation from that divine
spirit which pervades all nature, can never die.

The identification of the spot on which this divine truth was
promulgated in both systems--the Christian and the Masonic--affords an
admirable illustration of the readiness with which the religious spirit
of the former may be infused into the symbolism of the latter. And hence
Hutchinson, thoroughly imbued with these Christian views of Masonry, has
called the Master Mason's order a Christian degree, and thus
Christianizes the whole symbolism of its mythical history.

"The Great Father of all, commiserating the miseries of the world, sent
his only Son, who was *innocence* itself, to teach the doctrine of
salvation--by whom man was raised from the death of sin unto the life of
righteousness--from the tomb of corruption unto the chamber of
hope--from the darkness of despair to the celestial beams of faith; and
not only working for us this redemption, but making with us the covenant
of regeneration; whence we are become the children of the Divinity, and
inheritors of the realms of heaven.

"We, *Masons*, describing the deplorable estate of religion under the
Jewish law, speak in figures: 'Her tomb was in the rubbish and filth
cast forth of the temple, and *acacia* wove its branches over her
monuments;' *akakia* being the Greek word for innocence, or being free
from sin; implying that the sins and corruptions of the old law, and
devotees of the Jewish altar, had hid Religion from those who sought
her, and she was only to be found where *innocence* survived, and under
the banner of the Divine Lamb, and, as to ourselves, professing that we
were to be distinguished by our *Acacy*, or as true *Acacians* in our
religious faiths and tenets.

"The acquisition of the doctrine of redemption is expressed in the
typical character of *Huramen* (I have found it.--*Greek*), and by the
applications of that name with Masons, it is implied that we have
discovered the knowledge of God and his salvation, and have been
redeemed from the death of sin and the sepulchre of pollution and
unrighteousness.

"Thus the *Master Mason* represents a man, under the Christian doctrine,
saved from the grave of iniquity and raised to the faith of salvation."

It is in this way that Masonry has, by a sort of inevitable process
(when we look to the religious sentiment of the interpreters), been
Christianized by some of the most illustrious and learned writers on
masonic science--by such able men as Hutchinson and Oliver in England,
and by Harris, by Scott, by Salem Towne, and by several others in this
country.

I do not object to the system when the interpretation is not strained,
but is plausible, consistent, and productive of the same results as in
the instance of Mount Calvary: all that I contend for is, that such
interpretations are modern, and that they do not belong to, although
they may often be deduced from, the ancient system.

But the true ancient interpretation of the legend,--the universal
masonic one,--for all countries and all ages, undoubtedly was, that the
fate of the temple builder is but figurative of the pilgrimage of man on
earth, through trials and temptations, through sin and sorrow, until his
eventual fall beneath the blow of death and his final and glorious
resurrection to another and an eternal life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXVIII. The Sprig of Acacia](sof30.md)

</div>
