[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sof22)  [Next](sof24.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="21"></span>

<div>

<span id="img_head21.png"></span> ![Header Chapter XXI.](img/head21.png.md)

## XXI.

### The Rite of Circumambulation.

The *rite of circumambulation* will supply us with another ritualistic
symbol, in which we may again trace the identity of the origin of
Freemasonry with that of the religious and mystical ceremonies of the
ancients.

"Circumambulation" is the name given by sacred archaeologists to that
religious rite in the ancient initiations which consisted in a formal
procession around the altar, or other holy and consecrated object.

The prevalence of this rite among the ancients appears to have been
universal, and it originally (as I shall have occasion to show) alluded
to the apparent course of the sun in the firmament, which is from east
to west by the way of the south.

In ancient Greece, when the priests were engaged in the rites of
sacrifice, they and the people always walked three times around the
altar while chanting a sacred hymn or ode. Sometimes, while the people
stood around the altar, the rite of circumambulation was performed by
the priest alone, who, turning towards the right hand, went around it,
and sprinkled it with meal and holy water. In making this
circumambulation, it was considered absolutely necessary that the right
side should always be next to the altar, and consequently, that the
procession should move from the east to the south, then to the west,
next to the north, and afterwards to the east again. It was in this way
that the apparent revolution was represented.

This ceremony the Greeks called moving εϗ δεξια εν δεξια, *from the
right to the right*, which was the direction of the motion, and the
Romans applied to it the term *dextrovorsum*, or *dextrorsum*, which
signifies the same thing. Thus Plautus makes Palinurus, a character in
his comedy of "Curculio," say, "If you would do reverence to the gods,
you must turn to the right hand." Gronovius, in commenting on this
passage of Plautus, says, "In worshipping and praying to the gods they
were accustomed to *turn to the right hand*."

A hymn of Callimachus has been preserved, which is said to have been
chanted by the priests of Apollo at Delos, while performing this
ceremony of circumambulation, the substance of which is, "We imitate the
example of the sun, and follow his benevolent course."

It will be observed that this circumambulation around the altar was
accompanied by the singing or chanting of a sacred ode. Of the three
parts of the ode, the *strophe*, the *antistrophe*, and the *epode*,
each was to be sung at a particular part of the procession. The analogy
between this chanting of an ode by the ancients and the recitation of a
passage of Scripture in the masonic circumambulation, will be at once
apparent.

Among the Romans, the ceremony of circumambulation was always used in
the rites of sacrifice, of expiation or purification. Thus Virgil
describes Corynasus as purifying his companions, at the funeral of
Misenus, by passing three times around them while aspersing them with
the lustral waters; and to do so conveniently, it was necessary that he
should have moved with his right hand towards them.

> "Idem ter socios pura circumtulit unda,  
> Spargens rore levi et ramo felicis olivæ."  
> *Æn.* vi. 229.
>
> "Thrice with pure water compassed he the crew,  
> Sprinkling, with olive branch, the gentle dew."

In fact, so common was it to unite the ceremony of circumambulation with
that of expiation or purification, or, in other words, to make a
circuitous procession, in performing the latter rite, that the term
*lustrare*, whose primitive meaning is "to purify," came at last to be
synonymous with *circuire*, to walk round anything; and hence a
purification and a circumambulation were often expressed by the same
word.

Among the Hindoos, the same rite of circumambulation has always been
practised. As an instance, we may cite the ceremonies which are to be
performed by a Brahmin upon first rising from bed in the morning, an
accurate account of which has been given by Mr. Colebrooke in the
"Asiatic Researches." The priest, having first adored the sun while
directing his face to the east, then walks towards the west by the way
of the south, saying, at the same time, "I follow the course of the
sun," which he thus explains: "As the sun in his course moves round the
world by the way of the south, so do I follow that luminary, to obtain
the benefit arising from a journey round the earth by the way of the
south."  [93](sof37.htm#xref_93.md)

Lastly, I may refer to the preservation of this rite among the Druids,
whose "mystical dance" around the *cairn*, or sacred stones, was nothing
more nor less than the rite of circumambulation. On these occasions the
priest always made three circuits, from east to west, by the right hand,
around the altar or cairn, accompanied by all the worshippers. And so
sacred was the rite once considered, that we learn from
Toland [94](sof37.htm#xref_94.md) that in the Scottish Isles, once a
principal seat of the Druidical religion, the people "never come to the
ancient sacrificing and fire-hallowing *cairns*, but they walk three
times around them, from east to west, according to the course of the
sun." This sanctified tour, or round by the south, he observes, is
called *Deiseal*, as the contrary, or unhallowed one by the north, is
called *Tuapholl*. And he further remarks, that this word *Deiseal* was
derived "from *Deas*, the *right* (understanding *hand*) and *soil*, one
of the ancient names of the sun, the right hand in this round being ever
next the heap."

I might pursue these researches still further, and trace this rite of
circumambulation to other nations of antiquity; but I conceive that
enough has been said to show its universality, as well as the tenacity
with which the essential ceremony of performing the motion a mystical
number of times, and always by the right hand, from the east, through
the south, to the west, was preserved. And I think that this singular
analogy to the same rite in Freemasonry must lead us to the legitimate
conclusion, that the common source of all these rites is to be found in
the identical origin of the Spurious Freemasonry or pagan mysteries, and
the pure, Primitive Freemasonry, from which the former seceded only to
be deteriorated.

In reviewing what has been said on this subject, it will at once be
perceived that the essence of the ancient rite consisted in making the
circumambulation around the altar, from the east to the south, from the
south to the west, thence to the north, and to the east again.

Now, in this the masonic rite of circumambulation strictly agrees with
the ancient one.

But this circuit by the right hand, it is admitted, was done as a
representation of the sun's motion. It was a symbol of the sun's
apparent course around the earth.

And so, then, here again we have in Masonry that old and often-repeated
allusion to sun-worship, which has already been seen in the officers of
a lodge, and in the point within a circle. And as the circumambulation
is made around the lodge, just as the sun was supposed to move around
the earth, we are brought back to the original symbolism with which we
commenced--that the lodge is a symbol of the world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXII. The Rite of Intrusting, and the Symbolism of Light](sof24.md)

</div>
