[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sof29)  [Next](sof31) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="28"></span>

<div>

<span id="img_head28.png"></span> ![Header Chapter
XXVIII.](img/head28.png)

## XXVIII.

### The Sprig of Acacia.

Intimately connected with the legend of the third degree is the mythical
history of the Sprig of Acacia, which we are now to consider.

There is no symbol more interesting to the masonic student than the
Sprig of Acacia, not only on account of its own peculiar import, but
also because it introduces us to an extensive and delightful field of
research; that, namely, which embraces the symbolism of sacred plants.
In all the ancient systems of religion, and Mysteries of initiation,
there was always some one plant consecrated, in the minds of the
worshippers and participants, by a peculiar symbolism, and therefore
held in extraordinary veneration as a sacred emblem. Thus the ivy was
used in the Mysteries of Dionysus, the myrtle in those of Ceres, the
erica in the Osirian, and the lettuce in the Adonisian. But to this
subject I shall have occasion to refer more fully in a subsequent part
of the present investigation.

Before entering upon an examination of the symbolism of the *Acacia*, it
will be, perhaps, as well to identify the true plant which occupies so
important a place in the ritual of Freemasonry.

And here, in passing, I may be permitted to say that it is a very great
error to designate the symbolic plant of Masonry by the name of
"Cassia"--an error which undoubtedly arose, originally, from the very
common habit among illiterate people of sinking the sound of the letter
*a* in the pronunciation of any word of which it constitutes the initial
syllable. Just, for instance, as we constantly hear, in the conversation
of the uneducated, the words *pothecary* and *prentice* for *apothecary*
and *apprentice*, shall we also find *cassia* used for
*acacia*. [177](sof37.htm#xref_177) Unfortunately, however, this
corruption of *acacia* into *cassia* has not always been confined to the
illiterate: but the long employment of the corrupted form has at length
introduced it, in some instances, among a few of our writers. Even the
venerable Oliver, although well acquainted with the symbolism of the
acacia, and having written most learnedly upon it, has, at times,
allowed himself to use the objectionable corruption, unwittingly
influenced, in all probability, by the too frequent adoption of the
latter word in the English lodges. In America, but few Masons fall into
the error of speaking of the *Cassia*. The proper teaching of the
*Acacia* is here well understood. [178](sof37.htm#xref_178)

The *cassia* of the ancients was, in fact, an ignoble plant having no
mystic meaning and no sacred character, and was never elevated to a
higher function than that of being united, as Virgil informs us, with
other odorous herbs in the formation of a garland:--

> "...violets pale,  
> The poppy's flush, and dill which scents the gale,  
> Cassia, and hyacinth, and daffodil,  
> With yellow marigold the chaplet fill."  [179](sof37.htm#xref_179)

Alston says that the "Cassia lignea of the ancients was the larger
branches of the cinnamon tree, cut off with their bark and sent together
to the druggists; their Cassia fistula, or Syrinx, was the same cinnamon
in the bark only;" but Ruæus says that it also sometimes denoted the
lavender, and sometimes the rosemary.

In Scripture the cassia is only three times
mentioned, [180](sof37.htm#xref_180) twice as the translation of the
Hebrew word *kiddak*, and once as the rendering of *ketzioth*, but
always as referring to an aromatic plant which formed a constituent
portion of some perfume. There is, indeed, strong reason for believing
that the cassia is only another name for a coarser preparation of
cinnamon, and it is also to be remarked that it did not grow in
Palestine, but was imported from the East.

The *acacia*, on the contrary, was esteemed a sacred tree. It is the
*acacia vera* of Tournefort, and the *mimosa nilotica* of Linnæus. It
grew abundantly in the vicinity of Jerusalem, [181](sof37.htm#xref_181)
where it is still to be found, and is familiar to us all, in its modern
uses at least, as the tree from which the gum arabic of commerce is
obtained.

The acacia, which, in Scripture, is always called
*shittah* [182](sof37.htm#xref_182) and in the plural *shittim*, was
esteemed a sacred wood among the Hebrews. Of it Moses was ordered to
make the tabernacle, the ark of the covenant, the table for the
showbread, and the rest of the sacred furniture. Isaiah, in recounting
the promises of God's mercy to the Israelites on their return from the
captivity, tells them, that, among other things, he will plant in the
wilderness, for their relief and refreshment, the cedar, the acacia (or,
as it is rendered in our common version, the *shittah*), the fir, and
other trees.

The first thing, then, that we notice in this symbol of the acacia, is,
that it had been always consecrated from among the other trees of the
forest by the sacred purposes to which it was devoted. By the Jew the
tree from whose wood the sanctuary of the tabernacle and the holy ark
had been constructed would ever be viewed as more sacred than ordinary
trees. The early Masons, therefore, very naturally appropriated this
hallowed plant to the equally sacred purpose of a symbol which was to
teach an important divine truth in all ages to come.

Having thus briefly disposed of the natural history of this plant, we
may now proceed to examine it in its symbolic relations.

First. The acacia, in the mythic system of Freemasonry, is preeminently
the symbol of the IMMORTALITY OF THE SOUL--that important doctrine which
it is the great design of the institution to teach. As the evanescent
nature of the flower which "cometh forth and is cut down" reminds us of
the transitory nature of human life, so the perpetual renovation of the
evergreen plant, which uninterruptedly presents the appearance of youth
and vigor, is aptly compared to that spiritual life in which the soul,
freed from the corruptible companionship of the body, shall enjoy an
eternal spring and an immortal youth. Hence, in the impressive funeral
service of our order, it is said, "This evergreen is an emblem of our
faith in the immortality of the soul. By this we are reminded that we
have an immortal part within us, which shall survive the grave, and
which shall never, never, never die." And again, in the closing
sentences of the monitorial lecture of the Third Degree, the same
sentiment is repeated, and we are told that by "the ever green and ever
living sprig" the Mason is strengthened "with confidence and composure
to look forward to a blessed immortality." Such an interpretation of the
symbol is an easy and a natural one; it suggests itself at once to the
least reflective mind, and consequently, in some one form or another, is
to be found existing in all ages and nations. It was an ancient custom,
which is not, even now, altogether disused, for mourners to carry in
their hands at funerals a sprig of some evergreen, generally the cedar
or the cypress, and to deposit it in the grave of the deceased.
According to Dalcho, [183](sof37.htm#xref_183) the Hebrews always
planted a sprig of the acacia at the head of the grave of a departed
friend. Potter tells us that the ancient Greeks "had a custom of
bedecking tombs with herbs and flowers."  [184](sof37.htm#xref_184) All
sorts of purple and white flowers were acceptable to the dead, but
principally the amaranth and the myrtle. The very name of the former of
these plants, which signifies "never fading," would seem to indicate the
true symbolic meaning of the usage, although archaeologists have
generally supposed it to be simply an exhibition of love on the part of
the survivors. Ragon says, that the ancients substituted the acacia for
all other plants because they believed it to be incorruptible, and not
liable to injury from the attacks of any kind of insect or other
animal--thus symbolizing the incorruptible nature of the soul.

Hence we see the propriety of placing the sprig of acacia, as an emblem
of immortality, among the symbols of that degree, all of whose
ceremonies are intended to teach us the great truth, that "the life of
man, regulated by morality, faith, and justice, will be rewarded at its
closing hour by the prospect of eternal bliss."
 [185](sof37.htm#xref_185) So, therefore, says Dr. Oliver, when the
Master Mason exclaims, "My name is Acacia," it is equivalent to saying,
"I have been in the grave,--I have triumphed over it by rising from the
dead,--and being regenerated in the process, I have a claim to life
everlasting."

The sprig of acacia, then, in its most ordinary signification, presents
itself to the Master Mason as a symbol of the immortality of the soul,
being intended to remind him, by its evergreen and unchanging nature, of
that better and spiritual part within us, which, as an emanation from
the Grand Architect of the Universe, can never die. And as this is the
most ordinary, the most generally accepted signification, so also is it
the most important; for thus, as the peculiar symbol of immortality, it
becomes the most appropriate to an order all of whose teachings are
intended to inculcate the great lesson that "life rises out of the
grave." But incidental to this the acacia has two other interpretations,
which are well worthy of investigation.

Secondly, then, the acacia is a symbol of INNOCENCE. The symbolism here
is of a peculiar and unusual character, depending not on any real
analogy in the form or use of the symbol to the idea symbolized, but
simply on a double or compound meaning of the word. For αϗαϗια, in the
Greek language, signifies both the plant in question and the moral
quality of innocence or purity of life. In this sense the symbol refers,
primarily, to him over whose solitary grave the acacia was planted, and
whose virtuous conduct, whose integrity of life and fidelity to his
trusts, have ever been presented as patterns to the craft, and
consequently to all Master Masons, who, by this interpretation of the
symbol, are invited to emulate his example.

Hutchinson, indulging in his favorite theory of Christianizing Masonry,
when he comes to this signification of the symbol, thus enlarges on the
interpretation: "We Masons, describing the deplorable estate of religion
under the Jewish law, speak in figures: 'Her tomb was in the rubbish and
filth cast forth of the temple, and *Acacia* wove its branches over her
monument;' *akakia* being the Greek word for innocence, or being free
from sin; implying that the sins and corruptions of the old law and
devotees of the Jewish altar had hid Religion from those who sought her,
and she was only to be found where *innocence* survived, and under the
banner of the divine Lamb; and as to ourselves, professing that we were
to be distinguished by our *Acacy*, or as true *Acacians* in our
religious faith and tenets."  [186](sof37.htm#xref_186)

Among the nations of antiquity, it was common thus by peculiar plants to
symbolize the virtues and other qualities of the mind. In many instances
the symbolism has been lost to the moderns, but in others it has been
retained, and is well understood, even at the present day. Thus the
olive was adopted as the symbol of peace, because, says Lee, "its oil is
very useful, in some way or other, in all arts manual which principally
flourish in times of peace."  [187](sof37.htm#xref_187)

The quince among the Greeks was the symbol of love and
happiness; [188](sof37.htm#xref_188) and hence, by the laws of Solon, in
Athenian marriages, the bride and bridegroom were required to eat a
quince together.

The palm was the symbol of victory; [189](sof37.htm#xref_189) and hence,
in the catacombs of Rome, the burial-place of so many of the early
Christians, the palm leaf is constantly found as an emblem of the
Christian's triumph over sin and death.

The rosemary was a symbol of remembrance, and hence was used both at
marriages and at funerals, the memory of the past being equally
appropriate in both rites. [190](sof37.htm#xref_190)

The parsley was consecrated to grief; and hence all the Greeks decked
their tombs with it; and it was used to crown the conquerors in the
Nemean games, which were of a funereal
character. [191](sof37.htm#xref_191)

But it is needless to multiply instances of this symbolism. In adopting
the acacia as a symbol of innocence, Masonry has but extended the
principle of an ancient and universal usage, which thus consecrated
particular plants, by a mystical meaning, to the representation of
particular virtues.

But lastly, the acacia is to be considered as the symbol of INITIATION.
This is by far the most interesting of its interpretations, and was, we
have every reason to believe, the primary and original, the others being
but incidental. It leads us at once to the investigation of that
significant fact to which I have already alluded, that in all the
ancient initiations and religious mysteries there was some plant,
peculiar to each, which was consecrated by its own esoteric meaning, and
which occupied an important position in the celebration of the rites; so
that the plant, whatever it might be, from its constant and prominent
use in the ceremonies of initiation, came at length to be adopted as the
symbol of that initiation.

A reference to some of these *sacred plants*--for such was the character
they assumed--and an investigation of their symbolism will not, perhaps,
be uninteresting or useless, in connection with the subject of the
present article.

In the Mysteries of Adonis, which originated in Phoenicia, and were
afterwards transferred to Greece, the death and resurrection of Adonis
was represented. A part of the legend accompanying these mysteries was,
that when Adonis was slain by a wild boar, Venus laid out the body on a
bed of lettuce. In memorial of this supposed fact, on the first day of
the celebration, when funeral rites were performed, lettuces were
carried in the procession, *newly planted* in shells of earth. Hence the
lettuce became the sacred plant of the Adonia, or Adonisian Mysteries.

The lotus was the sacred plant of the Brahminical rites of India, and
was considered as the symbol of their elemental trinity,--earth, water,
and air,--because, as an aquatic plant, it derived its nutriment from
all of these elements combined, its roots being planted in the earth,
its stem rising through the water, and its leaves exposed to the
air. [192](sof37.htm#xref_192) The Egyptians, who borrowed a large
portion of their religious rites from the East, adopted the lotus, which
was also indigenous to their country, as a mystical plant, and made it
the symbol of their initiation, or the birth into celestial light.
Hence, as Champollion observes, they often on their monuments
represented the god Phre, or the sun, as borne within the expanded calyx
of the lotus. The lotus bears a flower similar to that of the poppy,
while its large, tongue-shaped leaves float upon the surface of the
water. As the Egyptians had remarked that the plant expands when the sun
rises, and closes when it sets, they adopted it as a symbol of the sun;
and as that luminary was the principal object of the popular worship,
the lotus became in all their sacred rites a consecrated and mystical
plant.

The Egyptians also selected the *erica* [193](sof37.htm#xref_193) or
heath, as a sacred plant. The origin of the consecration of this plant
presents us with a singular coincidence, that will be peculiarly
interesting to the masonic student. We are informed that there was a
legend in the mysteries of Osiris, which related, that Isis, when in
search of the body of her murdered husband, discovered it interred at
the brow of a hill, near which an erica, or heath plant, grew; and
hence, after the recovery of the body and the resurrection of the god,
when she established the mysteries to commemorate her loss and her
recovery, she adopted the erica, as a sacred
plant, [194](sof37.htm#xref_194) in memory of its having pointed out the
spot where the *mangled remains* of Osiris were
concealed. [195](sof37.htm#xref_195)

The *mistletoe* was the sacred plant of Druidism. Its consecrated
character was derived from a legend of the Scandinavian mythology, and
which is thus related in the Edda, or sacred books. The god Balder, the
son of Odin, having dreamed that he was in some great danger of life,
his mother, Friga, exacted an oath from all the creatures of the animal,
the vegetable, and the mineral kingdoms, that they would do no harm to
her son. The mistletoe, contemptible from its size and weakness, was
alone neglected, and of it no oath of immunity was demanded. Lok, the
evil genius, or god of Darkness, becoming acquainted with this fact,
placed an arrow made of mistletoe in the hands of Holder, the blind
brother of Balder, on a certain day, when the gods were throwing
missiles at him in sport, and wondering at their inability to do him
injury with any arms with which they could attack him. But, being shot
with the mistletoe arrow, it inflicted a fatal wound, and Balder died.

Ever afterwards the mistletoe was revered as a sacred plant, consecrated
to the powers of darkness; and annually it became an important rite
among the Druids to proceed into the forest in search of the mistletoe,
which, being found, was cut down by the Arch Druid, and its parts, after
a solemn sacrifice, were distributed among the people.
Clavel [196](sof37.htm#xref_196) very ingeniously remarks, that it is
evident, in reference to the legend, that as Balder symbolizes the
Sun-god, and Lok, Darkness, this search for the mistletoe was intended
to deprive the god of Darkness of the power of destroying the god of
Light. And the distribution of the fragments of the mistletoe among
their pious worshippers, was to assure them that henceforth a similar
attempt of Lok would prove abortive, and he was thus deprived of the
means of effecting his design. [197](sof37.htm#xref_197)

The *myrtle* performed the same office of symbolism in the Mysteries of
Greece as the lotus did in Egypt, or the mistletoe among the Druids. The
candidate, in these initiations, was crowned with myrtle, because,
according to the popular theology, the myrtle was sacred to Proserpine,
the goddess of the future life. Every classical scholar will remember
the golden branch with which Aeneas was supplied by the Sibyl, before
proceeding on his journey to the infernal
regions [198](sof37.htm#xref_198)--a voyage which is now universally
admitted to be a mythical representation of the ceremonies of
initiation.

In all of these ancient Mysteries, while the sacred plant was a symbol
of initiation, the initiation itself was symbolic of the resurrection to
a future life, and of the immortality of the soul. In this view,
Freemasonry is to us now in the place of the ancient initiations, and
the acacia is substituted for the lotus, the erica, the ivy, the
mistletoe, and the myrtle. The lesson of wisdom is the same; the medium
of imparting it is all that has been changed.

Returning, then, to the acacia, we find that it is capable of three
explanations. It is a symbol of immortality, of innocence, and of
initiation. But these three significations are closely connected, and
that connection must be observed, if we desire to obtain a just
interpretation of the symbol. Thus, in this one symbol, we are taught
that in the initiation of life, of which the initiation in the
third-degree is simply emblematic, innocence must for a time lie in the
grave, at length, however, to be called, by the word of the Grand Master
of the Universe, to a blissful immortality. Combine with this the
recollection of the place where the sprig of acacia was planted, and
which I have heretofore shown to be Mount Calvary, the place of
sepulture of Him who "brought life and immortality to light," and who,
in Christian Masonry, is designated, as he is in Scripture, as "the lion
of the tribe of Judah," and remember, too, that in the mystery of his
death, the wood of the cross takes the place of the acacia, and in this
little and apparently insignificant symbol, but which is really and
truly the most important and significant one in masonic science, we have
a beautiful suggestion of all the mysteries of life and death, of time
and eternity, of the present and of the future. Thus read (and thus all
our symbols should be read), Masonry proves something more to its
disciples than a mere social society or a charitable association. It
becomes a "lamp to our feet," whose spiritual light shines on the
darkness of the deathbed, and dissipates the gloomy shadows of the
grave.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXIX. The Symbolism of Labor](sof31)

</div>
