[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sof36.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div>

## Footnotes

<span id="xref_1">1</span>. "The doctrine of the immortality of the
soul, if it is a real advantage, follows unavoidably from the idea of
God. The *best* Being, he must *will* the best of good things; the
*wisest*, he must devise plans for that effect; the *most powerful*, he
must bring it about. None can deny this."--THEO. PARKER, *Discourse of
Matters pertaining to Religion*, b. ii. ch. viii. p. 205.

</div>

<span id="xref_2">2</span>. "This institution of religion, like society,
friendship, and marriage, comes out of a principle, deep and permanent
in the heart: as humble, and transient, and partial institutions come
out of humble, transient, and partial wants, and are to be traced to the
senses and the phenomena of life, so this sublime, permanent, and useful
institution came out from sublime, permanent, and universal wants, and
must be referred to the soul, and the unchanging realities of
life."--PARKER, *Discourse of Religion*, b. i. ch. i. p. 14.

<span id="xref_3">3</span>. "The sages of all nations, ages, and
religions had some ideas of these sublime doctrines, though more or less
degraded, adulterated and obscured; and these scattered hints and
vestiges of the most sacred and exalted truths were originally rays and
emanations of ancient and primitive traditions, handed down from,
generation to generation, since the beginning of the world, or at least
since the fall of man, to all mankind."--CHEV. RAMSAY, *Philos. Princ.
of Nat. and Rev. Relig.*, vol ii. p. 8.

<span id="xref_4">4</span>. "In this form, not only the common objects
above enumerated, but gems, metals, stones that fell from heaven,
images, carved bits of wood, stuffed skins of beasts, like the
medicine-bags of the North American Indians, are reckoned as divinities,
and so become objects of adoration. But in this case, the visible
object, is idealized; not worshipped as the brute thing really is, but
as the type and symbol of God."--PARKER, *Disc. of Relig.* b. i. ch. v.
p. 50.

<span id="xref_5">5</span>. A recent writer thus eloquently refers to
the universality, in ancient times, of sun-worship: "Sabaism, the
worship of light, prevailed amongst all the leading nations of the early
world. By the rivers of India, on the mountains of Persia, in the plains
of Assyria, early mankind thus adored, the higher spirits in each
country rising in spiritual thought from the solar orb up to Him whose
vicegerent it seems--to the Sun of all being, whose divine light
irradiates and purifies the world of soul, as the solar radiance does
the world of sense. Egypt, too, though its faith be but dimly known to
us, joined in this worship; Syria raised her grand temples to the sun;
the joyous Greeks sported with the thought while feeling it, almost
hiding it under the mythic individuality which their lively fancy
superimposed upon it. Even prosaic China makes offerings to the yellow
orb of day; the wandering Celts and Teutons held feasts to it, amidst
the primeval forests of Northern Europe; and, with a savagery
characteristic of the American aborigines, the sun temples of Mexico
streamed with human blood in honor of the beneficent orb."--*The Castes
and Creeds of India*, Blackw. Mag., vol. lxxxi. p. 317.--"There is no
people whose religion is known to us," says the Abbé Banier, "neither in
our own continent nor in that of America, that has not paid the sun a
religious worship, if we except some inhabitants of the torrid zone, who
are continually cursing the sun for scorching them with his
beams."--*Mythology*, lib. iii. ch. iii.--Macrobius, in his
*Saturnalia*, undertakes to prove that all the gods of Paganism may be
reduced to the sun.

<span id="xref_6">6</span>. "Varro de religionibus loquens, evidenter
dicit, multa esse vera, quae vulgo scire non sit utile; multaque, quae
tametsi falsa sint, aliter existimare populum expediat."--St. AUGUSTINE,
*De Civil. Dei.*--We must regret, with the learned Valloisin, that the
sixteen books of Varro, on the religious antiquities of the ancients,
have been lost; and the regret is enhanced by the reflection that they
existed until the beginning of the fourteenth century, and disappeared
only when their preservation for less than two centuries more would, by
the discovery of printing, have secured their perpetuity.

<span id="xref_7">7</span>. Strabo, Geog., lib. i.

<span id="xref_8">8</span>. Maurice, Indian Antiquities, vol. ii. p.
297.

<span id="xref_9">9</span>. Div. Leg., vol. i. b. ii. § iv. p. 193, 10th
Lond. edit.

<span id="xref_10">10</span>. The hidden doctrines of the unity of the
Deity and the immortality of the soul were taught originally in all the
Mysteries, even those of Cupid and Bacchus.--WARBURTON, apud Spence's
*Anecdotes*, p. 309.

<span id="xref_11">11</span>. Isoc. Paneg., p. 59.

<span id="xref_12">12</span>. Apud Arrian. Dissert., lib. iii. c. xxi.

<span id="xref_13">13</span>. Phaedo.

<span id="xref_14">14</span>. Dissert. on the Eleusinian and Bacchic
Mysteries, in the Pamphleteer, vol. viii. p. 53.

<span id="xref_15">15</span>. Symbol. und Mythol. der Alt. Völk.

<span id="xref_16">16</span>. In these Mysteries, after the people had
for a long time bewailed the loss of a particular person, he was at last
supposed to be restored to life.--BRYANT, *Anal. of Anc. Mythology*,
vol. iii. p. 176.

<span id="xref_17">17</span>. Herod. Hist., lib. iii. c. clxxi.

<span id="xref_18">18</span>. The legend says it was cut into *fourteen*
pieces. Compare this with the *fourteen* days of burial in the masonic
legend of the third degree. Why the particular number in each? It has
been thought by some, that in the latter legend there was a reference to
the half of the moon's age, or its dark period, symbolic of the darkness
of death, followed by the fourteen days of bright moon, or restoration
to life.

<span id="xref_19">19</span>. Mystères du Paganisme, tom. i. p. 6.

<span id="xref_20">20</span>. Notes to Rawlinson's Herodotus, b. ii. ch.
clxxi. Mr. Bryant expresses the same opinion: "The principal rites in
Egypt were confessedly for a person lost and consigned for a time to
darkness, who was at last found. This person I have mentioned to have
been described under the character of Osiris."--*Analysis of Ancient
Mythology*, vol. iii. p. 177.

<span id="xref_21">21</span>. Spirit of Masonry, p. 100.

<span id="xref_22">22</span>. Varro, according to St. Augustine (De Civ.
Dei, vi. 5), says that among the ancients there were three kinds of
theology--a *mythical*, which was used by the poets; a *physical*, by
the philosophers, and a *civil*, by the people.

<span id="xref_23">23</span>. "Tous les ans," says Sainte Croix,
"pendant les jours consacrés au souvenir de sa mort, tout étoit plongé
dans la tristesse: on ne cessoit de pousser des gémissemens; on alloit
même jusqu'à se flageller et se donner des coups. Le dernier jour de ce
deuil, on faisoit des sacrifices funèbres en l'honneur de ce dieu. Le
jour suivant, on recevoit la nouvelle qu'Adonis venoit d'être rappelé à
la vie, qui mettoit fin à leur deuil."--*Recherches sur les Myst. du
Paganisme*, tom. ii. p. 105.

<span id="xref_24">24</span>. Clement of Alexandria calls them μυστήρια
τὰ πρὸ μυστηρίων, "the mysteries before the mysteries."

<span id="xref_25">25</span>. Les petits mystères ne consistoient qu'en
cérémonies préparatoires.--*Sainte Croix*, i. 297.--As to the oath of
secrecy, Bryant says, "The first thing at these awful meetings was to
offer an oath of secrecy to all who were to be initiated, after which
they proceeded to the ceremonies."--*Anal. of Anc. Myth.*, vol. iii. p.
174.--The Orphic Argonautics allude to the oath: μετὰ δ' ὁρϗια Μύσῖαις,
ϗ. τ. λ., "after the oath was administered to the mystes," &c.--*Orph.
Argon.*, v. 11.

<span id="xref_26">26</span>. The satirical pen of Aristophanes has not
spared the Dionysiac festivals. But the raillery and sarcasm of a comic
writer must always be received with many grains of allowance. He has, at
least, been candid enough to confess that no one could be initiated who
had been guilty of any crime against his country or the public
security.--*Ranae*, v. 360-365.--Euripides makes the chorus in his
Bacchae proclaim that the Mysteries were practised only for virtuous
purposes. In Rome, however, there can be little doubt that the
initiations partook at length of a licentious character. "On ne peut
douter," says Ste. Croix, "que l'introduction des fêtes de Bacchus en
Italie n'ait accéleré les progrès du libertinage et de la débauche dans
cette contrée."--*Myst. du Pag.*, tom. ii. p. 91.--St. Augustine (De
Civ. Dei, lib. vii. c. xxi.) inveighs against the impurity of the
ceremonies in Italy of the sacred rites of Bacchus. But even he does not
deny that the motive with which they were performed was of a religious,
or at least superstitious nature--"Sic videlicet Liber deus placandus
fuerat." The propitiation of a deity was certainly a religious act.

<span id="xref_27">27</span>. Hist. Greece, vol. ii. p. 140.

<span id="xref_28">28</span>. This language is quoted from Robison
(*Proofs of a Conspiracy*, p. 20, Lond. edit. 1797), whom none will
suspect or accuse of an undue veneration for the antiquity or the
morality of the masonic order.

<span id="xref_29">29</span>. We must not confound these Asiatic
builders with the play-actors, who were subsequently called by the
Greeks, as we learn from Aulus Gellius (lib. xx. cap. 4), "artificers of
Dionysus"--Διονυσιαϗοι τεχνιταὶ.

<span id="xref_30">30</span>. There is abundant evidence, among ancient
authors, of the existence of signs and passwords in the Mysteries. Thus
Apuleius, in his Apology, says, "Si qui forte adest eorundem Solemnium
mihi particeps, signum dato," etc.; that is, "If any one happens to be
present who has been initiated into the same rites as myself, if he will
give me the sign, he shall then be at liberty to hear what it is that I
keep with so much care." Plautus also alludes to this usage, when, in
his "Miles Gloriosus," act iv. sc. 2, he makes Milphidippa say to
Pyrgopolonices, "Cedo signum, si harunc Baccharum es;" i.e., "Give the
sign if you are one of these Bacchae," or initiates into the Mysteries
of Bacchus. Clemens Alexandrinus calls these modes of recognition
σωθηματα, as if *means of safety*. Apuleius elsewhere uses *memoracula*,
I think to denote passwords, when he says, "sanctissimè sacrorum signa
et memoracula custodire," which I am inclined to translate, "most
scrupulously to preserve the signs and passwords of the sacred rites."

<span id="xref_31">31</span>. The Baron de Sainte Croix gives this brief
view of the ceremonies: "Dans ces mystères on employoit, pour remplir
l'âme des assistans d'une sainte horreur, les mêmes moyens qu'à Eleusis.
L'apparition de fantômes et de divers objets propres à effrayer,
sembloit disposer les esprits à la crédulité. Ils en avoient sans doute
besoin, pour ajouter foi à toutes les explications des mystagogues:
elles rouloient sur le massacre de Bacchus par les Titans,"
&c.--*Recherches sur les Mystères du Paganisme*, tom. ii. sect. vii.
art. iii. p. 89.

<span id="xref_32">32</span>. Lawrie, Hist. of Freemasonry, p. 27.

<span id="xref_33">33</span>. Vincentius Lirinensis or Vincent of
Lirens, who lived in the fifth century of the Christian era, wrote a
controversial treatise entitled "Commonitorium," remarkable for the
blind veneration which it pays to the voice of tradition. The rule which
he there lays down, and which is cited in the text, may be considered,
in a modified application, as an axiom by which we may test the
*probability*, at least, of all sorts of traditions. None out of the
pale of Vincent's church will go so far as he did in making it the
criterion of positive truth.

<span id="xref_34">34</span>. Prolog. zu einer wissenshaftlich.
Mythologie.

<span id="xref_35">35</span>. In German *hutten*, in English *lodges*,
whence the masonic term.

<span id="xref_36">36</span>. Historical Essay on Architecture, ch. xxi.

<span id="xref_37">37</span>. Bishop England, in his "Explanation of the
Mass," says that in every ceremony we must look for three meanings: "the
first, the literal, natural, and, it may be said, the original meaning;
the second, the figurative or emblematic signification; and thirdly, the
pious or religious meaning: frequently the two last will be found the
same; sometimes all three will be found combined." Here lies the true
difference between the symbolism of the church and that of Masonry. In
the former, the symbolic meaning was an afterthought applied to the
original, literal one; in the latter, the symbolic was always the
original signification of every ceremony.

<span id="xref_38">38</span>. /P "Was not all the knowledge Of the
Egyptians writ in mystic symbols? Speak not the Scriptures oft in
parables? Are not the choicest fables of the poets, That were the
fountains and first springs of wisdom, Wrapped in perplexed allegories?"

BEN JONSON, *Alchemist*, act ii. sc. i. P/

<span id="xref_39">39</span>. The distinguished German mythologist
Müller defines a symbol to be "an eternal, visible sign, with which a
spiritual feeling, emotion, or idea is connected." I am not aware of a
more comprehensive, and at the same time distinctive, definition.

<span id="xref_40">40</span>. And it may be added, that the word becomes
a symbol of an idea; and hence, Harris, in his "Hermes," defines
language to be "a system of articulate voices, the symbols of our ideas,
but of those principally which are general or universal."--*Hermes*,
book iii. ch. 3.

<span id="xref_41">41</span>. "Symbols," says Müller, "are evidently
coeval with the human race; they result from the union of the soul with
the body in man; nature has implanted the feeling for them in the human
heart."--*Introduction to a Scientific System of Mythology*, p. 196,
Leitch's translation.--R.W. Mackay says, "The earliest instruments of
education were symbols, the most universal symbols of the
multitudinously present Deity, being earth or heaven, or some selected
object, such as the sun or moon, a tree or a stone, familiarly seen in
either of them."--*Progress of the Intellect*, vol. i p. 134.

<span id="xref_42">42</span>. Between the allegory, or parable, and the
symbol, there is, as I have said, no essential difference. The Greek
verb παραβαλλω, whence comes the word *parable*, and the verb συμβαλλω
in the same language, which is the root of the word *symbol*, both have
the synonymous meaning "to compare." A parable is only a spoken symbol.
The definition of a parable given by Adam Clarke is equally applicable
to a symbol, viz.: "A comparison or similitude, in which one thing is
compared with another, especially spiritual things with natural, by
which means these spiritual things are better understood, and make a
deeper impression on the attentive mind."

<span id="xref_43">43</span>. North British Review, August, 1851. Faber
passes a similar encomium. "Hence the language of symbolism, being so
purely a language of ideas, is, in one respect, more perfect than any
ordinary language can be: it possesses the variegated elegance of
synonymes without any of the obscurity which arises from the use of
ambiguous terms."--*On the Prophecies*, ii. p. 63.

<span id="xref_44">44</span>. "By speculative Masonry we learn to subdue
our passions, to act upon the square, to keep a tongue of good report,
to maintain secrecy, and practise charity."--*Lect. of Fel. Craft.* But
this is a very meagre definition, unworthy of the place it occupies in
the lecture of the second degree.

<span id="xref_45">45</span>. "Animal worship among the Egyptians was
the natural and unavoidable consequence of the misconception, by the
vulgar, of those emblematical figures invented by the priests to record
their own philosophical conception of absurd ideas. As the pictures and
effigies suspended in early Christian churches, to commemorate a person
or an event, became in time objects of worship to the vulgar, so, in
Egypt, the esoteric or spiritual meaning of the emblems was lost in the
gross materialism of the beholder. This esoteric and allegorical meaning
was, however, preserved by the priests, and communicated in the
mysteries alone to the initiated, while the uninstructed retained only
the grosser conception."--GLIDDON, *Otia Aegyptiaca*, p. 94.

<span id="xref_46">46</span>. "To perpetuate the esoteric signification
of these symbols to the initiated, there were established the Mysteries,
of which institution we have still a trace in Freemasonry."--GLIDDON,
*Otia Aegyp.* p. 95.

<span id="xref_47">47</span>. Philo Judaeus says, that "Moses had been
initiated by the Egyptians into the philosophy of symbols and
hieroglyphics, as well as into the ritual of the holy animals." And
Hengstenberg, in his learned work on "Egypt and the Books of Moses,"
conclusively shows, by numerous examples, how direct were the Egyptian
references of the Pentateuch; in which fact, indeed, he recognizes "one
of the most powerful arguments for its credibility and for its
composition by Moses."--HENGSTENBERG, p. 239, Robbins's trans.

<span id="xref_48">48</span>. Josephus, *Antiq.* book iii. ch. 7.

<span id="xref_49">49</span>. The ark, or sacred boat, of the Egyptians
frequently occurs on the walls of the temples. It was carried in great
pomp by the priests on the occasion of the "procession of the shrines,"
by means of staves passed through metal rings in its side. It was thus
conducted into the temple, and deposited on a stand. The representations
we have of it bear a striking resemblance to the Jewish ark, of which it
is now admitted to have been the prototype.

<span id="xref_50">50</span>. "The Egyptian reference in the Urim and
Thummim is especially distinct and incontrovertible."--HENGSTENBERG, p.
158.

<span id="xref_51">51</span>. According to the estimate of Bishop
Cumberland, it was only one hundred and nine feet in length, thirty-six
in breadth, and fifty-four in height.

<span id="xref_52">52</span>. "Thus did our wise Grand Master contrive a
plan, by mechanical and practical allusions, to instruct the craftsmen
in principles of the most sublime speculative philosophy, tending to the
glory of God, and to secure to them temporal blessings here and eternal
life hereafter, as well as to unite the speculative and operative
Masons, thereby forming a twofold advantage, from the principles of
geometry and architecture on the one part, and the precepts of wisdom
and ethics on the other."--CALCOTT, *Candid Disquisition*, p. 31, ed.
1769.

<span id="xref_53">53</span>. This proposition I ask to be conceded; the
evidences of its truth are, however, abundant, were it necessary to
produce them. The craft, generally, will, I presume, assent to it.

<span id="xref_54">54</span>.

> "The groves were God's first temples. Ere man learned  
> To hew the shaft, and lay the architrave,  
> And spread the roof above them--ere he framed  
> The lofty vault, to gather and roll back  
> The sound of anthems--in the darkling wood,  
> Amid the cool and silence, he knelt down,  
> And offered to the Mightiest solemn thanks  
> And supplication."--BRYANT.

<span id="xref_55">55</span>. Theologians have always given a spiritual
application to the temple of Solomon, referring it to the mysteries of
the Christian dispensation. For this, consult all the biblical
commentators. But I may particularly mention, on this subject, Bunyan's
"Solomon's Temple Spiritualized," and a rare work in folio, by Samuel
Lee, Fellow of Wadham College, Oxford, published at London in 1659, and
entitled "Orbis Miraculum, or the Temple of Solomon portrayed by
Scripture Light." A copy of this scarce work, which treats very
learnedly of "the spiritual mysteries of the gospel veiled under the
temple," I have lately been, by good fortune, enabled to add to my
library.

<span id="xref_56">56</span>. Veluti pecora, quae natura finxit prona et
obedientia ventri.--SALLUST, *Bell. Catil.* i.

<span id="xref_57">57</span>. I Kings vi. 7.

<span id="xref_58">58</span>. In further illustration of the wisdom of
these temple contrivances, it may be mentioned that, by marks placed
upon the materials which had been thus prepared at a distance, the
individual production of every craftsman was easily ascertained, and the
means were provided of rewarding merit and punishing indolence.

<span id="xref_59">59</span>. "Each of the pagan gods had (besides the
*public* and *open*) a *secret worship* paid unto him; to which none
were admitted but those who had been selected by preparatory ceremonies,
called Initiation. This *secret-worship* was termed the
Mysteries."--WARBURTON, *Div. Leg. I. i. p. 189*.

<span id="xref_60">60</span>. It must be remarked, however, that many of
the Fellow Crafts were also stone-cutters in the mountains, *chotzeb
bahor*, and, with their nicer implements, more accurately adjusted the
stones which had been imperfectly prepared by the apprentices. This fact
does not at all affect the character of the symbolism we are describing.
The due preparation of the materials, the symbol of purification, was
necessarily continued in all the degrees. The task of purification never
ceases.

<span id="xref_61">61</span>. The classical reader will here be reminded
of that beautiful passage of Horace, commencing with "Justum et tenacem
propositi virum."--Lib. iii. od. 3.

<span id="xref_62">62</span>. "Pallida mors aequo pulsat pede pauperum
tabernas Regumque turres."--HOR. lib. i. od. 4.

<span id="xref_63">63</span>. It is worth noticing that the verb
*natzach*, from which the title of the *menatzchim* (the overseers or
Master Masons in the ancient temple), is derived, signifies also in
Hebrew *to be perfected, to be completed*. The third degree is the
perfection of the symbolism of the temple, and its lessons lead us to
the completion of life. In like manner the Mysteries, says Christie,
"were termed τελεταὶ, *perfections*, because they were supposed to
induce a perfectness of life. Those who were purified by them were
styled τελουμένοι, and τετελεσμένοι, that is, brought to
perfection."--*Observations on Ouvaroff's Essay on the Eleusinian
Mysteries*, p. 183.

<span id="xref_64">64</span>. Dr. Oliver, in the first or preliminary
lecture of his "Historical Landmarks," very accurately describes the
difference between the pure or primitive Freemasonry of the Noachites,
and the spurious Freemasonry of the heathens.

<span id="xref_65">65</span>. The idea of the world, as symbolically
representing God's temple, has been thus beautifully developed in a hymn
by N.P. Willis, written for the dedication of a church:--

> "The perfect world by Adam trod  
> Was the first temple built by God;  
> His fiat laid the corner stone,  
> And heaved its pillars, one by one.
>
> "He hung its starry roof on high--  
> The broad, illimitable sky;  
> He spread its pavement, green and bright,  
> And curtained it with morning light.
>
> "The mountains in their places stood,  
> The sea, the sky, and 'all was good;'  
> And when its first pure praises rang,  
> The 'morning stars together sang.'
>
> "Lord, 'tis not ours to make the sea,  
> And earth, and sky, a house for thee;  
> But in thy sight our offering stands,  
> A humbler temple, made with hands."

<span id="xref_66">66</span>. "The idea," says Dudley, "that the earth
is a level surface, and of a square form, is so likely to have been
entertained by persons of little experience and limited observation,
that it may be justly supposed to have prevailed generally in the early
ages of the world."--*Naology*, p. 7.

<span id="xref_67">67</span>. The quadrangular form of the earth is
preserved in almost all the scriptural allusions that are made to it.
Thus Isaiah (xi. 12) says, "The Lord shall gather together the dispersed
of Judah from the *four corners* of the earth;" and we find in the
Apocalypse (xx. 9) the prophetic version of "four angels standing on the
*four corners* of the earth."

<span id="xref_68">68</span>. "The form of the lodge ought to be a
double cube, as an expressive emblem of the powers of darkness and light
in the creation."--OLIVER, *Landmarks*, i. p. 135, note 37.

<span id="xref_69">69</span>. Not that whole visible universe, in its
modern signification, as including solar systems upon solar systems,
rolling in illimitable space, but in the more contracted view of the
ancients, where the earth formed the floor, and the sky the ceiling. "To
the vulgar and untaught eye," says Dudley, "the heaven or sky above the
earth appears to be co-extensive with the earth, and to take the same
form, enclosing a cubical space, of which the earth was the base, the
heaven or sky the upper surface."--*Naology*, 7.--And it is to this
notion of the universe that the masonic symbol of the lodge refers.

<span id="xref_70">70</span>. "These rocky shrines, the formation of
which Mr. Grose supposes to have been a labor equal to that of erecting
the Pyramids of Egypt, are of various height, extent, and depth. They
are partitioned out, by the labor of the hammer and the chisel, into
many separate chambers, and the roof, which in the pagoda of Elephanta
is flat, but in that of Salsette is arched, is supported by rows of
pillars of great thickness, and arranged with much regularity. The walls
are crowded with gigantic figures of men and women, engaged in various
actions, and portrayed in various whimsical attitudes; and they are
adorned with several evident symbols of the religion now prevailing in
India. Above, as in a sky, once probably adorned with gold and azure, in
the same manner as Mr. Savary lately observed in the ruinous remains of
some ancient Egyptian temples, are seen floating the children of
imagination, genii and dewtahs, in multitudes, and along the cornice, in
high relief, are the figures of elephants, horses, and lions, executed
with great accuracy. Two of the principal figures at Salsette are
twenty-seven feet in height, and of proportionate magnitude; the very
bust only of the triple-headed deity in the grand pagoda of Elephanta
measures fifteen feet from the base to the top of the cap, while the
face of another, if Mr. Grose, who measured it, may be credited, is
above five feet in length, and of corresponding breadth."--MAURICE,
*Ind. Ant.* vol. ii. p. 135.

<span id="xref_71">71</span>. According to Faber, the egg was a symbol
of the world or megacosm, and also of the ark, or microcosm, as the
lunette or crescent was a symbol of the Great Father, the egg and
lunette--which was the hieroglyphic of the god Lunus, at Heliopolis--was
a symbol of the world proceeding from the Great Father.--*Pagan
Idolatry*, vol. i. b. i. ch. iv.

<span id="xref_72">72</span>. Zoroaster taught that the sun was the most
perfect fire of God, the throne of his glory, and the residence of his
divine presence, and he therefore instructed his disciples "to direct
all their worship to God first towards the sun (which they called
Mithras), and next towards their sacred fires, as being the things in
which God chiefly dwelt; and their ordinary way of worship was to do so
towards both. For when they came before these fires to worship, *they
always approached them on the west side*, that, having their faces
towards them and also towards the rising sun at the same time, they
might direct their worship to both. And in this posture they always
performed every act of their worship."--PRIDEAUX. *Connection.* i. 216.

<span id="xref_73">73</span>. "The mysteries of Ceres (or Eleusis) are
principally distinguished from all others as having been the
depositories of certain traditions coeval with the world."--OUVAROFF,
*Essay on the Mysteries of Eleusis*, p. 6.

<span id="xref_74">74</span>. The dadouchus, or torch-bearer, carried a
symbol of the sun.

<span id="xref_75">75</span>. "Indeed, the most ancient superstition of
all nations," says Maurice, "has been the worship of the sun, as the
lord of heaven and the governor of the world; and in particular it
prevailed in Phoenicia, Chaldaea, Egypt, and from later information we
may add, Peru and Mexico, represented in a variety of ways, and
concealed under a multitude of fanciful names. Through all the
revolutions of time the great luminary of heaven hath exacted from the
generations of men the tribute of devotion."--*Indian Antiquities*, vol.
ii. p. 91.

<span id="xref_76">76</span>. Facciolatus thus defines the Phallus:
"penis ligneus, vel vitreus, vel coriaceus, quem in Bacchi festis
plaustro impositum per rura et urbes magno honore
circumferebant."--*Lex. in voc.*

<span id="xref_77">77</span>. The exhibition of these images in a
colossal form, before the gates of ancient temples, was common. Lucian
tells us of two colossal Phalli, each one hundred and eighty feet high,
which stood in the fore court of the temple at Hierapolis. Mailer, in
his "Ancient Art and its Remains," mentions, on the authority of Leake,
the fact that a colossal Phallus, which once stood on the top of the
tomb of the Lydian king Halyattes, is now lying near the same spot; it
is not an entire Phallus, but only the head of one; it is twelve feet in
diameter below and nine feet over the glands. The Phallus has even been
found, so universal was this worship, among the savages of America. Dr.
Arthaut discovered, in the year 1790, a marble Phallic image in a cave
of the island of St. Domingo.--CLAVEL, *Hist. Pittoresq. des Religions*,
p. 9.

<span id="xref_78">78</span>. Sonnerat (Voyage aux Indes Orient, i. p.
118) observes, that the professors of this worship were of the purest
principles and most unblemished conduct, and it seems never to have
entered into the heads of the Indian legislator and people that anything
natural could be grossly obscene.--Sir William Jones remarks (Asiatic
Researches, i. 254), that from the earliest periods the women of Asia,
Greece, and Italy wore this symbol as a jewel, and Clavel tells us that
a similar usage prevails at this day among the women in some of the
villages of Brittany. Seely tells us that the Lingam, or Indian Phallus,
is an emblem as frequently met with in Hindostan as the cross is in
Catholic countries.--*Wonders of Elora.* p. 278.

<span id="xref_79">79</span>. Num. xxv. 1-3. See also Psalm cvi. 28:
"They joined themselves also unto Baal-peor, and ate the sacrifices of
the dead." This last expression, according to Russel, has a distinct
reference to the physical qualities of matter, and to the time when
death, by the winter absence of the solar heat, gets, as it were,
possession of the earth. Baal-peor was, he says, the sun exercising his
powers of fecundity.--*Connection of Sacred and Profane History*

<span id="xref_80">80</span>. Is there not a seeming reference to this
thought of divine hermaphrodism in the well-known passage of Genesis?
"So God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he
him: *male and female* created he them." And so being created "male and
female," they were "in the image of God."

<span id="xref_81">81</span>. The world being animated by man, says
Creuzer, in his learned work on Symbolism, received from him the two
sexes, represented by heaven and the earth. Heaven, as the fecundating
principle, was male, and the source of fire; the earth, as the
fecundated, was female, and the source of humidity. All things issued
from the alliance of these two principles. The vivifying powers of the
heavens are concentrated in the sun, and the earth, eternally fixed in
the place which it occupies, receives the emanations from the sun,
through the medium of the moon, which sheds upon the earth the germs
which the sun had deposited in its fertile bosom. The Lingam is at once
the symbol and the mystery of this religious idea.

<span id="xref_82">82</span>. Such was the opinion of some of the
ancient sun-worshippers, whose adorations were always performed in the
open air, because they thought no temple was spacious enough to contain
the sun; and hence the saying, "Mundus universus est templum solis"--the
universe is the temple of the sun. Like our ancient brethren, they
worshipped only on *the highest hills*. Another analogy.

<span id="xref_83">83</span>. *Asgard*, the abode of the gods, is shaded
by the ash tree, *Ydrasil*, where the gods assemble every day to do
justice. The branches of this tree extend themselves over the whole
world, and reach above the heavens. It hath three roots, extremely
distant from each other: one of them is among the gods; the second is
among the giants, where the abyss formerly was; the third covers
*Niflheim*, or hell, and under this root is the fountain *Vergelmer*,
whence flow the infernal rivers.--*Edda, Fab.* 8.

<span id="xref_84">84</span>. Exod. iii. 5.

<span id="xref_85">85</span>. Commentaries *in loco*.

<span id="xref_86">86</span>. Commentary on Exod. iii. 5.

<span id="xref_87">87</span>. Iamblichi Vita Pythag. c. 105. In another
place he says, "Θύειν χρὴ ἀνυπόδετον, ϗαι πρὸς τα ἱερὰ προστιέναι,"--We
must sacrifice and enter temples with the shoes off. Ibid. c. 85.

<span id="xref_88">88</span>. "Quod etiam nunc apud plerasque Orientis
nationes piaculum sit, calceato pede templorum pavimenta calcasse."

<span id="xref_89">89</span>. Beth Habbechirah, cap. vii.

<span id="xref_90">90</span>. Histor. Landm. vol. ii. p. 481.

<span id="xref_91">91</span>. "Non datur nobis potestas adeundi templum
nisi nudibus pedibus."

<span id="xref_92">92</span>. Commentaries, *ut supra*.

<span id="xref_93">93</span>. See a paper "on the religious ceremonies
of the Hindus," by H.T. Colebrooke, Esq. in the Asiatic Researches, vol.
vi. p. 357.

<span id="xref_94">94</span>. A Specimen of the Critical History of the
Celtic Religion and Learning. Letter ii. § xvii.

<span id="xref_95">95</span>. Dr. Oliver, referring to the "twelve grand
points in Masonry," which formed a part of the old English lectures,
says, "When the candidate was *intrusted*, he represented Asher, for he
was then presented with the glorious fruit of masonic knowledge, as
Asher was represented by fatness and royal dainties."--*Hist. Landm.*,
vol. i. lect. xi. p. 313.

<span id="xref_96">96</span>. From the Greek αὐτοψία, signifying *a
seeing with ones own eyes*. The candidate, who had previously been
called a *mystes*, or a *blind man*, from μίω, to *shut the eyes*, began
at this point to change his title to that of an *epopt*, or an
*eye-witness*.

<span id="xref_97">97</span>. יהי אדך ויהי אדך *Yehi aur va yehi aur.*

<span id="xref_98">98</span>. Robert William Mackay, Progress of the
Intellect, vol. i. p. 93.

<span id="xref_99">99</span>. "And thou shalt put in the breastplate of
judgment the Urim and the Thummim."--*Exod.* xxviii. 30.--The Egyptian
judges also wore breastplates, on which was represented the figure of
*Ra*, the sun, and *Thme*, the goddess of Truth, representing, says
Gliddon, "*Ra*, or the sun, in a double capacity--physical and
intellectual light; and *Thme*, in a double capacity--justice and
truth."--*Ancient Egypt*, p. 33.

<span id="xref_100">100</span>. We owe this interesting discovery to F.
Portal, who has given it in his elaborate work on Egyptian symbols as
compared with those of the Hebrews. To those who cannot consult the
original work in French, I can safely recommend the excellent
translation by my esteemed friend, Bro. John W. Simons, of New York, and
which will be found in the thirtieth volume of the "Universal Masonic
Library."

<span id="xref_101">101</span>. "The most early defection to Idolatry,"
says Bryant, "consisted in the adoration of the sun and the worship of
demons, styled Baalim."--*Analysts of Anc. Mythol.* vol. iii. p. 431.

<span id="xref_102">102</span>. The remarks of Mr. Duncan on this
subject are well worth perusal. "Light has always formed one of the
primary objects of heathen adoration. The glorious spectacle of animated
nature would lose all its interest if man were deprived of vision, and
light extinguished; for that which is unseen and unknown becomes, for
all practical purposes, as valueless as if it were non-existent. Light
is a source of positive happiness; without it, man could barely exist;
and since all religious opinion is based on the ideas of pleasure and
pain, and the corresponding sensations of hope and fear, it is not to be
wondered if the heathen reverenced light. Darkness, on the contrary, by
replunging nature, as it were, into a state of nothingness, and
depriving man of the pleasurable emotions conveyed through the organ of
sight, was ever held in abhorrence, as a source of misery and fear. The
two opposite conditions in which man thus found himself placed,
occasioned by the enjoyment or the banishment of light, induced him to
imagine the existence of two antagonist principles in nature, to whose
dominion he was alternately subject. Light multiplied his enjoyments,
and darkness diminished them. The former, accordingly, became his
friend, and the latter his enemy. The words 'light' and 'good,' and
'darkness' and 'evil,' conveyed similar ideas, and became, in sacred
language, synonymous terms. But as good and evil were not supposed to
flow from one and the same source, no more than light and darkness were
supposed to have a common origin, two distinct and independent
principles were established, totally different in their nature, of
opposite characters, pursuing a conflicting line of action, and creating
antagonistic effects. Such was the origin of this famous dogma,
recognized by all the heathens, and incorporated with all the sacred
fables, cosmogonies, and mysteries of antiquity."--*The Religions of
Profane Antiquity*, p. 186.

<span id="xref_103">103</span>. See the "Bhagvat Geeta," one of the
religious books of Brahminism. A writer in Blackwood, in an article on
the "Castes and Creeds of India," vol. lxxxi. p. 316, thus accounts for
the adoration of light by the early nations of the world: "Can we wonder
at the worship of light by those early nations? Carry our thoughts back
to their remote times, and our only wonder would be if they did not so
adore it. The sun is life as well as light to all that is on the
earth--as we of the present day know even better than they of old.
Moving in dazzling radiance or brilliant-hued pageantry through the sky,
scanning in calm royalty all that passes below, it seems the very god of
this fair world, which lives and blooms but in his smile."

<span id="xref_104">104</span>. The *Institutes of Menu*, which are the
acknowledged code of the Brahmins, inform us that "the world was all
darkness, undiscernible, undistinguishable altogether, as in a profound
sleep, till the self-existent, invisible God, making it manifest with
five elements and other glorious forms, perfectly dispelled the
gloom."--Sir WILLIAM JONES, *On the Gods of Greece. Asiatic Researches*,
i. 244.

Among the Rosicrucians, who have, by some, been improperly confounded
with the Freemasons, the word *lux* was used to signify a knowledge of
the philosopher's stone, or the great desideratum of a universal elixir
and a universal menstruum. This was their *truth*.

<span id="xref_105">105</span>. On Symbolic Colors, p. 23, Inman's
translation.

<span id="xref_106">106</span>. Freemasonry having received the name of
*lux*, or light, its disciples have, very appropriately, been called
"the Sons of Light." Thus Burns, in his celebrated Farewell:--

> "Oft have I met your social band,  
> And spent the cheerful, festive night;  
> Oft, honored with supreme command,  
> Presided o'er the *sons of light*."

<span id="xref_107">107</span>. Thus defined: "The stone which lies at
the corner of two walls, and unites them; the principal stone, and
especially the stone which forms the corner of the foundation of an
edifice."--Webster.

<span id="xref_108">108</span>. Among the ancients the corner-stone of
important edifices was laid with impressive ceremonies. These are well
described by Tacitus, in his history of the rebuilding of the Capitol.
After detailing the preliminary ceremonies which consisted in a
procession of vestals, who with chaplets of flowers encompassed the
ground and consecrated it by libations of living water, he adds that,
after solemn prayer, Helvidius, to whom the care of rebuilding the
Capitol had been committed, "laid his hand upon the fillets that adorned
the foundation stone, and also the cords by which it was to be drawn to
its place. In that instant the magistrates, the priests, the senators,
the Roman knights, and a number of citizens, all acting with one effort
and general demonstrations of joy, laid hold of the ropes and dragged
the ponderous load to its destined spot. They then threw in ingots of
gold and silver, and other metals, which had never been melted in the
furnace, but still retained, untouched by human art, their first
formation in the bowels of the earth."--*Tac. Hist.*, 1. iv. c. 53,
Murphy's transl.

<span id="xref_109">109</span>. As, for instance, in Psalm cxviii. 22,
"The stone which the builders refused is become the head-stone of the
corner," which, Clarke says, "seems to have been originally spoken of
David, who was at first rejected by the Jewish rulers, but was
afterwards chosen by the Lord to be the great ruler of his people in
Israel;" and in Isaiah xxviii. 16, "Behold, I lay in Zion, for a
foundation, a stone, a tried stone, a precious corner-stone, a sure
foundation," which clearly refers to the promised Messiah.

<span id="xref_110">110</span>. In the ritual "observed at laying the
foundation-stone of public structures," it is said, "The principal
architect then presents the working tools to the Grand Master, who
applies the plumb, square, and level to the stone, in their proper
positions, and pronounces it to be *well-formed, true, and
trusty*."--WEBB'S *Monitor*, p. 120.

<span id="xref_111">111</span>. "The square teaches us to regulate our
conduct by the principles of morality and virtue."--*Ritual of the E. A.
Degree.*--The old York lectures define the square thus: "The square is
the theory of universal duty, and consisteth in two right lines, forming
an angle of perfect sincerity, or ninety degrees; the longest side is
the sum of the lengths of the several duties which we owe to all men.
And every man should be agreeable to this square, when perfectly
finished."

<span id="xref_112">112</span>. Aristotle.

<span id="xref_113">113</span>. "The cube is a symbol of truth, of
wisdom, and moral perfection. The new Jerusalem, promised in the
Apocalypse, is equal in length, breadth, and height. The Mystical city
ought to be considered as a new church, where divine wisdom will
reign."--OLIVER'S *Landmarks*, ii. p. 357.--And he might have added,
where eternal truth will be present.

<span id="xref_114">114</span>. In the most primitive times, all the
gods appear to have been represented by cubical blocks of stone; and
Pausanias says that he saw thirty of these stones in the city of Pharae,
which represented as many deities. The first of the kind, it is
probable, were dedicated to Hermes, whence they derived their name of
"Hermae."

<span id="xref_115">115</span>. "Give unto Jehovah the glory due unto
His name; worship Jehovah in the beauty of holiness."--*Psalm* xxix. 2.

<span id="xref_116">116</span>. It is at least a singular coincidence
that in the Brahminical religion great respect was paid to the
north-east point of the heavens. Thus it is said in the Institutes of
Menu, "If he has any incurable disease, let him advance in a straight
path towards *the invincible north-east point*, feeding on water and air
till his mortal frame totally decay, and his soul become united with the
Supreme."

<span id="xref_117">117</span>. This symbolism of the double position of
the corner-stone has not escaped the attention of the religious
symbologists. Etsius, an early commentator, in 1682, referring to the
passage in Ephesians ii. 20, says, "That is called the corner-stone, or
chief corner-stone, which is placed in the extreme angle of a
foundation, conjoining and holding together two walls of the pile,
meeting from different quarters. And the apostle not only would be
understood by this metaphor that Christ is the principal foundation of
the whole church, but also that in him, as in a corner-stone, the two
peoples, Jews and Gentiles, are conjoined, and so conjoined as to rise
together into one edifice, and become one church." And Julius Firmicius,
who wrote in the sixteenth century, says that Christ is called the
corner-stone, because, being placed in the angle of the two walls, which
are the Old and the New Testament, he collects the nations into one
fold. "Lapis sanctus, i.e. Christus, aut fidei fundamenta sustentat aut
in angulo positus duorum parietum membra aequata moderatione conjungit,
i.e., Veteris et Novi Testamenti in unum colligit gentes."--*De Errore
profan. Religionum*, chap. xxi.

<span id="xref_118">118</span>. This permanence of position was also
attributed to those cubical stones among the Romans which represented
the statues of the god Terminus. They could never lawfully be removed
from the spot which they occupied. Hence, when Tarquin was about to
build the temple of Jupiter, on the Capitoline Hill, all the shrines and
statues of the other gods were removed from the eminence to make way for
the new edifice, except that of Terminus, represented by a stone. This
remained untouched, and was enclosed within the temple, to show, says
Dudley, "that the stone, having been a personification of the God
Supreme, could not be reasonably required to yield to Jupiter himself in
dignity and power."--DUDLEY'S *Naology*, p 145.

<span id="xref_119">119</span>. Dudley's Naology, p. 476.

<span id="xref_120">120</span>. Masonic Discourses, Dis. iv. p. 81.

<span id="xref_121">121</span>. "The act of consecration chiefly
consisted in the unction, which was a ceremony derived from the most
primitive antiquity. The sacred tabernacle, with all the vessels and
utensils, as also the altar and the priests themselves, were consecrated
in this manner by Moses, at the divine command. It is well known that
the Jewish kings and prophets were admitted to their several offices by
unction. The patriarch Jacob, by the same right, consecrated the altars
which he made use of; in doing which it is more probable that he
followed the tradition of his forefathers, than that he was the author
of this custom. The same, or something like it, was also continued down
to the times of Christianity."--POTTER'S *Archaeologia Graeca*, b. ii.
p. 176.

<span id="xref_122">122</span>. From the Greek τετρὰς, four, and γράμμα,
letter, because it is composed of four Hebrew letters. Brande thus
defines it: "Among several ancient nations, the name of the mystic
number *four*, which was often symbolized to represent the Deity, whose
name was expressed by four letters." But this definition is incorrect.
The tetragrammaton is not the name of the number *four*, but the word
which expresses the name of God in four letters, and is always applied
to the Hebrew word only.

<span id="xref_123">123</span>. Exod. iii. 15. In our common version of
the Bible, the word "Lord" is substituted for "Jehovah," whence the true
import of the original is lost.

<span id="xref_124">124</span>. Exod. vi. 2. 3.

<span id="xref_125">125</span>. "The Jews have many superstitious
stories and opinions relative to this name, which, because they were
forbidden to mention *in vain*, they would not mention *at all*. They
substituted *Adonai*, &c., in its room, whenever it occurred to them in
reading or speaking, or else simply and emphatically styled it השם *the
Name*. Some of them attributed to a certain repetition of this name the
virtue of a charm, and others have had the boldness to assert that our
blessed Savior wrought all his miracles (for they do not deny them to be
such) by that mystical use of this venerable name. See the *Toldoth
Jeschu*, an infamously scurrilous life of Jesus, written by a Jew not
later than the thirteenth century. On p. 7, edition of Wagenseilius,
1681, is a succinct detail of the manner in which our Savior is said to
have entered the temple and obtained possession of the Holy Name.
Leusden says that he had offered to give a sum of money to a very poor
Jew at Amsterdam, if he would only once deliberately pronounce the name
*Jehovah*; but he refused it by saying that he did not dare."--*Horae
Solitariae*, vol. i. p. 3.--"A Brahmin will not pronounce the name of
the Almighty, without drawing down his sleeve and placing it on his
mouth with fear and trembling."--MURRAY, *Truth of Revelation*, p. 321.

<span id="xref_126">126</span>. The same scrupulous avoidance of a
strict translation has been pursued in other versions. For Jehovah, the
Septuagint substitutes "Κύριος," the Vulgate "Dominus," and the German
"der Herr," all equivalent to "the Lord." The French version uses the
title "l'Eternel." But, with a better comprehension of the value of the
word, Lowth in his "Isaiah," the Swedenborgian version of the Psalms,
and some other recent versions, have restored the original name.

<span id="xref_127">127</span>. In the Talmudical treatise, *Majan
Hachochima*, quoted by Stephelin (Rabbinical Literature, i. p. 131), we
are informed that rightly to understand the shem hamphorash is a key to
the unlocking of all mysteries. "There," says the treatise, "shalt thou
understand the words of men, the words of cattle, the singing of birds,
the language of beasts, the barking of dogs, the language of devils, the
language of ministering angels, the language of date-trees, the motion
of the sea, the unity of hearts, and the murmuring of the tongue--nay,
even the thoughts of the reins."

<span id="xref_128">128</span>. The gamma, Γ, or Greek letter G, is said
to have been sacred among the Pythagoreans as the initial of Γεωμειρία
or Geometry.

<span id="xref_129">129</span>. Vide Oliver, *Hist. Init.* p. 68, note.

<span id="xref_130">130</span>. Jamblichus says that Pythagoras passed
over from Miletus to Sidon, thinking that he could thence go more easily
into Egypt, and that while there he caused himself to be initiated into
all the mysteries of Byblos and Tyre, and those which were practised in
many parts of Syria, not because he was under the influence of any
superstitious motives, but from the fear that if he were not to avail
himself of these opportunities, he might neglect to acquire some
knowledge in those rites which was worthy of observation. But as these
mysteries were originally received by the Phoenicians from Egypt, he
passed over into that country, where he remained twenty-two years,
occupying himself in the study of geometry, astronomy, and all the
initiations of the gods (πάσας θεῶν τελετάς), until he was carried a
captive into Babylon by the soldiers of Cambyses, and that twelve years
afterwards he returned to Samos at the age of sixty years.--*Vit.
Pythag*, cap. iii., iv.

<span id="xref_131">131</span>. "The sacred words were intrusted to him,
of which the Ineffable Tetractys, or name of God, was the
chief."--OLIVER, *Hist. Init.* p. 109.

<span id="xref_132">132</span>. "Hu, the mighty, whose history as a
patriarch is precisely that of Noah, was promoted to the rank of the
principal demon-god among the Britons; and, as his chariot was composed
of rays of the sun, it may be presumed that he was worshipped in
conjunction with that luminary, and to the same superstition we may
refer what is said of his light and swift course."--DAVIES, *Mythol. and
Rites of the Brit. Druids*, p. 110.

<span id="xref_133">133</span>. "All the male gods (of the ancients) may
be reduced to one, the generative energy; and all the female to one, the
prolific principle. In fact, they may all be included in the one great
Hermaphrodite, the ἀῥῤενοθηλυς who combines in his nature all the
elements of production, and who continues to support the vast creation
which originally proceeded from his will."--RUSSELL'S *Connection*, i.
p. 402.

<span id="xref_134">134</span>. It is a tradition that it was pronounced
in the following seven different ways by the patriarchs, from Methuselah
to David, viz.: *Juha, Jeva, Jova, Jevo, Jeveh, Johe*, and *Jehovah*. In
all these words the *j* is to be pronounced as *y*, the *a* as *ah*, the
*e* as a, and the *v* as *w*.

<span id="xref_135">135</span>. The *i* is to be pronounced as *e*, and
the whole word as if spelled in English *ho-he*.

<span id="xref_136">136</span>. In the apocryphal "Book of the
Conversation of God with Moses on Mount Sinai," translated by the Rev.
W. Cureton from an Arabic MS. of the fifteenth century, and published by
the Philobiblon Society of London, the idea of the eternal watchfulness
of God is thus beautifully allegorized:--

"Then Moses said to the Lord, O Lord, dost thou sleep or not? The Lord
said unto Moses, I never sleep: but take a cup and fill it with water.
Then Moses took a cup and filled it with water, as the Lord commanded
him. Then the Lord cast into the heart of Moses the breath of slumber;
so he slept, and the cup fell from his hand, and the water which was
therein was spilled. Then Moses awoke from his sleep. Then said God to
Moses, I declare by my power, and by my glory, that if I were to
withdraw my providence from the heavens and the earth for no longer a
space of time than thou hast slept, they would at once fall to ruin and
confusion, like as the cup fell from thy hand."

<span id="xref_137">137</span>. I have in my possession a rare copy of
the Vulgate Bible, in black letter, printed at Lyons, in 1522. The
frontispiece is a coarsely executed wood cut, divided into six
compartments, and representing the six days of the creation. The Father
is, in each compartment, pictured as an aged man engaged in his creative
task.

<span id="xref_138">138</span>. Christian Iconography, Millington's
trans., vol. i. p. 59.

<span id="xref_139">139</span>. The triangle, or delta, is the symbol of
Deity for this reason. In geometry a single line cannot represent a
perfect figure; neither can two lines; three lines, however, constitute
the triangle or first perfect and demonstrable figure. Hence this figure
symbolizes the Eternal God, infinitely perfect in his nature. But the
triangle properly refers to God only in his quality as an Eternal Being,
its three sides representing the Past, the Present, and the Future. Some
Christian symbologists have made the three sides represent the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost; but they evidently thereby destroy the divine
unity, making a trinity of Gods in the unity of a Godhead. The Gnostic
trinity of Manes consisted of one God and two principles, one of good
and the other of evil. The Indian trinity, symbolized also by the
triangle, consisted of Brahma, Siva, and Vishnu, the Creator, Preserver,
and Destroyer, represented by Earth, Water, and Air. This symbolism of
the Eternal God by the triangle is the reason why a trinitarian scheme
has been so prevalent in all religions--the three sides naturally
suggesting the three divisions of the Godhead. But in the Pagan and
Oriental religions this trinity was nothing else but a tritheism.

<span id="xref_140">140</span>. Noachidae, or Noachites, the descendants
of Noah. This patriarch having alone preserved the true name and worship
of God amid a race of impious idolaters, the Freemasons claim to be his
descendants, because they preserve that pure religion which
distinguished this second father of the human race from the rest of the
world. (See the author's *Lexicon of Freemasonry*.) The Tyrian workmen
at the temple of Solomon were the descendants of that other division of
the race who fell off, at Shinar, from the true worship, and repudiated
the principles of Noah. The Tyrians, however, like many other ancient
mystics, had recovered some portion of the lost light, and the complete
repossession was finally achieved by their union with the Jewish masons,
who were Noachidae.

<span id="xref_141">141</span>. "A mythis omnis priscorum hominum tum
historia tum philosophia procedit."--*Ad Apollod. Athen. Biblioth. not.*
f. p. 3.--And Faber says, "Allegory and personification were peculiarly
agreeable to the genius of antiquity; and the simplicity of truth was
continually sacrificed at the shrine of poetical decoration."--*On the
Cabiri.*

<span id="xref_142">142</span>. See Grote, History of Greece, vol. i.
ch. xvi. p. 479, whence this definition has been substantially derived.
The definitions of Creuzer, Hermann, Buttmann, Heyne, Welcker, Voss, and
Müller are none of them Better, and some of them not as good.

<span id="xref_143">143</span>. Hist. of Greece, vol. i. ch. xvi. p.
579. The idea of the existence of an enlightened people, who lived at a
remote era, and came from the East, was a very prevalent notion among
the ancient traditions. It is corroborative of this that the Hebrew word
ֶקֶדם, *kedem*, signifies, in respect to place, *the east*, and, in
respect to time, *olden time, ancient days*. The phrase in Isaiah xix.
11, which reads, "I am the son of the wise, the son of ancient kings,"
might just as well have been translated "the son of kings of the East."
In a note to the passage Ezek. xliii. 2, "the glory of the God of Israel
came from the way of the East," Adam Clarke says, "All knowledge, all
religion, and all arts and sciences, have travelled, according to the
*course of the sun*, FROM EAST TO WEST!" Bazot tells us (in his Manuel
du Franc-maçon, p. 154) that "the veneration which masons entertain for
the east confirms an opinion previously announced, that the religious
system of Masonry came from the east, and has reference to the
*primitive religion*, whose first corruption was the worship of the
sun." And lastly, the masonic reader will recollect the answer given in
the Leland MS. to the question respecting the origin of Masonry, namely,
"It did begin" (I modernize the orthography) "with the first men in the
east, which were before the first men of the west; and coming westerly,
it hath brought herewith all comforts to the wild and comfortless."
Locke's commentary on this answer may conclude this note: "It should
seem, by this, that masons believe there were men in the east before
Adam, who is called the 'first man of the west,' and that arts and
sciences began in the east. Some authors, of great note for learning,
have been of the same opinion; and it is certain that Europe and Africa
(which, in respect to Asia, may be called western countries) were wild
and savage long after arts and politeness of manners were in great
perfection in China and the Indies." The Talmudists make the same
allusions to the superiority of the east. Thus, Rabbi Bechai says, "Adam
was created with his face towards the east that he might behold the
light and the rising sun, whence the east was to him the anterior part
of the world."

<span id="xref_144">144</span>. Strauss makes a division of myths into
historical, philosophical, and poetical.--*Leben Jesu.*--His poetical
myth agrees with my first division, his philosophical with my second,
and his historical with my third. But I object to the word *poetical*,
as a distinctive term, because all myths have their foundation in the
poetic idea.

<span id="xref_145">145</span>. Ulmann, for instance, distinguishes
between a myth and a legend--the former containing, to a great degree,
fiction combined with history, and the latter having but a few faint
echoes of mythical history.

<span id="xref_146">146</span>. In his "Prolegomena zu einer
wissenshaftlichen Mythologie," cap. iv. This valuable work was
translated in 1844, by Mr. John Leitch.

<span id="xref_147">147</span>. Historical Landmarks, i. 53.

<span id="xref_148">148</span>. See an article, by the author, on "The
Unwritten Landmarks of Freemasonry," in the first volume of the Masonic
Miscellany, in which this subject is treated at considerable length.

<span id="xref_149">149</span>. As a matter of some interest to the
curious reader, I insert the legend as published in the Gentleman's
Magazine of June, 1815, from, it is said, a parchment roll supposed to
have been written early in the seventeenth century, and which, if so,
was in all probability copied from one of an older date:--

"Moreover, when Abraham and Sara his wife went into Egipt, there he
taught the Seaven Scyences to the Egiptians; and he had a worthy Scoller
that height Ewclyde, and he learned right well, and was a master of all
the vij Sciences liberall. And in his dayes it befell that the lord and
the estates of the realme had soe many sonns that they had gotten some
by their wifes and some by other ladyes of the realme; for that land is
a hott land and a plentious of generacion. And they had not competent
livehode to find with their children; wherefor they made much care. And
then the King of the land made a great counsell and a parliament, to
witt, how they might find their children honestly as gentlemen. And they
could find no manner of good way. And then they did crye through all the
realme, if there were any man that could enforme them, that he should
come to them, and he should be soe rewarded for his travail, that he
should hold him pleased.

"After that this cry was made, then came this worthy clarke Ewclyde, and
said to the King and to all his great lords: 'If yee will, take me your
children to governe, and to teach them one of the Seaven Scyences,
wherewith they may live honestly as gentlemen should, under a condicion
that yee will grant mee and them a commission that I may have power to
rule them after the manner that the science ought to be ruled.' And that
the Kinge and all his counsell granted to him anone, and sealed their
commission. And then this worthy tooke to him these lords' sonns, and
taught them the science of Geometric in practice, for to work in stones
all manner of worthy worke that belongeth to buildinge churches,
temples, castells, towres, and mannors, and all other manner of
buildings."

<span id="xref_150">150</span>. Ancient Egypt under the Pharaohs, vol. I
p. 393.

<span id="xref_151">151</span>. 1 Kings vi. 8.

<span id="xref_152">152</span>. An allusion to this symbolism is
retained in one of the well-known mottoes of the order--"*Lux e
tenebris.*"

<span id="xref_153">153</span>. "An allegory is that in which, under
borrowed characters and allusions, is shadowed some real action or moral
instruction; or, to keep more strictly to its derivation (ἄλλος,
*alius*, and ἀγορεύω, *dico*), it is that in which one thing is related
and another thing is understood. Hence it is apparent that an allegory
must have two senses--the literal and mystical; and for that reason it
must convey its instruction under borrowed characters and allusions
throughout."--*The Antiquity, Evidence, and Certainty of Christianity
canvassed, or Dr. Middleton's Examination of the Bishop of London's
Discourses on Prophecy. By Anselm Bayly, LL.B., Minor Canon of St.
Paul's.* Lond, 1751.

<span id="xref_154">154</span>. The words themselves are purely
classical, but the meanings here given to them are of a mediaeval or
corrupt Latinity. Among the old Romans, a *trivium* meant a place where
three ways met, and a *quadrivium* where four, or what we now call a
*cross-road*. When we speak of the *paths of learning*, we readily
discover the origin of the signification given by the scholastic
philosophers to these terms.

<span id="xref_155">155</span>. Hist. of Philos. vol. ii. p. 337.

<span id="xref_156">156</span>. Such a talisman was the following
figure:--

<span id="img_illus05.png"></span> ![matrix](img/illus05.png.md)  
matrix

<span id="xref_157">157</span>. Anderson's Constitutions, 2d ed. 1738,
p. 14.

<span id="xref_158">158</span>. Anderson's Constitutions, 3d ed. 1756,
p. 24.

<span id="xref_159">159</span>. "The hidden doctrines of the unity of
the Deity and the immortality of the soul were originally in all the
Mysteries, even those of Cupid and Bacchus."--WARBURTON, *in Spence's
Anecdotes*, p. 309.

<span id="xref_160">160</span>. "The allegorical interpretation of the
myths has been, by several learned investigators, especially by Creuzer,
connected with the hypothesis of an ancient and highly instructed body
of priests, having their origin either in Egypt or in the East, and
communicating to the rude and barbarous Greeks religious, physical, and
historical knowledge, under the veil of symbols."--GROTE, *Hist. of
Greece*, vol. i. ch. xvi. p. 579.--And the Chevalier Ramsay corroborates
this theory: "Vestiges of the most sublime truths are to be found in the
sages of all nations, times, and religions, both sacred and profane, and
these vestiges are emanations of the antediluvian and noevian tradition,
more or less disguised and adulterated."--*Philosophical Principles of
Natural and Revealed Religion unfolded in a Geometrical Order*, vol. 1,
p. iv.

<span id="xref_161">161</span>. Of this there is abundant evidence in
all the ancient and modern writers on the Mysteries. Apuleius,
cautiously describing his initiation into the Mysteries of Isis, says,
"I approached the confines of death, and having trod on the threshold of
Proserpine, I returned therefrom, being borne through all the elements.
At midnight I saw the sun shining with its brilliant light; and I
approached the presence of the gods beneath, and the gods of heaven, and
stood near and worshipped them."--*Metam.* lib. vi. The context shows
that all this was a scenic representation.

<span id="xref_162">162</span>. *Aish hakam iodea binah*, "a cunning
man, endued with understanding," is the description given by the king of
Tyre of Hiram Abif. See 2 Chron. ii. 13. It is needless to say that
"cunning" is a good old Saxon word meaning *skilful*.

<span id="xref_163">163</span>.

> "Pronaque cum spectent animalia cætera terram;  
> Os homini sublime dedit: coelumque tueri  
> Jussit, et erectos ad sidera tollere vultus."
>
> OVID, *Met.* i. 84.

> "Thus, while the mute creation downward bend  
> Their sight, and to their earthly mother tend,  
> Man looks aloft, and with erected eyes  
> Beholds his own hereditary skies."
>
> DRYDEN.

<span id="xref_164">164</span>. "Ἀφανισμὸς, disappearance, destruction,
a perishing, death, from ἀφανίζω, to remove from one's view, to
conceal," &c.--*Schrevel. Lex.*

<span id="xref_165">165</span>. "Εῦρεσις, a finding, invention,
discovery."--*Schrevel. Lex.*

<span id="xref_166">166</span>. A French writer of the last century,
speaking of the degree of "Très Parfait Maitre," says, "C'est ici qu'on
voit réellement qu'Hiram n'a été que le type de Jésus Christ, que le
temple et les autres symboles maçonniques sont des allegories relatives
à l'Eglise, à la Foi, et aux bonnes moeurs."--*Origine et Objet de la
Franchemaçonnerie, par le F.B.* Paris, 1774.

<span id="xref_167">167</span>. "This our order is a positive
contradiction to the Judaic blindness and infidelity, and testifies our
faith concerning the resurrection of the body."--HUTCHINSON, *Spirit of
Masonry*, lect. ix. p. 101.--The whole lecture is occupied in advancing
and supporting his peculiar theory.

<span id="xref_168">168</span>. "Thus, then, it appears that the
historical reference of the legend of Speculative Freemasonry, in all
ages of the world, was--to our death in Adam and life in Christ. What,
then, was the origin of our tradition? Or, in other words, to what
particular incident did the legend of initiation refer before the flood?
I conceive it to have been the offering and assassination of Abel by his
brother Cain; the escape of the murderer; the discovery of the body by
his disconsolate parents, and its subsequent interment, under a certain
belief of its final resurrection from the dead, and of the detection and
punishment of Cain by divine vengeance."--OLIVER, *Historical Landmarks
of Freemasonry*, vol. ii. p. 171.

<span id="xref_169">169</span>. "Le grade de Maître va donc nous
retracer allegoriquement la mort du *dieu-lumière*--mourant en hiver
pour reparaître et ressusciter au printemps."--RAGON, *Cours Philos. et
Interp. des Init.* p. 158.

<span id="xref_170">170</span>. "Dans l'ordre moral, Hiram n'est autre
chose que la raison éternelle, par qui tout est pondéré, réglé,
conservé."--DES ETANGS, *Œuvres Maçonniques*, p. 90.

<span id="xref_171">171</span>. With the same argument would I meet the
hypothesis that Hiram was the representative of Charles I. of
England--an hypothesis now so generally abandoned, that I have not
thought it worth noticing in the text.

<span id="xref_172">172</span>. "The initiation into the Mysteries," he
says, "scenically represented the mythic descent into Hades and the
return from thence to the light of day; by which was meant the entrance
into the Ark and the subsequent liberation from its dark enclosure. Such
Mysteries were established in almost every part of the pagan world; and
those of Ceres were substantially the same as the Orgies of Adonis,
Osiris, Hu, Mithras, and the Cabiri. They all equally related to the
allegorical disappearance, or death, or descent of the great father at
their commencement, and to his invention, or revival, or return from
Hades, at their conclusion."--*Origin of Pagan Idolatry*, vol. iv. b.
iv. ch. v. p. 384--But this Arkite theory, as it is called, has not met
with the general approbation of subsequent writers.

<span id="xref_173">173</span>. Mount Calvary is a small hill or
eminence, situated in a westerly direction from that Mount Moriah on
which the temple of Solomon was built. It was originally a hillock of
notable eminence, but has, in modern times, been greatly reduced by the
excavations made in it for the construction of the Church of the Holy
Sepulchre. Buckingham, in his Palestine, p. 283, says, "The present
rock, called Calvary, and enclosed within the Church of the Holy
Sepulchre, bears marks, in every part that is naked, of its having been
a round nodule of rock standing above the common level of the surface."

<span id="xref_174">174</span>. Dr. Beard, in the art. "Golgotha," in
Kitto's Encyc. of Bib. Lit., reasons in a similar method as to the place
of the crucifixion, and supposing that the soldiers, from the fear of a
popular tumult, would hurry Jesus to the most convenient spot for
execution, says, "Then the road to Joppa or Damascus would be most
convenient, and no spot in the vicinity would probably be so suitable as
the slight rounded elevation which bore the name of Calvary."

<span id="xref_175">175</span>. Some have supposed that it was so called
because it was the place of public execution. *Gulgoleth* in Hebrew, or
*gogultho* in Syriac, means *a skull*.

<span id="xref_176">176</span>. Quoted in Oliver, *Landmarks*, vol. i.
p. 587, note.

<span id="xref_177">177</span>. Oliver's idea (*Landmarks*, ii. 149)
that *cassia* has, since the year 1730, been corrupted into *acacia*, is
contrary to all etymological experience. Words are corrupted, not by
lengthening, but by abbreviating them. The uneducated and the careless
are always prone to cut off a syllable, not to add a new one.

<span id="xref_178">178</span>. And yet I have been surprised by seeing,
once or twice, the word "Cassia" adopted as the name of a lodge.
"Cinnamon" or "sandal wood" would have been as appropriate, for any
masonic meaning or symbolism.

<span id="xref_179">179</span>. Eclog. ii. 49.

> "Pallentes violas et summa papavera carpens,  
> Narcissum et florem jungit benè olentis anethi:  
> Tum casia, atque aliis intexens suavibus herbis,  
> Mollia luteola pingit vaccinia, caltha."

<span id="xref_180">180</span>. Exod. xxx. 24, Ezek. xxvii. 9, and Ps.
xlv. 8.

<span id="xref_181">181</span>. Oliver, it is true, says, that "there is
not the smallest trace of any tree of the kind growing so far north as
Jerusalem" (*Landm.* ii. 136); but this statement is refuted by the
authority of Lieutenant Lynch, who saw it growing in great abundance at
Jericho, and still farther north.--*Exped. to the Dead Sea*, p.
262.--The Rabbi Joseph Schwarz, who is excellent authority, says, "The
Acacia (Shittim) Tree, Al Sunt, is found in Palestine of different
varieties; it looks like the Mulberry tree, attains a great height, and
has a hard wood. The gum which is obtained from it is the gum
Arabic."--*Descriptive Geography and Historical Sketch of Palestine*, p.
308, Leeser's translation. Phila., 1850.--Schwarz was for sixteen years
a resident of Palestine, and wrote from personal observation. The
testimony of Lynch and Schwarz should, therefore, forever settle the
question of the existence of the acacia in Palestine.

<span id="xref_182">182</span>. Calmet, Parkhurst, Gesenius, Clarke,
Shaw, and all the best authorities, concur in saying that the *otzi
shittim*, or shittim wood of Exodus, was the common acacia or mimosa
nilotica of Linnæus.

<span id="xref_183">183</span>. "This custom among the Hebrews arose
from this circumstance. Agreeably to their laws, no dead bodies were
allowed to be interred within the walls of the city; and as the Cohens,
or priests, were prohibited from crossing a grave, it was necessary to
place marks thereon, that they might avoid them. For this purpose the
acacia was used."--DALCHO, *Oration*, p. 27, note.--I object to the
reason assigned by Dalcho; but of the existence of the custom there can
be no question, notwithstanding the denial or doubt of Dr. Oliver.
Blount (*Travels in the Levant*, p. 197) says, speaking of the Jewish
burial customs, "those who bestow a marble stone over any \[grave\] have
a hole a yard long and a foot broad, in which *they plant an evergreen*,
which seems to grow from the body, and is carefully watched."
Hasselquist (*Travels*, p. 28) confirms his testimony. I borrow the
citations from Brown (*Antiquities of the Jews*, vol. ii. p. 356), but
have verified the reference to Hasselquist. The work of Blount I have
not been enabled to consult.

<span id="xref_184">184</span>. Antiquities of Greece, p. 569.

<span id="xref_185">185</span>. Dr. Crucefix, MS., quoted by Oliver,
*Landmarks*, ii. 2.

<span id="xref_186">186</span>. Spirit of Masonry, lect. ix. p. 99.

<span id="xref_187">187</span>. The Temple of Solomon, ch. ix. p. 233.

<span id="xref_188">188</span>. It is probable that the quince derived
this symbolism, like the acacia, from its name; for there seems to be
some connection between the Greek word ϗυδώνιος, which means *a quince*,
and the participle ϗυδίων, which signifies *rejoicing, exulting*. But
this must have been an afterthought, for the name is derived from Cydon,
in Crete, of which island the quince is a native.

<span id="xref_189">189</span>. Desprez, speaking of the palm as an
emblem of victory, says (*Comment. in Horat. Od.* I. i. 5), "Palma verò
signum victoriae passim apud omnes statuitur, ex Plutarcho, propterea
quod ea est ejus natura ligni, ut urgentibus opprimentibusque minimè
cedat. Unde est illud Alciati epigramma,--

> 'Nititur in pondus palma, et consurgit in altum:  
> Quoque magis premitur, hoc magè tollit onus.'"

It is in the eighth book of his Symposia that Plutarch states this
peculiar property of the palm to resist the oppression of any
superincumbent weight, and to rise up against it, whence it was adopted
as the symbol of victory. Cowley also alludes to it in his *Davideis*.

> "Well did he know how palms by oppression speed  
> Victorious, and the vctor's sacred meed."

<span id="xref_190">190</span>. "Rosemary was anciently supposed to
strengthen the memory, and was not only carried at funerals, but worn at
weddings."--STEEVENS, *Notes on Hamlet*, a. iv. s. 5.--Douce
(*Illustrations of Shakspeare*, i. 345) gives the following old song in
reference to this subject:--

> "Rosemarie is for remembrance  
>    Betweene us daie and night,  
> Wishing that I might always have  
>    You present in my sight."

<span id="xref_191">191</span>. Ste. Croix (*Recherches sur les
Mystères*, i. 56) says that in the Samothracian Mysteries it was
forbidden to put parsley on the table, because, according to the
mystagogues, it had been produced by the blood of Cadmillus, slain by
his brothers.

<span id="xref_192">192</span>. "The Hindoos," says Faber, "represent
their mundane lotus, as having four large leaves and four small leaves
placed alternately, while from the centre of the flower rises a
protuberance. Now, the circular cup formed by the eight leaves they deem
a symbol of the earth, floating on the surface of the ocean, and
consisting of four large continents and four intermediate smaller
islands; while the centrical protuberance is viewed by them as
representing their sacred Mount Menu."--*Communication to Gent. Mag.*
vol. lxxxvi. p. 408.

<span id="xref_193">193</span>. The *erica arborea* or tree heath.

<span id="xref_194">194</span>. Ragon thus alludes to this mystical
event: "Isis found the body of Osiris in the neighborhood of Biblos, and
near a tall plant called the *erica*. Oppressed with grief, she seated
herself on the margin of a fountain, whose waters issued from a rock.
This rock is the *small hill* mentioned in the ritual; the erica has
been replaced by the acacia, and the grief of Isis has been changed for
that of the fellow crafts."--*Cours des Initiations*, p. 151.

<span id="xref_195">195</span>. It is singular, and perhaps significant,
that the word *eriko*, in Greek, ἐρίϗω, whence *erica* is probably
derived, means *to break in pieces, to mangle*.

<span id="xref_196">196</span>. Histoire Pittoresque des Religions, t.
i. p. 217.

<span id="xref_197">197</span>. According to Toland (*Works*, i. 74),
the festival of searching, cutting, and consecrating the mistletoe, took
place on the 10th of March, or New Year's day. "This," he says, "is the
ceremony to which Virgil alludes, by his *golden branch*, in the Sixth
Book of the Æneid." No doubt of it; for all these sacred plants had a
common origin in some ancient and general symbolic idea.

<span id="xref_198">198</span>. "Under this branch is figured the wreath
of myrtle, with which the initiated were crowned at the celebration of
the Mysteries."--WARBURTON, *Divine Legation*, vol. i. p. 299.

<span id="xref_199">199</span>. "In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat
bread." Gen. iii. 19. Bush interprets the decree to mean that "some
species of toilsome occupation is the appointed lot of all men."

<span id="xref_200">200</span>. Aristotle says, "He that cannot contract
society with others, or who, through his own self-sufficiency
αὐτάρϗειαν, does not need it, forms no part of the community, but is
either a wild beast or a god."

<span id="xref_201">201</span>. "Der Arbeiter," says Lenning, "ist der
symbolische Name eines Freimaurers"--the Workman is the symbolic name of
a Freemason.--*Encyclop. der Fraumererei.*

<span id="xref_202">202</span>. John iii. 19-21.

<span id="xref_203">203</span>. I Corinth, iii. 9.

<span id="xref_204">204</span>. Orbis Miraculum, or the Temple of
Solomon, pourtrayed by Scripture Light, ch. ix. p. 192. London, 1659.

<span id="xref_205">205</span>. Swedenborg a Hermetic Philosopher, &c.,
p. 210. The object of the author is to show that the Swedish sage was an
adept, and that his writings may be interpreted from the point of view
of Hermetic philosophy.

<span id="xref_206">206</span>. Cours Philosophique et Interprétatif des
Initiations Anciennes et Modernes, p. 99.

<span id="xref_207">207</span>. Ibid., p. 176.

<span id="xref_208">208</span>. Histoire Générale de la
Franc-maçonnerie, p. 52.

<span id="xref_209">209</span>. Histoire de la Magie, liv. v. ch. vii.
p. 100.

<span id="xref_210">210</span>. Vorlesung über das Symbol des Tempels,
in the "Jarbüchern der Gross. Loge Roy. York zur Freundschaft," cited by
Lenning, Encyc., voc. *Tempel*.

<span id="xref_211">211</span>. In an Essay on the Masonic Idea of Man's
Destination, cited by Lenning, *ut supra*, from the Altenburg
*Zeitschift der Freimaurerei*.

<span id="xref_212">212</span>. Cited by Lenning, *ut sup.*

<span id="xref_213">213</span>. Thus Dr. Oliver, while treating of the
relation of the temple to the lodge, thus briefly alludes to this
important symbol: "As our ancient brethren erected a material temple,
without the use of axe, hammer, or metal tool, so is our moral temple
constructed."--*Historical Landmarks*, lect. xxxi.

<span id="xref_214">214</span>. System of Speculative Masonry, ch. vi.
p. 63.

<span id="xref_215">215</span>. On the Speculative Temple--an essay read
in 1861 before the Grand Lodge of Alabama.

<span id="xref_216">216</span>. A portion of this essay, but in a very
abridged form, was used by the author in his work on "Cryptic Masonry."

<span id="xref_217">217</span>. Hist. Landmarks, i. 459, note 52.

<span id="xref_218">218</span>. אבך שתייה See the Gemara and Buxtorf
Lex. Talm., p. 2541.

<span id="xref_219">219</span>. Job xxxviii. 4-7.

<span id="xref_220">220</span>. A New Translation of the Book of Job,
notes, p. 196.

<span id="xref_221">221</span>. In voc. שתייה, where some other curious
extracts from the Talmud and Talmudic writers on the subject of the
Stone of Foundation are given.

<span id="xref_222">222</span>. Sepher Toldoth Jeshu, p. 6. The
abominably scurrilous character of this work aroused the indignation of
the Christians, who, in the fifteenth century, were not distinguished
for a spirit of tolerance, and the Jews, becoming alarmed, made every
effort to suppress it. But, in 1681, it was republished by Wagenselius
in his "Tela Ignea Satanae," with a Latin translation.

<span id="xref_223">223</span>. Comment, on Gen. xxviii. 18.

<span id="xref_224">224</span>. "Ni fallit fatum, Scoti quocunque
locatum Invenient lapidem, regnare tenentur ibidem."

<span id="xref_225">225</span>. Old and New Testament connected, vol. i.
p. 148.

<span id="xref_226">226</span>. The Temple of Solomon, pourtrayed by
Scripture Light, ch. ix. p. 194. Of the Mysteries laid up in the
Foundation of the Temple.

<span id="xref_227">227</span>. See Pausanias, lib. iv.

<span id="xref_228">228</span>. The "Disputationes adversus Gentes" of
Arnobius supplies us with a fund of information on the symbolism of the
classic mythology.

<span id="xref_229">229</span>. Naology, ch. iii. p. 119.

<span id="xref_230">230</span>. Cornut. de Nat. Deor. c. 16.

<span id="xref_231">231</span>. Essais sur les Fables, t. i. lett. 2. p.
9.

<span id="xref_232">232</span>. Bosworth (*Aug. Sax. Dict.*) defines
*treowth* to signify "troth, truth, treaty, league, pledge, covenant."
