[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md)  [New
Thought](../../nth/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](dth01.md) 
[Next](dth03.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Dynamic Thought, by Henry Thomas Hamblin \[1921\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

 

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0" width="75%">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="655"><p><em>I want you to realize:</em></p>
<p><em>That within you are infinite power and possibilities.</em></p>
<p><em>That the inward Power can be aroused and brought into expression by holding high ideals in the mind and by affirmations and meditation.</em></p>
<p><em>That it is necessary to spend a short time in the Unseen both night and morning.</em></p>
<p><em>That by so doing you can enter a super-conscious realm where your word is creative.</em></p>
<p><em>That what you speak comes to pass, that what you mentally picture must come true.</em></p>
<p><em>That it is only by following high ideals that true success can be achieved.</em></p>
<p><em>Therefore, picture a higher life--the highest you can conceive, and affirm that it is yours. Remember that this higher life is without sickness, disease, forward with joy--you can never fail</em>.</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

 

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

# DYNAMIC THOUGHT

### Success and Character Building

### PART I

THE objects of this course are: (1) To alter your mental attitude, and
(2) To direct your thoughts into those channels which lead to success,
achievement, health, happiness and perfect good; (3) The arousing of the
inward POWER, and (4) The overcoming of bad habits; (5) The building up
of character, and (6) The discovery and development of the creative
faculty.

How these are accomplished will be explained to you in their proper
place and at the proper time, but first of all I want you to consider,
thoughtfully, what is before you. It is not exactly an easy road which
you have chosen. No path that leads upward

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

ever is. The path of victory is always thorny; but when the thorns hurt
the feet most, we can console ourselves with the thought that the path
really does lead **somewhere**, and we know definitely that it leads to
**Success**, **Achievement**, **Happiness** and **Satisfaction**.
Difficulties there will be, disappointments, failures and set-backs, but
to him who sets his face towards the light, and will keep steadily
onward, there must come success and accomplishment and victory, above
all expectation.

If now you merely read this and pass on, the amount of good that it will
do you will be none at all. This course is useless if you do not "do"
it, reading it will do you little or no good, it is the **doing** of it
that will change your character and your life.

Therefore, stop now and think carefully over the path that lies before
you; estimate its difficulties, do not think lightly of them, be
prepared for difficulty, and make up your mind, here and now, to
conquer.

You may have failed in the past, but this time **you must, you will, and
you shall overcome** 

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

every difficulty and weakness, and achieve dominion over yourself,
victory over your circumstances and complete control over your life.

<div align="center">

|                                                                                                                        |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| THERE MUST AND SHALL BE NO FAILURE THIS TIME. THIS TIME YOU ARE GOING TO SUCCEED THROUGH THE POWER THAT IS WITHIN YOU. |

</div>

Now close your eyes, and mentally picture yourself, radiant, strong,
successful, happy, full of the joy and zest of life. **See** yourself
treading a path that leads ever upwards. Behind you the air is murky and
gloomy, but in front is increasing brightness and loveliness. **See**
yourself progressing, climbing, winning. **See** yourself trampling old
habits and weaknesses under your feet. **See** yourself meeting
difficulties in your path, and **see** yourself, sustained by a mighty
inward power, brushing all obstructions aside, and never faltering in
your upward climb.

Concentrate with all your powers upon

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

this mental imagery. Persevere until you can see yourself radiant,
sublime, shorn of all weaknesses and imperfections, the perfect image of
your perfect self. See yourself full of vitality and health, see
yourself successful, attracting both people and affluence to you. Make a
concrete, sharply defined image in your mind of yourself as you desire
to be; see yourself master of circumstances, attracting all good things
by the power of your mental forces.

<div align="center">

|                                                                                                           |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| WHATEVER YOU CREATE, IN THIS MANNER, IN YOUR MENTAL WORLD, WILL LATER BE MANIFESTED IN YOUR OUTWARD LIFE. |

</div>

In other words, by mental imagery you are creating your future self. You
will gradually grow into the likeness of the image that you are now
creating. Therefore create the right image. Let your ambition be a high
one; do not picture yourself as a common man, satisfied with vulgar
pleasures, instead, create a perfect man, the most perfect of which you
can conceive.

In the same way when you throw your mind forward and foresee the task
before

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

you and "will" that all difficulties shall be overcome, and that if you
get weary of well doing, you will not give up but will persevere, and
arouse fresh interest in the task of self culture and achievement, then
you are already winning the battle in advance, you are making your
ultimate success doubly sure.

I want you to realize that this journey of yours is not a walk over, I
want you to understand that it is a fight all the way, but at the same
time to realize that it is a **winning** fight all the time; for
although difficulties are real, yet you have within you the Powers which
make difficulties and obstacles melt away. Great and omnipotent is the
Power within you. Nothing can stay your upward climb, there is nobody
who can prevent you succeeding except **yourself**; there is nothing
that can stop your progress but your own doubt and fear. All things are
possible if you believe that they are possible.

<div align="center">

|                                                                                            |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Unbounded confidence, the keynote of Success. YOU cannot fail, YOU, yourself, are Success. |

</div>

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

Another word for "unbounded confidence" is "faith." Every successful man
is a confident man. He believes wholeheartedly in his own power to
succeed. This is not vanity or being too "cock-sure," instead it is
either conscious, or unconscious, or sub-conscious realization of the
**Inward Power**. This is why so few men are really successful, so few
men ever arouse the mighty powers that are within them, so few men think
the kind of thoughts that bring these powers into life and action.

Every successful man is a man of "faith," every successful man is a man
who cultivates "hope." A successful man is always hopeful, is **never**
a pessimist and he brings that which he hopes for, into being and
reality, by the strength of his faith.

Therefore I want you first of all to cultivate Hope and Faith for
without those qualities no one, **no matter how gifted or clever, can
ever succeed**.

That you have these two qualities is proved by the fact that you are
reading this course. You have had the hope of winning your way to a life
of Success, and Power,

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

and you have had the Faith to believe that within you are the powers and
forces which make this possible. Without Hope a man is as good as dead,
without Faith he is like a rudderless ship drifting hither and thither
with every wind and current. On the other hand **all things are
possible** to the man who has both these qualities.

Cast your eyes over the lives of all men of great achievement, and you
will see that they were all animated by Hope and sustained by Faith.
They hoped for success and believed that they had it in them to achieve
that success. In their darkest hours they hoped on, believing that soon
the reaction would come, which would carry them on to the accomplishment
of their ambitions. Nothing has ever yet been accomplished by man on
this planet without the inspiration of Hope and the tenacity of Faith.
Hope reaches forward and claims success, faith holds on until success is
attained. Therefore seek to develop these qualities to their fullest
extent.

It is a well known fact that when a man turns his face round and
determines to fight

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

his way to success, or to overcome evil habit, or to raise himself in
any way either mentally, morally, physically or spiritually, then
everything seems to happen to thwart his new intention and to throttle
his new desires. So long as he goes on in his old way, drifting with the
tide, floating about helplessly, the sport of fate and the prey of
outside circumstances, so long as this goes on, nothing unusual happens.
But directly a start is made in an upward direction, then all kinds of
psychic powers seem to be let loose, whose object
[appears](errata.htm#0.md) to be to prevent the student from making any
progress in his new life.

When a man realizes his own interior powers and understands the vastness
and wonder of his subliminal forces, and determines to make use of them,
and thus become a king among men instead of a slave, then such a
disturbance takes place that unless he possesses Hope and Faith he will
be tempted to turn his back on the new life and to sink back again into
the old sluggish drifting existence, which leads to disappointment and
despair.

Those people variously known as Christian

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Scientists, Mental
Scientists, Spiritual Scientists, etc. (no matter what they call
themselves, they all deal with the powers of the mind) all experience
the same thing. Even the health is affected in a curious way, friends
are peevish and irritable, little things go wrong in business, and
generally one is out of sorts and all things awry.

When this experience comes to one, then is the time to exercise Hope and
Faith. First of all remember that the condition is only temporary. After
a few days, in some cases it may be weeks, the health will improve,
friends will become genial and harmony will again reign in your life.
When the entities that cause the disturbance realize that you mean to
keep on, and that you cannot be bullied into going back to the old life,
they will quickly leave you. In any case there is nothing to be afraid
of, because these entities are **helpless** if one does not **fear**
them. In other words, if you have Hope and Faith you can win through.
Hope for better times although the present may be discouraging. Faith in
the sure belief that soon all the disagreeable symptoms will disappear.

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

Hope on; by Faith, hang on, and keep hanging on and you will win
through. Do not be discouraged by seeming failure, nothing was ever won
without effort. What can be had without effort is not worth having.

Take encouragement from the fact that this disturbance in your life
proves that vital changes are taking place within, that the vast powers
of your subliminal mind are beginning to awaken, and that the entities
of your old erroneous beliefs and habits are taking their departure.

Believe now that you can conquer and win through, and you **will**
conquer and win through. What you believe you can do, you **can** do,
because all power is within you. There is nothing in all the world that
can stop you, except your own doubt and fear.

I want you to trust me to the extent of doing something, the underlying
principle of which cannot be explained in this first lesson. I want you
to make what is known as an "affirmation," I want you to affirm the
following: "THE OLD LIFE IS DEAD

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

AND BURIED. I HAVE SEVERED MYSELF FROM IT ONCE AND FOR ALL. HENCEFORTH I
LIVE THE NEW LIFE OF SUCCESS AND POWER, OF SELF-MASTERY AND ALL
ACCOMPLISHMENT."

First of all memorize these words. Keep repeating them over until they
sink deeply into your memory, and their meaning finds a place in your
consciousness. If you can get a few moments to yourself during the day,
practice making the affirmations. The right way is as follows: Go into a
quiet place, whether you sit, stand, or lie down is immaterial. Now
close your eyes and say the words over very earnestly.

Strive to realize all that they mean and address the words to your
**inner mind**. It is your submerged mind that you are influencing, so
address the affirmation very earnestly to it. Do this for several
minutes, and finish by making the affirmation into space. Hurl it out as
a message to the Universe [and](errata.htm#1.md) by so doing you will come
into harmony with innumerable invisible forces, who will help and
strengthen you.

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

Do not make the affirmation while in a state of strain and nervous
tension. Relax yourself, take a deep breath, and as you exhale let your
muscles go limp; smooth out your nerves until your whole body is in a
peaceful easy state. Concentrate your thoughts on what you are doing. If
they wander bring them back and begin again. The more you concentrate
the better will be the result.

The most important, in fact **the** time above all times for making the
affirmation is just as you are falling to sleep. There is a great
psychological reason for this. If you can fall asleep while making the
affirmation, or while visualizing it, so much the better. Therefore take
no food or stimulants (it is better to avoid the latter altogether) just
before retiring. The reason cannot be given here because it would take
too long, but it is an important one.

In the early morning immediately on waking is the next best time, both
times should be made use of, and on no account be missed, but of the two
the one just before sleep is by far the more important.

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

The influence of these two affirmations will be felt during the day,
they will have an effect upon your mental outlook, and upon the way in
which you will deal with the problems of your day's work; but this
influence can be intensified and buttressed up, as it were, by "retiring
into yourself" at intervals, during the day, and mentally repeating the
affirmation. This will give you a sense of power and confidence and
hope, such as you have never experienced before. This is not
"imagination," it is your hitherto unsuspected interior powers being
aroused into activity.

When you have finished making the affirmation, again close your eyes and
make a mental picture of yourself in the manner already taught. Endeavor
to see yourself a radiant being, with the old life and its murkiness and
imperfections left far behind you. Picture yourself pressing forward to
higher and better things, meeting difficulties, it is true, but
overcoming them, trampling old habits, weaknesses and imperfections
under your feet. Try and realize that you have the power to raise
yourself above the ordinary things of life, that

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

you can breathe a rarer and purer atmosphere. Picture yourself as a new
being, happier, healthier, brighter and more radiant than ever you have
been even at your most [sublime](errata.htm#2.md) moments.

This will not be easy. It requires concentration and perseverance. You
will find it difficult to see yourself as you wish to see yourself, or
you will find it not easy to see yourself clearly at all, also you will
find it difficult to keep your mind concentrated upon the making of the
image. There is only one thing to do and that is to keep on trying. Thus
in the first lesson do you come face to face with a battle royal. With
most students this visualizing is a great difficulty, but no matter how
difficult it may be, it has to be overcome. If you fail to overcome this
difficulty then you fail in this course of lessons; if you fail to
overcome now, you will fail in the larger things of life.

The best way to overcome a difficulty is by getting interested in it.
When you have developed interest, enthusiasm is aroused, and after that
concentration becomes comparatively

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

easy, and this commands success. Therefore get interested in this
problem of visualizing. Remember that all men of great
[achievement](errata.htm#3.md) have had this power greatly developed,
therefore if you wish to be great and successful you must first develop
this same faculty.

There has never been a great act or achievement in the world's history
that was not first visualized in this manner. Everything is first
created in the unseen before it is manifested in the seen. When you, by
dint of practice, can visualize clearly and distinctly, you will have
developed creative power, not figuratively, but literally so.

Whatever you [create](errata.htm#4.md) in your mental world by means of
visualizing will in time be manifested in the outer physical world.
**The outer world of matter is subservient to the inner world of mind**.
This is a great occult truth which has been withheld from ordinary
people and has been until recently the closely guarded secret of certain
secret orders. It is now given into your hands, you are put upon your
honor not to reveal it to others. When they have reached a

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

certain stage of their development, the knowledge will come to them by
some channel or other, and in the meantime it does more harm than good
to try to impart occult knowledge to those who are not interested or
ready to receive it.

I hope enough has been said to arouse your interest in, and enthusiasm
for, visualizing. The more clearly you can visualize, the more clean cut
will be the results in your daily life. This creative power can be so
highly developed that a sick man can make himself well, a poor man can
change his circumstances from poverty to prosperity, and a miserable and
despondent pessimist can change himself into a cheery, optimist. By
visualizing, and by denials and affirmations (which will be explained
later), by meditation and by the exercise of Hope and Faith the life,
character and circumstances can be transformed. The results are so
extraordinary that it is very difficult to get people to believe them,
but they are none the less real. Therefore practice your affirmations
and persevere with your visualizing, they will lead to results of

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

which you can at present form but a faint conception.

To obtain the best results from this course it is necessary to set apart
a **special time every day** for meditation and concentration. The
reason man is so weak and unhappy is because he lives the whole of his
time in the objective life, the shallow material life of the senses, and
neglects the deeper, grander and transcendental life of the inner mind.
It is the **inner** life that gives power and peace and satisfaction.
The outer material life of the infinite mind of the senses only bring
worry and care, the inner life of the deeper mind brings strength,
wisdom, understanding and ability to accomplish and achieve.

It is a proved scientific fact that you grow into the likeness of that
upon which you meditate. If you meditate upon evil then evil will come
into your life; if you meditate upon revenge, your life will be turned
into an inferno of trouble; on the other hand, if you meditate upon
happiness and other higher mental states, then happiness

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

will be yours, and if you let your thoughts dwell upon "peace" then
peace of mind will result. All these states and many others are within
you; they can be called forth by meditation. You can call forth either
good or evil, success or failure, strength or weakness, happiness or
woe, everything is in your own hands.

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

### MEDITATION I

To be used every day and twice a day if possible, between the hours of 6
and 9 a.m. and 9 and 11:30 p.m. **Other times are suitable, but those
mentioned will be found** especially valuable to students, as between
these hours their teacher is meditating upon the same thoughts, and the
vibrations from his mind will be helpful to all who are "tuned to
receive them."

Try and arrange to spend half an hour in meditation before retiring for
the night. Sit in a quiet place, relax your body and concentrate upon
these words:

Within me are infinite powers seeking expression. In the past, because I
did not know of their existence, they have been stifled and suppressed.
Now I "will" that they shall be called into activity, and find perfect
and full expression in my body in the form of perfect health, in my life
in the

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

form of success and achievement, in my heart in the form of a mighty
upwelling of joy and happiness. Now that I have discovered this hidden
and inexhaustible store of power and energy, my life is transformed;
weakness gives place to strength, sorrow to happiness, morbidness to
radiant joy, pessimism to divine optimism, despair to hope, failure to
success, poverty to prosperity, sickness to health. Henceforth only the
highest good can come into my life. Now by the power of my
thought-forces I am allied with and joined to the Infinite Principle of
Good, and we have become one. Henceforth for me there is, and can be, no
evil, only Infinite Good. All evil is now cast out of my life, because I
am one with the Infinite Good. "No evil can come nigh my dwelling";
"nothing can harm or destroy." Henceforth by [scientific](errata.htm#5.md)
thinking I control my life, for my life is the result or effect of my
thoughts. When evil thoughts, or weak thoughts, or impure thoughts, or
failure thoughts, or fear thoughts, or poverty thoughts, or hate
thoughts, or disease thoughts assail me, I will cast them out and think
only of thoughts of love, and strength,

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

of health and prosperity, of success and achievement, and of the
Infinite Perfection with which I am now allied, and of which I form a
part.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

When meditating upon the above, take each thought separately in turn and
concentrate all your thoughts upon it. Not only grasp its meaning, but
try and picture what it means. For instance: "My life is transformed."
When you think upon these words, try and **see** your life being
transformed, **see** your weaknesses falling away from you like an
[old](errata.htm#6.md) garment, and instead, strength, success and noble
qualities being born in their place. Practice and concentrate and
**FEEL** the power of this meditation.

This ends the metaphysical part of this week's lesson, the following are
some brief hints of great value to the student beginning the study of
Scientific Thought: (1) Everything works according to Law, we each of us
have what we deserve. (2) Covet no man's goods, possessions or
happiness;

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

he deserves them, let him alone. Realize that the Universe holds all
that you can possibly desire--for you. (3) Hate no man. Hatred will come
back like a boomerang and hurt you far more than it can the object of
your hatred. Ignore what you cannot like, and concentrate your mind on
pleasant things. (4) Be true, be honest, be faithful. All these create
vibrations which will bring back blessings and happiness to you.

You have entered a life, the power and possibilities of which you at
present have no conception. If I described it now you would not
understand. But, believe me, it is a life of Power to accomplish and
Victory over all weaknesses. It is a life of Prosperity and true
Success. It is a life of [transcendent](errata.htm#7.md) Joy. It is a life
of peace and blessing to your fellows.

**Look up**. **Keep looking up**. Keep on affirming. Keep on
visualizing. Keep on meditating. Keep on believing. Keep on hoping. What
you hope for, and believe, and affirm, and visualize, is **yours**.
Remember also that you grow into the likeness of that which you meditate
upon.

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

The brain is a very delicate instrument; it is the vehicle through which
the mind finds expression. The mind cannot manifest its power if the
brain is clouded by grossness of body. The one who would improve his or
her mind, who would awaken the mighty powers within, must give up
hurtful physical habits. It is useless to attempt to eradicate bad
mental habits while the body is suffering from indulgence of any kind.
For instance, it would be waste of time to affirm all or any of the
higher qualities of the mind and then to go to bed intoxicated or full
of pork chops and fried onions. Let your diet be on the light side,
always rise from the table slightly hungry rather than repleted, and
never eat later than three hours before retiring to bed. For instance,
if you go to bed at 11 p. m. do not eat at a later hour than 8 p. m.
This is a most important point, **the affirmations have more power if
made when fasting**, therefore the last thing at night and the time of
waking in the early morning are the best times at which to perform them.
There are physical and psychological reasons for this.

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

Bathe the body every day and follow by rough towelling. Do not wear too
much clothing. Avoid **tight collars** and neck bands.

Take a fair amount of exercise, walking is the best form for most
people. When walking keep the shoulders fairly well back, the back
hollow and the body well balanced over the hips. Above all keep the head
up. Do not look down, but LOOK UP. There is a reason for this.

As regards diet, eat the food that agrees with you best, but eat if you
can digest them one or two raw things every day; raw ripe fruit, salad,
water cress, etc.; again there is a reason. Masticate each mouthful of
food until it becomes liquid.

Get into the habit of breathing deeply and through the nose. Keep the
mouth firmly closed. Keep your windows open night and day, fresh air is
cheap.

Lastly, try always to maintain a cheerful frame of mind.

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

### APPENDIX

It will be helpful for you to think of your subliminal Mind as another
person, one who is always listening, listening, listening. He hears all
that you say, and ACTS UPON all the thoughts that you let pass the
[threshold](errata.htm#8.md) of the inner mind.

"Hush! he is listening," should be the watch-word of your life. Let no
thought of evil, of impurity, of weakness, of ill-health, of failure, of
hate, of anger, of fear, enter your Subliminal Mind, for he will receive
them as orders which he will obey, and being all-powerful, great and
terrible will be the results. Therefore let only thoughts of good,
purity, strength, health, success, love, self-control, courage and
determination enter this greater mind of vast intelligence and power. Do
this, and your Subliminal Mind will take these thoughts as orders, and
will shape your life and health accordingly. Thus in a general way your
Subliminal

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Mind will be led
to develop your life on healthful and successful, noble and harmonious
lines.

The visualizing taught in this course, also the denials (explained
later), affirmations, meditations and other exercises, all have a very
strong, deep, scientific purpose in view, and this is the training of
the Subliminal Mind. The Affirmation and the Visualizing taught in this
lesson are given you in order to make a definite impression upon your
Subliminal Mind.

The main object of this lesson is to make a dent or impression on the
Subliminal Mind and to make it realize that the old life is dead and
that you have now entered a new life of health, success and power. Your
Subliminal Mind will accept this if you persevere with the visualizing
and affirmations, and will thus be prepared for the more advanced
training which is to follow.

Let "Hush! he is listening" be the watch-word of your life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part II](dth03.md)
