[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md)  [New
Thought](../../nth/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](dth06.md) 
[Next](dth08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Dynamic Thought, by Henry Thomas Hamblin \[1921\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

 

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0" width="75%">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="655"><p><strong><em>Read this lesson over as often as you can find time to do so; it cannot be absorbed all at once.</em></strong></p>
<p><strong><em>Hold in your mind a sharp definite picture of the success you have planned. If it is money that you desire, then see money in abundance pouring in streams on to your desk. If it is health that you need, hold a picture of perfect health ever before your mental eyes. If it is a wealthy practice, then mentally "see" yourself in a perfectly appointed office receiving wealthy clients in large numbers, and "see" them waiting patiently in queues for their turn to see you. Whatever it is that you desire, no matter whether it be invention, genius, love, friends, house, lands or service to others, picture it very definitely and distinctly and hold this image over before your mind, keep constantly calling it up, and every time that you do so let the sight thrill you with pleasure. As you call up the picture affirm "I am Success," and believe that it is already yours. Keep on affirming success, and visualizing success, and it will surely come and in much larger volume than ever you imagined possible.</em></strong></p>
<p><strong><em>I wish you the highest possible success</em></strong>.</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

 

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

# DYNAMIC THOUGHT

### Success and Character Building

### PART VI

THE Objective or conscious mind is the mind of the senses. It learns
from books, persons, experience and experiments. It reasons on things
learnt, and on thoughts received from a variety of sources,: and having
passed judgment, rejects some things as error, and accepts others as
truth. Things considered to be truth are passed down into the
sub-conscious mind to add to its existing store of memory and
experiences.

Whatever is passed to the sub-conscious mind becomes translated into
action. Thus if immoral or impure thoughts are entertained, then
immediately physical changes

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

take place in the body, which are simply these thoughts being translated
into action by the sub-conscious mind. Thus if one repeatedly imbibes
this class of thought, a time arrives when one is compelled by the
sub-conscious mind to indulge in immoral practices. This is why many
people who have been all their lives apparently quite moral, and well
behaved, suddenly break out into flagrant immorality. It is a great
surprise and causes great distress to relations and friends. They think
that it is a sudden transformation, or that it is due to a certain
temptation, or to the evil influence of a certain wicked person. It is
instead none of these things. It is simply the result of evil thinking.
Evil thoughts produce evil actions. Evil thoughts also attract other
thoughts just as evil as themselves. In the same way a person who
indulges in evil thinking, attracts other people of similar character.

There is a law running through the Universe which is that "like attracts
like," and the operation of this law is unalterable.

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Think evil
thoughts, and you will assuredly attract others just as evil, which will
help to drag you down. If a man thinks evil thoughts he will become evil
in word and deed. Let him think evil thoughts and he will attract other
people even worse than himself. In the same way if you entertain
thoughts of failure, if you doubt your ability to succeed, if you feel
that circumstances will arise which will "swamp" your business, then you
will attract streams of "failure" thoughts which will help to keep
success away. Not only so, but you will attract other people of a
similar nature, whose pessimism will help to complete your final
discomfiture. Like always attracts like. Thus it is that "failures"
always drift together, just as men of a successful type always draw to
themselves others of the same type of mind. "Birds of a feather flock
together" has behind it an unalterable law.

It is the same law that makes it impossible to think or fear sickness,
disease or ill-health, without drawing to yourself streams of thoughts
of, a similar nature

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

which cause certain cells to vibrate in the sub-conscious mind, and thus
produce disease. And not only by so thinking do you produce disease, .
but you also attract diseased people to you, who help by their "diseased
mental outlook" to make your illness become more firmly seated.

The reverse is of course equally true. If you entertain "pure" thoughts
you will attract thoughts of a similar kind from out the ether, and be
strengthened and blessed thereby. By the same law you will attract other
people of lofty minds who will aid you in your upward climb.

If you entertain beautiful thoughts, you will draw to yourself a
constant stream of thoughts of a like nature, and you will attract to
yourself friends of a noble and inspiring character.

In the same way, if you allow thoughts of success only to be held in the
mind, and chase away all thoughts of failure, you will attract to
yourself a full measure of successful thoughts. These will strengthen

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

your determination and inspire you to greater effort. By the same law
you will also attract to yourself men and women of a successful type of
mind. You will find yourself sought after by successful people, and they
will bring with them opportunities for your more abundant success.

Again, if you will only think thoughts of Health and Perfection, and
kill by denial all thoughts of disease, if you will raise yourself into
your Perfect World of Mind, and realize that there is no such thing as
sickness, illness, ill-health or disease, but that instead there is only
infinite Perfection and abounding Health, then not only will Health
manifest itself in your body, but you will also attract to yourself,
happy, radiant, healthy minded, and healthy bodied people, who will
inspire and help you in every department of your life.

Therefore you will readily see how important it is that only the right
type of thoughts should be allowed to enter the sub-conscious mind.

The Will and the Conscious Mind stand

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

as sentinels at the door of the sub-conscious mind. To them is given the
important task of deciding what shall, or what shall not, enter. Every
kind of thought and suggestion, inimical to our welfare, meet us and
strike us on every hand. Harmful thoughts seek to enter our minds at
every turn. Books, magazines, race thought, the mental outlook of
friends and acquaintances are all against our mental development. The
attitude of mind of the average person, of the common ruck, is not
inspiring. It does not suggest "success," it expresses at best, only a
passive acceptance of life. It takes like as it is, things as they come.
It is not often that you meet a man who is conscious that he is "Master
of his fate, the Captain of his soul."

How then can you escape all this deadening, destroying mental
atmosphere?

FIRST. You must, in habit of thought, separate yourself from "the
crowd." You must shut out their
pessimistic-belief-in-circumstances--weak-failure-low-lewd type of
thoughts altogether, and live in an entirely different world--the inner
world of

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

your own creative thought. If you meet a noble or inspiring thought--and
later you will be the recipient of a continuous stream of the finest
thoughts the world has ever known--let it in.

I do not mean that you are to look down upon your fellows, for nothing
is more destructive or contemptible. You must mix with your fellows, and
while holding yourself proof against low and weak types of thought, seek
to raise their minds by your own hopeful suggestions. When a friend
talks as though failure were a possibility in his life, suggest instead
that success is hastening his way. When people are sad, try to cheer
them by hopeful suggestions. When they look on the dark side of life,
show them the bright side. When they rail and rave, pour oil on the
troubled waters. Seek to cheer people up and resolutely refuse to accept
the suggestions of their minds.

The greatest antidote to this deadening atmosphere of doubt and
helplessness, of ignorance and materialism, of fear and

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

failure, due to the world's wrong habit of thought is the use of that
mind cleansing denial "There is no evil." It goes right to the root of
all trouble and failure, all that is undesirable in our lives, and
destroys it.

The word "evil" embraces everything in life that is not of the highest
good; failure, poverty, fear, sickness, disease, pain, ill-health,
unhappiness; all that limits, con fines, cramps and fetters one's life,
all these and much more are included in this one word. By this denial,
all this evil atmosphere is neutralized, and the mind is cleansed, ready
for the affirmation "Only Infinite Good" and these two words "Infinite
Good" cover everything that we can possibly desire. Peace, Power,
Plenty, Health, Happiness and Joy; Success, Achievement, Love, Service
to all mankind, what more can one desire?

Therefore mix with your fellows, they are your brothers and sisters;
seek to do all the good that you can, but continually cleanse your mind
and thought by the use of the denial of evil, and build up your

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

character and life and circumstances by affirmations of Infinite Good.

Thus while you are still mixing with the ordinary everyday type of
men--and they have much that is lovable and noble in their
characters--yet you will be as the poles apart. The fact that you are
taking this. Course proves that you are not as others. That you are
taking a course of metaphysical training shows that you are of a
different type to the ordinary crowd, that you are marked out for
distinction and progress.

SECOND. Everything that you read must be examined and criticized. You
must remember that books, papers, magazines, letters, unless you
consciously prevent them, will convey suggestions to your sub-conscious
mind and in course of time become translated into action. Therefore if
you read books of passion your life will be unbalanced and perhaps
wrecked by gusts of violent desire, which call loudly to be satisfied.
On the other hand, if you will read books written by lofty minds, you
will

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

receive thoughts which inspire and strengthen you.

You should therefore choose your reading wisely. Read the best
literature, and do not then accept as Truth all that you read. Refuse
resolutely to accept any idea that is not in agreement with your new
conception of life. All ideas of man being the puppet of powers outside
himself, of being the sport of fate and the victim of circumstances must
be rigorously rejected. All that tends to strengthen your new conception
of life, which is, that all things are delivered into your hands, and
that you have the power to conquer both yourself and all difficulty and
thus make your life sublime--all that tends to strengthen this mental
attitude should be accepted.

The Will and the Conscious Mind stand at the gate; by them you must
examine every thought, every suggestion. Hold everything up and examine
it in the light of your newly found knowledge, and if it cannot stand
this searching test, cast it from you.

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

You can never be successful if you allow thoughts of weakness or failure
or fear to enter your sub-conscious mind. The one great outstanding
characteristic that distinguishes successful men from the unsuccessful,
is their absolute belief and faith in their own ability to succeed.
Thoughts of failure, or fear, never enter the mind of the truly
successful man. If you examine the character of any great and truly
successful man, you will find this dominating characteristic--absolute
faith in his own success, and with it an entire absence of fear or
weakness.

Therefore it is certain that you can never be successful if you allow
doubt and fear to enter your mind; it is only when by mind control you
have cast out fear and doubt that you can enter the path that leads to
success.

Some men are successful and are not conscious of the laws which govern
success, They unconsciously work according to law--by instinct rather
than knowledge. It is because they are naturally men of LARGE

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> FAITH and
UNFAILING COURAGE that they have become successful.

Therefore you, too, in order to succeed, must have a large faith and
unfailing courage. Faith in the power within you and a courage that is
born of knowledge. Thus can you be placed on the same footing as that of
any other successful man, in fact you will be better equipped than the
naturally successful man, for possessing knowledge will enable you to
avoid many errors, into which he, through ignorance of the law, might
fall.

Therefore in your reading you must close your eyes to all suggestions
which are antagonistic to your newly found knowledge.

THIRD. By denial and affirmation you create a new mental outlook.

By denial we obtain immediate relief from our troubles. For instance,
if, when you are in pain you will deny that there is pain in your
perfect mental World and

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

raise yourself above the ordinary life of the senses, and realize that
you, your higher mental self, are a perfect mind, or mental creature,
incapable of being attacked by pain, then the pain will quickly go. In
the same way whatever trouble may confront you, by denial you obtain
immediate relief. Denial kills the evil thought which is the cause of
all the trouble, and cleanses and purifies the mind, making it ready for
the affirmation.

Always precede an affirmation by the necessary denial. If you are going
to affirm health, then first deny ill-health, sickness and disease. If
you are going to affirm success, first deny failure, if you wish for
prosperity and plenty, then first deny poverty and want, so as to get
the mind ready for the affirmation "I am success; prosperity and plenty
are already mine."

But, you [exclaim](errata.htm#13.md), how can I truthfully affirm that I am
that which I know myself not to be? The answer is: There are two YOUS.
There is the finite, outside, surface, material YOU, and there is the
great

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

and glorious inner spiritual and mental being which is the real YOU. The
former is a weak and coarse reflection of the latter. This glorious and
real YOU is perfect and lives in a perfect mental world. When you affirm
in your perfect Mental World, that you are perfect you mean the real and
sublime YOU, and you are telling the truth. Whatever good quality you
affirm is quite true, because you (yourself, the real YOU) are perfect.
By denial of evil and imperfection and by the affirming of infinite
perfection you destroy evil in your material life and bring it more into
harmony with the perfect life. Therefore what you affirm in your perfect
mental world, is later, and sometimes instantaneously, manifested in
your material world.

An affirmation has been described by one writer as "a statement of Truth
consciously used so as to become the directing power of Life's
expression." This is a good and true definition. Scientists will tell
you that the submerged mind of man acts only upon suggestion. So
powerful is the hidden mind and so subject is it to suggestion that we

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

have in affirmations a weapon of extraordinary power for good, and in
negative suggestion a terrible power for evil.

When we use an affirmation we make a statement of Truth which, if
repeated often enough, will sink down into the recesses of our mind and
become part of our very life. It will galvanize the hidden forces of our
mind into activity and guide them into the path of achievement.

If in the past you have been a failure, then by constantly affirming "I
am Success," you will gradually eradicate the
weak-fearing-give-up-too-soon attitude of your material mind, and build
up in its place the mental outlook of courage, cheerfulness, optimism
and belief in your ability to succeed.

Failure or lack of success in life is not, as I have already pointed
out, due to outward circumstances, but is simply a weakness of
character. By affirmations you can build up your character and make its
former

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

weak points strongest in your armor.

It is by affirmations, then, that man can control himself, build up his
character and shape his own destiny.

It was for this reason that I gave you in your first lesson the
affirmation, which is a denial and affirmation combiner, "The old life
is dead, I have entered the new life of Success and Power." In that
affirmation if consciously applied and persevered with, you kill the old
life of failure and partial success, and step out definitely into a new
life of power and accomplishment. As a consequence, you will look upon
life in a different way, you will act in a different manner, you will
attract a different kind of people. Soon you begin to see evidences of
the truth of these teachings manifested in your life and circumstances.

Therefore you can by affirmations make yourself proof against the
harmful suggestions that meet you on every hand.. By affirmations you
build up the courageous, confident, hopeful, cheerful, absolutely
certain

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

attitude of mind, which is the only type of mind that can readily
succeed.

As you begin to see evidences of the working of your newly found power,
you feel lifted up in a strange and wonderful way. You feel as if you
are being carried forward, by invisible powers, to success; it is as
though some impelling force were pushing you in the back and urging you
forward to the goal of your endeavor.

Therefore, persist and persevere with your affirmations. Continue to
look for difficult tasks, and unpleasant, but very necessary duties, and
aided by the power of affirmations. DO THEM.

Make affirmations to suit your own peculiar needs. If you are too
energetic and inclined to run yourself to pieces, and rush and tear
about and get your own nerves and everybody's else, on edge, affirm as
follows: "I am perfectly calm, cool and collected. I refuse to get
excited or flustered. I work quietly and methodically." Then mentally
picture yourself at work in a very calm, cool and collected way, without

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

hurry, fluster or excitement. You will find your work go much better in
consequence, and certainly not less quickly.

If, on the other hand, you are inclined to be lazy or lethargic, affirm
as follows: "I am the personification of industry and energy. I am busy
from morning until night." Then picture yourself hard at work, doing
good work and plenty of it. This you will find will help you vastly in
enabling you to "stick" to your task, and to keep sticking to it day
after day.

Thus you have within your grasp the power by which you can overcome
every weakness of character; a key which will unlock every door; an art
which is the open sesame to the unlimited treasure house of the
Universal Mind.

By the use of this wonderful power you can turn failure into success,
sorrow into joy, sickness into health, mediocrity into genius.

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

To you all things are possible--strength of purpose, the joy of
achievement, all the glories of a life of self-mastery.

Unto you it is given to taste of the delights of heaven while yet upon
earth--for heaven and hell are within you, they are but mental states.

Unto him who attains to the dazzling height of self-mastery, unto him
who can stand erect, and unafraid, and untroubled by the things that vex
and rend the hearts of men; unto him who is master of his passions, his
emotions, his circumstances and his life; unto such a one has come that
for which the world has longed and strived in vain, about which
philosophers, poets and seers have, for centuries, spoken and written,
and yet never have been able to grasp or to hold.

He who overcomes himself, overcomes the world; all its treasures are
poured at his feet; "all the Divine Forces hasten to minister to his
eternal joy."

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

Dear reader, all this is for yon. Persevere with the affirmations and
practice the visualization exercises as taught in this course, and you
can never fail to succeed beyond your wildest dreams.

For visualizing exercises, picture the window frame of your bedroom,
trace the wood of which it is made, step by step, process by process,
right back to its original form, the tree in the forest. See clearly and
distinctly every stage, leave out no detail.

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

### MEDITATION

In future I am going to close my eyes to the imperfections of other
people and endeavor only to see their good points. Everyone has lovable
traits in his or her character. Even the hardest "case" has a "soft
spot" somewhere, therefore in future I will look only for the lovable
traits and the "soft spots." In everyone I shall see something to admire
and reverence, something to love.

And I shall not stop with people. I will also look for the good in every
circumstance, in every difficulty, in every failure. I will look for the
good in every blade of grass and every opening flower, in the wind that
blows and the sun that burns my cheek. Rain or sunshine, fair weather or
foul, I will see good in everything, see perfection underlying all. Out
of these will grow a new sympathy, a more extensive and embracing

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

love, a larger and wider consciousness, for everyone and everything are
my brothers, each forms a part of the one whole, we are one with one
another and the Universal Life and Mind of which we each form an
individual part.

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

### APPENDIX

Continue to get your Subliminal Mind to solve your problems. Do not be
disheartened by failures, simply try again until you succeed. One word
of warning. After receiving your answer in the early morning, you get to
business, or practice, or whatever your work may be, and you may think
that the answer which came to you as a flash of inspiration must be a
mistake, so opposed does it appear to ordinary worldly wisdom. Be not
deceived, what you have received by inspiration is the sublimest wisdom,
and the so-called "wisdom" which now seeks to reverse the decision,
will, if followed, lead you to confusion and disaster. Infinite wisdom
always appears to be foolishness to finite man.

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

Continue to hold a vision of glorious health and eternal youthfulness
ever before your mental eyes. Also deny sickness and affirm health
without ceasing, not in a strained way, but with confidence and
conviction.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part VII](dth08.md)
