[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md)  [New
Thought](../../nth/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](dth07.md) 
[Next](dth09.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Dynamic Thought, by Henry Thomas Hamblin \[1921\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

# DYNAMIC THOUGHT

#### Success and Character Building

#### PART VII

TO the ordinary "man in the street" a thought is an "airy nothing "--a
mere flash in the consciousness--it comes, it goes, and there is an end
to it. To the student of Mind however, thought is known to be the power
that is greater than any other power--a force that controls all other
forces. An American writer speaking of Universal Mind says:

"It thinks, and Suns spring into shape;  
It wills, and Worlds disintegrate;  
It loves and Souls are born."

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> It will thus be
seen that thought is the

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

origin of the visible Universe. All that we see around us is the result
of thought. We may even go further, and say that all the invisible
forces, which keep the wonderful machinery of the Universe working
perfectly and smoothly, are but the thought-energies of the same
Universal Mind.

As in the macrocosm so is it in the microcosm; the subliminal mind of
man is the same in essence as the Universal Mind of the Universe; the
difference is not one of kind but of degree.

In our world, our circumstances, our life, our bodies, we stand supreme,
or rather we have within us the power, which properly directed, can make
us supreme. This power is "Thought." Thought is so subtle, so elusive,
that it has by the majority of men, been considered impossible of
control, but the greatest philosophers, seers and leaders in the World's
history have known differently. All that they achieved, they
accomplished through the power of thought; and this was possible because
they had learned the art of thought control.

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

"What man has done, man can do." This was never so true as it is today,
because the science of Mind is now being spread abroad, and that it is
possible for quite ordinary people to learn how to control their
thoughts, is now known to be a scientific possibility.

Dr. Abrams in his epoch-making book entitled "New Concepts in Diagnosis
and Treatment; The Practical Application of the Electrotonic Theory in
the Interpretation and Treatment of Disease," describes how he has
discovered the energy of thought and measured it by means of an
instrument called the Bio-dynamometer.

With one subject in a room with closed doors, and another subject, in
another room, forty or more feet away, it was found that one subject
could affect the other by a definite exercise of thought. Anger and
emotion yielded an energy which produced an effect at a distance of
eighty feet. Dr. Abrams also found that there arts three great energy
centers in the human body, the right and left side of the brain, called
by

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

him the right and left psychomotor areas; and the finger tips. When the
brain is actively engaged in thought there is an increase in the
discharge of energy from the psychomotor areas, and also from the finger
tips.

It was also found that ordinary people discharged energy from one
psychomotor area only, but a great thinker discharged energy from both.
The amount of energy discharged in this way can be gauged by the fact
that Edward Markham, the poet, discharged energy from his left
psychomotor area alone equal to a resistance of sixty ohms. As the
energy discharged from a giant magnet with a lifting capacity of 400
lbs. to the square inch is only thirty-two ohms, we can form some idea
of the immense power of thought which man possesses.

The flow of energy from the finger tips is also suggestive. In all ages
the laying on of hands has been recognized as a healing act, now it is
proved by scientific means

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

to have been simply the power or energy of thought.

You will therefore see that "thought" so far from being "an airy
nothing" or a mere flash in the consciousness is a wonderful and potent
force, the most wonderful and potent force of which we know.

A man is a small individualized part of the Universal Mind, alike in
essence but infinitely less in degree. Just as the Universal Mind finds
expression through all the Universe, so does man when awake to his own
interior powers, express himself by the power of his thought, through
his body, his work, his circumstances and his life. Thus far can he go
and no farther. In himself he is an epitome of the Universe, outside of
the miniature Universe he has no jurisdiction. By this I mean that man
has the power to do what he likes with his own life, but he has no right
to dominate other people or to interfere with their lives.

I mention this because there is a pernicious practice being taught
today. It is

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

known as "mind domination." People are being taught that by using what
is called the "hypnotic gaze," by telepathy and hetero-suggestion they
can dominate other people. It is quite true; it can be done and is being
done. This is precisely the same method as that practiced by certain
criminals in America. By this method people are being deprived of money
and property--they sign documents they do not wish to sign, simply
because they are compelled to do so by "mind domination."

No one is to be safe from these misguided people. While you sit in a
public room or theater somebody may be behind you concentrating his
"hypnotic gaze" upon the back of your neck. When you receive a visit
from a traveling salesman he may be working some of his mind dominating
black art upon you in order to coerce you into acting against your
better judgment, simply and solely that he may reap a temporary benefit.

This sort of thing is not only being practiced,

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

but is being taught, both in this country and America.

I mention this in order to put you on your guard against such practices;
first, so that you can avoid being hypnotized by these people, and
second, that you should never under any circumstances use your mind
forces in order to dominate other people. Whoever prostitutes his mental
powers in this way is hurrying to disaster. To so misuse the tremendous
powers of the mind is to destroy oneself, body and soul. All who sink to
these practices are [deliberately](errata.htm#14.md) creating for
themselves an inferno of trouble. The powers of the mind are like
electricity; for the latter, if used according to certain laws, produces
beneficial results; if used in opposition to these laws, it burns,
maims, and destroys. So it is with the powers of the Mind, used aright
they lead to success, happiness and all accomplishment; if used wrongly
they grind to powder.

Both Hypnotism and Mind Domination are being so largely used and taught
that

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

it is advisable to always work against them. These are really a revival
of the "Black Magic" of bygone days. Sorcery, witchcraft, necromancy,
thaumaturgy, they are all the practice of the same power, and all who
use them bring destruction upon their own heads. Sorcery, black magic,
or hypnotism, or whatever you like to call it, is accomplished by the
lower mind of man. The higher self, the perfect mental or spiritual
creature, the real Ego, has nothing to do with it. This is why hypnotic
healing is always harmful. If a person is healed by hypnotic suggestion
in about three months' time either the same disease will reappear, or a
new and worse disease will manifest itself. But healing done by the
higher perfect mind, that is one with, and forms part of, the Universal
Infinite Mind, that is in turn one and part of the Infinite Principle of
Good, such healing is permanent and can have no relapse.

By this we see that the higher mind is infinitely more powerful than the
lower. Therefore Hypnotism and Mind Domination

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

can be overcome and guarded against by the use of the higher Mental
Powers.

To work against Hypnotism, it is necessary not only to live as much as
possible in the atmosphere of your perfect World of Mind, but also to
deny the power of Hypnotism to affirm the perfect power of the perfect
Universal Mind of which you, your higher self, form a part. If you work
in this way you will make yourself proof against all Hypnotism, Sorcery,
Witchcraft and Malpractice of every kind.

The Law which keeps the Universe running so smoothly is the law of
Attraction. It is this law that brought it together; it is this law that
keeps it from falling apart.

Those who practice Mind domination are acting in direct opposition to
this immutable law. They are trying to do by force that which should be
accomplished by attraction, therefore they are encompassing their own
mental, moral and physical disintegration.

All the Universe, in all its planes, is ruled

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

by this law; in the Spiritual World it is called the Law of Love; in the
Mental World the Law of Attraction; in the Material World it is known as
the Law of Affinity. They all mean the same--in essence they are the
same.

Just as the electrons are called together in the invisible aether, thus
to form an atom so, in turn, are atoms brought together, and by
vibrating at different rates of speed, create what we call form. Thus is
matter (so-called) built up into all the beautiful forms we see, simply
by the Law of Attraction.

It is this law that holds all matter together. If it failed, rocks would
fly asunder and all things would disintegrate, because the power that
attracted one atom to another would have ceased to operate.

It is the same in the Mental World, everything works according to this
same law. It is because "like creates like" and "like attracts like"
that it is possible to revolutionize our lives by the power of thought.

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

"Thoughts," said Prentice Mulford, "are things." "Thoughts," says T.
Sharper Knowlson, "so far from being mere brain flashes, are, judging
solely from their effects, real entities, apparently composed of
spiritual substance, the nature of which is outside the range of
discovery of our present faculties." "Thought," says Levy, "is not an
event which dies in a world ethereal, supersensible, imperceptible; it
has continually its likeness and repercussion in our organism." "Thought
is not," says Ralph Waldo Trine, "as is many times supposed, a mere
indefinite abstraction, or something of a like nature. It is, on the
contrary, a vital, living force, the most vital, subtle and irresistible
force in the Universe."

In our very laboratory experiments we are demonstrating the great fact
that thoughts are forces. They have form, and quality, and substance,
and power, and we are beginning to find that there is what we may term a
science of thought.

We are beginning to find also that through the instrumentality of our
thought

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

forces we have creative power in reality. Many more authorities could be
quoted, but these will suffice to show that thoughts are just as much
"things" as town halls or mountains are "things." It is a great mistake
to imagine that because you can see a thing with your physical eyes,
feel it with your hands, or hit it with a hammer, that it is for that
reason more real than something you can neither see nor feel. On the
contrary the "Unseen" is vastly more powerful, lasting and forceful than
anything you can see with your physical eyes. What you see with your
eyes is only the effect of greater causes which are invisible.

"Everything exists in the unseen before it is manifested in the seen,
and in this sense it is true that the unseen things are real, while the
things that are seen are the unreal. The unseen things are **cause**;
the seen things are **effect**. The unseen things are eternal; the seen
things are the changing, the transient."

Thoughts then are "entities," are

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "things," are
"forces," are vital subtle "powers." They, like everything else, and
every other force in the universe, are subject to law. This law is the
Law of Attraction.

Whatever thoughts you think will attract to you thoughts of a similar
nature. According as you create good or bad thoughts, so do you
determine whether your life shall be blessed or cursed. If you think a
good thought and dwell upon it, and, as it were, nourish it with your
meditations, it will not only bless and enrich your life, but will
attract hosts of other thoughts of equal power and beauty, which will
hasten to minister to you. Thus, if you think "Success" thoughts, and
affirm them, and cling to them in the face of apparent defeat and
failure, you will attract to yourself such a wave of powerful,
upbuilding and inspiring thoughts that you will be lifted right over
your difficulty and carried, as by invisible forces, along the path of
accomplishment.

On the other hand, it is equally true that

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

if you think a weak thought, a low thought, a vile thought, or a thought
of failure, there will be attracted to you a host of thoughts of like
character, which by their nature will curse you and drag you down. "Unto
him that hath shall be given, and from him that hath not shall be taken
away that which he hath" is simply the working of the Law of Attraction.
Think "Success" and thousands of invisible forces will fly to your aid.
Think "failure" and innumerable forces will help to make your failure
even more complete.

If thought is the "greatest power of all powers," "the most vital,
subtle and irresistible force in the universe," and if your thoughts
have the power to attract other thoughts of a like character, then the
choice of your thoughts is the 'nose important act of your life.

By choosing your thoughts you choose either success or failure,
happiness or misery, health or disease, hope or despair.

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

Says one of deep insight into the nature of things: "The things that we
see, are but a very small fraction of the things that are. The real,
vital forces at work in our own lives, and in the world about us, are
not seen by the ordinary physical eye. Yet they are the causes of which
all things we see are merely the effects. Thoughts are forces; like
builds like, and like attract like. For one to govern his thinking then
is to determine his life."

Therefore do not believe anyone who wants to teach you how to "overcome"
other people, and to dominate them either by "will-power" or by
Hypnotism. If you seek to get the better of other people and to
influence them by mine domination, you are charging full tilt against
the Law of the Universe, and this can only lead to the most disastrous
results.

The "hypnotic gaze" and "suggestion" can never bring you success; it may
bring a temporary, fleeting advantage, but this will

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

be followed by disaster either in your business or profession, your
body, your life, or your home.

By the right use of your thought-forces you can make yourself a magnet
and attract to yourself all that you **deserve**. We each get what he or
she deserves. As we improve the quality of our thoughts, so do we become
deserving of better results; as we become deserving of better results,
so do better things flow to us by the operation of Universal Law.

By the use of carefully graded denials and affirmations, we break the
power of evil thought-habit, and in its place create a new mental
attitude, hopeful, strong, cheerful, successful, confident, an attitude
of mind that knows not failure, can never be discouraged; that stands
firm and unafraid amid the changing scenes of life; an attitude of mind
that overcomes, conquers and achieves. An attitude of mind that lives in
a sea of positive, helpful, stimulating

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

thoughts, that are the products of the best minds of all ages.

Thus it all comes down to this. It is by the use of denials and
affirmations, and by persevering in their use, that the life can be
changed, circumstances altered, and ambitious realized.

By denials and affirmations we can direct our thought-stream into the
right channel; by denials and affirmations we can impress upon our
sub-conscious mind thoughts which, becoming translated into actions,
lead to success and all accomplishment. By denials and affirmations we
can break down the force of evil habit, and in its place install habits
that ennoble and enrich our lives. By denials and affirmations we can
build up our characters, changing what was weak and vacillating into
that which is powerful and stable. By denials and affirmations we can
concentrate our consciousness upon thoughts of Power, Success and
Courage and these, in turn, will attract to us multitudes of other
thoughts of a similar nature. Do you realize, dear Reader, the

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

extent of the wonderful power that you hold in your hands?

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Make denials and affirmations to suit your particular needs. Whatever
you desire to do, affirm beforehand that you can do it, and that you
will do it when the time for doing comes. Whatever disagreeable or
difficult duty lies before you, deny failure, and affirm beforehand that
you can and will do it, that already in your Mental World it is
accomplished; then visualize yourself doing the thing calmly and without
effort. Mentally see yourself dealing with a difficult or unpleasant
matter, with calm dignity and ease. When the time for action arrives you
will succeed.

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

### MEDITATION

Concentrate your whole attention upon the meditations. If you find your
thoughts wandering through lack of concentrative power make use of the
following denial and affirmation. First of all cleanse the mind by the
denial of evil and calm and strengthen it by the affirmation of good.
You have by so doing raised yourself into your perfect Mental World,
breathing the pure air of perfect mental freedom. Now say, "Mind
wandering cannot affect me. I am a perfect MIND, part of the great
Universal Mind that is everywhere and works in and through everything.
Therefore my mental powers are perfect. It was a mistake that made me
think I could not concentrate; it was simply a delusion of the physical
senses. Now I know that this could never be, because I am a perfect Mind
gifted with God-like powers." Now affirm as follows: "Now

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I know that I can
concentrate on any subject I please. My potential powers are infinite, I
have only to develop them, I have only to 'try' and I must succeed."
Working in this way you will develop tremendous powers of Concentration.

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

### MEDITATION VII

I send out my thoughts to all mankind and say: "Dear everybody, I love
you." Like the beams of a searchlight my mental vision sweeps over all
the continents and islands of the world, and visualizes all peoples,
sending out to them a great beam of Love and Blessedness. Then it takes
in all sky and sun and earth and sea, and the sweet breath of heaven. It
embraces all animals and flowers and loveliness, it sweeps through a
thousand sunsets and a million dew-washed fragrant dawns back to the one
Source of all life--again affirming, "I love you, I love you." Then into
my heart flows a great wave of divinest peace, a great inrush of the
accumulated love-force of the invisible Universe, I become submerged in
a sea of Infinite Blessedness. Thus in blessing others do I help to make
the world a little better, and in return I am doubly blessed.

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

For this week's visualizing exercise take six small articles and examine
them very carefully one at a time. For instance, if one article is a
lead pencil, look at it and see in what respects it differs from other
lead pencils. You notice its color; its shape, either round, hexagon or
oval; its point, well sharpened or otherwise; the maker's name and
trade-mark; what kind of lead, either BB, B or JIB; the name of the
pencil itself; its condition, scratches on the surface of the polish;
all these and many other points should be minutely noticed. Examine each
article in turn and just as minutely. When you have examined them all,
shut your eyes and visualize each article, and see every point and
peculiarity in your mind's eye, just as you did with your physical
sight. Change the articles for new ones from day to day.

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

### APPENDIX

If you lack knowledge of a certain subject and desire to gain this
knowledge, then tell your subliminal mind what it is that you require;
it will then either supply direct the knowledge that you need or bring
to your notice the very book or course of lessons that you require. Also
in solving your problems your subliminal mind may bring a sentence to
your notice, which, directly you read it, tells you that it is the
answer to your riddle. The more you can quieten the senses and the
objective mind and rely upon your subliminal mind the greater will be
your wisdom and understanding.

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

In the letter I have sent you this week I speak of visualizing and
affirming the success that you desire to demonstrate, fn the same way
hold the [picture](errata.htm#15.md) of perfect health ever before your
mind. Let it be a constant inspiration and source of radiant joy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part VIII](dth09.md)
