[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md)  [New
Thought](../../nth/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](dth03.md) 
[Next](dth05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Dynamic Thought, by Henry Thomas Hamblin \[1921\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

 

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0" width="75%">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="655"><p><strong><em>The Unseen is greater than the Seen, therefore to work in the Unseen is to deal with the "cause" of which the outward life is the "effect." By working in the Unseen by means of meditation, affirmation, visualizing and by holding in our mind the highest ideals we arouse the Power that lies hidden within us.</em></strong></p>
<p><strong><em>The Power that is within us is the power of the Universal Mind or Spirit, therefore it is infinite and illimitable; the only limit there can be is the limitation we place upon it by our lack of faith.</em></strong></p>
<p><strong><em>Therefore in all your difficulties and battles remember that the Power within you is infinite. You are one with the Infinite if you will only believe it, if you can only realize it.</em></strong></p>
<p><strong><em>Rise up and go forward with confidence, your highest ideals can. be attained too, if you will believe and have faith and reach upward to higher and better things.</em></strong></p>
<p><strong><em>I affirm for you the inward knowledge of these things</em></strong>.</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

 

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

# DYNAMIC THOUGHT

### Success and Character Building

### PART III

WHILE the existence of the subliminal mind is a modern discovery to
Western minds, it is ancient knowledge in the East. For centuries this
knowledge has been treasured by certain orders of mystics. Dating right
back to the earliest times we find evidence of signs and wonders being
worked through the power of the subliminal mind.

In the West, however, there has always been a tendency toward
materialism. A materialist believes in matter. He wants to see, touch
and handle before he will believe.

Literally he will only believe what he sees through the senses,

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

Modern science has, however, knocked the ground from under the
materialist's feet, because it is constantly proving that there is far
more in the unseen than there is in the seen. Science, in spite of all
its achievements, realizes that, up to the present, it has only been
paddling on the edge of a mighty ocean of mystery.

Science has, slowly and with huge and clumsy effort, now proved the
existence of many things which scientists would not believe before, but
which were known to the ancients, and have been known in the East for
centuries. One of these is the existence of the subliminal mind.
Mesmerism and Hypnotism have proved that man is composed of more than
one MIND. There is the surface or outside mind of the senses. This mind
reasons, learns from books and other outside sources, and function
generally, on the physical plane. It is only a minute fraction of the
total mind of man. Like the iceberg which only shows one-twelfth of
itself above the surface of the sea, the other eleven-twelfths being
submerged, the objective mind of man is only an infinitesimal portion of
the whole.

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

The surface or objective mind is the finite mind, the Subliminal is
joined up with the Universal Mind of the Universe, therefore it can
never be measured, it is beyond comprehension. Sufficient for us to know
that its power is limitless, and that we can use this power in creating
our lives anew, and for the realization of all our desires.

The Subliminal Mind is (1) inspiratory, (2) intuitive, and (3) creative.
It is a store-house of knowledge and the power-house of energy. It is
much more than all this, how much no one knows. In this lesson we will
consider the first three descriptions in the order named.

\(1\) Inspiration. It is through the subliminal mind that all
inspiration has come to men. It was through this channel that
Wordsworth, Shakespeare, Milton, Emerson and all great teachers,
preachers and leaders have drawn their inspiration. All the good that
has ever come into this world has been through inspiration; and all
inspiration comes through the subliminal mind.

All who have ever accomplished anything worth accomplishing have done so

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

through the inspiration of their subliminal mind. That some are giants
in their accomplishments and others pigmies is simply due to differing
degrees of expression. Some express more of the Power within them, some
express less. The Power is there, it is for us to express it. We cannot
all be Shakespeares and Miltons, neither is it possible for all men to
be Gladstones or Lincolns, but there is a niche somewhere in the world
where we can each find a useful field of congenial work. We can, if we
will, be guided by inspiration, find somewhere a field of labor where we
can pour out our pent up passion for achievement, where we can command
success beyond our wildest dreams.

You, dear reader, have not been sent into this world for a joke, you
have been sent to achieve a certain purpose, to accomplish something
which no one can do but you. There is no one in all the world just like
you, and all that you do is colored by your individuality. No one in all
the world could do your work just as you do it; there are fields of
conquest in front of you which no

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

one out you can conquer. **Therefore listen to the voice of
inspiration**.

\(2\) Intuitive. Those who learn to recognize the voice of intuition are
brought into touch with infinite wisdom. They do by intuition that which
other people can only do by cumbersome effort, if indeed they can do it
at all. One who has developed this power has no perplexities, because
all his problems are solved for him by his subliminal mind. He listens
to the inner voice of wisdom, acts accordingly, and the result always
justifies his faith in this inward power.

President Lincoln, when confronted by a perplexing problem. used to make
a habit of dismissing it to his inner mind; and then going for a short
walk. During his walk he would interest himself in the birds and trees
and other things around him and then give no thought to the perplexity
which was demanding an answer. When he got back from his walk the answer
would be ready--his subliminal mind had solved the problem. Others,
puzzled by an intricate matter, may go to bed with the problem still
unsolved, and awake in the morning with

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

the solution of their difficulty already formed in their conscious mind;
or it may come to them, like a flash, while they are dressing; the
subliminal mind has solved their problem.

In the subliminal mind is all wisdom and understanding. You, too, can
use this wisdom and understanding if you develop the faculty of inward
hearing.

\(3\) Creative. The subliminal mind is creative. Being one with the
Universal Mind, which is the Creative Power of the Universe, it partakes
of the same nature. The difference is not one of kind but of degree.

As in the macrocosm, so in the microcosm. Just as Infinite Mind is
absolute through the whole Universe, so is man king of his life, master
of his fate, captain of his soul, creator of his life and circumstances.

Man cannot create a planet, but he can consciously form an image or
picture in his creative mind, a picture of better circumstance,
different environment or definite achievement, and holding that image
persistently compel it to materialize in his life and circumstances.
This is not a fairy tale

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> --it is a hard,
common sense fact. There is nothing that has ever been accomplished by
man that has not first been created and imaged in his mind. It is always
the vision first, and afterwards the accomplishment. The difference
between men is a difference of vision. The difference between their
vision is the difference between their accomplishment. Some men create
more than others--it is because theirs is a greater vision. All the
great ones of the earth, leaders of men and nations, artists, poets,
inventors, financiers, have been what they were because of their
"vision," because they were men of "imagination."

People who pride themselves on being "practical" look askance at
imagination, thinking it to be something impractical and shadowy;
something belonging to the realm of dreams. They confuse constructive
imagery with day dreaming. Now, the imagination of which I am speaking
is the very antithesis of day dreaming. Day dreaming is the aimless
frittering away of the mental powers; creative imagination, on the other
hand, gathers together the mental forces, and by
[focusing](errata.htm#10.md) the powers

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

of the hidden mind bring into being a definite image. This definite
image is the vision which all men of accomplishment possess.

This vision is the basis of all achievement. It is impossible to name a
single great man or woman who has not been inspired and guided by it.
The reason that here and there in the world's history there have been
great characters who have achieved the noblest ends is because theirs
have been the noblest visions. It is impossible to create a poor, puny,
low kind of image in the mind, and then to win great success in life. As
the image is, so your life will be. Therefore if you hold in your mind
the vision, or mental picture, of great success or noble endeavor, then
in your life these things will become manifested. It cannot be
otherwise--because what is held in the mind is later manifested in the
life.

Thus it is that a person of poor powers of concentration cannot hold a
definite image in his mind, but must be always changing and modifying
it, with the result that he gets nothing but confusion and lack of
achievement manifested in his life.

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

What you are inwardly, what you think inwardly, what you visualize
inwardly, is what your future life will be. Your outward life is modeled
on your inward life--it is an exact replica of the life within.

Therefore your subliminal mind is not only the source of inspiration and
intuition, it is creative also. Your life is in your own hands, you can
make it what you will. Your future is yours entirely, you can build it
up with mathematical precision into any form you please. You are free to
make or to mar, to build up or destroy. You can climb to the highest
heights or descend to the lowest depths. You can be weak or strong,
filthy or pure, miserable or happy, unsuccessful or successful, poverty
stricken or prosperous, ill or healthy, hated or loved: It is all a
matter of Thought-control and Scientific Thinking.

It is now time that you begin to apply some of the things you have
learned. Therefore add to your affirmation at night the following:

<div align="center">

|                                         |
|-----------------------------------------|
| MINE IS A LIFE OF OVERCOMING AND POWER. |

</div>

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top"><p>Henceforward I will cease doing ...... and will instead do ......</p>
<p>I do this by the Infinite Power within me which can never fail.</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

Where I have left blanks I want you to fill in with (1) whatever bad
habit you most wish to eradicate, and (2) to insert the virtue which you
wish to put in its place. For instance suppose you have been in the
habit of getting up late, swallowing your breakfast hurriedly and
rushing to business, getting all behind with appointments and
correspondence, developing indigestion, headache and peevishness in
consequence. Supposing this is the case (of course I only use this as an
illustration), you will fill in the words to suit, so that the sentence
will read something like this, supposing your proper time for rising to
be 7 a. m.:

<div align="center">

|                                                                                        |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Henceforward I will cease getting up late and will instead get up punctually at 7 a. m |

</div>

or better still, you can command yourself to wake at 6:30 and spend half
an hour in meditations and the saying of affirmations,

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> You will then be
quite ready to rise at 7 o'clock.

Immediately following the affirmation, visualize a picture of yourself
waking in the morning. "See" yourself open your eyes and look at the
clock. "See" that the time is 6:30. "See" yourself engaged in
concentration, meditation and making of affirmations. "See" yourself
look at the clock again, and at 7 o'clock "see" yourself get up and go
to the bath room. The more clearly you can picture this scene the easier
will you find the task of getting up to be.

You may not be successful the first morning or two, but if you
**persevere** you will find that you have by the use of affirmations
complete control over yourself. The more successful you become the
stronger does your Will-power grow.

If you are in the habit of going to bed too late you can add to your
morning affirmation the following:

<div align="center">

|                                                                                                                                                            |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| "Henceforward I will cease going to bed late. I will instead go to bed at 10. At 10 o'clock tonight I shall feel sleepy and tired. I will then go to bed." |

</div>

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

After making this affirmation, visualize yourself as you will appear at
10 p. m. You are, we will say, sitting reading or working. You "see"
yourself look at the clock. You "see" yourself put your book or work
away and go to bed. Persevere with the visualizing until you can see
every detail with great vividness and distinctness.

Make this affirmation and create this mental picture and you will find
that what you have affirmed and visualized will come to pass exactly as
desired. Before you is unfolding a life of perfect self-control and
overcoming. When you have become master of yourself, first in small
things and then in the greater, you will have become master over your
life, your circumstances and your destiny.

Not only is it necessary that you should overcome habits in this way by
reversing them, but it is also necessary that you should reverse all
your wrong ideas of life and the Universe, replacing wrong and harmful
ideas by Truth. One of the objects of this course is to dispel old
erroneous beliefs, and thus to change your mental outlook.

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

In addition it is necessary that you should reverse every thought and
suggestion of a harmful character directly it comes to you. A thought
may come to you such as: "You will fail, you can never succeed." Now if
you allow that thought to enter your mind it will weaken you, paralyze
your efforts and bring failure into your life, just as surely as day
follows night. Therefore as soon as it comes to you you must kill it by
denial. In this case you would raise yourself in thought to your perfect
mental world and say, "There is no failure. I am a perfect Mental
creature living in a perfect Mental World, all the potentialities of the
Infinite Mind are mine. I cannot fail." Say this over several times and
then affirm: "I am Success, within me are Infinite Powers; I am success
in all that I undertake."

Every time that you do this you drive failure further and further away
and establish success more firmly in your life. The oftener you do this,
provided that you get a clear concept of your perfect Mental World, and,
as it were, breathe its atmosphere. the more rapidly you will progress.
Do not, however, strain and worry after results, instead

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

seek to adopt and maintain a calm, serene, confident attitude, above the
worries and cares of life.

Again, the thought may come to you, "there is that pain again, I am
going to have one of my bad attacks." If you allow this thought to enter
your mind you will have that bad "attack"; it will surely come and
nothing will be able to keep it away. The "attack" is only effect, the
cause is the thought within your mind, and no amount of medicine will be
able to help you because it cannot touch the "cause," and can only
tinker about with the "effect." Such efforts are on a par with trying to
keep the ocean back with a broom.

Therefore when the pain and thought come and seek admittance at the door
of your mind, immediately deny their existence, **They have no real
existence**. You, the real **YOU**, are a perfect mental creature in a
perfect mental world, where there is no such thing as pain or "attacks,"
and if you realize this you can never be ill. It is only when you let
thoughts and suggestions of pain and illness come into the mind

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

that pain and illness become possible in your body, because what happens
in your body and life is an exact reflex of what you hold in your mind.
Therefore if you deny pain and sickness in your perfect Mental World,
then at once the pain will cease. In lesson 2 I told you that by denying
evil you not only killed the thought of evil, but that you also
destroyed the evil itself, and that later you could prove the truth of
this. This you can do with pain. If, when in pain, you will rise into
your perfect Mental World and deny pain, then the pain will go away
almost immediately. After denying pain and sickness, affirm perfect
health. The denial will kill the harmful thought and cleanse the mind,
and the affirmation will heal and build up and make all future attacks
weaker. By this method you can "reverse" every harmful thought, belief
and emotion.

It is necessary when you deny any evil, no matter what it may be, that
you clearly realize that you are denying apparent evil to exist in the
material world. For instance, if you have a carbuncle as big as your
fist at the back of your neck it is foolish

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

to deny that it exists, because it does exist as much as anything can he
said to exist in this transient world.

There are, however, two YOUS. There is the material YOU, and there is
the sublime mental and spiritual YOU. The material YOU is a transient
fleeting material person, the real YOU is a glorious mental and
spiritual creature, imperishable and eternal. When you (the real YOU)
raise yourself into your Perfect World of Mind, you leave the imperfect
and coarse material body behind, and it is the sublime YOU, the perfect
Mental and Spiritual YOU who, in a perfect World of Infinite Good,
Purity and Perfection, deny that there is a carbuncle. You, the sublime
YOU, have no carbuncle, it is only the material YOU which you have left
behind which has a carbuncle. By raising yourself into your Perfect
World of Mind you transfer your consciousness from the material world to
that [Transcendental](errata.htm#11.md) World of Infinite Perfection which
our greatest philosophers and thinkers have always realized to exist
around us and above us. This is why, as gnu raise yourself into your
Perfect World

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

of Mind, your pain disappears like the sound of a band dying away in the
distance; it is because you have transferred your consciousness from a
material world to a mental or spiritual one.

If, when you have entered this Perfect World of Mind you deny the evil
that is troubling you (by this you do not deny that it exists in your
material body but only in your radiant mental body) and if you then
meditate upon the Infinite Perfection Boundless Life, Perfect Good,
Unsullied Purity and Immeasurable Power of the Infinite Mind which rules
this Perfect Mental World; if you will bask, as it were, in the sunshine
and happiness of Infinite Perfection and Love of this Transcendental
World, then you open your life and your physical body to the action of
the Universal Mind, and your material life, circumstances and body
become more like the life of the Perfect World of Mind, and your body
more like your sublime mental body. Thus if it is a carbuncle that is
troubling you, then it will disperse and your body become quite healthy.
The clearer your concept of the

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Perfect World is
the more rapid and certain are the results in your life, body and
circumstances.

Every time you rise to your Perfect Mental World and deny evil, every
time you realize and bask in the infinite Perfections of the ideal
world, each time that you do this, evil is destroyed in your life and
body, and good is installed in its place. Therefore, the more you live
in your Perfect World the more perfect will your life and circumstances
become.

Remember, therefore, to always retire into yourself and to rise into
your Perfect World of Mind before making a denial and an affirmation.

### MEDITATION NO. 3

To be pondered over between the hours of 6 a. m. and 9 a. m. and 9 p. m.
and 11 p. m. Especially just before retiring is recommended.

In the past I have listened to the distracting voices of this imperfect
unsatisfying Life of the senses. I have been pulled this way and that,
by desire, by impulse, by uncontrolled emotions, and have been
influenced

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

by the advice of those who have had no inward knowledge. Henceforth I
turn a deaf ear to all these voices and listen only to the inward voice
which always speaks with perfect wisdom. No more shall I be perplexed
and worried not knowing which way to turn or what to do, instead I shall
be guided perfectly by the inward voice of inspiration. I raise my mind
above this life of the senses and dwell in the perfect World of Mind.
All thoughts and suggestions and states that are not in harmony with the
highest good, I reverse into their opposites. Thus do I cleanse my mind,
my thought, my life, my circumstances, my world, and build up my life
anew.

When perplexed or faced with difficult problems, I retire into my inner
self, and, by thought control, I keep out, or "reverse," the unwanted
thought, until my inner mind is stilled and calmed, and I car hear the
inner voice of wisdom. This voice of wisdom never errs, **never** leads
astray, but always guides me toward the highest good. Therefore I have
no worry or care or perplexity, because I always know how

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

to act even in the most perplexing circumstances, being guided perfectly
by the inner voice of wisdom.

Henceforth there is for me no care, anxiety or worry, because I am
guided into all good. Every good and perfect thing is mine **NOW**.
Health, prosperity, happiness, peace of mind, all are mine here and now.

### APPENDIX

Having for this week past impressed on your Subliminal Mind that it CAN
think constructively and drawing upon the All-Knowledge, solve your
every problem, it is now necessary for you to tell your Subliminal Mind
that it DOES solve all your problems. This week's meditation indicates
the way--to retire into yourself--this is the secret. To most students
it is a difficult task to still the senses and inhibit unwanted thought,
but it is comparatively easy, if, instead of trying to inhibit all
thought and keep on concentrating upon it and dismissing every thought
of care, worry, business, or anything to do with the senses which comes
to you. It must be a thought which

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

will draw you away from the life of the senses to the greater life of
the mind and spirit. For instance, the Bible student might with
advantage concentrate upon some such words as these: "Thou wilt keep him
in perfect peace whose mind is stayed on Thee." Another might say with
Emerson: "I am the owner of the Sphere, of the seven stars and the Solar
Year," and so on according to what your religion or philosophical views
may happen to be. Or you can concentrate upon a mental image of infinite
beauty and perfection, the future Golden Age, Paradise, Heaven or
whatever is to you the highest, MOST PLEASING and most inspiring.
Continue to dismiss all other thought until all worry is killed and the
mind and Spirit are at rest. Then say in your own words, something like
this: My Subliminal Mind draws upon the All-Wisdom and solves my every
problem and difficulty.

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

 

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0" width="75%">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="655"><p><strong><em>The life that lies before the student of Truth is one of great glory--of infinite expansion and unfoldment. It does not, however, always appear thus to him. In order to test his mettle, it often appears drab and hopeless. Everything seems to go wrong, and voices whisper "Go back, why trouble any longer, the pursuit is hopeless." If the student does go back he proves that he is not worthy, and for him there can never be the steep ascent to God. But the one who will keep on in spite of all discouragements and opposition, and who proves his worth, passes on to a life of indescribable joy, of victory and achievement, of abundant health and peace of mind.</em></strong></p>
<p><strong><em>I affirm for you the life of true freedom. "Ye shall know the Truth, and the Truth shall set you free."</em></strong></p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part IV](dth05.md)
