[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc10010)  [Next](cc10012.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 10: Psalms, Part III*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xii"></span>

<span id="xii-p1"></span>PSALM 77

<span id="xii-p2"></span>Whoever was the penman of this psalm, the Holy
Spirit seems, by his mouth, to have dictated a common form of prayer for
the Church in her afflictions, that even under the most cruel
persecutions the faithful might not fail to address their prayers to
heaven. It is not the private grief of some particular individual which
is here expressed, but the lamentations and groanings of the chosen
people. The faithful celebrate the deliverance which had been once
wrought for them, and which was a testimony of God’s everlasting grace,
to animate and strengthen themselves to engage in the exercise of prayer
with the greater earnestness.

<span id="xii-p3"></span>To the chief musician upon Jeduthun. A Psalm of
Asaph.

<span id="xii.i"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p1"></span><span id="xii.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
77:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#001.md)<span id="xii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p2"></span>**1.** My voice came to God, and I cried: my
voice came to God, and he heard me. **2.** I sought the: Lord in the day
of my trouble: my hand was stretched out in the night, and remitted not
my soul refused to be comforted. **3.** I will remember God, and will be
troubled: I will meditate, and my spirit will be oppressed \[or
overwhelmed\] with sorrow. Selah. **4.** Thou hast held the watches of
my eyes: I am troubled, and will not speak. **5.** I have recounted the
days of old, the years of ancient times. **6.** I will call to
remembrance my song in the night: I will commune with my heart, and my
spirit will search diligently.

<span id="xii.i-p3"></span> 

<span id="xii.i-p4"></span><span id="xii.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p5"></span>**1.** *My voice came to God, and I cried.*
This is not a mere complaint, as some interpreters explain it, denoting
the surprise which the people of God felt in finding that he who
hitherto had been accustomed to grant their requests shut his ears to
them, and was called upon in vain. It appears more probable that the
prophet either speaks of the present feeling of his mind, or else calls
to remembrance how he had experienced that God was inclined and ready to
hear his prayers. There can be no doubt that he describes the greatness
of the sorrow with which he was afflicted; and, in nay opinion, he
denotes a continued act both by the past and the future tenses of the
verbs. In the first place, he declares that he did not foolishly rend
the air with his cries, like many who pour forth bitter cries without
measure and at random under their sorrows; but that he addressed his
speech to God when necessity constrained him to cry. The copula *and,*
which is joined to the verb *cried,* should be resolved into the adverb
of time *when,* in this way, *When I cried my voice came to God* At the
same time, he also shows, that although he had been constrained often to
reiterate his cries, he had not given over persevering in prayer. What
is added immediately after is intended for the confirmation of his
faith: *And he heard me.* The copula *and,* as in many other places, is
here put instead of the causal adverb *for.* The meaning is, that he
encouraged himself to cry to God, from the consideration that it was
God’s usual manner to show his favor and mercy towards him.

<span id="xii.i-p6"></span><span id="xii.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p7"></span>**2.** *I sought the Lord in the day of my
trouble.* In this verse he expresses more distinctly the grievous and
hard oppression to which the Church was at that time subjected. There
is, however, some ambiguity in the words. The Hebrew word <span
id="xii.i-p7.1"></span>יד*, yad,* which I have translated *hand,* is
sometimes taken metaphorically for *a wound;* and, therefore, many
interpreters elicit this sense, *My wound ran in the night, and ceased
not,*  <span id="fr_285"></span>[286](#fn_285.md) that is to say, My wound
was not so purified from ulcerous matter as that the running from it was
made to stop. But; I rather take the word in its ordinary signification,
which is *hand,* because the verb <span id="xii.i-p8.1"></span>נגרה,
*niggera,* which he uses, signifies not only to run as a sore does, but
also to be stretched forth or extended.  <span
id="fr_286"></span>[287](#fn_286.md) Now, when he affirms that he sought
the Lord in the day of his trouble, and that his hands were stretched
out to him in the night season, this denotes that prayer was his
continual exercise, — that his heart was so earnestly and unweariedly
engaged in that exercise, that he could not desist from it. In the
concluding sentence of the verse the adversative particle *although* is
to be supplied; and thus the meaning will be, that although the prophet
found no solace and no alleviation of the bitterness of his grief, he
still continued to stretch forth his hands to God. In this manner it
becomes us to wrestle against despair, in order that our sorrow,
although it may seem to be incurable, may not shut our mouths, and keep
us from pouring out our prayers before God.

<span id="xii.i-p10"></span><span id="xii.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p11"></span>**3.** *I will remember God, and will be
troubled.* The Psalmist here employs a variety of expressions to set
forth the vehemence of his grief, and, at the same time, the greatness
of his affliction. He complains that what constituted the only remedy
for allaying his sorrow became to him a source of disquietude. It may,
indeed, seem strange that the minds of true believers should be troubled
by remembering God. But the meaning of the inspired writer simply is,
that although he thought upon God his distress of mind was not removed.
It no doubt often happens that the remembrance of God in the time of
adversity aggravates the anguish and trouble of the godly, as, for
example, when they entertain the thought that he is angry with them. The
prophet, however, does not mean that his heart was thrown into new
distress and disquietude whenever God was brought to his recollection:
he only laments that no consolation proceeded from God to afford him
relief; and this is a trial which it is very hard to bear. It is not
surprising to see the wicked racked with dreadful mental agony; for,
since their great object and endeavor is to depart from God, they must
suffer the punishment which they deserve, on account of their rebellion
against him. But when the remembrance of God, from which we seek to draw
consolation for mitigating our calamities, does not afford repose or
tranquillity to our minds, we are ready to think that he is sporting
with us. We are nevertheless taught from this passage, that however much
we may experience of fretting, sorrow, and disquietude, we must
persevere in calling upon God even in the midst of all these
impediments.

<span id="xii.i-p12"></span><span id="xii.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p13"></span>**4.** *Thou hast held the watches of my
eyes.*  <span id="fr_287"></span>[288](#fn_287.md) This verse is to the
same effect with the preceding. The Psalmist affirms that he spent whole
nights in watching, because God granted him no relief. The night in
ancient times was usually divided into many watches; and, accordingly,
he describes his continued grief, which pre. vented him from sleeping,
by the metaphorical term *watches.* When he stated a little before that
he prayed to God with a loud voice, and when he now affirms that he will
remain silent, there seems to be some appearance of discrepancy. This
difficulty has already been solved in our exposition of <span
id="xii.i-p14.1"></span>[Ps 32:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#003.md)<span
id="xii.i-p14.1"></span>, where we have shown that true believers, when
overwhelmed with sorrow, do not continue in a state of unvarying
uniformity, but sometimes give vent to sighs and complaints, while, at
other times, they are silent as if their mouths were stopped. It is,
therefore, not wonderful to find the prophet frankly confessing that he
was so overwhelmed, and, as it were, choked, with calamities, as to be
unable to open his mouth to utter even a single word.

<span id="xii.i-p15"></span><span id="xii.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p16"></span>**5.** *I have recounted the days of old.*
There is no doubt that he endeavored to assuage his grief by the
remembrance of his former joy; but he informs us that relief was not so
easily nor so speedily obtained. By the *days of old,* and *the years of
ancient times,* he seems not only to refer to the brief course of his
own life, but to comprehend many ages. The people of God, in their
afflictions, ought, undoubtedly, to set before their eyes, and to call
to their remembrance, not only the Divine blessings which they have
individually experienced, but also all the blessings which God in every
age has bestowed upon his Church It may, however, be easily gathered
from the text, that when the prophet reckoned up in his own mind the
mercies which God had bestowed in time past, he began with his own
experience.

<span id="xii.i-p17"></span><span id="xii.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p18"></span>**6.** *I will call to remembrance my song
in the night.* By *his song* he denotes the exercise of thanksgiving in
which he had engaged during the time of his prosperity.  <span
id="fr_288"></span>[289](#fn_288.md) There is no remedy better adapted for
healing our sorrows, as I have just now observed, than this; but Satan
often craftily suggests to our thoughts the benefits of God, that the
very feeling of the want of them may inflict upon our minds a deeper
wound. It is, therefore, highly probable, that the prophet was pierced
with bitter pangs when he compared the joy experienced by him in time
past with the calamities which he was presently suffering. He expressly
mentions *the night;* because, when we are then alone by ourselves, and
withdrawn from the society and presence of men, it engenders in the mind
more cares and thoughts than are experienced during the day. What is
added immediately after with respect to *communing with his own heart,*
is to the same effect. Solitude has an influence in leading men to
retire within their own minds, to examine themselves thoroughly, and to
speak to themselves freely and in good earnest, when no created being is
with them to impose a restraint by his presence.

<span id="xii.i-p20"></span>The last clause of the verse, *And my spirit
will search diligently,* admits of a twofold exposition. The word <span
id="xii.i-p20.1"></span>חפש, *chaphas,* for *search diligently,*  <span
id="fr_289"></span>[290](#fn_289.md) being in the masculine gender, and the
word <span id="xii.i-p21.7"></span>רוה, *ruach,* for *spirit,* being
sometimes feminine, some commentators suppose that the name of *God* is
to be understood, and explain the sentence as if the Psalmist had said,
There is nothing, O Lord! so hidden in my heart into which thou hast not
penetrated. And God is with the highest propriety said to search the
spirit of the man whom he awakens from his indolence or torpor, and whom
he examines by acute afflictions. Then all hiding — places and retreats,
however obscure, are explored, and affections before unknown are brought
into the light. As, however, the gender of the noun in the Hebrew
language is ambiguous, others more freely translate, MY *spirit hath
searched diligently.* This being the sense which is most generally
embraced, and being, at the same time, the most natural, I readily adopt
it. In that debate, of which the inspired writer makes mention, he
searched for the causes on account of which he was so severely
afflicted, and also into what. his calamities would ultimately issue. It
is surely highly profitable to meditate on these subjects, and it is the
design of God to stir us up to do this when any adversity presses upon
us. There is nothing more perverse than the stupidity  <span
id="fr_290"></span>[291](#fn_290.md) of those who harden themselves under
the scourges of God. Only we must keep within due bounds, in order that
we may not be swallowed up of over much sorrow, and that the
unfathomable depth of the Divine judgments may not overwhelm us by our
attempting to search them out thoroughly. The prophet’s meaning is, that
when he sought for comfort in all directions, he could find none to
assuage the bitterness of his grief.

<span id="xii.ii"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p1"></span><span id="xii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
77:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#007.md)<span id="xii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p2"></span>**7.** Will the Lord cast off  <span
id="fr_291"></span>[292](#fn_291.md) for ever? and will he be favorable no
more? **8.** Is his mercy quite gone for ever? Doth his oracle fail from
generation to generation? **9.** Hath God forgotten, to be merciful?
Hath he shut up his compassions in anger? Selah. **10.** And said, My
death,  <span id="fr_292"></span>[293](#fn_292.md) the years  <span
id="fr_293"></span>[294](#fn_293.md) of the right hand of the Most High.

<span id="xii.ii-p6"></span> 

<span id="xii.ii-p7"></span><span id="xii.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p8"></span>**7.** and **8.** *Will the Lord cast off
for ever?* The statements here made undoubtedly form a part of the
searchings which engaged the Psalmist’s mind. He intimates that he was
almost overwhelmed by a long succession of calamities; for he did not
break forth into this language until he had endured affliction for so
long a period as hardly to venture to entertain the hope that God would
in future be favorable to him. He might well argue with himself whether
God would continue to be gracious; for when God embraces us with his
favor, it is on the principle that he will continue to extend it towards
us even to the end. He does not properly complain or find fault with
God, but rather reasoning with himself, concludes, from the nature of
God, that it is impossible for him not to continue his free favor
towards his people, to whom he has once shown himself to be a father. As
he has traced all the blessings which the faithful receive from the
Divine hand to the mere good pleasure of God, as to a fountain; so a
little after he adds the Divine goodness, as if he had said, How can we
suppose it possible for God to break off the course of his fatherly
layout, when it is considered that he cannot divest himself of his own
nature? We see, then, how by an argument drawn from the goodness of God,
he repels the assaults of temptation. When he puts the question, *Doth
his word or oracle fail?* he intimates that he was destitute of all
consolation, since he met with no promise to support and strengthen his
faith. We are indeed thrown into a gulf of despair when God takes away
from us his promises in which our happiness and salvation are included.
If it is objected, that such as had the \]Law among their hands could
not be without the word of God, I answer, that on account of the
imperfection of the former dispensation, when Christ was not yet
manifested,  <span id="fr_294"></span>[295](#fn_294.md) special promises
were then necessary. Accordingly, in <span id="xii.ii-p9.2"></span>[Ps
74:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#009.md)<span id="xii.ii-p9.2"></span>, we
find the faithful complaining that they saw not any longer their wonted
signs, and that there was no longer a prophet who had knowledge of the
time among them. If David was the penman of this psalm, we know that in
matters of doubt and perplexity it was usual with him to ask counsel
from God, and that God was accustomed to grant him answers. If he was
deprived of this source of alleviation in the midst of his calamities,
he had reason to bewail that he found no oracle or word to sustain and
strengthen his faith. But if the psalm was composed by some other
inspired prophet, this complaint will suit the period which intervened
between the return of the Jews from the Babylonish captivity and the
coming of Christ; for, during that time, the course of prophecy was in a
manner broken off, and there was none endued with any peculiar gift of
the Holy Spirit to raise up the hearts of those who were cast down, or
to support and keep them from falling. In addition to this, it sometimes
happens that although the word of God is offered to us, it yet does not
enter into our minds, in consequence of our being involved in such deep
distress, as to prevent us from receiving or admitting the smallest
degree of comfort. But I embrace the former sense, which is, that the
Church was now without those special announcements of prophecy with
which she had formerly been favored, and that as she still depended upon
the mere sight of the shadows of that economy, she stood constantly in
need of fresh supports. From this we may gather the profitable lesson,
that we ought not to be unduly disquieted, if God should at any time
withdraw his word from us. It should be borne in mind, that he tries his
own people by such wonderful methods, that they imagine the whole of
Scripture to be turned from its proper end, and that although they are
desirous to hear God speaking, they yet cannot be brought to apply his
words to their own particular case. This, as I have said, is a
distressing and painful thing; but it ought not to hinder us from
engaging in the exercise of prayer.

<span id="xii.ii-p10"></span><span id="xii.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p11"></span>**9.** *Hath God forgotten to be merciful?*
The prophet still continues debating with himself the same subject. His
object, however, is not to overthrow his faith, but rather to raise it
up. He does not put this question, as if the point to which it refers
were a doubtful matter. It is as if he had said, Hath God forgotten
himself? or, hath he changed his nature? for he cannot be God unless he
is merciful. I indeed admit that he did not remain unshaken as if he had
had a heart of steel. But the more violently he was assailed, the more
firmly did he lean upon the truth, That the goodness of God is so
inseparably connected with his essence as to render it impossible for
him not to be merciful. Whenever, therefore, doubts enter into our minds
upon our being harassed with cares, and oppressed with sorrows, let us
learn always to endeavor to arrive at a satisfactory answer to this
question, Has God changed his nature so as to be no longer merciful? The
last clause, *Hath he shut up or restrained his compassions in his
anger?* is to the same effect. It was a very common and notable
observation among the holy patriarchs, That God is long — suffering,
slow to wrath, ready to forgive, and easy to be entreated. It was from
them that Habakkuk derived the statement which he makes in his song,

<span id="xii.ii-p12"></span>“Even in his anger he will be mindful of
his mercy.” (<span id="xii.ii-p12.1"></span>[Hab
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#002)<span id="xii.ii-p12.1"></span>.md)

<span id="xii.ii-p13"></span>The prophet, then, here comes to the
conclusion, that the chastisement which he felt would not prevent God
from being again reconciled to him, and returning to his wonted manner
of bestowing blessings upon him, since his anger towards his own people
endures only for a moment. Yea, although God manifests the tokens of his
anger, he does not cease most tenderly to love those whom he chastises.
His wrath, it its true, rests continually upon the reprobate; but the
prophet, accounting himself among the number of God’s children, and
speaking of other genuine believers, justly argues from the
impossibility of the thing, that the temporary displeasure of God cannot
break off the course of his goodness and mercy.

<span id="xii.ii-p14"></span><span id="xii.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p15"></span>**10.** *And I said, My death, the years of
the right hand, etc.* This passage has been explained in various ways.
Some deriving the word <span id="xii.ii-p15.1"></span>חלותי,
*challothi,* from <span id="xii.ii-p15.2"></span>חלה*, chalah,* which
signifies *to kill,* consider the prophet as meaning, that being
overwhelmed with an accumulation of calamities, the only conclusion to
which he could come was, that God had appointed him to utter
destruction; and that his language is a confession of his having fallen
into despair. Others translate it *to be sick, to be infirm* or
*enfeebled,* which is much more agreeable to the scope of the passage.
 <span id="fr_295"></span>[296](#fn_295.md) But they differ with respect to
the meaning. According to some interpreters, the prophet accuses and
reproves himself for his effeminacy of mind, and for not setting himself
more manfully to resist temptation.  <span
id="fr_296"></span>[297](#fn_296.md) This exposition may be admitted; for
the people of God ordinarily gather courage after having for a time
wavered under the shock of temptation. I, however, prefer a different
interpretation, namely, that this was a disease merely temporary, and on
this account, he compares it indirectly to death; even as it is said in
<span id="xii.ii-p17.1"></span>[Ps
118:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#018.md)<span id="xii.ii-p17.1"></span>,

<span id="xii.ii-p18"></span>“The Lord hath chastised me sore: but he
hath not given me over unto death.” Also, “I shall not die, but live.”
(<span id="xii.ii-p18.1"></span>[Ps
118:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#018)<span id="xii.ii-p18.1"></span>.md)

<span id="xii.ii-p19"></span>He, therefore, I have no doubt, unburdens
himself by cherishing the confident persuasion, that although he was at
present cast down, it was only for a season, and that therefore it
behoved him patiently to endure this sickness or disease, since it was
not mortal. Nor are commentators agreed in the explanation of the second
clause. Those who connect this verse with the preceding verses, think
that the prophet was reduced to such a state of despondency at first,
that he looked upon himself as utterly undone; and that afterwards he
lifted up his head at times, even as those who are thrown into the deep
in a shipwreck repeatedly rise above the water. Besides, they would have
this to be understood as a word of encouragement addressed by some one
to the prophet, desiring him to call to remembrance the years in which
he had experienced that God was merciful to him. But it will be more
appropriate to understand it thus:, Thou hast no reason to think that
thou art now doomed to death, since thou art not laboring under an
incurable disease, and the hand of God is wont to make whole those whom
it has stricken. I do not reject the opinion of those who translate
<span id="xii.ii-p19.1"></span>שנות, *shenoth,* by *changes;*  <span
id="fr_297"></span>[298](#fn_297.md) for as the Hebrew verb <span
id="xii.ii-p22.1"></span>שנה*, shanah,* signifies *to change,* or *to do
a thing again and again,* the Hebrews have taken from it the word <span
id="xii.ii-p22.2"></span>שנות, *shenoth,* which they employ to denote
*years,* from their revolving character, from their turning round, as it
were, in the same orbit. But in whatever way we may understand it, the
comfort of which I have spoken will remain firm, which is, that the
prophet, assuring himself of a favorable change in his condition, does
not look upon himself as doomed to death. Others give a somewhat
different interpretation, arriving at it in another way:  <span
id="fr_298"></span>[299](#fn_298.md) as if the prophet had said, Why
shouldst thou not patiently endure the severity of God at this time,
when hitherto he has cherished thee by his beneficence? even as Job
said,

<span id="xii.ii-p24"></span>“Shall we receive good at the hand of God,
and shall we not  
also receive evil?” (<span id="xii.ii-p24.2"></span>[Job
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#010)<span id="xii.ii-p24.2"></span>.md)

<span id="xii.ii-p25"></span>But it is more probable that the prophet
directs his view to the future, and means that it became him to await
the years or revolutions of the right hand of the Most High, until lie
should afford clear and undisputed evidence of the return of his favor
towards him.

<span id="xii.iii"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p1"></span><span id="xii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
77:11-14](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#011.md)<span
id="xii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p2"></span>**11.** I will remember the works of God:
surely I will remember thy wonderful works from the beginning. **12.** I
will also meditate on all thy works, and I will muse on thy doings.
**13.** Thy ways, O God! are in the sanctuary: who is so great a God as
our God? **14.** Thou art the God that doest wonders: thou hast made
known thy strength among the peoples.

<span id="xii.iii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xii.iii-p4"></span><span id="xii.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p5"></span>**11.** *I will remember the works of God.*
The prophet now, inspired with new courage, vigorously resists the
temptations, which had so far prevailed against him as well nigh to
overwhelm his faith. This remembering of the works of God differs from
the remembering of which he had previously spoken. Then he contemplated
from a distance the divine benefits, and he found the contemplation of
them inadequate to assuage or mitigate his grief. Here he takes hold of
them, so to speak, as assured testimonies of God’s everlasting grace. To
express the greater earnestness, he repeats the same sentence,
interjecting an affirmation; for the word <span
id="xii.iii-p5.1"></span>כי, *ki,* is here used simply to confirm or
enhance the statement. Having then, as it were, obtained the victory, he
triumphs in the remembrance of the works of God, being assuredly
persuaded that God would continue the same as he had shown himself to be
from the beginning. In the second clause, he highly extols the power
which God had displayed in preserving his servants: *I will remember thy
wonderful works from the beginning. He* employs the singular number,
*thy secret,* or *thy wonderful work;* but I have not hesitated to
correct the obscurity by changing the number. We will find him soon
after employing the singular number to denote many miracles. What he
means in short is, that the wonderful power of God which he has always
put forth for the preservation and salvation of his servants, provided
we duly reflect upon it, is sufficient to enable us to overcome all
sorrows. Let us learn from this, that, although sometimes the
remembrance of the works of God may bring us less comfort than we would
desire, and our circumstances would require, we must nevertheless
strive, that the weariness produced by grief may not break our courage.
This is deserving of our most careful attention. In the time of sorrow,
we are always desirous of finding some remedy to mitigate its
bitterness; but the only way by which this can be done is, to cast our
cares upon God. It, however, often happens, that the nearer he
approaches us, the more, to outward appearance, does he aggravate our
sorrows. Many, therefore, when they derive no advantage from this
course, imagine that they cannot do better than forget him. Thus they
loathe his word, by the hearing of which their sorrow is rather
embittered than mitigated, and what is worse, they desire that God, who
thus aggravates and inflames their grief, would withdraw to a distance.
Others, to bury the remembrance of him, devote themselves wholly to
worldly business. It was far otherwise with the prophet. Although he did
not immediately experience the benefit which he could have desired, yet
he still continued to set God. before his view, wisely supporting his
faith by the reflection, that as God changes neither his love nor his
nature, he cannot but show himself at length merciful to his servants.
Let us also learn to open our eyes to behold the works of God; the
excellence of which is of little account in our estimation, by reason of
the dimness of our eyes, and our inadequate perception of them; but
which, if examined attentively, will ravish us with admiration. The
Psalmist repeats in the 12th verse, that he will meditate continually
upon these works, until, in due time, he receive the full advantage
which this meditation is calculated to afford. The reason why so many
examples of the grace of God contribute nothing to our profit, and fail
in edifying our faith, is, that as soon as we have begun to make them
the subjects of our consideration, our inconstancy draws us away to
something else, and thus, at the very commencement, our minds soon lose
sight of them.

<span id="xii.iii-p6"></span><span id="xii.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p7"></span>**13.** *Thy ways, O God! are in the
sanctuary.* Some translate *in holiness,* and they are led to do this,
because it seems to them a cold and meagre form of expression to say,
that *God’s ways are in his sanctuary* But as the rules of grammar will
not easily admit of this, we must inquire whether a profitable truth may
not be drawn from the term *sanctuary,* which is the proper
signification of the original word <span id="xii.iii-p7.1"></span>בקדש,
*bakkodesh.* Some are of opinion that this is an abrupt exclamation, as
if it had been said, *O* *God, who art in the sanctuary! O thy ways!*
but of this I do not approve; for they do violence to the words of the
prophet. The clause should be read in one connected sentence, and the
word *sanctuary* is to be taken either for heaven or for the temple. I
am rather inclined to refer it to heaven, conceiving the meaning to be,
that the ways of God rise high above the world, so that if we are truly
desirous to know them, we must ascend above all heavens. Although the
works of God are in part manifest to us, yet all our knowledge of them
comes far short of their immeasurable height. Besides, it is to be
observed, that none enjoy the least taste of his works but those who by
faith rise up to heaven. And yet, the utmost point to which we can ever
attain is, to contemplate with admiration and reverence the hidden
wisdom and power of God, which, while they shine forth in his works, yet
far surpass the limited powers of our understanding. If it is objected,
that it is wrong to attempt to confine to heaven the ways of God, which
are extended through the whole world, the answer is easy; for although
there is not a single corner of the globe in which God does not exhibit
some proof of his power and operation, yet the wonderful character of
his works escapes the eyes of men. If any would rather understand
*sanctuary* as meaning the temple, it may be noticed, that we have met
with an almost similar sentence in <span id="xii.iii-p7.2"></span>[Ps.
73:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#016.md),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#017.md)<span id="xii.iii-p7.2"></span>,

<span id="xii.iii-p8"></span>*“When* I thought to know this, it was too
painful for me,  
until I went into the sanctuary of God.”

<span id="xii.iii-p9"></span>The temple, indeed, in which God manifested
himself was, as it were, a heaven on earth.  <span
id="fr_299"></span>[300](#fn_299.md) It is now obvious that the meaning of
the inspired writer is, that as at the commencement he had uttered
distressing complaints, so now, having attained to a calm and settled
state of mind, he admires and adores the high ways of God, and conscious
of his own weakness, quietly and modestly keeps himself within the
bounds prescribed to him, not permitting himself to judge or pass
sentence upon the secret judgments of God according to the dictates of
his carnal understanding. He therefore immediately after exclaims, *Who
is so great a God as our God?* By this comparison, he does not mean that
there are many gods, but he indirectly rebukes the deep infatuation of
the world who, not contented with the only true God whose glory is so
conspicuous, invent for themselves many gods. If men would look upon the
works of God with pure eyes, they would be led without much difficulty
to rest with satisfaction in him alone.

<span id="xii.iii-p11"></span><span id="xii.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p12"></span>**14.** *Thou art the God that doest
wonders.* The Psalmist confirms the preceding sentence, proving the
greatness of God from the wonderful character of his works. He does not
speak of the hidden and mysterious essence of God which fills heaven and
earth, but of the manifestations of his power, wisdom, goodness, and
righteousness, which are clearly exhibited, although they are too vast
for our limited understandings to comprehend. Literally, the words are,
*Thou art the God that doest a Wonder*; but the singular number is here
evidently put for the plural, an instance of which we have seen before.
From this we learn that the glory of God is so near us, and that he has
so openly and clearly unfolded himself, that we cannot justly pretend
any excuse for ignorance. He, indeed, works so wonderfully, that even
the heathen nations are inexcusable for their blindness. For this reason
it is added, *Thou hast made known thy strength among the peoples.* This
has an immediate reference to the deliverance of the Church; but, at the
same time, it shows that the glory of God, which he had clearly and
mightily displayed among the nations, could not be despised without the
guilt of grievous impiety having been incurred.

<span id="xii.iv"></span>

<span id="xii.iv-p1"></span><span id="xii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
77:15-20](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#015.md)<span id="xii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iv-p2"></span>**15.** Thou hast redeemed thy people by thy
arm, the sons of Jacob and Joseph. Selah. **16.** The waters saw thee, O
God! the waters saw thee; they were afraid, yea even the deeps trembled.
**17.** The clouds poured out waters, the heavens \[or skies\] sent
forth a sound: thy arrows also went abroad. **18.** The voice of thy
thunder was in the heaven; the lightnings illumined the world: the earth
trembled and shook. **19.** Thy ways are in the sea, and thy paths in
the great waters: and thy footsteps are not known. **20.** Thou didst
lead thy people like a flock by the hand of Moses and Aaron.

<span id="xii.iv-p3"></span> 

<span id="xii.iv-p4"></span><span id="xii.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iv-p5"></span>**15.** *Thou hast redeemed thy people by
thy arm.* The Psalmist here celebrates, above all the other wonderful
works of God, the redemption of the chosen people, to which the Holy
Spirit everywhere throughout the Scriptures invites the attention of
true believers, in order to encourage them to cherish the hope of their
salvation. It is well known that the power of God was at that time
manifested to the Gentiles. The truth of history, indeed, through the
artifice of Satan, was corrupted and falsified by many fables; but this
is to be imputed to the wickedness of those in whose sight those
wonderful works were wrought, who, although they saw them, chose rather
to blind their eyes and disguise the truth of their existence, than to
preserve the true knowledge of them.  <span
id="fr_300"></span>[301](#fn_300.md) How can we explain the fact that they
made Moses to be I know not what kind of a magician or enchanter, and
invented so many strange and monstrous stories, which Josephus has
collected together in his work against Apion, but upon the principle
that it was their deliberate purpose to bury in forgetfulness the power
of God? It is not, however, so much the design of the prophet to condemn
the Gentiles of the sin of ingratitude, as to furnish himself and others
of the children of God matter of hope as to their own circumstances; for
at the time referred to, God openly exhibited for the benefit of all
future ages a proof of his love towards his chosen people. The word
*arm* is here put metaphorically for power of an extraordinary
character, and which is worthy of remembrance. God did not deliver his
ancient people secretly and in an ordinary way, but openly, and, as it
were, with his arm stretched forth. The prophet, by calling the chosen
tribes *the sons of Jacob and Joseph,* assigns the reason why God
accounted them as his people. The reason is, because of the covenant
into which he entered with their godly ancestors. The two tribes which
descended from the two sons of Joseph derived their origin from Jacob as
well as the rest; but the name of Joseph is expressed to put honor upon
him, by whose instrumentality the whole race of Abraham were preserved
in safety.  <span id="fr_301"></span>[302](#fn_301.md)

<span id="xii.iv-p8"></span><span id="xii.iv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iv-p9"></span>**16.** *The waters saw thee, O God!* Some
of the miracles in which God had displayed the power of his arm are here
briefly adverted to. When it is said that the *waters saw God,* the
language is figurative, implying that they were moved, as it were, by a
secret instinct and impulse to obey the divine command in opening up a
passage for the chosen people. Neither the sea nor the Jordan would have
altered their nature, and by giving place have spontaneously afforded a
passage to them, had they not both felt upon them the power of God.
 <span id="fr_302"></span>[303](#fn_302.md) It is not meant that they
retired backward because of any judgment and understanding which they
*possessed,* but that in receding as they did, God showed that even the
inanimate elements are ready to yield obedience to him. There is here an
indirect contrast, it being intended to rebuke the stupidity of men if
they do not acknowledge in the redemption of the Israelites from Egypt
the presence and hand of God, which were seen even by the waters. What
is added concerning *the deeps* intimates, that not only the surface of
the waters were agitated at the sight of God, but that his power
penetrated even to the deepest gulfs.

<span id="xii.iv-p11"></span><span id="xii.iv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iv-p12"></span>**17.** *The clouds poured out waters.* As
the noun <span id="xii.iv-p12.1"></span>מים, *mayim,* cannot be taken in
the construct state, the verb, I have no doubt, is put transitively; but
it makes little difference as to the sense, whether we take this view,
or read as if <span id="xii.iv-p12.2"></span>מים, *mayim,* were in the
construct state and the verb passive; that is, whether we read, *The
clouds poured out waters,* or, *The waters of the clouds were poured
out.* The meaning obviously is, that not only the sea and the river
Jordan, but also the waters which were suspended in the clouds, yielded
to God the honor to which he is entitled, the air, by the concussion of
the thunder, having poured forth copious showers. The object is to show,
that, to whatever quarter men turn their eyes, the glory of God is
illustriously manifested, that it is so in every part of creation, above
and beneath, from the height of heaven to the depths of the sea. What
history is here referred to is involved in some degree of uncertainty.
 <span id="fr_303"></span>[304](#fn_303.md) Perhaps it is that which is
recorded in <span id="xii.iv-p13.2"></span>[Ex
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#023.md)<span id="xii.iv-p13.2"></span>;
where we are informed, that hail mingled with thunder and lightning was
one of the dreadful plagues inflicted upon the Egyptians. *The arrows
which went abroad* are, no doubt, to be taken metaphorically for
lightnings. With this verse we are to connect the following, in which it
is said, that *the voice of the thunder was heard in the air, and that
the lightnings illumined the world, so that the earth trembled* The
amount is, that at the departure of the people from Egypt, ample
testimony was borne to the power of God, both to the eyes and the ears
of men; peals of thunder having been heard in every quarter of the
heavens, and the whole sky having shone with flashes of lightning, while
at the same time the earth was made to tremble.

<span id="xii.iv-p14"></span><span id="xii.iv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iv-p15"></span>**19.** *Thy ways are in the sea.* The
miracle which was wrought in drying up the Red Sea is here again
described in different phraseology. What, properly speaking, refers to
the Israelites is applied to God, under whose protection and guidance
they passed dry-shod through the midst of the Red Sea. It is declared
that a path had been opened up for them in a very strange and unusual
manner; for the sea was not drained by the skill of man, nor was the
river Jordan turned aside from its ordinary course into a different
channel, but the people walked through the midst of the waters in which
Pharaoh and his whole army were soon after drowned. On this account, it
is said, that *the footsteps of God were not known,* for no sooner had
God made the people to pass over than he caused the waters to return to
their accustomed course.  <span id="fr_304"></span>[305](#fn_304.md)

<span id="xii.iv-p17"></span>The purpose for which this was effected is
added in the 20th verse, — the deliverance of the Church: *Thou didst
lead thy people like a flock.*  <span id="fr_305"></span>[306](#fn_305.md)
And this deliverance should be regarded by all the godly as affording
them the best encouragement to cherish the hope of safety and salvation.
The comparison of the people to *sheep,* tacitly intimates that they
were in themselves entirely destitute of wisdom, power, and courage, and
that God, in his great goodness, condescended to perform the office of a
shepherd in leading through the sea, and the wilderness, and all other
impediments, his poor flock, which were destitute of all things, that he
might put them in possession of the promised inheritance. This statement
is confirmed, when we are told that Moses and Aaron were the persons
employed in conducting the people. Their service was no doubt
illustrious and worthy of being remembered; but God displayed in no
small degree the greatness of his power in opposing two obscure and
despised individuals to the fury and to the great and powerful army of
one of the proudest kings who ever sat on a throne. What could the rod
of an outlaw and a fugitive, and the voice of a poor slave, have done of
themselves, against a formidable tyrant and a warlike nation? The power
of God then was the more manifest when it wrought in such earthen
vessels. At the same time, I do not deny that it is here intended to
commend these servants of God, to whom he had committed such an
honorable trust.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_285"></span>[286](cc10011.htm#fr_285.md) <span
id="xii.i-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p8"></span> This is the rendering in our English Bible,
which Dr Adam Clarke pronounces to be “a most unaccountable
translation.” The reading of the margin, however, “my hand,” favours the
sense given by our Author.

<span id="fn_286"></span>[287](cc10011.htm#fr_286.md) <span
id="xii.i-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p9"></span> This is the translation adopted by many
critics, and it appears to be the true signification of the passage.
Thus Symmachus’ version is, <span id="xii.i-p9.1"></span>ἡ χειρ μου
νυκτοςἐκτετατο διηνεκως, “my hand was stretched out by night
continually;” and, in like manner, Jerome, “<span
id="xii.i-p9.2"></span>Manus mea nocte extenditur, et non quiescit.”
Parkhurst renders the verse thus: “In the day of my trouble I sought the
Lord; my hand was stretched out by night and ceased not,” or, “without
interruption.” With this agree the versions of Horsley, Mant, Fry, Adam
Clarke, Walford, and others. The stretching out of the hand was an usual
gesture in prayer. Instead of <span id="xii.i-p9.3"></span>ידי, the
Chaldee reads <span id="xii.i-p9.4"></span>עיני, “*mine* *eye* trickled
down,” which Archbishop Secker and Green think likely to be the true
reading.

<span id="fn_287"></span>[288](cc10011.htm#fr_287.md) <span
id="xii.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p14"></span> Some of the Jewish commentators interpret
this clause thus: “Thou holdest the brows of my eyes.” The eyebrows
which protect the eyes were held, so that he could not shut them and
obtain sleep. Sleep to a person in trouble has the effect of
interrupting his sorrow for a time, and of weakening it by refreshing
the body. It is, therefore, in such circumstances, a great blessing, and
is earnestly desired. But to have this denied, and for the sufferer to
have sleepless and wearisome nights appointed to him, is a great
aggravation of his distress.

<span id="fn_288"></span>[289](cc10011.htm#fr_288.md) <span
id="xii.i-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p19"></span> “The times were indeed greatly altered;
formerly his sleep had been prevented by the joyfulness of his feelings,
which prompted the voice of thanksgiving during even the shades of
night; now his sleep is taken away by the severity of his disease, and
the anguish of his soul, which was augmented by the contrast with his
past happiness.” — *Walford*.

<span id="fn_289"></span>[290](cc10011.htm#fr_289.md) <span
id="xii.i-p20.2"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p21"></span> “The verb <span
id="xii.i-p21.1"></span>חפש, *chaphas*, signifies such an investigation
as a man makes who is obliged to *strip himself* in order to do it. Or,
*to lift up coverings*, to search fold by fold; or, in our phrase, *to
leave no stone unturned* The Vulgate translates, <span
id="xii.i-p21.2"></span>*et scopebam spiritum meum* As <span
id="xii.i-p21.3"></span>*scopebam* is no pure Latin word, it may
probably be taken from the Greek, <span id="xii.i-p21.4"></span>σκοπεω,
*scopeo*, ‘to look about, to consider attentively.’ It is, however, used
by no author but St Jerome, and by him only here, and in <span
id="xii.i-p21.5"></span>[Isa
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#023.md)<span id="xii.i-p21.5"></span>,
‘And I will sweep it with the besom of destruction;’ ‘<span
id="xii.i-p21.6"></span>scopabo eam in scopa terens.’ Hence we see that
he has formed a verb from the noun *scopae*; *a sweeping brush* or
*besom*.” — *Dr Adam Clarke*

<span id="fn_290"></span>[291](cc10011.htm#fr_290.md) <span
id="xii.i-p21.8"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p22"></span> “<span id="xii.i-p22.1"></span>La stupidite
brutale.” — *Fr*. “The brutish stupidity.”

<span id="fn_291"></span>[292](cc10011.htm#fr_291.md) <span
id="xii.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p3"></span> “<span id="xii.ii-p3.1"></span>Ou, sera-il
eslongne.” — *Fr*. *marg*. “Or, will he be at a distance.”

<span id="fn_292"></span>[293](cc10011.htm#fr_292.md) <span
id="xii.ii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p4"></span> “<span id="xii.ii-p4.1"></span>C’est, ma
maladie.” — *Fr*. *marg*. “That is, my disease *or* sickness.”

<span id="fn_293"></span>[294](cc10011.htm#fr_293.md) <span
id="xii.ii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p5"></span> “<span id="xii.ii-p5.1"></span>Ou,
changemens.” — *Fr*. *marg*. “Or, changes.”

<span id="fn_294"></span>[295](cc10011.htm#fr_294.md) <span
id="xii.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p9"></span> “<span id="xii.ii-p9.1"></span>Qu’a cause
de l’infirmite du temps, (ascavoir avant la manifestation de Christ).” —
*Fr*.

<span id="fn_295"></span>[296](cc10011.htm#fr_295.md) <span
id="xii.ii-p15.3"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p16"></span> Walford translates, “Then I said, My
disease is this. “Such,” he observes, “is the exact rendering of the
text. Some painful disease had befallen him, which was heightened by the
depression of his spirits, which deprived him of mental vigor and
energy, and clothed every object in the blackest colours. ... ‘I said,
This is my disease.’ My mind is oppressed by the mortified feelings of
my corporeal frame, and on this account, the changes by which the hand
of God has affected me appear in the darkest colours, and I am ready to
give up every hope that he will ever display his goodness to me as he
formerly did.”

<span id="fn_296"></span>[297](cc10011.htm#fr_296.md) <span
id="xii.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p17"></span> According to this view, he refers to what
he had said in the 7th, 8th, and 9th verses, in which he seemed to
arrive at the conclusion, that there would never be an end to his
present afflictions, as if the decree had gone forth, and God had
pronounced a final and irreversible sentence. But here he checks and
corrects himself for having given utterance to such language, and
recalls his thoughts to more just and encouraging sentiments respecting
God. He acknowledges his sin in questioning or yielding to a feeling of
suspicion in reference to the divine love, and the truth of the divine
promises; and confesses that this flowed from the corruption of his
nature, and the weakness of his faith; that he had spoken rashly and in
haste; and that taking shame and confusion of face to himself, he would
now desist and proceed no farther.

<span id="fn_297"></span>[298](cc10011.htm#fr_297.md) <span
id="xii.ii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p20"></span>Walford translates the verse thus: —

<span id="xii.ii-p21"></span>“Then I said, My disease is this,  
The change of the right hand of the High God.”

<span id="xii.ii-p22"></span>“There is no authority,” he observes, “for
the version, ‘I will remember the years;’ his meaning is, the power of
God has changed and altered my condition; from a state of health and
peace, he has brought me into disease, and pain, and sorrow. This, he
says, he will remember, so as to inspire some hope that the power which
had brought low would again raise him up.”

<span id="fn_298"></span>[299](cc10011.htm#fr_298.md) <span
id="xii.ii-p22.3"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p23"></span> Our Author seems to refer to those
interpreters who, as in our English version, make the supplement, *But I
will remember*, before the words, “the years of the right hand of the
Most High.”

<span id="fn_299"></span>[300](cc10011.htm#fr_299.md) <span
id="xii.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p10"></span> “*Thy way*, *O God*! *is in the
sanctuary*; the temple, the Church of God, where he takes his walks and
manifests himself, and where the reasons of his providence and dealings
with his people are opened and made known unto them.” — *Dr* *Gill*.

<span id="fn_300"></span>[301](cc10011.htm#fr_300.md) <span
id="xii.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iv-p6"></span> “<span id="xii.iv-p6.1"></span>Neantmoins
il faut imputer cela a la malice de ceux qui ayans veu la chose
eux-mesmes de leurs yeux, ont mieux aime s’esblouir la veue et desguiser
le faict, que d’en entretenir la pure cognoissance.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_301"></span>[302](cc10011.htm#fr_301.md) <span
id="xii.iv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xii.iv-p7"></span> “The reason of Joseph’s being coupled with
Jacob is, that as the Israelites derived their birth from Jacob, so they
were sustained by Joseph in Egypt, who became to them a second parent.”
— *Walford*.

<span id="fn_302"></span>[303](cc10011.htm#fr_302.md) <span
id="xii.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iv-p10"></span> “‘The waters of the Red Sea,’ says Bishop
Horne, ‘are here beautifully represented as endued with sensibility; as
seeing, feeling, and being confounded, even to the lowest depths, at the
presence and power of their great Creator, when he commanded them to
open a way, and to form a wall on each side of it, until his people were
passed over.’ This, in fact, is true poetry; and in this attributing of
life, spirit, feeling, action, and suffering, to inanimate objects,
there are no poets who can vie with those of the Hebrew nation.” —
*Mant*.

<span id="fn_303"></span>[304](cc10011.htm#fr_303.md) <span
id="xii.iv-p12.3"></span>

<span id="xii.iv-p13"></span> As in the three preceding verses the
deliverance of the chosen people from Egypt, and the drying up of the
Red Sea, to make a way for them to pass through, are the subjects
celebrated, it is very natural to suppose that the 17th and 18th verses
refer to the tempestuous rain, the thunder, lightning, and earthquake,
by which God testified his wrath against the Egyptians, and by which
that ruthless host were filled with dismay, when they went into the
midst of the Red Sea after the Israelites. Of these particular
circumstances, we have indeed no distinct information in the narrative
of Moses; but from a comparison of what is here stated, with what is
said in <span id="xii.iv-p13.1"></span>[Ex
14:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#024.md)<span id="xii.iv-p13.1"></span>,
“And it came to pass, that in the morning watch the Lord looked unto the
host of the Egyptians through the pillar of fire and of the cloud, and
troubled the host of the Egyptians,” it seems highly probable that they
took place on that occasion. With this corresponds the representation
given by Josephus of this part of Jewish History. “As soon as ever the
whole Egyptian army was within it, the sea flowed to its own place, and
came down with a torrent raised by storms of wind, and encompassed the
Egyptians. Showers of rain also came down from the sky, and dreadful
thunders and lightning, with flashes of fire. Thunder-bolts also were
darted upon them; nor was there any thing which used to be sent by God
upon men, as indications of his wrath, which did not happen at that
time; for a dark and dismal night oppressed them.” — *Antiquities of the
Jews*, Book II. chapter 16, section 3.

<span id="fn_304"></span>[305](cc10011.htm#fr_304.md) <span
id="xii.iv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iv-p16"></span> “*Thy footsteps are not known*; not by the
Egyptians, who essayed to follow after the people of Israel, with the
Lord at the head of them, nor by any since; for the waters returned and
covered the place on which the Israelites went as on dry ground; so that
no footsteps or traces were to be seen at all ever since; and such are
the ways of God, many of them in providence as well as in grace, <span
id="xii.iv-p16.1"></span>[Ro
11:33](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#033.md)<span id="xii.iv-p16.1"></span>.”
— *Dr Gill*.

<span id="fn_305"></span>[306](cc10011.htm#fr_305.md) <span
id="xii.iv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iv-p18"></span> “After the sublime and awful imagery of
the four preceding verses, in which thunders and lightnings, storms and
tempests, rain, hail, and earthquakes, the ministers of the Almighty’s
displeasure, are brought together and exhibited in the most impressive
colours; nothing can be, more exquisite than the calmness and
tranquillity of this concluding verse, on which the mind reposes with
sensations of refreshment and delight.” — *Mant*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 78](cc10012.md)
