[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc10023)  [Next](cc10025) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 10: Psalms, Part III*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxv"></span>

<span id="xxv-p1"></span>PSALM 90

<span id="xxv-p2"></span>As Moses is about to treat as well of the
brevity and miseries of human life, as of the punishments inflicted upon
the people of Israel, in order to minister some consolation for
assuaging the grief and fear which the faithful might have entertained
upon observing the operation of the common law, to which all mankind are
subject, and especially, upon considering their own afflictions, he
opens the psalm by speaking of the peculiar grace which God had
vouchsafed to his chosen tribes. He next briefly recites, how wretched
the condition of men is, if they allow their hearts to rest in this
world, especially when God summons them as guilty sinners to his
judgment seat. And after he has bewailed, that even the children of
Abraham had experienced for a time such severity, that they were almost
consumed with sorrow, confiding in God’s free favor, by which He had
adopted them to himself, he prays that He would deal towards them in a
merciful and gracious manner, as he had done in times past, and that he
would continue even to the end the ordinary course of his grace.

<span id="xxv-p3"></span>A Prayer of Moses, the man of God.

<span id="xxv-p4"></span>It is uncertain whether this psalm was composed
by Moses, or whether some one of the prophets framed it into a song for
the use of the people, from a formula of prayer written by Moses, and
handed down from age to age. It is, however, highly probable, that it is
not without some ground ascribed to Moses in the title; and since psalms
were in use even in his time, I have no doubt that he was its author.
 <span id="fr_561"></span>[562](#fn_561) Some maintain that the reason
why his name appears in the inscription is, that it was sung by his
posterity; but I cannot see why they should have recourse to such a
groundless conceit. The epithet, *The man of God,* given to Moses, which
is immediately added, clearly confutes them.  <span
id="fr_562"></span>[563](#fn_562) This honorable designation is
expressly applied to him, that his doctrine may have the greater
authority. If conjectures are to be admitted, it is probable, that when
the time of his death drew near, he endited this prayer to assuage the
prolonged sorrow under which the people had almost pined away, and to
comfort their hearts, under the accumulation of adversities with which
they were oppressed. Although the wonderful goodness of God shone
brightly in their deliverance from Egypt, which, burying the miseries
formerly endured by them, might have filled them with joy; yet we know
that, soon after, it was extinguished by their ingratitude; so that for
the space of not less than forty years, they were consumed with
continual languor in the wilderness. It was therefore very seasonable
for Moses at that time to beseech God that he would deal mercifully and
gently with his people, according to the number of the years in which he
had afflicted them.

<span id="xxv.i"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p1"></span><span id="xxv.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
90:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#001)<span id="xxv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p2"></span>**1.** O Lord! thou hast been our
dwelling-place, from generation to generation. **2.** Before the
mountains were brought forth, and before thou hadst formed the earth and
the world,  <span id="fr_563"></span>[564](#fn_563) even from
everlasting to everlasting, thou art God.

<span id="xxv.i-p4"></span> 

<span id="xxv.i-p5"></span><span id="xxv.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p6"></span>**1** *O Lord! thou hast been our
dwelling-place.* In separating the seed of Abraham by special privilege
from the rest of the human family, the Psalmist magnifies the grace of
adoption, by which God had embraced them as his children. The object
which he has in view in this exordium is, that God would now renew the
grace which he had displayed in old time towards the holy patriarchs,
and continue it towards their offspring. Some commentators think that he
alludes to the tabernacle, because in it the majesty of God was not less
conspicuous than if he had dwelt in the midst of the people; but this
seems to me to be altogether out of place. He rather comprehends the
whole time in which the Fathers sojourned in the land of Canaan. As the
tabernacle had not yet continued for the space of forty years, the long
duration here mentioned — *our dwelling-place from generation to
generation* — would not at all be applicable to it. It is not then
intended to recount what God showed himself to be towards the Israelites
from the time that he delivered them from Egypt; but what their fathers
had experienced him to be in all ages, even from the beginning.  <span
id="fr_564"></span>[565](#fn_564) Now it is declared that as they had
always been pilgrims and wanderers, so God was to them instead of a
dwelling-place. No doubt, the condition of all men is unstable upon
earth; but we know that Abraham and his posterity were, above all
others, sojourners, and as it were exiles. Since, then, they wandered in
the land of Canaan till they were brought into Egypt, where they lived
only by sufferance from day to day, it was necessary for them to seek
for themselves a dwelling-place under the shadow of God, without which
they could hardly be accounted inhabitants of the world, since they
continued everywhere strangers, and were afterwards led about through
many windings and turnings. The grace which the Lord displayed in
sustaining them in their wanderings, and shielding them with his hand
when they sojourned among savage and cruel nations, and were exposed to
injurious treatment at their hands — this grace is extolled by Moses in
very striking terms, when he represents God as an abode or
dwelling-place to these poor fugitives who were continually wandering
from one place to another in quest of lodgings. This grace he magnifies
from the length of time during which it had been exercised; for God
ceased not to preserve and defend them for the space of more than four
hundred years, during which time they dwelt under the wings of his
protection.

<span id="xxv.i-p8"></span><span id="xxv.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p9"></span>**2** *Before the mountains were brought
forth.* Moses designs to set forth some high and hidden mystery, and yet
he seems to speak feebly, and, as it were, in a puerile manner. For who
does not know that God existed before the world? This we grant is a
truth which all men admit; but we will scarcely find one in a hundred
who is thoroughly persuaded that God remains unchangeably the same. God
is here contrasted with created beings, who, as all know, are subject to
continual changes, so that there is nothing stable under heaven. As, in
a particular manner, nothing is fuller of vicissitude than human life,
that men may not judge of the nature of God by their own fluctuating
condition, he is here placed in a state of settled and undisturbed
tranquillity. Thus the everlastingness of which Moses speaks is to be
referred not only to the essence of God, but also to his providence, by
which he governs the world. Although he subjects the world to many
alterations, he remains unmoved; and that not only in regard to himself,
but also in regard to the faithful, who find from experience, that
instead of being wavering, he is steadfast in his power, truth,
righteousness, and goodness, even as he has been from the beginning.
This eternal and unchangeable steadfastness of God could not be
perceived prior to the creation of the world, since there were as yet no
eyes to be witnesses of it. But it may be gathered *a posteriori;* for
while all things are subject to revolution and incessant vicissitude,
his nature continues always the same. There may be also here a contrast
between him and all the false gods of the heathen, who have, by little
and little, crept into the world in such vast numbers, through the error
and folly of men. But I have already shown the object which Moses has in
view, which is, that we mistake if we measure God by our own
understanding; and that we must mount above the earth, yea, even above
heaven itself, whenever we think upon him.

<span id="xxv.ii"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii-p1"></span><span id="xxv.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
90:3-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#003)<span id="xxv.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii-p2"></span>**3.** Thou shalt turn man to destruction,
and shalt say, Return, ye sons of Adam. **4.** For a thousand years in
thy sight are as yesterday when it is gone, and as a watch in the night.
**5.** Thou carriest them away as with a flood, they will be a sleep: in
the morning he shall grow as grass: **6.** In the morning it shall
flourish and grow: at the evening it shall be cut down, and shall
wither. **7.** For we fail by thy anger, and are affrighted by thy
indignation. **8.** Thou hast set our iniquities before thee, and our
secret sins in the light of thy countenance.

<span id="xxv.ii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xxv.ii-p4"></span><span id="xxv.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii-p5"></span>**3** *Thou shalt turn man to destruction.*
Moses, in the first place, mentions how frail and transitory is the life
of man, and bewails its miseries. This he does, not for the purpose of
quarrelling with God, but as an argument to induce him the more readily
to exercise his mercy, even as he is elsewhere said to pardon mortal
men, when he considers of what they are made, and remembers that they
are but dust and grass, (<span id="xxv.ii-p5.1"></span>[Ps
103:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#014)<span id="xxv.ii-p5.1"></span>.)
he compares the course of our life to a ring or circle, because God,
placing us upon the earth, turns us about within a narrow circuit, and
when we have reached the last point, draws us back to himself in a
moment. Others give a different interpretation, namely, that God leads
men forth to death, and afterwards restores them at the resurrection.
But this subtilty is far-fetched, and does not harmonise with the
context. We have here laid down a simple definition of our life, that it
is, as it were, a short revolution in which we quickly complete our
circle, the last point of which is the termination of our earthly
course. This account of human life sets in a clearer light the gracious
manner in which God deals with his servants, in adopting them to be his
peculiar people, that he may at length gather them together into his
everlasting inheritance. Nor is it in vain that it is added, by way of
contrast, (verse 4,) *that a thousand years in God’s sight are as
yesterday* Although we are convinced from experience that men, when they
have completed their circle, are forthwith taken out of the world, yet
the knowledge of this frailty fails in making a deep impression upon our
hearts, because we do not lift our eyes above the world. Whence proceeds
the great stupidity of men, who, bound fast to the present state of
existence, proceed in the affairs of life as if they were to live two
thousand years, but because they do not elevate their conceptions above
visible objects? Each man, when he compares himself with others,
flatters himself that he will live to a great age. In short, men are so
dull as to think that thirty years, or even a smaller number, are, as it
were, an eternity; nor are they impressed with the brevity of their life
so long as this world keeps possession of their thoughts. This is the
reason why Moses awakens us by elevating our minds to the eternity of
God, without the consideration of which we perceive not how speedily our
life vanishes away. The imagination that we shall have a long life,
resembles a profound sleep in which we are all benumbed, until
meditation upon the heavenly life swallow up this foolish fancy
respecting the length of our continuance upon earth.

<span id="xxv.ii-p6"></span>As men are thus blinded, Moses sets before
their view God as their judge. O Lord! as if he had said, if men would
duly reflect upon that eternity from which thou beholdest these
inconstant circlings of the world, they would not make so great account
of the present life. But as, instead of seriously considering what is
true duration, they rather wilfully turn away their eyes from heaven,
this explains why they are so stupid, and look upon one day as if it
were a hundred years. Moses’ apostrophe to God is emphatic, implying
that his patience being exhausted at seeing us so thoughtless, he
addresses himself to God; and that it was labor to no purpose for him to
speak to the deaf, who would not be taught that they were mortal, no,
not even by the proofs of this, which experience was constantly
presenting before them. This text is quoted by the Apostle Peter in a
sense somewhat different, (<span id="xxv.ii-p6.1"></span>[2Pe
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#008)<span id="xxv.ii-p6.1"></span>,)
while at the same time he does not pervert it, for he aptly and
judiciously applies the testimony of Moses in illustration of the
subject of which he is there treating. The design of Moses is to elevate
the minds of men to heaven by withdrawing them from their own gross
conceptions. And what is the object of Peter? As many, because Christ
does not hasten his coming according to their desire, cast off the hope
of the resurrection through the weariness of long delay, he corrects
this preposterous impatience by a very suitable remedy. He perceives
men’s faith in the Divine promises fainting and failing, from their
thinking that Christ delays his coming too long. Whence does this
proceed, but because they grovel upon the earth? Peter therefore
appropriately applies these words of Moses to cure this vice. As the
indulgence in pleasures to which unbelievers yield themselves is to be
traced to this, that having their hearts too much set upon the world,
they do not taste the pleasures of a celestial eternity; so impatience
proceeds from the same source. Hence we learn the true use of this
doctrine. To what is it owing that we have so great anxiety about our
life, that nothing suffices us, and that we are continually molesting
ourselves, but because we foolishly imagine that we shall nestle in this
world for ever? Again, to what are we to ascribe that extreme
fretfulness and impatience, which make our hearts fail in waiting for
the coming of Christ, but to their grovelling upon the earth? Let us
learn then not to judge according to the understanding of the flesh, but
to depend upon the judgment of God; and let us elevate our minds by
faith, even to his heavenly throne, from which he declares that this
earthly life is nothing. Nor does Moses simply contrast a thousand years
with one day, but he contrasts them with *yesterday,* which is already
gone; for whatever is still before our eyes has a hold upon our minds,
but we are less affected with the recollection of what is past. In
regard to the word *watch,* the ancients, as is well known, were
accustomed to divide the night into four watches, consisting of three
hours each.  <span id="fr_565"></span>[566](#fn_565) To express still
more forcibly how inconsiderable that which appears to us a long period
is in God’s eyes, this similitude is added, That a thousand years in his
sight differ nothing from three hours of the night, in which men
scarcely know whether they are awake or asleep.

<span id="xxv.ii-p8"></span><span id="xxv.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii-p9"></span>**5** *Thou carriest them away as with a
flood.* Moses confirms what he had previously said, That men, so long as
they are sojourners in this world, perform, as it were, a revolution
which lasts only for a moment. I do not limit the expression to *carry
away as with a flood* *to* calamities of a more grievous kind, but
consider that death is simply compared in general to a flood; for when
we have staid a little while in the world, we forthwith fall into the
grave and are covered with earth. Thus death, which is common to all, is
with propriety called *an inundation.* While we are breathing the breath
of life, the Lord overflows us by death, just as those who perish in a
shipwreck are engulfed in the ocean; so that death may be fitly called
an invisible deluge. And Moses affirms, that it is then evidently seen
that men who flatter themselves that they are possessed of wonderful
vigor in their earthly course, are only as a sleep. The comparison of
*grass* which is added, amounts to this, That men come forth in the
morning as grass springs up, that they become green, or pass away within
a short time, when being cut down, they wither and decay. The verbs in
the 6th verse being in the singular number, it is better to connect them
with the word *grass.* But they may also be appropriately referred to
each man; and as it makes little difference as to the sense of the text,
whether we make *grass* or *each man* the nominative to the verbs, I am
not disposed to expend much labor upon the matter. This doctrine
requires to be continually meditated upon; for although we all confess
that nothing is more transitory than our life, yet each of us is soon
carried away, as it were, by a frantic impulse to picture to his own
imagination an earthly immortality. Whoever bears in mind that he is
mortal, restrains himself, that instead of having his attention and
affections engrossed beyond measure with earthly objects, he may advance
with haste to his mark. When we set no limit to our cares, we require to
be urged forward by continual goadings, that we may not dream of a
thousand lives instead of one, which is but as a shadow that quickly
vanishes away.

<span id="xxv.ii-p10"></span><span id="xxv.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii-p11"></span>**7** *For we fail by thy anger.* Moses
makes mention of the anger of God advisedly; for it is necessary that
men be touched with the feeling of this, in order to their considering
in good earnest, what experience constrains them to acknowledge, how
soon they finish their course and pass away. He had, however, still
another reason for joining together the brevity of human life and the
anger of God. Whilst men are by nature so transitory, and, as it were,
shadowy, the Israelites were afflicted by the hostile hand of God; and
his anger is less supportable by our frail natures, which speedily
vanish away, than it would be were we furnished with some tolerable
degree of strength.

<span id="xxv.ii-p12"></span><span id="xxv.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii-p13"></span>**8** *Thou hast set our iniquities before
thee.* To show that by this complaint he is far from intending to murmur
against God, he asserts that the Divine anger, however terrible it had
been, was just, inasmuch as the people had provoked it by their
iniquities; for those who, when stricken by the Divine hand, are not
brought to genuine humiliation, harden themselves more and more. The
true way to profit, and also to subdue our pride, is to feel that He is
a righteous judge. Accordingly Moses, after having briefly taught that
men by nature vanish away like smoke, gathers from thence that it is not
to be wondered at if God exanimates and consumes those whom he pursues
with his wrath. The manner of the expression by which God is described
as showing the tokens of his anger is to be observed — *he sets the
iniquities of men before his eyes* Hence it follows, that whatever
intermission of punishment we experience ought in justice to be ascribed
to the forbearance of. God, who buries our sins that he may spare us.
The word <span id="xxv.ii-p13.1"></span>עלומים, *alumim,* which I have
rendered *our secret sins,* is translated by some, *our youth;*  <span
id="fr_566"></span>[567](#fn_566) as if Moses had said that the faults
committed in youth are brought to remembrance. But this is too forced,
and inconsistent with the scope of the passage; for it would destroy the
contrast between *secret sins* and *the light of God’s countenance,* by
which Moses intimates that men hide themselves in darkness, and wrap
themselves in many deceits, so long as God does not shine upon them with
the light of his judgment; whereas, when he draws them back from their
subterfuges, by which they endeavor to escape from him, and sets before
his eyes the sins which they hide by hypocrisy, being subdued by fear
and dread, they are brought sincerely to humble themselves before him.

<span id="xxv.iii"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii-p1"></span><span id="xxv.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
90:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#009)<span id="xxv.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii-p2"></span>**9.** For all our days are passed away in
thy indignation: we have spent our years as it were a thought.  <span
id="fr_567"></span>[568](#fn_567) **10.** In the days of our years there
are threescore years and ten: and if through strength they are fourscore
years, yet is their pride but labor and grief; for it  <span
id="fr_568"></span>[569](#fn_568) swiftly passes by, and we fly away.

<span id="xxv.iii-p5"></span> 

<span id="xxv.iii-p6"></span><span id="xxv.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii-p7"></span>**9.** *For all our days are passed away in
thy indignation.* This might be viewed as a general confirmation of the
preceding sentence, That the whole course of man’s life is suddenly
brought to an end, as soon as God shows himself displeased. But in my
opinion Moses rather amplifies what he has said above concerning the
rigour of God’s wrath, and his strict examination of every case in which
he punishes sin. He asserts that this terror which God brought upon his
people was not only for a short time, but that it was extended without
intermission even to death. He complains that the Jews had almost wasted
away by continual miseries; because God neither remitted nor mitigated
his anger. It is therefore not surprising to find him declaring that
their years passed away like a *tale,* when God’s anger rested upon them
so unremittingly.

<span id="xxv.iii-p8"></span><span id="xxv.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii-p9"></span>**10.** *In the days of our years there are
threescore years and ten.* He again returns to the general doctrine
respecting the precariousness of the condition of men, although God may
not openly display his wrath to terrify them. “What,” says he, “is the
duration of life? Truly, if we reckon all our years, we will at length
come to threescore and ten, or, if there be some who are stronger and
more vigorous, they will bring us even to fourscore.” Moses uses the
expression, *the days of our years,* for the sake of emphasis; for when
the time is divided into small portions, the very number itself deceives
us, so that we flatter ourselves that life is long. With the view of
overthrowing these vain delusions, he permits men to sum up the many
thousand days  <span id="fr_569"></span>[570](#fn_569) which are in a
few years; while he at the same time affirms that this great heap is
soon brought to nothing. Let men then extend the space of their life as
much as they please, by calculating that each year contains three
hundred and sixty-five days; yet assuredly they will find that the term
of seventy years is short. When they have made a lengthened calculation
of the days, this is the sum in which the process ultimately results. He
who has reached the age of fourscore years hastens to the grave. Moses
himself lived longer, (<span id="xxv.iii-p10.2"></span>[De
34:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#007)<span id="xxv.iii-p10.2"></span>,)
 <span id="fr_570"></span>[571](#fn_570) and so perhaps did others in
his time; but he speaks here of the ordinary term. And even then, those
were accounted old men, and in a manner decrepit, who attained to the
age of fourscore years; so that he justly declares that it is the robust
only who arrive at that age. He puts *pride* for *the strength* or
*excellence* of which men boast so highly. The sense is, that before men
decline and come to old age, even in the very bloom of youth they are
involved in many troubles, and that they cannot escape from the cares,
weariness, sorrows, fears, griefs, inconveniences, and anxieties, to
which this mortal life is subject. Moreover, this is to be referred to
the whole course of our existence in the present state. And assuredly,
he who considers what is the condition of our life from our infancy
until we descend into the grave, will find troubles and turmoil in every
part of it. The two Hebrew words <span id="xxv.iii-p11.3"></span>עמל,
*amal,* and <span id="xxv.iii-p11.4"></span>און, *aven,* which are
joined together, are taken passively for *inconveniences* and
*afflictions;* implying that the life of man is full of labor, and
fraught with many torments, and that even at the time when men are in
the height of their pride. The reason which is added, *for it swiftly
passes by, and we fly away,* seems hardly to suit the scope of the
passage; for felicity may be brief, and yet on that account it does not
cease to be felicity. But Moses means that men foolishly glory in their
excellence, since, whether they will or no, they are constrained to look
to the time to come. And as soon as they open their eyes, they see that
they are dragged and carried forward to death with rapid haste, and that
their excellence is every moment vanishing away.

<span id="xxv.iv"></span>

<span id="xxv.iv-p1"></span><span id="xxv.iv-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
90:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#011)<span id="xxv.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iv-p2"></span>**11.** Who knoweth the power of thy anger?
and according to thy fear, so is thy wrath. **12.** Teach us so  <span
id="fr_571"></span>[572](#fn_571) to number our days, and we shall apply
our hearts to wisdom. **13.** Return, O Jehovah! how long? Be pacified
towards thy servants.

<span id="xxv.iv-p4"></span> 

<span id="xxv.iv-p5"></span><span id="xxv.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iv-p6"></span>**11.** *Who knoweth, the power of thy
anger?* Moses again returns to speak of the peculiar afflictions of the
Israelites; for he had also on this occasion complained before of the
common frailty and miseries of mankind. He justly exclaims that the
power of God’s wrath is immeasurably great. So long as God withholds his
hand, men wantonly leap about like runaway slaves, who are no longer
afraid at the sight of their master; nor can their rebellious nature be
reduced to obedience in any other way than by his striking them with the
fear of his judgment. The meaning then is, that whilst God hides
himself, and, so to speak, dissembles his displeasure, men are inflated
with pride, and rush upon sin with reckless impetuosity; but when they
are compelled to feel how dreadful his wrath is, they forget their
loftiness, and are reduced to nothing. What follows, *According to thy
fear, so is thy wrath,* is commonly explained as denoting that the more
a man is inspired with reverence towards God, the more severely and
sternly is he commonly dealt with; for “judgment begins at the house of
God,” (<span id="xxv.iv-p6.1"></span>[1Pe
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#017)<span id="xxv.iv-p6.1"></span>.)
Whilst he pampers the reprobate with the good things of this life, he
wastes his chosen ones with continual troubles; and in short, “whom he
loveth he chasteneth,” (<span id="xxv.iv-p6.2"></span>[Heb
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#006)<span id="xxv.iv-p6.2"></span>.)
It is then a true and profitable doctrine that he deals more roughly
with those who serve him than with the reprobate. But Moses, I think,
has here a different meaning, which is, that it is a holy awe of God,
and that alone, which makes us truly and deeply feel his anger. We see
that the reprobate, although they are severely punished, only chafe upon
the bit, or kick against God, or become exasperated, or are stupified,
as if they were hardened against all calamities; so far are they from
being subdued. And though they are full of trouble, and cry aloud, yet
the Divine anger does not so penetrate their hearts as to abate their
pride and fierceness. The minds of the godly alone are wounded with the
wrath of God; nor do they wait for his thunderbolts, to which the
reprobate hold out their hard and iron necks, but they tremble the very
moment when God moves only his little finger. This I consider to be the
true meaning of the prophet. He had said that the human mind could not
sufficiently comprehend the dreadfulness of the Divine wrath. And we see
how, although God shakes heaven and earth, many notwithstanding, like
the giants of old, treat this with derision, and are actuated by such
brutish arrogance, that they despise him when he brandishes his bolts.
But as the Psalmist is treating of a doctrine which properly belongs to
true believers, he affirms that they have a strongly sensitive feeling
of the wrath of God which makes them quietly submit themselves to his
authority. Although to the wicked their own conscience is a tormentor
which does not suffer them to enjoy repose, yet so far is this secret
dread from teaching them to humble themselves, that it excites them to
clamor against God with increasing frowardness. In short, the faithful
alone are sensible of God’s wrath; and being subdued by it, they
acknowledge that they are nothing, and with true humility devote
themselves wholly to Him. This is wisdom to which the reprobate cannot
attain, because they cannot lay aside the pride with which they are
inflated. They are not touched with the feeling of God’s wrath, because
they do not stand in awe of him.

<span id="xxv.iv-p7"></span><span id="xxv.iv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iv-p8"></span>**12.** *Teach us so to number our days.*
Some translate to *the number of our days,* which gives the same sense.
As Moses perceived that what he had hitherto taught is not comprehended
by the understandings of men until God shine upon them by his Spirit, he
now sets himself to prayer. It indeed seems at first sight absurd to
pray that we may know the number of our years. What? since even the
strongest scarcely reach the age of fourscore years, is there any
difficulty in reckoning up so small a sum? Children learn numbers as
soon as they begin to prattle; and we do not need a teacher in
arithmetic to enable us to count the length of a hundred upon our
fingers. So much the fouler and more shameful is our stupidity in never
comprehending the short term of our life. Even he who is most skillful
in arithmetic, and who can precisely and accurately understand and
investigate millions of millions, is nevertheless unable to count
fourscore years in his own life. It is surely a monstrous thing that men
can measure all distances without themselves, that they know how many
feet the moon is distant from the center of the earth, what space there
is between the different planets; and, in short, that they can measure
all the dimensions both of heaven and earth; while yet they cannot
number threescore and ten years in their own case. It is therefore
evident that Moses had good reason to beseech God for ability to perform
what requires a wisdom which is very rare among mankind. The last clause
of the verse is also worthy of special notice. By it he teaches us that
we then truly apply our hearts to wisdom when we comprehend the
shortness of human life. What can be a greater proof of madness than to
ramble about without proposing to one’s self any end? True believers
alone, who know the difference between this transitory state and a
blessed eternity, for which they were created, know what ought to be the
aim of their life. No man then can regulate his life with a settled
mind, but he who, knowing the end of it, that is to say death itself, is
led to consider the great purpose of man’s existence in this world, that
he may aspire after the prize of the heavenly calling.

<span id="xxv.iv-p9"></span><span id="xxv.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iv-p10"></span>**13.** *Return, O Jehovah! how long?*
After having spoken in the language of complaint, Moses adds a prayer,
That God, who had not ceased for a long time severely to punish his
people, would at length be inclined to deal gently with them. Although
God daily gave them in many ways some taste of his love, yet their
banishment from the land of promise was a very grievous affliction; for
it admonished them that they were unworthy of that blessed inheritance
which he had appointed for his children. They could not fail often to
remember that dreadful oath which he had thundered out against them,

<span id="xxv.iv-p11"></span>“Surely they shall not see the land which I
sware unto their fathers, neither shall any of them that provoked me see
it: But as for you, your carcases, they shall fall in this
wilderness,”  
(<span id="xxv.iv-p11.2"></span>[Num.
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#023),
[32](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#032)<span id="xxv.iv-p11.2"></span>.)
 <span id="fr_572"></span>[573](#fn_572)

<span id="xxv.iv-p13"></span>Moses, no doubt, combines that sore bondage
which they had suffered in Egypt with their wanderings in the
wilderness; and therefore he justly bewails their protracted languishing
in the words *how long?* As God is said to turn his back upon us, or to
depart to a distance from us, when he withdraws the tokens of his favor,
so by his return we are to understand the manifestation of his grace.
The word <span id="xxv.iv-p13.1"></span>נחם, *nacham,* which we have
translated *be pacified,* signifies to *repent,* and may therefore not
improperly be explained thus: Let it repent thee concerning thy
servants. According to the not unfrequent and well known phraseology of
Scripture, God is said to repent, when putting away men’s sorrow, and
affording new ground of gladness, he appears as it were to be changed.
Those, however, seem to come nearer the mind of the Psalmist who
translate, *Comfort thyself over thy servants;* for God, in cherishing
us tenderly, takes no less pleasure in us than does a father in his own
children. Now that is nothing else than to be pacified or propitious, as
we have translated it, to make the meaning the more obvious.

<span id="xxv.v"></span>

<span id="xxv.v-p1"></span><span id="xxv.v-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
90:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#014)<span id="xxv.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.v-p2"></span>**14.** Satiate us early  <span
id="fr_573"></span>[574](#fn_573) with thy goodness, and we will be glad
and rejoice all our days. **15.** Make us joyful according to the days
of our affliction; according to the years in which we have seen evil.
**16.** Let thy work appear towards thy servants, and thy glory upon
their children. **17.** And let the beauty of the Lord our God be upon
us; and direct the work of our hands upon us; yea, direct thou the work
of our hands.

<span id="xxv.v-p4"></span> 

<span id="xxv.v-p5"></span><span id="xxv.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.v-p6"></span>**16** *Let thy work appear towards thy
servants.* As God, when he forsakes his Church, puts on as it were a
character different from his own, Moses, with much propriety, calls the
blessing of protection which had been divinely promised to the children
of Abraham *God’s proper work.* Although, therefore, God’s work was
manifest in all the instances in which he had punished the
perfidiousness, ingratitude, obstinacy, unruly lusts, and unhallowed
desires of his people, yet Moses, by way of eminence, prefers before all
other proofs of God’s power, that care which he exercised in maintaining
the welfare of the people, by which it was his will that he should be
principally known. This is the reason why Paul, in <span
id="xxv.v-p6.1"></span>[Ro 9:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#023)<span
id="xxv.v-p6.1"></span>, especially applies to the Divine goodness the
honorable title of “glory.” God indeed maintains his glory by judging
the world; but as nothing is more natural to him than to show himself
gracious, his glory on that account is said to shine forth chiefly in
his benefits. With respect to the present passage, God had then only
begun to deliver his people; for they had still to be put in possession
of the land of Canaan. Accordingly, had they gone no farther than the
wilderness, the lustre of their deliverance would have been obscured.
Besides, Moses estimates the work of God according to the Divine
promise; and doing this he affirms that it will be imperfect and
incomplete, unless he continue his grace even to the end. This is
expressed still more plainly in the second clause of the verse, in which
he prays not only for the welfare of his own age, but also for the
welfare of the generation yet unborn. His exercise thus corresponds with
the form of the covenant,

<span id="xxv.v-p7"></span>“And I will establish my covenant between me
and thee, and thy seed after thee, in their generations, for an
everlasting covenants to be a God unto thee, and to thy seed after
thee,”  
(<span id="xxv.v-p7.2"></span>[Ge
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#007)<span id="xxv.v-p7.2"></span>.)

<span id="xxv.v-p8"></span>By this example we are taught, that in our
prayers we ought to extend our care to those who are to come after us.
As God has promised that the Church will be perpetuated even to the end
of the world, — a subject which was brought under our notice in the
preceding psalm, — this ought, in a special manner, to lead us in all
the prayers by which we commend the welfare of the Church to him, to
include, at the same time, our posterity who are yet unborn. Farther,
the words *glory* and *beauty* are to be particularly noticed: from
which we learn that the love which God bears towards us is unparalleled.
Although, in enriching us with his gifts he gains nothing for himself;
yet he would have the splendor and beauty of his character manifested in
dealing bountifully with us, as if his beauty were obscured when he
ceases to do us good. In the clause immediately succeeding, *Direct the
work of our hands upon us,* Moses intimates that we cannot undertake or
attempt anything with the prospect of success, unless God become our
guide and counsellor, and govern us by his Spirit. Whence it follows,
that the reason why the enterprises and efforts of worldly men have a
disastrous issue is, because, in not following God, they pervert all
order and throw everything into confusion. Nor is the word <span
id="xxv.v-p8.1"></span>עלינו, *alenu, upon us,* superfluous; for
although God converts to good in the end whatever Satan and the
reprobate plot and practice against him or his people; yet the Church,
in which God rules with undisturbed sway, has in this respect a special
privilege. By his providence, which to us is incomprehensible, he
directs his work in regard to the reprobate externally; but he governs
his believing people internally by his Holy Spirit; and therefore he is
properly said to order or direct the work of their hands. The repetition
shows that a continual course of perseverance in the grace of God is
required. It would not be enough for us to be brought to the midst of
our journey. He must enable us to complete the whole course. Some
translate, *confirm* or *establish;* and this sense may be admitted. I
have, however, followed that translation which was more agreeable to the
context, conceiving the prayer to be that God would direct to a
prosperous issue all the actions and undertakings of his people.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_561"></span>[562](cc10024.htm#fr_561) <span
id="xxv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xxv-p5"></span> “<span id="xxv-p5.1"></span>Pour faire la fin
de ce livre troisieme.” — *Fr*. “As a conclusion to this third Book.”
The Psalter, as we have before observed, has been divided by the Hebrews
into five books. This is the end of Book 3. See volume 2, page 126,
note.

<span id="fn_562"></span>[563](cc10024.htm#fr_562) <span
id="xxv-p5.3"></span>

<span id="xxv-p6"></span> All the ancient versions ascribe this psalm to
Moses, and it is generally agreed, that it was written by him. To him
also, R. Selomo, and other Jewish commentators, ascribe the nine
following psalms; for which they do not appear to have any other
foundation but their own absurd canon of criticism, by which they assign
all anonymous psalms to that author whose name last occurred in a
preceding title. It is evident, for instance, <span
id="xxv-p6.1"></span>[Ps 99](../../../bib/kjv/psa099.htm#000)<span
id="xxv-p6.1"></span>, in which the prophet Samuel is mentioned, could
not have been written by Moses.

<span id="fn_563"></span>[564](cc10024.htm#fr_563) <span
id="xxv.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p3"></span> *Man of God* was a common designation of the
Jewish prophets: comp. <span id="xxv.i-p3.1"></span>[Jud
13:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#006)<span id="xxv.i-p3.1"></span>;
<span id="xxv.i-p3.2"></span>[1 Sam.
2:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#027), [1 Sam.
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#006)<span id="xxv.i-p3.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_564"></span>[565](cc10024.htm#fr_564) <span
id="xxv.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p7"></span> “*The earth and the world*. The latter of
those words properly means, the habitable world; that part of the earth
which, by its fertility, is capable of supporting inhabitants.” —
*Walford*.

<span id="fn_565"></span>[566](cc10024.htm#fr_565) <span
id="xxv.ii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii-p7"></span> “‘Our home’ — or ‘our dwelling-place.’ This
image seems to have a particular reference to the unsettled condition of
the Israelites before their establishment in the Land of Promise.
‘Strangers and pilgrims as we have hitherto been, in every succeeding
generation, from the days of Abraham; first sojourners in Canaan; then
bondsmen in Egypt; now wanderers in this dreary waste; we nevertheless
find the comforts of a home and settlement in thy miraculous
protection.’” — *Horsley*

<span id="fn_566"></span>[567](cc10024.htm#fr_566) <span
id="xxv.ii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii-p14"></span> “In the Indies,” says Sir John Chardin,
“the parts of the night are made known, as well by instruments (of
music,) in great cities, as by the rounds of the watchmen, who, with
cries and small drums, give notice that a fourth part of the night is
passed. Now, as these cries awaked those who had slept all that quarter
part of the night, it appeared to them but as a moment.” — *Harmer*’*s
Observations*, volume 1, page 333. If this psalm was the production of
Moses, it is observable that night watches were in use in his time.

<span id="fn_567"></span>[568](cc10024.htm#fr_567) <span
id="xxv.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii-p3"></span> Archbishop Secker supposes that this may
be the reading, and refers to <span id="xxv.iii-p3.1"></span>[Job
20:11](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#011)<span id="xxv.iii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_568"></span>[569](cc10024.htm#fr_568) <span
id="xxv.iii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii-p4"></span> “<span id="xxv.iii-p4.1"></span>Ou, une
parolle.” — *Fr*. *marg*. “Or, a word.” Dr Adam Clarke reads, “We
consume our years like a groan;” and observes, “We live a dying,
whining, complaining life; and at last a *groan* is its termination! How
amazingly expressive!”

<span id="fn_569"></span>[570](cc10024.htm#fr_569) <span
id="xxv.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii-p10"></span> “<span id="xxv.iii-p10.1"></span>Pource
que nostre vie.” — *Fr*. “For our life.”

<span id="fn_570"></span>[571](cc10024.htm#fr_570) <span
id="xxv.iii-p10.3"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii-p11"></span> In the Latin version it is, “<span
id="xxv.iii-p11.1"></span>multa annorum millia;” “many thousand years.”
But this is evidently a mistake, which the French version corrects,
reading “<span id="xxv.iii-p11.2"></span>beaucoup de milliers de jours.”

<span id="fn_571"></span>[572](cc10024.htm#fr_571) <span
id="xxv.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iv-p3"></span> Moses, as we learn from the passage to
which Calvin refers, “was an hundred and twenty years old when he died,
his eye was not dim, nor his natural force abated.” He was eighty years
old when God made him captain of the chosen people; and Aaron was
eighty-three years old before he was made High Priest, <span
id="xxv.iv-p3.1"></span>[Ex 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#007)<span
id="xxv.iv-p3.1"></span>. These, and a few other similar cases, have led
many to conclude that the age of eighty was not considered at that time
the age of decrepitude; and consequently that this psalm, which limits
the average length of human life to seventy or eighty years, must be of
a later date than the time of Moses. But this is no valid argument
against his being its penman. According to Calvin, seventy or eighty
years was at that time, in general, the utmost limits of human life; and
the longevity of Moses and some others who exceeded that limit was an
exception to the general rule. If this should be called in question, it
might be observed that this psalm treats of the afflictions and brevity
of life, not in reference to all men absolutely, but with respect to the
Israelites in particular, who, on account of their murmuring at the
report of the spies who had been sent to spy out the land of Canaan, and
other sins, provoked God to swear in his wrath that the carcases of all
that were numbered of them according to their whole number, from twenty
years old and upwards, with the exception of Caleb and Joshua, should
fall in the wilderness during the forty years of their wandering in it,
(<span id="xxv.iv-p3.2"></span>[Nu
14:27-29](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#027)<span
id="xxv.iv-p3.2"></span>.) Few of them, therefore, could have exceeded
or even reached the age of fourscore years. It has been thought by some
that at that time human life all over the world was reduced to the
measure here specified, as its average standard. “The decree which
abbreviated the life of man as a general rule to seventy or eighty
years,” observes Dr J. M. Good, “was given as a chastisement upon the
whole race of Israelites in the wilderness. It does not appear that the
term of life was lengthened afterwards. Samuel died about seventy years
old, David under seventy-one, and Solomon under sixty; and the history
of the world shows that the abbreviation of life in other countries was
nearly in the same proportion.”

<span id="fn_572"></span>[573](cc10024.htm#fr_572) <span
id="xxv.iv-p11.3"></span>

<span id="xxv.iv-p12"></span> “There is an ambiguity in <span
id="xxv.iv-p12.1"></span>כן, as it denotes either *so* or *rightly*
Hence the interpretation is twofold; either ‘so make us to know that we
may cause a heart of wisdom to come,’ *i* *e*., so instruct us that we
may acquire a wise heart. Or, ‘teach us to number our days rightly,’
etc. LXX. give it another and distorted interpretation.” — *Bythner*

<span id="fn_573"></span>[574](cc10024.htm#fr_573) <span
id="xxv.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.v-p3"></span> The great mortality constantly taking place
among them could not but remind them of this oath. Dimock calculates
that the number of persons who died in the wilderness, from twenty years
old and upwards, was one year with another near 15,000.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 91](cc10025)
