[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc10015)  [Next](cc10017) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 10: Psalms, Part III*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvii"></span>

<span id="xvii-p1"></span>PSALM 82

<span id="xvii-p2"></span>As kings, and such as are invested with
authority, through the blindness which is produced by pride, generally
take to themselves a boundless liberty of action, the Psalmist warns
them that they must render an account at the bar of the Supreme Judge,
who is exalted above the highest of this world. After he has reminded
them of their duty and condition, perceiving that he speaks to such as
refuse to receive admonition, he calls upon God to vindicate his
character as a righteous judge.  <span id="fr_420"></span>[421](#fn_420)

<span id="xvii-p4"></span>A Psalm of Asaph.

<span id="xvii.i"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p1"></span><span id="xvii.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
82:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#001)<span id="xvii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p2"></span>**1.** God sitteth in the assembly of God:
he will judge in the midst of the gods.  <span
id="fr_421"></span>[422](#fn_421) **2.** How long will ye judge
unjustly? and accept the persons of the wicked? Selah. **3.** Determine
the cause of the poor and the orphan; justify  <span
id="fr_422"></span>[423](#fn_422) the helpless and the destitute. **4.**
Rescue the poor and the afflicted: deliver them out of the hand of the
wicked.

<span id="xvii.i-p5"></span> 

<span id="xvii.i-p6"></span><span id="xvii.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p7"></span>**1** *God sitteth in the assembly of God.*
 <span id="fr_423"></span>[424](#fn_423) It is unquestionably a very
unbecoming thing for those whom God has been pleased to invest with the
government of mankind for the common good, not to acknowledge the end
for which they have been exalted above others, nor yet by whose blessing
they have been placed in so elevated a station; but instead of doing
this, contemning every principle of equity, to rule just as their own
unbridled passions dictate. So infatuated are they by their own splendor
and magnificence, as to imagine that the whole world was made only for
them. Besides, they think that it would derogate from their elevated
rank were they to be governed by moderate counsels; and although their
own folly is more than enough to urge them on in their reckless career,
they, notwithstanding, seek for flatterers to soothe and applaud them in
their vices. To correct this arrogance, the psalm opens by asserting,
that although men occupy thrones and judgment-seats, God nevertheless
continues to hold the office of supreme ruler. God has made even a
heathen and licentious poet bear testimony to this truth in the
following lines: —

<span id="xvii.i-p11"></span>*“*<span id="xvii.i-p11.1"></span>*Regum
timendorum in proprios greges,  
Reges in ipsos imperium est Jovis,  
Clari giganteo triumpho,  
Cuncta supercilio moventis.”  
*Horatii, Carm. Liber in Ode i.

<span id="xvii.i-p12"></span>*“Kings rule their subject flocks; great
Jove  
O’er kings themselves his reign extends,  
Who hurl’d the rebel giants from above;  
At whose majestic nod all nature bends.”  
*Boscawen’s Translation.

<span id="xvii.i-p13"></span>That the potentates of this world may not
arrogate to themselves more than belongs to them, the prophet here
erects a throne for *God,* from which he judges them all, and represses
their pride; a thing which is highly necessary. They may, indeed, admit
that they owe their elevation to royal power to the favor of God, and
they may worship him by outward ceremonies, but their greatness so
infatuates them that they are chargeable with expelling and casting him
to a distance from their assembly, by their vain imaginations; for they
cannot bear to be subject to reason and laws. Thus the design of the
prophet was to deride the madness by which the princes of this world are
bewitched, in leaving God no place in their assembly. The more
effectually to overthrow this irrational self-confidence with which they
are intoxicated, civil order is termed *the assembly of God;* for
although the divine glory shines forth in every part of the world, yet
when lawful government flourishes among men, it is reflected therefrom
with pre-eminent lustre. I indeed grant that it is quite common for the
Hebrews to adorn with the title of *God* whatever is rare and excellent.
But here it would appear, from the scope of the passage, that this name
of the Divine Being is applied to those who occupy the exalted station
of princes, in which there is afforded a peculiar manifestation of the
majesty of God; even as Solomon, in <span id="xvii.i-p13.1"></span>[Pr
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#017)<span id="xvii.i-p13.1"></span>,
calls marriage “the covenant of God,” from the peculiar sanctity by
which that relation is distinguished.

<span id="xvii.i-p14"></span>In the second clause of the verse, it is
not material whether we read, *He will judge in the midst of the gods,*
or, *He will judge the gods in the midst.* The first construction,
however, is the most easy and natural, That however much the rulers of
the world may exalt themselves, they cannot in the least impair the
authority of God, by divesting him of his sovereignty over them and of
the government of all things, which he will ever retain as his
inalienable prerogative. But here, as also a little after, the name
*gods* is to be understood of *judges,* on whom God has impressed
special marks of his glory. To apply it to angels is a fancy too
strained to admit of serious consideration.

<span id="xvii.i-p15"></span><span id="xvii.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p16"></span>**2** *How long will ye judge unjustly?*
Many suppose that God is here introduced speaking, and that these are
the words which he utters from his throne of judgment. But I would
rather consider the prophet himself as the speaker, who, in order to
prepare the way for administering a rebuke, had spoken in the manner in
which he did in the first verse. Kings may lift up their heads above the
clouds, but they, as well as the rest of mankind, are under the
government of God; and such being the case, it is in vain for them
arrogantly to struggle to obtain exemption from the obligations of
reason. Yet this is what they do. Although tyrants are amongst the
basest of men, and occupy their exalted station by detestable treason,
yet if any servant of God has the fortitude to open his mouth against
them, they immediately attempt to shelter themselves by appealing to the
sacred name of God, as if great wrong had been done to them. Thus,
whilst they persuade themselves that they are privileged with exemption
from the law to which the rest of mankind are subject, they endeavor to
deprive the common people of divine truth and its ministers. In short,
they think that there can be no sovereignty unless where uncontrolled
license is enjoyed. But let this principle be once established, “That
God rules among them,” and then a way is opened up for the admission of
divine truth. Accordingly, the prophet, after having thus laid a
foundation for his authority, freely inveighs against princes, and
reproves the very gross vice of selling themselves to those who
unrighteously oppress the poor, and of being gained by bribes to pervert
in their administration every principle of justice. He expressly names
the *wicked;* for good men will never attempt to corrupt judges.
Moreover, there is a certain devilish frenzy which infatuates the
princes of the world, and leads them voluntarily to pay greater respect
to wicked men than to the simple and innocent. Even supposing that the
wicked continue inactive, and use no endeavors to obtain for themselves
favor either by flattery, fraud, bribery, or other artifices; yet those
who bear rule are for the most part inclined of themselves to the bad
side. The reason why the prophet upbraids them is, that wicked men find
more favor at their hands than the good and conscientious.

<span id="xvii.i-p17"></span><span id="xvii.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p18"></span>**3** *Determine the cause of the poor and
the orphan.* We are here briefly taught that a just and well-regulated
government will be distinguished for maintaining the rights of the poor
and afflicted. By the figure synecdoche, one part of equitable
administration is put for the whole; for it cannot be doubted that
rulers are bound to observe justice towards all men without distinction.
But the prophet, with much propriety, represents them as appointed to be
the defenders of the miserable and oppressed, both because such persons
stand in need of the assistance of others, and because they can only
obtain this where rulers are free from avarice, ambition, and other
vices. The end, therefore, for which judges bear the sword is to
restrain the wicked, and thus to prevent violence from prevailing among
men, who are so much disposed to become disorderly and outrageous.
According as men increase in strength, they become proportionally
audacious in oppressing the weak; and hence it is that rich men seldom
resort to magistrates for help, except when they happen to fall out
among themselves. From these remarks, it is very obvious why the cause
of the poor and needy is here chiefly commended to rulers; for those who
are exposed an easy prey to the cruelty and wrongs of the rich have no
less need of the assistance and protection of magistrates than the sick
have of the aid of the physician. Were the truth deeply fixed in the
minds of kings and other judges, that they are appointed to be the
guardians of the poor, and that a special part of this duty lies in
resisting the wrongs which are done to them, and in repressing all
unrighteous violence, perfect righteousness would become triumphant
through the whole world. Whoever thinks it not beneath him to defend the
poor, instead of allowing himself to be carried hither and thither by
favor, will have a regard only to what is right. We may farther learn
from this passage, that although magistrates may not be solicited for
succor, they are accounted guilty before God of negligence, if they do
not, of their own accord, succor those who stand in need of their
interference. When iniquity openly prevails, and when, on account of it,
sighs and lamentations are everywhere heard, it is in vain for them to
pretend that they cannot redress wrongs, unless complaints are addressed
to them. Oppression utters a sufficiently loud cry of itself; and if the
judge, sitting on a high watch-tower, seems to take no notice of it, he
is here plainly warned, that such connivance shall not escape with
impunity.

<span id="xvii.ii"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p1"></span><span id="xvii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
82:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#005)<span id="xvii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p2"></span>**5.** They know not, neither do they
understand: they walk in darkness, although all the foundations of the
earth are moved. **6.** I have said, Ye are gods, and all of you sons of
the Most High. **7.** But ye shall die as a man; and ye shall fall, O
princes: as one of the people. **8.** Arise, O God! Judge the earth: for
thou shalt inherit all nations.

<span id="xvii.ii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xvii.ii-p4"></span><span id="xvii.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p5"></span>**5** *They know not, neither do they
understand.*  <span id="fr_424"></span>[425](#fn_424) After having
reminded princes of their duty, the Psalmist complains that his
admonition from their infatuation is ineffectual, and that they refuse
to receive wholesome instruction; yea, that although the whole world is
shaken to its foundations, they, notwithstanding, continue thoughtless
and secure in the neglect of their duty. He chiefly reprobates and
condemns their madness as manifested in this, that although they see
heaven and earth involved in confusion, they are no more affected at the
sight than if the care of the interests of mankind did not belong to
them, of which they are, notwithstanding, in an especial manner the
chosen and appointed conservators. I have stated a little before, that
what chiefly deprives them of understanding is, that, being dazzled with
their own splendor, and perversely shaking off every yoke, no religious
considerations have the effect of inclining them to moderation. All
sound knowledge and wisdom must commence with yielding to God the honor
which is his due, and submitting to be restrained and governed by his
word. The last clause of the verse, *Although all the foundations of the
earth are moved,*  <span id="fr_425"></span>[426](#fn_425) is almost
universally understood by interpreters in a different sense from that in
which I have rendered it. They explain it as implying, that of all the
calamities in the world the greatest is when princes neglect to execute
the duties of their office; for it is the observance and prevalence of
justice which constitutes the foundation on which the fabric of human
society rests. Thus the sense, according to them, is, that the world is
undermined and overthrown by the unjust tyranny of princes. I am far
from rejecting this interpretation; but, as I have already hinted, I am
more inclined to think, that we have here condemned the monstrous
stupidity of judges, who can remain indifferent and unmoved in beholding
the horrible confusion of civil society, yea even the very earth shaken
to its foundations.

<span id="xvii.ii-p8"></span><span id="xvii.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p9"></span>**6** *I have said, ye are gods.* God has
invested judges with a sacred character and title. This the prophet
concedes; but he, at the same time, shows that this will afford no
support and protection to wicked judges. He does not introduce them as
speaking of the dignity of their office; but anticipating the style of
reasoning which they would be disposed to adopt, he replies, “If you
appeal to your dignity as an argument to shield you, this boasting will
avail you nothing; yea, rather you are deceiving yourselves by your
foolish confidence; for God, in appointing you his substitutes, has not
divested himself of his own sovereignty as supreme ruler. Again, he
would have you to remember your own frailty as a means of stirring you
up to execute with fear and trembling the office intrusted to you.” This
verse may also be viewed as addressed by God himself to rulers, and as
intimating, that, in addition to his clothing them with authority, he
has bestowed upon them his name. This interpretation seems to agree with
the language of Christ in <span id="xvii.ii-p9.1"></span>[Joh
10:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#034)<span id="xvii.ii-p9.1"></span>,
where he speaks of those as called gods to whom the word of God came.
The passage, however, may be appropriately resolved thus: *I grant that
ye are gods, and the sons of the Most High*  <span
id="fr_426"></span>[427](#fn_426) But this does not materially alter the
meaning. The object is simply to teach that the dignity with which
judges are invested can form no excuse or plea why they should escape
the punishment which their wickedness deserves. The government of the
world has been committed to them upon the distinct understanding that
they themselves also must one day appear at the judgment-seat of heaven
to render up an account. The dignity, therefore, with which they are
clothed is only temporary, and will pass away with the fashion of the
world. Accordingly, it is added in the 7th verse, *But ye shall die as
men.* You are armed with power, as if he had said, to govern the world;
but you have not on that account ceased to be men, so as to be no longer
subject to mortality. The last clause of the verse is translated by some
expositors, *Ye shall fall like one of the princes;*  <span
id="fr_427"></span>[428](#fn_427) but in my opinion improperly. They
think that it contains a threatening of the violent death which would
befall these unrighteous judges, corresponding to the sentiment of these
lines of a heathen poet: —

<span id="xvii.ii-p12"></span>“<span id="xvii.ii-p12.1"></span>Ad
generum Cereris sine caede et sanguine pauci,  
Descendunt reges, et sicca morte tyranni.”

<span id="xvii.ii-p13"></span>“Few kings and tyrants go down to Pluto,
the son-in-law of Ceres, without being put to a violent death, before
they have completed the ordinary term allotted to the life of mortal
man.”  <span id="fr_428"></span>[429](#fn_428) That translation being
forced, and not such as the words naturally suggest, I have no doubt
that princes are here compared to the obscure and common class of
mankind. The word *one* signifies any of the common people. Forgetting
themselves to be men, the great ones of the earth may flatter themselves
with visionary hopes of immortality; but they are here taught that they
will be compelled to encounter death as well as other men. Christ, with
the view of rebutting the calumny with which the Pharisees loaded him,
quoted this text, <span id="xvii.ii-p14.1"></span>[John
10:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#034),
[35](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#035)<span id="xvii.ii-p14.1"></span>,
“Jesus answered them, Is it not written in your law, I said, Ye are
gods? If he called them gods, unto whom the word of God came, and the
Scripture cannot be broken; say ye of him whom the Father hath
sanctified and sent into the world, Thou blasphemest; because I said, I
am the Son of God?” By these words Christ did not mean to place himself
among the order of judges; but he argues from the less to the greater,
that if the name of God is applied to God’s officers, it with much more
propriety belongs to his only begotten Son, who is the express image of
the Father, in whom the Father’s majesty shines forth, and in whom the
whole fullness of the Godhead dwells.

<span id="xvii.ii-p15"></span><span id="xvii.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p16"></span>**8** *Arise, O God! judge the earth.* The
reason why this psalm concludes with a prayer has been already stated at
the commencement. The prophet, finding that his admonitions and
remonstrances were ineffectual, and that princes, inflated with pride,
treated with contempt all instruction on the principles of equity,
addresses himself to God, and calls upon Him to repress their insolence.
By this means, the Holy Spirit furnishes us with ground of comfort
whenever we are cruelly treated by tyrants. We may perceive no power on
earth to restrain their excesses; but it becomes us to lift up our eyes
to heaven, and to seek redress from Him whose office it is to judge the
world, and who does not claim this office to himself in vain. It is
therefore our bounden duty to beseech him to restore to order what is
embroiled in confusion. The reason of this which immediately follows —
*for thou shalt inherit all nations* — is understood by some as a
prophecy concerning the kingdom of Christ, by whom God has brought all
nations in subjection to himself. But it is to be viewed in a more
extensive sense, as implying that God has a rightful claim to the
obedience of all nations, and that tyrants are chargeable with wickedly
and unjustly wresting from him his prerogative of bearing rule, when
they set at nought his authority, and confound good and evil, right and
wrong. We ought therefore to beseech him to restore to order the
confusions of the world, and thus to recover the rightful dominion which
he has over it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_420"></span>[421](cc10016.htm#fr_420) <span
id="xvii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xvii-p3"></span> Kimchi thinks it probable that this psalm was
written in the days of Jehoshaphat, and refers to <span
id="xvii-p3.1"></span>[2Ch 19:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2019.htm#005)<span
id="xvii-p3.1"></span>, as indicating the time and occasion of its
composition. We are there informed that Jehoshaphat; “set judges in the
land, throughout all the fenced cities of Judah, city by city;” and in
instructing them with regard to their duty, he uses nearly the same
words as those in the beginning of this psalm. Dr Morison takes a
different view. “This psalm,” says he, “was composed in all probability
in the days of Hezekiah, in reference to certain wicked magistrates,
(<span id="xvii-p3.2"></span>[2Ch
29:30](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#030)<span id="xvii-p3.2"></span>,)
who had grievously perverted the administration of justice, who were
guilty of great oppression, and who had done much to introduce a state
of general national corruption. King Jehoshaphat had reformed several
public abuses which had crept into the judicatories of Israel in his
time, (<span id="xvii-p3.3"></span>[2Ch
19:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2019.htm#007)<span id="xvii-p3.3"></span>,) but
before the reign of Hezekiah, things had reverted to their former
unhappy condition; so that a public national reformation was loudly
demanded. The psalm contains an exhortation to the judges of Israel, and
a reproof for their negligence and oppression.”

<span id="fn_421"></span>[422](cc10016.htm#fr_421) <span
id="xvii.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p3"></span> “<span id="xvii.i-p3.1"></span>Ou, il
jugeras au milieu les dieux.” — *Fr*. *marg*. “Or, he will judge in the
midst the gods.”

<span id="fn_422"></span>[423](cc10016.htm#fr_422) <span
id="xvii.i-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p4"></span> “<span id="xvii.i-p4.1"></span>C’est,
faites justice.” — *Fr*. *marg*. “That is, do justice to.”

<span id="fn_423"></span>[424](cc10016.htm#fr_423) <span
id="xvii.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p8"></span> Horsley translates the first verse thus: —

<span id="xvii.i-p9"></span>“God standeth in the assembly;  
God, in the midst of the gods, giveth sentence.”

<span id="xvii.i-p10"></span>On which he has the following note: — “In
what assembly? The assembly of his holy angels. The Psalmist, I think,
poetically imagines the celestial court assembled for the business of
this review of the proceedings of the earth’s judges, and God, in the
midst of his angels, taxing their iniquity, and awarding their
punishment.”

<span id="fn_424"></span>[425](cc10016.htm#fr_424) <span
id="xvii.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p6"></span> “The Psalmist having thus far addressed
himself to the administrators of justice, as if wearied with his
ineffectual remonstrance, here suddenly turns away and condemns their
inattention and perverseness. The change of person is a natural
indication of the earnestness of the speaker, and has a lively effect.”
— *Mant*.

<span id="fn_425"></span>[426](cc10016.htm#fr_425) <span
id="xvii.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p7"></span> “*All the foundations of the earth*, etc.
Rather, *of the land*; that is, truth and justice, the foundation of all
good government, and the only security of a state, are now altogether
violated or disregarded.” — *Warner*.

<span id="fn_426"></span>[427](cc10016.htm#fr_426) <span
id="xvii.ii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p10"></span> “*Ye are all the children of the Most
High*, an Hebrew idiom, signifying men of the highest rank and power.
Comp. <span id="xvii.ii-p10.1"></span>[Ps.
29:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#001), [Ps.
89:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#007)<span id="xvii.ii-p10.1"></span>.”
— *Cresswell*.

<span id="fn_427"></span>[428](cc10016.htm#fr_427) <span
id="xvii.ii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p11"></span> This is the reading in our English Bible,
on which Archbishop Secker remarks, “It seems needless to say that these
princes shall fall like one of the princes.” He thinks with Bishop Hare
that the true reading is not <span id="xvii.ii-p11.1"></span>השרים,
*hassarim*, *the princes*, as in our present copies, but <span
id="xvii.ii-p11.2"></span>הרשים, *harsaim*, *the poor* The translation,
however, given by Calvin, who takes <span
id="xvii.ii-p11.3"></span>השרים in the vocative case, *O* *ye princes*!
and who, after the word <span id="xvii.ii-p11.4"></span>כאחד,
*cheachad*, for *as one of*, supplies *the people*, makes any alteration
of the text unnecessary. Gataker also considers <span
id="xvii.ii-p11.5"></span>השרים, to be in the vocative case, which is
approved by Horsley, Berlin, and others. Dathe takes <span
id="xvii.ii-p11.6"></span>השרים in the sense of *tyrants*, but brings no
authority to prove that the word has this sense. Le Clerc, in the latter
part of the verse, after *like one of*, supplies *the many*, reading,
“And fall, O ye princes! like one of the many.”

<span id="fn_428"></span>[429](cc10016.htm#fr_428) <span
id="xvii.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p14"></span> This is the translation given of these
lines in the French version.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 83](cc10017)
