[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc10014)  [Next](cc10016) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 10: Psalms, Part III*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi"></span>

<span id="xvi-p1"></span>PSALM 81

<span id="xvi-p2"></span>This psalm consists of two parts. Whoever was
its author, he exhorts the people to remember the unparalleled grace of
God towards them, in delivering them by his outstretched arm, and
choosing them to be a kingdom of priests, and a peculiar Church to
himself; that thus they may be excited devoutly to honor their
deliverer, both by celebrating his praises, and by leading a holy life.
God is next introduced as upbraiding them for their ingratitude in
continuing obstinately to refuse to submit to the yoke of the law,
notwithstanding the tender and gracious manner in which he allured them
to himself.

<span id="xvi-p3"></span>To the chief musician upon Gittith. A Psalm of
Asaph.  <span id="fr_400"></span>[401](#fn_400)

<span id="xvi.i"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p1"></span><span id="xvi.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
81:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#001)<span id="xvi.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p2"></span>**1.** Sing joyfully to God our strength sing
with a loud voice: to the God of Jacob. **2.** Raise a song,  <span
id="fr_401"></span>[402](#fn_401) and bring forth the tabret, the
pleasant harp, with the psaltery.  <span
id="fr_402"></span>[403](#fn_402) **3.** Sound the trumpet at the new
moon; at the time appointed on the day of our sacrifice.  <span
id="fr_403"></span>[404](#fn_403) **4.** For this is a statute to
Israel, a law to the God of Jacob. **5.** He set it for a testimony in
Joseph, when he went forth over \[or above\] the land of Egypt: I heard
a language which I understood not. **6.** I removed his shoulder from
the burden; his hands were freed from the pots.  <span
id="fr_404"></span>[405](#fn_404) **7.** Thou didst cry in trouble, and
I delivered thee: I answered thee in the secret place of thunder: I
proved thee at the waters of Meribah. Selah.

<span id="xvi.i-p7"></span> 

<span id="xvi.i-p8"></span><span id="xvi.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p9"></span>**1** *Sing joyfully to God our strength.*
This psalm, it is probable, was appointed to be sung on the festival
days on which the Jews kept their solemn assemblies. In the exordium,
there is set forth the order of worship which God had enjoined. They
were not to stand deaf and dumb at the tabernacle; for the service of
God does not consist in indolence, nor in cold and empty ceremonies; but
they were, by such exercises as are here prescribed, to cherish among
themselves the unity of faith; to make an open profession of their
piety; to stir up themselves to continual progress therein; to endeavor
to join, with one accord, in praising God; and, in short, to continue
steadfast in the sacred covenant by which God had adopted them to
himself.

<span id="xvi.i-p10"></span>Such having been the use of festival days
under the law, we may conclude, that whenever true believers assemble
together at the present day, the end which they ought to have in view is
to employ themselves in the exercises of religion — to call to their
remembrance the benefits which they have received from God — to make
progress in the knowledge of his word — and to testify the oneness of
their faith. Men only mock God by presenting to him vain and
unprofitable ceremonies, unless the doctrine of faith go before,
stirring them up to call upon God; and unless, also, the remembrance of
his benefits furnish matter of praise. Yea, rather it is a profanation
of his name, when people quench the light of divine truth, and satisfy
themselves with performing mere outward service. Accordingly, the
faithful are here not only enjoined to come together to the tabernacle,
but are also taught the end for which they are to assemble there, which
is, that the free and gracious covenant which God has made with them may
be brought anew to their remembrance, for increasing their faith and
piety, that thus the benefits which they have received from him may be
celebrated, and their hearts thereby moved to thanksgiving. With respect
to the *tabret, harp, and psaltery,* we have formerly observed, and will
find it necessary afterwards to repeat the same remark, that the
Levites, under the law, were justified in making use of instrumental
music in the worship of God; it having been his will to train his
people, while they were as yet tender and like children, by such
rudiments, until the coming of Christ. But now when the clear light of
the gospel has dissipated the shadows of the law, and taught us that God
is to be served in a simpler form, it would be to act a foolish and
mistaken part to imitate that which the prophet enjoined only upon those
of his own time. From this, it is apparent that the Papists have shown
themselves to be very apes in transferring this to themselves. Under the
*new moon,* by the figure synecdoche, is comprehended all the other high
feasts. Sacrifices were daily offered; but the days on which the
faithful met together at the tabernacle, according to the express
appointment of the law, are called, by way of eminence, *the days of
sacrifice.*

<span id="xvi.i-p11"></span><span id="xvi.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p12"></span>**4** *For this is a statute to Israel.* To
give the more effect to the preceding exhortation, it is here taught
that this law or ordinance had been prescribed to God’s ancient people,
for the purpose of ratifying the everlasting covenant. And as in
covenants there is a mutual agreement between the parties, it is
declared that this *statute was given to Israel,* and that God, in
contracting, reserved this for himself, as a right to which he was
justly entitled.

<span id="xvi.i-p13"></span><span id="xvi.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p14"></span>**5** *He set it for a testimony in Joseph.*
The Hebrew word <span id="xvi.i-p14.1"></span>עדוה*, eduth,* is by some
derived from <span id="xvi.i-p14.2"></span>עדה*, adah,* which signifies
*to adorn;* and they translate it *the honor* or *ornament* of Joseph.
But it rather comes from the verb <span id="xvi.i-p14.3"></span>עוד*,
ud, to testify;* and the scope of the passage requires that it should be
translated *a testimony* or *covenant.* Farther, when Joseph is named in
particular, there is a reference to the first original of the chosen
people, when, after the death of Jacob, the twelve tribes were
distinguished. As the sovereignty had not at that time come to the tribe
of Judah, and as Reuben had fallen from his right of primogeniture, the
posterity of Joseph justly had the pre-eminence, on account of the
benefits which he had been instrumental in conferring; having been the
father and nourisher of his brethren and of the whole nation. Moreover,
the sacredness of the covenant is commended by a special appeal to the
fact, that at the time when God stipulated that this honor should be
yielded to him, he had purchased that people to himself; as if it had
been said, The condition upon which the people were delivered was, that
they should assemble together on the days appointed for renewing the
remembrance of the grace which had been exercised towards them. The
words *when he went forth* will apply equally to God and to the people.
 <span id="fr_405"></span>[406](#fn_405) It is a common form of
expression to speak of God as going forth before his people, as a
shepherd goes before his flock, or as a general before his army. When it
is said ABOVE *the land of Egypt,* some think there is an allusion to
the situation of Judea, which was higher than that of Egypt; so that
those who come out of Egypt to Judea ascend. But I understand the
language as meaning simply, that the people, having God for their
conductor, passed freely and without obstruction through the land of
Egypt, the inhabitants having been so discouraged and dismayed as not to
dare to make any opposition to their passage.  <span
id="fr_406"></span>[407](#fn_406) The prophet enhances the blessing of
their deliverance, when, speaking in the name of the whole people, he
affirms that he had been rescued from profound barbarism*: I heard a
language which I understood not.*  <span
id="fr_407"></span>[408](#fn_407) Nothing is more disagreeable than to
sojourn among a people with whom we can hold no communication by
language, which is the chief bond of society. Language being, as it
were, the image and mirror of the mind, those who cannot employ it in
their mutual intercourse are no less strangers to one another than the
wild beasts of the forest. When the Prophet Isaiah (<span
id="xvi.i-p17.1"></span>[Isa
33:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#019)<span id="xvi.i-p17.1"></span>)
intends to denounce a very dreadful punishment, he says, “Thou shalt see
a fierce people, a people of a deeper speech than thou canst perceive;
of a stammering tongue, that thou canst not understand.” Thus the people
acknowledge that the benefit which God conferred was so much the more to
be valued, because they were delivered from the Egyptians, with whose
language they were unacquainted.  <span
id="fr_408"></span>[409](#fn_408)

<span id="xvi.i-p19"></span><span id="xvi.i-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p20"></span>**6** *I have removed his shoulder from the
burden.* Here God begins to recount the benefits which he had bestowed
upon the Israelites, and the many ways in which he had laid them under
obligations to him. The more galling the bondage was from which they had
been delivered, the more desirable and precious was their liberty. When,
therefore, it is affirmed that their burdens were so heavy that they
stooped under them, and that they were doomed to the labor of making
bricks, and to other slavish and toilsome occupations, the comparison of
this their first state with their condition afterwards is introduced to
illustrate the more strikingly the greatness of the blessing of their
deliverance. Let us now apply this to ourselves, and elevate our minds
to a higher subject, of which it was an image. As God has not only
withdrawn our shoulders from a burden of brick, and not only removed our
hands from the kilns, but has also redeemed us from the cruel and
miserable tyranny of Satan, and drawn us from the depths of hell, the
obligations under which we lie to him are of a much more strict and
sacred kind than those under which he had brought his ancient people.

<span id="xvi.i-p21"></span><span id="xvi.i-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p22"></span>**7** *Thou didst cry in trouble, and I
delivered thee.* Here the same subject is prosecuted. By their crying
when they were in distress, I understand the prayers which they then
offered to God. It sometimes happens that those who are reduced to
extremity bewail their calamities with confused crying; but as this
afflicted people still had in them some remains of godliness, and as
they had not forgotten the promise made to their fathers, I have no
doubt that they directed their prayers to God. Even men without
religion, who never think of calling upon God, when they are under the
pressure of any great calamity, are moved by a secret instinct of nature
to have recourse to Him. This renders it the more probable that the
promise was, as it were, a schoolmaster to the Israelites, leading them
to look to God. As no man sincerely calls upon Him but he who trusts in
him for help; this crying ought the more effectually to have convinced
them that it was their duty to ascribe to Him alone the deliverance
which was offered them. By *the secret place of thunder* some, in my
opinion, with too much refinement of interpretation, understand that God
by thundering rendered the groanings of the people inaudible to the
Egyptians, that by hearing them the Egyptians might not become the more
exasperated. But the meaning simply is, that the people were heard in a
secret and wonderful manner, while, at the same time, manifest tokens
were given by which the Israelites might be satisfied that they were
succoured by the Divine hand. God, it is true, was not seen by them face
to face; but the thunder was an evident indication of his secret
presence among them.  <span id="fr_409"></span>[410](#fn_409) To make
them prize more highly this benefit, God upbraidingly tells them that
they were unworthy of it, having given such a manifest proof *at the
waters of Meribah,*  <span id="fr_410"></span>[411](#fn_410) that they
were of a wicked and perverse disposition, <span
id="xvi.i-p24.4"></span>[Ex 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#007)<span
id="xvi.i-p24.4"></span>. Your wickedness, as if he had said, having at
that time so openly shown itself, surely it must from this be
incontrovertible that my favor to you did not proceed from any regard to
your good desert. This rebuke is not less applicable to us than to the
Israelites; for God not only heard our groanings when we were afflicted
under the tyranny of Satan, but before we were born appointed his only
begotten Son to be the price of our redemption; and afterwards, when we
were his enemies, he called us to be partakers of his grace,
illuminating our minds by his gospel and his Holy Spirit; while we,
notwithstanding, continue to indulge in murmuring, yea, even proudly
rebel against Him.

<span id="xvi.ii"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p1"></span><span id="xvi.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
81:8-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#008)<span id="xvi.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p2"></span>**8.** Hear, O my people! and I will protest
to thee:  <span id="fr_411"></span>[412](#fn_411) O Israel! if thou wilt
hearken to me. **9.** Let there be no strange god in thee: neither
worship thou a strange god. **10.** I am Jehovah thy God, who brought
thee out of the land of Egypt: open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it.
**11.** But my people hearkened not to my voice, and Israel would none
of me **12.** And I gave them up to the thoughts  <span
id="fr_412"></span>[413](#fn_412) of their own heart: they shall walk in
their own counsels.

<span id="xvi.ii-p5"></span> 

<span id="xvi.ii-p6"></span><span id="xvi.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p7"></span>**8** *Hear, O my people!* The more
effectually to touch the hearts of the people, God is here invested with
the character of a teacher, and introduced as speaking familiarly in the
midst of the congregation; and this is done for the purpose of
instructing them, that all assemblies are unprofitable and trifling in
which the voice of God stirring up men to faith and true godliness is
not uttered. But let us proceed to the consideration of the words. This
preface was intended to teach in a few words, that festival days were
not purely and rightly observed unless the people listened with
attention to the voice of God. In order to consecrate their hands, feet,
eyes, and their whole persons, to his service, it behoved them, in the
first place, to open their ears to his voice. Thus the lesson is taught
that he acknowledges as his servants those only who are disposed to
become learners. By the word *protest* he intimates that he covenants
after a solemn manner, thereby to give his words the greater authority.
The clause which follows*, O Israel! if thou wilt hearken to me,* is, I
presume, an abrupt expression, similar to what is frequently employed in
pathetic discourses, the ellipse serving to express the greater
earnestness. Some connect it with the following verse in this way, *O
Israel! if thou wilt hearken to me, there will be no strange god in
thee* But it is rather to be viewed as the language of regret on the
part of God. He indirectly intimates that he distrusts this obstinate
and rebellious people, and can hardly indulge the hope that they will
prove obedient and teachable.

<span id="xvi.ii-p8"></span><span id="xvi.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p9"></span>**9** *Let there be no strange god*  <span
id="fr_413"></span>[414](#fn_413) *in thee.* Here there is propounded
the leading article of the covenant, and almost the whole sum of it,
which is, that God alone must have the pre-eminence. Some may prefer
this explanation: O Israel! if thou wilt hearken to me, there is nothing
which I more strictly require or demand from thee than that thou
shouldst be contented with me alone, and that thou shouldst not seek
after strange gods: and of this opinion I am far from disapproving. God
by this language undoubtedly confirms the truth which he so frequently
inculcates elsewhere in the law and the prophets, that he is so jealous
a God as not to allow another to be a partaker of the honor to which he
alone is entitled. But at the same time he teaches us that true
religious worship begins with obedience. The order which Moses observes
is different, <span id="xvi.ii-p10.1"></span>[Exod.
20:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#002),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#004)<span id="xvi.ii-p10.1"></span>, and
<span id="xvi.ii-p10.2"></span>[Deut.
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#006),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#008)<span id="xvi.ii-p10.2"></span>. In
these passages God sets out with declaring that he is the God of Israel;
and then he forbids them to make for themselves any new gods. But here
the prohibition is put first, and then the reason of it is subjoined,
which is, that the people ought to be abundantly satisfied with the God
who had purchased them to be his people. Perhaps also he sets this in
the front to prepare the way for his obtaining the throne of their
hearts. He would first withdraw the people from superstitions, as these
must necessarily be plucked up and cleared away before true religion can
take root in our hearts.

<span id="xvi.ii-p11"></span><span id="xvi.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p12"></span>**10.** *I am Jehovah thy God, who brought
thee out of the land of Egypt: open thy mouth wide.* God, by making
mention of the deliverance which he had wrought for the people, put a
bridle upon those whom he had taken under his protection, by which he
might hold them bound to his service; and now he assures them, that with
respect to the time to come, he had an abundant supply of all blessings
with which to fill and satisfy their desires. The three arguments which
he employs to induce the Israelites to adhere exclusively to him, and by
which he shows them how wickedly and impiously they would act in turning
aside from him, and having recourse to strange gods, are worthy of
special attention. The first is, that he is *Jehovah.* By the word
*Jehovah,* he asserts his claims as God by nature, and declares, that it
is beyond the power of man to make new gods. When he says *I am
Jehovah,* the pronoun I is emphatic. The Egyptians, no doubt, pretended
to worship the Creator of heaven and of earth; but their contempt of the
God of Israel plainly convicted them of falsehood. Whenever men depart
from Him, they adorn the idols of their own invention with His spoils,
whatever the specious pretexts may be by which they attempt to vindicate
themselves. After having affirmed that he is Jehovah, he proves his
Godhead from the effect and experience, — from the clear and
irrefragable evidence of it in his delivering his people from Egypt, and
especially, from his performing at that time the promise which he had
made to the fathers. This is his second argument. The power which was
displayed on that occasion ought not to have been contemplated apart by
itself, since it depended upon the covenant, which long before he had
entered into with Abraham. By that deliverance he gave a proof not less
of his veracity than of his power, and thus vindicated the praise which
was due to him. The third argument is, that he offers himself to the
people for the time to come; assuring them, that, provided they continue
to persevere in the faith, he will be the same towards the children as
the fathers experienced him to be, his goodness being inexhaustible:
*Open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it.* By the expression *open
wide,* he tacitly condemns the contracted views and desires which
obstruct the exercise of his beneficence. “If the people are in penury,”
we may suppose him to say, “the blame is to be entirely ascribed to
themselves, because their capacity is not large enough to receive the
blessings of which they stand in need; or rather, because by their
unbelief they reject the blessings which would flow spontaneously upon
them.” He not only bids them open their mouth, but he magnifies the
abundance of his grace still more highly, by intimating, that however
enlarged our desires may be, there will be nothing wanting which is
necessary to afford us full satisfaction. Whence it follows, that the
reason why God’s blessings drop upon us in a sparing and slender manner
is, because our mouth is too narrow; and the reason why others are empty
and famished is, because they keep their mouth completely shut. The
majority of mankind, either from disgust, or pride, or madness, refuse
all the blessings which are offered them from heaven. Others, although
they do not altogether reject them, yet with difficulty take in only a
few small drops, because their faith is so straitened as to prevent them
from receiving an abundant supply. It is a very manifest proof of the
depravity of mankind, when they have no desire to know God, in order
that they may embrace him, and when they are equally disinclined to rest
satisfied with him. He undoubtedly here requires to be worshipped by
external service; but he sets no value upon the bare name of Deity — for
his majesty does not consist in two or three syllables. He rather looks
to what the name imports, and is solicitous that our hope may not be
withdrawn from him to other objects, or that the praise of
righteousness, salvation, and all blessings, may not be transferred from
him to another. In calling himself by the name *Jehovah,* he claims
Godhead exclusively to himself, on the ground that he possesses a
plenitude of all blessings with which to satisfy and fill us.

<span id="xvi.ii-p13"></span><span id="xvi.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p14"></span>**11.** *But my people hearkened not to my
voice.* God now complains, that the Israelites, whom he endeavored
gently to allure to him, despised his friendly invitation; yea, that
although he had for a long time continued to exhort them, they always
shut their ears against his voice. It is not a rebellion of one day
which he deplores: he complains, that from the very beginning they were
always a stupid and hardened people, and that they continued to
persevere in the same obstinacy. It is assuredly monstrous perverseness
to exclude God from obtaining access to us, and to refuse to give him a
hearing, when he is ready to enter into covenant with us, making the
terms almost equal on both sides. To leave them no room for extenuating
their guilt under the pretense of ignorance, he adds, that he was
rejected with avowed and deliberate contempt: *Israel would none of me.*
From this it is evident, that their minds were bewitched by the god of
this world.

<span id="xvi.ii-p15"></span>This is the reason why, as is stated in the
following verse, *he gave them up to the hardness of their own heart,*
or, as others translate it, *to the thoughts of their own heart.* The
root <span id="xvi.ii-p15.1"></span>שרר, *shorer,* from which the word
rendered *thoughts* is derived, signifies properly *the navel*
Accordingly, the translation is very appropriate, which takes this word
either for the thoughts which are wrapped up in the hearts of men, or
for the hardness which possesses the heart. It being, however, as is
well known, a usual thing in the Psalms for the same thing to be twice
repeated, I have preferred the word *thoughts,* because it follows
immediately after, *They shall walk in their own counsels.* Besides, by
these words, God testifies, that he justly punished his people, when he
deprived them of good and wholesome doctrine, and gave them over to a
reprobate mind. As in governing us by means of his word, he restrains
us, as it were, with a bridle, and thereby prevents us from going astray
after our own perverse imaginations, so, by removing his prophets from
the Jews, he gave loose reins to their froward and corrupt counsels, by
which they were led into devious paths. It is assuredly the most
dreadful kind of punishment which can be inflicted upon us, and an
evidence of the utter hopelessness of our condition, when God, holding
his peace, and conniving at our perverseness, applies no remedy for
bringing us to repentance and amendment. So long as he administers
reproof to us, alarms us with the dread of judgment, and summons us
before his tribunal, he, at the same time, calls upon us to repent. But
when he sees that it is altogether lost labor to reason any longer with
us, and that his admonitions have no effect, he holds his peace, and by
this teaches us that he has ceased to make our salvation the object of
his care. Nothing, therefore, is more to be dreaded, than for men to be
so set free from the divine guidance, as recklessly to follow their own
counsels, and to be dragged by Satan wherever he pleases. The words,
however may be viewed in a more extensive sense, as implying that the
patience of God being worn out, he left his people, who, by their
desperate perverseness, had cut off all hope of their ever becoming
better, to act without restraint as they chose. It is a very absurd
inference which some draw from this passage, that the grace of God is
bestowed equally upon all men until it is rejected. Even at that time,
God, while he passed by all the rest of the world, was graciously
pleased to bring the posterity of Abraham, by peculiar and exclusive
privilege, into a special relation to himself. At the present day, this
distinction, I admit, has been abolished, and the message of the gospel,
by which God reconciles the world to himself, is common to all men. Yet
we see how God stirs up godly teachers in one place rather than in
another. Still the external call alone would be insufficient, did not
God effectually draw to himself those whom he has called. Further, as
this passage teaches us, that there is no plague more deadly than for
men to be left to the guidance of their own counsels, the only thing
which remains for us to do is to renounce the dictates of carnal wisdom,
and to follow the guidance of the Holy Spirit.

<span id="xvi.iii"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p1"></span><span id="xvi.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
81:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#013)<span
id="xvi.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p2"></span>**13.** O if my people had hearkened to me!
If Israel had walked in my ways! **14.** I would soon have brought their
enemies low, and turned my hand against their adversaries. **15.** The
haters of Jehovah would have lied to him, and their time should have
been everlasting. **16.** I  <span id="fr_414"></span>[415](#fn_414)
would have fed them with the fat of corn: and I would have satisfied
thee with honey from the rock.

<span id="xvi.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xvi.iii-p5"></span><span id="xvi.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p6"></span>**13.** *O if my people had hearkened to
me!* By the honorable designation which God gives to the people of
Israel, He exposes the more effectually their shameful and disgraceful
conduct. Their wickedness was doubly aggravated, as will appear from the
consideration, that although God called them to be his people, they
differed nothing from those who were the greatest strangers to him. Thus
he complains by the Prophet Isaiah,

<span id="xvi.iii-p7"></span>“The ox knoweth his owner, and the ass his
master’s crib:  
but Israel doth not know, my people doth not consider.”  
(<span id="xvi.iii-p7.3"></span>[Isa
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#003)<span id="xvi.iii-p7.3"></span>)

<span id="xvi.iii-p8"></span>The Hebrew particle <span
id="xvi.iii-p8.1"></span>לו, *lu,* which I have rendered *O* *if!* is
not to be understood as expressing a condition, but a wish; and
therefore God, I have no doubt, like a man weeping and lamenting, cries
out, O the wretchedness of this people in wilfully refusing to have
their best interests carefully provided for! He assumes the character of
a father, and observing, after having tried every possible means for the
recovery of his children, that their condition is utterly hopeless, he
uses the language of one saddened, as it were, with sighing and
groaning; not that he is subject to human passions, but because he
cannot otherwise express the greatness of the love which he bears
towards us.  <span id="fr_415"></span>[416](#fn_415) The Prophet seems
to have borrowed this passage from the song of Moses in <span
id="xvi.iii-p11.4"></span>[De
32:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#029)<span id="xvi.iii-p11.4"></span>,
where the obstinacy of the people is bewailed in almost the same words:
“Oh that they were wise, that they understood this, that they would
consider their latter end!” He means tacitly to upbraid the Jews, and to
impress upon their minds the truth, that their own perverseness was the
only cause which prevented them from enjoying a state of great outward
prosperity. If it is objected, that God in vain and without ground
utters this complaint, since it was in his power to bend the stiff necks
of the people, and that, when he was not pleased to do this, he had no
reason to compare himself to a man deeply grieved; I answer, that he
very properly makes use of this style of speaking on our account, that
we may seek for the procuring cause of our misery nowhere but in
ourselves. We must here beware of mingling together things which are
totally different — as widely different from each other as heaven is
distant from the earth. God, in coming down to us by his word, and
addressing his invitations to all men without exception, disappoints
nobody. All who sincerely come to him are received, and find from actual
experience that they were not called in vain. At the same time, we are
to trace to the fountain of the secret electing purpose of God this
difference, that the word enters into the heart of some, while others
only hear the sound of it. And yet there is no inconsistency in his
complaining, as it were, with tears, of our folly when we do not obey
him. In the invitations which he addresses to us by the external word,
he shows himself to be a father; and why may he not also be understood
as still representing himself under the image of a father in using this
form of complaint? In <span id="xvi.iii-p11.5"></span>[Eze
18:32](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#032)<span id="xvi.iii-p11.5"></span>,
he declares with the strictest regard to truth, “I have no pleasure in
the death of him that dieth,” provided in the interpretation of the
passage we candidly and dispassionately take into view the whole scope
of it. God has no pleasure in the death of a sinner: How? because he
would have all men turned to himself. But it is abundantly evident, that
men by their own free-will cannot turn to God, until he first change
their stony hearts into hearts of flesh: yea, this renovation, as
Augustine judiciously observes, is a work surpassing that of the
creation itself. Now what hinders God from bending and framing the
hearts of all men equally in submission to him? Here modesty and
sobriety must be observed, that instead of presuming to intrude into his
incomprehensible decrees, we may rest contented with the revelation
which he has made of his will in his word. There is the justest ground
for saying that he wills the salvation of those to whom that language is
addressed, (<span id="xvi.iii-p11.6"></span>[Isa
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#012)<span
id="xvi.iii-p11.6"></span>,) “Come unto me, and be ye converted.” In the
second part of the verse before us, we have defined what it is to hear
God. To assent to what he speaks would not be enough; for hypocrites
will grant at once that whatever proceeds from his mouth is true, and
will affect to listen just as if an ass should bend its ears. But the
clause is intended to teach us that we can only be said to hear God,
when we submit ourselves to his authority.

<span id="xvi.iii-p12"></span><span id="xvi.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p13"></span>**14.** *I would soon have brought their
enemies low.* Here the Israelites are taught, that all the calamities
which had befallen them were to be imputed to their own sins; for their
enemies did not fight against them with any other strength than that
with which they were supplied from above. God had promised that under
his leading the chosen people would prove victorious over all their
enemies; and now to take away all ground for charging him with violating
his word, he affirms that he would not have failed to enable them to do
this had he not been prevented by their sins. He doubtless intends
tacitly to remind them that the victories which they had formerly
achieved were not owing to their own military valor, but to Him under
whose conduct they had been placed. Now, he tells them that he was not
only kept back by their sins from putting forth his power to defend
them, but that he was also compelled by their perverseness to rush
against them with the sword in his hand, while he left their enemies to
remain in undisturbed tranquillity.

<span id="xvi.iii-p14"></span><span id="xvi.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p15"></span>**15.** *The haters of Jehovah would have
lied to him.* Here the same thought is pursued, when the Israelites are
informed that their enemies would have humbly submitted to their
authority had not their impiety emboldened them to run to excess, when
they shook off the yoke of God, and waxed wanton against him. In calling
these enemies *the enemies of Jehovah,* it is intended to censure the
folly of the Israelites in breaking the bond of the covenant made
between God and them, and thereby separating themselves from him, and
preventing him from forthwith engaging in war in their behalf against
those who were alike their and his enemies. As earthly princes, when
they are disappointed of the assistance promised by their allies, are
excited to enter into terms of agreement with their enemies, and in this
way avenge themselves on those who have been found to be guilty of
perjury and covenant-breakers; so God declares that he had spared his
own enemies, because he had been treacherously and wickedly deceived by
the people of Israel. Why does he permit his avowed enemies to remain
unpunished, and cease for a time to maintain his own glory, if it is not
because his object is to set them in contrast with his own rebellious
and disobedient people, whom, by this means, he intends to subdue? The
meaning of the word <span id="xvi.iii-p15.1"></span>כחש, *cachash,*
which we have rendered *lied,* has been explained in a previous psalm
 <span id="fr_416"></span>[417](#fn_416) . It is here intimated that
peace with the reprobate cannot be looked for except in so far as God
restrains their rage by hidden chains. A lion shut up in an iron cage
still retains his own nature, but he is kept from mangling and tearing
in pieces those who are not even more than five or six feet distant from
him. Thus it is with respect to the wicked. They may greedily desire our
destruction; but they are unable to accomplish what their hearts are set
upon; yea God humbles and abases their fierceness and arrogance, so that
they put on the appearance of gentleness and meekness. The amount of the
whole is, that it was the fault of the Israelites themselves that their
enemies prevailed against them, and insolently triumphed over them;
whereas, had they continued the humble and obedient children of God,
these enemies would have been in a state of subjection to them. When it
is said, *their time should have been everlasting,*  <span
id="fr_417"></span>[418](#fn_417) the expression is to be referred to
the promises; and so must the abundance of *wheat* and of *honey,* with
which they would have been fully satisfied. God had solemnly declared
that he would be their protector and guardian even to the end. The
change, then, which so suddenly befell them is set before them as a
matter of reproach, inasmuch as they had deliberately cast away all at
once their happy state. The same remarks are applicable to the
fruitfulness of the land. How is it to be accounted for that they
suffered hunger in the land in which God had promised them abundance of
wheat and honey, but because the blessing of God had been withheld on
account of their iniquity? By *the fat of corn*  <span
id="fr_418"></span>[419](#fn_418) is meant, metaphorically, pure grain,
unless it may be thought preferable to understand it of the finest
wheat. Some are of opinion that the expression, *honey out of the rock,*
is hyperbolical, implying that honey would have flowed from the very
rocks rather than that God would have failed to satisfy his people. But
as it is evident from sacred history that honey was found everywhere in
the hollows of the rocks  <span id="fr_419"></span>[420](#fn_419) so
long as they enjoyed the blessing of God, the meaning simply is, that
the grace of God would have continued to flow in an unbroken and uniform
course, had it not been interrupted by the perverseness and wickedness
of the people.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_400"></span>[401](cc10015.htm#fr_400) <span
id="xvi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xvi-p4"></span> There are various opinions as to the time and
occasion of the composition of this psalm. Bishop Horsley observes, “It
is certainly older than the time of David; for the use of Joseph’s name,
in the 5th verse, as the name of the whole nation, shows that it was
composed before Judah became the principal tribe, while the place of
worship was in the tribe of Ephraim; that is, among Joseph’s
descendants.” “This, however,” says Fry, “is not conclusive, as a psalm,
whenever composed, referring to the events of those times, might use the
same distinctions.” According to Walford, it “was most likely written to
be sung at some celebration of the feast of the Passover, during the
reign of Jehoshaphat or of Hezekiah.” But the generally received opinion
is, that it was composed, in the first instance, for the feast of
trumpets. This feast was celebrated on the first day of the month
*Tisri*, which was the beginning of the Jewish year, answering to our
September. It has been supposed by some, that this feast was appointed
in commemoration of the creation of the world, which is conjectured to
have been completed at that season of the year. The Hebrew months were
lunar, and the first day of each month had its religious services,
accompanied with sound of trumpets, <span id="xvi-p4.1"></span>[Nu
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#010)<span id="xvi-p4.1"></span>; but
the feast of trumpets was kept with additional sacrifices, <span
id="xvi-p4.2"></span>[Le 23:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#024)<span
id="xvi-p4.2"></span>; <span id="xvi-p4.3"></span>[Nu
29:1](../../../bib/kjv/num029.htm#001)<span id="xvi-p4.3"></span>. The
trumpets were blown from sunrise until sunset. It appears from the book
of the Jewish Liturgy, that this psalm is still sung at that feast. “It
may have been used,” observes Dr Adam Clarke, “in celebrating the feast
of trumpets on the first of Tisri; the feast of tabernacles, on the
fifteenth of the same month; the creation of the world; the feast of the
new moons; and the deliverance of the Israelites from Egypt; to all
which circumstances it appears to refer.”

<span id="fn_401"></span>[402](cc10015.htm#fr_401) <span
id="xvi.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p3"></span> “*Take a psalm*. Ainsworth, *Take up a
psalm*. Bishop Horsley says, ‘The word (psalm) must in this place denote
some musical instrument.’ But, with all due deference to his Lordship,
suppose a clergyman in the present day were to say to his clerk, ‘Strike
up a psalm!’ (quite a similar phrase,) would the clerk understand him to
mean a musical instrument? Certainly not.” — *Williams*.

<span id="fn_402"></span>[403](cc10015.htm#fr_402) <span
id="xvi.i-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p4"></span> For an account of these musical instruments,
see Appendix.

<span id="fn_403"></span>[404](cc10015.htm#fr_403) <span
id="xvi.i-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p5"></span> Hammond translates this verse thus, “Blow
the trumpet on the first day of the month, on the new moon, on the day
of our feast." "The word <span id="xvi.i-p5.1"></span>כהדש," says he,
"must here be rendered, *in the beginning of the month*, that so <span
id="xvi.i-p5.2"></span>ככסה, that follows, may be rendered, as it truly
signifies, *in the new moon*. It is true, that from <span
id="xvi.i-p5.3"></span>הדׁש, *new*, <span id="xvi.i-p5.4"></span>הדׁש
indifferently signifies the <span id="xvi.i-p5.5"></span>*novilunium*,
and *the first day of the month*; but here, *the new moon* being
peculiarly expressed by <span id="xvi.i-p5.6"></span>כסה, to avoid
tautology, <span id="xvi.i-p5.7"></span>הדש must be rendered *the new
month*; i.e., *the first day of the month*. The Syriac sets this down
here most expressly, 'In the beginning or first of the month, and in the
new moon;' which, meeting always together, were festival among the Jews,
and so the trumpet was to be sounded thereon.” \[Note: The Hebrew words
and stems being discussed in this footnote require punctuation which
cannot be shown using the OLBHEB font. The reader should refer to the
original commentary for the actual puctuation. — *sg.*\]

<span id="fn_404"></span>[405](cc10015.htm#fr_404) <span
id="xvi.i-p5.8"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p6"></span> The word translated *pot* was, according to
Kennicott, a large vessel in which the earth was mixed and worked up for
making the bricks. The LXX. the Vulgate, Symmachus, Jerome, Street,
Parkhurst, Ainsworth, Fry, Walford, and others, render the original
word, by *the basket*. Parkhurst observes, that baskets might probably
be employed both in carrying the earth of which the bricks were made,
and also the bricks themselves.

<span id="fn_405"></span>[406](cc10015.htm#fr_405) <span
id="xvi.i-p14.4"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p15"></span> “*When he went forth*, etc.; *i*.*e*., When
God went forth to destroy the first-born in all the land of Egypt, on
account of which the passover was appointed.” — *Walford*.

<span id="fn_406"></span>[407](cc10015.htm#fr_406) <span
id="xvi.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p16"></span> “Going forth (<span
id="xvi.i-p16.1"></span>על) over the land of Egypt seems to express
dominion over it, which God exercised in bringing out the Israelites;
and they were then in what may be called a state of superiority over the
Egyptians, and went out with a high hand. <span
id="xvi.i-p16.2"></span>[Ex 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#008)<span
id="xvi.i-p16.2"></span>; <span id="xvi.i-p16.3"></span>[Nu
33:3](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#003)<span id="xvi.i-p16.3"></span>.
And soon after that the law was given.” — *Archbishop Secker*

<span id="fn_407"></span>[408](cc10015.htm#fr_407) <span
id="xvi.i-p16.4"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p17"></span> The Septuagint, Syriac, Vulgate, and all
the versions except the Chaldee, have the third person, “*He* heard a
language which *he* understood not;” Doederlein reads, “I heard a voice
which I understood not;” and retaining the first person, interprets the
words as an abrupt exclamation of the Psalmist upon feeling himself
suddenly influenced by a divine afflatus, and upon hearing an oracle
addressed to him by God, which consisted of what immediately follows,
from the 6th verse to the close of the psalm, and which is spoken in the
person of God. This voice he heard, but he did not understand it; that
is, he did not fully comprehend its design and import.

<span id="fn_408"></span>[409](cc10015.htm#fr_408) <span
id="xvi.i-p17.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p18"></span> “The Egyptian language was not intelligible
to the children of Jacob; for Joseph spake to his brethren by an
interpreter, when he appeared as ruler of Egypt, and did not as yet
choose to make himself known to them. See <span
id="xvi.i-p18.1"></span>[Ge 42:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#023)<span
id="xvi.i-p18.1"></span>.” — *Street*.

<span id="fn_409"></span>[410](cc10015.htm#fr_409) <span
id="xvi.i-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p23"></span> Bishop Lowth understands by “the secret
place of thunder” the communication of the Israelites with God upon
mount Sinai, the awfulness of which is expressed by these few words.
(Lowth’s Lectures on the Sacred Poetry of the Hebrews, volume 2, page
220.) Walford reads, “I answered thee by thunder, from a hidden
retreat;” and he observes, that this contains “a reference to the
majestic display on Sinai, where, though the symbols of the present
Deity were seen and heard, the lightnings and thunders, he himself was
concealed from all human view.” The only objection which can be made
against interpreting this of Sinai is, that the murmuring at Meribah,
<span id="xvi.i-p23.1"></span>[Ex
17](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#000)<span id="xvi.i-p23.1"></span>, was
before the thundering on Sinai, <span id="xvi.i-p23.2"></span>[Ex
19](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#000)<span id="xvi.i-p23.2"></span>;
whereas here the thunder is mentioned first, and then what took place at
Meribah in the end of the verse. But this objection is easily removed;
for in the poetical compositions of Scripture strict order is not,
always observed in the narration of facts. Thus in <span
id="xvi.i-p23.3"></span>[Ps 83:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#009)<span
id="xvi.i-p23.3"></span>, the victory over the Midianites (<span
id="xvi.i-p23.4"></span>[Jud 7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#000)<span
id="xvi.i-p23.4"></span>) is mentioned before that over Sisera, (<span
id="xvi.i-p23.5"></span>[Jud 4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#000)<span
id="xvi.i-p23.5"></span>,) which was the victory first achieved.

<span id="fn_410"></span>[411](cc10015.htm#fr_410) <span
id="xvi.i-p23.6"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p24"></span> Literally “the waters of contradiction;”
<span id="xvi.i-p24.2"></span>מריבה, *meribah*, from <span
id="xvi.i-p24.3"></span>רוב, *rub*, *to quarrel*, being a noun
signifying *contention*, *strife* It is therefore fitly used as the name
of the place in the desert where the Israelites quarrelled with Moses.
“The local specification,” observes Bishop Mant, “as used in our Bible
translation, is much more poetical than the rendering in the Common
Prayer-Book, ‘the waters of strife.’” “The mention of Meribah,” says
Lowth, “introduces another idea, namely, the ingratitude and contumacy
of the Israelites, who appear to have been ever unmindful of the favors
and indulgence of their heavenly Benefactor.”

<span id="fn_411"></span>[412](cc10015.htm#fr_411) <span
id="xvi.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p3"></span> Street reads, “and I will make a testimony
with thee.” “<span id="xvi.ii-p3.1"></span>אעידה” says he, “is in the
hiphil conjugation, which frequently signifies to make or cause a thing
to be made. The ark is called *the ark of the testimony*, <span
id="xvi.ii-p3.2"></span>ארון העדת, <span id="xvi.ii-p3.3"></span>[Ex
30:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#026)<span id="xvi.ii-p3.3"></span>,
and *the ark of the covenant*, <span id="xvi.ii-p3.4"></span>[Jos
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#006)<span id="xvi.ii-p3.4"></span>, and
<span id="xvi.ii-p3.5"></span>[Ex
25:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#021)<span id="xvi.ii-p3.5"></span>.
Moses is commanded to put *the testimony* which God shall give him into
the ark. It is plain, therefore, that the covenant and the testimony are
the same.” “*I* *will testify unto thee* I will, upon all occasions,
give the oracular direction, so that thou shalt have no occasion to
resort to other gods, nor shall any pretended god have power to harm
thee.” — *Horsley*

<span id="fn_412"></span>[413](cc10015.htm#fr_412) <span
id="xvi.ii-p3.6"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p4"></span> “<span id="xvi.ii-p4.1"></span>Ou,
perversite, ou, durete.” — *Fr*. *marg*. “Or, the perversity, or, the
hardness.” Hammond reads: “I gave them up unto the imaginations of their
hearts.” Horsley: “So I gave them up to the government of their own
hearts.” Fry: “And I gave them up to the desires of their heart.”
Walford: “Therefore I gave them up to the purposes of their heart.”

<span id="fn_413"></span>[414](cc10015.htm#fr_413) <span
id="xvi.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p10"></span> “Heathen, or foreign god.” — *Hammond*.

<span id="fn_414"></span>[415](cc10015.htm#fr_414) <span
id="xvi.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p3"></span> In our English Bible it is, “*He* should
have fed them.” The LXX., Vulgate, and Syriac versions, Green, Walford,
and others, read as Calvin does, “I would have fed them.” “This is the
preferable reading,” says Walford, “as the common lection introduces a
too sudden change of person.”

<span id="fn_415"></span>[416](cc10015.htm#fr_415) <span
id="xvi.iii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p9"></span> “Nothing,” says Dr Adam Clarke on this
verse, “can be more plaintive than the original: *sense* and *sound* are
surprisingly united. I scruple not to say to him who understands the
Hebrew, however learned, he has never found in any poet, Greek or Latin,
a finer example of deep-seated grief, unable to express itself in
appropriate words, without frequent interruptions of sighs and sobs,
terminated with a mournful cry —

<span id="xvi.iii-p10"></span>יל עמש ימע ול  
וכלהי יכרדב לארשי*  
Loo-ghammee-shomeagh-lee  
Yishrael-bid’ rakee-yehallekoo!*

<span id="xvi.iii-p11"></span>“He who can give the proper guttural
pronunciation to the letter <span id="xvi.iii-p11.1"></span>ע, *ayin*;
and gives the <span id="xvi.iii-p11.2"></span>ו, *vau*, and the <span
id="xvi.iii-p11.3"></span>י, *yod*, their full Asiatic sound; and does
not pinch them to death by a compressed and worthless European
enunciation; will at once be convinced of the propriety of this remark.”

<span id="fn_416"></span>[417](cc10015.htm#fr_416) <span
id="xvi.iii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p16"></span> See volume 1, page 301.

<span id="fn_417"></span>[418](cc10015.htm#fr_417) <span
id="xvi.iii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p17"></span> “*Their time*, etc.: that is, the time,
the continuance, the prosperity of my people, would have been durable.”
— *Warner*.

<span id="fn_418"></span>[419](cc10015.htm#fr_418) <span
id="xvi.iii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p18"></span> It is an usual phrase with the Hebrews to
call the most esteemed part of anything <span
id="xvi.iii-p18.1"></span>חלב, *cheleb*, “the fat.” The word is used
with this combination in <span id="xvi.iii-p18.2"></span>[De
32:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#014)<span id="xvi.iii-p18.2"></span>;
and is adopted again in <span id="xvi.iii-p18.3"></span>[Ps
147:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#014)<span
id="xvi.iii-p18.3"></span>. See also <span id="xvi.iii-p18.4"></span>[Ge
45:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#018)<span id="xvi.iii-p18.4"></span>;
<span id="xvi.iii-p18.5"></span>[Nu
18:29](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#029)<span id="xvi.iii-p18.5"></span>;
and <span id="xvi.iii-p18.6"></span>[Ps
73:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#004)<span id="xvi.iii-p18.6"></span>.
The translators of our English version have rendered it here “the finest
of the wheat.”

<span id="fn_419"></span>[420](cc10015.htm#fr_419) <span
id="xvi.iii-p18.7"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p19"></span> Palestine abounded in wild bees, which,
living in the crevices of rocks, and in the hollows of trees, furnished
honey in great plenty. To this there are frequent allusions in
Scripture. In <span id="xvi.iii-p19.1"></span>[De
32:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#013)<span id="xvi.iii-p19.1"></span>,
Moses, speaking of God’s goodness to Israel in the song with which he
closed his long and eventful career, says, “He made him suck honey out
of the rock.” As an evidence of the great abundance of wild honey in
that country, we may refer to <span id="xvi.iii-p19.2"></span>[1Sa
14:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#025)<span id="xvi.iii-p19.2"></span>,
where it is said, “And all they of the land came to a wood, and there
was honey upon the ground; and when the people were come to the wood,
behold the honey dropped.” In proof of the same point, reference may be
also made to the fact, that a part of the food of John the Baptist in
the wilderness was wild honey, which most probably he found in rocks or
hollow trees. In Scripture, the country is frequently described by a
familiar phrase, as “A land flowing with milk and honey;” and in <span
id="xvi.iii-p19.3"></span>[Job
20:17](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#017)<span id="xvi.iii-p19.3"></span>,
we meet with the strong expression of “Brooks, floods, and rivers of
honey.” Palestine is still remarkable for this natural production. It
may be observed, that the change of person in this last verse from the
third to the first is highly poetical.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 82](cc10016)
