[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc10022)  [Next](cc10024) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 10: Psalms, Part III*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxiv"></span>

<span id="xxiv-p1"></span>PSALM 89

<span id="xxiv-p2"></span>The prophet who wrote this psalm, whoever he
was, in approaching the throne of grace to make supplication to God in
behalf of the afflicted Church, lays down, as an encouragement both to
himself and the rest of the faithful to cherish good hope, the covenant
which God had made with David. He then adverts in general to the Divine
power which is discerned in the whole government of the world. And next,
he calls to remembrance the redemption in which God had given an
everlasting testimony of his fatherly love towards his chosen people.
Thence, he again returns to the covenant made with David, in which God
had promised to continue his favor towards that people for ever, for the
sake of their king. Finally, he subjoins a complaint that God, as if he
had forgotten his covenant, abandoned his Church to the will of her
enemies, and, in the midst of strange disaster and mournful desolation,
withheld all succor and consolation.

<span id="xxiv-p3"></span>An instruction of Ethan, the Ezrahite.

<span id="xxiv-p4"></span>Who this Ethan was, to whom this psalm is
ascribed, is somewhat uncertain. If we should consider him to have been
one of the four eminent men to whom Solomon is compared for his
distinguished wisdom, (<span id="xxiv-p4.1"></span>[1Ki
4:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#031)<span id="xxiv-p4.1"></span>)
 <span id="fr_519"></span>[520](#fn_519) the argument or subject of the
poem will not agree with his time; unless we suppose him to have
survived Solomon, and bewailed the sad and mournful division which
occurred after the death of that monarch, and which proved the
commencement and prelude of future ruin. The people, it is true, after
being divided into two kingdoms, continued still to exist safe as
before; but as that rupture dissolved the unity established by God, what
ground of hope could any longer remain? Besides, the prosperity and
welfare of the whole body depended upon their having one head, from
their allegiance to whom the ten tribes had wickedly revolted. What a
horrible spectacle was it to behold that kingdom, which might have
flourished in unimpaired vigor, even to the end of the world, disfigured
and miserably rent asunder, at the close of the life of one man! Who
would not have thought that the holy oracle was deceptive and vain, the
truth of which seemed to be overthrown in so short a time? If,
therefore, the Ethan above referred to should be regarded as the author
of this psalm, the complaints contained in it must be applied to that
period, in which not only the throne of David was weakened, but in which
also the great mass of the people apostatised from God, while those who
were brethren proceeded to work each other’s ruin by mutual and
intestine discord. This certainly appears to me to be the most probable
conjecture in this doubtful case. Some think that the author, speaking
under the influence of the Spirit of prophecy, predicts the calamities
which were to befall the people: but this opinion may be easily refuted
by the context itself, where the inspired bard expressly bewails the
first unhappy alteration which took place in the kingdom, in consequence
of the conspiracy of Jeroboam.

<span id="xxiv.i"></span>

<span id="xxiv.i-p1"></span><span id="xxiv.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
89:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#001)<span id="xxiv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.i-p2"></span>**1.** I will sing of the mercies of Jehovah
for ever: with my mouth will I celebrate thy truth from generation to
generation. **2.** For I have said, Mercy shall be built up for ever:
thou shalt establish the heavens, thy truth is in them.  <span
id="fr_520"></span>[521](#fn_520) **3.** I have made a covenant with my
chosen: I have sworn to David my servant, **4.** I will establish thy
seed for ever, and will build up thy throne from age to age. Selah.

<span id="xxiv.i-p4"></span> 

<span id="xxiv.i-p5"></span><span id="xxiv.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.i-p6"></span>**1** *I will sing of the mercies of Jehovah
for ever.* It must be borne in mind, as I have just now observed, that
the Psalmist opens with the praises of God, and with calling to mind the
Divine covenant, to encourage the faithful to strengthen their faith
against the formidable assaults of temptation. If when we set about the
duty of prayer some despairing thought, at the very outset, presents
itself to us, we must forcibly and resolutely break through it, lest our
hearts faint and utterly fail. The design of the prophet, therefore, was
to fortify the minds of the godly at the very commencement, with stable
and substantial supports, that, relying on the Divine promise, which, to
outward appearance, had almost fallen to the ground, and repelling all
the assaults of temptation with which their faith was severely shaken,
they might with confidence hope for the re-establishment of the kingdom,
and continue perseveringly to pray for this blessing. From the sad
spectacle of begun decay,  <span id="fr_521"></span>[522](#fn_521) which
Ethan beheld, listening to the dictates of carnal reason, he might have
thought that both himself and the rest of God’s believing people were
deceived; but he expresses his determination to celebrate the mercies of
God which at that time were hidden from his view. And as it was no easy
matter for him to apprehend and acknowledge the merciful character of
God, of whose severity he had actual experience, he uses the plural
number, *the Mercies of God,* that by reflecting on the abundance and
variety of the blessings of Divine grace he might overcome this
temptation.

<span id="xxiv.i-p8"></span><span id="xxiv.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.i-p9"></span>**2** *For I have said, Mercy shall be built
up for ever.* He assigns the reason why he perseveres in singing the
Divine praises in the midst of adversities; which is, that he does not
despair of the manifestation of God’s loving-kindness towards his
people, although at present they were under severe chastisement. Never
will a man freely open his mouth to praise God, unless he is fully
persuaded that God, even when he is angry with his people, never lays
aside his fatherly affection towards them. The words *I have said,*
imply that the truth which the inspired writer propounds was deeply
fixed in his heart.  <span id="fr_522"></span>[523](#fn_522) Whatever,
as if he had said, has hitherto happened, it has never had the effect of
effacing from my heart the undoubted hope of experiencing the Divine
favor as to the future, and I will always continue steadfastly to
cherish the same feeling. It is to be observed, that it was not without
a painful and arduous conflict that he succeeded in embracing by faith
the goodness of God, which at that time had entirely vanished out of
sight; — this we say is to be particularly noticed, in order that when
God at any time withdraws from us all the tokens of his love, we may
nevertheless learn to erect in our hearts *that everlasting building of
mercy,* which is here spoken of, — a metaphor, by which is meant that
the Divine mercy shall be extended, or shall continue till it reach its
end or consummation. In the second clause of the verse something must be
supplied. The sense, in short, is, that the Divine promise is no less
stable than the settled course of the heavens, which is eternal and
exempt from all change. By the word *heavens* I understand not only the
visible skies, but the heavens which are above the whole frame of the
world; for the truth of God, in the heavenly glory of his kingdom, is
placed above all the elements of the world.

<span id="xxiv.i-p11"></span><span id="xxiv.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.i-p12"></span>**3** *I have made a covenant with my
chosen.*  <span id="fr_523"></span>[524](#fn_523) The more effectually
to confirm himself and all the godly in the faith of the Divine promise,
he introduces God himself as speaking and sanctioning, by his authority,
what had been said in the preceding verse. As faith ought to depend on
the Divine promise, this manner of speaking, by which God is represented
as coming forward and alluring us to himself by his own voice, is more
forcible than if the prophet himself had simply stated the fact. And
when God in this way anticipates us, we cannot be charged with rashness
in coming familiarly to him; even as, on the contrary, without His word
we have no ground to presume that he will be gracious to us, or to hope,
at the mere suggestion of our own fancy, for what he has not promised.
Moreover, the truth of the promise is rendered still more irrefragable,
when God declares that he had made a covenant with his servant David,
ratified by his own solemn oath. It having been customary in ancient
times to engrave leagues and covenants on tables of brass, a metaphor is
here used borrowed from this practice. God applies to David two titles
of distinction, calling him both *his chosen* and *his servant.* Those
who would refer the former appellation to Abraham do not sufficiently
attend to the style of the Book of Psalms, in which it is quite common
for one thing to be repeated twice. David is called *the chosen of God,*
because God of his own good pleasure, and from no other cause, preferred
him not only to the posterity of Saul, and many distinguished
personages, but even to his own brethren. If, therefore, the cause or
origin of this covenant is sought for, we must necessarily fall back
upon the Divine election.

<span id="xxiv.i-p14"></span>The name of *servant,* which follows
immediately after, is not to be understood as implying that David by his
services merited any thing at the hand of God. He is called *God’s
servant* in respect of the royal dignity, into which he had not rashly
thrust himself, having been invested with the government by God, and
having undertaken it in obedience to his lawful call. When, however, we
consider what the covenant summarily contains, we conclude that the
prophet has not improperly applied it to his own use, and to the use of
the whole people; for God did not enter into it with David individually,
but had an eye to the whole body of the Church, which would exist from
age to age. The sentence, *I will establish thy throne for ever,* is
partly to be understood of Solomon, and the rest of David’s successors;
but the prophet well knew that perpetuity or everlasting duration, in
the strict and proper sense, could be verified only in Christ. In
ordaining one man to be king, God assuredly did not have a respect to
one house alone, while he forgot and neglected the people with whom he
had before made his covenant in the person of Abraham; but he conferred
the sovereign power upon David and his children, that they might rule
for the common good of all the rest, until the throne might be truly
established by the advent of Christ.

<span id="xxiv.ii"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ii-p1"></span><span id="xxiv.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
89:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#005)<span id="xxiv.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ii-p2"></span>**5.** And the heavens shall praise thy
wondrous work, O Jehovah! thy truth  <span
id="fr_524"></span>[525](#fn_524) also in the congregation of the
saints. **6.** For who in the clouds \[or in heaven\] can be compared to
Jehovah? who among the sons of the gods  <span
id="fr_525"></span>[526](#fn_525) is like to Jehovah? **7.** God is very
terrible  <span id="fr_526"></span>[527](#fn_526) in the assembly of the
saints, and to be feared above all who are around him. **8.** O Jehovah!
God of Hosts, who is a strong God as thou art? and thy truth is round
about thee.

<span id="xxiv.ii-p6"></span> 

<span id="xxiv.ii-p7"></span><span id="xxiv.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ii-p8"></span>**5.** *And the heavens shall praise thy
wondrous work.* The prophet, having spoken of God’s covenant, even as
faith ought to begin at the word, now descends to a general commendation
of his works. It is, however, to be observed, that when he treats of the
wonderful power of God, he has no other end in view than to exalt and
magnify more highly the holiness of the covenant. He exclaims, that this
is the God who has rightful claims to be served and feared, who ought to
be believed, and upon whose power the most unhesitating confidence may
be reposed. The words *wondrous work,* in the first clause, I would
therefore limit to the power which God displays in preserving and
maintaining his Church. The heavens, it is true, are most excellent
witnesses and preachers of God’s wonderful power; but from attending to
the scope of the passage, it will be still more evident, that the
encomiums here pronounced have all a special reference to the end of
which I have spoken. Some interpreters judiciously explain the word
*heavens,* of the angels, among whom there is a common joy and
congratulation in the salvation of the Church. This interpretation is
confirmed from the last clause of the verse, in which it is asserted,
that *God’s truth will be celebrated in the congregation of the saints*
There is no doubt, that the same subject is here prosecuted, and that by
the word *truth,* it is intended to signalise the remarkable
deliverances by which God had manifested his faithfulness to the
promises made to his servants.

<span id="xxiv.ii-p9"></span><span id="xxiv.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ii-p10"></span>**6** *For who in the clouds can be
compared to Jehovah?* The prophet now proceeds to illustrate farther
what he had said respecting God’s wonders, and exclaims emphatically,
*Who in the clouds can be compared to God?* The reason why he speaks of
*the clouds,* or *heaven,* is because, what is not surprising, nothing
is to be found upon the earth which can at all approach the glory of
God. Although man excels other living creatures, yet we see how
contemptible and miserable his condition is, or rather, how full it is
of shame and reproach. Whence it follows, that under heaven there is no
excellence which can compete with that of God. But when we ascend to
heaven, immediately ravished with admiration, we conceive of a multitude
of gods, which do away with the true God. The last clause of the verse,
in which it is said, *that among the sons of the gods there is none like
the true and only God,* is an explanation of the first. The opinion of
some, that by *the clouds,* or *the heavens,* is to be understood the
sun, moon, and stars, is disproved by the context itself. The amount
then is, that even in the heavens, God alone has the entire
pre-eminence, having there none as a companion or equal. The appellation
*the sons of the gods* is here given to angels, because they neither
have their origin from the earth, nor are clothed with a corruptible
body, but are celestial spirits, adorned with a Divine glory. It is not
meant that they are a part of the Divine essence or substance, as some
fanatics dream; but as God displays his power in them, this title is
attributed to them, to distinguish between their nature and ours. In
short, although a greater majesty shines forth in the angels than in
other creatures, at the contemplation of which we are ravished with
admiration, yet come they not near God, so as to obscure and impair his
glory by their excellence, or to share with him in the sovereignty of
the universe. This is a point worthy of our careful attention; for,
although God everywhere declares in his word that the angels are only
his servants, and always ready to execute his commands, yet the world,
not contented with having only one God, forges for itself a countless
number of deities.

<span id="xxiv.ii-p11"></span><span id="xxiv.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ii-p12"></span>To the same effect is the following verse,
in which it is affirmed, that *God is very terrible in the assembly of
the saints.* In these words is censured that devilish superstition, to
which almost all men are prone, of exalting angels beyond measure, and
without reason. But if the angels themselves tremble, and are afraid
before the Divine Majesty, why should they not be regarded as subjects,
and kept in their own rank, that God alone may have the sovereignty
entirely to himself? Farther, when they are represented as *around God,*
the meaning is, that they surround his royal throne like body-guards,
and are always ready to execute his behests. In the subsequent verse the
same thing is repeated yet again, *Who is a strong God as thou art?* and
this is done, that at least the fear of the Divine Majesty may teach us
to beware of robbing him of the honor which belongs to him. That we may
not, however, by too much fear, be prevented from approaching him, some
portion of sweetness is intermingled with this description, when it is
declared, that *his truth is to be seen round about him on all sides;*
by which we are to understand, that God is always steadfast in his
promises, and that whatever changes may happen, he nevertheless
continues invariably true, both before and behind, on the right hand and
on the left.  <span id="fr_527"></span>[528](#fn_527)

<span id="xxiv.iii"></span>

<span id="xxiv.iii-p1"></span><span id="xxiv.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
89:9-14](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#009)<span
id="xxiv.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.iii-p2"></span>**9.** Thou governest the pride of the
sea: when the waves thereof rise up, thou restrainest them **10.** Thou
hast overthrown Egypt, as a wounded man;  <span
id="fr_528"></span>[529](#fn_528) with thy mighty arm \[literally, with
the arm of thy strength\] thou hast scattered thy enemies. **11.** The
heavens are thine, the earth also is thine: thou hast made the world,
and the fullness thereof. **12.** Thou hast created the north  <span
id="fr_529"></span>[530](#fn_529) and the south:  <span
id="fr_530"></span>[531](#fn_530) Tabor and Hermon  <span
id="fr_531"></span>[532](#fn_531) shall rejoice in thy name. **13.**
Thou hast a mighty arm: thou wilt strengthen thy hand, thou wilt exalt
thy right hand. **14.** Righteousness and judgment are the place of thy
throne: mercy and truth shall go before thy face.

<span id="xxiv.iii-p7"></span> 

<span id="xxiv.iii-p8"></span><span id="xxiv.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.iii-p9"></span>**9.** *Thou governest the pride of the
sea.* I have already observed that what the prophet has hitherto spoken
generally concerning the power of God, is to be referred to the miracle
of the deliverance of the Israelites from Egypt, which he now celebrates
in express terms. According to the interpretation of some, God is said
to still the impetuous waves of the sea, because he does not suffer it
to break forth and overflow the whole world by a deluge. But I would
read the 9th and 10th verses connectedly, and would understand the
prophet as speaking of the Red Sea, which God divided to make a way for
the chosen tribes to pass over. The Psalmist adds immediately after,
that all *the land of Egypt was overthrown as a wounded man* By these
words he magnifies the grace of God, which was displayed in the
deliverance of the Church. He intended, there can be no doubt, to set
before his own mind and the minds of others, the paternal love of God,
to encourage both himself and others to have recourse to Him for succor,
with the greater freedom and alacrity. And in affirming that *God had
broken in pieces his enemies with his mighty arm,* he concludes from the
past experience of the Church, that his mode of acting will be always
similar, whenever in his infinite wisdom he sees it to be required.

<span id="xxiv.iii-p10"></span><span id="xxiv.iii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.iii-p11"></span>**11** *The heavens are thine, the earth
also is thine.* He again repeats, the third time, that the same God who
had been the deliverer of the chosen people exercises supreme dominion
over the whole world. From the fact that God created all things, he
concludes, that it is He who actually presides over, and controls
whatever takes place in heaven and in earth. It would be absurd to
suppose, that the heavens, having been once created by God, should now
revolve by chance, and that things should be thrown into confusion upon
the earth either at the will of men, or at random, when it is considered
that it belongs to God to maintain and govern whatever he has created;
unless, like the heathen, we would imagine that he enjoys himself in
beholding all the works of his hand, in this beautiful theater of the
heaven and the earth, without giving himself any farther trouble about
them. In speaking of *the south* and *the north,* and also of the
mountains, *Tabor* and *Hermon,* the prophet accommodates his language
to the unrefined apprehension of the common people: as if he had said,
there is no part of the fabric of the world which does not reverence and
honor its Creator. I also connect with this the next verse, which
affirms, that *the arm of God is furnished with power, his hand with
strength, and that his right hand is exalted* Some resolve the two last
clauses of the verse into the form of a prayer, *Strengthen thy hand,
lift up thy right hand;* but this seems too much removed from the mind
of the prophet, who, with the simple view of encouraging all the godly,
celebrates the inconceivable power of God.

<span id="xxiv.iii-p12"></span><span id="xxiv.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.iii-p13"></span>**14.** *Righteousness and judgement are
the place of thy throne.* These encomiums serve more effectually to
confirm the hope of true believers than if the Divine power alone had
been presented to our view. Whenever mention is made of God, it behoves
us to apply our minds principally to those attributes of his nature
which are specially fitted for establishing our faith, that we may not
lose ourselves by vainly indulging in subtile speculations, by which
foolish men, although they may minister to their own mental recreation,
make no advances to the right understanding of what God really is. The
prophet, therefore, in allusion to the insignia and pomp of kings,
declares that *righteousness and judgment* are the pillars of the throne
on which God sits conspicuous in sovereign state, and that *mercy* and
*truth* are, as it were, his pursuivants; as if he had said, “The
ornaments with which God is invested, instead of being a robe of purple,
a diadem, or a scepter, are, that he is the righteous and impartial
judge of the world, a merciful father, and a faithful protector of his
people.” Earthly kings, from their having nothing in themselves to
procure for them authority, and to give them dignity,  <span
id="fr_532"></span>[533](#fn_532) are under the necessity of borrowing
elsewhere what will invest them therewith; but God having in himself an
all-sufficiency, and standing in no need of any other helps, exhibits to
us the splendor of his own image in his righteousness, mercy, and truth.

<span id="xxiv.iv"></span>

<span id="xxiv.iv-p1"></span><span id="xxiv.iv-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
89:15-18](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#015)<span
id="xxiv.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.iv-p2"></span>**15.** Blessed is the people that know the
joyful sound!  <span id="fr_533"></span>[534](#fn_533) they shall walk,
O Jehovah! in the brightness of thy countenance. **16.** In thy name
shall they daily rejoice; and in thy righteousness shall they glory.
**17.** For thou art the glory of their strength; and in thy favor shall
our horn be exalted. **18.** For to Jehovah  <span
id="fr_534"></span>[535](#fn_534) is our buckler; and our King is to the
Holy One of Israel.

<span id="xxiv.iv-p5"></span> 

<span id="xxiv.iv-p6"></span><span id="xxiv.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.iv-p7"></span>**15.** *Blessed is the people that know
the joyful sound.* Here the same train of reflection concerning the
Church is pursued, not only because unbelievers are blind to the
consideration of God’s works, but also because the prophet has no other
purpose in view than to inspire the godly with good hope, that they may
with confidence rely upon God, and not be discouraged by any adversities
from boldly calling upon him. It is declared that those are happy to
whom it is given to rejoice in God; for although all men in common are
sustained and nourished by his liberality, yet the feeling of his
paternal goodness is far from being experienced by all men in such a
manner as to enable them, from a certain persuasion that he is favorable
to them, to congratulate themselves upon their happy condition. It is,
therefore, a singular privilege which he confers upon his chosen ones,
to make them taste of his goodness, that thereby they may be encouraged
to be glad and rejoice. And, in fact, there is not a more miserable
condition than that of unbelievers, when by their brutish insensibility
they trample under foot the Divine benefits which they greedily devour;
for the more abundantly God pampers them, the fouler is their
ingratitude. True happiness then consists in our apprehending the Divine
goodness which, filling our hearts with joy, may stir us up to praise
and thanksgiving.

<span id="xxiv.iv-p8"></span>The prophet afterwards proves from the
effect, that those who with joy and delight acknowledge God to be their
father are blessed, because they not only enjoy his benefits, but also,
confiding in his favor, pass the whole course of their life in mental
peace and tranquillity. This is the import of *walking in the light of
God’s countenance:* it is to repose upon his providence from the certain
persuasion that he has a special care about our well-being, and keeps
watch and ward effectually to secure it. The expressions *rejoicing in
his name,* and *glorying in his righteousness,* are to the same purpose.
The idea involved in them is, that believers find in God abundant, yea
more than abundant, ground to rejoice and glory. The word *daily*
appears to denote steadfast and unwavering perseverance; and thus there
is indirectly censured the foolish arrogance of those who, inflated only
with wind and presuming on their own strength, lift up their horns on
high. Standing as they do upon an insecure foundation, they must at
length inevitably fall. Whence it follows, that there is no true
magnanimity nor any power which can stand but that which leans upon the
grace of God alone; even as we see how Paul (<span
id="xxiv.iv-p8.1"></span>[Ro 8:31](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#031)<span
id="xxiv.iv-p8.1"></span>) nobly boasts, “If God be for us, who can be
against us?” and defies all calamities both present and to come.

<span id="xxiv.iv-p9"></span><span id="xxiv.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.iv-p10"></span>**17.** *For thou art the glory of their
strength.* The same sentiment is confirmed when it is declared, that God
never leaves his faithful servants destitute of strength. By the
appellation *the glory of their strength,* which is ascribed to him, is
meant that they are always so sustained by his present aid as to have
just ground to glory in him; or which amounts to the same thing, that
his power appears always glorious in aiding and sustaining them. They
are, however, at the same time, reminded of the duty of yielding to God
all the praise of their being preserved in safety. If this is true as to
the present life, it is much more truly applicable to the spiritual life
of the soul. Farther, the more highly to magnify this instance of God’s
liberality, we are taught, at the same time, that it depends entirely
upon his good pleasure, there being no other cause of it.  <span
id="fr_535"></span>[536](#fn_535) Whence it follows, that they are
wholly bound and indebted to Him who is induced by his free bounty alone
to continue to extend to them his help.

<span id="xxiv.iv-p12"></span><span id="xxiv.iv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.iv-p13"></span>**18.** *For to Jehovah is our buckler.*
As the chief protection of the people was in the person of their king,
it is here expressly shown, that the maintenance of the welfare of the
faithful by his instrumentality is the gift of God. But it is to be
noticed, that the prophet’s mind was not so fixed upon this temporal and
transitory kingdom as to neglect, at the same time, to consider the end
of it, as we shall presently see. He knew that it was only on account of
Christ that God made his favor to flow upon the head of the Church, and
from thence upon the whole body. And, in the first place, while he calls
the king metaphorically *a buckler*, — a figurative expression
frequently employed in Scripture, — he confesses that when the people
are defended by his hand and working, it is nevertheless done by the
providence of God, and is thus to be traced to a higher source than
human agency. The same thing is again repeated in the second clause, in
which it is affirmed, that the king was given by God to govern the
people; and that, therefore, the defense which comes from the king is a
blessing of God. Moreover, we must remember that what is said of this
kingdom, which was a shadow of something greater, properly applies to
the person of Christ, whom the Father has given to us to be the guardian
of our welfare, that we may be maintained and defended by his power.

<span id="xxiv.v"></span>

<span id="xxiv.v-p1"></span><span id="xxiv.v-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
89:19-23](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#019)<span id="xxiv.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.v-p2"></span>**19.** Then thou spakest in vision to thy
meek ones,  <span id="fr_536"></span>[537](#fn_536) and saidst, I have
laid help upon a mighty one; I have exalted one chosen from among the
people. **20.** I have found David my servant; with my holy oil
\[literally with the oil of my holiness\] have I anointed him. **21.**
Therefore, my hand shall be established with him: my arm also shall
strengthen him. **22.** The enemy shall not exact upon him,  <span
id="fr_537"></span>[538](#fn_537) nor shall the son of iniquity afflict
him. **23.** And I will break in pieces his oppressors before his face;
and I will strike those who hate him.

<span id="xxiv.v-p5"></span> 

<span id="xxiv.v-p6"></span><span id="xxiv.v-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.v-p7"></span>**19.** *Then thou spakest in vision to thy
meek ones.* The Psalmist now declares at greater length why he said that
the king, set over the chosen people for the preservation of the public
good, was given them from heaven; namely, because he was not chosen by
the suffrages of men, nor usurped at his own hand the supreme power, nor
insinuated himself into it by corrupt arts, but was elected by God to be
the instrument of maintaining the public good, and performed the duties
of his office under the auspices and conduct of God. The design of the
prophet, as we shall shortly see more clearly, is to distinguish this
Divinely-appointed king from all other kings. Although what Paul teaches
in <span id="xxiv.v-p7.1"></span>[Ro
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#001)<span id="xxiv.v-p7.1"></span>, is
true, “There is no power but of God;” yet there was a great difference
between David and all earthly kings who have acquired sovereign power by
worldly means. God had delivered the scepter to his servant David
immediately with his own hand, so to speak, and had seated him on the
royal throne by his own authority. The particle <span
id="xxiv.v-p7.2"></span>אז, *az,* which properly signifies *then,* is
taken also for *long since,* or *in old time.* The meaning, therefore,
is, that whereas some are born kings, succeeding their fathers by right
of inheritance, and some are elevated to the royal dignity by election,
while others acquire it for themselves by violence and force of arms,
God was the founder of this kingdom, having chosen David to the throne
by his own voice. Farther, although he revealed his purpose to Samuel,
yet as the plural number is here used, implying, that the same oracle
had been delivered to others, we may certainly conclude that it had been
communicated to other prophets that they might be able, with one
consent, to bear testimony that David was created king by the Divine
appointment. And, indeed, as other distinguished and celebrated prophets
lived at that time, it is not very probable that a matter of so great
importance was concealed from them. But Samuel alone is named in this
business, because he was the publisher of the Divine oracle and the
minister of the royal anointing. As God in those days spake to his
prophets either by dreams or *by visions,* this last mode of revelation
is here mentioned.

<span id="xxiv.v-p8"></span>There next follows the substance or amount
of the Divine oracle, That God had furnished with help the strong or
mighty one whom he had chosen to be the supreme head and governor of the
kingdom. David is called *strong,* not because naturally and in himself
he excelled in strength, (for, as is well known, he was of small
stature, and despised among his brethren, so that even Samuel passed him
over with neglects) but because God, after having chosen him, endued him
with new strength, and other distinguished qualities suitable for a
king; even as in a parallel case, when Christ chose his apostles, he not
only honored them with the title, but at the same time bestowed the
gifts which were necessary for executing their office. And at the
present day he imparts to his ministers the same grace of his Spirit.
The strength of David, then, of which mention is here made, was the
effect of his election; for God, in creating him king, furnished him at
the same time with strength adequate for the preservation of the people.
This appears still more distinctly from the second clause, where this
invincible strength is traced to its source: *I have exalted one chosen
from among the people.* All the words are emphatic. When God declares
that he *exalted* him, it is to intimate the low and mean condition in
which David lived, unknown and obscure, before God stretched out his
hand to him. To the same effect is the expression which follows, *from
among the people.* The meaning is, that he was at that time unnoted, and
belonged to the lowest class of the people, and gave no indications of
superior excellence, being the least esteemed of his father’s children,
in whose country cottage he held the humble office of a herdsman.  <span
id="fr_538"></span>[539](#fn_538) By the word *chosen,* God calls us
back to the consideration of his own free will, as if he forbade us to
seek for any other cause of David’s exaltation than his own good
pleasure.

<span id="xxiv.v-p10"></span><span id="xxiv.v-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.v-p11"></span>**20** *I have found David my servant.* The
prophet confirms the same proposition, That there was nothing of royalty
in David, who owed all to the sovereignty of God in preventing him by
his grace. Such is the import of the word *found,* as if God had said,
When I took him to elevate him, this proceeded entirely from my free
goodness. The name *servant,* therefore, does not denote any merit, but
is to be referred to the divine call. It is as if God had said, that he
confirmed and ratified by his authority the sovereign power of David;
and if He approved it, its legitimacy is placed beyond all doubt. The
second clause of the verse affords an additional confirmation of God’s
free election: *With my holy oil have I anointed him.* This anointing,
which was not the fruit of David’s own policy, but which he obtained
contrary to all expectation, was the cause of his elevation to the
estate of royalty. God then having of himself, and according to his mere
good pleasure, anticipated David, that he might anoint him king by the
hand of Samuel, he justly declares that *he found him.* It is afterwards
added, that he will be the guardian and protector of this kingdom of
which he was the founder; for it is not his usual way to abandon his
works after having commenced them, but, on the contrary, to carry them
forward by a continued process of improvement to their completion.

<span id="xxiv.v-p12"></span><span id="xxiv.v-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.v-p13"></span>**22** *The enemy shall not exact upon
him.*  <span id="fr_539"></span>[540](#fn_539) Here it is declared in
express terms, that although David may not be without enemies, the power
of God will be always ready to maintain and defend him, that he may not
be oppressed with unrighteous violence. It is accordingly affirmed, that
David will not be tributary to his enemies, as he who is vanquished in
battle is constrained to grant such conditions of peace as his conqueror
may dictate, however injurious to himself these may be. When his enemies
are called *sons of iniquity,* it is tacitly intimated, that this
government will be so exempt from tyranny and extortion, that whoever
shall attempt to overthrow it will be involved in the perpetration of
wrong and wickedness. The amount is, that David and his successors will
be so secure and strongly fortified by the divine protection, that it
will be impossible for their enemies to treat them as they would wish.
In regard to the fact, that God suffered this kingdom to be greatly
afflicted, so that David’s successors were constrained to pay a vast
amount of tribute to foreign and heathen kings, it is not at variance
with this promise; for, although the power of the kingdom was reduced,
it was enough that the root still remained, until Christ came, in whose
hand the kingdom was at length firmly established. As both the king and
the people wickedly rejected this singular blessing of God, the kingdom
was often shaken through their own default, afterwards impaired, and
finally ruined. Yet God, to confirm his oracle concerning the perpetuity
of this kingdom, ceased not all along to cherish and preserve some hope,
by contending against their ingratitude. Besides, when mention is made
of David’s *haters* and *oppressors,* it is intimated, that this throne
will not be privileged with exemption from annoyances and troubles,
inasmuch as there will be always some who will rise up in hostility
against it, unless God set himself in opposition to them.

<span id="xxiv.vi"></span>

<span id="xxiv.vi-p1"></span><span id="xxiv.vi-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
89:24-29](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#024)<span
id="xxiv.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.vi-p2"></span>**24.** My truth and my mercy shall be with
him: and in my name shall his horn be exalted. **25.** And I will set
his hand in the sea, and his right hand in the rivers.  <span
id="fr_540"></span>[541](#fn_540) **26.** He shall cry to me, Thou art
my Father, my God, and the Rock of my salvation. **27.** I will also
make him my first-born,  <span id="fr_541"></span>[542](#fn_541) higher
than the kings of the earth. **28.** And I will keep my mercy for him
for ever, and my covenant shall stand fast with him. **29.** And I will
establish his seed for ever, and his throne as the days of heaven.

<span id="xxiv.vi-p5"></span> 

<span id="xxiv.vi-p6"></span><span id="xxiv.vi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.vi-p7"></span>**24** *My truth and my mercy shall be with
him.* God shows that he will continue to exercise without intermission
that grace which he had manifested towards David at first. These words
are as if he had said, that to prove himself faithful to his word, he
would be always gracious and bountiful. Thus We see that God, not only
at the outset, furnished David with testimonies of his goodness, but
that he always continued to deal with him in the same merciful way. This
has a reference to the whole Church of Christ, so that the divine
goodness is manifested in the whole course of our salvation, and not
only at our first entrance upon it, as these shufflers and sophists the
Sorbonists foolishly talk.  <span id="fr_542"></span>[543](#fn_542) *The
horn* of David denotes here, as it often does in other places, his
glory, dignity, and power. The meaning therefore is, that by the grace
of God, this kingdom shall always flourish and prosper.

<span id="xxiv.vi-p9"></span><span id="xxiv.vi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.vi-p10"></span>**25.** *And I will set his hand in the
sea.* The vast extent of the kingdom is here adverted to. As the people
by their wickedness had, as it were, blocked up the way, and intercepted
the blessing of God, their inheritance was more limited than the promise
implied. But now God declares, that during the reign of David, it will
be again enlarged, so that the people shall possess the whole country,
from the sea even to the river Euphrates. From this we gather, that what
God had promised by Moses was fulfilled only in the person of David,
that is to say, from his time.  <span id="fr_543"></span>[544](#fn_543)
By *the rivers* may be understood, either the Euphrates alone, which is
cut into many channels, or the other neighboring rivers on the coast of
Syria.

<span id="xxiv.vi-p12"></span><span id="xxiv.vi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.vi-p13"></span>**26.** *He shall cry to me, Thou art my
Father.* In this verse it is declared, that the chief excellence of this
king will consist in this, that he will be accounted the Son of God.
This indeed is a title of honor, which is applied to all whom God
ordains to be kings, as we have seen in a previous psalm,

<span id="xxiv.vi-p14"></span>“I have said, Ye are gods; and all of you
are children of the Most High:”  
(<span id="xxiv.vi-p14.2"></span>[Ps
82:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#006)<span id="xxiv.vi-p14.2"></span>)

<span id="xxiv.vi-p15"></span>but in the passage before us, something
special is expressed of the holy king whom God had chosen, and it is
intended to say, that he will be the son of God in a different sense. We
shall immediately see in the subsequent verse, how he is placed in a
higher rank than the kings of the earth, although they may sway the
scepter over a larger extent of country. It was therefore a privilege
peculiar to only one king in this world, to be called the Son of God.
Had it been otherwise, the apostle reasoned not only inconclusively but
absurdly, in quoting this text as a proof of the doctrine, that Christ
is superior to the angels:

<span id="xxiv.vi-p16"></span>“I will be to him a Father, and he shall
be to me a Son,”  
(<span id="xxiv.vi-p16.2"></span>[Heb
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#005)<span id="xxiv.vi-p16.2"></span>.)

<span id="xxiv.vi-p17"></span>Angels, and kings, and all who are
regenerated by the Spirit of adoption, are called *sons of God;* but
David, when God promises to take him for his son, is, by singular
prerogative, elevated above all others to whom this designation is
applied. This is still more apparent from the following verse, in which
he is called *God’s first-born,* because he is higher than all the kings
of the earth; and this is an honor which transcends all the dignity both
of men and angels. If it is objected, that David being a mortal man
could not be equal to the angels, the obvious answer is, that if he is
considered in himself, he cannot justly be elevated to the same rank
with them, but with the highest propriety he may, in so far as for a
time he represented the person of Christ.

<span id="xxiv.vi-p18"></span><span id="xxiv.vi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.vi-p19"></span>**28.** *And I will keep my mercy to him
for ever.* We see how God frequently repeats, that he had set up the
kingdom of David with the express design of establishing it for ever. By
placing *his mercy* first in order, and then adding *his covenant,* he
points out the cause of this covenant, intimating in one word, that it
is gratuitous, and that his grace is not only the foundation on which it
rests, but also the cause why it is preserved inviolate. The amount is,
that God will be always merciful to David, in order that his covenant
may never fail. From this it follows, that its inviolability depends
upon the mere good pleasure of God. In the next verse, God expresses the
effect of his truth, declaring, that the posterity of David will sit for
ever on the royal throne. There being nothing under heaven of long
continuance, *the days of heaven* is an expression employed to denote
everlasting duration. Whence it follows, that this prophecy cannot have
its full accomplishment in any till we come to Christ, in whom alone, in
the strict and proper sense, this everlasting duration is to be found.

<span id="xxiv.vii"></span>

<span id="xxiv.vii-p1"></span><span id="xxiv.vii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
89:30-37](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#030)<span
id="xxiv.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.vii-p2"></span>**30.** If his children shall forsake my
law, and walk not in my judgments; **31.** If they violate  <span
id="fr_544"></span>[545](#fn_544) my ordinances, and keep not my
statutes; **32.** Then will I visit their transgression with my rod,
 <span id="fr_545"></span>[546](#fn_545) and their iniquity with
stripes. **33.** But my loving-kindness will I not withdraw from him;
nor suffer my faithfulness to fail, \[literally, nor will I lie in my
truth.\] **34.** My covenant will I not break, nor alter that which hath
proceeded from my lips. **35.** Once have I sworn by my holiness, That I
will not lie  <span id="fr_546"></span>[547](#fn_546) to David. **36.**
His seed shall endure for ever; and his throne as the sun before me.
**37.** It shall be established for ever as the moon, and a faithful
witness in the heaven.  <span id="fr_547"></span>[548](#fn_547) Selah.

<span id="xxiv.vii-p7"></span> 

<span id="xxiv.vii-p8"></span><span id="xxiv.vii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.vii-p9"></span>**30.** *If his children shall forsake my
law.* The prophet proceeds yet farther, declaring, that although the
posterity of David should fall into sin, yet God had promised to show
himself merciful towards them, and that he would not punish their
transgressions to the full extent of their desert. Moreover, to give the
promise the greater efficacy, he always introduces God speaking, as if
he presented to him a request corresponding with the precise words and
express articles of his covenant.  <span
id="fr_548"></span>[549](#fn_548) It was very necessary that this should
be added; for so easily do we slide into evil, and so prone are we to
continual falls, that unless God, in the exercise of his infinite mercy,
pardoned us, there would not be a single article of his covenant which
would continue steadfast. God, therefore, seeing that it could not be
otherwise, but that the posterity of David, in so far as it depended
upon themselves, would frequently fall from the covenant, by their own
fault, has provided a remedy for such cases, in his pardoning grace.

<span id="xxiv.vii-p11"></span>Farther, as it is profitable for men to
be subjected to divine correction, he does not promise that he will
allow them to escape unpunished, which would be to encourage them in
their sins; but he promises, that in his chastisements he will exercise
a fatherly moderation, and will not execute vengeance upon them to the
full extent which their sins deserve. It is also to be observed, that he
promises pardon, not only for light offenses, but also for great and
aggravated sins. It is not without cause that he uses these forms of
expression, *to forsake his law, to violate his statutes, not to walk in
his judgments,* and *not to keep his commandments* Nor is it without
cause that he uses the word *transgression,* or perfidiousness, and
*iniquity.* We see, then, that the patience and lenity of God, by which
he reconciles to himself the posterity of David, is extended even to
sins of the most heinous and aggravated description.

<span id="xxiv.vii-p12"></span>This passage teaches us, that when God
adopts men into his family, they do not forthwith completely lay aside
the flesh with its corruptions, as is held by some enthusiasts, who
dream, that as soon as we are grafted into the body of Christ, all the
corruption that is in us must be destroyed. Would to God that we could
all on a sudden change our nature, and thus exhibit that angelic
perfection which they require! But as it is quite apparent, that we are
far from such an attainment, so long as we carry about with us this
tabernacle of flesh, let us bid adieu to that devilish figment, and let
us all betake ourselves to the sanctuary of forgiveness, which is at all
times open for us. God, unquestionably, is speaking of the household of
his Church; and yet it is declared, with sufficient plainness, in the
promise which he makes of pardoning their offenses, that they will
transgress and be guilty of revolting from him.

<span id="xxiv.vii-p13"></span>To limit what is here said to the ancient
people of Israel, is an exposition not only absurd, but altogether
impious. In the first place, I take it as a settled point, which we have
already had occasion often to consider, that this kingdom was erected to
be a figure or shadow in which God might represent the Mediator to his
Church: and this can be proved, not only from the testimony of Christ
and the apostles, but it may also be clearly and indubitably deduced
from the thing considered in itself. If we set Christ aside, where will
we find that everlasting duration of the royal throne of which mention
is here made? The second from David, in the order of succession, was
despoiled of the greater part of the kingdom, so that out of twelve
tribes he retained scarcely one tribe and a half. Afterwards, how many
losses did this kingdom thus greatly reduced sustain, and by how many
calamities was it defaced, until at length the king and the whole body
of the people were dragged into captivity, with the utmost ignominy and
reproach? And I pray you to consider where was the dignity of the
throne, when the king, after his sons were put to death before his eyes,
was himself treated as a criminal? (<span
id="xxiv.vii-p13.1"></span>[2Ki
25:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#007)<span
id="xxiv.vii-p13.1"></span>.) The Jews were indeed afterwards permitted
to dwell in their own country; but it was without the honor and title of
a kingdom. Accordingly, Ezekiel (<span id="xxiv.vii-p13.2"></span>[Eze
21:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#027)<span
id="xxiv.vii-p13.2"></span>) declares thrice, that the crown shall be
laid in the dust, “until he come whose right it is.” The obvious
conclusion then is, that perpetuity, as applied to this kingdom, can be
verified in Christ alone. And, in fact, what access could the Jews of
old time have had to God, or what access could we in the present day
have to him, did not the Mediator come between us and him, to cause us
find favor in his sight?

<span id="xxiv.vii-p14"></span>It now remains that we apply to ourselves
the qualities of this kingdom of which we have been speaking. As its
everlasting duration leads us to the hope of a blessed immortality, and
its invincible strength inspires our minds with tranquillity, and
prevents our faith from failing, notwithstanding all the efforts which
Satan may put forth against us, and notwithstanding the numerous forms
of death which may surround us; so the pardon which is here promised
belongs to the spiritual kingdom of Christ: and it may be equally
gathered from this passage, that the salvation of the Church depends
solely upon the grace of God, and the truth of his promises. If it is
objected, that those who are regenerated by the Spirit of God never
totally fall away, because the incorruptible seed of the word abides in
them, I grant that this is an important truth. It is not, however, a
total apostasy which is here spoken of — not such as implies the entire
extinction of godliness in the individual chargeable with it. But it
sometimes happens that the faithful cast off the yoke of God, and break
forth into sin in such a manner, as that the fear of God seems to be
extinguished in them; and such being the case, it was necessary that He
should promise the pardon even of heinous sins, that they might not upon
every fall be overwhelmed with despair. Thus David seemed, to outward
appearance, to be wholly deprived of the Spirit of God, whom he prays to
be restored to him. The reason why God leaves hope of pardon even for
detestable and deadly transgressions is, that the enormity of our sins
may not keep us back or hinder us from seeking reconciliation with him.
From this, we are led to condemn the undue severity of the fathers, who
scrupled to receive to repentance those who had fallen for the second or
third time. Due care must indeed be taken lest, by too great
forbearance, loose reins should be given to men to commit iniquity; but
there is no less danger in an extreme degree of rigour. It is to be
observed, that when God declares that he will show himself merciful
towards sinners, who have violated his law, and broken his commandments,
he purposely employs these odious terms to excite our hatred and
detestation of sin, and not to entice us to the commission of it. Still,
however, we must understand the passage as amounting to this, That
although the faithful may not in every instance act in a manner worthy
of the grace of God, and may therefore deserve to be rejected by him,
yet he will be merciful to them, because remission of sins is an
essential article promised in his covenant. And, indeed, as God in his
law requires us to perform what exceeds our power, all that he promises
in it is of no avail to us, to whom it can never be accomplished. Hence
Paul, in <span id="xxiv.vii-p14.1"></span>[Ro
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#014)<span id="xxiv.vii-p14.1"></span>,
affirms, “If the inheritance come by the law, faith is made void, and
the promise made of none effect.” To this also belong these words of
Jeremiah,

<span id="xxiv.vii-p15"></span>“Behold, the days come, saith the Lord,
that I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel, and with the
house of Judah; not according to the covenant that I made with their
fathers, in the day that I took them by the hand to bring them out of
the land of Egypt; (which my covenant they brake, although I was an
husband unto them, saith the Lord;) but this shall be the covenant that
I will make with the house of Israel: After those days, saith the Lord,
I will put my law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts;
and will be their God, and they shall be my people. I will forgive their
iniquity, and I will remember their sin no more.” (<span
id="xxiv.vii-p15.1"></span>[Jer
31:31-34](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#031)<span
id="xxiv.vii-p15.1"></span>)

<span id="xxiv.vii-p16"></span>Farther, since God does not adopt us as
his children, to encourage us to take liberty to commit sin with the
greater boldness, mention is here made at the same time of chastisement,
by which he shows that he hates the sins of his children, and, warning
them of what they have deserved in offending him, invites and exhorts
them to repentance. This fatherly chastisement then, which operates as
medicine, holds the medium between undue indulgence, which is an
encouragement to sin, and extreme severity, which precipitates persons
into destruction. Here the inspired writer adverts to the prophecy
recorded in <span id="xxiv.vii-p16.1"></span>[2Sa
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#014)<span id="xxiv.vii-p16.1"></span>,
where God declares that in chastising his own people, he will proceed
after the manner of men —

<span id="xxiv.vii-p17"></span>“If he commit iniquity, I will chasten
him with the rod of men, and with the stripes of the children of men.”
(<span id="xxiv.vii-p17.1"></span>[2Sa
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#014)<span id="xxiv.vii-p17.1"></span>)

<span id="xxiv.vii-p18"></span>God there speaks of his chastising his
people after the manner of men, either because the anger of a father in
correcting his children proceeds from love, — for he sees that otherwise
he would fail in promoting their good; or it contains a contrast between
God and men, implying, that in the task of chastising he will proceed
with moderation and gentleness; for, were he to put forth his strength,
he would immediately bring us to nothing, yea, he could do this simply
by moving one of his fingers. The scope of both passages undoubtedly is,
that whenever God punishes the sins of true believers, he will observe a
wholesome moderation; and it is therefore our duty to take all the
punishments which he inflicts upon us, as so many medicines. On this
point, the Papists have egregiously blundered. Not understanding the
true end and fruit of chastisements, they have imagined that God
proceeds herein as if avenging himself upon sinners. Whence arose their
satisfactions, and from these again proceeded pardons and indulgences,
by which they endeavored to redeem themselves from the hand and
vengeance of God.  <span id="fr_549"></span>[550](#fn_549) But God has
nothing else in view than to correct the vices of his children, in order
that, after having thoroughly purged them, he may restore them anew to
his favor and friendship; according to the words of Paul in <span
id="xxiv.vii-p19.3"></span>[1Co
11:33](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#033)<span
id="xxiv.vii-p19.3"></span>, which affirm that the faithful “are
chastened of the Lord, that they should not be condemned with the
world.” For this reason, lest they should be overwhelmed with the weight
of chastisement, he restrains his hand, and makes considerate allowance
for their infirmity. Thus the promise is fulfilled, That *he does not
withdraw his loving-kindness from* his people, even when he is angry
with them; for, while he is correcting them for their profit and
salvation, he does not cease to love them. It is, however, to be
observed, that there is a change of person in the words. After it is
said, *If his children shall forsake my law,* etc., it is at length
subjoined*, My loving-kindness or mercy will I not withdraw from Him*.
It ought surely to have been said, *them* instead of *him,* since it is
*children* in the plural number who are before spoken of. But it is very
probable that this form of expression is purposely employed to teach us
that we are reconciled to God only through Christ; and that if we would
expect to find mercy, we must seek for it from that source alone. What
follows in the end of the verse, *I will not suffer my faithfulness to
fail,* is more emphatic than if it had been said that God will be true
to what he has said. It is possible that God’s promise may fail of
taking effect, and yet he may continue faithful. For example, the law is
true and holy, and yet of what advantage is it to us that salvation is
promised in the law, when no human being can ever obtain salvation by
it? God then in this passage leads us farther; promising that his
covenant shall be steadfast and effectual, not only because he will be
faithful on his part, but also because he will keep his people from
falling away through their own inconstancy.

<span id="xxiv.vii-p20"></span><span id="xxiv.vii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.vii-p21"></span>**34** *My covenant will I not break.* As
the true knowledge of God’s mercy can only be obtained from his word, he
enjoins us to keep our eyes intently fixed upon his covenant. The more
excellent and invaluable a blessing it is, “Never to be rejected after
having been once adopted by him,” the more difficult it is for us to
believe its truth. And we know how many thoughts from time to time
present themselves to our minds, tempting us to call it in question.
That the faithful, therefore, may not harass themselves beyond measure
in debating in their own minds whether or no they are in favor with God,
they are enjoined to look to the covenant, and to embrace the salvation
which is offered to them in it. God here commends to us his own
faithfulness, that we may account his promise sufficient, and that we
may not seek the certainty of our salvation any where else. He had said
above, *If the children of David break my statutes;* and now, alluding
to that breach, he declares that he will not requite them as they
requite him, *My covenant will I not break,* implying, that although his
people may not altogether act in a manner corresponding to their
vocation, as they ought to do, he will not suffer his covenant to be
broken and disannulled on account of their fault, because he will
promptly and effectually prevent this in the way of blotting out their
sins by a gratuitous pardon. He is still pursuing the illustration of
the preceding proposition, *I will not suffer my faithfulness to fail;*
promising not only to be faithful on his side, as we say, but also that
what he has promised shall take full effect, in despite of all the
impediments which men may cast in the way; for he will strive against
their sins, that by means of them the fruit of his goodness may not be
prevented from reaching them. When the Jews, by their ingratitude and
treachery, revolted from him, the covenant was not disannulled, because
it was founded upon the perfect immutability of his nature. And still,
at the present day, when our sins mount even to the heavens, the
goodness of God fails not to rise above them, since it is far above the
heavens.

<span id="xxiv.vii-p22"></span><span id="xxiv.vii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.vii-p23"></span>**35.** *Once have I sworn by my
holiness.* God now confirms by an oath what he previously stated he had
promised to David; from which it appears that it was not a matter of
small importance; it being certain that God would not interpose his holy
name in reference to what was of no consequence. It is a token of
singular loving-kindness for him, upon seeing us prone to distrust, to
provide a remedy for it so compassionately. We have, therefore, so much
the less excuse if we do not embrace, with true and unwavering faith,
his promise which is so strongly ratified, since in his deep interest
about our salvation, he does not withhold his oath, that we may yield
entire credence to his word. If we do not reckon his simple promise
sufficient, he adds his oath, as it were, for a pledge. The adverb
*once,*  <span id="fr_550"></span>[551](#fn_550) denotes that the oath
is irrevocable, and that therefore we have not the least reason to be
apprehensive of any inconstancy. He affirms that he sware *by his
holiness,* because a greater than himself is not to be found, by whom he
could swear. In swearing by Him, we constitute him our judge, and place
him as sovereign over us, even as he is our sovereign by nature. It is a
more emphatic manner of expression for him to say, *by my holiness,*
than if he had said, *by myself,* not only because it magnifies and
exalts his glory, but also because it is far more fitted for the
confirmation of faith, calling back, as it does, the faithful to the
earthly habitation which he had chosen for himself, that they might not
think it necessary for them to seek him at a distance; for by the term
*holiness,* I have no doubt, he means *the sanctuary.* And yet he swears
by himself, and by nothing else; for, in naming the temple which he had
appointed as his seat, he does not depart from himself; but, merely
accommodating his language to our rude understandings, swears by his
holiness which dwells visibly upon earth. With respect to the elliptical
form of the oath, we have seen, in a previous psalm, that this was a
manner of swearing quite common among the Hebrews. Thus they were warned
that the name of God was not to be used without due consideration, lest,
by using it rashly and irreverently, they should draw down upon
themselves the Divine vengeance. The abrupt and suspended form of
expression was, as it were, a bridle to restrain them, and give them
opportunity for reflection. It is no uncommon thing for God to borrow
something from the common custom of men.

<span id="xxiv.vii-p25"></span><span id="xxiv.vii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.vii-p26"></span>**36.** *His seed shall endure for ever.*
There now follows the promise that the right of sovereignty shall always
remain with the posterity of David. These two things — his offspring and
his throne, are conjoined; and by these words the everlasting duration
of the kingdom is promised, so that it should never pass to those who
were of a strange and different race. The sun and the moon are produced
as witnesses; for although they are creatures subject to corruption,
they yet possess more stability than the earth or air; the elements, as
we see, being subject to continual changes. As the whole of this lower
world is subject to unceasing agitation and change, there is presented
to us a more steadfast state of things in the sun and moon, that the
kingdom of David might not be estimated according to the common order of
nature. Since, however, this royal throne was shaken in the time of
Rehoboam, as we have before had occasion to remark, and afterwards
broken down and overthrown, it follows that this prophecy cannot be
limited to David. For although at length the outward majesty of this
kingdom was put an end to without hope of being re-established, the sun
ceased not to shine by day, nor the moon by night. Accordingly, until we
come to Christ, God might seem to be unfaithful to his promises. But in
the branch which sprung from the root of Jesse, these words were
fulfilled in their fullest sense.  <span
id="fr_551"></span>[552](#fn_551)

<span id="xxiv.viii"></span>

<span id="xxiv.viii-p1"></span><span id="xxiv.viii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
89:38-45](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#038)<span
id="xxiv.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.viii-p2"></span>**38.** But thou hast abhorred and
rejected him; thou hast been angry against thy anointed. **39.** Thou
hast made the covenant of thy servant to cease;  <span
id="fr_552"></span>[553](#fn_552) thou hast profaned his crown to the
earth. **40.** Thou hast broken down all his walls; thou hast made his
fortresses a ruin. **41.** All who pass by the way have spoiled him: he
has been a reproach to his neighbors. **42.** Thou hast exalted the
right hand of his oppressors; thou hast caused all his enemies to
rejoice. **43.** Thou hast also blunted the edge of his sword, and hast
not made him to stand in battle. **44.** Thou hast effaced his splendor,
and cast his throne to the ground. **45.** Thou hast shortened the days
of his youth; thou hast covered him with shame. Selah.

<span id="xxiv.viii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xxiv.viii-p5"></span><span id="xxiv.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.viii-p6"></span>**38.** *But thou hast abhorred and
rejected him.* Here the prophet complains that in consequence of the
decayed state of the kingdom, the prophecy appeared to have failed of
its accomplishment. Not that he accuses God of falsehood; but he speaks
in this manner, that he may with all freedom cast his cares and griefs
into the bosom of God, who permits us to deal thus familiarly with him.
It doubtless becomes us to frame our desires according to the divine
will; but that person cannot be said to pass beyond due bounds who
humbly laments that he is deprived of the tokens of the divine favor,
provided be does not despair, or rebelliously murmur against God; and we
shall afterwards see that the prophet, when he blesses God at the close
of the psalm, affords a proof of tranquil submission, by which he
corrects or qualifies his complaints. Whoever, therefore, that Rabbin
was who maintained that it is unlawful to recite this psalm, he was led
by a foolish and impious peevishness to condemn what God bears with in
his children. In taking this liberty of expostulating with God, the
prophet had no other object in view than that he might the more
effectually resist distrust and impatience, by unburdening himself in
the divine presence. Farther, the words, *Thou hast abhorred and
rejected him,* if criticised according to the rules of the Greek and
Latin language, will be pronounced inelegant; for the word which is most
emphatic is put first, and then there is added another which is less
emphatic. But as the Hebrews do not observe our manner of arrangement in
this respect, the order here adopted is quite consistent with the idiom
of the Hebrew language. The third verb contains the reason of this
change on the part of God, teaching us that the king was rejected
because God was incensed against him. It is thought by some that there
is here a recital of the mockery in which the enemies of the chosen
people indulged, an opinion which they adopt to avoid the difficulty
arising from viewing this severe kind of complaint, as uttered by the
Church, which proved such a stumbling-block to the Rabbin above referred
to, that on account of it he condemned the whole psalm. But it is to be
observed, that the prophet speaks according to the common feeling and
apprehension of men; while at the same time he was fully convinced in
his own mind, that the king who had been once chosen by God could not be
rejected by him.

<span id="xxiv.viii-p7"></span>In the same sense we ought to understand
what follows (verse 39) concerning the disannulling of the covenant —
*Thou hast made the covenant of thy servant to cease.* The prophet does
not charge God with levity and inconstancy: he only complains that those
notable promises of which he had spoken had to appearance vanished and
come to nought. Whenever the faithful put the question,

<span id="xxiv.viii-p8"></span>“How long wilt thou forget me, O Lord?”
“Awake, why sleepest thou, O Lord?”  
(<span id="xxiv.viii-p8.2"></span>[Ps.
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#001), [Ps.
44:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#023), [Ps.
79:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#005)<span
id="xxiv.viii-p8.2"></span>,)

<span id="xxiv.viii-p9"></span>they assuredly are not to be understood
as attributing forgetfulness or sleep to him: they only lay before him
the temptations which flesh and blood suggest to them in order to induce
him speedily to succor them under the infirmity with which they are
distressed. It is not then wonderful, though the prophet, amidst such
horrible desolation, was affected by the infirmities to which human
nature is so liable in such circumstances, and thus prompted to make the
assertion, that what God promised was far from being manifestly
realised. When he saw all things going contrary to the Divine promise,
he was not a man so steel-hearted as to remain unmoved at so pitiable
and confused a spectacle. But coming freely into the Divine presence, he
seeks a remedy that he might not be swallowed up with sorrow, which
would have been the case had he indulged in secret repining, and
neglected this means of alleviation. What is added in the close of the
verse, *Thou hast cast his crown to the earth,* does not seem to apply
to the time of Rehoboam, unless, perhaps, the dismemberment of the
kingdom may be denoted by the casting of the crown to the earth. The
statements which are made immediately after must necessarily be referred
to some greater calamity. If this is admitted, the author of the psalm
must have been a different person from Ethan, who was one of the four
wise men, of whom mention is made in the sacred history, (<span
id="xxiv.viii-p9.1"></span>[2Ki
4:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#031)<span
id="xxiv.viii-p9.1"></span>.) In so doubtful a case, I leave every one
to adopt the conjecture which appears to him the most probable.

<span id="xxiv.viii-p10"></span><span id="xxiv.viii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.viii-p11"></span>**40.** *Thou hast broken down all his
walls.* The prophet, although he might easily have found another cause
to which to impute the breaking down and razing of the fortifications,
yet under the influence of devout and sanctified feeling acknowledges
God to be the author of this calamity; being fully convinced that men
could not at their pleasure have destroyed the kingdom which God had set
up had not the Divine anger been kindled. Afterwards speaking
metaphorically, he complains that the kingdom was exposed as a prey to
all passers-by, resembling a field or garden, of which the walls were
broken down, and the ground laid open to depredation. As an aggravation
of a calamity which in itself was sufficiently grievous, the additional
indignity is brought forward, that the king *was a reproach to his
neighbors.* The worldly and the profane, there can be no doubt, finding
an opportunity so much according to their wishes, derided him, saying,
Is this that king of God’s choice, a king more excellent than the
angels, and whose throne was to continue as long as the sun and the moon
should endure? As these railings recoiled upon God himself, the prophet
justly complains of the reproachful derision with which God’s Anointed
was treated, whose dignity and royal estate were ratified and confirmed
by heavenly anointing.

<span id="xxiv.viii-p12"></span><span id="xxiv.viii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.viii-p13"></span>**42** *Thou hast exalted the right hand
of his oppressors.* Here he states that God took part with the enemies
of the king; for he was well aware that these enemies could not have
prevailed but by the will of God, who inspires some with courage, and
renders others faint-hearted. In short, in proportion to the number of
the calamities which had befallen the chosen people, was the number of
the evidences of their having been forsaken by God; for, so long as he
continued his favor, the whole world, by all their machinations, were
unable to impair the stability of that kingdom. Had it been said that
the enemies of the king obtained the victory, the statement would have
been quite true; but it would not have been a mode of expression so
obviously fitted to exalt the Divine power; as it might have been
thought that men setting themselves in opposition to God had, by their
own power, forced their way, and effected their purpose, even against
those who enjoyed his protection. Accordingly, the prophet reflects with
himself, that unless the Divine anger had been incensed, that kingdom
which God had erected could not have been reduced to a condition so
extremely wretched.

<span id="xxiv.viii-p14"></span><span id="xxiv.viii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.viii-p15"></span>**45.** *Thou hast shortened the days of
his youth.* Some would explain this sentence as meaning, that God had
weakened the king, so that he faded or withered away at his very
entrance upon the flower of youth, and was exhausted with old age before
reaching the period of manhood.  <span id="fr_553"></span>[554](#fn_553)
This exposition may be regarded as not improbable; but still it is to be
observed, in order to our having a clearer understanding of the mind of
the prophet, that he does not speak exclusively of any one individual,
but compares the state of the kingdom to the life of man. His complaint
then amounts to this, That God caused the kingdom to wax old, and
finally to decay, before it reached a state of complete maturity; its
fate resembling that of a young man, who, while yet increasing in
strength and vigor, is carried away by a violent death before his time.
This similitude is highly appropriate; for the kingdom, if we compare
the state of it at that period with the Divine promise, had scarce yet
fully unfolded its blossom, when, amidst its first advances, suddenly
smitten with a grievous decay, its freshness and beauty were defaced,
while at length it vanished away. Moreover, what we have previously
stated must be borne in mind, that when the prophet complains that the
issue does not correspond with the promise, or is not such as the
promise led the chosen people to expect, he does not, on that account,
charge God with falsehood, but brings forward this apparent discrepancy
for another purpose — to encourage himself, from the consideration of
the Divine promises, to come to the throne of grace with the greater
confidence and boldness; and, while he urged this difficulty before God,
he was fully persuaded that it was impossible for Him not to show
himself faithful to his word. As the majority of men drink up their
sorrow and keep it to themselves, because they despair of deriving any
benefit from prayer so true believers, the more frankly and familiarly
they appeal to God in reference to his promises, the more valiantly do
they wrestle against their distrust, and encourage themselves in the
hope of a favorable issue.

<span id="xxiv.ix"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ix-p1"></span><span id="xxiv.ix-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
89:46-48](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#046)<span
id="xxiv.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ix-p2"></span>**46.** How long, O Jehovah? wilt thou hide
thyself for ever? shall thy fury burn like fire? **47.** Remember of
what age I am!  <span id="fr_554"></span>[555](#fn_554) why shouldst
thou have created all the sons of men in vain?  <span
id="fr_555"></span>[556](#fn_555) **48.** What man shall live, and shall
not see death? shall he deliver his soul \[or life\] from the hand of
the grave?  <span id="fr_556"></span>[557](#fn_556) Selah.

<span id="xxiv.ix-p6"></span> 

<span id="xxiv.ix-p7"></span><span id="xxiv.ix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ix-p8"></span>**46.** *How long, O Jehovah? wilt thou
hide thyself for ever?* After having poured forth his complaints
respecting the sad and calamitous condition of the Church, the Psalmist
now turns himself to prayer. Whence it follows that the language of
lamentation to which he had hitherto given utterance, although it
emanated from carnal sense, was nevertheless conjoined with faith.
Unbelievers, in the agitation of trouble, may sometimes engage in
prayer, yet whatever they ask proceeds from feigned lips. But the
prophet, by connecting prayer with his complaints, bears testimony that
he had never lost his confidence in the truth of the Divine promises.
With respect to this manner of expression, *How long, for ever?* we have
spoken on <span id="xxiv.ix-p8.2"></span>[Psalm
79:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#005)<span id="xxiv.ix-p8.2"></span>,
where we have shown that it denotes a long and continued succession of
calamities. Moreover, by asking *How long God will hide himself,* he
tacitly intimates that all will be well as soon as God is pleased to
look upon his chosen people with a benignant countenance. In the second
clause of the verse, he again mentions as the reason why God did not
vouchsafe to look upon them with paternal favor, that his anger was
incensed against them. The obvious conclusion from which is, that all
the afflictions endured by us proceed from our sins; these being the
scourges of an offended God.

<span id="xxiv.ix-p9"></span><span id="xxiv.ix-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ix-p10"></span>**47** *Remember how short my time is.*
After having confessed that the severe and deplorable afflictions which
had befallen the Church were to be traced to her own sins as the
procuring cause, the prophet, the more effectually to move God to
commiseration, lays before him the brevity of human life, in which, if
we receive no taste of the Divine goodness, it will seem that we have
been created in vain. That we may understand the passage the more
clearly, it will be better to begin with the consideration of the last
member of the verse, *Why shouldst thou have created all the sons of men
in vain?* The faithful, in putting this question, proceed upon an
established first principle, That God has created men and placed them in
the world, to show himself a father to them. And, indeed, as his
goodness extends itself even to the cattle and lower animals of every
kind,  <span id="fr_557"></span>[558](#fn_557) it cannot for a moment be
supposed, that we, who hold a higher rank in the scale of being than the
brute creation, should be wholly deprived of it. Upon the contrary
supposition, it were better for us that we had never been born, than to
languish away in continual sorrow. There is, moreover, set forth the
brevity of the course of our life; which is so brief, that unless God
make timely haste in giving us some taste of his benefits, the
opportunity for doing this will be lost, since our life passes rapidly
away. The drift of this verse is now very obvious. In the first place,
it is laid down as a principle, That the end for which men were created
was, that they should enjoy God’s bounty in the present world; and from
this it is concluded that they are born in vain, unless he show himself
a father towards them. In the second place, as the course of this life
is short, it is argued that if God does not make haste to bless them,
the opportunity will no longer be afforded when their life shall have
run out.

<span id="xxiv.ix-p14"></span>But here it may be said, in the first
place, that the saints take too much upon them in prescribing to God a
time in which to work; and, in the next place, that although he afflict
us with continual distresses, so long as we are in our state of earthly
pilgrimage, yet there is no ground to conclude from this that we have
been created in vain, since there is reserved for us a better life in
heaven, to the hope of which we have been adopted; and that, therefore,
it is not surprising though now our life is hidden from us on earth. I
answer, That it is by the permission of God that the saints take this
liberty of urging him in their prayers to make haste; and that there is
no impropriety in doing so, provided they, at the same time, keep
themselves within the bounds of modesty, and, restraining the
impetuosity of their affections, yield themselves wholly to his will.
With respect to the second point, I grant that it is quite true, that
although we must continue to drag out our life amidst continual
distresses, we have abundant consolation to aid us in bearing all our
afflictions, provided we lift up our minds to heaven. But still it is to
be observed, in the first place, that it is certain, considering our
great weakness, that no man will ever do this unless he has first tasted
of the Divine goodness in this life; and, secondly, that the complaints
of the people of God ought not to be judged of according to a perfect
rule, because they proceed not from a settled and an undisturbed state
of mind, but have always some excess arising from the impetuosity or
vehemence of the affections at work in their minds. I at once allow that
the man who measures the love of God from the state of things as
presently existing, judges by a standard which must lead to a false
conclusion;

<span id="xxiv.ix-p15"></span>“for whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth,”
(<span id="xxiv.ix-p15.1"></span>[Heb
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#006)<span id="xxiv.ix-p15.1"></span>.)

<span id="xxiv.ix-p16"></span>But as God is never so severe towards his
own people as not to furnish them with actual experimental evidence of
his grace, it stands always true that life is profitless to men, if they
do not feel, while they live, that He is their father.

<span id="xxiv.ix-p17"></span>As to the second clause of the verse, it
has been stated elsewhere that our prayers do not flow in one uniform
course, but sometimes betray an excess of sorrow. It is, therefore, not
to be wondered at that the faithful, when immoderate sorrow or fear
occupies their thoughts and keeps fast hold of them, experience such
inattention stealing by degrees upon them, as to make them for a time
forget to keep their minds fixed in meditation upon the life to come.
Many think it very unaccountable, if the children of God do not, the
first moment they begin to think, immediately penetrate into heaven, as
if thick mists did not often intervene to impede or hinder us when we
would look attentively into it. For faith to lose its liveliness is one
thing, and for it to be utterly extinguished is another. And, doubtless,
whoever is exercised in the judgments of God, and in conflict with
temptations, will acknowledge that he is not so mindful of the spiritual
life as he ought to be. Although then the question, *Why shouldst thou
have created all the sons of men in vain?* is deduced from a true
principle, yet it savours somewhat of a faulty excess. Whence it appears
that even in our best framed prayers, we have always need of pardon.
There always escapes from us some language or sentiment chargeable with
excess, and therefore it is necessary for God to overlook or bear with
our infirmity.

<span id="xxiv.ix-p18"></span><span id="xxiv.ix-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ix-p19"></span>**48.** *What man shall live, and shall
not see death?* This verse contains a confirmation of what has been
already stated concerning the brevity of human life. The amount is, that
unless God speedily hasten to show himself a father to men, the
opportunity of causing them to experience his grace will no longer
exist. The original word <span id="xxiv.ix-p19.1"></span>גבר, *geber,*
which we have translated *man,* is derived from the verb <span
id="xxiv.ix-p19.2"></span>גבר, *gabar, he was strong,* or *he
prevailed;* and the sacred writer employs this word, the more forcibly
to express the truth, that no man is privileged with exemption from the
dominion of death.

<span id="xxiv.x"></span>

<span id="xxiv.x-p1"></span><span id="xxiv.x-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
89:49-52](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#049)<span id="xxiv.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.x-p2"></span>**49.** O Lord! where are thy former
mercies? thou hast sworn to David in thy truth. **50.** O Lord! Remember
the reproach of thy servants: I have sustained in my bosom all the
reproaches of mighty peoples; **51.** With which thy enemies, O Jehovah!
have reproached thee; with which they have reproached the footsteps of
thy Messiah, \[or thy Anointed.\] **52.** Blessed be Jehovah for ever!
Amen, and Amen.

<span id="xxiv.x-p3"></span> 

<span id="xxiv.x-p4"></span><span id="xxiv.x-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.x-p5"></span>**49.** *O Lord! where are thy former
mercies?* The prophet encourages himself, by calling to remembrance
God’s former benefits, as if his reasoning were, That God can never be
unlike himself, and that therefore the goodness which he manifested in
old time to the fathers cannot come to an end. This comparison might
indeed make the godly despond, when they find that they are not dealt
with by him so gently as he dealt with the fathers, did not another
consideration at the same time present itself to their minds — the
consideration that he never changes, and never wearies in the course of
his beneficence. As to the second clause of the verse, some interpreters
connect it with the first, by interposing the relative, thus: — *Where
are thy former mercies* which *thou hast sworn?* In this I readily
acquiesce; for the sense is almost the same, although the relative be
omitted. God had given evident and indubitable proofs of the truth of
the oracle delivered to Samuel;  <span id="fr_558"></span>[559](#fn_558)
and, therefore, the faithful lay before him both his promise and the
many happy fruits of it which had been experienced. They say, *in
truth,* that they may with the greater confidence apply to themselves,
whatever tokens of his liberality God had in old time bestowed upon the
fathers; for they had the same ground to expect the exercise of the
Divine goodness towards them as the fathers had, God, who is
unchangeably the same, having sworn to be merciful to the posterity of
David throughout all ages.

<span id="xxiv.x-p7"></span><span id="xxiv.x-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.x-p8"></span>**50.** *O Lord! remember the reproach of
thy servants.* They again allege, that they are held in derision by the
ungodly, — a consideration which had no small influence in moving God to
compassion: for the more grievous and troublesome a temptation it is, to
have the wicked deriding our patience, that, after having made us
believe that God is not true in what he has promised, they may
precipitate us into despair; the more ready is he to aid us, that our
feeble minds may not yield to the temptation. The prophet does not
simply mean that the reproaches of his enemies are to him intolerable,
but that God must repress their insolence in deriding the faith and
patience of the godly, in order that those who trust in him may not be
put to shame. He enhances still more the same sentiment in the second
clause, telling us, that he was assailed with all kind of reproaches by
*many peoples,* or by *the great peoples,* for the Hebrew word <span
id="xxiv.x-p8.1"></span>רבים, *rabbim,* signifies both *great* and
*many*

<span id="xxiv.x-p9"></span>Moreover, it is not without cause, that,
after having spoken in general of the servants of God, he changes the
plural into the singular number. He does this, that each of the faithful
in particular may be the more earnestly stirred up to the duty of
prayer. The expression, *in my bosom,* is very emphatic. It is as if he
had said, The wicked do not throw from a distance their insulting words,
but they vomit them, so to speak, upon the children of God, who are thus
constrained to receive them into their bosom, and to bear patiently this
base treatment. Such is the perversity of the time in which we live,
that we have need to apply the same doctrine to ourselves; for the earth
is full of profane and proud despisers of God, who cease not to make
themselves merry at our expense. And as Satan is a master well qualified
to teach them this kind of rhetoric, the calamities of the Church always
furnish them with matter for exercising it. Some take *bosom* for the
secret affection of the heart; but this exposition seems to be too
refined.

<span id="xxiv.x-p10"></span><span id="xxiv.x-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.x-p11"></span>**51.** *With which thy enemies, O Jehovah!
have reproached thee.* What the Psalmist now affirms is, not that the
wicked torment the saints with their contumelious language, but that
they revile even God himself. And he makes this statement, because it is
a much more powerful plea for obtaining favor in the sight of God, to
beseech him to maintain his own cause, because all the reproaches by
which the simplicity of our faith is held up to scorn recoil upon
himself, than to beseech him to do this, because he is wounded in the
person of his Church; according as he declares in Isaiah,

<span id="xxiv.x-p12"></span>“Whom hast thou reproached and blasphemed;
and against whom hast thou exalted thy voice, and lifted up thine eyes
on high? even against the Holy One of Israel.” (<span
id="xxiv.x-p12.1"></span>[Isa
37:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#023)<span id="xxiv.x-p12.1"></span>)

<span id="xxiv.x-p13"></span>That wicked robber Rabshakeh thought that
he scoffed only at the wretched Jews whom he besieged, and whose
surrender of themselves into his hands he believed he would soon
witness; but God took it as if he himself had been the object whom that
wicked man directly assailed. On this account also, the prophet calls
these enemies of his people *the enemies of God;* namely, because in
persecuting the Church with deadly hostility, they made an assault upon
the majesty of God, under whose protection the Church was placed.

<span id="xxiv.x-p14"></span>In the second clause, by *the footsteps of
Messiah* or *Christ* is meant the coming of Christ, even as it is said
in <span id="xxiv.x-p14.1"></span>[Isa
52:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#007)<span id="xxiv.x-p14.1"></span>,

<span id="xxiv.x-p15"></span>“How beautiful upon the mountains are the
feet of him that bringeth good tidings, that publisheth peace!” (<span
id="xxiv.x-p15.1"></span>[Isa
52:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#007)<span id="xxiv.x-p15.1"></span>)

<span id="xxiv.x-p16"></span>The Hebrew word <span
id="xxiv.x-p16.1"></span>עקב, *akeb,* sometimes signifies *the heel;*
but here, as in many other passages, it signifies *the sole of the
foot.* Others translate it *the pace* or *step,* but this gives exactly
the same sense. There can be no doubt, that *footsteps,* by the figure
synecdoche, is employed to denote *the feet;* and again, that by *the
feet,* according to the figure metonomy, is meant the coming of Christ.
The wicked, observing that the Jews clung to the hope of redemption, and
patiently endured all adversities because a deliverer had been promised
them, disdainfully derided their patience, as if all that the prophets
had testified concerning the coming of Christ had been only a fable.
 <span id="fr_559"></span>[560](#fn_559) And now also, although he has
been once manifested to the world, yet as, in consequence of his having
been received up into the glory of heaven, he seems to be far distant
from us, and to have forsaken his Church, these filthy dogs scoff at our
hope, as if it were a mere delusion.

<span id="xxiv.x-p18"></span><span id="xxiv.x-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.x-p19"></span>**52.** *Blessed be Jehovah for ever!* I am
surprised why some interpreters should imagine, that this verse was
added by some transcriber in copying the book, affirming, that it does
not correspond with the context: as if the language of praise and
thanksgiving to God were not as suitable at the close of a psalm as at
the opening of it. I have therefore no doubt, that the prophet, after
having freely bewailed the calamities of the Church, now, with the view
of allaying the bitterness of his grief, purposely breaks forth into the
language of praise. As to the words *Amen, and Amen,* I readily grant,
that they are here employed to distinguish the book.  <span
id="fr_560"></span>[561](#fn_560) But whoever composed this psalm, there
is no doubt, that by these words of rejoicing, the design of the writer
was to assuage the greatness of his grief in the midst of his heavy
afflictions, that he might entertain the livelier hope of deliverance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_519"></span>[520](cc10023.htm#fr_519) <span
id="xxiv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xxiv-p5"></span> The Hebrew verb for “doubting” is, <span
id="xxiv-p5.1"></span>אפונה, *aphunah* It means “to turn this way and
that,” as a person in great distress, not knowing, as we say, which way
to turn himself. (See Parkhurst’s Lexicon, <span
id="xxiv-p5.2"></span>פנה, 8.)

<span id="fn_520"></span>[521](cc10023.htm#fr_520) <span
id="xxiv.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.i-p3"></span> The Ethan celebrated in that passage,
according to some, is the same person who is mentioned in <span
id="xxiv.i-p3.1"></span>[1Ch 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#006)<span
id="xxiv.i-p3.1"></span>, as the grandson of Judah. (See page 406, note
2.) But that this psalm could not have been written by him is evident,
as we have there observed, from several allusions contained in it to
events which happened even posterior to the days of David. A person of
this name was one of the chief musicians in the time of David, (<span
id="xxiv.i-p3.3"></span>[1Ch 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1025.htm#001)<span
id="xxiv.i-p3.3"></span>,) but he was a Levite; whereas this Ethan is
called an Ezrahite. Nichols thinks it probable that the author, like
Heman, was of the family of Zerah, and wrote this psalm during the
captivity, most likely in the time of Jehoiakim, whose misfortunes he
seems here to describe in a spirit of despondency, notwithstanding the
promises made to David.

<span id="fn_521"></span>[522](cc10023.htm#fr_521) <span
id="xxiv.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.i-p7"></span> Ainsworth’s translation of this last clause
is both literal and elegant. “The heavens, thou wilt establish thy
faithfulness in them.” Dr Kennicott, in his Remarks on Select Passages
of the Old Testament, here refers to verses 37, 38, “where,” says he,
“it appears that the sun, the moon, and the bow in the sky, were the
tokens of confirmation given by God to the covenant made with David.”
“The meaning of this passage,” says Warner, “appears to be, that the
constancy of the celestial motions, the regular vicissitudes of day and
night, and alternations of the seasons, were emblems of God’s own
immutability.”

<span id="fn_522"></span>[523](cc10023.htm#fr_522) <span
id="xxiv.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.i-p10"></span> “<span id="xxiv.i-p10.1"></span>Ex tristi
ruinae spectaculo.” — *Lat*. “<span id="xxiv.i-p10.2"></span>Voyant ce
commoncement pitoyable d’une ruine.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_523"></span>[524](cc10023.htm#fr_523) <span
id="xxiv.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.i-p13"></span> “The word <span
id="xxiv.i-p13.1"></span>אמרתי, ‘I have said,’ is used, in the Book of
Psalms, to express two things; either a fixed purpose, or a settled
opinion of the person speaking. The Psalmist, therefore, delivers the
whole of this second verse in his own person, and introduces not God
speaking till the next verse.” — *Horsley*

<span id="fn_524"></span>[525](cc10023.htm#fr_524) <span
id="xxiv.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ii-p3"></span> “Comp. <span id="xxiv.ii-p3.1"></span>[2Sa
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#011)<span id="xxiv.ii-p3.1"></span>,
etc. In 5:3 and 5:4, the Psalmist introduces God as speaking on a
subject which he resumes in 5:34; so that the intervening verses may be
considered as parenthetical.” — *Cresswell*.

<span id="fn_525"></span>[526](cc10023.htm#fr_525) <span
id="xxiv.ii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ii-p4"></span> “ — *and thy truth*” — Le Clerc thinks
that the word *men* should here be supplied, *and men thy truth*; in
which case, the congregation of the saints will have its proper meaning
— an assembly of the pious upon earth; and the Psalmist thus describes
both angels and men as praising God.” — *Cresswell*.

<span id="fn_526"></span>[527](cc10023.htm#fr_526) <span
id="xxiv.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ii-p5"></span> “Literally *who is he among the sons of
Alim*, (or of Gods, as in <span id="xxiv.ii-p5.1"></span>[Ps
29:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#001)<span id="xxiv.ii-p5.1"></span>,)
*i*.*e*., according to Suicer, the powerful, the princes of the earth.
*Ale*, in the singular number, is used to signify God in <span
id="xxiv.ii-p5.2"></span>[De
32:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#017)<span id="xxiv.ii-p5.2"></span>;
<span id="xxiv.ii-p5.3"></span>[Job
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#004),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#023)<span id="xxiv.ii-p5.3"></span>,
(and in other places of that book;) <span id="xxiv.ii-p5.4"></span>[Da
11:38](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#038)<span id="xxiv.ii-p5.4"></span>;
<span id="xxiv.ii-p5.5"></span>[Hab
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#003)<span id="xxiv.ii-p5.5"></span>.
But it may be doubted whether its plural, *Alim*, ever means, as *Aleim*
does, the true God. We have, however, *the sons of Aleim*, *for chief
men*, in <span id="xxiv.ii-p5.6"></span>[Ge
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#002)<span id="xxiv.ii-p5.6"></span>,
and for angels in <span id="xxiv.ii-p5.7"></span>[Job
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#006)<span id="xxiv.ii-p5.7"></span>; in
which sense some commentators have understood *the sons of Alim* both
here and in <span id="xxiv.ii-p5.8"></span>[Ps
29:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#001)<span id="xxiv.ii-p5.8"></span>,
and with them agrees the Chaldee interpreter of this place. In <span
id="xxiv.ii-p5.9"></span>[Hab
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#011)<span id="xxiv.ii-p5.9"></span>,
*Ale* is used in speaking of the false god of the Chaldeans; and
Parkhurst is of opinion, that by *the sons of Alim* are meant those
kings who worshipped material divinities, such as the sun.” —
*Cresswell*.

<span id="fn_527"></span>[528](cc10023.htm#fr_527) <span
id="xxiv.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ii-p13"></span> Ainsworth reads, “God is daunting
terrible.” The original word is <span id="xxiv.ii-p13.1"></span>נערף,
*naarats*, from <span id="xxiv.ii-p13.2"></span>ערף, *arats*, *he was
broken*, *bruised*, *terrified*. “An epithet of God,” says Bythner “as
though breaking all things.”

<span id="fn_528"></span>[529](cc10023.htm#fr_528) <span
id="xxiv.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.iii-p3"></span> Hammond’s explanation of the words, *And
thy truth is round about thee*, conveys a striking and beautiful idea.
“The elegance of the phrase (which is poetical) seems to be taken,” says
he, “from the style of angels, verse 7th, where they are described as
they that encompass God; signifying, that as they wait upon God, and
execute his will, so, far above the strength of those, God’s fidelity,
his care to perform his promise exactly encompasses him, is ready prest
to perform all that he hath ever promised to do.” — *Hammond*.

<span id="fn_529"></span>[530](cc10023.htm#fr_529) <span
id="xxiv.iii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.iii-p4"></span> Horsley renders the clause thus: — Thou
hast crushed Rahab, that she lies gasping with her wounds; and has the
following note: — “The word <span id="xxiv.iii-p4.1"></span>חלל,” \[for
*lies gasping with her wounds*,\] “as it is used here, and in <span
id="xxiv.iii-p4.2"></span>[Ps
88:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#005)<span id="xxiv.iii-p4.2"></span>,
signifies not a dead carcass, but a person left for dead, under his
wounds, upon the field of battle; a person so wounded, as to be fallen,
and incapable of rising to defend himself, or annoy the enemy. It
answers exactly to the Greek word, <span
id="xxiv.iii-p4.3"></span>τραυματιας, by which the LXX. render it. We
have no corresponding word in the English language.” Dr Adam Clarke
reads, “Thou, like a hero, hast broken down Egypt;” and observes, “Dr
Kennicott has largely proved, that <span id="xxiv.iii-p4.4"></span>חלל,
*chalal*, which we render *wounded*, *slain*, etc., means a *soldier*,
*warrior*, *hero*; and it is certain that this sense agrees better with
it than the other in a great number of places.”

<span id="fn_530"></span>[531](cc10023.htm#fr_530) <span
id="xxiv.iii-p4.5"></span>

<span id="xxiv.iii-p5"></span> “The Hebrew word for ‘the north,’ is
derived from a root signifying ‘to hide, conceal.’ The ‘north’ is
probably so named; because in our northern hemisphere of the earth, the
sun appears to move from east to south, and from south to west, and,
towards mid-day, is at all times of the year southerly; whence the north
side of a building, tree, or mountain, is usually ‘concealed’ or
‘hidden’ from his direct rays, and is, as we express it, in the shade.
(See Parkhurst on <span id="xxiv.iii-p5.1"></span>צפן, 4.) Simonis,
also, assigns this as the reason of the name, in the judgment of some
critics, or, in that of others, because the north is covered with snow,
and of others again, with darkness; and so the Greek word for darkness,
<span id="xxiv.iii-p5.2"></span>ζοφος, is continually used by Homer for
the north: for the ancients thought that the north was always buried in
gloom and thick darkness.” — *Mant*

<span id="fn_531"></span>[532](cc10023.htm#fr_531) <span
id="xxiv.iii-p5.3"></span>

<span id="xxiv.iii-p6"></span> The original word <span
id="xxiv.iii-p6.1"></span>ימין, *yamin*, for “the south,” signifies
literally “the right hand.” As the Hebrews, when they engaged in prayer,
turned their faces eastward, they called the East <span
id="xxiv.iii-p6.2"></span>פנים, *the face*, and the West, <span
id="xxiv.iii-p6.3"></span>אחור, *the hinder part* *The South*,
therefore, would necessarily be *on their right hand*; and hence, <span
id="xxiv.iii-p6.4"></span>ימים, *yamin*, came to be used to denote *the
south*

<span id="fn_532"></span>[533](cc10023.htm#fr_532) <span
id="xxiv.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.iii-p14"></span> *Tabor* is a mountain of Judea, and
*Hermon* (<span id="xxiv.iii-p14.1"></span>[Ps
133:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa133.htm#003)<span
id="xxiv.iii-p14.1"></span>) of Syria, the former to the west, and the
latter to the east of the Jordan; so that they may be considered as put
for the East and the West. Accordingly, the Chaldee paraphrase is, “Thou
hast created the desert of the north, and the inhabitants of the south;
Tabor on the west, and Hermon on the east, sing praises to thy name.”
“These mountains,” says Warner, “were at a considerable distance from
each other. This indicates, that the most distant parts of the land
shall be equally blessed; have a like cause of rejoicing.”

<span id="fn_533"></span>[534](cc10023.htm#fr_533) <span
id="xxiv.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.iv-p3"></span> “<span id="xxiv.iv-p3.1"></span>Pource
qu’ils n’ont rien au dedans qui leur acquiere authorite et donne
majeste.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_534"></span>[535](cc10023.htm#fr_534) <span
id="xxiv.iv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xxiv.iv-p4"></span> “O the blessednesses of the people that
know the joyful sound; that are spared to hear the sound of the trumpet
on the morning of the jubilee, which proclaims deliverance to the
captives, and the restoration of all their forfeited estates!” — *Dr*
*Adam Clarke*. “But let us not forget,” says Dr Morison, “that the
trumpet of jubilee was a type of the proclamation of peace and salvation
by Jesus Christ. How happy they who, when the gospel trumpet is blown by
the heralds of salvation, are enabled to recognize its joyful sound.”

<span id="fn_535"></span>[536](cc10023.htm#fr_535) <span
id="xxiv.iv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.iv-p11"></span> “The Hebrew <span
id="xxiv.iv-p11.1"></span>ליהוה, must be rendered *of* or *from the
Lord*, in both places in this verse: ‘Of the Lord is our shield *or*
defense;’ ‘Of the Lord, *or* from him,’ *i* *e*., of his appointment,
‘is our King.’”— *Hammond*

<span id="fn_536"></span>[537](cc10023.htm#fr_536) <span
id="xxiv.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.v-p3"></span> “<span id="xxiv.v-p3.1"></span>Sans qu’il y
en ait aucune autre cause.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_537"></span>[538](cc10023.htm#fr_537) <span
id="xxiv.v-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xxiv.v-p4"></span> The word in the Hebrew Bible for “thy meek
ones” is in the singular number; but in the ancient versions, and in
sixty-three MSS. of Dr Kennicott’s collection, and seventy-one of De
Rossi’s, it is in the plural number.

<span id="fn_538"></span>[539](cc10023.htm#fr_538) <span
id="xxiv.v-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.v-p9"></span> “<span id="xxiv.v-p9.1"></span>L’ennemi
n’aura puissance sur luy.” — *Fr*. “The enemy shall not have power over
him.”

<span id="fn_539"></span>[540](cc10023.htm#fr_539) <span
id="xxiv.v-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.v-p14"></span> “<span id="xxiv.v-p14.1"></span>Quum
ultimus esset in rustico tugurio, et inter pecuarios.” — *Lat*. “<span
id="xxiv.v-p14.2"></span>Veu qu’il estoit le plus petit en la maison de
son pere, et qu’en ce mesnage de village il estoit de ceux qui gardoyent
les bestes.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_540"></span>[541](cc10023.htm#fr_540) <span
id="xxiv.vi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.vi-p3"></span> “The allusion appears to us to be made to
a cruel and unjust creditor, who exacts not only his just debts, but
some exaggerated demand, with usurious interest, which was not
permitted.” — *Williams*.

<span id="fn_541"></span>[542](cc10023.htm#fr_541) <span
id="xxiv.vi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.vi-p4"></span> This means, that David’s power should
extend from the Mediterranean, or Great Sea, to the river Euphrates.
Gejerus and Le Clerc have illustrated this passage from a speech
addressed to Alexander by the Scythian ambassadors, in Q. Curtius, 50,
7.” <span id="xxiv.vi-p4.1"></span>Si Dii habitum corporis tui aviditati
animi parem esse voluissent, orbis te non caperet; altera manu orientem,
altera occidentem contingeres.” “If the gods had given thee a body
proportionable to thy insatiable mind, the world would not be able to
contain thee. Thou wouldst stretch forth one hand to the furthest
extremities of the east, and the other to the utmost west.”

<span id="fn_542"></span>[543](cc10023.htm#fr_542) <span
id="xxiv.vi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.vi-p8"></span> “*I* *will make him my first-born*;
*i*.*e*., as the eldest son of a family ranks the highest, and receives
the most from his father, so shall David be first in the order of kings,
who, when they are legitimate sovereigns, may be regarded as the sons of
God, their common Father: comp. <span id="xxiv.vi-p8.1"></span>[Ge
27:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#001)<span id="xxiv.vi-p8.1"></span>,
etc.; <span id="xxiv.vi-p8.2"></span>[Ex
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#022)<span id="xxiv.vi-p8.2"></span>;
<span id="xxiv.vi-p8.3"></span>[De
21:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#017)<span id="xxiv.vi-p8.3"></span>;
<span id="xxiv.vi-p8.4"></span>[Ps
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#007)<span id="xxiv.vi-p8.4"></span>;
<span id="xxiv.vi-p8.5"></span>[Col
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#015)<span id="xxiv.vi-p8.5"></span>.
In <span id="xxiv.vi-p8.6"></span>[Isa
14:30](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#030)<span id="xxiv.vi-p8.6"></span>,
by *the first-born of the poor*, is meant the extreme of that class,
they who are the poorest of the poor.” — *Cresswell*.

<span id="fn_543"></span>[544](cc10023.htm#fr_543) <span
id="xxiv.vi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.vi-p11"></span> “<span id="xxiv.vi-p11.1"></span>Sicuti
nugantur Sophistae.” — *Lat*. “<span id="xxiv.vi-p11.2"></span>Comme
gazouillent ces brouillons et Sophistes de Sorbonistes.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_544"></span>[545](cc10023.htm#fr_544) <span
id="xxiv.vii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.vii-p3"></span> “<span id="xxiv.vii-p3.1"></span>C’est a
dire, de son temps.”

<span id="fn_545"></span>[546](cc10023.htm#fr_545) <span
id="xxiv.vii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xxiv.vii-p4"></span> The original word for “they violate” is
<span id="xxiv.vii-p4.1"></span>יחללו, *yechallelu*, from <span
id="xxiv.vii-p4.2"></span>חלל, *chalal*, *he perforated* or *pierced
through* “When said of sacred things, *he profaned*, *violated*,
*polluted*, *prostituted*, as though, *pierced through* divine things.”
— *Bythner*

<span id="fn_546"></span>[547](cc10023.htm#fr_546) <span
id="xxiv.vii-p4.3"></span>

<span id="xxiv.vii-p5"></span> “<span id="xxiv.vii-p5.1"></span>In
virga.” — *Lat*. “<span id="xxiv.vii-p5.2"></span>Avec *ma* verge.” —
*Fr*.

<span id="fn_547"></span>[548](cc10023.htm#fr_547) <span
id="xxiv.vii-p5.3"></span>

<span id="xxiv.vii-p6"></span> Heb. ‘if I lie,’ the most solemn form of
negative in that language.” — *Williams*.

<span id="fn_548"></span>[549](cc10023.htm#fr_548) <span
id="xxiv.vii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.vii-p10"></span> “The whole passage, beginning with ‘I
have laid help,’ in verse 19, to the end of verse 37, may be considered
as a paraphrase of what God had said unto David, (<span
id="xxiv.vii-p10.1"></span>[2Sa
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#008)<span id="xxiv.vii-p10.1"></span>,
etc.,) through the mouth of Nathan. The promises herein recited, we know
from history, had their fulfillment only in Jesus Christ. The Psalmist,
therefore, in the next subsequent verses, contemplating the calamities
of his nation, indulges in the language of complaint.” — *Cresswell*.

<span id="fn_549"></span>[550](cc10023.htm#fr_549) <span
id="xxiv.vii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.vii-p19"></span> “<span id="xxiv.vii-p19.1"></span>Acsi
ex conceptis pacti verbis cum eo ageret.” — *Lat*. “<span
id="xxiv.vii-p19.2"></span>Comme s’il luy presentoit requeste suyvant
les propres mots et articles expres de son alliance.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_550"></span>[551](cc10023.htm#fr_550) <span
id="xxiv.vii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="xxiv.vii-p24"></span> “<span id="xxiv.vii-p24.1"></span>Par
lesqnels moyens ils ont pensé se racheter pour eschapper la main et
vengence de Dieu.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_551"></span>[552](cc10023.htm#fr_551) <span
id="xxiv.vii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.vii-p27"></span> “*Once*. Emphatic. It needs not to be
repeated: nor will be.” — *Walford*.

<span id="fn_552"></span>[553](cc10023.htm#fr_552) <span
id="xxiv.viii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.viii-p3"></span> “There is a very obvious and important
observation to be made on the description of the apparent change that
had taken place in the conduct of God towards the family and descendants
of David. The extraordinary promises which had been given to that prince
were certainly not accomplished in the fortunes of his descendants, the
kings of Judah; nor shall we be able to discover how the truth of these
promises is to be sustained without an admission of their being given in
reference to the Messiah, that spiritual king, who ‘was born of the seed
of David, according to the flesh.’ When we take the assurances which
were made to David, and which pledged to him the perpetuity of his
kingdom, in this sense, the mystery is disclosed, and the difficulty is
completely removed: ‘the loving-kindness of God has not been withdrawn
from him, nor has his faithfulness failed.’ David has still a royal
successor, though the genealogy of his posterity is lost upon earth; a
successor who will endure for ever, and whose throne will be perpetuated
in glory, not merely as long as the sun and the moon continue, but will
still be rising in splendor, when those lights of heaven shall be
extinguished, and the new heaven and the new earth shall witness the
imperishable glories of the Son of God.” — *Walford*.

<span id="fn_553"></span>[554](cc10023.htm#fr_553) <span
id="xxiv.viii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.viii-p16"></span> “<span id="xxiv.viii-p16.1"></span>Ou,
as quitte l’alliance de ton serviteur.” — *Fr*. *marg*. “Or, thou hast
quitted the covenant of thy servant.”

<span id="fn_554"></span>[555](cc10023.htm#fr_554) <span
id="xxiv.ix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ix-p3"></span> Some of the Jewish interpreters take this
view, and suppose the allusion to be to king Jehoiachin, (<span
id="xxiv.ix-p3.1"></span>[2Ki
24:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#008)<span id="xxiv.ix-p3.1"></span>.)
Kennicott infers from the expression, “Thou hast shortened the days of
his youth,” that this portion of the psalm refers to Ahaz, who died at
thirty-six years of age.

<span id="fn_555"></span>[556](cc10023.htm#fr_555) <span
id="xxiv.ix-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ix-p4"></span> “‘Remember at what an age *or* time of
life I am.’ Or, ‘of what duration,’ or, ‘how fleeting,’ <span
id="xxiv.ix-p4.1"></span>חלר, (by a transposition of letters from <span
id="xxiv.ix-p4.2"></span>חרל, *he ceased*,) denotes the present time
rapidly passing away. Or, the short race of our life; or this world,
‘the fashion of which passeth away,’ (<span
id="xxiv.ix-p4.3"></span>[1Co
7:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#031)<span id="xxiv.ix-p4.3"></span>.)”
— *Bythner*

<span id="fn_556"></span>[557](cc10023.htm#fr_556) <span
id="xxiv.ix-p4.4"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ix-p5"></span> Ainsworth reads, “O call thou to
remembrance how transitory I am; into what vain state thou hast made all
the sons of Adam.”

<span id="fn_557"></span>[558](cc10023.htm#fr_557) <span
id="xxiv.ix-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ix-p11"></span> This appeal respecting the universality
of death, and the impossibility of avoiding it, meets with a ready
response in the bosom of every child of Adam, however exalted or humble
his lot. And, when death has once seized on its victim, all the wealth,
power, and skill of the world cannot spoil the grave of its dominion.
The admirable lines of Gray, in his celebrated Elegy, furnish a very
good comment on this verse: —

<span id="xxiv.ix-p12"></span>*“The boast of heraldry, the pomp of
power,  
And all that beauty, all that wealth e’er gave,  
Await alike th’ inevitable hour:* —*  
The paths of glory lead but to the grave.*

<span id="xxiv.ix-p13"></span>“Can storied urn, or animated bust,  
Back to its mansions call the fleeting breath?  
Can Honour’s voice provoke the silent dust,  
Or Flatt’ry soothe the dull cold ear of Death?”

<span id="fn_558"></span>[559](cc10023.htm#fr_558) <span
id="xxiv.x-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.x-p6"></span> “<span id="xxiv.x-p6.1"></span>Sur les
asnes et chevaux, et autres bestes brutes.” — *Fr*. “To asses and
horses, and other brute beasts.”

<span id="fn_559"></span>[560](cc10023.htm#fr_559) <span
id="xxiv.x-p16.2"></span>

<span id="xxiv.x-p17"></span> “<span id="xxiv.x-p17.1"></span>De la
revelation faite a Samuel.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_560"></span>[561](cc10023.htm#fr_560) <span
id="xxiv.x-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.x-p20"></span> Or, as if our Redeemer were slow-paced,
halt, or lame, and his Church should never behold his steps. With this
agrees the Chaldee paraphrase: — “The slowness of the footsteps of the
feet of thy Messiah or anointed.” Kimchi renders, “the delays of the
Messiah;” “the discourse,” he observes, “being of those who say that he
will never come.” A similar style of speech has been employed by the
enemies of the gospel, as Calvin goes on to observe, who scoffingly
asked in the days of the apostles, and who still ask, “Where is the
promise of his coming?” <span id="xxiv.x-p20.1"></span>[2Pe
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#004)<span id="xxiv.x-p20.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 90](cc10024)
