[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc10009)  [Next](cc10011) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 10: Psalms, Part III*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xi"></span>

<span id="xi-p1"></span>PSALM 76

<span id="xi-p2"></span>There is here celebrated the grace and truth of
God in having, according to his promise that he would be the protector
of the city of Jerusalem, defended it by his wonderful power against
enemies, who were renowned for their warlike valor, and well equipped
with everything requisite for war.  <span
id="fr_263"></span>[264](#fn_263)

<span id="xi-p4"></span>To the chief musician upon Neginoth. A Psalm of
Asaph. A Song.

<span id="xi-p5"></span>This psalm, it is probable, was composed after
the death of David; and, accordingly, some think that what is here
described is that deliverance of the Jews from the Ammonites which took
place in the reign of king Jehoshaphat. But I am rather inclined to
adopt a different opinion, and to refer the psalm to that deliverance
which they obtained from the Assyrians, recorded in <span
id="xi-p5.1"></span>[2Ki 19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#000)<span
id="xi-p5.1"></span>. The Assyrians, under the conduct of Sennacherib,
not only invaded Judea, but also made a violent assault upon the city of
Jerusalem, the capital of the kingdom. The result of this is well known.
They were compelled to raise the siege by the miraculous interference of
God, who in one night destroyed that army with dreadful slaughter by the
hand of his angel, (<span id="xi-p5.2"></span>[2Ki
19:35](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#035)<span id="xi-p5.2"></span>.)
 <span id="fr_264"></span>[265](#fn_264) Hence the prophet, not
inappropriately, affirms that God broke the arrows, the swords, and the
shields. The point, however, which is chiefly necessary to be known and
attended to is, that the continual care of God in defending the Church,
which he has chosen, is here celebrated to encourage the faithful
without any doubt or hesitation to glory in his protection.

<span id="xi.i"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p1"></span><span id="xi.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
76:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#001)<span id="xi.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p2"></span>**1.** God is known in Judah; his name is
great in Israel. **2.** And his tabernacle was in Salem, and his
dwelling-place in Zion. **3.** There he broke the arrows of the bow, the
shield, and the sword, and the battle. Selah. **4.** Thou art more
glorious and terrible than the mountains of prey. **5.** The stout
hearted were spoiled, they slept their sleep,  <span
id="fr_265"></span>[266](#fn_265) and all the men of might have not
found their hands. **6.** At thy rebuke, O God of Jacob! the chariot and
the horse were cast into a deep sleep.

<span id="xi.i-p4"></span> 

<span id="xi.i-p5"></span><span id="xi.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p6"></span>**1.** *God is known in Judah.* In the outset,
we are taught that it was not by human means that the enemies of Israel
were compelled to retire without accomplishing any thing, but by the
ever-to-be-remembered aid of Jehovah. Whence came *that knowledge of God
and the greatness of his name* which are spoken of, but because He
stretched forth his hand in an extraordinary manner, to make it openly
manifest that both the chosen people and the city were under his defense
and protection? It is therefore asserted, that the glory of God was
conspicuously displayed when the enemies of Israel were discomfited by
such a miraculous interposition.

<span id="xi.i-p7"></span><span id="xi.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p8"></span>**2.** *And his tabernacle was in Salem* Here
the reason is assigned why God, putting the Assyrians to flight,
vouchsafed to deliver the city of Jerusalem, and to take it under his
protection. The reason is, because he had there chosen for himself a
dwelling-place, in which his name was to be called upon. The amount, in
short, is, first, that men had no ground to arrogate to themselves any
share in the deliverance of the city here portrayed, God having
strikingly showed that all the glory was his own, by displaying from
heaven his power in the sight of all men; and, secondly, that he was
induced to oppose his enemies from no other consideration but that of
his free choice of the Jewish nation. God having, by this example,
testified that his power is invincible for preserving his Church, it is
a call and an encouragement to all the faithful to repose with
confidence under his shadow. If his name is precious to himself, it is
no ordinary pledge and security which he gives to our faith when he
assures us that it is his will that the greatness of his power should be
known in the preservation of his Church. Moreover, as the Church is a
distinguished theater on which the Divine glory is displayed, we must
always take the greatest care not to shroud or bury in forgetfulness, by
our ingratitude, the benefits which have been bestowed upon it, and
especially those which ought to be held in remembrance in all ages.
Farther, although God is not now worshipped in the visible tabernacle,
yet as by Christ he still dwells in the midst of us, yea even within us,
we will doubtless experience, whenever we are exposed to danger, that
under his protection we are in perfect safety. If the earthly sanctuary
of Jerusalem afforded to God’s ancient people succor while it stood, we
may rest assured that he will have no less care of us who live in the
present day, when we consider that he has vouchsafed to choose us as his
temples in which he may dwell by his Holy Spirit. Here the prophet, in
speaking of Jerusalem, uses merely the name of *Salem,* which was the
simple and uncompounded name of the city, and had been applied to it
very anciently, as appears from <span id="xi.i-p8.1"></span>[Ge
14:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#018)<span id="xi.i-p8.1"></span>.
Some think that the name in the course of time assumed its compound
form, by having *Jebus* prefixed to *Salem;* for Jebus was the name by
which it was afterwards known in the intervening period, as we learn
from the Book of Judges, <span id="xi.i-p8.2"></span>[Jud
19:10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#010)<span id="xi.i-p8.2"></span>, it
being so called because it was inhabited by the Jebusites. But we will
be more correct as to the etymology of the word, if we derive it from
the verb <span id="xi.i-p8.3"></span>יראה, *yereh,* which signifies
*will see,*  <span id="fr_266"></span>[267](#fn_266) because Abraham
said,

<span id="xi.i-p10"></span>“God will look out for himself a lamb for a
burnt-offering,” (<span id="xi.i-p10.1"></span>[Ge
22:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#008)<span id="xi.i-p10.1"></span>.)

<span id="xi.i-p11"></span><span id="xi.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p12"></span>**3.** *There he broke the arrows of the
bow.* We have here stated the particular way in which God was known in
Judah. He was known by the wonderful proofs of his power, which he
exhibited in preserving the city. Under these figures is described the
destruction of the enemies of the chosen people.  <span
id="fr_267"></span>[268](#fn_267) They could not otherwise have been
overthrown than by being despoiled of their armor and weapons of war. It
is therefore said, that *the arrows, the swords, and the shields, were
broken,* yea, all the implements of war; implying that these impious
enemies of the Church were deprived of the power of doing harm. The fact
indeed is, that they were wounded and slain, while their weapons
remained uninjured; but this metonymy, by which what befell themselves
is represented as happening to their implements of war, is not improper.
Some translate the word <span id="xi.i-p13.2"></span>רשפים, *reshaphim,
points* of weapons! Properly, it should be rendered *fires;*  <span
id="fr_268"></span>[269](#fn_268) but it is more accurate to take it for
*arrows.* Even birds are sometimes metaphorically so called, on account
of their swiftness; and flying is attributed to arrows in <span
id="xi.i-p14.7"></span>[Ps 91:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#006)<span
id="xi.i-p14.7"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p15"></span><span id="xi.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p16"></span>It is farther added, (verse 4th,) that *God
is more glorious and terrible than the mountains of prey* By *the
mountains of prey,* is meant kingdoms distinguished for their violence
and extortion. We know that from the beginning, he who exercised himself
most in robbery and pillage, was the man who most enlarged his borders
and became greatest. The Psalmist, therefore, here compares those great
kings, who had acquired large dominions by violence and the shedding of
human blood, to savage beasts, who live only upon prey, and their
kingdoms to mountains covered with forests, which are inhabited by
beasts inured to live by the destruction of other animals. The enemies
of God’s ancient people had been accustomed to make violent and furious
assaults upon Jerusalem; but it is affirmed that God greatly surpassed
them all in power that the faithful might not be overwhelmed with
terror.

<span id="xi.i-p17"></span><span id="xi.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p18"></span>**5.** *The stout-hearted were spoiled,* The
power of God in destroying his enemies is here exalted by another form
of expression. The verb <span id="xi.i-p18.1"></span>אשתוללו*,
eshtolelu,* which we translate *were spoiled,* is derived from <span
id="xi.i-p18.2"></span>שלל, *shalal,* and the letter <span
id="xi.i-p18.3"></span>א, *aleph,* is put instead of the letter <span
id="xi.i-p18.4"></span>ה, *he.*  <span id="fr_269"></span>[270](#fn_269)
Some translate, *were made fools;*  <span
id="fr_270"></span>[271](#fn_270) but this is too forced. I, however,
admit that it is of the same import, as if it had been said, that they
were deprived of wisdom and courage; but we must adhere to the proper
signification of the word. What is added in the second clause is to the
same purpose, *All the men of might have not found their hands*  <span
id="fr_271"></span>[272](#fn_271) that is to say, they were as incapable
of fighting as if their hands had been maimed or cut off. In short,
their strength, of which they boasted, was utterly overthrown. The
words, *they slept their sleep,*  <span
id="fr_272"></span>[273](#fn_272) refer to the same subject; implying
that whereas before they were active and resolute, their hearts now
failed them, and they were sunk asleep in sloth and listlessness. The
meaning, therefore, is, that the enemies of the chosen people were
deprived of that heroic courage of which they boasted, and which
inspired them with such audacity; and that, in consequence, neither
mind, nor heart, nor hands, none either of their mental or bodily
faculties, could perform their office. We are thus taught that all the
gifts and power which men seem to possess are in the hand of God, so
that he can, at any instant of time, deprive them of the wisdom which he
has given them, make their hearts effeminate, render their hands unfit
for war, and annihilate their whole strength. It is not without reason
that both the courage and power of these enemies are magnified; the
design of this being, that the faithful might be led, from the contrast,
to extol the power and working of God. The same subject is farther
confirmed from the statement, that *the chariot and the horse were cast
into a deep sleep at the rebuke of God*  <span
id="fr_273"></span>[274](#fn_273) This implies, that whatever activity
characterised these enemies, it was rendered powerless, simply by the
nod of God. Although, therefore, we may be deprived of all created means
of help, let us rest contented with the favor of God alone, accounting
it all-sufficient, since he has no need of great armies to repel the
assaults of the whole world, but is able, by the mere breath of his
mouth, to subdue and dissipate all assailants.

<span id="xi.ii"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p1"></span><span id="xi.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
76:7-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#007)<span id="xi.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p2"></span>**7.** Thou, even thou, art terrible, and who
shall stand before thy face when thou art angry? **8.** From heaven thou
hast made thy judgment to be heard: the earth was afraid,  <span
id="fr_274"></span>[275](#fn_274) and was still, **9.** When God arose
to judgment,  <span id="fr_275"></span>[276](#fn_275) to save all the
meek  <span id="fr_276"></span>[277](#fn_276) of the earth. Selah.
**10.** Surely the wrath of men shall praise thee, and the remainder of
wrath thou wilt restrain. **11.** Vow and pay  <span
id="fr_277"></span>[278](#fn_277) to Jehovah your God: let all those who
are round about him bring presents to him who is worthy to be feared,
 <span id="fr_278"></span>[279](#fn_278) \[literally to the terrible
one.\] **12.** He will cut off the spirit of princes: he is terrible to
the kings of the earth.

<span id="xi.ii-p8"></span> 

<span id="xi.ii-p9"></span><span id="xi.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p10"></span>**7.** *Thou, even thou, art terrible.* The
repetition of the pronoun *Thou,* is intended to exclude all others from
what is here predicated of God, as if it had been said, Whatever power
there is in the world, it at once vanishes away, and is reduced to
nothing, when He comes forth and manifests himself; and, therefore, He
alone is terrible. This is confirmed by the comparison added immediately
after, which intimates that, although the wicked are so filled with
pride as to be ready to burst with it, yet they are unable to abide the
look and presence of God. But as he sometimes keeps silence, and seems
merely to look on as an idle spectator, it is expressly asserted, that
as soon as he begins to be angry, ruin will be near all the wicked.
Although they may then for a time not only stand, but also rise above
the clouds by their fury, we are here, notwithstanding, admonished that
we ought to wait for the time of wrath. Let us also mark that this
terror is denounced against the wicked in such a manner as that it
sweetly draws all true believers to God.

<span id="xi.ii-p11"></span><span id="xi.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p12"></span>**8.** *From heaven thou hast made thy
judgment to be heard.* By the name of *heaven,* the Psalmist forcibly
intimates that the judgment of God was too manifest to admit of the
possibility of its being ascribed either to fortune or to the policy of
men. Sometimes God executes his judgments obscurely, so that they seem
to proceed out of the earth. For example, when he raises up a godly and
courageous prince, the holy and lawful administration which will
flourish under the reign of such a prince will be the judgment of God,
but it will not be vividly seen to proceed from heaven. As, therefore,
the assistance spoken of was of an extraordinary kind, it is
distinguished by special commendation. The same remarks apply to *the
hearing of God’s judgment,* of which the Psalmist speaks. It is more for
the divine judgments to sound aloud like a peal of thunder, and to stun
the ears of all men with their noise, than if they were merely seen with
the eyes. There is here, I have no doubt, an allusion to those mighty
thunder-claps by which men are stricken with fear.  <span
id="fr_279"></span>[280](#fn_279) When it is said, *the earth was
still,* it is properly to be referred to the ungodly, who, being
panic-struck, yield the victory to God, and dare no longer to rage as
they had been accustomed to do. It is only fear which has the effect of
bringing them to subjection; and, accordingly, fear is justly
represented as the cause of this stillness. It is not meant that they
restrain themselves willingly, but that God compels them whether they
will or no. The amount is, that whenever God thunders from heaven, the
tumults which the insolence of the ungodly stir up, when things are in a
state of confusion, come to an end. We are, at the same time, warned of
what men may expect to gain by their rebellion; for, whoever despise the
paternal voice of God which is loudly uttered, must be destroyed by the
bolts of his wrath.

<span id="xi.ii-p14"></span><span id="xi.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p15"></span>**9.** *When God arose to judgment.* The
great object which God had in view in executing this judgment is now
declared; which was, that he might furnish a proof of his fatherly love
towards all his people. He is, therefore, introduced as speaking, not
with his mouth, but with his hand, that he may show to all how precious
in his sight is the salvation of all who fear and love him. Under the
word *arise,* there is a reference to the inactivity and indolency
ascribed by wicked men to God, an opinion which had led them to take so
much liberty to themselves. God is then said to ascend into his
judgment-seat, when he plainly indicates that he exercises a special
care over his Church. The design of the passage is to show that it is as
impossible for God to forsake the afflicted and innocent, as it is
impossible for him to deny himself. It is to be observed that he is
termed Judge, because he affords succor to the poor who are
unrighteously oppressed. The appellation of *the meek* or *humble of the
earth* is applied to the faithful, who, subdued by afflictions, seek not
high things, but, with humble groaning, patiently bear the burden of the
cross. The best fruit of afflictions is, when thereby we are brought to
purge our minds from all arrogance, and to bend them to meekness and
modesty. When such is the effect, we may conclude with certainty that we
are under the guardianship and protection of God, and that he is ready
to extend his aid and favor towards us.

<span id="xi.ii-p16"></span><span id="xi.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p17"></span>**10.** *Surely the wrath of men shall
praise thee.* Some understand these words as denoting, that after these
enemies shall have submitted to God, they will yield to him the praise
of the victory; being constrained to acknowledge that they have been
subdued by his mighty hand. Others elicit a more refined sense, That
when God stirs up the wicked, and impels their fury, he in this way
affords a most illustrious display of his own glory; even as he is said
to have stirred up the heart of Pharaoh for this very purpose, (<span
id="xi.ii-p17.1"></span>[Ex 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#004)<span
id="xi.ii-p17.1"></span>; <span id="xi.ii-p17.2"></span>[Ro
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#017)<span id="xi.ii-p17.2"></span>.)
Understood in this sense, the text no doubt contains a profitable
doctrine, but this being, I am afraid, too refined an explanation, I
prefer considering the meaning simply to be, that although at first the
rage of the enemies of God and his Church may throw all things into
confusion, and, as it were, envelop them in darkness, yet all will at
length redound to his praise; for the issue will make it manifest, that,
whatever they may contrive and attempt, they cannot in any degree
prevail against him. The concluding part of the verse, *The remainder of
wrath thou wilt restrain,* may also be interpreted in two ways. As the
word <span id="xi.ii-p17.3"></span>חגר*, chagar,* signifies *to gird,*
some supply the pronoun *thee,* and give this sense, All the enemies of
the Church are not yet overthrown; but thou, O God! wilt gird thyself to
destroy those of them who remain. The other interpretation is, however,
the more simple., which is, that although these enemies might not cease
to breathe forth their cruelty, yet God would effectually restrain them,
and prevent them from succeeding in the accomplishment of their
enterprises.  <span id="fr_280"></span>[281](#fn_280) Perhaps, also, it
would not be unsuitable to explain the verb thus, *Thou wilt gather into
a bundle,* as we say in French, “*Tu trousseras,” i.e., Thou wilt truss*
or *pack up.* Let us therefore learn, while the wicked would involve in
obscurity and doubt the providence of God, to wait patiently until he
glorify himself by bringing about a happier state of things, and trample
under foot their infatuated presumption, to their shame and confusion.
But if new troubles arise from time to time, let us remember that it is
his proper office to restrain the remainder of the wrath of the wicked,
that they may not proceed to greater lengths. Meanwhile, let us not be
surprised if we observe fresh outrages every now and then springing
forth; for, even to the end of the world, Satan will always have
partisans or agents, whom he will urge forward to molest the children of
God.

<span id="xi.ii-p19"></span><span id="xi.ii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p20"></span>**11.** *Vow and pay to Jehovah your God.*
The faithful are now exhorted to the exercise of gratitude. As under the
law the custom prevailed among the Jews of vowing sacrifices for
singular blessings which God had conferred upon them, by which they
solemnly acknowledged that their safety depended solely upon him, and
that to him they were entirely indebted for it, they are called anew to
engage in this exercise of religion; and by the word *pay* it is
intended to inculcate steadfastness, — to teach them that they should
not make merely a sudden and inconsiderate acknowledgement, but that
they should also testify at all times that the remembrance of their
deliverance was deeply fixed in their hearts. Their most important
business, no doubt, was seriously to reflect with themselves that God
was the author of their salvation; but still it is to be observed, that
the solemn profession of religion, by which every man stimulates not
only himself but also others to the performance of their duty, is far
from being superfluous. In the second clause, those addressed seem to be
the neighboring nations; as if it had been said, that such a special
manifestation of the goodness of God was worthy of being celebrated even
by foreign and uncircumcised nations.  <span
id="fr_281"></span>[282](#fn_281) But it appears to me, that the sense
most agreeable to the context is, that these words are addressed either
to the Levites or to all the posterity of Abraham, both of whom are not
improperly said *to be round about God,* both because the tabernacle was
pitched in the midst of the camp so long as the Israelites traveled in
the wilderness, and also because the resting-place assigned for the ark
was mount Zion, whither the people were accustomed to resort from all
the surrounding parts of the country. And the Levites had intrusted to
them the charge of the temple, and were appointed to keep watch and ward
round about it. The word <span id="xi.ii-p21.1"></span>למורא*, lammora,*
is referred to God by the majority of interpreters, and they translate
it *terrible.* The term *fear* is, however, sometimes taken in a passive
sense for God himself.  <span id="fr_282"></span>[283](#fn_282) If it is
applied to the Gentiles and to irreligious men,  <span
id="fr_283"></span>[284](#fn_283) the sense will be, that they shall be
tributaries to God; because, being stricken with fear, they shall no
longer dare to offer him any resistance. But it is more probable that
this word has a reference to God, whom the prophet justly declares to be
worthy of being feared, after having given such a remarkable proof of
his power.

<span id="xi.ii-p24"></span><span id="xi.ii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p25"></span>**12.** *He will cut off*  <span
id="fr_284"></span>[285](#fn_284) *the spirit of princes.* As the Hebrew
word <span id="xi.ii-p26.4"></span>בצר, *batsar,* occasionally signifies
*to strengthen,* some think it should be so translated in this passage.
But as in the two clauses of the verse the same sentiment is repeated, I
have no doubt that by the first clause is meant that understanding and
wisdom are taken away from princes; and that by the second, God is
represented in general as terrible to them, because he will cast them
down headlong from their loftiness. As the first thing necessary to
conduct an enterprise to a prosperous issue is to possess sound
foresight, in which the people of God are often deficient from the great
perplexity in which they are involved in the midst of their distresses,
while, on the other hand, the ungodly are too sharp-sighted in their
crafty schemes; it is here declared that it is in the power of God to
deprive of understanding, and to inflict blindness on those who seem to
surpass others in acuteness and ingenuity. The majority of princes being
enemies to the Church of God, it is expressly affirmed, that He is
sufficiently terrible to subdue all the kings of the earth. When it is
said, that *their spirit is cut off,* or taken away from them, it is to
be limited to tyrants and robbers whom God infatuates, because he sees
that they apply all their ingenuity and counsels to do mischief.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_263"></span>[264](cc10010.htm#fr_263) <span
id="xi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xi-p3"></span> “<span id="xi-p3.1"></span>Et bien equippez de
toutes choses requises a la guerre.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_264"></span>[265](cc10010.htm#fr_264) <span
id="xi-p5.3"></span>

<span id="xi-p6"></span> The inscription prefixed to the psalm in the
Septuagint expressly mentions this as the occasion of its composition,
<span id="xi-p6.1"></span>Ωδὴ πρὸς τὸν Ασσύριον; “An ode against the
Assyrian.” If in this the version of the LXX. is correct, and if Asaph,
to whom the psalm is ascribed, was the person of that name who lived in
the time of David, one of his compositions must have been adopted as
suitably descriptive of this remarkable deliverance. He may, however,
have been a different person of the same name, and was probably one of
his descendants, as has been before observed, (page 159,) who lived in
the time of Hezekiah. Bishop Patrick and Calmet are of this last
opinion. Those who adopt the former suppose that the original reference
of the psalm was to the victory obtained by David over the Philistines
in the valley of Rephaim.

<span id="fn_265"></span>[266](cc10010.htm#fr_265) <span
id="xi.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p3"></span> “<span id="xi.i-p3.1"></span>N’ont peu
trouver leurs mains.” — *Fr*. “Have not been able to find their hands.”

<span id="fn_266"></span>[267](cc10010.htm#fr_266) <span
id="xi.i-p8.4"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p9"></span> From <span id="xi.i-p9.1"></span>ראה, *raäh*,
*he saw*, or *beheld*

<span id="fn_267"></span>[268](cc10010.htm#fr_267) <span
id="xi.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p13"></span> “This seems to allude to the miraculous
destruction of the Assyrian army, as recorded in <span
id="xi.i-p13.1"></span>[Isaiah
27:36](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#036)<span id="xi.i-p13.1"></span>.” —
*Warner*.

<span id="fn_268"></span>[269](cc10010.htm#fr_268) <span
id="xi.i-p13.3"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p14"></span> “The Hebrew <span
id="xi.i-p14.1"></span>רשף, \[here rendered *arrows*,\] signifies fire,
<span id="xi.i-p14.2"></span>[Job
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#007)<span id="xi.i-p14.2"></span>,
where ‘sparks that fly upward’ are poetically expressed by <span
id="xi.i-p14.3"></span>בני רשף, ‘the sons of the fire.’ By metaphor it
is applies to an ‘arrow’ or ‘dart’ shot out of a bow, and, by the
swiftness of the motion, supposed to be inflamed. See <span
id="xi.i-p14.4"></span>[So 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#006)<span
id="xi.i-p14.4"></span>, where of love it is said, (not the *coals*,
but) ‘the arrows thereof are arrows of fire,’ it shoots, and wounds, and
burns a man’s heart, inflames it vehemently by wounding it. The poetical
expression will best be preserved by retaining some trace of the primary
sense in the rendering of it — ‘fires or lightnings of the bow,’ *i*
*e*., those hostile weapons which are most furious and formidable, as
fire shot out from a bow.” — *Hammond* Parkhurst renders “glittering
flashing arrows,” or rather, “fiery, or fire-bearing arrows;” such as,
it is certain, were used in after times in sieges and in battles; the
<span id="xi.i-p14.5"></span>βελη πεπυρωμενα of the Greeks, to which
Paul alludes in <span id="xi.i-p14.6"></span>[Eph
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#016)<span id="xi.i-p14.6"></span>, and
*the phalarica* of the Romans, which Servius (on Virgil, Æn. lib. 9, 5,
705) describes as a dart or javelin with a spherical leaden head, to
which combustible matter was attached, which being set on fire, the
weapon was darted against the enemy; and when thrown by a powerful hand,
it killed those whom it hit, and set fire to buildings. Walford has,
“fiery arrows.” “The arrows,” says he, “are described as fiery, to
denote either the rapidity of their motion, or that they were tinged
with some poisonous drugs to render them more deadly.”

<span id="fn_269"></span>[270](cc10010.htm#fr_269) <span
id="xi.i-p18.5"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p19"></span> The verb is in the praet. hithpahel; and it
has <span id="xi.i-p19.1"></span>א, *aleph*, instead of <span
id="xi.i-p19.2"></span>ה, *he*, according to the Chaldaic language,
which changes <span id="xi.i-p19.3"></span>ה, the Hebrew characteristic
of *hiphil* and hithpahel into <span id="xi.i-p19.4"></span>א

<span id="fn_270"></span>[271](cc10010.htm#fr_270) <span
id="xi.i-p19.5"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p20"></span> As the verb signifies, *has plundered*,
*spoiled*; and as it is here in the praet. *hithpahel*, which generally
denotes reciprocal action, that is, acting on one’s self, it has been
here rendered by some, *despoiled themselves* of mind, *were mad*,
*furious*. Hammond reads, “The stout-hearted have despoiled or disarmed
themselves.” The Chaldee paraphrase is, “They have cast away their
weapons.”

<span id="fn_271"></span>[272](cc10010.htm#fr_271) <span
id="xi.i-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p21"></span> “<span id="xi.i-p21.1"></span>ידיהם לא מצאו,
may be rendered *have not found their hands*, *i* *e*., have not been
able to use them for resistance, for the offending others, or even for
their own defense.” — *Hammond* The Chaldee paraphrase is, “They could
not take their weapons in their hands,” *i* *e*., they could not use
their hands to manage their weapons. In the Septuagint, the reading
is,<span id="xi.i-p21.2"></span> εὕρον οὐδὲν ταῖς χερσιν αὐτῶν; “they
found nothing with their hands,” *i* *e*., they were able to do nothing
with them: the vast army of Assyrians, the most warlike and victorious
then in the world, achieved nothing, but “returned with shame to face to
their own land,” (<span id="xi.i-p21.3"></span>[2Ch
32:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#021)<span id="xi.i-p21.3"></span>.)

<span id="fn_272"></span>[273](cc10010.htm#fr_272) <span
id="xi.i-p21.4"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p22"></span> “*They slept their sleep*.” “They slept, but
never waked again.” — *Hammond*. There may be here a direct allusion to
the catastrophe which befell the Assyrian army during the night, when,
as they were fast *asleep* in their tents, a hundred and eighty-five
thousand of them were at once slain, <span id="xi.i-p22.1"></span>[Isa
37:36](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#036)<span id="xi.i-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_273"></span>[274](cc10010.htm#fr_273) <span
id="xi.i-p22.2"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p23"></span> The *chariot and horse* may be put
poetically for charioteers and horsemen. Chariots formed a most
important part of the array in the battles of the ancients. See <span
id="xi.i-p23.1"></span>[Jud 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#003)<span
id="xi.i-p23.1"></span>. Instead of “both the chariot and the horse,”
Horsley reads, “both the rider and the horse.” “It is not improbable,”
says he, “that the pestilence in Sennacherib’s army might seize the
horses as well as the men, although the death of the beasts is not
mentioned by the sacred historian.”

<span id="fn_274"></span>[275](cc10010.htm#fr_274) <span
id="xi.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p3"></span> “<span id="xi.ii-p3.1"></span>*Dont* la
terre a eu frayeur.” — *Fr*. “*With which* the earth was afraid.”

<span id="fn_275"></span>[276](cc10010.htm#fr_275) <span
id="xi.ii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p4"></span> “<span id="xi.ii-p4.1"></span>*Pour faire*
jugement.” — *Fr*. “*To* *execute* judgment.”

<span id="fn_276"></span>[277](cc10010.htm#fr_276) <span
id="xi.ii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p5"></span> “<span id="xi.ii-p5.1"></span>Tous les
humbles.” — *Fr*. “All the humble.”

<span id="fn_277"></span>[278](cc10010.htm#fr_277) <span
id="xi.ii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p6"></span> “<span id="xi.ii-p6.1"></span>Rendez *vos
voeus*.” — *Fr*. “Pay *your vows*.”

<span id="fn_278"></span>[279](cc10010.htm#fr_278) <span
id="xi.ii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p7"></span> “<span id="xi.ii-p7.1"></span>Ou, a cause de
la frayeur.” — *Fr*. *marg*. “Or, on account of fear.”

<span id="fn_279"></span>[280](cc10010.htm#fr_279) <span
id="xi.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p13"></span> When an angel of the Lord descended to
perform some mighty work with which he had been commissioned, thunders
and earthquakes frequently accompanied the execution of his commission;
and it is highly probable that both these phenomena accompanied such a
stupendous display of power, as that which was afforded by the slaughter
of one hundred and eighty-five thousand men in the army of Sennacherib.
By *God*’*s judgment being heard*, may accordingly be understood the
thunder which was heard; and what follows, “The earth was afraid,” may
signify the earthquake which then took place.

<span id="fn_280"></span>[281](cc10010.htm#fr_280) <span
id="xi.ii-p17.4"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p18"></span> Hammond’s statement of these two
interpretations is clear and full. It is as follows: — “What <span
id="xi.ii-p18.1"></span>תחגור \[which Calvin renders, *thou wilt
restrain*\] signifies here, is not agreed among the interpreters, the
word signifying 1. *to gird*, and, 2. *to restrain* In the notion of
*restraining*, it will have a very commodious sense, applied to
Sennacherib, to whom this psalm belongs. For, as by the slaughter of the
one hundred and eighty-five thousand in his army he was forced to
depart, and dwell at Nineveh, <span id="xi.ii-p18.2"></span>[2Ki
19:36](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#036)<span id="xi.ii-p18.2"></span>;
so, after his return thither, there are some remainders of his wrath on
the Jews that dwelt there. We may see it, <span
id="xi.ii-p18.3"></span>[Tob 1:18](../../../bib/apo/tob001.htm#018)<span
id="xi.ii-p18.3"></span>, ‘If the king Sennacherib had slain any, when
he was come and fled from Judea, I buried them privily, (for in his
wrath he killed many,’) etc. This was the gleanings of his wrath, and
this was ‘restrained’ by God; for he soon falls by the hands of his
sons, Adrammelech and Sharezer, ‘as he was worshipping in the house of
Nisroch his god,’ <span id="xi.ii-p18.4"></span>[2Ki
19:37](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#037)<span id="xi.ii-p18.4"></span>.
And to this sense Kimchi interprets it, ‘Thou shalt so repress the
malice of our enemies, that the other nations shall not dare to fight
against us;’ so likewise Aben Ezra. And thus it must be, if ‘the
remainder of wrath’ be ‘man’s wrath,’ as the former part of the verse
inclines it, ‘Surely the wrath of man,’ etc. But <span
id="xi.ii-p18.5"></span>חגר, in the primary notion, signifies *girding*
or *putting on*, *arraying oneself* *Girding*, we know, signifies
*putting on*, and is applied to garments, ornaments, arms: <span
id="xi.ii-p18.6"></span>חגור, ‘Gird thy sword upon thy thigh,’ <span
id="xi.ii-p18.7"></span>[Ps 45:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#003)<span
id="xi.ii-p18.7"></span>, and frequently elsewhere; and so ‘girding with
gladness,’ is putting on festival ornaments. And in like manner here, in
a poetical phrase, ‘Thou shalt gird on the remainder of wrath,’ parallel
to ‘putting on the garments of vengeance for clothing,’ <span
id="xi.ii-p18.8"></span>[Isa
59:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#017)<span id="xi.ii-p18.8"></span>,
will signify God’s adorning and setting out himself by the exercise of
his *vengeance*, vulgarly expressed by his *wrath*, and the word <span
id="xi.ii-p18.9"></span>חמת, *wrath*, most fitly used with reference on
<span id="xi.ii-p18.10"></span>חמת, the *wrath of man*, in the beginning
of the verse. *Man*’*s* wrath is the violence, and rage, and blasphemy
of the oppressor, upon the *meek* or poor man foregoing. This begins,
goes foremost, in provoking God; and then <span
id="xi.ii-p18.11"></span>שארית, *the remnant*, or second part *of
wrath*, is still behind for God; and with that he *girds* himself, *i*
*e*., sets himself out illustriously and dreadfully, as with an
ornament, and as with an hostile preparation in the eyes of men. And so
in this sense also it is agreeable to the context... In either sense,
the parts of this verse are perfectly answerable the one to the other.
To this latter rendering of <span id="xi.ii-p18.12"></span>תחגור, the
Chaldee inclines us, paraphrasing it by, ‘Thou hast girded on, *or*
prepared, *or* made ready, the remainder of fury, (meaning by God’s
fury,) for the destroying of the nations.’”

<span id="fn_281"></span>[282](cc10010.htm#fr_281) <span
id="xi.ii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p21"></span> This is Kimchi’s interpretation: He
understands by “those round about God,” the nations near the land of
Israel, and so near God.

<span id="fn_282"></span>[283](cc10010.htm#fr_282) <span
id="xi.ii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p22"></span> In this sense it is employed in <span
id="xi.ii-p22.1"></span>[Ge 31:53](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#053)<span
id="xi.ii-p22.1"></span>, “And Jacob sware by the Fear of his father
Isaac.”

<span id="fn_283"></span>[284](cc10010.htm#fr_283) <span
id="xi.ii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p23"></span> If it is thus applied, the reading will be,
“Let all those who are round about him bring presents on account of
fear.”

<span id="fn_284"></span>[285](cc10010.htm#fr_284) <span
id="xi.ii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p26"></span> The word employed by Calvin is “<span
id="xi.ii-p26.1"></span>Vindemiabit,” which expresses the precise idea
of the original verb, <span id="xi.ii-p26.2"></span>יבצור, *yebtstor* It
is from <span id="xi.ii-p26.3"></span>בצר, *he cut off*, *brake off*,
referring properly to grapes and other fruits. The reading of the LXX.
is, “takes away.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 77](cc10011)
