[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc10024)  [Next](cc10026) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 10: Psalms, Part III*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxvi"></span>

<span id="xxvi-p1"></span>PSALM 91

<span id="xxvi-p2"></span>In this psalm we are taught that God watches
over the safety of his people, and never fails them in the hour of
danger. They are exhorted to advance through all perils, secure in the
confidence of his protection. The truth inculcated is one of great use,
for though many talk much of God’s providence, and profess to believe
that he exercises a special guardianship over his own children, few are
found actually willing to intrust their safety to him.  <span
id="fr_574"></span>[575](#fn_574)

<span id="xxvi.i"></span>

<span id="xxvi.i-p1"></span><span id="xxvi.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
91:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#001)<span id="xxvi.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.i-p2"></span>**1.** He that dwelleth in the secret place
of the High One shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty. **2.** I
will say to Jehovah, He is my hope and my fortress: my God; in him will
I hope. **3.** Surely he shall deliver thee from the snare of the
fowler, from the noxious pestilence. **4.** He shall protect thee with
his wings, and under his feathers shalt thou be safe; his truth shall be
thy shield and buckler.

<span id="xxvi.i-p3"></span> 

<span id="xxvi.i-p4"></span><span id="xxvi.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.i-p5"></span>**1** *He that dwelleth in the secret place
of the High One.* Some Hebrew interpreters read the three first verses
as one continuous sentence, down to the words, *he shall deliver thee
from the snare of the fowler* The whole would then run thus — “He who
dwells in the covert of the Most High, and abides under his shadow, to
him will I say of Jehovah, that he is his hope and defense, and the God
in whom he may safely rest, for he shall deliver him from the snare,”
etc. This is evidently a forced construction to put upon the verses, and
the reason which has led some to adopt it is weak and insufficient. They
consider that the first verse repeats the same thing twice, and
therefore conveys no proper meaning. But this is a great mistake; for
the inspired penman of the psalm, whoever he may have been, states two
ideas quite distinct, That he who is hid under the Divine protection
occupies a safe and secure position, where no hostile weapon can reach
him. Or should the verse be read — *He* *who has God to be the guardian
of his safety shall rest under the shadow of God;* still the second
clause would retain an emphatic meaning, for the power of God would be
contrasted with that weak defense which man is able to extend. Those,
too, who dwell in the secret place of God are here said by the Psalmist
to dwell under his shadow, in the sense that they experience to what a
rich extent his protection reaches. Men generally seek out a
great-variety of hiding-places, having recourse to one or another,
according as the calamities are different which threaten to overtake
them; but here we are taught that the only safe and impregnable fortress
to which we can betake ourselves is the protection of God. He contrasts
the security of those who trust in God with the vanity of all other
confidences by which we are apt to delude ourselves.

<span id="xxvi.i-p6"></span><span id="xxvi.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.i-p7"></span>In the second verse he repeats the truth
which he had already inculcated, showing at the same time that he speaks
from his personal feeling and experience as a believer. This is very
necessary in one who would be a teacher; for we cannot communicate true
knowledge unless we deliver it not merely with the lips, but as
something which God has revealed to our own hearts.  <span
id="fr_575"></span>[576](#fn_575) The Psalmist accordingly gives
evidence, that what he had taught in the preceding verse accorded with
his own inward experience. Some read, *I will say* concerning *the
Lord,* and the Hebrew prefix, <span id="xxvi.i-p8.4"></span>ל, *lamed,*
may be so rendered; but the other translation which I have given conveys
the more forcible meaning. The believer does more than simply resolve to
make God his fortress; he draws near in the trust of the Divine
promises, and familiarly addresses God. This confidence in prayer
affords an additional proof how securely the people of God can dwell
under his shadow. This holy species of boasting constitutes the very
highest triumph of faith, when we betake ourselves to God without fear
under our worst trials, and are fully persuaded that he answers all our
prayers, nay, that we have in him a sufficiency and a superabundance of
help.

<span id="xxvi.i-p9"></span><span id="xxvi.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.i-p10"></span>In verse third the Psalmist expresses his
assurance that the trust of which he had spoken would not be vain and
delusory, but that God would prove at all times the deliverer of his
people. He is evidently to be considered as addressing himself, and in
this way encouraging his own heart to hope in the Lord. Some think that
by the *snare of the fowler,* spoken of here in connection with *the
pestilence,* is to be understood hidden mischief as distinguished from
open aggression, and that the Psalmist declares the Divine protection to
be sufficient for him, whether Satan should attack him openly and
violently or by more secret and subtle methods. I would not reject this
interpretation; for though some may think that the words should be taken
in their simpler acceptation, the Psalmist most probably intended under
these terms to denote all different kinds of evil, and to teach us that
God was willing and able to deliver us from any of them.

<span id="xxvi.i-p11"></span><span id="xxvi.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.i-p12"></span>**4** *He shall protect thee with his
wings.* This figure, which is employed in other parts of Scripture, is
one which beautifully expresses the singularly tender care with which
God watches over our safety. When we consider the majesty of God, there
is nothing which would suggest a likeness such as is here drawn between
him and the hen or other birds, who spread their wings over their young
ones to cherish and protect them. But, in accommodation to our
infirmity, he does not scruple to descend, as it were, from the heavenly
glory which belongs to him, and to encourage us to approach him under so
humble a similitude. Since he condescends in such a gracious manner to
our weakness, surely there is nothing to prevent us from coming to him
with the greatest freedom. By *the truth of God,* which, the Psalmist
says, would be his *shield* and *buckler,* we must understand God’s
faithfulness, as never deserting his people in the time of their need;
still we cannot doubt that he had in his eye the Divine promises, for it
is only by looking to these that any can venture to cast themselves upon
the protection of God. As, without the word, we cannot come to the
enjoyment of that Divine mercy of which the Psalmist had already spoken,
he now comes forward himself to bear witness in behalf of it. Formerly,
under the comparison of a *fortress,* he had taught that by trusting in
God we shall enjoy safety and security; now he compares God to a
*shield,* intimating that he will come between us and all our enemies to
preserve us from their attacks.

<span id="xxvi.ii"></span>

<span id="xxvi.ii-p1"></span><span id="xxvi.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
91:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#005)<span id="xxvi.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.ii-p2"></span>**5.** Thou shalt not fear for the terror
of the night; for the arrow that flieth by day; **6.** For the
destruction that walketh in darkness; for the pestilence  <span
id="fr_576"></span>[577](#fn_576) which wasteth at noon-day.  <span
id="fr_577"></span>[578](#fn_577) **7.** A thousand shall fall at thy
side, and ten thousand at thy right hand; it shall not come nigh thee.
**8.** Only with thine eyes shalt thou behold and see the reward of the
wicked.

<span id="xxvi.ii-p5"></span> 

<span id="xxvi.ii-p6"></span><span id="xxvi.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.ii-p7"></span>**5** *Thou shalt not fear for the terror
of the night.* The Psalmist continues to insist upon the truth which I
have just adverted to, that, if we confide with implicit reliance upon
the protection of God, we will be secure from every temptation and
assault of Satan. It is of importance to remember, that those whom God
has taken under his care are in a state of the most absolute safety.
Even those who have reached the most advanced experience find nothing
more difficult than to rely upon Divine deliverance; and more especially
when, overtaken by some of the many forms in which danger and death
await us in this world, doubts will insinuate themselves into our
hearts, giving rise to fear and disquietude. There was reason,
therefore, why the Psalmist should enter upon a specification of
different evils, encouraging the Lord’s people to look for more than one
mode of deliverance, and to bear up under various and accumulated
calamities. Mention is made of *the fear of the night,* because men are
naturally apprehensive in the dark, or because the night exposes us to
dangers of different kinds, and our fears are apt at such a season to
magnify any sound or disturbance. The *arrow,* rather than another
weapon, is instanced as flying by day, for the reason apparently that it
shoots to a greater distance, and with such swiftness, that we can with
difficulty escape it. The verse which follows states, though in
different words, the same truth, that there is no kind of calamity which
the shield of the Almighty cannot ward off and repel.

<span id="xxvi.ii-p8"></span><span id="xxvi.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.ii-p9"></span>**7** *A thousand shall fall at thy side.*
 <span id="fr_578"></span>[579](#fn_578) He proceeds to show that,
though the state of all men may to appearance be alike, the believer has
the special privilege of being exempted from evils of an imminent and
impending nature; for it might be objected that he was but man, and, as
such, exposed with others to death in its thousand different forms. To
correct this mistake, the Psalmist does not hesitate to assert that,
when universal ruin prevails around, the Lord’s children are the objects
of his distinguishing care, and are preserved amidst the general
destruction. The lesson is one which is needed by us all, that, though
naturally subject to the common evils which are spread around, we are
privileged with a special exemption which secures our safety in the
midst of dangers. In the verse succeeding more is meant than merely that
the believer will have personal experience of the truth which the
Psalmist had stated, actually feeling and seeing with his own eyes that
God manages his defense; a new argument is brought forward in support of
the truth, which is this, that God, as the righteous judge of the world,
cannot but punish the wicked according to their sins, and extend
protection to his own children. There is much that is dark in the aspect
of things in this world, yet the Psalmist hints that, amidst all the
confusion which reigns, we may collect from what we see of God’s
judgments, that he does not disappoint the expectations of his believing
people. He must be considered, however, as addressing those who have
eyes to see, who are privileged with the true light of faith, who are
fully awake to the consideration of the Divine judgments, and who wait
patiently and quietly till the proper time arrive; for most men stagger
and confuse their minds upon this subject, by starting to precipitate
conclusions, and are prevented from discovering the providence of God by
judging according to sense. It becomes us too to be satisfied with
apprehending the judgments of God only in some imperfect measure while
we remain upon earth, and leaving him to defer the fuller discovery of
them to the day of complete revelation.

<span id="xxvi.iii"></span>

<span id="xxvi.iii-p1"></span><span id="xxvi.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
91:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#009)<span
id="xxvi.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.iii-p2"></span>**9.** Because thou, Jehovah, art my
protection; thou hast made the Most High thy refuge.  <span
id="fr_579"></span>[580](#fn_579) **10.** There shall no evil befall
thee, and no plague shall come nigh thy dwelling. **11.** For he has
given his angels charge concerning thee, to keep thee in all thy ways.
**12.** They shall bear thee upon their hands, lest thou dash thy foot
upon a stone,

<span id="xxvi.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xxvi.iii-p5"></span><span id="xxvi.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.iii-p6"></span>**9** *Because thou, Jehovah, art my
protection.* He dwells at this length in commendation of the providence
of God, as knowing how slow men naturally are to resort to God in a
right manner; and how much they need to be stimulated to this duty, and
to be driven from those false and worldly refuges in which they confide.
There is a change of person frequently throughout this psalm: thus, in
the first verse, he addresses God, and afterwards addresses himself. God
he styles *his protection,* — in this manner, by his own example,
recommending others to have recourse to God as their help. So,
afterwards, he addresses himself, that he may be the better persuaded of
the sincerity of his inward affection. The true method of testing our
faith is to turn our thoughts inward upon ourselves, and, when no human
eye sees us, to search our own spirits. If, not content with having to
do with God only, we turn our eyes to men, it is almost impossible to
prevent pride from insinuating itself into the room of faith. He speaks
of accounting God to be his *house* or *refuge,* because he defends us
from every evil, as in <span id="xxvi.iii-p6.1"></span>[Ps
90:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#001)<span id="xxvi.iii-p6.1"></span>.
This verse may be considered as connected with that which follows, and
as stating the cause or reason of what is there asserted; for it is
added, *There shall no evil befall thee.* And how are coming evils
averted, but just by our resting with confidence in the protection of
God? Troubles, it is true, of various kinds assail the believer as well
as others, but the Psalmist means that God stands between him and the
violence of every assault, so as to preserve him from being overwhelmed.
The Divine guardianship is represented as extending to the whole
*household* of the righteous; and we know that God comprehends under his
love the children of such as he has adopted into his fatherly favor. Or,
perhaps, the term may be taken in its simpler sense, and nothing more be
intended than that those who choose God for their refuge will dwell
safely in their *houses.*

<span id="xxvi.iii-p7"></span><span id="xxvi.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.iii-p8"></span>**11** *For he has given his angels charge
concerning thee.* This is added by the Psalmist expressly with the view
of obviating any fears which might arise from our infirmity; so that we
cannot fail to be struck with the benignant condescension of God in thus
not only forgiving our diffidence, but proposing the means by which it
may be best removed. Does he exhibit himself to us as a fortress and
shield, proffer the shadow of his protection, make himself known to us
as a habitation in which we may abide, and stretch out his wings for our
defense — surely we are chargeable with the worst ingratitude if we are
not satisfied with promises so abundantly full and satisfactory? If we
tremble to think of his majesty, he presents himself to us under the
lowly figure of the hen: if we are terrified at the power of our
enemies, and the multitude of dangers by which we are beset, he reminds
us of his own invincible power, which extinguishes every opposing force.
When even all these attempts to encourage us have been tried, and he
finds that we still linger and hesitate to approach him, or cast
ourselves upon his sole and exclusive protection, he next makes mention
of the angels, and proffers them as guardians of our safety. As an
additional illustration of his indulgent mercy, and compassion for our
weakness, he represents those whom he has ready for our defense as being
a numerous host; he does not assign one solitary angel to each saint,
but commissions the whole armies of heaven to keep watch over every
individual believer. It is the individual believer whom the Psalmist
addresses, as we read also <span id="xxvi.iii-p8.1"></span>[Ps
34:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#007)<span id="xxvi.iii-p8.1"></span> —
that “angels encamp round about them that fear him.” We may learn from
this that there is no truth in the idea that each saint has his own
peculiar guardian angel; and it is of no little consequence to consider,
that as our enemies are numerous, so also are the friends to whom our
defense is intrusted. It were something, no doubt, to know that even one
angel was set over us with this commission, but it adds weight to the
promise when we are informed that the charge of our safety is committed
to a numerous host, as Elisha was enabled, by a like consideration, to
despise the great army of adversaries which was arrayed against him,
(<span id="xxvi.iii-p8.2"></span>[2Ki
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#016)<span id="xxvi.iii-p8.2"></span>.)
Nor is this inconsistent with passages of Scripture, which seem to speak
as if a distinct angel were assigned to each individual. It is evident
that God employs his angels in different ways, setting one angel over
several whole nations, and again several angels over one man. There is
no necessity that we should be nice and scrupulous in inquiring into the
exact manner in which they minister together for our safety; it is
enough that, knowing from the authority of an apostle the fact of their
being appointed ministers to us, we should rest satisfied of their being
always intent upon their commission. We read elsewhere of their
readiness to obey and execute the commands of God; and this must go to
strengthen our faith, since their exertions are made use of by God for
our defense.

<span id="xxvi.iii-p9"></span>The Psalmist, in the passage now before
us, speaks of members of the Church generally; and yet the devil did not
wrest the words when, in his temptation in the wilderness, he applied
them particularly to Christ. It is true that he is constantly seeking to
pervert and corrupt the truth of God; but, so far as general principles
are concerned, he can put a specious gloss upon things, and is a
sufficiently acute theologian. It is to be considered that when our
whole human family were banished from the Divine favor, we ceased to
have anything in common with the angels, and they to have any
communication with us. It was Christ, and he only, who, by removing the
ground of separation, reconciled the angels to us; this being his proper
office, as the apostle observes, (<span id="xxvi.iii-p9.1"></span>[Eph
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#010)<span id="xxvi.iii-p9.1"></span>,)
to gather together in one what had been dispersed both in heaven and on
earth. This was represented to the holy patriarch Jacob under the figure
of a ladder, (<span id="xxvi.iii-p9.2"></span>[Ge
28:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#012)<span
id="xxvi.iii-p9.2"></span>;) and, in allusion to our being united into
one collective body with the angels, Christ said,

<span id="xxvi.iii-p10"></span>“Afterwards ye shall see the heavens
opened, and the angels of God ascending and descending,” (<span
id="xxvi.iii-p10.1"></span>[Joh
1:51](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#051)<span
id="xxvi.iii-p10.1"></span>.)

<span id="xxvi.iii-p11"></span>The Psalmist adds, *all your ways* in the
plural number, to convey to us more distinctly that wherever we go we
may expect that the angels shall always extend their guardianship to us.
The course of our life is subject to many windings and changes, and who
can tell all the storms by which we are liable to be tossed? It was
necessary, therefore, to know that the angels preside over all our
particular actions and purposes, and thus to be assured of their
safe-conduct in whatever quarter we might be called to move. This
expression, however, *your ways,* was, in all likelihood, intended to
enjoin upon us a due consideration and modesty, to warn us against
tempting God by any rash step, and admonish us to confine ourselves
within the bounds of our proper calling. For should we commit ourselves
recklessly, and attempt things which the promise of God does not warrant
us to undertake, aspiring at what is presumptuous, and opposed to the
Divine will, we are not to expect that the angels will become ministers
and helps to our temerity. Satan would appear to have craftily omitted
this clause when he tempted Christ rashly to throw himself down from the
temple.

<span id="xxvi.iii-p12"></span><span id="xxvi.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.iii-p13"></span>**12** *They shall bear thee upon their
hands.* He gives us a still higher idea of the guardianship of the
angels, informing us, that they not only watch lest any evil should
befall us, and are on the alert to extend assistance, but bear up our
steps with their hands, so as to prevent us from stumbling in our
course. Were we to judge indeed by mere appearances, the children of God
are far from being thus borne up aloft in their career; often they labor
and pant with exertion, occasionally they stagger and fall, and it is
with a struggle that they advance in their course; but as in the midst
of all this weakness it is only by the singular help of God that they
are preserved every moment from falling and from being destroyed, we
need not wonder that the Psalmist should speak in such exalted terms of
the assistance which they receive through the ministrations of angels.
Never, besides, could we surmount the serious obstacles which Satan
opposes to our prayers, unless God should bear us up in the manner here
described. Let any one combine together the two considerations which
have been mentioned, — our own utter weakness on the one hand, and on
the other the roughness, the difficulties, the thorns which beset our
way, the stupidity besides which characterises our hearts, and the
subtlety of the evil one in laying snares for our destruction, — and he
will see that the language of the Psalmist is not that of hyperbole,
that we could not proceed one step did not the angels bear us up in
their hands in a manner beyond the ordinary course of nature. That we
frequently stumble is owing to our own fault in departing from him who
is our head and leader. And though God suffers us to stumble and fall in
this manner that he may convince us how weak we are in ourselves, yet,
inasmuch as he does not permit us to be crushed or altogether
overwhelmed, it is virtually even then as if he put his hand under us
and bore us up.

<span id="xxvi.iv"></span>

<span id="xxvi.iv-p1"></span><span id="xxvi.iv-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
91:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#013)<span
id="xxvi.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.iv-p2"></span>**13.** Thou shalt walk over the lion and
asp, the young lion and dragon shalt thou trample under feet. **14.**
Because he hath trusted in me, I will deliver him; because he hath known
my name, I will set him on high. **15.** He shall call upon me, and I
shall answer him: I will be with him in trouble; I will deliver him, and
glorify him. **16.** With length of days will I satisfy him, and I will
show him my salvation.

<span id="xxvi.iv-p3"></span> 

<span id="xxvi.iv-p4"></span><span id="xxvi.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.iv-p5"></span>**13.** *Thou shalt walk over the lion and
asp.* The same truth is here expressed in different words. He had
already spoken of the obstacles which Satan throws in our course under
the figure of a *stone.* Now he speaks of the formidable troubles to
which we are exposed in the world under the figures of the *asp, lion,
young lion,* and *dragon* So long as we are here we may be truly said to
walk amongst wild beasts, and such as threaten us with destruction. And
in this case what would become of us did not God promise to make us
victorious over the manifold evils which everywhere impend us? None who
seriously considers the temptations to which he is liable will wonder
that the Psalmist, with the view of removing apprehension from the minds
of the Lord’s people, should have adopted the language of hyperbole; nor
indeed will he say that it is the language of hyperbole, but a true and
exact representation of their case. We boast much of our courage so long
as we remain at a distance from the scene of danger; but no sooner are
we brought into action, than in the smallest matters we conjure up to
ourselves lions, and dragons, and a host of frightful dangers. The
Psalmist accommodates his language to this infirmity of our carnal
apprehension. The Hebrew word <span id="xxvi.iv-p5.1"></span>שחל,
*shachal,* which in the Septuagint is rendered *asp,*  <span
id="fr_580"></span>[581](#fn_580) signifies *a lion,* and such
repetition in the second member of the sentence is usual in the Hebrew.
There is therefore no occasion for seeking any nice distinction which
may have been intended in specifying these four different kinds of
animals; only by *the lion* and *young lion* we are evidently to
understand more open dangers, where we are assailed by force and
violence, and by *the serpent* and *dragon* hidden mischiefs, where the
enemy springs upon us insidiously and unexpectedly, as the serpent from
its lurking place.  <span id="fr_581"></span>[582](#fn_581)

<span id="xxvi.iv-p9"></span><span id="xxvi.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.iv-p10"></span>**14.** *Because he hath trusted in me, I
will deliver him.* It may prevent any feeling of disgust or weariness
under the repetition and enlargement of the Psalmist upon his present
subject, to remember, that, as I have already observed, he is influenced
in this by a due consideration of our weakness, ever indisposed, as we
are upon the approach of danger, to exercise a due reliance upon the
providence of God. With this view he now introduces God himself as
speaking, and confirming by his own voice what had already been
asserted. And here it is noticeable that God, in declaring from heaven
that we shall be safe under the wings of his protection, speaks of
nothing as necessary on the part of his people but hope or trust. For
the Hebrew verb <span id="xxvi.iv-p10.1"></span>חשק*, chashak,* which
signifies to desire, or love, or, as we commonly express it, to find our
delight in any object, means here to rest with a sweet confidence in
God, and rejoice in his favor. He engages to extend us assistance, if we
seek him in sincerity. The language implies that we must be continually
surrounded by death and destruction in this world, unless his hand is
stretched out for our preservation. Occasionally he assists even
unbelievers, but it is only to his believing people that his help is
vouchsafed, in the sense of his being their Savior to the true extent of
that term, and their Savior to the end. Their *knowing the name* of God
is spoken of in connection with their trust and expectation; and very
properly, for why is it that men are found casting their eyes vainly
round them to every quarter in the hour of danger, but because they are
ignorant of the power of God? They cannot indeed be said to know God at
all, but delude themselves with a vague apprehension of something which
is not God, a mere dead idol substituted for him in their imaginations.
As it is a true knowledge of God which begets confidence in him, and
leads us to call upon him; and as none can seek him sincerely but those
who have apprehended the promises, and put due honor upon his name, the
Psalmist with great propriety and truth represents this knowledge as
being the spring or fountain of trust. That the doctrine which he
teaches was needful we may learn from the senseless and erroneous manner
in which the Papists speak of faith. While they inculcate an implicit
adherence to God, they bury the word which opens up the only access
which men can have to him. The expression to *exalt* or *lift up on
high* means no more than to keep in a state of safety or security; but
the reason of this metaphor is, that God preserves his people in an
extraordinary manner, raising them, as it were, to some high and
impregnable fortress.

<span id="xxvi.iv-p11"></span><span id="xxvi.iv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.iv-p12"></span>**15.** *He shall call upon me.* He now
shows more clearly what was meant by trusting in God, or placing our
love and delight in him. For that affection and desire which is produced
by faith, prompts us to call upon his name. This is another proof in
support of the truth, which I had occasion to touch upon formerly, that
prayer is properly grounded upon the word of God. We are not at liberty
in this matter, to follow the suggestions of our own mind or will, but
must seek God only in so far as he has in the first place invited us to
approach him. The context, too, may teach us, that faith is not idle or
inoperative, and that one test, by which we ought to try those who look
for Divine deliverances, is, whether they have recourse to God in a
right manner. We are taught the additional lesson, that believers will
never be exempt from troubles and embarrassments. God does not promise
them a life of ease and luxury, but deliverance from their tribulations.
Mention is made of his *glorifying* them, intimating that the
deliverance which God extends, and which has been spoken of in this
psalm, is not of a mere temporary nature, but will issue at last in
their being advanced to perfect happiness. He puts much honor upon them
in the world, and glorifies himself in them conspicuously, but it is not
till the completion of their course that he affords them ground for
triumph. It may seem strange that *length of days* should be mentioned
in the last verse as promised to them, since many of the Lord’s people
are soon taken out of the world. But I may repeat an observation which
has been elsewhere made, that those Divine blessings which are promised
in relation to the present perishing world, are not to be considered as
made good in a universal and absolute sense, or fulfilled in all
according to one set and equal rule.  <span
id="fr_582"></span>[583](#fn_582) Wealth and other worldly comforts must
be looked upon as affording some experience of the Divine favor or
goodness, but it does not follow that the poor are objects of the Divine
displeasure; soundness of body and good health are blessings from God,
but we must not conceive on this account that he regards with
disapprobation the weak and the infirm. Long life is to be classed among
benefits of this kind, and would be bestowed by God upon all his
children, were it not for their advantage that they should be taken
early out of the world.  <span id="fr_583"></span>[584](#fn_583) They
are more satisfied with the short period during which they live than the
wicked, though their life should be extended for thousands of years. The
expression cannot apply to the wicked, that they are *satisfied with
length of days;* for however long they live, the thirst of their desires
continues to be unquenched. It is life, and nothing more, which they
riot in with such eagerness; nor can they be said to have had one
moment’s enjoyment of that Divine favor and goodness which alone can
communicate true satisfaction. The Psalmist might therefore with
propriety state it as a privilege peculiarly belonging to the Lord’s
people, that they are *satisfied with life.* The brief appointed term is
reckoned by them to be sufficient, abundantly sufficient. Besides,
longevity is never to be compared with eternity. The salvation of God
extends far beyond the narrow boundary of earthly existence; and it is
to this, whether we live or come to die, that we should principally
look. It is with such a view that the Psalmist, after stating all the
other benefits which God bestows, adds this as a last clause, that when
he has followed them with his fatherly goodness throughout their lives,
he at last shows them his salvation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_574"></span>[575](cc10025.htm#fr_574) <span
id="xxvi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi-p3"></span> “*Early*, after the dark night of
afflictions.” — *Ainsworth*.

<span id="fn_575"></span>[576](cc10025.htm#fr_575) <span
id="xxvi.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.i-p8"></span> This psalm is allowed to be one of the
finest in the whole collection. “Could the Latin or any modern
language,” says Simon de Muis, “express thoroughly all the beauties and
elegancies as well of the *words* as of the *sentences*, it would not be
difficult to persuade the reader that we have no poem, either in Greek
or Latin, comparable to this Hebrew ode.” It is supposed by some to have
been composed by Moses on the same occasion as the preceding; but others
think it was written by David on the occasion of the pestilence which
was inflicted upon the people as a punishment of his sin in numbering
them, (<span id="xxvi.i-p8.1"></span>[2Sa
24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#000)<span id="xxvi.i-p8.1"></span>.) It
is ascribed to David in the Septuagint, Chaldee, Vulgate, Syriac,
Arabic, and Æthiopic versions. Its subject-matter affords us no
assistance in determining who was its inspired author, or on what
occasion it was written. “There is, however, no reason,” says Walford,
“to regret our unacquaintedness with these particulars, as the poem is
so clear and intelligible, that nothing in it can be mistaken or
misunderstood. The purpose of it is to illustrate the safety and
happiness which result from the knowledge of God, and the exercise of a
steadfast dependence upon his promise and grace. The sentiments are
expressed with great force and beauty; and dead indeed must be the soul
to every emotion of spiritual and heavenly delight that fails to be
impressed by its truth, or to aim at the acquirement of such faith and
reliance upon it as will alone render it productive of the peace and
tranquillity of mind which it is intended to bestow. The learned
Michaelis is of opinion that this psalm was to be recited in alternate
parts by two choruses or sets of singers responding to each other, and
that God himself is introduced in verse 14 as taking part of the
performance.” It is supposed by the Jews to relate to the Messiah. See
<span id="xxvi.i-p8.2"></span>[Mt
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#006)<span id="xxvi.i-p8.2"></span>;
<span id="xxvi.i-p8.3"></span>[Luke
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#011)<span id="xxvi.i-p8.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_576"></span>[577](cc10025.htm#fr_576) <span
id="xxvi.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.ii-p3"></span> “<span id="xxvi.ii-p3.1"></span>Car ceste
est la vraye cognoissance, laquelle nous pouvons bailler aux autres de
main en main, quand nous mettons en avant ce que Dieu nous a revele, non
point des levres taut seulement: mais aussi du profond du coeur.” —
*Fr*.

<span id="fn_577"></span>[578](cc10025.htm#fr_577) <span
id="xxvi.ii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xxvi.ii-p4"></span> The original word, which Calvin renders
“the pestilence,” is rendered in the Syriac “the blowing wind.” Fry’s
version has “the blast.” “The *simoon*, or hot wind of the desert,” he
observes, “a phenomenon in those regions too remarkable to have escaped
the divine poet in enumerating the sources of danger to human life.”
This wind being hot and burning in its effects, when it blows at
noon-day, must be still more fatal.

<span id="fn_578"></span>[579](cc10025.htm#fr_578) <span
id="xxvi.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.ii-p10"></span> “Verses 5 and 6. Jos. Scaliger explains,
in Epis. 9, these two verses thus: — *Thou shalt not fear*, <span
id="xxvi.ii-p10.1"></span>מפהר, *from consternation by night*, <span
id="xxvi.ii-p10.2"></span>מחף, *from the arrow flying by day*, <span
id="xxvi.ii-p10.3"></span>מדבר, *from pestilence walking at evening*,
<span id="xxvi.ii-p10.4"></span>מקטב, *from devastation at noon* Under
these four he comprehends all the evils and dangers to which man is
liable. And as the Hebrews divide the four and twenty hours of day and
night into four parts, namely, evening, midnight, morning, and mid-day,
so he understands the hours of danger to be divided accordingly: in a
word, ‘that the man, who has made God his refuge,’ is always safe, day
and night, at every hour, from every danger.” — *Bythner*

<span id="fn_579"></span>[580](cc10025.htm#fr_579) <span
id="xxvi.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.iii-p3"></span> As a signal instance of this
preservation, Bishop Horne adduces the well known and exemplary conduct
of the good Bishop of Marseilles, who, during the plague in that city in
1720, When nature sickened, and each gale was death, though in constant
attendance on the infected and dying thousands, entirely escaped the
contagion.

<span id="fn_580"></span>[581](cc10025.htm#fr_580) <span
id="xxvi.iv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xxvi.iv-p6"></span> Calvin’s reading of this verse is
different from that of our English Bible. According to it, *thou*, in
the first clause, refers to the Psalmist; while, according to him, it is
to be understood of God. Hammond gives a similar version. “Because thou,
O Lord! art my hope; thou hast made the Most High thy help *or* refuge.”
All the ancient versions understand the first clause as spoken of God.
In the Septuagint it is <span id="xxvi.iv-p6.1"></span>σὺ Κύριε ἡ ἔλπις
μου, “thou, O Lord! art my hope.” Similar is the reading of the Chaldee,
the Syriac, and Vulgate. But the last member of the verse, “thou hast
made the Most High thy refuge,” is generally referred to the Psalmist,
and regarded as a part of a soliloquy to which, when alone, his soul
gave utterance.

<span id="fn_581"></span>[582](cc10025.htm#fr_581) <span
id="xxvi.iv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xxvi.iv-p7"></span> <span id="xxvi.iv-p7.1"></span>ἀσπιδα. The
most ancient versions correspond in this respect with the Septuagint, as
the Vulgate, St Jerome’s, Apollinaris’, the Syriac, Arabic, and Æthiopic
versions, rendering <span id="xxvi.iv-p7.2"></span>שחל, *shachal*, not
by *the lion* but by *the asp*, though they are not agreed as to the
particular kind of asp which is intended. This opinion is adopted by the
learned Bochart, (Hieroz. volume 3, lib. 3, cap. 3,) who thinks it
probable that throughout the verse serpents only are spoken of, and
other interpreters have concurred in the same view. He thinks <span
id="xxvi.iv-p7.3"></span>שחל, *shachal*, rendered “the lion,” is the
*black serpent*, or hoemorhous; and <span id="xxvi.iv-p7.4"></span>כפיר,
*kepher*, rendered “young lion,” has been supposed to be the *cenchris*,
which Nicander (*Theriac*, 5, 463) calls <span
id="xxvi.iv-p7.5"></span>λέων ἄιολος, *the spotted lion*, because he is
speckled, and, like the lion, raises his tail when about to fight, and
bites and gluts himself with blood. Bochart objects to *the lion* and
*young lion* being meant, on the ground of the incongruity of animals of
so very different a nature as lions and serpents being joined together;
and observes, that to *walk upon the lion* seems not a very proper
expression, as men do not in walking tread on lions as they do on
serpents. But *the lion* and the *young* *lion*, the rendering of later
interpreters, correspond to each other, and preserve the parallelism for
which the Hebrew poetry is distinguished, and the reasons assigned by
Bochart for setting it aside seem insufficient. The lion and the serpent
are formidable animals to contend with; and Satan, one of the enemies to
be “put in subjection under the feet of Christ,” is, in the New
Testament, compared both to the lion and the dragon, (<span
id="xxvi.iv-p7.6"></span>[1Pe 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#008)<span
id="xxvi.iv-p7.6"></span>; <span id="xxvi.iv-p7.7"></span>[Re
12:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#009)<span id="xxvi.iv-p7.7"></span>.)
“Let it be added,” says Merrick, “that the Hebrew text says nothing of
*walking upon the lion*, but has the word <span
id="xxvi.iv-p7.8"></span>תדרך, which strictly signifies *calcabis*,
*thou shalt tread*; and as *to* *trample on the nations*, and *to* *make
his enemies his footstool*, are expressions used to signify the subduing
and triumphing over them; to tread on the lion and the serpent may be
understood in the same sense.”

<span id="xxvi.iv-p8"></span>Cresswell thinks it probable that the
language of this verse is proverbial. “The course of human life,” he
remarks, “is in Scripture compared to a journey; and the dangers
described in this verse were common to the wayfaring man in the
Psalmist’s time and country.”

<span id="fn_582"></span>[583](cc10025.htm#fr_582) <span
id="xxvi.iv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.iv-p13"></span> “<span id="xxvi.iv-p13.1"></span>Dei
benedictiones quae ad hanc caducam vitam spectant, non esse perpetuas,
neque aequali tenore fluere.” — *Lat*. “<span
id="xxvi.iv-p13.2"></span>Ne sont pas perpetuelles, et ne descoulent pas
d’un fil continuel.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_583"></span>[584](cc10025.htm#fr_583) <span
id="xxvi.iv-p13.3"></span>

<span id="xxvi.iv-p14"></span> “*With long life*, etc. This was a
blessing often pledged to good men during the Mosaic dispensation;
though we cannot understand it as being universally accomplished,
because God at that, as at every subsequent period, has reserved to
himself, and to his own wisdom, ‘the times and the seasons.’” —
*Walford*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 92](cc10026)
