[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc10011)  [Next](cc10013) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 10: Psalms, Part III*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiii"></span>

<span id="xiii-p1"></span>PSALM 78

<span id="xiii-p2"></span>To comprehend many things within small
compass, it is to be observed, that in this psalm there are two leading
topics. On the one hand, it is declared how God adopted for himself a
Church from the posterity of Abraham, how tenderly and graciously he
cherished it, how wonderfully he brought it out of Egypt, and how varied
were the blessings which he bestowed upon it. On the other hand, the
Jews, who were so much indebted to him for the great blessings which he
had conferred upon them, are upbraided for having from time to time
perversely and treacherously revolted from so liberal a father; so that
his inestimable goodness was clearly manifested, not only in his free
adoption of them at first, but also in continuing by the uninterrupted
course of his goodness to strive against the rebellion of so perfidious
and stiff-necked a people. Moreover, mention is made of the renewal of
God’s grace, and as it were of a second election which he made when he
chose David out of the tribe of Judah to sway the scepter over the
kingdom of Israel.

<span id="xiii-p3"></span>Asaph giving instruction.

<span id="xiii.i"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p1"></span><span id="xiii.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
78:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#001)<span id="xiii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p2"></span>**1.** Hearken, O my people! to my law:
 <span id="fr_306"></span>[307](#fn_306) incline your ears to the words
of my mouth. **2.** I will open my mouth in a parable; I will utter dark
sayings from of old time: **3.** What we have heard and known, and our
fathers have related to us. **4.** We will not conceal from their
children in the generation to come, recounting the praises of Jehovah,
and his power, and the wonderful works which he has done. **5.** He
established a testimony in Jacob, and appointed a law in Israel: for he
commanded our fathers to make them known to their children: **6.** That
the generation to come might know them, and that the children to be born
should arise and declare them to their children.

<span id="xiii.i-p4"></span> 

<span id="xiii.i-p5"></span><span id="xiii.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p6"></span>**1.** *Give ear, O my people! to my law.*
From the close of the psalm, it may with probability be conjectured,
that it was written long after the death of David; for there we have
celebrated the kingdom erected by God in the family of David. There also
the tribe of Ephraim, which is said to have been rejected, is contrasted
with, and set in opposition to, the house of David. From this it is
evident, that the ten tribes were at that time in a state of separation
from the rest of the chosen people; for there must be some good reason
why the kingdom of Ephraim is branded with a mark of dishonor as being
illegitimate and bastard.  <span id="fr_307"></span>[308](#fn_307)

<span id="xiii.i-p8"></span>Whoever was the inspired writer of this
psalm, he does not introduce God speaking as is thought by some, but he
himself addresses the Jews in the character of a teacher. It is no
objection to this that he calls the people *his people,* and the law
*his law;* it being no uncommon thing for the prophets to borrow the
name of Him by whom they were sent, that their doctrine might have the
greater authority. And, indeed, the truth which has been committed to
their trust may, with propriety, be called *theirs.* Thus Paul, in <span
id="xiii.i-p8.1"></span>[Ro 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#016)<span
id="xiii.i-p8.1"></span>, glories in the gospel as *his gospel,* an
expression not to be understood as implying that it was a system which
owed its origin to him, but that he was a preacher and a witness of it.
I am somewhat doubtful whether interpreters are strictly correct in
translating the word <span id="xiii.i-p8.2"></span>תורה*, torah,* by
law.  <span id="fr_308"></span>[309](#fn_308) The meaning of it seems to
be somewhat more general, as appears from the following clause, where
the Psalmist uses the phrase, *the words of my mouth,* in the same
sense. If we consider with what inattention even those who make great
professions of being the disciples of God listen to his voice, we will
admit that the prophet had good reason for introducing his lessons of
instruction by a solemn call of attention. He does not, it is true,
address the unteachable and obstinate, who frowardly refuse to submit
themselves to the word of God; but as even true believers themselves are
generally too backward to receive instruction, this exhortation, so far
from being superfluous, was highly necessary to stir up the sluggish and
inactive among them.

<span id="xiii.i-p10"></span>To secure for himself the greater
attention, he declares it to be his purpose to discuss subjects of a
great, high, and difficult character. The word <span
id="xiii.i-p10.1"></span>משל, *mashal,* which I have translated *a
parable,* denotes grave and striking sentences, such as adages, or
proverbs, and apophthegms.  <span id="fr_309"></span>[310](#fn_309) As
then the matter itself of which we treat, if it is weighty and
important, awakens the minds of men, the inspired penman affirms that it
is his purpose to utter only striking sentences and notable sayings. The
word <span id="xiii.i-p11.2"></span>חידות, *chidoth,* which, following
others, I have rendered *enigmas,* is here used, not so much for dark
sentences, as for sayings which are pointed and worthy of special
notice.  <span id="fr_310"></span>[311](#fn_310) He does not mean to
wrap up his song in ambiguous language, but clearly and distinctly to
dwell both upon the benefits of God and the ingratitude of the people.
Only, as I have said, his design is to stimulate his readers to weigh
and consider more attentively the subject propounded. This passage is
quoted by Matthew, (<span id="xiii.i-p14.8"></span>[Mt
13:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#035)<span id="xiii.i-p14.8"></span>,)
and applied to the person of Christ, when he held the minds of the
people in suspense by parables which they could not understand. Christ’s
object in doing so, was to prove that he was a distinguished prophet of
God, and that thus he might be received with the greater reverence.
Since he then resembled a prophet because he preached sublime mysteries
in a style of language above the common kind, that which the sacred
writer here affirms concerning himself, is with propriety transferred to
him. If in this psalm there shines forth such a majesty as may justly
stir up and inflame the readers with a desire to learn, we gather from
it with what earnest attention it becomes us to receive the gospel, in
which Christ opens and displays to us the treasures of his celestial
wisdom.

<span id="xiii.i-p15"></span><span id="xiii.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p16"></span>**3.** *What we have heard and known.*
There seems to be some discrepancy between what the Psalmist had stated
in the commencement, when he said that he would speak of great and
hidden matters, and what he now adds, that his subject is a common one,
and such as is transmitted from one age to another by the father to the
son. If it was incumbent upon the fathers to recount to their children
the things here spoken of, these things ought, of course, to have been
familiarly known to all the people, yea, even to those who were most
illiterate, and had the weakest capacity. Where, then, it may be said,
are the enigmas or dark sentences of which he has just now made mention?
I answer, that these things can easily be reconciled; for although the
psalm contains many things which are generally known, yet he illustrates
them with all the splendor and ornaments of diction, that he may the
more powerfully affect the hearts of men, and acquire for himself the
greater authority. At the same time, it is to be observed, that however
high may be the majesty of the Word of God, this does not prevent the
benefits or advantages of it from reaching even to the unlearned and to
babes. The Holy Spirit does not in vain invite and encourage such to
learn from it: — a truth which we ought carefully to mark. If God,
accommodating himself to the limited capacity of men, speaks in an
humble and lowly style, this manner of teaching is despised as too
simple; but if he rise to a higher style, with the view of giving
greater authority to his Word, men, to excuse their ignorance, will
pretend that it is too obscure. As these two vices are very prevalent in
the world, the Holy Spirit so tempers his style as that the sublimity of
the truths which he teaches is not hidden even from those of the weakest
capacity, provided they are of a submissive and teachable disposition,
and bring with them an earnest desire to be instructed. It is the design
of the prophet to remove from the mind all doubt respecting his sayings,
and for this purpose, he determines to bring forward nothing new, but
such subjects as had been long well known, and received without dispute
in the Church. He accordingly not only says *we have heard,* but also
*we have known.* Many things are rashly spread abroad which have no
foundation in truth; yea, nothing is more common than for the ears of
men to be filled with fables. It is, therefore, not without cause that
the prophet, after having spoken of the things which he had heard, at
the same time, refers in confirmation of their truth to undoubted
testimony. He adds, that the knowledge of these subjects had been
communicated to the Jews by *their fathers.* This does not imply, that
what is taught under the domestic roof is always faultless; but it is
obvious, that there is afforded a more favorable opportunity of palming
upon men forgeries for truth, when things are brought from a distant
country. What is to be principally observed is, that all fathers are not
here spoken of indiscriminately, but only those who were chosen to be
God’s peculiar people, and to whom the care of divine truth was
intrusted.

<span id="xiii.i-p17"></span><span id="xiii.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p18"></span>**4.** *We will not conceal them from their
children in the generation to come.* Some take the verb <span
id="xiii.i-p18.1"></span>נכחד, *nechached,* in the *nephil* conjugation,
and translate it, *they are not concealed or hidden.* But it ought,
according to the rules of grammar, to be resolved thus: — *We* *will not
conceal them from our posterity,* implying, that what we have been
taught by our ancestors we should endeavor to transmit to their
children. By this means, all pretense of ignorance is removed; for it
was the will of God that these things should be published from age to
age without interruption; so that being transmitted from father to child
in each family, they might reach even the last family of man. The end
for which this was to be done is shown — that *they might celebrate the
praises of Jehovah, in the wonderful works which he hath done*

<span id="xiii.i-p19"></span><span id="xiii.i-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p20"></span>**5.** *He established a testimony in
Jacob.*  <span id="fr_311"></span>[312](#fn_311) As the reception or
approbation of any doctrine by men would not be a sufficient reason for
yielding a firm assent to its truth, the prophet proceeds farther, and
represents God as the author of what he brings forward. He declares,
that the father’s were not led to instruct their children in these
truths under the mere impulse of their own minds, but by the commandment
of God. Some understand the words, *He hath established a testimony in
Jacob, and appointed a law in Israel,* as implying that God had
established a decree in Jacob, to be observed as an inviolable rule,
which was, that the deliverance divinely wrought for the people should
be at all times in the mouth of every Israelite; but this seems to give
too restricted a sense. I therefore consider *statute,* or *testimony,*
and *law,*  <span id="fr_312"></span>[313](#fn_312) as referring to the
written law, which, however, was partly given for this end, that by the
remembrance of their deliverance, the people, after having been once
gathered into one body, might be kept in their allegiance to God. The
meaning then is, that God not only acquired a right to the Jews as his
people by his mighty power, but that he also sealed up his grace, that
the knowledge of it might never be obliterated. And, undoubtedly, it was
then registered as it were in public records, when the covenant was
ratified by the written law, in order to assure the posterity of Abraham
that they had been separated from all other nations. It would have been
a matter of very small importance to have been acquainted with, or to
have remembered the bare history of what had been done, had their eyes
not been, at the same time, directed to the free adoption and the fruit
of it. The decree then is this, That the fathers being instructed in the
doctrine of the law themselves, should recount, as it were, from the
mouth of God, to their children, that they had been not only once
delivered, but also gathered into one body as his Church, that
throughout all ages they might yield a holy and pure obedience to him as
their deliverer. The reading of the beginning of the second clause of
the verse properly is, *Which he commanded, etc.* But the relative <span
id="xiii.i-p22.1"></span>אשר*, asher, which,* I have no doubt, is here
put by way of exposition for *namely,* or *that is, he commanded,* etc.
I have translated it *for,* which amounts to the same thing.

<span id="xiii.i-p23"></span><span id="xiii.i-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p24"></span>**6.** *That the generation to come might
know them.* In this verse, the Psalmist confirms what he had said
concerning the continued transmission of divine truth. It greatly
concerns us to know, that the law was given not for one age only; but
that the fathers should transmit it to their children, as if it were
their rightful inheritance, in order that it might never be lost, but be
preserved to the end of the world. This is the reason why Paul, in <span
id="xiii.i-p24.1"></span>[1Ti
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#015)<span id="xiii.i-p24.1"></span>,
asserts that “the Church is the pillar and ground of the truth;” by
which he does not mean that the truth of itself is weak, and stands in
need of foreign supports, but that God extends and diffuses it by the
instrumentality of his ministers, who when they faithfully execute the
office of teaching with which they are invested, sustain the truth, as
it were, upon their shoulders. Now, the prophet teaches us, that it is
our bounden duty to use our endeavors that there may be a continual
succession of persons to communicate instruction in divine truth. It is
said of Abraham before the law was written, <span
id="xiii.i-p24.2"></span>[Ge
18:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#019)<span id="xiii.i-p24.2"></span>,

<span id="xiii.i-p25"></span>“I know him, that he will command his
children and his household after him, and they shall keep the way of the
Lord to do justice and judgment;”

<span id="xiii.i-p26"></span>and after his death, this was enjoined upon
the patriarchs as a necessary part of their duty. No sooner was the law
delivered, than God appointed priests in his Church to be public masters
and teachers. He has also testified by the prophet Isaiah, that the same
is to be observed under the New Testament dispensation, saying,

<span id="xiii.i-p27"></span>“My Spirit that is upon thee, and my words
which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor
out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seed’s seed,
from henceforth and for ever.” (<span id="xiii.i-p27.1"></span>[Isa
59:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#021)<span id="xiii.i-p27.1"></span>)

<span id="xiii.i-p28"></span>In the passage before us, however, a
particular injunction is given to the fathers on this point — each of
them is enjoined diligently to instruct his own children, and all
without distinction are taught, that their exertions in transmitting the
name of God to their posterity will be most acceptable to Him, and
receive his highest approbation. By the words, *That the children to be
born should arise,* is not denoted a small number of individuals; but it
is intimated, that the preachers of divine truth, by whose efforts pure
religion may flourish and prevail for ever, will be as numerous as those
who are born into the world.

<span id="xiii.ii"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p1"></span><span id="xiii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
78:7-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#007)<span id="xiii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p2"></span>**7.** That they might set their hope
 <span id="fr_313"></span>[314](#fn_313) in God, and not forget the
works of God; but keep his commandments. **8.** And that they might not
be as their fathers, a rebellious \[or an apostatising\] and a provoking
generation; a generation which directed not their heart aright, and
whose spirit was not faithful towards God. **9.** The children of
Ephraim, being armed and shooting with the bow, turned back in the day
of battle. **10.** They kept not the covenant of God, and refused to
walk in his law. **11.** And they forgat his works, and the wonders
which he had shown them.

<span id="xiii.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xiii.ii-p5"></span><span id="xiii.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p6"></span>**7.** *That they might set their hope in
God.* Here the Psalmist points out the use to which the doctrine which
he had stated should be applied. In the first place, the fathers, when
they find that on the one hand they are instrumental in maintaining the
pure worship of God, and that on the other, they are the means of
providing for the salvation of their children, should, by such a
precious result of their labors, be the more powerfully stirred up to
instruct their children. In the second place, the children on their
part, being inflamed with greater zeal, should eagerly press forward in
the acquisition of divine knowledge, and not suffer their minds to
wander in vain speculations, but should aim at, or keep their eyes
directed to, the right mark. It is unhappy and wretched toil to be

<span id="xiii.ii-p7"></span>“ever learning, and never able to come to
the knowledge of  
the truth,” (<span id="xiii.ii-p7.2"></span>[2Ti
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#007)<span id="xiii.ii-p7.2"></span>.)

<span id="xiii.ii-p8"></span>When, therefore, we hear for what purpose
the law was given, we may easily learn what is the true and most
successful method of deriving benefit from it. The inspired writer
places *trust* first, assigning it the highest rank. He then requires
the observance of the holy commandments of God; and he puts in the
middle the remembrance of the works of God, which serves to confirm and
strengthen faith. In short, what he means is, that the sum of heavenly
wisdom consists in this, that men, having their hearts fixed on God by a
true and unfeigned faith, call upon him, and that, for the purpose of
maintaining and cherishing their confidence in him, they exercise
themselves in meditating in good earnest upon his benefits; and that
then they yield to him an unfeigned and devoted obedience. We may learn
from this, that the true service of God begins with faith. If we
transfer our trust and confidence to any other object, we defraud him of
the chief part of his honor.

<span id="xiii.ii-p9"></span><span id="xiii.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p10"></span>**8.** *And that they might not be as
their fathers, a rebellious and provoking generation.* The Psalmist here
shows still more distinctly how necessary this sermon was, from the
circumstance that the Jews were exceedingly prone to revolt from God, if
they were not kept in subjection by powerful restraints. He takes it as
a fact, which could not be questioned, that their hearts were in no
respect better than the hearts of their fathers, whom he affirms to have
been a treacherous, rebellious, crooked and disobedient race. They
would, therefore, immediately backslide from the way of God, unless
their hearts were continually sustained by stable supports. The
experience of all ages shows that what Horace writes concerning his own
nation is true every where: —

<span id="xiii.ii-p11"></span>*“*<span id="xiii.ii-p11.1"></span>*Ætas
parenturn, pejor avis, tulit  
Nos nequiores, mox daturos  
Progeniem vitiosiroem.”  
*Odes, *Book III. Ode vi.*

<span id="xiii.ii-p12"></span>*“The age that gave our fathers birth,  
Saw them their noble sires disgrace:  
We, baser still, shall leave on earth  
The still increasing guilt of our degenerate race.”  
*Boscawen’Translation.

<span id="xiii.ii-p13"></span>What then would be the consequence, did
not God succor the world which thus proceeds from evil to worse? As the
prophet teaches the Jews from the wickedness and perverseness of their
fathers, that they stood in need of a severe discipline to recall them
from the imitation of bad examples, we learn from this, how great the
folly of the world is, in persuading itself that the example of the
fathers is to be regarded as equivalent to a law, which ought, in every
case, to be followed. He does not here speak of all people without
distinction, but of the holy and chosen race of Abraham; nor does he
rebuke a small number of persons, but almost the whole nation, among
whom there prevailed excessive obstinacy, as well as perverse
forgetfulness of the grace of God, and perfidious dissimulation. He does
not mention merely the fathers of one age, but he comprehends a period
stretching back into a remote antiquity, that persons may not take
occasion to excuse themselves in committing sin, from the length of time
during which it has prevailed. We must therefore make a wise selection
from amongst the fathers of those whom it becomes us to imitate. It
being a work of great difficulty to remove the disposition to this
perverse imitation of the fathers, towards whom the feeling of reverence
is naturally impressed on the minds of their successors, the prophet
employs a multiplicity of terms to set forth the aggravated wickedness
of the fathers, stigmatising them as chargeable with apostasy,
provocation, treachery, and hypocrisy. These are very weighty charges;
but it will be evident from the sequel that they are not exaggerated.
The word <span id="xiii.ii-p13.1"></span>הכין*, hechin,* which I have
rendered *directed,* is by some translated *established,* but in my
opinion, the meaning rather is, that God’s ancient people always turned
aside from God into crooked by-paths. Also, in what follows, instead of
reading *whose spirit was not faithful towards God,* some read *whose
spirit leaned not upon God.*  <span id="fr_314"></span>[315](#fn_314)
But it is better to follow the former interpretation, That they were not
faithfully and steadfastly devoted to God, although they had solemnly
sworn allegiance to him. The Papists make use of this passage as an
argument to prove that man has the power of bending his own heart, and
directing it either to good or evil as he pleases; but this is an
inference from it which cannot stand examination for a single moment.
Although the prophet justly blames those who have not directed their
heart aright, his object is not expressly to speak of what men can do of
themselves. It is the special work of God to turn to himself the hearts
of men by the secret influence of his Holy Spirit. It does not however
follow from this, that they will be exempted from blame, when their own
lust and depravity draw them away from God. Moreover, from the sins
which are here reproved, we should learn in what way he would have us to
obey and serve him. In the first place, we must lay aside all obstinacy
and take his yoke upon us;  <span id="fr_315"></span>[316](#fn_315) and,
secondly, we must clothe ourselves with the spirit of meekness, bring
the affections of the heart to the obedience of God, and follow after
uprightness, and that not with the fervor of a mere transient impulse,
but with unfeigned and unwavering steadfastness.

<span id="xiii.ii-p16"></span><span id="xiii.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p17"></span>**9.** *The children of Ephraim being
armed, and shooting with the bow.* The sacred writer sets before us an
example of this unfaithfulness in the children of Ephraim. As those who
are pertinaciously set upon doing evil are not easily led to repentance
and reformation by simple instruction, the punishments with which God
visited the children of Ephraim are brought forward, and by these it is
proved that they were reprobates. Since they were a warlike people, it
was an evidence of the divine displeasure for them to turn their backs
in battle. And it is expressly declared, that they were skillful *in*
*shooting with the bow;*  <span id="fr_316"></span>[317](#fn_316) for it
is an additional stigma to represent such as were armed with weapons to
wound their enemies at a distance as fleeing through fear. From this, it
is the more abundantly manifest that they had incurred the displeasure
of God, who not only deprived them of his aid, but also made their
hearts effeminate in the hour of danger.

<span id="xiii.ii-p19"></span>Here the question may be raised, Why the
children of Ephraim only are blamed, when we find a little before, all
the tribes in general comprehended in the same sentence of condemnation?
Some commentators refer this to the slaughter of the sons of Ephraim by
the men of Gath, who came forth against them to recover their cattle of
which they had been despoiled, <span id="xiii.ii-p19.1"></span>[1 Chr.
7:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch1007.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/ch1007.htm#021),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/ch1007.htm#022)<span id="xiii.ii-p19.1"></span>.
 <span id="fr_317"></span>[318](#fn_317) But this exposition is too
restricted. Perhaps the kingdom of Israel had fallen into decay, and had
been almost ruined when this psalm was composed. It is therefore better
to follow the opinion of other interpreters, who think, that by the
figure synecdoche, the children of Ephraim are put for the whole people.
But these interpreters pass over without consideration the fact, which
ought not to be overlooked, that the Ephraimites are purposely named
because they were the means of leading others into that rebellion which
took place when Jeroboam set up the calves, (<span
id="xiii.ii-p20.4"></span>[1Ki
12:25-33](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#025)<span
id="xiii.ii-p20.4"></span>.) What we have already said must be borne in
mind, that towards the close of the psalm, the rejection of the tribe of
Ephraim is, not, without cause, contrasted with the election of the
tribe of Judah. The children of Ephraim are also here spoken of by way
of comparison, to warn the true children of Abraham from the example of
those who cut themselves off from the Church, and yet boasted of the
title of the Church without exhibiting holy fruits in their life.  <span
id="fr_318"></span>[319](#fn_318) As they surpassed all the other tribes
in number and wealth, their influence was too powerful in beguiling the
simple; but of this the prophet now strips them, showing that they were
deprived of the aid of God.

<span id="xiii.ii-p22"></span><span id="xiii.ii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p23"></span>**10.** *They kept not the covenant of
God.* This is the reason assigned for the Ephraimites turning their
backs in the day of battle; and it explains why the divine assistance
was withheld from them. Others, it is true, were guilty in this respect
as well as they, but the vengeance of God executed on that tribe, which
by its influence had corrupted almost the whole kingdom, is purposely
brought forward as a general warning. Since then the tribe of Ephraim,
in consequence of its splendor and dignity, when it threw off the yoke,
encouraged and became as it were a standard of shameful revolt to all
the other tribes, the prophet intended to put people on their guard,
that they might not suffer themselves in their simplicity to be again
deceived in the same manner. It is no light charge which he brings
against the sons of Ephraim: he upbraids them on account of their
perfidiousness in despising the whole law and in violating the covenant.
Although he employs these two words, *law* and *covenant,* in the same
sense; yet, in placing *the covenant* first, he clearly shows that he is
speaking not only of the moral law, the all-perfect rule of life, but of
the whole service of God, of the truth and faithfulness of the divine
promises, and of the trust which ought to be reposed in them,  <span
id="fr_319"></span>[320](#fn_319) of invocation, and of the doctrine of
true religion, the foundation whereof was the adoption. He therefore
calls them covenant-breakers, because they had fallen from their trust
in the promises, by which God had entered into covenant with them to be
their Father. Yet he afterwards very properly adds *the law,* in which
the covenant was sealed up, as it were, in public records. He aggravates
the enormity of their guilt by the word *refuse,* which intimates that
they were not simply carried away by a kind of thoughtless or
inconsiderate recklessness, and thus sinned through giddiness, want of
knowledge or foresight, but that they had purposely, and with deliberate
obstinacy, violated the holy covenant of God.

<span id="xiii.ii-p25"></span><span id="xiii.ii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p26"></span>**11.** *And they forgat his works.* This
shameful impiety is here represented as having originated in
ingratitude, inasmuch as they wickedly buried, and made no account of
the deliverance wrought for them, which was worthy of everlasting
remembrance. Truly it was stupidity more than brutish, or rather, as it
were, a monstrous thing,  <span id="fr_320"></span>[321](#fn_320) for
the Israelites to depart from God, to whom they were under so many and
strong obligations. Nor would it have been possible for them to have
been so bewitched by Satan, had they not quite forgotten the many
miracles wrought in their behalf, which formed so many bonds to keep
them in the fear of God and in obedience to him. That no excuse might be
left for extenuating their guilt, the prophet ennobles those works by
applying to them the term *wonderful,* thereby intimating, that God’s
manner of acting was not of a common kind, so as easily to account for
their gradually forgetting his works, but that the Israelites had
perversely and wickedly shut their eyes, that they might not be
restrained in their sinful course, by beholding the glory of God.

<span id="xiii.iii"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p1"></span><span id="xiii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
78:12-16](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#012)<span
id="xiii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p2"></span>**12.** He wrought marvellously \[or he
did wondrous things\] in the sight of their fathers; in the land of
Egypt, in the field of Zoan.  <span id="fr_321"></span>[322](#fn_321)
**13.** He divided the sea, and caused them to pass through, and made
the waters to stand as an heap. **14.** And he led them by a cloud in
the day; and all the night by the light of fire. **15.** He clave the
rocks in the wilderness: and made them to drink in great deeps. **16.**
And he brought forth streams from the rock, and made the waters to run
down like rivers.

<span id="xiii.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xiii.iii-p5"></span><span id="xiii.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p6"></span>**12.** *He wrought marvellously in the
sight of their fathers.* The Psalmist is still to be regarded as
condemning the posterity of the Israelites for their guilt; but he very
properly, at the same time, begins to speak of the first ancestors of
the nation, intimating, that the whole race of them, even from their
first original, were of a perverse and rebellious disposition. But
having remarked that the children of Ephraim had fallen into apostasy,
because they had forgotten the wonderful works of God, he continues to
prosecute the same subject. Meanwhile, as I have said, he makes a very
happy transition to speak of the fathers, whom it was his object to
include in the same condemnation. In the first place, he adverts to the
miracles which were wrought in the midst of the land of Egypt, previous
to the departure of the people from it. To recall these the more vividly
to the mind, he names a place which was highly celebrated — *the field
of Zoan.* He next comes to speak of the passage through the sea, where
he repeats what was brought under our notice in the previous psalm, that
the order of nature was reversed when the waters stopped in their
course, and were even raised up into solid heaps like mountains. In the
third place, he declares, that after the people had passed through the
Red Sea, God still continued to be their guide in their journey; and
that this might not be a mere temporary deliverance, he graciously
continued to stretch forth his hand to bestow upon them new testimonies
of his goodness. It being a difficult and wearisome thing for them to
pursue their journey through dry and sandy regions, it was no ordinary
blessing to be protected from the heat of the sun by the intervention of
a cloud. This, however, was to them a pledge of more distinguished
grace. God hereby testified, that this people were under his protection,
until they should reach the heavenly inheritance. Accordingly, Paul
teaches in <span id="xiii.iii-p6.1"></span>[1Co
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#002)<span id="xiii.iii-p6.1"></span>,
that there was a kind of baptism administered to the people in that
cloud, as also in their passing through the sea; the fruit of which is
not limited to this frail and transitory life, but extends even to
everlasting salvation.

<span id="xiii.iii-p7"></span><span id="xiii.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p8"></span>**15.** *He clave the rocks in the
wilderness.* The Psalmist produces another evidence of the fatherly love
by which God testified the greatness of the care which he exercised
about the welfare of this people. It is not simply said that God gave
them drink, but that he did this in a miraculous manner. Streams, it is
true, sometimes issue from rocks, but the rock which Moses smote was
completely dry. Whence it is evident, that the water was not brought
forth from any spring, but that it was made to flow from the profoundest
deeps, as if it had been said, from the very center of the earth. Those,
therefore, who have interpreted this passage as meaning, that the
Israelites drank in the bottomless deeps, because the waters flowed in
great abundance, have failed in giving the true explanation. Moses, in
his history of the miracle, rather enhances its greatness, by
intimating, that God commanded those waters to come gushing from the
remotest veins.

<span id="xiii.iii-p9"></span>The same truth is confirmed in the
following verse, in which it is stated, that where there had not been a
single drop of water before there was a large and mighty river. Had
there only sprung out of the rock a small rivulet, ungodly men might
have had some apparent ground for cavilling at, and underrating the
goodness of God, but when the water gushed out in such copious abundance
all on a sudden, who does not see that the ordinary course of nature was
changed, rather than that some vein or spring which lay hidden in the
earth was opened?

<span id="xiii.iv"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p1"></span><span id="xiii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
78:17-22](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#017)<span
id="xiii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p2"></span>**17.** Yet they continued still to sin
against him, to provoke the Most High in the wilderness. **18.** And
they tempted God in their heart, by asking food for their soul.  <span
id="fr_322"></span>[323](#fn_322) **19.** And they spake against God:
they said, Can God prepare a table in the wilderness? **20.** Behold! he
smote the rock, and the waters gushed out; and streams overflowed. Can
he give bread also? Can he prepare flesh for his people? **21.**
Therefore Jehovah heard, and was wroth: and a fire was kindled in Jacob:
and wrath also ascended against Israel?  <span
id="fr_323"></span>[324](#fn_323) **22.** Because they believed not in
God, nor trusted in his salvation.

<span id="xiii.iv-p5"></span> 

<span id="xiii.iv-p6"></span><span id="xiii.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p7"></span>**17.** *Yet they continued still to sin
against him.* The prophet, having briefly declared how God, by a
continual succession of benefits, had clearly manifested the greatness
of his love towards the children of Abraham, now adds, that after having
been laid under such deep and solemn obligations to him, they, as was
natural to them, and according to their customary way, wickedly rebelled
against him. In the first place, he accuses them of having provoked him
grievously, by pertinaciously adding iniquity to iniquity; and then he
points out the particular kind of the provocation with which they were
chargeable. By the word *provoke,* he intimates, that it was no light
offense which they had committed, but wickedness so heinous and
aggravated as not to be endured. From the place in which it was
committed, he aggravates the enormity of the sin. It was in the very
wilderness, whilst the remembrance of their deliverance was yet fresh in
their memory, and where they had every day full in their view tokens of
the presence of God, and where even necessity itself should have
constrained them to yield a true and holy obedience — it was in that
place, and under these circumstances, that they repressed not their
insolence and unbridled appetite.  <span
id="fr_324"></span>[325](#fn_324) It was then, certainly, a proof of
monstrous infatuation for them to act in such a wanton and disgraceful
manner as they did, at the very time when their want of all things
should have proved the best remedy for keeping them under restraint, and
to do this even in the presence of God, who presented before them such
manifestations of his glory as filled them with terror, and who allured
them so kindly and tenderly to himself.

<span id="xiii.iv-p9"></span><span id="xiii.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p10"></span>**18.** *And they tempted God in their
heart.* This is the provocation of which mention is made in the
preceding verse. Not that it was unlawful for them simply to ask food,
when constrained to do so by the cravings of hunger. Who can impute
blame to persons, when being hungry, they implore God to supply their
necessities? The sin with which the Israelites were chargeable consisted
in this, that not content with the food which He had appointed them,
they gave loose reins to their lusts. He, at that time, had begun to
feed them with manna, as we shall again see by and by. It was their
loathing of that sustenance which impelled them eagerly to desire new
food, as if they disdained the allowance assigned them by their heavenly
Father. This is what is meant when it is said that *they asked food for
their soul*  <span id="fr_325"></span>[326](#fn_325) They were not
reduced to the necessity of asking it by hunger; but their lust was not
satisfied with living on the provision which God had appointed for them.
On this account, it is declared, that *they tempted God,* overpassing,
as they did, the bounds within which he had limited them. Whoever,
undervaluing and despising the permission or license which He grants,
gives full scope to his own intemperate lust, and desires more than is
lawful, is said to tempt God. He acts as if he would subject Him to his
own caprice, or questioned whether He could do more than he is pleased
really to do. God has power to accomplish whatever he wills; and
assuredly, the person who would separate the power of God from his will,
or represent him as unable to do what he wills, does all he can to rend
him in pieces. Those are chargeable with doing this, who are set upon
trying whether he will grant more than he has given them permission to
ask. That, therefore, the lust of the flesh may not stir us up to tempt
him, let us learn to impose a restraint upon our desires, and humbly to
rest contented within the limits which are prescribed to us. If the
flesh is allowed to indulge itself without control, we will not be
satisfied with ordinary bread, but will often, and in many ways, murmur
against God.

<span id="xiii.iv-p12"></span><span id="xiii.iv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p13"></span>**19.** *And they spake against God. The
prophet had said that they tempted God in their heart;*  <span
id="fr_326"></span>[327](#fn_326) and now he adds, that they were not
ashamed openly to utter with their impure and blasphemous tongues, the
impiety which they had inwardly conceived. From this, it is the more
abundantly manifest that malignity and wickedness had taken entire
possession of their hearts. Thus we see how lust conceives sin, when it
is admitted into the soul with unhallowed consent. Afterwards the sin
develops itself farther, even as we see the Israelites proceeding to
such a length of profane wantonness, as to call in question the power of
God, as if they made no account of it, any farther than as it ministered
to their lust. By the *table prepared* which is spoken of, is to be
understood the dainty food, which was their ordinary fare in Egypt. A
single dish did not satisfy their appetite. They were not contented
unless they could gratify themselves with great abundance and variety.
When it is said in the following verse, *Behold! God smote the rock, and
the waters gushed out, etc*., this, I have no doubt, is the language of
bitter irony, with which the prophet taunts their unblushing insolence.
It is not very likely that they spake in this manner; but he relates, as
it were, with their mouth, or in their person, the things which took
place before their eyes.

<span id="xiii.iv-p15"></span><span id="xiii.iv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p16"></span>**21.** *Therefore Jehovah heard, and was
wroth.* This hearing of God implies full and perfect knowledge; and it
is a figure taken from earthly judges, who cannot punish criminals until
they have become thoroughly acquainted with the cause. He is said to
hear his own people, when he shows his favor and mercy towards them by
granting their requests; and, on the other hand, he is said to hear
those blasphemies which he does not allow to pass unpunished. To remove
all ground for thinking that the divine wrath was unduly severe, the
enormity of the guilt of the Israelites is again described as manifested
in this, that *they believed not God, nor trusted in his salvation.* It
is here taken as an indisputable point, that promises were made to them
to which they ought to have yielded an assent, which, however, they were
prevented from yielding by the extreme infatuation with which they were
carried away. *To trust in the salvation of God,* is to lean upon his
fatherly providence, and to regard him as sufficient for the supply of
all our wants. From this we learn not only how hateful unbelief is in
the sight of God, but also, what is the true nature of faith, and what
are the fruits which it produces. Whence is it that men quietly submit
themselves to Him, but because they are persuaded that their salvation
is singularly precious in his sight, and are fully assured that he will
give them whatever is needful for them? It is thus that they are led to
surrender themselves to him, to be governed according to his good
pleasure. Faith, then, is the root of true piety. It teaches us to hope
for, and to desire every blessing from God, and it frames us to yield
obedience to him; while those who distrust him must necessarily be
always murmuring and rebelling against him. The scope of the prophet is
this, that the pretences to faith which are made by those who do not
hope for salvation from God, rest upon false grounds; for when God is
believed in, the hope of salvation is speedily produced in the mind, and
this hope renders to him the praise of every blessing.

<span id="xiii.v"></span>

<span id="xiii.v-p1"></span><span id="xiii.v-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
78:23-25](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#023)<span id="xiii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.v-p2"></span>**23.** But he had commanded the clouds from
above, and opened the doors of heaven, **24.** And had rained down manna
 <span id="fr_327"></span>[328](#fn_327) upon them to eat, and had given
them of the corn of heaven. **25.** Man had eaten the bread of the
mighty: he had sent them meat to the full.

<span id="xiii.v-p4"></span> 

<span id="xiii.v-p5"></span><span id="xiii.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.v-p6"></span>**23.** *But he had commanded the clouds
from above.* It is a mistake to suppose that this miracle is related
merely in the way of history. The prophet rather censures the Israelites
the more severely from the consideration, that although fed to the full
with manna, they ceased not to lust after the dainties which they knew
God had denied them. It was the basest ingratitude to scorn and reject
the heavenly food, which, so to speak, associated them with angels. Were
a man who dwells in France or Italy to grieve and fret that he has not
the bread of Egypt to eat, nor the wine of Asia to drink, would he not
make war against God and nature, after the manner of the giants of old?
Much less excusable was the inordinate lust of the Israelites, whom God
not only furnished with earthly provision in rich abundance, but to whom
he also gave the bread of heaven for their support. Had they even
endured hunger for a lengthened period, propriety and duty would have
required them to ask food with more humility. Had they been supplied
with only bran and chaff to eat, it would have been their bounden duty
to have acknowledged that in the place where they were — in the
wilderness — this was no ordinary boon of Heaven. Had only coarse bread
been granted them, they would have had sufficient reason for
thanksgiving. But how much stronger were their obligations to God, when
he created a new kind of food, with which, by stretching out, as it
were, his hand from heaven, he supplied them richly and in great
abundance? This is the reason why the manna is called *corn of heaven,*
and *bread of the mighty* Some explain the Hebrew word <span
id="xiii.v-p6.1"></span>אבירים*, abbirim,* as denoting *the heavens,*
 <span id="fr_328"></span>[329](#fn_328) an opinion which I do not
altogether reject. I, however, prefer taking it for *angels,* as it is
understood by the Chaldee interpreter, and some others who have followed
him.  <span id="fr_329"></span>[330](#fn_329) The miracle is celebrated
in high terms, to present the impiety of the people in a more detestable
light; for it was a much more striking display of divine power for manna
to be rained down from heaven, than if they had been fed either with
herbs or fruits, or with other increase of the earth. Paul, in <span
id="xiii.v-p8.5"></span>[1Co 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#003)<span
id="xiii.v-p8.5"></span>, calls the manna *spiritual meat,* in a
different sense — because it was a figure and symbol of Christ. But here
the design of the prophet is to reprove the twofold ingratitude of the
people, who despised not only the common food which was produced from
the ground, but also the bread of angels. Some have translated the verbs
in the past tense, *He commanded the clouds* — *he opened the doors of
heaven* — *he rained down manna, etc*  <span
id="fr_330"></span>[331](#fn_330) But to remove all ambiguity, I have
thought it preferable to translate the verbs in the preterpluperfect
tense, *He had commanded, he had opened, he had rained,* to enable my
readers the better to understand that the prophet does not here simply
relate this history, but recalls it to remembrance for another purpose,
as a thing which happened long ago.

<span id="xiii.vi"></span>

<span id="xiii.vi-p1"></span><span id="xiii.vi-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
78:26-31](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#026)<span
id="xiii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.vi-p2"></span>**26.** He caused an east wind to blow in
the heavens; and by his power he raised up the south wind. **27.** And
he rained upon them flesh as dust, and feathered fowl  <span
id="fr_331"></span>[332](#fn_331) as the sand of the sea; **28.** And he
caused it to fall in the midst of his camp,  <span
id="fr_332"></span>[333](#fn_332) round about his tabernacles. **29.**
And they did eat and were filled, and he gave them their desire. **30.**
They were not estranged from their desire: the meat was still in their
mouth, **31.** When the wrath of God ascended against them, and slew the
fat ones among them, and brought low the chosen of Israel.

<span id="xiii.vi-p5"></span> 

<span id="xiii.vi-p6"></span><span id="xiii.vi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.vi-p7"></span>**26.** *He caused an east wind to blow in
the heavens.* We have here related how God granted the request of his
people. This does not imply that he favourably regarded their fretful
desires, but that he showed by the effect that it was in his power to do
what they believed it to be impossible for him to accomplish. From this,
we may perceive how injudiciously some expositors here join together
*the flesh* and *the manna.* The reason why the flesh was given was
altogether different from that for which the manna was given. God, in
giving the manna, performed the office of a father; but by the flesh, he
satisfied their gluttonous desires, that their very greediness in
devouring it might choke them. It would not have been a difficult matter
for God to have created quails in the midst of the wilderness; but he
chose rather to bring them by the force of the winds, to teach the
Israelites that all the elements are obedient to his command, and that
the distance of places cannot prevent his power from immediately
penetrating from the east even to the west.  <span
id="fr_333"></span>[334](#fn_333) That unbelieving people, therefore,
were furnished with an undoubted proof of the power of *God,* from which
they had malignantly detracted, in seeing all the elements of nature
ready to obey and promptly to execute whatever he has commanded.
Besides, he no doubt raised the winds according to the situation of the
camp, although it would have been easy for him, without any means, to
have presented flesh before them. It is stated, that *they did eat and
were filled,* not only to intimate that God brought to them a large
supply of birds, with which their bellies might be stuffed to the full;
but also, that it was ungovernable lust which led them to ask flesh, and
not a solicitude for having provision on which to live. It has been said
above, that manna had been given them in the greatest abundance, but
here it is intended expressly to censure their gluttony, in which they
gave manifest proof of their unbridled appetite. God promises, in <span
id="xiii.vi-p8.6"></span>[Ps
145:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#019)<span id="xiii.vi-p8.6"></span>,
as a peculiar privilege to those who fear him, that “he will fulfill
their desire;” but it is in a different way that he is here said to have
yielded to the perverse desires of the people, who had cast off all fear
of him; for that which his favor and loving-kindness would have led him
to refuse, he now granted them in his wrath. This is an example well
worthy of our attention, that we may not complain if our desires are
frowned upon and crossed by the secret providence of God when they break
forth beyond bounds. God then truly hears us, when, instead of yielding
to our foolish inclinations, he regulates his beneficence according to
the measure of our welfare; even as in lavishing upon the wicked more
than is good for them, he cannot, properly speaking, be said to hear
them: he rather loads them with a deadly burden, which serves to cast
them down headlong into destruction.

<span id="xiii.vi-p9"></span><span id="xiii.vi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.vi-p10"></span>The Psalmist expresses this still more
clearly, by adding immediately after, (verses 30, 31,) that this
pampering proved fatal to them, as if with the meat they had swallowed
the flame of the divine wrath. When he says that *they were not
estranged from their lust,* this implies, that they were still burning
with their lust. If it is objected that this does not agree with the
preceding sentence, where it is said, that “they did eat, and were
thoroughly filled,” I would answer, that if, as is well known, the minds
of men are not kept within the bounds of reason and temperance, they
become insatiable; and, therefore, a great abundance will not extinguish
the fire of a depraved appetite. Some translate the clause, *They were
not disappointed,* and others, *They did not yet loathe their meat.*
This last translation brings out the meaning very well; but it is too
far removed from the signification of the Hebrew word <span
id="xiii.vi-p10.1"></span>זור, *zur,* which I have rendered *estranged.*
The prophet intended to express in two words a present felt pleasure;
for when God executed vengeance upon the people, they still indulged in
the excessive gratification of the palate.  <span
id="fr_334"></span>[335](#fn_334) *The wrath of God* is said
metaphorically *to ascend,* when he suddenly rises up to execute
judgment; for when he apparently shuts his eyes and takes no notice of
our sins, he seems, so to speak, to be asleep. The punishment was felt
by persons of every condition among the Israelites; but *the fat ones*
 <span id="fr_335"></span>[336](#fn_335) and *the chosen* are expressly
named, in order to exhibit the judgment of God in a light still more
conspicuous. It did not happen by chance that the most robust and
vigorous were attacked and cut off by the plague. As the strong are
commonly deceived by their strength, and proudly exalt themselves
against God, forgetting their own weakness, and thinking that they may
do whatever they please, it is not surprising to find that the wrath of
God burned more fiercely against such persons than against others.

<span id="xiii.vii"></span>

<span id="xiii.vii-p1"></span><span id="xiii.vii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
78:32-37](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#032)<span
id="xiii.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.vii-p2"></span>**32.** For all this they still sinned,
and believed not his wondrous works **33.** And he consumed their days
in vanity, and their years in haste.  <span
id="fr_336"></span>[337](#fn_336) **34.** When he slew them, then they
sought him; they returned, and hastened early to God. **35.** And they
remembered that God was their Rock, and that the High God was their
Redeemer. **36.** And they flattered him with their mouth, and lied to
him with their tongue. **37.** But their heart was not right before him,
neither were they faithful in his covenant

<span id="xiii.vii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xiii.vii-p5"></span><span id="xiii.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.vii-p6"></span>**32.** *For all this they still sinned.*
It is a common proverb, that fools become wise when the rod is applied
to them. Hence it follows, that those who have often been chastised of
God, and yet are not thereby brought to repentance and amendment, are
utterly to be despaired of. Such was the obstinacy of the Israelites
here described. They could not be reformed by any of the afflictions
which were sent upon them. It was a dreadful manifestation of the
vengeance of God to see so many bodies of strong and vigorous men
stretched dead on the ground. It was therefore a proof of monstrous
obduracy, when they were not moved at such an appalling spectacle. By
the expression *wondrous works,* is not only meant the plague just now
spoken of: the other miracles, previously mentioned, are comprehended.
There is, therefore, laid to the charge of the people a twofold
wickedness; — they are accused not only of disbelieving the word of God,
but also of despising the miracles which he wrought. For this reason, it
is added, that their plagues were increased; even as God denounces and
threatens by Moses, that he will deal sevenfold more severely with the
obstinate and hardened who persevere in their wickedness.

<span id="xiii.vii-p7"></span><span id="xiii.vii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.vii-p8"></span>**33.** *And he consumed their days in
vanity.* As the Psalmist here speaks of the whole people, as if he had
said, that all without exception were speedily consumed, from the least
even to the greatest, this might with probability be referred to that
most grievous punishment which was confirmed and ratified by the wrath
of God — that they should all perish in the wilderness with only two
exceptions, Joshua and Caleb; because, when already near the land of
Canaan, they had turned back. That vast multitude, therefore, after they
had shut against themselves the door of entrance into the Holy Land,
died in the wilderness during the course of forty years. *Days* are put
in the first place, and then *years;* by which it is intimated, that the
duration of their life was cut short by the curse of God, and that it
was quite apparent that they failed in the midst of their course. *Their
days* then were consumed *in vanity;* for they vanished away like smoke:
and *their years in haste,* because they passed swiftly away like a
stream. The word <span id="xiii.vii-p8.1"></span>בהלה, *behalah,* here
translated *haste,* is by some rendered *terror.* I would rather prefer
reading *tumult;* for it is undoubtedly meant that their life was taken
away, as when in a tumult any thing is taken by force.  <span
id="fr_337"></span>[338](#fn_337) But I would not be disposed to change
the word *haste,* which brings out the meaning more perspicuously. It
was a display of righteous retribution, on account of their obstinacy,
that their strength which made them proud, thus withered and vanished
all on a sudden as a shadow.

<span id="xiii.vii-p10"></span><span id="xiii.vii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.vii-p11"></span>**34.** *When he slew them, then they
sought him.* By the circumstance here recorded, it is intended to
aggravate their guilt. When under a conviction of their wickedness they
acknowledged that they were justly punished, and yet did not with
sincerity of heart humble themselves before God, but rather mocked him,
intending to put him off with false pretences, their impiety was the
less excusable. If a man who has lost his judgment does not feel his own
calamities, he is excusable because he is insensible; but he who is
forced to acknowledge that he is culpable, and yet always continues the
same, or after having lightly sought pardon, in fair but deceitful
words, suddenly returns to his former state of mind, manifestly shows by
such hollowness of heart that his disease is incurable. It is here
tacitly intimated, that the punishments, by which a people so obstinate
were constrained to seek God, were of no common or ordinary kind; and we
are informed, (verse 35,  <span id="fr_338"></span>[339](#fn_338) ) not
only that they were convinced of wickedness, but also that they were
affected with a sense and a remembrance of the redemption from which
they were fallen. By this means they are the more effectually deprived
of all excuse on the ground of ignorance. The language implies that they
were not carried away inadvertently, or deceived through ignorance, but
that they had provoked the wrath of God, by dealing treacherously, as it
were with deliberate purpose. And, indeed, God opened their eyes with
the view of more openly discovering their desperate wickedness, as if,
shaking off their hypocrisy and flatteries, he drew them from their
lurking-places into the light.

<span id="xiii.vii-p13"></span><span id="xiii.vii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.vii-p14"></span>**36.** *And they flattered him with
their mouth, and lied to him with their tongue.* Here they are charged
with perfidiousness, because they neither confessed their guilt with
sincerity of heart, nor truly ascribed to God the glory of their
deliverance. We are not to suppose that they made no acknowledgement at
all; but it is intimated that the confession of the mouth, as it did not
proceed from the heart, was constrained and not voluntary. This is well
worthy of being noticed; for from it we learn, not only the duty
incumbent upon us of guarding against that gross hypocrisy which
consists in uttering with the tongue, before men, one thing, while we
think a different thing in our hearts, but also that we ought to beware
of a species of hypocrisy which is more hidden, and which consists in
this, that the sinner, being constrained by fear, flatters God in a
slavish manner, while yet, if he could, he would shun the judgment of
God. The greater part of men are mortally smitten with this disease; for
although the divine majesty extorts from them some kind of awe, yet it
would be gratifying to them were the light of divine truth completely
extinguished. It is, therefore, not enough to yield an assent to the
divine word, unless that assent is accompanied with true and pure
affection, so that our hearts may not be double or divided. The Psalmist
points out the cause and source of this dissimulation to be, that they
were not *steadfast and faithful* By this he intimates, that whatever
does not proceed from unfeigned purity of heart is accounted lying and
deceit in the sight of God. Since this uprightness is every where
required in the law, he accuses the people with being covenant-breakers,
because they had not kept the covenant of God with that fidelity which
became them. As I have observed elsewhere, there is always to be
presupposed a mutual relation and correspondence between the covenant of
God and our faith, in order that the unfeigned consent of the latter may
answer to the faithfulness of the former.

<span id="xiii.viii"></span>

<span id="xiii.viii-p1"></span><span id="xiii.viii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
78:38-41](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#038)<span
id="xiii.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.viii-p2"></span>**38.** Yet he, being merciful, expiated
their iniquity,  <span id="fr_339"></span>[340](#fn_339) and did not
destroy them: and he multiplied to turn away his anger, and did not stir
up all his wrath. **39.** And he remembered that they were flesh; a
spirit  <span id="fr_340"></span>[341](#fn_340) that passeth, and
returneth not. **40.** How often did they provoke him in the desert, and
grieve him in the wilderness! **41.** And they returned, and tempted
God, and limited the Holy One of Israel.

<span id="xiii.viii-p5"></span> 

<span id="xiii.viii-p6"></span><span id="xiii.viii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.viii-p7"></span>**38.** *Yet he, being merciful, expiated
their iniquity.* To show the more fully that no means had succeeded in
bending the Israelites, and causing them to return to a sound state of
mind, we are now informed that, although God bare with their multiplied
transgressions, and exercised his mercy in forgiving them, they had no
less manifested their wickedness in abusing his benignity in every
instance in which it was displayed, than they had shown themselves
refractory and obstinate when he treated them with severity. At the same
time, the reason is assigned why they did not utterly perish. They no
doubt deserved to be involved in one common destruction; but it is
declared that God mitigated his anger, that some seed of them might
remain. That none might infer, from these examples of vengeance which
have been mentioned, that God had proceeded to punish them with undue
severity, we are told that the punishments inflicted upon them were
moderate — yea, mild, when compared with the aggravated nature of their
wickedness. God kept back his hand, not looking so much to what they had
deserved, as desiring to give place to his mercy. We are not, however,
to imagine that he is changeable, when at one time he chastises us with
a degree of severity, and at another time gently draws and allures us to
himself; for in the exercise of his matchless wisdom, he has recourse to
different means by which to try whether there is really any hope of our
recovery. But the guilt of men becomes more aggravated, when neither his
severity can reform them nor his mercy melt them. It is to be observed,
that the mercy of God, which is an essential attribute of his nature, is
here assigned as the reason why he spared his people, to teach us that
he was not induced by any other cause but this, to show himself so much
inclined and ready to pardon. Moreover, as he pardoned them not only in
one instance, nor in one respect, it is affirmed that *he expiated their
iniquity, that he might not destroy them;* and again, that although he
had been oftentimes provoked, he yet ceased not to turn away his anger;
and, finally, that he mitigated his chastisements, lest the people
should be overwhelmed with the weight of them.

<span id="xiii.viii-p8"></span><span id="xiii.viii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.viii-p9"></span>**39.** *And he remembered that they were
flesh.* Another reason is now brought forward why God had compassion on
the people, which is, his unwillingness to try his strength against men
who are so constituted as to live only for a short period in this world,
and who then quickly pass away; for the forms of expression here used
denote the frailty by which the condition of men is made miserable.
*Flesh* and *spirit* are frequently contrasted in the Scriptures; not
only when *flesh* means our depraved and sinful nature, and *spirit* the
uprightness to which the children of God are born again; but also when
men are called *flesh,* because there is nothing firm or stable in them:
as it is said in Isaiah, (<span id="xiii.viii-p9.1"></span>[Isa
31:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#003)<span
id="xiii.viii-p9.1"></span>,) “Egypt is flesh, and not spirit.” In this
passage, however, the *words flesh* and *spirit* are employed in the
same sense — *flesh* meaning that men are subject to corruption and
putrefaction; and *spirit,* that they are only a breath or a fleeting
shadow. As men are brought to death by a continual wasting and decay,
the people are compared to a wind which passes away, and which, of its
own accord, falls and does not return again. When we have run our race,
we do not commence a new life upon the earth; even as it is said in Job,

<span id="xiii.viii-p10"></span>“For there is hope of a tree, if it be
cut down, that it will sprout again, and that the tender branch thereof
will not cease. Though the root thereof wax old in the earth, and the
stock thereof die in the ground; yet through the scent of water it will
bud, and bring forth boughs like a plant. But man dieth and wasteth
away; yea, man giveth up the ghost, and where is he?” (<span
id="xiii.viii-p10.1"></span>[Job
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#007)<span
id="xiii.viii-p10.1"></span>)

<span id="xiii.viii-p11"></span>The meaning, then, as we may now clearly
perceive, is, that God, in the exercise of his mercy and goodness, bare
with the Jews, not because they deserved this, but because their frail
and transitory condition called forth his pity and induced him to pardon
them. We shall afterwards meet with an almost similar statement in <span
id="xiii.viii-p11.1"></span>[Ps
103:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#013)<span
id="xiii.viii-p11.1"></span>, where God is represented as being merciful
to us, because he sees that we are like grass, and that we soon wither
and become dry like hay. Now, if God find in us nothing but misery to
move him to compassion, it follows that it is solely his own pure and
undeserved goodness which induces him to sustain us. When it is affirmed
that men *return not,* when they have finished the course of their life
in this world, it is not meant to exclude the hope of a future
resurrection; for men are contemplated only as they are in themselves,
and it is merely their state on earth which is spoken of. With respect
to the renovation of man to the heavenly life, it is a miracle far
surpassing nature. In the same sense it is said, in another place, “His
spirit goeth forth, and returneth not,” (<span
id="xiii.viii-p11.2"></span>[Wisdom
16:14](../../../bib/apo/wis016.htm#014)<span
id="xiii.viii-p11.2"></span>;) language which implies that men, when
they are born into the world, do not bring with them the hope of future
restoration, which must be derived from the grace of regeneration.

<span id="xiii.viii-p12"></span><span id="xiii.viii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.viii-p13"></span>**40.** *How often did they provoke him
in the desert?* Here the preceding sentence is confirmed, it being
declared that, as they had in so many instances provoked God in the
wilderness, by the vast accumulation of their sins,  <span
id="fr_341"></span>[342](#fn_341) they must of necessity have perished a
thousand times, had not God as often shown himself favorable and
merciful towards them. The interrogatory form of the sentence expresses
more significantly that they continued sinning without intermission. The
word *wilderness* includes in it the circumstance both of place and of
time. By this it is intended, first, to reprove their ingratitude, in
that the memory of God’s benefits, while still so fresh in their minds,
and even the sight of them daily before their eyes, were not at least
able to check them in their wickedness; and, secondly, to condemn their
impetuous and infatuated recklessness, in heaping up such a multitude of
sins within so short a period.

<span id="xiii.viii-p15"></span>In the same sense it is added
immediately after, (verse 41,) that *they returned* to their former
ways, and *tempted God.* The word *return* does not here signify change,
but a continued course of sinning. The heinous indignity which is done
to God when men tempt him, is expressed by a beautiful metaphor. The
Hebrew word <span id="xiii.viii-p15.1"></span>תוה*, tavah,* signifies
*to mark out* or *describe.* It is intimated, that when the people dared
to limit the operations of God, according to their own pleasure, he was,
as it were, shut up within bars of wood or iron, and his infinite power
circumscribed within the narrow boundaries to which unbelief would
confine it. And assuredly, whenever men do not go beyond their own
understandings, it is as if they would measure God by their own small
capacity, which is nothing else than to pull him down from his throne;
for his Majesty must be brought into subjection to us, if we would have
him to be regulated according to our own fancy.

<span id="xiii.ix"></span>

<span id="xiii.ix-p1"></span><span id="xiii.ix-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
78:42-51](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#042)<span
id="xiii.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ix-p2"></span>**42.** They remembered not his hand in the
day that he delivered them from the oppressor:  <span
id="fr_342"></span>[343](#fn_342) **43.** When he set his signs in
Egypt, and his miracles in the field of Zoan. **44.** When he turned
their rivers into blood; and their streams, that they could not drink.
**45.** He sent among them a mixture  <span
id="fr_343"></span>[344](#fn_343) which devoured them; and the frog
which destroyed them. **46.** And he gave their fruit \[or produce\] to
the caterpillar,  <span id="fr_344"></span>[345](#fn_344) and their
labor to the grasshopper.  <span id="fr_345"></span>[346](#fn_345)
**47.** And he destroyed their vines with hail, and their wild fig-trees
 <span id="fr_346"></span>[347](#fn_346) with hail stones.  <span
id="fr_347"></span>[348](#fn_347) **48.** And he gave up their cattle to
the hail; and their flocks to thunderbolts. **49.** He sent upon them
the fierceness of his wrath, fury, anger, and affliction, and sent evil
angels among them. **50.** He made a way to his anger: he kept not their
soul from death, and shut up their cattle  <span
id="fr_348"></span>[349](#fn_348) to the pestilence. **51.** And he
smote all the first-born in Egypt: the first-fruits of their strength
 <span id="fr_349"></span>[350](#fn_349) in the tents of Ham.

<span id="xiii.ix-p11"></span> 

<span id="xiii.ix-p12"></span><span id="xiii.ix-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ix-p13"></span>**42.** *They remembered not his hand.*
The sacred writer still continues to upbraid the Israelites; for the
simple remembrance of God’s benefits might have restrained them, had
they not wilfully and perversely forgotten whatever they had
experienced. From this impious forgetfulness proceed waywardness and all
rebellion. *The hand of God,* as is well known, is by the figure
metonomy taken for his power. In the deliverance of the chosen tribes
from Egypt here celebrated, the hand of God was stretched forth in a new
and an unusual manner. And their impiety, against which the prophet now
inveighs, was rendered the more detestable, from the fact that they
accounted as nothing, or soon forgat, that which no length of time ought
to have effaced from their memory. Farther, he recounts certain examples
of the power of God, which he calls first *signs,* and then *miracles,*
(verse 43,) that, by the recital of these, he may again rebuke the
shameful stupidity of the people. By both these words he expresses the
same thing; but in the second clause of the verse, the word *miracles*
gives additional emphasis, implying that, by such strange and unheard-of
events, the Egyptians had at that time been stricken with such terror as
ought not to have vanished so speedily from the minds of the Israelites.

<span id="xiii.ix-p14"></span><span id="xiii.ix-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ix-p15"></span>**44.** *When he turned their rivers into
blood.* The Psalmist does not enumerate in their order the miracles by
which God gave evidence of his power in the deliverance of his people.
He considered it enough to bring to their remembrance the well-known
histories of these events, which would be sufficient to lay open the
wickedness and ingratitude with which they were chargeable; nor is it
necessary for us to stay long on these things, since the narrative of
Moses gives a more distinct and fuller account of what is here briefly
stated. Only I would have my readers to remember that, although God
often punished the sins of the heathen by sending upon them hail and
other calamities, yet all the plagues which at that time were inflicted
upon the Egyptians were of an extraordinary character, and such as were
previously unheard-of. A variety of words is therefore employed to
enhance these memorable instances of the vengeance of God, as that *he
sent upon them the fierceness of his wrath, fury, anger, and affliction*
This accumulation of words is intended to awaken minds which are asleep
to a discovery of so many miracles, of which both the number and the
excellence might be perceived even by the blind themselves.

<span id="xiii.ix-p16"></span>In the last place, it is added that God
executed these judgments *by angels.* Although God has, according as it
has pleased him, established certain laws, both in heaven and on earth,
and governs the whole order of nature in such a manner as that each
creature has assigned to it its own peculiar office; yet whenever it
seems good to him he makes use of the ministration of angels for
executing his commands, not by ordinary or natural means, but by his
secret power, which to us is incomprehensible. Some think that devils
are here spoken of, because the epithet *evil* or *hurtful* is applied
to *angel.*  <span id="fr_350"></span>[351](#fn_350) This opinion I do
not reject; but the ground upon which they rest it has little solidity.
They say that as God dispenses his benefits to us by the ministry of
elect angels, so he also executes his wrath by the agency of reprobate
angels, as if they were his executioners. This I admit is partly true;
but I deny that this distinction is always observed. Many passages of
Scripture can be quoted to the contrary. When the army of the Assyrians
laid siege to the holy city Jerusalem, who was it that made such havoc
among them as compelled them to raise the siege, but the angel who was
appointed at that time for the defense of the Church? (<span
id="xiii.ix-p17.9"></span>[2Ki
19:35](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#035)<span
id="xiii.ix-p17.9"></span>.) In like manner, the angel who slew the
first-born in Egypt (<span id="xiii.ix-p17.10"></span>[Ex
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo011.htm#005)<span id="xiii.ix-p17.10"></span>)
was not only a minister and an executor of the wrath of God against the
Egyptians, but also the agent employed for preserving the Israelites. On
the other hand, although the kings of whom Daniel speaks were avaricious
and cruel, or rather robbers, and turned all things upside down, yet the
Prophet declares, (chapter 20:13,) that holy angels were appointed to
take charge of them. It is probable that the Egyptians were given over
and subjected to reprobate angels, as they deserved; but we may simply
consider the angels here spoken of as termed *evil,* on account of the
work in which they were employed, — because they inflicted upon the
enemies of the people of God terrible plagues to repress their tyranny
and cruelty. In this way, both the heavenly and elect angels, and the
fallen angels, are justly accounted the ministers or executors of
calamity; but they are to be regarded as such in different senses. The
former yield a prompt and willing obedience to God; but the latter, as
they are always eagerly intent upon doing mischief, and would, if they
could, turn the whole world upside down, are fit instruments for
inflicting calamities upon men.

<span id="xiii.ix-p18"></span><span id="xiii.ix-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ix-p19"></span>**50.** *He made a way to his anger.*
 <span id="fr_351"></span>[352](#fn_351) To take away all excuse from
this ungrateful people, whom the most evident and striking proofs of the
goodness of God which were presented before their eyes could not keep in
their obedience to him, it is here again repeated that the wrath of God
overflowed Egypt like an impetuous torrent. The miracle adverted to is
the last which was there wrought, when God, by the powerful hand of his
angel, slew, in one night, all the first-born of Egypt. According to a
common and familiar mode of speaking in the Hebrew language, the
first-born are called *the beginning,* or *the first-fruits of
strength.* Although the old advance to death as they decline in years,
yet as they are in a manner renewed in their offspring, and thus may be
said to recover their decayed strength, the term *strength* is applied
to their children. And the first-born are called *the beginning* or *the
first-fruits* of this strength, as I have explained more at large on
<span id="xiii.ix-p20.4"></span>[Genesis
49:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#003)<span id="xiii.ix-p20.4"></span>.
The houses of Egypt are called *the tents of Ham,* because Misraim, who
gave the name to the country, was the son of Ham, <span
id="xiii.ix-p20.5"></span>[Ge
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#006)<span id="xiii.ix-p20.5"></span>.
Farther, there is here celebrated the free love of God towards the
posterity of Shem, as manifested in his preferring them to all the
children of Ham, although they were possessed of no intrinsic excellence
which might render them worthy of such a distinction.

<span id="xiii.x"></span>

<span id="xiii.x-p1"></span><span id="xiii.x-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
78:52-58](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#052)<span id="xiii.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.x-p2"></span>**52.** And he made his people to go forth
like sheep, and led them in the wilderness like a flock. **53.** And he
conducted them in safety, and they were not afraid: and the sea covered
their enemies. **54.** And he brought them to his holy border,
\[literally to the border of his holiness,\] this mountain,  <span
id="fr_352"></span>[353](#fn_352) which his right hand acquired.  <span
id="fr_353"></span>[354](#fn_353) **55.** He expelled the heathen from
before them; and made them to fall into their part of the inheritance;
 <span id="fr_354"></span>[355](#fn_354) and made the children of Israel
to dwell in their tents. **56.** And they tempted and provoked the Most
High God, and kept not his testimonies. **57.** And they turned back and
dealt treacherously, like their fathers: they turned back, like a
deceitful bow.  <span id="fr_355"></span>[356](#fn_355) **58.** And they
provoked him to anger with their high places; and moved him to anger
with their graven images.

<span id="xiii.x-p7"></span> 

<span id="xiii.x-p8"></span><span id="xiii.x-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.x-p9"></span>**52.** *And he made his people to go forth
like sheep.* The Psalmist again celebrates God’s fatherly love towards
the chosen people, whom, as we have elsewhere remarked, he compares to a
flock of sheep. They had no wisdom or power of their own to preserve and
defend themselves; but God graciously condescended to perform towards
them the office of a shepherd. It is a singular token of the love which
he bore towards them, that he did not disdain to humble himself so far
as to feed them as his own sheep. What could a multitude who had never
been trained up to the art of war do against powerful and warlike
enemies? So far from having learned the art of war, the people, as is
well known, had been employed, when in Egypt, in mean and servile
occupations, as if they had been condemned to toil under the earth in
mines or in quarries.

<span id="xiii.x-p10"></span><span id="xiii.x-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.x-p11"></span>**53.** *And he conducted them in safety,
and they were not afraid.* This does not imply that they relied on God
confidently, and with tranquil minds, but that, having God for their
guide and the guardian of their welfare, they had no just cause to be
afraid. When at any time they were thrown into consternation, this was
owing to their own unbelief. From this cause proceeded these murmuring
questions to which they gave utterance, when Pharaoh pursued them, upon
their leaving Egypt, and when they were “sore afraid:” “Because there
were no graves in Egypt, hast thou taken us away to die in the
wilderness? wherefore hast thou dealt thus with us, to carry us forth
out of Egypt? Is not this the word that we did tell thee in Egypt,
saying, Let us alone, that we may serve the Egyptians? For it had been
better for us to serve the Egyptians, than that we should die in the
wilderness,” (<span id="xiii.x-p11.1"></span>[Ex
14:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#011)<span id="xiii.x-p11.1"></span>.)
This security, then, is not to be referred to the feeling of this in the
minds of the people, but to the protection of God, by which it came to
pass that, their enemies having been drowned in the Red Sea, they
enjoyed quiet and repose in the wilderness. Other benefits which God had
bestowed upon them are here recited, and at the same time other
transgressions with which they had been chargeable. This shows the more
clearly their deep ingratitude. After having obtained possession of the
inheritance which was promised them, as if they had been under no
obligations to God, their hearts were always rebellious and untractable.
The accomplishment, and, as it were, the concluding act of their
deliverance, was the putting them in possession of the land of Canaan,
from entering which they had precluded themselves, had not God
determined, notwithstanding their wickedness, to complete, in all
respects, the work which he had commenced. The land itself is called
*the borders of God’s sanctuary,* (verse 54,) because God, in assigning
it to his people, had also consecrated it to himself. This, it is
manifest, exhibits in a more heinous and aggravated light the iniquity
of the people, who brought into that land the same pollutions with which
it had been anciently defiled. What madness was it for the people of
Israel, who knew that the old inhabitants of the country had been driven
from it on account of their abominations, to strive to surpass them in
all kinds of wickedness? as if they had been resolved to do all they
could to bring down upon their own heads that divine vengeance which
they had seen executed upon others. The words *this mountain* are
improperly explained by some as applying to the whole country of Judea;
for although it was a mountainous country, there were in it plain and
level grounds of large extent, both as to breadth and length. I have,
therefore, no doubt, that by way of amplification the Psalmist makes
honorable mention of mount Zion, where God had chosen a habitation for
himself, and his chief seat. I indeed allow, that under this expression,
by the figure synecdoche, a part is put for the whole; only I would have
my readers to understand, that this place is expressly named, because
from it, as from a source or fountain, flowed the holiness of the whole
land. It is asserted that God, by his right hand, possessed or acquired
this mountain; for the Hebrew verb <span id="xiii.x-p11.2"></span>קנה*,
kanah,* may be understood in either of these senses: and this assertion
is made, that the Israelites might not be lifted up with pride, as if
they had achieved the conquest of the land, or had obtained the
peaceable possession of it by their own power. As is stated in <span
id="xiii.x-p11.3"></span>[Ps 44:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#003)<span
id="xiii.x-p11.3"></span>,

<span id="xiii.x-p12"></span>“They got not the land in possession by
their own sword, neither did their own arm save them, but thy right
hand, and thine arm, and the light of thy countenance, because thou
hadst a favor unto them.” (<span id="xiii.x-p12.1"></span>[Ps
44:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#003)<span id="xiii.x-p12.1"></span>)

<span id="xiii.x-p13"></span><span id="xiii.x-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.x-p14"></span>**55.** *He expelled the heathen from
before them; and made them to fall into their part of the inheritance.*
These words are an explanation of the concluding sentence of the
preceding verse: they describe the manner in which the land of Canaan
was acquired, plainly intimating that the Israelites were not such a
warlike race, nor those heathen nations so cowardly, as to render it an
easy matter for the former to vanquish the latter, and that it would
have been impossible for the former to have expelled the latter from the
country, had they not been led on to victory under the conduct of God,
and been aided by his power. Besides, it would have been unlawful for
them to have taken possession of the country, had it not been the will
of God that the first inhabitants should be deprived of it, and that
strangers should be established in it in their room.

<span id="xiii.x-p15"></span><span id="xiii.x-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.x-p16"></span>**56.** *And they tempted and provoked the
Most High God.* Here they are upbraided for having, notwithstanding the
many tokens of the divine favor by which they were distinguished,
persevered in acting perfidiously: yea, even although God from time to
time conferred upon them new benefits, to recover them to their
allegiance to him, they, notwithstanding, by their rebellion, shook off
his yoke. With respect to the word *tempt,* we have already explained
its import. But it is added in general, that *they provoked God, because
they had not kept his covenant* By this last clause, their open and
gross rebellion is the more completely demonstrated; for, although they
had been plainly taught their duty, they nevertheless refused to submit
to the authority of God. The law is called *testimonies* or
*agreements,*  <span id="fr_356"></span>[357](#fn_356) because, as men
enter into contracts upon certain conditions, so God, by his covenant,
entered into a contract with this people, and bound them to himself. In
speaking of them in this manner, there is pronounced upon them no light
censure; but when they are charged in the next verse with apostasy and
perfidiousness, that fills up the measure of their guilt. God had
adopted them to be his people: they, on the other hand, despising his
favor, voluntarily renounce it. He had gathered them together under his
wings; and they, by their waywardness, scatter themselves in all
directions. He had promised to be a father to them; and they refuse to
be his children. He had shown them the way of salvation; and they, by
going astray, willingly precipitate themselves into destruction. The
prophet, therefore, concludes, that in every age they showed themselves
to be an impious and wicked people. It is again to be noticed, that the
fault which is most severely condemned in them is, that they too much
resembled their fathers. This is particularly mentioned, to prevent any
man from deceiving himself by supposing, that in indiscriminately
imitating his ancestors he is doing right, and that he may not think of
making use of their example as an argument for defending his own
conduct. The instability of the people is next expressed by a very
apposite figure, which Hosea also employs in <span
id="xiii.x-p17.2"></span>[Ho 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#016)<span
id="xiii.x-p17.2"></span>. As archers are deceived when they have a bow
which is too weak, or ill bent, or crooked and flexible, so it is
stated, that this people *turned back,* and slipped away by their
deceitful and tortuous craftiness, that they might not be governed by
the hand of God.

<span id="xiii.x-p18"></span><span id="xiii.x-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.x-p19"></span>**58.** *And they provoked him to anger
with their high places.* We have here adduced the species of defection
by which the Israelites afforded incontestable evidence that they
refused to be faithful to God, and to yield allegiance to him. They had
been sufficiently, and more than sufficiently warned, that the service
of God would be perverted and contaminated, unless they were regulated
in every part of it by the Divine Word; and now, disregarding his whole
law, they recklessly follow their own inventions. And the fruits which
uniformly proceed from the contempt of the law are, that men who choose
rather to follow their own understanding than to submit to the authority
of God, become wedded to gross superstitions. The Psalmist complains
that the service of God was corrupted by them in two ways; in the first
place, by their defacing the glory of God, in setting up for themselves
idols and graven images; and, secondly, by their inventing strange and
forbidden ceremonies to appease the anger of God.

<span id="xiii.xi"></span>

<span id="xiii.xi-p1"></span><span id="xiii.xi-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
78:59-66](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#059)<span
id="xiii.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xi-p2"></span>**59.** God heard it, and was wroth, and
exceedingly abhorred Israel. **60.** And he forsook the habitation of
Shiloh,  <span id="fr_357"></span>[358](#fn_357) the tabernacle where he
dwelt among men. **61.** And he delivered his strength into captivity,
and his beauty into the hand of the enemy. **62.** And he shut up his
people to the sword, and was wroth with his own inheritance. **63.** The
fire devoured their chosen;  <span id="fr_358"></span>[359](#fn_358) ,
and their virgins were not applauded.  <span
id="fr_359"></span>[360](#fn_359) **64.** Their priests fell by the
sword; and their widows made no lamentation. **65.** But the Lord awoke
as one asleep, as a mighty man that crieth out by reason of wine.
**66.** And he smote his enemies behind; he put upon them everlasting
disgrace.

<span id="xiii.xi-p8"></span> 

<span id="xiii.xi-p9"></span><span id="xiii.xi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xi-p10"></span>**59** *God heard it, and was wroth.* The
prophet again shows that God, when he found that no good resulted from
his long-suffering, which the people abused, yea, even treated with
mockery, and perverted as an encouragement to greater excess in sinning,
at length proceeded to inflict severe punishments upon them. The
metaphor, which he borrows from earthly judges, is frequently to be met
with in the Scriptures. When God is said *to hear,* it is not meant that
it is necessary for him to make inquisition, but it is intended to teach
us that he does not rush forth inconsiderately to execute his judgments,
and thus to prevent any from supposing that he ever acts precipitately.
The amount of what is stated is, that the people continued so
pertinaciously in their wickedness, that at length the cry of it
ascended to heaven; and the very weight of the punishment demonstrated
the aggravated nature of the offense.

<span id="xiii.xi-p11"></span><span id="xiii.xi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xi-p12"></span>After it is said that Israel, whom God had
loved so much, was become an abomination in his sight, it is added,
(verse 60,) that they were bereft of the presence of God, which is the
only source of true felicity and comfort under calamities of every kind.
God, then, is said *to have abhorred Israel,* when he permitted the ark
of the covenant to be carried into another country, as if he intended by
this to indicate that he had departed from Judea, and bidden the people
farewell. It is indeed very obvious, that God was not fixed to the
outward and visible symbol; but as he had given the ark to be a token or
sign of the close union which subsisted between him and the Israelites,
in suffering it to be carried away, he testified, that he himself had
also departed from them. Shiloh having been for a long time the abode of
the ark, and the place where it was captured by the Philistines, (<span
id="xiii.xi-p12.1"></span>[1Sa
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#011)<span id="xiii.xi-p12.1"></span>,)
it is termed *the habitation* or *dwelling-place of God.* The manner of
his residence, in short, is beautifully expressed in the next sentence,
where Shiloh is described as his dwelling-place *among men.* God, it is
true, fills both heaven and earth; but as we cannot attain to that
infinite height to which he is exalted, in descending among us by the
exercise of his power and grace, he approaches as near to us as is
needful, and as our limited capacity will bear. It is a very emphatic
manner of speaking to represent God as so incensed by the continual
wickedness of his people, that he was constrained to forsake this place,
the only one which he had chosen for himself upon the earth.

<span id="xiii.xi-p13"></span><span id="xiii.xi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xi-p14"></span>**61.** *And he delivered his strength
into captivity.* In this verse, the same subject is prosecuted: it is
declared, that *the strength* of God, by which the Israelites had been
shielded and defended, was at that time *in captivity.* Not that his
power could only be exerted in connection with the outward symbol; but
instead of opposing their enemies as he had formerly done, it was now
his will that the grace by which he had preserved his people should, so
to speak, be led captive. This, however, is not to be understood as
implying that the Philistines had made God their prisoner. The meaning
simply is, that the Israelites were deprived of the protection of God,
in consequence of which they fell into the hands of their enemies, even
as an army is put to flight when the general is taken prisoner. The ark
is also termed *the beauty of God;* because, being in himself invisible,
he made it the symbol of his presence, or, as it were, a mirror in which
he might be seen. It is a bold, and at first sight, an absurd hyperbole,
to say that the strength of God was taken prisoner by the Philistines;
but it is expressly used for the purpose of aggravating the wickedness
of the people. As he had been accustomed mightily to display the power
of his arm in aiding them, the offenses with which he had been provoked
must have been of a very heinous character, when he suffered that symbol
of his power to be forcibly carried away by a heathen army. We are
taught by the prophet Jeremiah, (<span id="xiii.xi-p14.1"></span>[Jer
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#012)<span id="xiii.xi-p14.1"></span>,)
that what is here related of Shiloh, is addressed as a warning to all
those who, flattering themselves upon false grounds, that they enjoy the
presence of God, are lifted up with vain confidence: “But go ye now unto
my place which was in Shiloh, where I set my name at the first, and see
what I did to it for the wickedness of my people Israel.” If, therefore,
when God approaches us familiarly, we do not sincerely receive him with
that reverence which becomes us, we have ground to fear that what
happened to the people of Shiloh will happen also to us. So much the
more disgusting, then, is the boasting of the Pope and his adherents,
who support the claims of Rome as the special dwelling-place of God,
from the fact, that the Church in former times flourished in that city.
It is to be remembered, — what they seem to forget, — that Christ, who
is the true temple of the Godhead, was born in Bethlehem, and brought up
in Nazareth, and that he dwelt and preached in Capernaum and Jerusalem;
and yet the miserable desolation of all these cities affords a dreadful
testimony of the wrath of God.

<span id="xiii.xi-p15"></span><span id="xiii.xi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xi-p16"></span>**62.** *And he shut up his people to the
sword.* Other parts of the calamity which befell Israel in the time of
the high priest Eli are here mentioned. God, in permitting the ark to be
carried away, showed that he had withdrawn his favor from them. This was
also demonstrated from the fact, that all the flower of the people —
those who were in the prime and blush of manhood — were consumed by the
wrath of God: which is expressed by *the fire devouring them.* But this
language is metaphorical, as is evident from the history of the event
referred to, which informs us, that those that perished who were of the
chosen of Israel, to the number of thirty thousand men, fell by the
sword of the enemy, and not by fire, (<span
id="xiii.xi-p16.1"></span>[1Sa
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#010)<span id="xiii.xi-p16.1"></span>.)
This figure points out the suddenness of the dreadful calamity. It is as
if it had been said, They were destroyed in a moment, even as fire
quickly consumes chaff and the dry leaves of trees.  <span
id="fr_360"></span>[361](#fn_360)

<span id="xiii.xi-p18"></span>The great extent of this slaughter is
heightened by another figure, which is, that for want of men, the
maidens continued unmarried. This is the meaning of the clause, *Their
virgins were not applauded;* the reference being to the nuptial songs
which were wont to be sung at marriages in praise of the bride. To
aggravate still more the unwonted and appalling nature of the calamity,
it is added, that even *the priests,* whom God had taken under his
special protection, perished indiscriminately with others. When it is
said, that *the widows made no lamentation,* I would explain it as
denoting, either that they themselves died first for sorrow, so that
they had no opportunity of mourning for others, or else, that when led
captive by their enemies, they were prohibited to mourn. By all these
expressions, the object is to show, in a few words, that all kinds of
calamities were heaped upon them.  <span
id="fr_361"></span>[362](#fn_361)

<span id="xiii.xi-p20"></span><span id="xiii.xi-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xi-p21"></span>**65.** *But the Lord awoke as one
asleep.* Some understand this as spoken of the Israelites, implying that
the Lord awoke against them; and others, as spoken of their enemies. If
the first sense is adopted, it need not excite our surprise, that the
Israelites are termed, in the 66th verse, *the enemies of God,* even as
they are so designated in <span id="xiii.xi-p21.1"></span>[Isa
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#024)<span id="xiii.xi-p21.1"></span>,

<span id="xiii.xi-p22"></span>“Therefore, saith the Lord, the Lord of
hosts, the mighty One of Israel, Ah! I will ease me of mine adversaries,
and avenge me of mine enemies.” (<span id="xiii.xi-p22.1"></span>[Isa
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#024)<span id="xiii.xi-p22.1"></span>)

<span id="xiii.xi-p23"></span>And thus the meaning will be, that the
Israelites paid dearly for abusing the patience of God, by taking
encouragement from it to indulge to greater excess in the commission of
sin; for awaking suddenly, he rushed upon them with so much the greater
fury. But as we find the prophets drawing their doctrine from Moses, and
also framing their language according to his as a standard, the opinion
of those who understand this and the following verse, as referring to
the Philistines, is no less probable. The prophet here appears to have
borrowed this order, from the song of Moses, (<span
id="xiii.xi-p23.1"></span>[De
32:27](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#027)<span
id="xiii.xi-p23.1"></span>,) where God declares, that while he punished
his own people, he, at the same time, did not forget to repress their
enemies. Since it is a common proverb, that the issue of wars is
uncertain, if, after the enemies of the chosen tribes had obtained the
victory, no change had happened to them, it would not have been so
manifest, that what befell his own people was a punishment inflicted
upon them by God. But when God, after having afflicted and humbled the
Israelites, made his judgments to fall on their conquerors, without the
instrumentality of man, beyond all human expectation, and contrary to
what happens in the ordinary course of events; — from this it is the
more plainly manifest, that when the Israelites were laid in the dust,
it was the work of God, who intended thus to punish them. The prophet,
however, at the same time, gives us to understand, that God was
constrained, as it were, by necessity, to punish them with greater
severity; because, in afterwards inflicting his judgments upon the
Philistines, he gave abundant evidence of his regard to his covenant,
which the Israelites might be very apt to think he had quite forgotten.
Although he had, so to speak, taken the side of the Philistines for a
time, it was not his intention utterly to withdraw his love from the
children of Abraham, lest the truth of his promise should become void.

<span id="xiii.xi-p24"></span>The figure of a drunken man may seem
somewhat harsh; but the propriety of using it will appear, when we
consider that it is employed in accommodation to the stupidity of the
people. Had they been of a pure and clear understanding,  <span
id="fr_362"></span>[363](#fn_362) God would not have thus transformed
himself, and assumed a character foreign to his own. When he, therefore,
compares himself to a drunken man, it was the drunkenness of the people;
that is to say, their insensibility that constrained him to speak thus:
which was so much the greater shame to them. With respect to God, the
metaphor derogates nothing from his glory. If he does not immediately
remedy our calamities, we are ready to think that he is sunk into a
profound sleep. But how can God, it may be said, be thus asleep, when he
is superior in strength to all the giants, and yet they can easily watch
for a long time, and are satisfied with little sleep? I answer, when he
exercises forbearance, and does not promptly execute his judgments, the
interpretation which ignorant people put upon his conduct is, that he
loiters in this manner like a man who is stupified, and knows not how to
proceed.  <span id="fr_363"></span>[364](#fn_363) The prophet, on the
contrary, declares, that this sudden awaking of God will be more
alarming and terrible than if he had at the first lifted up his hand to
execute judgment; and that it will be as if a giant, drunken with wine,
should start up suddenly out of his sleep, while as yet he had not slept
off his surfeit. Many restrict the statement in the 66th verse,
concerning God’s *smiting his enemies behind,* to the plague which he
sent upon the Philistines, recorded in <span
id="xiii.xi-p26.2"></span>[1Sa
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1005.htm#012)<span id="xiii.xi-p26.2"></span>.
The phrase, *everlasting disgrace,* agrees very well with this
interpretation; for it was a shameful disease to be afflicted with
haemorrhoids in their hinder parts. But as the words, *They were smitten
behind,* admit of a more simple sense, I leave the matter undecided.

<span id="xiii.xii"></span>

<span id="xiii.xii-p1"></span><span id="xiii.xii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
78:67-72](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#067)<span
id="xiii.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xii-p2"></span>**67.** And he rejected the tabernacle of
Joseph, and chose not the tribe of Ephraim: **68.** But he chose the
tribe of Judah, the mountain of Zion, which he loved:  <span
id="fr_364"></span>[365](#fn_364) **69.** And built his sanctuary like
high places, and like the earth which he has established for ever.
**70.** And he chose David his servant, and took him from the
sheepfolds: **71.** He took him froth following the suckling ewes, to
feed Jacob his people, and Israel his inheritance: **72.** And he fed
them in the uprightness of his heart, and guided them by the prudence of
his hands.

<span id="xiii.xii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xiii.xii-p5"></span><span id="xiii.xii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xii-p6"></span>**67.** *And he rejected the tabernacle of
Joseph.* Those who suppose that the word *enemies,* in the 66th verse,
applies to the Israelites, connect these verses with the preceding, and
suppose the meaning to be, that the wound which God had inflicted upon
them was incurable. But, preferring the other opinion, which regards the
Philistines as spoken of, and the scope to be, that God, in punishing
them so severely, evidently showed that the covenant which he had made
with his people was not disannulled, since he had avenged himself in
such an awful manner upon their enemies, the explanation which I would
rather give is, that this is added by way of correction, as if it had
been said, That God was not yet fully reconciled towards his people who
had wickedly revolted from him, and that, as an evidence of this, there
remained among them some traces of the punishment with which he had
visited them. The meaning of the text, therefore, is, that when the ark
was taken by the Philistines, God was, so to speak, asleep, having been
made drunk by the sins of his people, so that he could no longer keep
watch for their defense as he had been accustomed to do; and yet, that
he did not continue long sunk in sleep, but that, whenever he saw the
ungodly Philistines treating with mockery the glory of his majesty, this
heinous insult awoke and provoked him, just as if a giant, having well
supped, had awoke from his first sleep before he had recovered from the
exciting effects of his wine; and that, at the same time, his anger had
not been so provoked against this heathen and uncircumcised nation as to
prevent him from exhibiting some signs of the chastisement which he had
inflicted upon the wicked and ungrateful Israelites even to the end. The
rejection spoken of amounts to this, that when God permitted his ark to
be carried away to another place, the Israelites were thereby deprived
of the honor with which, by special privilege, they had been previously
distinguished.

<span id="xiii.xii-p7"></span>There are two principal points which
should here be particularly attended to; in the first place, when the
Philistines were smitten with unseemly ulcers, the plainest evidence was
afforded that when the Israelites were conquered by them, this happened
solely because God willed it to be so. He did not recover new strength,
or gather together a new army for the purpose of invading, some short
time after, the Philistines who had been victorious, nor did he have
recourse, in doing this, to foreign aid. The other point is, that
although God stretched forth his hand against the Philistines, to show
that he had still some remembrance of his covenant, and some care of the
people whom he had chosen, yet in restoring the Israelites in some
measure to their former state, he made the rejection of Shiloh a
perpetual monument of his wrath. He, therefore, rejected the tribe of
Ephraim;  <span id="fr_365"></span>[366](#fn_365) not that he cast them
off for ever, or completely severed them from the rest of the body of
the Church, but he would not have the ark of his covenant to reside any
longer within the boundaries of that tribe. To the tribe of Ephraim is
here opposed the tribe of Judah, in which God afterwards chose for
himself a dwelling-place.

<span id="xiii.xii-p9"></span>Thus the prophet proceeds to show, that
when the ark of the covenant had a resting-place assigned to it on mount
Zion, the people were in a manner renewed; and this symbol of
reconciliation being restored to them, they were recovered to the favor
of God from which they had fallen. As God had, so to speak, been
banished from the kingdom, and his strength led into captivity through
the sins of the Israelites, they had need to be taught, by this
memorial, that God had been so highly displeased with their wickedness,
that he could not bear to look upon the place in which he had formerly
dwelt. After this separation, although to teach the people to be more on
their guard in time to come, there was not a full and perfect
restitution, yet God again chose a fixed residence for his ark, which
was a manifestation of wonderful goodness and mercy on his part. The
ark, after its return, was carried from one place to another, as to
Gath, Ekron, and other places, until mount Zion was pointed out by an
oracle as its fixed abode; but this intervening period is not taken
notice of by the prophet, because his design went no farther than to
impress upon the memory, both the example of the punishment, and the
grace of God, which was greater than any could have ventured to hope
for.  <span id="fr_366"></span>[367](#fn_366) That which is often
repeated by Moses should also be remembered:

<span id="xiii.xii-p11"></span>“But unto the place which the Lord your
God shall choose out of all your tribes to put his name there, even unto
his habitation shall ye seek, and thither thou shalt come,” etc., (<span
id="xiii.xii-p11.1"></span>[De
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#005)<span
id="xiii.xii-p11.1"></span>.)

<span id="xiii.xii-p12"></span>Shiloh having acquired this renown,
because the ark had dwelt there for a long time, when the ark was
carried away into the country of the enemies of Israel, the minds of men
were strangely perplexed, until they knew the place which God had chosen
for its future residence. The ten tribes were not at that time rejected,
and they had an equal interest in the kingdom and the priesthood with
the tribe of Judah; but in process of time their own rebellion cut them
off. This is the reason why the prophet says, in scorn, that the tribe
of Ephraim was rejected, and that the tribe of Joseph, from whom it
sprung, was not chosen.

<span id="xiii.xii-p13"></span><span id="xiii.xii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xii-p14"></span>**68.** *But he chose the tribe of
Judah.* The meaning is, that God preferred the tribe of Judah to all the
rest of the people, and chose from it a king, whom he might set over all
the Israelites as well as the Jews. And he chose *the mountain of Zion,*
appointing a certain spot upon it to be the seat of his sanctuary. That
the cause of this choice might not be sought any where else but in God,
it is particularly stated that the preferring of mount Zion to all other
places, and the enriching of it in such a distinguished manner,
proceeded entirely from the free and unmerited love of God. The relative
*which* is here put instead of the causal adverb *for;* the meaning
being, that the sanctuary of God was established there, not for any
worthiness of the place, but solely because it was the good pleasure of
God. It was proper that this second restitution of the people should be
no less free than their first adoption was, when God made his covenant
with Abraham, or when he delivered them from the land of Egypt. God’s
*love* to the place had a respect to men. From this it follows, that the
Church has been gathered together from the beginning, and in all ages,
by the pure grace and goodness of God; for never have men been found to
possess any intrinsic meritorious claims to his regard, and the Church
is too precious to be left to depend upon the power of men.

<span id="xiii.xii-p15"></span><span id="xiii.xii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xii-p16"></span>**69.** *And built his sanctuary like
high places.*  <span id="fr_367"></span>[368](#fn_367) In this verse,
what is intimated is simply this, that Mount Zion was singularly
beautified; which, however, ought to be referred to the heavenly
pattern. It was not the will of God that the minds of his people should
be entirely engrossed with the magnificence of the building, or with the
pomp of outward ceremonies; but that they should be elevated to Christ,
in whom the truth of the figures of the former economy was exhibited. It
is, therefore affirmed, that *the sanctuary was built like high places;*
that is to say, it was conspicuous among all the high mountains: even as
Isaiah (<span id="xiii.xii-p17.6"></span>[Isa
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#002)<span id="xiii.xii-p17.6"></span>,)
and Micah, (<span id="xiii.xii-p17.7"></span>[Mic
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#001)<span id="xiii.xii-p17.7"></span>,)
prophesying of the building of the new and spiritual temple, declare
that it “shall be established in the tops of the mountains, and shall be
exalted above the hills.” And it is well known that fortresses were in
those days erected upon high places. Zion is next compared to the entire
mass of the globe: *He hath built his sanctuary like the earth,*  <span
id="fr_368"></span>[369](#fn_368) *which he has established for ever.*
Some regions of the globe are visited by earthquakes, or perish by the
opening of the earth, or are agitated by some violent commotion, or
undergo some alteration; but the body of the earth itself continues
always stable and unchanged, because it rests upon deep foundations. It
is, therefore, here taught that the building spoken of was not
temporary, like the sumptuous palaces of kings, which fall into ruins
during the lapse of time, or are in danger of being destroyed by other
means; but that it was founded to stand entire, even to the end of the
world. If it is objected that the temple was destroyed by the Chaldeans
and Assyrians, the answer is obvious, That the stability celebrated
consists in Christ alone; for, if the ancient sanctuary, which was only
a figure, is considered merely in itself, without any regard to that
which it typified, it will be only an empty shadow. But as God intended
it to be a pledge to show that Christ was to come, perpetuity is justly
attributed to it. In like manner it is said, in another place, (<span
id="xiii.xii-p18.1"></span>[Ps
87:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#001)<span
id="xiii.xii-p18.1"></span>,) “His foundation is in the holy mountains;”
and in Isaiah, (<span id="xiii.xii-p18.2"></span>[Isa
14:32](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#032)<span
id="xiii.xii-p18.2"></span>,) “The Lord hath founded Zion;” and again,
in <span id="xiii.xii-p18.3"></span>[Ps
74:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#002)<span id="xiii.xii-p18.3"></span>,
God is said “to dwell in mount Zion,” so that it should never be moved.

<span id="xiii.xii-p19"></span><span id="xiii.xii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xii-p20"></span>**70.** *And he chose David his servant.*
After having made mention of the temple, the prophet now proceeds to
speak of the kingdom; for these two things were the chief signs of God’s
choice of his ancient people, and of his favor towards them; and Christ
also hath appeared as our king and priest to bring a full and perfect
salvation to us. He proves that David was made king by God, who elevated
him from the sheepfold, and from the keeping of cattle, to the royal
throne. It serves in no small degree to magnify the grace of God, that a
peasant was taken from his mean shepherd’s cot, and exalted to the
dignity of a king. Nor is this grace limited to the person of David. We
are taught that whatever worth there was in the children of Abraham,
flowed from the fountain of God’s mercy. The whole glory and felicity of
the people consisted in the kingdom and priesthood; and both these are
attributed to the pure grace and good pleasure of God. And it was
requisite that the commencement of the kingdom of Christ should be lowly
and contemptible, that it might correspond with its type, and that God
might clearly show that he did not make use of external aids in order to
accomplish our salvation.

<span id="xiii.xii-p21"></span><span id="xiii.xii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xii-p22"></span>**71.** *He took him from following the
suckling ewes, etc.* The grace of God is farther commended from the
circumstance, that David, who was a keeper of sheep, was made the
shepherd of the chosen people and heritage of God. There is an allusion
to David’s original condition; but the Spirit of God, at the same time,
shows us the difference between good and lawful kings, and tyrants,
robbers, and insatiable extortioners, by telling us that whoever would
aspire to the character of the former must be like shepherds.

<span id="xiii.xii-p23"></span>It is afterwards added, (verse 72,) that
David had faithfully performed the duties of the trust committed to him.
By this the prophet indirectly rebukes the ingratitude and perverseness
of the people, who not only overturned the holy and inviolable order
which God had established, but who had also, in shaking off his salutary
yoke, thrown themselves into a state of miserable dispersion. What
follows concerning *the prudence of David’s hands* seems to be an
improper form of expression. But it is intended forcibly to express,
that he not only was successful in what he had undertaken, but that he
was governed by the Spirit of God, which prevented him from putting his
hand at random to any work which might come in his way, and led him
prudently and skilfully to do that to which faith and duty called him;
and thus, in the success of his undertakings, his wisdom appears more
conspicuous than his good fortune.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_306"></span>[307](cc10012.htm#fr_306) <span
id="xiii.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p3"></span> “<span id="xiii.i-p3.1"></span>Ou, ma
doctrine.” — *Fr*. *marg*. “Or, my doctrine, *or* instruction.”

<span id="fn_307"></span>[308](cc10012.htm#fr_307) <span
id="xiii.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p7"></span> Calmet refers the composition of this psalm
to the days of Asa, who, aided by the Syrians, obtained a signal victory
over the Israelites, and brought back to the pure worship of God many
out of the tribes of Ephraim, Manasseh, and Simeon. See <span
id="xiii.i-p7.1"></span>[2Ch 15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#000)<span
id="xiii.i-p7.1"></span> and <span id="xiii.i-p7.2"></span>[2Ch
16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2016.htm#000)<span id="xiii.i-p7.2"></span>.
Schnurrer supposes, that the special purpose for which it was composed
was, to celebrate a decisive victory which had been gained over the
kingdom of Ephraim or Israel by Abijah, the king of Judah during the
reign of Jeroboam. Walford thinks this opinion highly probable. “There
is,” say’s he, “an eulogy passed upon David at the conclusion of the
psalm, which makes it likely that the author of it wished to conciliate
the favor of the whole people towards David’s successors, from whom
Jeroboam had revolted: and in verse 9th, there is a reference to Ephraim
which affords some degree of evidence in support of Schnurrer’s
hypothesis. Whatever may be thought of this hypothesis, we cannot
hesitate to admit that the psalm itself is clear, pungent, and
persuasive, and must have been felt to be so by the persons for whose
use it was written.”

<span id="fn_308"></span>[309](cc10012.htm#fr_308) <span
id="xiii.i-p8.3"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p9"></span> We have seen that Calvin, on the margin of
the French version, reads *instruction*, and this reading is adopted by
Street, Fry, Morison, and Walford.

<span id="fn_309"></span>[310](cc10012.htm#fr_309) <span
id="xiii.i-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p11"></span> See volume 2, page 238, note 2.

<span id="fn_310"></span>[311](cc10012.htm#fr_310) <span
id="xiii.i-p11.3"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p12"></span> Walford translates <span
id="xiii.i-p12.1"></span>חידות, *chidoth*, “all impressive record.” His
version of the first and second verses is,

<span id="xiii.i-p13"></span>“Hear, O my people! my instruction:  
Incline your ears to the words of my mouth.  
I will open my mouth with an instructive speech,  
I will utter an impressive record of ancient times.”

<span id="xiii.i-p14"></span>“The words *law*, *parable*, and *dark
sayings*,” he observes, “which are found in the English translation of
verses 1st and 2d, are not appropriate to the recitals which are
contained in the psalm. They are here altered for others, which are in
agreement with the subjects which follow, and may be supported by the
usage of the original words which are employed.” Similar is Street’s
note on this place. He translates <span id="xiii.i-p14.1"></span>חידות,
*chidoth*, “pointed truths,” and objects to its being translated *dark
sayings* “There is nothing obscure in the psalm,” says he, “it contains
instructive historical truth, but no enigma. Therefore, the rendering of
the English Bible, *dark sayings*, does not seem to be right. The
Septuagint renders the word <span id="xiii.i-p14.2"></span>διηγημα,
<span id="xiii.i-p14.3"></span>[Eze
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#002)<span id="xiii.i-p14.3"></span>,
and that rendering would suit this place better than <span
id="xiii.i-p14.4"></span>προθληματα I have endeavored to express the
relation of the word to <span id="xiii.i-p14.5"></span>חדד, <span
id="xiii.i-p14.6"></span>*acutum est*.” See volume 2 of this work, page
238, note 3. But as Dimock observes, “The several transactions of the
Mosaical covenant hereafter recited, might be well called *parables* and
*dark speeches*, or, as Arabic, *mysteries*, considered as types or
figures of the Christian; and viewed in this light, afford ample matter
of contemplation, serving not only as a schoolmaster to bring us unto
Christ, but to keep us steadfast in faith and obedience to David our
king.”

<span id="fn_311"></span>[312](cc10012.htm#fr_311) <span
id="xiii.i-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p21"></span> Horsley considers this verse as a
parenthesis.

<span id="fn_312"></span>[313](cc10012.htm#fr_312) <span
id="xiii.i-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p22"></span> Dr Adam Clarke, by *a testimony*
understands the various *ordinances*, *rites*, and ceremonies prescribed
by the laws and by the word *law*, the *moral law*.

<span id="fn_313"></span>[314](cc10012.htm#fr_313) <span
id="xiii.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p3"></span> “<span id="xiii.ii-p3.1"></span>כסלם,
*kislam*, *their hope*, or *their constancy* <span
id="xiii.ii-p3.2"></span>כסל, *folly*, by antiphrasis, *constancy*.” —
*Bythner*

<span id="fn_314"></span>[315](cc10012.htm#fr_314) <span
id="xiii.ii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p14"></span> “The Syriac version reads, ‘And confided
not in the God of its spirit,’ translating <span
id="xiii.ii-p14.1"></span>נאמנה, \[the word which Calvin renders ‘was
faithful,’\] by a masculine verb; and this indeed the sense will very
well bear, and the change of genders is not unusual, and God is
frequently known by that title, ‘the God of the spirits of all flesh.’
See <span id="xiii.ii-p14.2"></span>[Nu
16:22](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#022)<span
id="xiii.ii-p14.2"></span>.” — *Hammond*

<span id="fn_315"></span>[316](cc10012.htm#fr_315) <span
id="xiii.ii-p14.3"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p15"></span> “<span
id="xiii.ii-p15.1"></span>Premierement il faut que nous ostions toute
obstination, avant que nous puissions avoir les cols propres pour
recevoir son joug.” — *Fr*. In the first place, we must lay aside all
obstinacy before we can bend our necks to receive his yoke.

<span id="fn_316"></span>[317](cc10012.htm#fr_316) <span
id="xiii.ii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p18"></span> Of the Ephraimites shooting with the bow,
or being archers, we have an intimation in <span
id="xiii.ii-p18.1"></span>[Ge
49:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#024)<span id="xiii.ii-p18.1"></span>,
where, in Jacob’s blessing on Joseph, the father of Ephraim, it is said,
“His bow abode in strength.”

<span id="fn_317"></span>[318](cc10012.htm#fr_317) <span
id="xiii.ii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p20"></span> Dr Morison supposes, that the history
here referred to, is that of the Israelites going up contrary to the
divine command to take possession of the promised land, when, for their
temerity, they were smitten and humbled before their enemies. (<span
id="xiii.ii-p20.1"></span>[De
1:42](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#042)<span id="xiii.ii-p20.1"></span>.)
“The tribe of Ephraim,” he observes, “is doubtless specially singled
out, because they were the most warlike of all the chosen tribes, and
because, perhaps, they led on the other tribes to the fatal act of
rebellion against the expressed will of the God of Israel.” This,
perhaps, may be considered as receiving some support from comparing the
number of the tribe of Ephraim (<span id="xiii.ii-p20.2"></span>[Nu
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/num002.htm#019)<span id="xiii.ii-p20.2"></span>)
when they came out of Egypt, with their number when taken in the plains
of Moab, at the termination of their wanderings in the wilderness,
(<span id="xiii.ii-p20.3"></span>[Nu
26:37](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#037)<span
id="xiii.ii-p20.3"></span>.) At the former period, they amounted to
40,500, at the latter, to 32,500, eight thousand less; whereas, during
those forty years the other tribes had considerably increased.

<span id="fn_318"></span>[319](cc10012.htm#fr_318) <span
id="xiii.ii-p20.5"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p21"></span> “<span id="xiii.ii-p21.1"></span>Sans en
monstrer les fruicts en leur vie.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_319"></span>[320](cc10012.htm#fr_319) <span
id="xiii.ii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p24"></span> “<span id="xiii.ii-p24.1"></span>De la
verite et fidelite des promesses, et de la foy qu’on y doit adjouster.”
— *Fr*.

<span id="fn_320"></span>[321](cc10012.htm#fr_320) <span
id="xiii.ii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p27"></span> “<span id="xiii.ii-p27.1"></span>A la
verite une telle stupidite estoit plusque brutale, ou plustost comme une
chose monstrueuse.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_321"></span>[322](cc10012.htm#fr_321) <span
id="xiii.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p3"></span> Zoan was the ancient capital of Egypt
where the Pharaohs resided. Its great antiquity appears from the
expression used respecting Hebron, in <span
id="xiii.iii-p3.2"></span>[Nu
13:22](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#022)<span id="xiii.iii-p3.2"></span>,
where, to set forth the antiquity of that city, in which Abraham the
tenth from Noah dwelt, it is said, that it “was built seven years before
Zoan in Egypt.” Zoan is twice specified in this psalm, here and in verse
43d, (though not mentioned in the history of the plagues in the book of
Exodus,) as the scene of the wonderful works wrought on Pharaoh and the
land of Egypt by Moses. This may mean, that these miracles were
performed there in the sight of Pharaoh. Or *the field* or country *of
Zoan*, may be put poetically for Egypt in general. Thus, in other
poetical parts of Scripture, Zoan is sometimes used instead of Egypt, as
in <span id="xiii.iii-p3.3"></span>[Isa.
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#011),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#013)<span id="xiii.iii-p3.3"></span>,
where “the princes of Zoan” just mean the counsellors of Pharaoh; and in
<span id="xiii.iii-p3.4"></span>[Isa
30:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#004)<span id="xiii.iii-p3.4"></span>,
where, when God’s ancient people are represented as sending to Egypt for
relief, it is said, that their “princes were at Zoan.” Zoan is rendered
by the Chaldee <span id="xiii.iii-p3.5"></span>טאנים, by the LXX. <span
id="xiii.iii-p3.6"></span>Τανις, by the Vulgate Tanis, and by the Coptic
Tane, from the Coptic *ten*, plain, flat, level; being situated on the
low ground of the Delta, on one of the Eastern branches of the Nile,
bearing its own name, near a large lake, now called the Lake of Menzala,
44 miles west of Pelusium, 169 miles east of Alexandria, and three miles
from the Mediterranean. There are ruins still remaining to mark the site
of *Zoan* or *Tanis*, called *San* by the Arabs, comprising broken
obelisks, capitals of the Corinthian order, a granite monument, etc.
These ruins, however, are not thought to be of the highest antiquity.

<span id="fn_322"></span>[323](cc10012.htm#fr_322) <span
id="xiii.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p3"></span> “<span id="xiii.iv-p3.1"></span>Ou, a leur
cupidite.” — *Fr*. *marg*. “Or, for their lust.”

<span id="fn_323"></span>[324](cc10012.htm#fr_323) <span
id="xiii.iv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p4"></span> “The term *ascended* is figurative,
derived from the ascending of the breath, in vehement gusts of agitation
and anger.” — *Walford*.

<span id="fn_324"></span>[325](cc10012.htm#fr_324) <span
id="xiii.iv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p8"></span> “<span id="xiii.iv-p8.1"></span>Qu’ils
n’ont point reprime leur insolence et appetit desordonne.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_325"></span>[326](cc10012.htm#fr_325) <span
id="xiii.iv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p11"></span> The word <span
id="xiii.iv-p11.1"></span>נפש, *nephesh*, for *soul*, has great latitude
of signification. It sometimes signifies the sensitive or animal
appetites, as in this passage. The people had their wants abundantly
supplied, and yet they remained unsatisfied and querulous. It is
therefore said, that *they demanded meat* <span
id="xiii.iv-p11.2"></span>לנפשם, *for their souls*; *i* *e*., not for
their real wants, which they might rationally and lawfully desire to
have supplied, but to gratify their sensitive and carnal appetites. Our
English Bible, and Calvin on the margin of the French version, give a
very happy translation, *They tempted God*, *by asking meat for their
lust*

<span id="fn_326"></span>[327](cc10012.htm#fr_326) <span
id="xiii.iv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p14"></span> “‘They tempted God with their heart,’
that is, heartily, or with all their soul.” — *Walford*.

<span id="fn_327"></span>[328](cc10012.htm#fr_327) <span
id="xiii.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.v-p3"></span> The manna received its name, either from
<span id="xiii.v-p3.1"></span>מנה, *manah*, *he prepared*, *appointed*,
*distributed*, to intimate that this food was prepared by God for the
Israelites, and was their appointed portion which was daily distributed
to them by measure; or, it is from the words <span
id="xiii.v-p3.2"></span>הוה מן, *huh man*, *What is this*? <span
id="xiii.v-p3.3"></span>[Ex 15:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#016)<span
id="xiii.v-p3.3"></span>, <span id="xiii.v-p3.4"></span>ן being used for
<span id="xiii.v-p3.5"></span>ה in euphony. This was the question which
they asked when they first saw this species of food, not knowing what it
was.

<span id="fn_328"></span>[329](cc10012.htm#fr_328) <span
id="xiii.v-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.v-p7"></span> Abu Walid and Kimchi read, “the bread of
heaven.”

<span id="fn_329"></span>[330](cc10012.htm#fr_329) <span
id="xiii.v-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.v-p8"></span> The Chaldee paraphrase of the expression,
*the bread of the mighty*, is, “the food that descends from the dwelling
of angels;” so that, according to this view, it signifies no more than,
“corn of heaven,” by which the manna is described in the preceding
verse. Dr Geddes and Williams observe, that the Hebrew word <span
id="xiii.v-p8.1"></span>אבירים, *abbirim*, never signifies *angels*, but
persons of the higher classes, the *rich*, the *great*, the *noble*; and
that the meaning of the Psalmist is, that the Israelites found in the
manna a dainty, delicate food, such as might suit the palates of the
great; that it was bread fit for princes; the best, the choicest of
bread. This agrees with Simonis’ rendering of the phrase, “<span
id="xiii.v-p8.2"></span>cibus nobilium, scilicet principum; hoc est,
cibus exquisitus, delicatus, eximius.” Such also is the view taken by
Fry, Walford, and others. If by <span id="xiii.v-p8.3"></span>אבירים,
*abbirim*, *the mighty*, angels should be understood, as it is rendered
in all the ancient versions, the meaning will be substantially the same;
for the manna, by an obvious poetical figure, may be called *the bread
of angels*, to denote food of the most exquisite kind; just as Paul
speaks of *the tongues of angels*, (<span id="xiii.v-p8.4"></span>[1Co
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#001)<span id="xiii.v-p8.4"></span>,)
to indicate eloquence of the highest order.

<span id="fn_330"></span>[331](cc10012.htm#fr_330) <span
id="xiii.v-p8.6"></span>

<span id="xiii.v-p9"></span> “<span id="xiii.v-p9.1"></span>Les autres
ont traduit les verbes par un temps passe, Il a commande aux nuees, Il a
ouvert les portes du ciel, Il a fait pluvoir la Manne,” etc. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_331"></span>[332](cc10012.htm#fr_331) <span
id="xiii.vi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.vi-p3"></span> “Heb. ‘fowl of wing;’ *i*.*e*., flying
fowls, in distinction from domestic poultry.” — *Williams*.

<span id="fn_332"></span>[333](cc10012.htm#fr_332) <span
id="xiii.vi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.vi-p4"></span> “Heb. *Of his camp*; either Israel’s camp
or God’s camp; for seeing Israel was God’s people, and he dwelt among
them, their camp was his camp.” — *Poole*.

<span id="fn_333"></span>[334](cc10012.htm#fr_333) <span
id="xiii.vi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.vi-p8"></span> The Israelites were miraculously supplied
with quails in the wilderness on two different occasions. The first
occasion was upon the fifteenth day of the second month after their
departure from Egypt, and before they came to mount Sinai, <span
id="xiii.vi-p8.2"></span>[Exod. 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#001),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#013)<span id="xiii.vi-p8.2"></span>.
The second, which is the one here referred to, was at Kibroth-hattaavah,
a place three days’ journey beyond the desert of Sinai, in the beginning
of the second year after their departure from Egypt, <span
id="xiii.vi-p8.3"></span>[Nu
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#011)<span id="xiii.vi-p8.3"></span>;
and <span id="xiii.vi-p8.4"></span>[Nu
11:31-35](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#031)<span
id="xiii.vi-p8.4"></span>. In both instances, the quails were sent in
consequence of the murmuring of the Israelites. But in the first
instance, they came up and covered the camp of Israel only one evening,
while in the second, they came up from the sea for a whole month. No
token of the divine displeasure accompanied the first miracle, God
having, in his compassion, forgiven their murmuring; but the second
miracle was wrought in wrath, and attended with the infliction of the
divine vengeance on that rebellious people, (<span
id="xiii.vi-p8.5"></span>[Nu
11:33](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#033)<span id="xiii.vi-p8.5"></span>.)

<span id="fn_334"></span>[335](cc10012.htm#fr_334) <span
id="xiii.vi-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.vi-p11"></span> “*While their meat was yet in their
mouth*; the meat of the quails, while it was between their teeth, ere it
was chewed, and before it was swallowed down, while they were rolling
this sweet morsel under their tongues, and were gorging themselves with
it, destruction came upon them; just as Belshazzar, while he was
feasting with his nobles, in the midst of his mirth and jollity, was
slain by the Persians, <span id="xiii.vi-p11.1"></span>[Dan.
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#001),
[30](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#030)<span id="xiii.vi-p11.1"></span>.”
— *Dr Gill*.

<span id="fn_335"></span>[336](cc10012.htm#fr_335) <span
id="xiii.vi-p11.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.vi-p12"></span> Mr Mudge observes, that this clause
should be translated, “Slew them amidst their fatnesses or indulgences.”
This is approved of by Lowth. Cocceius and Michaelis give a similar
version.

<span id="fn_336"></span>[337](cc10012.htm#fr_336) <span
id="xiii.vii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.vii-p3"></span> “This alludes to their appointed
wanderings for forty years in the wilderness, as the punishment of their
disobedience and rebellion; that all those who had left Egypt, and were
grown to man’s estate, were dead, with the exceptions of Caleb and
Joshua.” — *Warner*.

<span id="fn_337"></span>[338](cc10012.htm#fr_337) <span
id="xiii.vii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.vii-p9"></span> “<span id="xiii.vii-p9.1"></span>Que leur
vie a este emportee comme quand en tumulte on ravit quelque chose.” —
*Fr*.

<span id="fn_338"></span>[339](cc10012.htm#fr_338) <span
id="xiii.vii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.vii-p12"></span> In the Hebrew Bible, a masoretic note is
inserted after the 35th verse, <span id="xiii.vii-p12.1"></span>חצי
הספר, *chatsi ha-sepher*, *the middle of the book*, that is, with
respect to verses.

<span id="fn_339"></span>[340](cc10012.htm#fr_339) <span
id="xiii.viii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.viii-p3"></span> “<span id="xiii.viii-p3.1"></span>יכפר,
*yecapher*, made an *atonement* for their iniquity.” — *Dr* *Adam
Clarke*

<span id="fn_340"></span>[341](cc10012.htm#fr_340) <span
id="xiii.viii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.viii-p4"></span> “<span id="xiii.viii-p4.1"></span>C’est
a dire, souffle.” — *Fr*. *marg*. “That is to say, a breath.” Dr Adam
Clarke translates, “the spirit goeth away, and it doth not return.” “The
present life,” he observes, “is the state of probation; when, therefore,
the *flesh*, the *body*, fails, the *spirit* goeth away into the eternal
world, and returneth not hither again.” He considers the translation in
our English Bible, “a wind that passeth away, and cometh not again,” to
be a bad one, and that it may be productive of error; as if when a man
dies, his being were ended, and death were an eternal sleep.

<span id="fn_341"></span>[342](cc10012.htm#fr_341) <span
id="xiii.viii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.viii-p14"></span> “They provoked God at least ten times,
(<span id="xiii.viii-p14.1"></span>[Nu
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#022)<span
id="xiii.viii-p14.1"></span>,) during the first two years of their
journey through the wilderness. 1. at the Red Sea, (<span
id="xiii.viii-p14.2"></span>[Exod.
14:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#012)<span
id="xiii.viii-p14.2"></span>;) 2. at the waters of Marah, (<span
id="xiii.viii-p14.3"></span>[Ex
15:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#024)<span
id="xiii.viii-p14.3"></span>;) 3. in the wilderness of Sin, (<span
id="xiii.viii-p14.4"></span>[Ex
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#002)<span
id="xiii.viii-p14.4"></span>;) 4. when they kept the manna until the
following day, (<span id="xiii.viii-p14.5"></span>[Ex
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#010)<span
id="xiii.viii-p14.5"></span>;) 5, when the manna was collected on the
Sabbath, (<span id="xiii.viii-p14.6"></span>[Ex
16:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#027)<span
id="xiii.viii-p14.6"></span>;) 6. in Rephidim, where there was no water,
(<span id="xiii.viii-p14.7"></span>[Num.
20:2](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#002),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#013)<span
id="xiii.viii-p14.7"></span>;) 7. at Horeb, when a molten calf was made,
(<span id="xiii.viii-p14.8"></span>[Ex
32:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#001)<span
id="xiii.viii-p14.8"></span>, etc.;) 8. at Taberah, (<span
id="xiii.viii-p14.9"></span>[Num.
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#003)<span id="xiii.viii-p14.9"></span>;)
9. when they lusted for flesh, (<span id="xiii.viii-p14.10"></span>[Nu
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#004)<span
id="xiii.viii-p14.10"></span>;) 10. when they murmured at the news
brought by the men, who had been sent to search the land, (<span
id="xiii.viii-p14.11"></span>[Nu
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#001)<span
id="xiii.viii-p14.11"></span>, etc.”) — *Cresswell*.

<span id="fn_342"></span>[343](cc10012.htm#fr_342) <span
id="xiii.ix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ix-p3"></span> That is, Pharaoh, as the next verse shows.
See <span id="xiii.ix-p3.1"></span>[Ps
107:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#002)<span id="xiii.ix-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_343"></span>[344](cc10012.htm#fr_343) <span
id="xiii.ix-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ix-p4"></span> This is the literal rendering of the
original word <span id="xiii.ix-p4.2"></span>ערב, *arob*, which is
derived from the verb <span id="xiii.ix-p4.3"></span>ערב, *arab*, *he
mingled* It is not agreed among interpreters what is meant by this name
given here, and in <span id="xiii.ix-p4.4"></span>[Ex
8:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#021)<span id="xiii.ix-p4.4"></span>,
and in <span id="xiii.ix-p4.5"></span>[Ps
105:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#031)<span id="xiii.ix-p4.5"></span>,
to one of the plagues which fell upon the Egyptians. The Chaldee has “a
mixture of living creatures of the wood.” “*A mixture*; a mixed
collection of beasts,” says Bythner. In our English Bible, it is “divers
sorts of flies.” Others read, “swarms of flies.” Bishop Mant reads, “the
ravening fly;” Fry, simply “the fly;” and Walford, “the horse-fly.” “The
Seventy,” says Mant, “have rendered the original word translated ‘fly,’
when spoken of the Egyptian plague, constantly by <span
id="xiii.ix-p4.6"></span>κυνομυία, ‘the dog-fly;’ whence it is plain
those translators thought it meant some particular species of fly, in
opposition to those who are of opinion that it meant ‘all sorts of
flies.’ (See Parkhurst on <span id="xiii.ix-p4.7"></span>ערב.) What
particular species was intended has been much doubted. Bruce, however,
seems to have decided the question, and fixed the insect to be the
Ethiopian fly, called Zimb, of which he has given a particular
description. Some of its effects are thus represented by him. ‘As soon
as this plague appears, and their buzzing is heard, all the cattle
forsake their food, and run wildly about the plain, till they die, worn
out with fatigue, fright, and hunger. No remedy remains but to leave the
black earth, and hasten down to the sands of Atbara; and there they
remain, while the rains last, this cruel enemy not daring to pursue them
further. Though his size be immense, as is his strength, and his body
covered with a thick skin, defended with strong hair, yet even the camel
is not capable of sustaining the violent punctures the fly makes with
his pointed proboscis. When once attacked by this fly, his body, head,
and legs, break out into large bosses, which swell, break, and putrefy,
to the certain destruction of the creature. Even the elephant and
rhinoceros, which, by reason of their enormous bulk, and the vast
quantity of food and water they daily need, cannot shift to desert and
dry places, as the season may require, are obliged to roll themselves in
mud and mire; which, when dry, coats them over like armor, and enables
them to stand their ground against this winged assassin.’” — *Mant*

<span id="fn_344"></span>[345](cc10012.htm#fr_344) <span
id="xiii.ix-p4.8"></span>

<span id="xiii.ix-p5"></span> <span id="xiii.ix-p5.1"></span>חסיל,
*chasil*, which is derived from <span id="xiii.ix-p5.2"></span>חסל,
*chasal*, *to consume*, *eat up*, denotes a species of insect, so called
from its devouring the fruits of the earth. But we are so little
acquainted with the various kinds of destructive insects that ravage the
Eastern countries, that it is somewhat difficult to determine the
particular species meant by this term. It is distinguished from the
locust in Solomon’s prayer at the dedication of the temple, <span
id="xiii.ix-p5.3"></span>[2Ch
6:28](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#028)<span id="xiii.ix-p5.3"></span>,
and in <span id="xiii.ix-p5.4"></span>[Joe
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#004)<span id="xiii.ix-p5.4"></span>,
where it is mentioned as eating up what the locusts had left. Harmer is
of opinion that it is the species of insects now called *sim* in Persia,
referred to in the following extract from Sir John Chardin’s Travels: —
“Persia is subject to have its harvests spoiled by hail, by drought, or
by insects, either locusts or small insects which they call *sim*, which
are small white lice, which fix themselves on the foot of the stalk of
corn, gnaw it, and make it die. It is rare for a year to be exempt from
one or other of these scourges, which affect the ploughed lands and the
gardens,” etc. On this Harmer observes, “The enumeration by Solomon and
that of this modern writer, though not exactly alike, yet so nearly
resemble each other, that one would be inclined to believe these small
insects are what Solomon meant by the word \[<span
id="xiii.ix-p5.5"></span>חסיל, *chasil*\] translated ‘caterpillars’ in
our English version.” — *Harmer*’*s Observations*, volume 3, page 316.
<span id="xiii.ix-p5.6"></span>חסיל, *chasil*, is rendered <span
id="xiii.ix-p5.7"></span>βρουχος by the LXX., in <span
id="xiii.ix-p5.8"></span>[2Ch
6:28](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#028)<span id="xiii.ix-p5.8"></span>,
and by Aquila here, and also by the Vulgate in Chronicles and in <span
id="xiii.ix-p5.9"></span>[Isa
33:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#004)<span id="xiii.ix-p5.9"></span>,
and it is rendered by Jerome here, <span
id="xiii.ix-p5.10"></span>*bruchus*, “the chaffer,” which every one
knows to be a great devourer of the leaves of trees. The Syriac in <span
id="xiii.ix-p5.11"></span>[Joel 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#004),
[Joel 2:25](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#025)<span
id="xiii.ix-p5.11"></span>, renders it, <span
id="xiii.ix-p5.12"></span>צרצורא, *tzartzooro*, which Michaelis,
(Supplem. ad Lex. Heb., page 865,) from the Arabic <span
id="xiii.ix-p5.13"></span>צרצר, *tsartzar*, a cricket, interprets the
*mole-cricket*, which, in its grub state, is also very destructive to
corn, grass, and other vegetables, by cankering the roots on which it
feeds. — See *Parkhurst*’*s Lexicon* on <span
id="xiii.ix-p5.14"></span>חאל

<span id="fn_345"></span>[346](cc10012.htm#fr_345) <span
id="xiii.ix-p5.15"></span>

<span id="xiii.ix-p6"></span> The Hebrew word here translated
“grasshopper” is, <span id="xiii.ix-p6.1"></span>ארבה, *arbeh*, which
properly means “locust.” The locust receives no fewer than ten different
names in Scripture, each of which indicates something characteristic. It
is called <span id="xiii.ix-p6.2"></span>ארבה, *arbeh*, from its
extraordinary fecundity. No animal is more prolific; nor has Providence
ever employed an agency more effective in destroying the fruits of the
earth. Dr Russell, in his Natural History of Aleppo, observes that
locusts “sometimes arrive in such incredible multitudes as it would
appear fabulous to relate, destroying the whole of the verdure wherever
they pass.” A Traveller in Syria says, “That country, together with
Egypt, Persia, and almost all the whole middle part of Asia, partakes in
another scourge besides volcanoes and earthquakes, and that no less
terrible; I mean those clouds of locusts of which travelers have spoken:
the quantity of these insects is incredible to any man who has not seen
it: the earth is covered by them for several leagues round. One may hear
at a distance the noise they make in brousing the plants and trees, like
an army plundering in secret. It would be better to be concerned with
Tartars than these little destructive animals: one might say that fire
follows their tract.” — See *Parkhurst*’*s Lexicon* on <span
id="xiii.ix-p6.3"></span>רבה,4.

<span id="fn_346"></span>[347](cc10012.htm#fr_346) <span
id="xiii.ix-p6.4"></span>

<span id="xiii.ix-p7"></span> The original word <span
id="xiii.ix-p7.1"></span>שקמותם, *shikmotham*, does not properly signify
*the fig-tree*, but the *sycamore*, a tree which grows in Palestine,
Arabia, and Egypt. It is different from the English sycamore, which is a
species of maple. It bears fruit resembling the fig, whilst its leaves
are like those of the mulberry-tree; whence its name, <span
id="xiii.ix-p7.2"></span>συκος, (<span
id="xiii.ix-p7.3"></span>*sycos*,) a fig-tree, and, <span
id="xiii.ix-p7.4"></span>μωρος, (<span
id="xiii.ix-p7.5"></span>*moros*,) a mulberry-tree. The sycamore was
highly valued by the ancient Egyptians. It furnished them with wood for
various purposes; it afforded a grateful shade by its wide-spreading
branches; and the figs which it produced, it is not improbable, formed a
principal part of the food of the common people. “Norden tells us the
people for the greater part live upon these figs; thinking themselves
well regaled when they have a piece of bread, a couple of sycamore-figs,
and a pitcher filled with water from the Nile.” — *Harmer*’*s
Observations*, volume 4, pages 4, 5. From this it is easy to conceive
how severe and distressing the loss must have been which the Egyptians
sustained “when their vines were destroyed with hail, and their
sycamore-trees with frost or hailstones.”

<span id="fn_347"></span>[348](cc10012.htm#fr_347) <span
id="xiii.ix-p7.6"></span>

<span id="xiii.ix-p8"></span> “<span id="xiii.ix-p8.1"></span>בחנמל,
*ba-chana-mal*, *in frost* A noun of four letters prefixed with <span
id="xiii.ix-p8.2"></span>ב; <span id="xiii.ix-p8.3"></span>חנמל is read
here only in Scripture. And what it may be is unknown. *Severe frost*,
according to some; *a kind of hail*, according to others.” — *Bythner*

<span id="fn_348"></span>[349](cc10012.htm#fr_348) <span
id="xiii.ix-p8.4"></span>

<span id="xiii.ix-p9"></span>The original word <span
id="xiii.ix-p9.1"></span>חיתם, *chayatham*, here rendered *their
cattle*, is translated in our English Bible *their life* But in all the
ancient versions it is *their cattle* The reference is to the plague
which destroyed all the first-born in the land of Egypt. The first-born
both of cattle, and of the Egyptians themselves, were involved in one
common destruction. <span id="xiii.ix-p9.2"></span>[Ex
12:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#029)<span id="xiii.ix-p9.2"></span>

<span id="fn_349"></span>[350](cc10012.htm#fr_349) <span
id="xiii.ix-p9.3"></span>

<span id="xiii.ix-p10"></span> “Ar. reads, <span
id="xiii.ix-p10.1"></span>בניהם, ‘the first-fruits *of their children*.’
See <span id="xiii.ix-p10.2"></span>[Ex
12:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#029)<span
id="xiii.ix-p10.2"></span>.” — *Dimock*

<span id="fn_350"></span>[351](cc10012.htm#fr_350) <span
id="xiii.ix-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ix-p17"></span> Aben Ezra supposes <span
id="xiii.ix-p17.1"></span>מלאכי רעים, *malachey raim*, to be Moses and
Aaron, as *messengers of evil* to Pharaoh, who are so called because
they previously warned him, and denounced the judgments of God against
him, just as the Prophet Abijah makes use of a similar expression when
the wife of Jeroboam came to him to inquire concerning her son: “I am a
messenger to thee of hard things,” <span id="xiii.ix-p17.2"></span>[1Ki
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#006)<span id="xiii.ix-p17.2"></span>.
Fry also reads “messengers of evil,” and has the following note: “Such
is the literal meaning and exact rendering of <span
id="xiii.ix-p17.3"></span>מלאכי רעים, and not *evil angels*, which would
be regularly <span id="xiii.ix-p17.4"></span>מלאכים רעים. By these
*messengers of evil*, I make no doubt, no more is meant than Moses and
Aaron, who were charged with denunciations of wrath to Pharaoh,
previously to the infliction of all the several plagues.” Archbishop
Secker, however, observes, that although <span
id="xiii.ix-p17.5"></span>מלאכים רעים would be the proper expression for
*evil angels*, yet the plural of <span id="xiii.ix-p17.6"></span>לאכ is
sometimes written defectively <span id="xiii.ix-p17.7"></span>מלאכי. The
LXX. has, <span id="xiii.ix-p17.8"></span>ἀποστολὢν δἰ ἀγγελων πονηρῶν,
“a message by evil angels.”

<span id="fn_351"></span>[352](cc10012.htm#fr_351) <span
id="xiii.ix-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ix-p20"></span> “*He levelled a path to his anger* <span
id="xiii.ix-p20.1"></span>פלס \[the word for *levelled*\] signifies to
direct by a line or level; and when applied to a way, is understood to
denote that the way is made straight and smooth, so as to leave no
impediment to the passenger. See Poole’s Synopsis and Le Clerc. The
sense will be much the same whether we thus interpret the phrase, or
suppose the anger of God to have taken its direction, <span
id="xiii.ix-p20.2"></span>παρὰ στάθμην, in a straight line, and by a
level; that is, in the shortest way, without delay or deviation.” —
*Merrick*’*s Annotations*

<span id="fn_352"></span>[353](cc10012.htm#fr_352) <span
id="xiii.x-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.x-p3"></span> “This mountain, *i*.*e*., *Zion*; which the
Psalmist might point to with his finger.” — *Dimock*.

<span id="fn_353"></span>[354](cc10012.htm#fr_353) <span
id="xiii.x-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.x-p4"></span> “<span id="xiii.x-p4.1"></span>Ou,
possedee.” — *Fr*. *marg*. “Or, possessed.”

<span id="fn_354"></span>[355](cc10012.htm#fr_354) <span
id="xiii.x-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.x-p5"></span> “Perhaps for <span
id="xiii.x-p5.2"></span>נחלה, we should read <span
id="xiii.x-p5.3"></span>נחלם, ‘and he made them fall *in the lot* of
their inheritance.’ For it has been by some learned men conjectured,
that the land of Canaan was originally the allotment of Heber and his
descendants, and that the Canaanites had obtained it by *force and
violence*; for which reason amongst others, they were expelled from it,
and the Hebrews reinstated. See <span id="xiii.x-p5.4"></span>[Gen.
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#015), [Gen.
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#015)<span id="xiii.x-p5.4"></span>;
<span id="xiii.x-p5.5"></span>[1Ch
1:24-27](../../../bib/kjv/ch1001.htm#024)<span id="xiii.x-p5.5"></span>;
and Bryant’s Obs. But see <span id="xiii.x-p5.6"></span>[Ps.
105:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#012),
[44](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#044)<span id="xiii.x-p5.6"></span>, and
<span id="xiii.x-p5.7"></span>[Ps
111:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa111.htm#007)<span id="xiii.x-p5.7"></span>.”
— *Dimock*

<span id="fn_355"></span>[356](cc10012.htm#fr_355) <span
id="xiii.x-p5.8"></span>

<span id="xiii.x-p6"></span> “<span id="xiii.x-p6.1"></span>כקשת רמיה,
*like a deceitful bow* This comparison does not seem to convey a
suitable idea either here or <span id="xiii.x-p6.2"></span>[Ho
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#016)<span id="xiii.x-p6.2"></span>.
Might we then venture to read in both places <span
id="xiii.x-p6.3"></span>כאשת ‘*like a deceitful woman*?’ backsliding
Israel being often represented under the character of an adulteress. See
<span id="xiii.x-p6.4"></span>[Eze
16:32](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#032)<span id="xiii.x-p6.4"></span>.
And the last line of the next verse strongly countenances this reading:
‘and they made him jealous *with their images*.’ See <span
id="xiii.x-p6.5"></span>[Ex 20:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#005)<span
id="xiii.x-p6.5"></span>.” — *Dimock* There is, however, no necessity
for this conjectural emendation. The image employed is natural enough.
“The Eastern bow,” says Dr Adam Clarke, “which, when at rest, is in the
form of a<span id="xiii.x-p6.6"></span>וסב , must be *recurred*, or
*turned the contrary way*, in order to be what is called *bent* and
*strung* If a person who is unskilful or weak attempt to *recurve* and
string one of these bows, if he take not great heed, it will spring back
and regain its quiescent position, and perhaps break his arm. And
sometimes I have known it, when bent, to *start aside* — regain its
quiescent position — to my no small danger; and, in one or two cases, to
my injury. This image is frequently used in the Sacred Writings; but no
person has understood it, not being acquainted with the Eastern
*recurved bow*, which must be bent the contrary way, in order to be
proper for use These Israelites, when brought out of their natural bent,
soon recoiled, and relapsed into their former state.”

<span id="fn_356"></span>[357](cc10012.htm#fr_356) <span
id="xiii.x-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.x-p17"></span> “<span id="xiii.x-p17.1"></span>Ou,
Convenances.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_357"></span>[358](cc10012.htm#fr_357) <span
id="xiii.xi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xi-p3"></span> Shiloh was a city in the tribe of Ephraim,
(the son of Joseph,) where the tabernacle and the ark had for a long
time their fixed abode; (see <span id="xiii.xi-p3.1"></span>[Jos
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#001)<span id="xiii.xi-p3.1"></span>,)
but from whence the ark was taken by the Philistines, in the time of Eli
the priest.

<span id="fn_358"></span>[359](cc10012.htm#fr_358) <span
id="xiii.xi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.xi-p4"></span> “<span id="xiii.xi-p4.1"></span>C’est,
l’elite et la fleur du peuple.” — *Fr*. *marg*. “That is, the choice and
flower of the people.”

<span id="fn_359"></span>[360](cc10012.htm#fr_359) <span
id="xiii.xi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.xi-p5"></span> Fry renders this verse: —

<span id="xiii.xi-p6"></span>“A fire consumed their young men,  
And their virgins had no nuptial song.”

<span id="xiii.xi-p7"></span>“<span id="xiii.xi-p7.1"></span>הוללו,
(<span id="xiii.xi-p7.2"></span>*pro* <span
id="xiii.xi-p7.3"></span>הללו,) <span
id="xiii.xi-p7.4"></span>*laudatae*, *celebratoe sunt*, scil.
epithalamiis.” — *Simonis* “*Were* *not praised*, *i* *e*., remained
unmarried; as marriage songs were sung at nuptials.” — *Bythner*

<span id="fn_360"></span>[361](cc10012.htm#fr_360) <span
id="xiii.xi-p16.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.xi-p17"></span> “<span id="xiii.xi-p17.1"></span>Que c’en
a este fait en un moment, ainsi que le feu a incontinent consume de la
paille ou des fueilles d’arbres bieu seiches.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_361"></span>[362](cc10012.htm#fr_361) <span
id="xiii.xi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xi-p19"></span> That is, the order of enumerating first
the judgments inflicted by God upon his own people, and then those
inflicted upon their enemies.

<span id="fn_362"></span>[363](cc10012.htm#fr_362) <span
id="xiii.xi-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xi-p25"></span> “<span id="xiii.xi-p25.1"></span>S’il
eust eu un entendement rassis et bien dispose a escouter.” — *Fr*. “Had
they been possessed of a clear understanding, and disposed to listen.”

<span id="fn_363"></span>[364](cc10012.htm#fr_363) <span
id="xiii.xi-p25.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.xi-p26"></span> “<span id="xiii.xi-p26.1"></span>Les gens
stupides prenent cela comme s’il s’arrestoit ainsi qu’un homme estonne,
qui ne scait par ou commencer.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_364"></span>[365](cc10012.htm#fr_364) <span
id="xiii.xii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xii-p3"></span> “The epocha to which the Psalmist brings
down the Israelitish history was the exaltation of David, and the
establishment of the royal and ecclesiastical pre-eminence of Judah and
Jerusalem. Previous to that period, Ephraim was in some sort the leading
tribe; and the first erection of the tabernacle in Shiloh, whither the
tribes went up, gave to the sons of Joseph a kind of metropolitan
dignity in Israel. Hence, this period is considered as the time of their
precedency in the nation. But the children of Ephraim, or Israel, under
their precedency, had been faithless to their trust, and in the day of
trial, had not answered to their promise and professions. And to this
was owing the low estate, in which the administrations of Samuel and
David found the Church and people of Israel.” — *Fry*.

<span id="fn_365"></span>[366](cc10012.htm#fr_365) <span
id="xiii.xii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xii-p8"></span> Shiloh, as formerly observed, was a city
in the tribe of Ephraim, and it was rejected as the resting-place of the
ark.

<span id="fn_366"></span>[367](cc10012.htm#fr_366) <span
id="xiii.xii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xii-p10"></span> “<span id="xiii.xii-p10.1"></span>La
grace de Dieu plus grande qu’on n’eust ose esperer.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_367"></span>[368](cc10012.htm#fr_367) <span
id="xiii.xii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xii-p17"></span> In our English Bible it is, “And he
built his sanctuary like high palaces.” On which Archbishop Secker has
the following note: — “That God *built his tabernacle like high
palaces*, is not a strong expression. *On high*, which Hare adopts, is
better. And perhaps changing <span id="xiii.xii-p17.1"></span>כ, into
<span id="xiii.xii-p17.2"></span>ב, would suffice for this sense. But
the old versions have <span id="xiii.xii-p17.3"></span>כ, and yet in the
latter part of the verse they have <span id="xiii.xii-p17.4"></span>ב,
for <span id="xiii.xii-p17.5"></span>כ. It is a remarkable anticipation
to mention the temple, which Solomon built, before the mention of
David.”

<span id="fn_368"></span>[369](cc10012.htm#fr_368) <span
id="xiii.xii-p17.8"></span>

<span id="xiii.xii-p18"></span> “*Like the earth*; the simile is
intended to point out the fixedness of the *temple*, in opposition to
the frequent *different* stations in which the tabernacle had been
placed.” — *Warner*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 79](cc10013)
