[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc10005)  [Next](cc10007) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 10: Psalms, Part III*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii"></span>

<span id="vii-p1"></span>PSALM 72

<span id="vii-p2"></span>David in this psalm prays to God, in the name
of the whole Church, for the continual prosperity of the kingdom which
was promised him, and teaches us at the same time, that the true
happiness of the godly consists in their being placed under the
government of a king who was raised to the throne by the appointment of
heaven.

<span id="vii-p3"></span>¶ Of Solomon.  <span
id="fr_118"></span>[119](#fn_118)

<span id="vii-p5"></span>From the inscription of this psalm we cannot
determine who was its author. As it is expressly said at the close to be
the last of David’s prayers, it is more probable that it was composed by
him than by Solomon, his successor.  <span
id="fr_119"></span>[120](#fn_119) It may, however, be conjectured that
Solomon reduced the prayer of his father into poetical measure, to make
it more generally known, and to bring it more extensively into use among
the people, — a conjecture which is not improbable. But as the letter
<span id="vii-p6.2"></span>ל, *lamed,* has many significations in
Hebrew, it may be explained as denoting that this psalm was composed for
or in behalf of Solomon. If this is admitted, it is to be observed, that
under the person of one man there is comprehended the state of the
kingdom through successive ages. After having carefully weighed the
whole matter, I am disposed to acquiesce in the conjecture, that the
prayers to which David gave utterance on his death-bed were reduced by
his son into the form of a psalm, with the view of their being kept in
everlasting remembrance. To indicate the great importance of this
prayer, and to induce the faithful with the greater earnestness to unite
their prayers with the memorable prayer of this holy king, it is
expressly added, that this is the last which he poured forth. As Solomon
did nothing more than throw into the style of poetry the matter to which
his father gave expression, David is to be considered as the principal
author of this inspired composition. Those who would interpret it simply
as a prophecy of the kingdom of Christ, seem to put a construction upon
the words which does violence to them; and then we must always beware of
giving the Jews occasion of making an outcry, as if it were our purpose,
sophistically, to apply to Christ those things which do not directly
refer to him. But as David, who was anointed king by the commandment of
God, knew that the terms upon which he and his posterity possessed the
kingdom were, that the power and dominion should at length come to
Christ; and as he farther knew that the temporal well-being of the
people was, for the time, comprehended in this kingdom, as held by him
and his posterity, and that from it, which was only a type or shadow,
there should at length proceed something far superior — that is,
spiritual and everlasting felicity; knowing, as he did, all this, he
justly made the perpetual duration of this kingdom the object of his
most intense solicitude, and prayed with the deepest earnestness in its
behalf, — reiterating his prayer in his last moments, with the view of
distinctly testifying, that of all his cares this was the greatest. What
is here spoken of everlasting dominion cannot be limited to one man, or
to a few, nor even to twenty ages; but there is pointed out the
succession which had its end and its complete accomplishment in Christ.

<span id="vii.i"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p1"></span><span id="vii.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
72:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#001)<span id="vii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p2"></span>**1.** O God! give thy judgments to the king,
and thy righteousness to the king’s son. **2.** He shall judge thy
people in righteousness, and thy poor ones in judgment. **3.** The
mountains shall bring forth peace to the people, and the hills in
righteousness.  <span id="fr_120"></span>[121](#fn_120) **4.** He shall
judge the poor of the people; he shall save the children of the
afflicted; and shall break in pieces the calumniator. **5.** They shall
fear thee with the sun; and generation of generations shall fear thee
 <span id="fr_121"></span>[122](#fn_121) in the presence of the moon.
**6.** He shall descend as rain upon the mown grass; as the showers
 <span id="fr_122"></span>[123](#fn_122) which water the earth.

<span id="vii.i-p6"></span> 

<span id="vii.i-p7"></span><span id="vii.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p8"></span>**1.** *O God! give thy judgments to the
king.*  <span id="fr_123"></span>[124](#fn_123) While David, to whom the
promise had been made, at his death affectionately recommended to God
his son, who was to succeed him in his kingdom, he doubtless endited to
the Church a common form of prayer, that the faithful, convinced of the
impossibility of being prosperous and happy, except under one head,
should show all respect, and yield all obedience to this legitimate
order of things, and also that from this typical kingdom they might be
conducted to Christ. In short, this is a prayer that God would furnish
the king whom he had chosen with the spirit of uprightness and wisdom.
By the terms *righteousness and judgment,* the Psalmist means a due and
well-regulated administration of government, which he opposes to the
tyrannical and unbridled license of heathen kings, who, despising God,
rule according to the dictates of their own will; and thus the holy king
of Israel, who was anointed to his office by divine appointment, is
distinguished from other earthly kings. From the words we learn by the
way, that no government in the world can be rightly managed but under
the conduct of God, and by the guidance of the Holy Spirit. If kings
possessed in themselves resources sufficiently ample, it would have been
to no purpose for David to have sought by prayer from another, that with
which they were of themselves already provided. But in requesting that
the righteousness and judgment of God may be given to kings, he reminds
them that none are fit for occupying that exalted station, except in so
far as they are formed for it by the hand of God. Accordingly, in the
Proverbs of Solomon, (<span id="vii.i-p9.3"></span>[Pr
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#015)<span id="vii.i-p9.3"></span>,)
Wisdom proclaims that kings reign by her. Nor is this to be wondered at,
when we consider that civil government is so excellent an institution,
that God would have us to acknowledge him as its author, and claims to
himself the whole praise of it. But it is proper for us to descend from
the general to the particular; for since it is the peculiar work of God
to set up and to maintain a rightful government in the world, it was
much more necessary for him to communicate the special grace of his
Spirit for the maintenance and preservation of that sacred kingdom which
he had chosen in preference to all others. By *the king’s son* David no
doubt means his successors. At the same time, he has an eye to this
promise:

<span id="vii.i-p10"></span>“Of the fruit of thy body will I set upon
thy throne,”  
(<span id="vii.i-p10.2"></span>[Ps
132:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#011)<span id="vii.i-p10.2"></span>.)

<span id="vii.i-p11"></span>But no such stability as is indicated in
that passage is to be found in the successors of David, till we come to
Christ. We know that after the death of Solomon, the dignity of the
kingdom decayed, and from that time its wealth became impaired, until,
by the carrying of the people into captivity, and the ignominious death
inflicted upon their king, the kingdom was involved in total ruin. And
even after their return from Babylon, their restoration was not such as
to inspire them with any great hope, until at length Christ sprung forth
from the withered stock of Jesse. He therefore holds the first rank
among the children of David.

<span id="vii.i-p12"></span><span id="vii.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p13"></span>**2.** *He shall judge thy people in
righteousness.* Some read this in the form of a wish — *O* *that he may
judge, etc.* Others retain the future tense; and thus it is a prophecy.
But we will come nearer the correct interpretation by understanding
something intermediate, as implied. All that is afterwards spoken,
concerning the king, flows from the supposition, that the blessing
prayed for in the first verse is conferred upon him — from the
supposition that he is adorned with righteousness and judgment. The
prayer, then, should be explained thus: Govern our king, O God! that he
may judge. Or in this way, When thou shalt have bestowed upon the king
thy righteousness, then he will judge uprightly. To govern a nation
well, is an endowment far too excellent to grow out of the earth; but
the spiritual government of Christ, by which all things are restored to
perfect order, ought much more to be considered a gift of heaven. In the
first clause of the verse, David speaks of the whole people in general.
In the second clause, he expressly mentions *the poor,* who, on account
of their poverty and weakness, have need of the help of others, and for
whose sake kings are armed with the sword to grant them redress when
unjustly oppressed. Hence, also, proceeds *peace,* of which mention is
made in the third verse. The term *peace* being employed among the
Hebrews to denote not only *rest* and *tranquillity,* but also
*prosperity,* David teaches us that the people would enjoy prosperity
and happiness, when the affairs of the nation were administered
according to the principles of righteousness. *The bringing forth of
peace* is a figurative expression taken from the fertility of the earth.
 <span id="fr_124"></span>[125](#fn_124) And when it is said that *the
mountains and hills shall bring forth peace,*  <span
id="fr_125"></span>[126](#fn_125) the meaning is, that no corner would
be found in the country in which it did not prevail, not even the most
unpromising parts, indicated by the mountains, which are commonly
barren, or at least do not produce so great an abundance of fruits as
the valleys. Besides, both the word *peace* and the word *righteousness*
are connected with each clause of the verse, and must be twice repeated,
 <span id="fr_126"></span>[127](#fn_126) the idea intended to be
conveyed being, that peace by righteousness  <span
id="fr_127"></span>[128](#fn_127) should be diffused through every part
of the world. Some read simply *righteousness,* instead of In
*righteousness,* supposing the letter <span id="vii.i-p17.1"></span>ב*,
beth,* to be here redundant, which does not, however, appear to be the
case.  <span id="fr_128"></span>[129](#fn_128)

<span id="vii.i-p19"></span><span id="vii.i-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p20"></span>**4.** *He shall judge the poor of the
people.* The poet continues his description of the end and fruit of a
righteous government, and unfolds at greater length what he had briefly
touched upon concerning the afflicted among the people. But it is a
truth which ought to be borne in mind, that kings can keep themselves
within the bounds of justice and equity only by the grace of God; for
when they are not governed by the Spirit of righteousness proceeding
from heaven, their government is converted into a system of tyranny and
robbery. As God had promised to extend his care to the poor and
afflicted among his people, David, as an argument to enforce the prayer
which he presents in behalf of the king, shows that the granting of it
will tend to the comfort of the poor. God is indeed no respecter of
persons; but it is not without cause that God takes a more special care
of the poor than of others, since they are most exposed to injuries and
violence. Let laws and the administration of justice be taken away, and
the consequence will be, that the more powerful a man is, he will be the
more able to oppress his poor brethren. David, therefore, particularly
mentions that the king will be the defender of those who can only be
safe under the protection of the magistrate, and declares that he will
be their avenger when they are made the victims of injustice and wrong.
The phrase, *The children of the afflicted,* is put for *the afflicted,*
an idiom quite common in Hebrew, and a similar form of expression is
sometimes used by the Greeks, as when they say <span
id="vii.i-p20.1"></span>υἱους ἰατρων, *the sons of physicians,* for
*physicians.*  <span id="fr_129"></span>[130](#fn_129) But as the king
cannot discharge the duty of succouring and defending the poor which
David imposes upon him, unless he curb the wicked by authority and the
power of the sword, it is very justly added in the end of the verse,
that when righteousness reigns, *oppressors* or *extortioners will be
broken in pieces.* It would be foolish to wait till they should give
place of their own accord. They must be repressed by the sword, that
their audacity and wickedness may be prevented from proceeding to
greater lengths. It is therefore requisite for a king to be a man of
wisdom, and resolutely prepared effectually to restrain the violent and
injurious, that the rights of the meek and orderly may be preserved
unimpaired. Thus none will be fit for governing a people but he who has
learned to be rigorous when the case requires. Licentiousness must
necessarily prevail under an effeminate and inactive sovereign, or even
under one who is of a disposition too gentle and forbearing. There is
much truth in the old saying, that it is worse to live under a prince
through whose lenity everything is lawful, than under a tyrant where
there is no liberty at all.

<span id="vii.i-p22"></span><span id="vii.i-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p23"></span>**5.** *They shall fear thee with the sun*
If this is read as an apostrophe, or change of person, it may be
properly and without violence understood of the king; implying, that the
ornaments or distinctions which chiefly secure to a sovereign reverence
from his subjects are his impartially securing to every man the
possession of his own rights, and his manifesting a spirit of humanity
ready at all times to succor the poor and miserable, as well as a spirit
determined rigorously to subdue the audacity of the wicked. But it will
be more appropriate, without changing the person, to explain it of God
himself.  <span id="fr_130"></span>[131](#fn_130) The preservation of
mutual equity among men is an inestimable blessing; but the service of
God is well worthy of being preferred even to this. David, therefore,
very properly commends to us the blessed fruits of a holy and righteous
government, by telling us that it will draw in its train true religion
and the fear of God. And Paul, when enjoining us in <span
id="vii.i-p24.1"></span>[1Ti 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#002)<span
id="vii.i-p24.1"></span>, to pray for kings, expressly mentions what we
ought to have in view in our prayers, which is, “that we may lead a
quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty.” As there is no
small danger, were civil government overthrown, of religion being
destroyed, and the worship of God annihilated, David beseeches God to
have respect to his own name and glory in preserving the king. By this
argument he at once reminds kings of their duty, and stirs up the people
to prayer; for we cannot be better employed than in directing all our
desires and prayers to the advancement of the service and honor of God.
When we come to Christ, this is far more truly applicable to him, true
religion being established in his kingdom and nowhere else. And
certainly David, in describing the worship or service of God as
continuing to the end of the world, intimates by the way that he ascends
in thought to that everlasting kingdom which God had promised: *They
shall fear thee with the sun; and generation of generations shall fear
thee in the presence of the moon.*  <span
id="fr_131"></span>[132](#fn_131)

<span id="vii.i-p26"></span><span id="vii.i-p26.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p27"></span>**6.** *He shall descend as the rain upon
the mown grass.* This comparison may seem at first sight to be somewhat
harsh; but it elegantly and appositely expresses the great advantage
which is derived by all from the good and equitable constitution of a
kingdom. Meadows, we know, are cut in the beginning of summer when the
heat prevails; and did not the earth imbibe new moisture by the falling
rain, even the very roots of the herbage would wither by reason of the
barren and parched state of the soil. David, therefore, teaches us that
as God defends the earth from the heat of the sun by watering it, so he
in like manner provides for the welfare of his Church, and defends it
under the government of the king. But this prediction has received its
highest fulfillment in Christ, who, by distilling upon the Church his
secret grace, renders her fruitful.

<span id="vii.ii"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p1"></span><span id="vii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
72:7-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#007)<span id="vii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p2"></span>**7.** In his days shall the righteous
flourish; and there shall be abundance of peace, so long as the moon
endureth.  <span id="fr_132"></span>[133](#fn_132) **8.** He shall have
dominion from sea to sea, and from the river to the ends of the earth.
**9.** The inhabitants of the desert shall bow before him; and his
enemies shall lick the dust. **10.** The kings of Tarshish and of the
isles shall bring a present: the kings of Sheba and Seba shall bring a
gift to him. **11.** And all kings shall prostrate themselves before
him; all nations shall serve him.

<span id="vii.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="vii.ii-p5"></span><span id="vii.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p6"></span>**7.** *In his days shall the righteous
flourish* It is unnecessary for me frequently to repeat what I have once
stated, that all these sentences depend upon the first verse. David,
therefore, prayed that the king might be adorned with righteousness and
judgment, that the just might flourish and the people prosper. This
prediction receives its highest fulfillment in Christ. It was, indeed,
the duty of Solomon to maintain the righteous; but it is the proper
office of Christ to make men righteous. He not only gives to every man
his own, but also reforms their hearts through the agency of his Spirit.
By this means he brings righteousness back, as it were, from exile,
which otherwise would be altogether banished from the world. Upon the
return of righteousness there succeeds the blessing of God, by which he
causes all his children to rejoice in the way of making them to perceive
that under their King, Christ, every provision is made for their
enjoying all manner of prosperity and felicity. If any would rather take
the word *peace* in its proper and more restricted signification, I have
no objections to it. And, certainly, to the consummation of a happy
life, nothing is more desirable than peace; for amidst the turmoils and
contentions of war, men derive almost no good from having an abundance
of all things, as it is then wasted and destroyed. Moreover, when David
represents the life of the king as prolonged to the end of the world,
this shows more clearly that he not only comprehends his successors who
occupied an earthly throne, but that he ascends even to Christ, who, by
rising from the dead, obtained for himself celestial life and glory,
that he might govern his Church for ever.

<span id="vii.ii-p7"></span><span id="vii.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p8"></span>**8** *He shall have dominion from sea to
sea.* As the Lord, when he promised his people the land of Canaan for an
inheritance, assigned to it these four boundaries, (<span
id="vii.ii-p8.1"></span>[Ge 15:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#018)<span
id="vii.ii-p8.1"></span>,) David intimates, that so long as the kingdom
shall continue to exist, the possession of the promised land will be
entire, to teach the faithful that the blessing of God cannot be fully
realised, except whilst this kingdom shall flourish. He therefore
declares that he will exercise dominion from the Red Sea, or from that
arm of the Egyptian sea to the sea of Syria, which is called the Sea of
the Philistines,  <span id="fr_133"></span>[134](#fn_133) and also from
the river Euphrates to the great wilderness. If it is objected that such
narrow bounds do not correspond with the kingdom of Christ, which was to
be extended from the rising of the sun to the going down thereof, we
reply, that David obviously accommodates his language to his own time,
the amplitude of the kingdom of Christ not having been, as yet, fully
unfolded. He has therefore begun his description in phraseology well
known, and in familiar use under the law and the prophets; and even
Christ himself commenced his reign within the limits here marked out
before he penetrated to the uttermost boundaries of the earth; as it is
said in <span id="vii.ii-p9.1"></span>[Ps
110:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#002)<span id="vii.ii-p9.1"></span>,

<span id="vii.ii-p10"></span>“The Lord shall send the rod of thy
strength out of Zion.”

<span id="vii.ii-p11"></span>But, soon after, the Psalmist proceeds to
speak of the enlarged extent of the empire of this king, declaring that
the kings beyond the sea shall also be tributaries to him; and also that
the inhabitants of the desert shall receive his yoke. The word <span
id="vii.ii-p11.1"></span>ציים, *tsiim,*  <span
id="fr_134"></span>[135](#fn_134) which we have translated *inhabitants
of the desert,* is, I have no doubt, to be understood of those who,
dwelling towards the south, were at a great distance from the land of
Canaan. The Prophet immediately adds, that *the enemies of the king
shall lick the dust* in token of their reverence. This, as is well
known, was in ancient times a customary ceremony among the nations of
the East; and Alexander the Great, after he had conquered the East,
wished to compel his subjects to practice it, from which arose great
dissatisfaction and contentions, the Macedonians disdainfully refusing
to yield such a slavish and degrading mark of subjection.  <span
id="fr_135"></span>[136](#fn_135) The meaning then is, that the king
chosen by God in Judea will obtain so complete a victory over all his
enemies, far and wide, that they shall come humbly to pay him homage.

<span id="vii.ii-p14"></span><span id="vii.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p15"></span>**10.** *The kings of Tarshish and of the
isles shall bring presents.* The Psalmist still continues, as in the
preceding verse, to speak of the extent of the kingdom. The Hebrews
apply the appellation of *Tarshish* to the whole coast, which looks
towards Cilicia. By *the isles,* therefore, is denoted the whole coast
of the Mediterranean Sea, from Cilicia to Greece. As the Jews,
contenting themselves with the commodities of their own country, did not
undertake voyages to distant countries, like other nations; God having
expressly required them to confine themselves within the limits of their
own country, that they might not be corrupted by the manners of
strangers; they were accustomed, in consequence of this, to apply the
appellation of *isles* to those countries which were on the other side
of the sea. I indeed admit that Cyprus, Crete, and other islands, are
comprehended under this name; but I also maintain that it applies to all
the territories which were situated beyond the Mediterranean Sea. By the
words <span id="vii.ii-p15.1"></span>מנחה, *minchah, a present,* and
<span id="vii.ii-p15.2"></span>אשכר, *eshcar, a gift,* must be
understood any tribute or custom, and not voluntary offerings; for it is
vanquished enemies, and the mark or token of their subjection, which are
spoken of. These terms appear to be used intentionally in this place, in
order to mitigate the odium attached to such a mark of subjugation;
 <span id="fr_136"></span>[137](#fn_136) as if the inspired writer
indirectly reproved subjects, if they defrauded their kings of their
revenues. By <span id="vii.ii-p16.4"></span>שבא, *Sheba,* some think
Arabia is intended, and by <span id="vii.ii-p16.5"></span>שבא, *Seba,*
Ethiopia. Some, however, by the first word understand all that part of
the Gulf of Arabia which lies towards Africa; and by the second, which
is written with the letter <span id="vii.ii-p16.6"></span>ס, *samech,*
the country of Sabea,  <span id="fr_137"></span>[138](#fn_137) the more
pleasant and fruitful country. This opinion is probably the more correct
of the two. It is unnecessary here to remark how foolishly this passage
has been wrested in the Church of Rome. They chant this verse as
referring to the philosophers or wise men who came to worship Christ; as
if, indeed, it were in their power of philosophers to make kings all
upon a sudden; and in addition to this, to change the quarters of the
world, to make of the east the south or the west.

<span id="vii.ii-p18"></span><span id="vii.ii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p19"></span>**11.** *And all kings shall prostrate
themselves before him.* This verse contains a more distinct statement of
the truth, That the whole world will be brought in subjection to the
authority of Christ. The kingdom of Judah was unquestionably never more
flourishing than under the reign of Solomon; but even then there were
only a small number of kings who paid tribute to him, and what they paid
was inconsiderable in amount; and, moreover, it was paid upon condition
that they should be allowed to live in the enjoyment of liberty under
their own laws. While David then began with his own son, and the
posterity of his son, he rose by the Spirit of prophecy to the spiritual
kingdom of Christ; a point worthy of our special notice, since it
teaches us that we have not been called to the hope of everlasting
salvation by chance, but because our heavenly Father had already
destined to give us to his Son. From this we also learn, that in the
Church and flock of Christ there is a place for kings; whom David does
not here disarm of their sword nor despoil of their crown, in order to
admit them into the Church, but rather declares that they will come with
all the dignity of their station to prostrate themselves at the feet of
Christ.

<span id="vii.iii"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p1"></span><span id="vii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
72:12-15](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#012)<span
id="vii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p2"></span>**12.** For he will deliver the poor when
he crieth to him; and the afflicted person who hath none to succor him.
**13.** He will have pity on the poor and indigent; and will save the
souls \[or lives\] of the poor. **14.** He will redeem their souls from
fraud and violence: and their blood will be precious in his sight.
**15.** And he shall live; and there shall be given to him of the gold
of Sheba; and prayer shall continually be made for him, and daily shall
he be blessed.

<span id="vii.iii-p3"></span> 

<span id="vii.iii-p4"></span><span id="vii.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p5"></span>**12.** *For he will deliver the poor when
he crieth to him.* The Psalmist again affirms that the kingdom which he
magnifies so greatly will not be tyrannical or cruel. The majority of
kings, neglecting the well-being of the community, have their minds
wholly engrossed with their own private interests. The consequence is,
that they unmercifully oppress their miserable subjects; and it even
happens that the more formidable any of them is, and the more absorbing
his rapacity, he is accounted so much the more eminent and illustrious.
But it is far different with the king here described. It has been held
as a proverb by all mankind, “That there is nothing in which men
approach nearer to God than by their beneficence;” and it would be very
inconsistent did not this virtue shine forth in those kings whom God has
more nearly linked to himself. Accordingly, David, to render the king
beloved who was chosen of God, justly declares, not only that he will be
the guardian of justice and equity, but also that he will be so humane
and merciful, as to be ready to afford succor to the most despised;
qualities too seldom to be found in sovereigns, who, dazzled with their
own splendor, withdraw themselves to a distance from the poor and the
afflicted, as if it were unworthy of, and far beneath, their royal
dignity to make them the objects of their care. David avows that the
blood of the common people, which is usually accounted vile and as a
thing of nought, will be very precious in the estimation of this
heavenly king. Constancy and magnanimity are denoted by the words *he
will redeem;* for it would be far short of the duty of a king merely to
hate fraud and extortion, did he not resolutely come forward to punish
these crimes and set himself to defend those who are oppressed.  <span
id="fr_138"></span>[139](#fn_138) Under the terms *fraud* and *violence*
is comprehended all kind of wrong-doing; for a man in working mischief
is either a lion or a fox. Some rage with open violence, and others
proceed to wrong-doing insidiously and by secret arts. Moreover, we know
that supreme sovereignty, both in heaven and earth, has been given to
Christ, (<span id="vii.iii-p6.2"></span>[Mt
28:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#018)<span id="vii.iii-p6.2"></span>,)
that he may defend his people not only from all temporal dangers, but
especially from all the harassing annoyances of Satan, until having
delivered them at length from all trouble, he gather them into the
everlasting rest of his heavenly kingdom.

<span id="vii.iii-p7"></span><span id="vii.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p8"></span>**15.** *And he shall live.* To refer the
word *live* to the poor, as some do, seems forced. What David affirms
is, that this king shall be rewarded with long life, which is not the
least of God’s earthly blessings. The words which follow are to be read
indefinitely, that is to say, without determining any particular person;
 <span id="fr_139"></span>[140](#fn_139) as if it had been said, The
gold of Arabia shall be given him, and prayers shall everywhere be made
for his prosperity. There is thus again a repetition of what had been
previously said concerning his power; for if Arabia shall pay him
tribute, how vast an amount of riches will be gathered from so many
countries nearer home! Christ, it is true, does not reign to hoard up
gold, but David meant to teach by this figure, that even the nations
which were most remote would yield such homage to him, as to surrender
to him themselves and all that they possessed. It is no uncommon thing
for the glory of the spiritual kingdom of Christ to be portrayed under
images of outward splendor. David, in conformity with this usual style
of Scripture, has here foretold that the kingdom of Christ would be
distinguished for its wealth; but this is to be understood as referring
to its spiritual character. Whence it appears how wickedly and wantonly
the Papists have perverted this passage, and made it subserve their
purpose of raking to themselves the perishable riches of the world.
Moreover, when he speaks of the common prayers of the people, by which
they will commend the prosperity of the king to the care of God, he
intimates that so well-pleased will they be with being his subjects,
that they will account nothing so desirable as to yield entire
submission to his authority. Many, no doubt, reject his yoke, and
hypocrites fret and murmur secretly in their hearts, and would gladly
extinguish all remembrance of Christ, were it in their power; but the
affectionate interest here predicted is what all true believers are
careful to cultivate, not only because to pray for earthly kings is a
duty enjoined upon them in the Word of God, but also because they ought
to feel a special desire and solicitude for the enlargement of the
boundaries of this kingdom, in which both the majesty of God shines
forth, and their own welfare and happiness are included. Accordingly, in
<span id="vii.iii-p9.4"></span>[Ps
118:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#025)<span id="vii.iii-p9.4"></span>,
we will find a form of prayer dictated for the whole Church, That God
would bless this king; not that Christ stands in need of our prayers,
but because he justly requires from his servants this manifestation or
proof of true piety; and by it they may also exercise themselves in
praying for the coming of the kingdom of God.

<span id="vii.iv"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p1"></span><span id="vii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
72:16-20](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#016)<span id="vii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p2"></span>**16.** A handful of corn shall be in the
earth upon the top of the mountains; the fruit thereof shall be shaken
as of Lebanon:  <span id="fr_140"></span>[141](#fn_140) and they shall
go forth from the city as it were a plant of the earth. **17.** His name
shall endure for ever: his name shall be continued in the presence of
the sun: and all nations shall bless themselves in him, and shall call
him blessed. **18.** Blessed be Jehovah God! the God of Israel! who
alone doeth wonderful things. **19.** And blessed be his glorious name
\[literally, the name of his glory\] for ever; and let all the earth be
filled with his glory. Amen, and Amen. **20.** The prayers of David the
son of Jesse are ended.

<span id="vii.iv-p4"></span> 

<span id="vii.iv-p5"></span><span id="vii.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p6"></span>**16.** *A handful of corn shall be*  <span
id="fr_141"></span>[142](#fn_141) *in the earth upon the top of the
mountains.* The opinion of those who take *a handful*  <span
id="fr_142"></span>[143](#fn_142) for a small portion appears to be well
founded. They think that by the two circumstances here referred to, a
rare and uncommon fertility is indicated. Only a very small quantity of
wheat, not even more than a man can hold in the palm of his hand, has
been sown, and that even upon the tops of the mountains, which generally
are far from being fruitful; and yet so very abundant will be the
increase, that the ears will wave and rustle in the winds as the trees
on Lebanon. I do not, however, know whether so refined a comparison
between seed-time and harvest is at all intended by David. His words may
be considered more simply as denoting that so great will be the
fertility, so abundant the produce of wheat which the mountain tops
shall yield, that it may be reaped with full hand. By this figure is
portrayed the large abundance of all good things which, through the
blessing of God, would be enjoyed under the reign of Christ. To this is
added the increase of children. Not only would the earth produce an
abundance all kinds of fruits, but the cities and towns also would be
fruitful in the production of men: *And they shall go out*  <span
id="fr_143"></span>[144](#fn_143) *from the city as the grass of the
earth* I have preferred translating the word *Lebanon* in the genitive
case instead of the nominative; for the metonomy of putting the name of
the mountain, Lebanon, for the trees upon it, which is renounced by
others, is somewhat harsh.

<span id="vii.iv-p10"></span><span id="vii.iv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p11"></span>**17.** *His name shall endure for ever*
The inspired writer again repeats what he had previously affirmed
concerning the perpetual duration of this kingdom. And he doubtless
intended carefully to distinguish it from earthly kingdoms, which either
suddenly vanish away, or at length, oppressed with their own greatness,
fall into ruin, affording by their destruction incontestible evidence
that nothing in this world is stable and of long duration. When he says
that *his name shall endure for ever,* it is not to be understood as
merely implying that his fame should survive his death, as worldly men
are ambitious that their name may not be buried with their body. He is
rather speaking of the kingdom when he says that the name of this prince
will continue illustrious and glorious for ever. Some explain the words
<span id="vii.iv-p11.1"></span>לפני-שמש, *liphney-shemesh,* which we
have rendered, *in the presence of the sun*, as if he meant that the
glory with which God would invest the kings of Judah would surpass the
brightness of the sun; but this is at variance with the context, for he
had said above, (verse 5th,) in the same sense, *with the sun,* and *in
the presence of the moon.*

<span id="vii.iv-p12"></span>After having, therefore, made mention of
the everlasting duration of the name of this king, he subjoins, by way
of explanation, *his name shall be continued in the presence of the sun*
Literally it is, *his name shall have children,*  <span
id="fr_144"></span>[145](#fn_144) (for the Hebrew verb is derived from
the noun for *son*,) that is to say, it shall be perpetuated from father
to son;  <span id="fr_145"></span>[146](#fn_145) and as the sun rises
daily to enlighten the world, so shall the strength of this king be
continually renewed, and thus will continue from age to age for ever. In
like manner, we shall afterwards see that the sun and the moon are
called witnesses of the same eternity, (<span
id="vii.iv-p14.2"></span>[Ps
89:38](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#038)<span id="vii.iv-p14.2"></span>.)
Whence it follows that this cannot be understood of the earthly kingdom,
which flourished only for a short time in the house of David, and not
only lost its vigor in the third successor, but was at length
ignominiously extinguished. It properly applies to the kingdom of
Christ; and although that kingdom often totters upon the earth when
assailed with the furious hatred of the whole world, and battered by the
most formidable engines of Satan, it is yet wonderfully upheld and
sustained by God, that it may not altogether fail. The words which
follow, *All nations* *shall bless themselves in him,* admit of a
twofold meaning. The Hebrews often use this form of expression when the
name of any man is used as an example or formula of prayer for
blessings. For instance, a man blesses himself in David, who beseeches
God to be as favorable and bountiful to him as he proved himself to be
towards David. On the other hand, he is said to curse in Sodom and
Gomorrah who employs the names of these cities by which to pronounce
some curse. If, then, these two expressions, *they shall bless
themselves in him, and they shall call him blessed,* are used in the
same sense; the expression, *to bless themselves in the king,* will just
mean to pray that the same prosperity may be conferred upon us which was
conferred upon this highly favored king, whose happy condition will
excite universal admiration. But if it is considered preferable to
distinguish between these two expressions, (which is not less probable,)
to *bless one’s self in the king,* will denote to seek happiness from
him; for the nations will be convinced that nothing is more desirable
than to receive from him laws and ordinances.

<span id="vii.iv-p15"></span><span id="vii.iv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p16"></span>**18.** *Blessed be Jehovah God! the God of
Israel.*  <span id="fr_146"></span>[147](#fn_146) David, after having
prayed for prosperity to his successors, breaks forth in praising God,
because he was assured by the divine oracle that his prayers would not
be in vain. Had he not with the eyes of faith beheld those things which
we have seen above, his rejoicing would have been less free and lively.
When he says that *God alone doeth wonderful things,* this, no doubt, is
spoken in reference to the subject of which he is presently treating,
with the view not only of commending the excellence of the kingdom, but
also to admonish himself and others of the need which there is that God
should display his wonderful and stupendous power for its preservation.
And certainly it was not owing to any of David’s successors, a few
excepted, that the royal throne did not fall a hundred times, yea, was
not even completely ruined. To go no farther, was not Solomon’s most
disgraceful apostasy deserving of utter destruction? And as to the rest
of his successors, with the exception of Josias, Hezekiah, Jehoshaphat,
and a few others, did they not fall from evil to worse, as if each
strove to outstrip his predecessor, and thus so provoked the wrath of
God, as it were deliberately, that it is wonderful that he did not
immediately launch the thunderbolts of his vengeance upon the whole race
utterly to destroy them? Moreover, as David, being endued with the
Spirit of prophecy, was not ignorant that Satan would always continue to
be a cruel enemy of the Church’s welfare, he doubtless knew that the
grace of God, of which he presently speaks, would have great and arduous
difficulties to overcome in order to continue for ever in his own
nation. And the event afterwards unquestionably showed by how many
miracles God accomplished his promises, whether we consider the return
of his people from the captivity of Babylon, or the astonishing
deliverances which followed until Christ as a tender branch sprung out
of a dead tree. David, therefore, with good reason prays that the glory
of the divine name may fill the whole earth, since that kingdom was to
be extended even to the uttermost boundaries of the globe, And that all
the godly, with earnest and ardent affection of heart, may unite with
him in the same prayers, there is added a confirmation in the words,
*Amen, and Amen*

<span id="vii.iv-p18"></span><span id="vii.iv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p19"></span>**20.** *The prayers of David the son of
Jesse are ended.* We have before observed that this was not without
cause added by Solomon, (if we may suppose him to have put the matter of
this psalm into the form of poetical compositions) not only that he
might avoid defrauding his father of the praise which was due to him,
but also to stir up the Church the more earnestly to pour forth before
God the same prayers which David had continued to offer even with his
last breath. Let us then remember that it is our bounden duty to pray to
God, both with unfeigned earnestness, and with unwearied perseverance,
that he would be pleased to maintain and defend the Church under the
government of his Son. The name of *Jesse,* the father of David, seems
to be here introduced to bring to remembrance David’s origin, that the
grace of God may appear the more illustrious in having raised from the
sheepfold a man of mean birth, as well as the youngest and the least
esteemed among his brethren, and in having advanced him to so high a
degree of honor, as to make him king over the chosen people.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_118"></span>[119](cc10006.htm#fr_118) <span
id="vii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vii-p4"></span> “<span id="vii-p4.1"></span>Ou, pour Solomon.”
— *Fr* *marg* “Or, for Solomon.” The prefix <span
id="vii-p4.2"></span>ל, *lamed*, may be rendered either *of* or *for*

<span id="fn_119"></span>[120](cc10006.htm#fr_119) <span
id="vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii-p6"></span> To this it may be added, as Dathe observes,
that “Solomon could not, without the imputation of vanity, have
predicted in such strains the glory of his reign, the admiration with
which he would be regarded by other nations, and the happiness of his
subjects, arising from his prudence and virtue.” The same writer adds,
“But while David, or the inspired author, whoever he was, predicted the
prosperity of Solomon’s reign, the promise given (<span
id="vii-p6.1"></span>[2Sa 7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#000)<span
id="vii-p6.1"></span>) of that greatest and best of kings, who was
afterwards to arise in the family of David, seems to have been brought
before his mind. This is the reason that the description given is, in
various respects, more suited to the reign of the Messiah than to the
reign of Solomon.”

<span id="fn_120"></span>[121](cc10006.htm#fr_120) <span
id="vii.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p3"></span> In the Septuagint, *in righteousness* is
connected with the following verse — In righteousness he shall judge the
poor of the people,” Dr Adam Clarke considers this to be the true
division.

<span id="fn_121"></span>[122](cc10006.htm#fr_121) <span
id="vii.i-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p4"></span> “<span id="vii.i-p4.1"></span>*Te
craindra*,” “*shall fear thee*,” is a supplement in the French version.
There is no supplement in the Latin version.

<span id="fn_122"></span>[123](cc10006.htm#fr_122) <span
id="vii.i-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p5"></span> “<span id="vii.i-p5.1"></span>Comme les
pluyes drues et longues.” — *Fr*. “As the plenteous and prolonged
showers.”

<span id="fn_123"></span>[124](cc10006.htm#fr_123) <span
id="vii.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p9"></span> “In other places, those events which God
himself brings to pass in defending the righteous, and in punishing the
wicked, are called *his* *judgments*, as in <span
id="vii.i-p9.1"></span>[Ps 36:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#007)<span
id="vii.i-p9.1"></span>; but the statutes promulgated by God for the
regulation of human conduct are also styled *his judgments*. In this
sense, the judgments and laws of God may be considered as synonymous
terms, <span id="vii.i-p9.2"></span>[Ps.
119:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#020),
[30](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#030),
[39](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#039),
[52](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#052),
[75](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#075)<span id="vii.i-p9.2"></span>. The
clause is justly explained by Jarchi: ‘*Knowledge of the judgments* — to
wit, of the particular rules of right — *which thou hast commanded in
the law*.’ The explication given by Kimchi is suitable also: ‘That he
may not err in giving forth sentences, give him knowledge and
understanding, that he may judge with judgment and justice.’” —
*Rosenmüller on the Messianic Psalms*, *Biblical Cabinet*, volume 32,
pp. 232, 233.

<span id="fn_124"></span>[125](cc10006.htm#fr_124) <span
id="vii.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p14"></span> As the earth brings forth fruits, so shall
the mountains bring forth peace. The same figure is used in <span
id="vii.i-p14.1"></span>[Ps 85:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#012)<span
id="vii.i-p14.1"></span>, where it is said, “Truth shall spring out of
the earth.”

<span id="fn_125"></span>[126](cc10006.htm#fr_125) <span
id="vii.i-p14.2"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p15"></span> Dathe and Boothroyd take another view.
According to them, the allusion is to the custom which, in ancient
times, prevailed in the East, of announcing good or bad news from the
tops of mountains, or other eminences; by means of which, acts of
justice were speedily communicated to the remotest part of the country.
The same image is used in <span id="vii.i-p15.1"></span>[Isa
40:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#009)<span id="vii.i-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_126"></span>[127](cc10006.htm#fr_126) <span
id="vii.i-p15.2"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p16"></span> That is, we are to read thus: “The
mountains shall bring forth peace to the people in righteousness; and
the hills shall bring forth peace to the people in righteousness.”

<span id="fn_127"></span>[128](cc10006.htm#fr_127) <span
id="vii.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p17"></span> “Peace by righteousness.” Calvin considers
the Psalmist as representing peace to be the native fruit or effect of
righteousness. Such also is the interpretation of Rosenmüller: “‘And
*the hills* shall bring forth peace with *justice*, or *because of
justice*.’ *Justice* and *peace* are joined together, as cause and
effect. When iniquity or injustice prevails, general misery is the
consequence; and, on the contrary, the prevalence of justice is followed
by general felicity. The sense of the clause is, — happiness shall reign
throughout the land, for the people shall be governed with equity.”

<span id="fn_128"></span>[129](cc10006.htm#fr_128) <span
id="vii.i-p17.2"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p18"></span> Rosenmüller, in like manner, objects to
this reading. “Some expositors,” says he, “consider the prefix <span
id="vii.i-p18.1"></span>ב, *beth*, as redundant, or as denoting that the
noun is in the accusative case; and that the clause may be rendered,
*And the hills shall bring forth justice* Noldius, in his Concordance,
adduces several passages as examples of a similar construction; but they
appear, all of them, to be constructed on a different principle.”

<span id="fn_129"></span>[130](cc10006.htm#fr_129) <span
id="vii.i-p20.2"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p21"></span> Many examples of this Hebraism might be
quoted. In <span id="vii.i-p21.1"></span>[Ec
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#017)<span id="vii.i-p21.1"></span>,
“a son of nobles” is put for “a noble person;” in <span
id="vii.i-p21.2"></span>[Ps 18:45](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#045)<span
id="vii.i-p21.2"></span>, *children of the stranger*, for *strangers*;
and, in many passages, *children*, or *sons of men*, for *men*, simply
considered.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[131](cc10006.htm#fr_130) <span
id="vii.i-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p24"></span> “The poet in this clause addresses God; not
the king, of whom he speaks always in the third person. The sense is,
This king shall establish and preserve among his subjects the true
religion, — the uncorrupted worship of God. Michaelis, on this passage,
justly remarks that this could not, without extreme flattery, be
predicated of Solomon.” — *Dathe*.

<span id="fn_131"></span>[132](cc10006.htm#fr_131) <span
id="vii.i-p24.2"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p25"></span> “With the sun,” and “in the presence of the
moon,” are Hebrew idioms, designating the eternity of the Messiah’s
kingdom. “‘They shall venerate thee with the sun, and in presence of the
moon;’ that is, as long as the sun shines, and is succeeded by the moon,
or while the sun and moon continue to give light, — in a word, for ever.
Compare verse seventh, where the same idea is expressed, only in a
slightly different manner, — *until there be no moon* <span
id="vii.i-p25.1"></span>[Ps 89:37](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#037)<span
id="vii.i-p25.1"></span> — ‘His throne shall be as the sun before me, as
the moon it shall be established for ever.’ The word <span
id="vii.i-p25.2"></span>לפני, \[translated *in presence of*,\] in this
passage, is to be understood in the same sense as in <span
id="vii.i-p25.3"></span>[Ge 11:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#028)<span
id="vii.i-p25.3"></span>, <span id="vii.i-p25.4"></span>*Mortuus est
Haran*, <span id="vii.i-p25.5"></span>על-פני,<span
id="vii.i-p25.6"></span>*coram facie* Terah; ‘And Haran died before the
face of Terah,’ that is, while Terah still survived. Hence, in <span
id="vii.i-p25.7"></span>[Ps
102:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#028)<span id="vii.i-p25.7"></span>,
where <span id="vii.i-p25.8"></span>לפניך, <span
id="vii.i-p25.9"></span>*coram te*, ‘before thee,’ is used in reference
to God, — the Alexandrine version gives <span
id="vii.i-p25.10"></span>εἰς αἰω̑νας ‘for ever.’ Here the sense is given
in the words immediately following, <span id="vii.i-p25.11"></span>דור
דורים, <span id="vii.i-p25.12"></span>*generatio generationum*, ‘a
generation of generations’ shall venerate thee; — in other words,
throughout all generations, or during a continual series of years, men
shall celebrate thy happy and glorious reign.” — *Rosenmüller* Calvin
also reads <span id="vii.i-p25.13"></span>דור דורים, “generation of
generations,” in the nominative case. The translators of our English
Bible supply the preposition <span id="vii.i-p25.14"></span>ל, *lamed*,
thus making it, “throughout all generations.” But in either case the
meaning is the same.

<span id="fn_132"></span>[133](cc10006.htm#fr_132) <span
id="vii.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p3"></span> Literally, “till there be no moon;” till
the end of the world — for ever.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[134](cc10006.htm#fr_133) <span
id="vii.ii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p9"></span> Or the Mediterranean.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[135](cc10006.htm#fr_134) <span
id="vii.ii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p12"></span> <span id="vii.ii-p12.1"></span>ציים,
*tsiim*, is from <span id="vii.ii-p12.2"></span>ציה, *tsiyah*, *a dry
and parched country*, *a desert* Rosenmüller translates it, *the* *rude
nations* “The word <span id="vii.ii-p12.3"></span>ציים,” says he, “seems
to signify rude, barbarous tribes; the inhabitants of desert places, —
of vast and unknown regions. This sense appears to be most suitable,
both here and in <span id="vii.ii-p12.4"></span>[Ps
74:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#014)<span id="vii.ii-p12.4"></span>.
Hence it is used <span id="vii.ii-p12.5"></span>[Isa.
13:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#021), [Isa.
34:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#014)<span id="vii.ii-p12.5"></span>;
<span id="vii.ii-p12.6"></span>[Jer
50:39](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#039)<span id="vii.ii-p12.6"></span>,
for the animals, — the wild beasts that inhabit jungles and deserts.”
The LXX. translate it <span id="vii.ii-p12.7"></span>Αιθιοπες, “the
Æthiopians;” and in like manner the Vulgate, Æthiopic, and Arabic
versions. Boothroyd is of opinion that the wild Arabs may be intended.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[136](cc10006.htm#fr_135) <span
id="vii.ii-p12.8"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p13"></span> The kings of Persia never admitted any
into their presence without exacting this act of adoration, and it was
the Persian custom which Alexander wished to introduce among the
Macedonians. — *Rollin*’*s Ancient History*, volume 4, p. 288. This
custom is still extant among the Turks. As soon as an ambassador sees
the Sultan, he falls on his knees and kisses the ground.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[137](cc10006.htm#fr_136) <span
id="vii.ii-p15.3"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p16"></span> <span id="vii.ii-p16.1"></span>מנחה,
*minchah*, properly signifies a *friendly offering*; and <span
id="vii.ii-p16.2"></span>אשכר, *eshcar*, *a compensative present* made
on account of benefits received, — a gift which a person presents as a
token of gratitude. — See Appendix.

<span id="fn_137"></span>[138](cc10006.htm#fr_137) <span
id="vii.ii-p16.7"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p17"></span> Supposed to be in Arabia Felix. “The
Septuagint reads, ‘The kings of the Arabs, and Sabaeans, shall bring
gifts.’ So that anciently, perhaps, Sheba was the general name of
Arabia; and Seba, or Sabaea, was that particular province of it called
Arabia Felix, lying to the South, between the Persian Gulf and the Red
Sea.” — *Hewlett*.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[139](cc10006.htm#fr_138) <span
id="vii.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p6"></span> “<span id="vii.iii-p6.1"></span>Si d’un
grand coeur il ne se presentoit pour les punir et en faire la vengence,
et s’opposoit pour defendre ceux qu’on oppresse.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[140](cc10006.htm#fr_139) <span
id="vii.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p9"></span> “<span id="vii.iii-p9.1"></span>C’est a
dire, sans determiner quelque certaine personne.” — *Fr*. In the Hebrew,
the three last verbs of the verse are in the singular number, in the
future of *kal* active, and there is no nominative with which they
agree. Calvin translates them literally: “<span
id="vii.iii-p9.2"></span>Et dabit ei de auro Seba: et orabit pro eo
semper, quotidie benedicit eum;” “And shall give to him of the gold of
Sheba, and shall pray for him continually, daily shall bless him.” But,
on the margin of the French version, he thus explains the construction:
“<span id="vii.iii-p9.3"></span>C’est, on luy donnera, etc., on priera,
etc., on benira.” “That is, the gold of Sheba shall be given to him,
prayer shall be made for him continually, and daily shall he be
blessed.”

<span id="fn_140"></span>[141](cc10006.htm#fr_140) <span
id="vii.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p3"></span> “<span id="vii.iv-p3.1"></span>Ou, le
Leban.” — *Fr*. *marg*. “Or, Lebanon.”

<span id="fn_141"></span>[142](cc10006.htm#fr_141) <span
id="vii.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p7"></span> In the French version, the word <span
id="vii.iv-p7.1"></span>*semee*, *i*.*e*., *sown*, is supplied.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[143](cc10006.htm#fr_142) <span
id="vii.iv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p8"></span> The noun <span id="vii.iv-p8.1"></span>פסה,
*phissah*, here translated *handful*, is found only in this passage. In
explaining <span id="vii.iv-p8.2"></span>[1Ki
18:44](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#044)<span id="vii.iv-p8.2"></span>,
the Chaldee interpreter, for the Hebrew words rendered “as a man’s
hand,” has <span id="vii.iv-p8.3"></span>כפסת יד, *ke-phissath yad*,
which strictly signify, “as if a part of the hand.” On this authority
several expositors, along with Calvin, have understood <span
id="vii.iv-p8.4"></span>פסה, *phissah*, as signifying “a small quantity
of corn,” as much as may lie on a man’s hand, or as he may hold within
it. And some at the beginning of the verse supply the conditional
particle <span id="vii.iv-p8.5"></span>אם, *im*, *if* But Rosenmüller
thinks that “others with more propriety consider the noun <span
id="vii.iv-p8.6"></span>פסה as having the same signification as <span
id="vii.iv-p8.7"></span>פסיון, <span id="vii.iv-p8.8"></span>*diffusio*,
*uberitas*, ‘spreading abroad, plenty,’ and as derived from the verb
<span id="vii.iv-p8.9"></span>פסא, which, both in the Chaldee and in the
Arabic, means <span id="vii.iv-p8.10"></span>*expandit*, *diffudit se*,
‘he spread abroad, he enlarged himself.’ The Syriac interpreter had, no
doubt, this sense in view, when he rendered the words <span
id="vii.iv-p8.11"></span>*multitudinem frumenti*, ‘an abundance of
corn.’”

<span id="fn_143"></span>[144](cc10006.htm#fr_143) <span
id="vii.iv-p8.12"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p9"></span> The word <span id="vii.iv-p9.1"></span>ציף,
*tsits*, which Calvin renders *shall go out*, signifies *to spring
from*, *to spring up* It is used, says Rosenmüller, with respect to
plants or herbs when, sprouting from the seed, they make their
appearance above ground in beauty and gracefulness, (<span
id="vii.iv-p9.2"></span>[Nu 17:8](../../../bib/kjv/num017.htm#008)<span
id="vii.iv-p9.2"></span> .) It is used to denote also the reproduction
of mankind in prosperous circumstances, (<span
id="vii.iv-p9.3"></span>[Isa 27:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#006)<span
id="vii.iv-p9.3"></span>.) From the noun <span
id="vii.iv-p9.4"></span>מעיר, \[from the city,\] we are at no loss to
supply the proper nominative to the preceding verb; <span
id="vii.iv-p9.5"></span>*q* *d*., *ex civitatibus* singulis cives
*efflorescent*, ‘from the cities severally, the citizens shall spring
forth.’ The expression is somewhat similar to that in <span
id="vii.iv-p9.6"></span>[Ps 68:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#027)<span
id="vii.iv-p9.6"></span>, where the descendants of Israel are said to be
*from the fountain of Israel*.” The extraordinary fertility and great
increase of population here predicted took place in Palestine under the
reign of Solomon, as is evident from <span id="vii.iv-p9.7"></span>[1Ki
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#020)<span id="vii.iv-p9.7"></span>,
where it is said, that in the time of Solomon “Judah and Israel were
many as the sand which is by the sea in multitude, eating and drinking,
and making merry.” But this prophecy is destined to receive its fullest
accomplishment under the reign of the Messiah.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[145](cc10006.htm#fr_144) <span
id="vii.iv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p13"></span> “<span id="vii.iv-p13.1"></span>Filiabitur
nomen ejus.” — *Henry* In the margin of our English Bibles it is, “He
shall be as a son to continue his father’s name.” Bishop Patrick,
therefore, paraphrases it, “His memory and fame shall never die, but be
propagated from father to son, so long as the sun shall shine.”
Rosenmüller reads, “<span id="vii.iv-p13.2"></span>*Sobolescet nomen
ejus*, ‘his name shall increase,’ that is, shall be continued as long as
the sun endureth; the government shall continue to his posterity in
perpetual succession.” “The verb <span id="vii.iv-p13.3"></span>נון,
*nun*,” he adds, “which occurs only in this passage, is explained from
the noun <span id="vii.iv-p13.4"></span>נין, *nin*, <span
id="vii.iv-p13.5"></span>[Ge
21:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#023)<span id="vii.iv-p13.5"></span>;
<span id="vii.iv-p13.6"></span>[Job
18:19](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#019)<span id="vii.iv-p13.6"></span>;
<span id="vii.iv-p13.7"></span>[Isa
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#022)<span id="vii.iv-p13.7"></span>.
In these passages the word has obviously the meaning of offspring, and
by the Chaldee interpreters, it is constantly rendered by the word <span
id="vii.iv-p13.8"></span>בר, *bar*, <span
id="vii.iv-p13.9"></span>*falius*, ‘a son.’ It may, therefore, be
assumed with certainty, that the verb <span
id="vii.iv-p13.10"></span>נון, *nun*, signifies <span
id="vii.iv-p13.11"></span>*sobolem procreare*, ‘to procreate
descendants.’ It may, however, be added, that the Alexandrine has here
<span id="vii.iv-p13.12"></span>διαμενεῖ, a rendering in which both the
Vulgate and Jerome concur: ‘<span
id="vii.iv-p13.13"></span>*perseverabit nomen ejus*,’ ‘his name shall
endure.” Dathe takes this last mentioned view. He supposes, that instead
of <span id="vii.iv-p13.14"></span>ינון, *yinnon*, we should read <span
id="vii.iv-p13.15"></span>יכון, *yikon*, <span
id="vii.iv-p13.16"></span>*stabilietur*, — *permanebit*; “shall be
established, — shall continue.” “The verb <span
id="vii.iv-p13.17"></span>נון, *nun*,” says he, “is not met with either
in the Hebrew or in the cognate tongues, and is explained, — merely by
conjecture, — <span id="vii.iv-p13.18"></span>*augescere* —
*sobolescere*, — ‘to increase or multiply,’ because, as a noun in some
of the dialects, it signifies a *fish* In the Septuagint the word is
rendered <span id="vii.iv-p13.19"></span>διαμενεῖ; in the Vulgate and by
Jerome, <span id="vii.iv-p13.20"></span>*perseverabit*; in the Chaldee,
<span id="vii.iv-p13.21"></span>*praeparatum est*; in the Syriac, <span
id="vii.iv-p13.22"></span>*existet nomen ejus* All these, without doubt,
read <span id="vii.iv-p13.23"></span>יכון, *yikon*, ‘prepared, —
established, — fixed,’ — the word which we find in the parallel passage,
<span id="vii.iv-p13.24"></span>[Ps
89:38](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#038)<span id="vii.iv-p13.24"></span>.
The letters <span id="vii.iv-p13.25"></span>כ, *caph*, and <span
id="vii.iv-p13.26"></span>נ, *nun*, it is evident, may very easily be
interchanged from their similarity in form.”

<span id="fn_145"></span>[146](cc10006.htm#fr_145) <span
id="vii.iv-p13.27"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p14"></span> “<span id="vii.iv-p14.1"></span>(Car c’est
un verbe en la langue Hebraique qui vient du nom de Fils,) c’est a dire,
sera perpetue de pere en fils.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_146"></span>[147](cc10006.htm#fr_146) <span
id="vii.iv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p17"></span> This psalm concludes the second book of
the Psalms, and this and the following verse are a doxology similar to
that with which the first book and the other three are concluded. See
volume 2, p. 126, note.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 73](cc10007)
