[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc10025)  [Next](cc10027.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 10: Psalms, Part III*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxvii"></span>

<span id="xxvii-p1"></span>PSALM 92

<span id="xxvii-p2"></span>This psalm contains an exhortation to praise
God, and shows how much ground we have for this exercise from the works
of God, insisting, especially, upon his justice, displayed in the
protection of his people, and the destruction of the wicked. By such
truth it encourages to the practice of righteousness, and preserves us
from fainting under the cross of Christ, by proposing to our view a
happy issue out of all our afflictions. To deter us, on the other hand,
from the commission of iniquity it declares that sinners, however they
may prosper for a time, will speedily be destroyed.

<span id="xxvii-p3"></span>A Song for the Sabbath-day.

<span id="xxvii.i"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p1"></span><span id="xxvii.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
92:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#001.md)<span id="xxvii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p2"></span>**1.** It is good to give thanks unto
Jehovah, to sing praises unto thy name, O Most High! **2.** To show
forth thy lovingkindness in the morning, and thy faithfulness in the
night, **3.** Upon the psaltery, and upon the hand instrument, with the
song upon the harp. **4.** For thou, Jehovah, hast made me glad in thy
works; I will triumph in the works of thy hands.

<span id="xxvii.i-p3"></span> 

<span id="xxvii.i-p4"></span><span id="xxvii.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p5"></span>**1** *It is good to give thanks unto
Jehovah.* There is no reason to doubt that the Jews were in the habit of
singing this psalm, as the inscription bears, upon the Sabbath-day, and
it is apparent, from different passages, that other psalms were applied
to this use. As the words may be read literally in the Hebrew, *it is
good for giving thanks unto the Lord,* some interpreters, founding upon
the letter <span id="xxvii.i-p5.1"></span>ל, *lamed,* prefixed to the
verb, understand the Psalmist to mean that it was good to have a certain
day set apart for singing the praises of God — that it was a useful
arrangement by which one day had been chosen to be occupied by the
Lord’s people in celebrating his works. But it is well known that this
letter, when prefixed, is merely the ordinary mark of the infinitive
mood — and I have given what is obviously the simple meaning. The reason
why the Psalmist appropriated this psalm to the Sabbath is sufficiently
obvious. That day is not to be holy, in the sense of being devoted to
idleness, as if this could be an acceptable worship to God, but in the
sense of our separating ourselves from all other occupations, to engage
in meditating upon the Divine works. As our minds are inconstant, we are
apt, when exposed to various distractions, to wander from God.  <span
id="fr_584"></span>[585](#fn_584.md) We need to be disentangled from all
cares if we would seriously apply ourselves to the praises of God. The
Psalmist then would teach us that the right observance of the Sabbath
does not consist in idleness, as some absurdly imagine, but in the
celebration of the Divine name. The argument which he adduces is drawn
from the profitableness of the service, for nothing is more encouraging
than to know that our labor is not in vain, and that what we engage in
meets with the Divine approbation. In the succeeding verse, he adverts
to the grounds which we have for praising God, that we may not imagine
that God calls upon us to engage in this service without reason, or
simply in consideration of his greatness and power, but in remembrance
of his *goodness* and *faithfulness,* which should inflame our hearts to
such exercise, if we had any proper sense and experience of them. He
would have us consider, in mentioning these, that not only is God worthy
of praise, but that we ourselves are chargeable with ingratitude and
perversity should we refuse it. We are the proper objects of his
faithfulness and goodness, and it would argue inexcusable indifference
if they did not elicit our cordial praises. It might seem a strange
distinction which the Psalmist observes when he speaks of our announcing
God’s goodness in the *morning,* and his faithfulness *at night.* His
goodness is constant, and not peculiar to any one season, why then
devote but a small part of the day to the celebration of it? And the
same may be said of the other Divine perfection mentioned, for it is not
merely in the night that his faithfulness is shown. But this is not what
the Psalmist intends. He means that beginning to praise the Lord from
earliest dawn, we should continue his praises to the latest hour of the
night, this being no more than his goodness and faithfulness deserve.
 <span id="fr_585"></span>[586](#fn_585.md) If we begin by celebrating his
goodness, we must next take up the subject of his faithfulness. Both
will occupy our continued praises, for they stand mutually and
inseparably connected. The Psalmist is not therefore to be supposed as
wishing us to separate the one from the other, for they are intimately
allied; he would only suggest that we can never want matter for praising
God unless indolence prevail over us, and that if we would rightly
discharge the office of gratitude, we must be assiduous in it, since his
goodness and his faithfulness are incessant.

<span id="xxvii.i-p8"></span>In the fourth verse, he more immediately
addresses the Levites, who were appointed to the office of singers, and
calls upon them to employ their instruments of music — not as if this
were in itself necessary, only it was useful as an elementary aid to the
people of God in these ancient times.  <span
id="fr_586"></span>[587](#fn_586.md) We are not to conceive that God
enjoined the harp as feeling a delight like ourselves in mere melody of
sounds; but the Jews, who were yet under age, were astricted to the use
of such childish elements. The intention of them was to stimulate the
worshippers, and stir them up more actively to the celebration of the
praise of God with the heart. We are to remember that the worship of God
was never understood to consist in such outward services, which were
only necessary to help forward a people, as yet weak and rude in
knowledge, in the spiritual worship of God. A difference is to be
observed in this respect between his people under the Old and under the
New Testament; for now that Christ has appeared, and the Church has
reached full age, it were only to bury the light of the Gospel, should
we introduce the shadows of a departed dispensation. From this, it
appears that the Papists, as I shall have occasion to show elsewhere, in
employing instrumental music, cannot be said so much to imitate the
practice of God’s ancient people, as to ape it in a senseless and absurd
manner, exhibiting a silly delight in that worship of the Old Testament
which was figurative, and terminated with the Gospel.  <span
id="fr_587"></span>[588](#fn_587.md)

<span id="xxvii.i-p11"></span><span id="xxvii.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p12"></span>**4** *Because thou, Jehovah, hast made me
glad.* The Psalmist repeats the truth that the Sabbath was not
prescribed as a day of idleness, but a season when we should collect our
whole energies for meditation upon the works of God. He intimates, at
the same time, that those are best qualified for celebrating the praises
of God who recognize and feel his fatherly goodness, and can undertake
this service with willing and joyful minds. His language implies that
the goodness and faithfulness of God, which he had already mentioned,
are apparent in his works upon a due examination of them. What produces
joy in our hearts is the exhibition which God gives of himself as a
Father, and of his deep and watchful anxiety for our welfare; as, on the
other hand, the cause of our brutish indifference is our inability to
savor or relish the end designed in the works of God.  <span
id="fr_588"></span>[589](#fn_588.md) As the universe proclaims throughout
that God is faithful and good, it becomes us to be diligently observant
of these tokens, and to be excited by a holy joy to the celebration of
his praise.

<span id="xxvii.ii"></span>

<span id="xxvii.ii-p1"></span><span id="xxvii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
92:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#005.md)<span id="xxvii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.ii-p2"></span>**5.** O Jehovah! how magnificent are thy
works! thy thoughts are very deep. **6.** The foolish man shall not know
them, neither shall the man void of wisdom understand them. **7.** When
the wicked flourish as the grass, and all the workers of iniquity spring
up, that they may perish for ever. **8.** And thou, O Jehovah! art
exalted for evermore.

<span id="xxvii.ii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xxvii.ii-p4"></span><span id="xxvii.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.ii-p5"></span>**5** *O Jehovah! how highly exalted are
thy works!* The Psalmist, having spoken of the works of God in general,
proceeds to speak more particularly of his justice in the government of
the world. Though God may postpone the punishment of the wicked, he
shows, in due time, that in conniving at their sins, he did not overlook
or fail to perceive them; and though he exercises his own children with
the cross, he proves in the issue, that he was not indifferent to their
welfare. His reason for touching upon this particular point seems to be,
that much darkness is thrown upon the scheme of Divine Providence by the
inequality and disorder which prevail in human affairs.  <span
id="fr_589"></span>[590](#fn_589.md) We see the wicked triumphing, and
applauding their own good fortune, as if there was no judge above, and
taking occasion from the Divine forbearance to run into additional
excesses, under the impression that they have escaped his hand. The
temptation is aggravated by that stupidity and blindness of heart which
lead us to imagine that God exerts no superintendence over the world,
and sits idle in heaven. It is known, too, how soon we are ready to sink
under the troubles of the flesh. The Psalmist, therefore, intentionally
selects this as a case in which he may show the watchful care exerted by
God over the human family. He begins, by using the language of
exclamation, for such is the dreadful distemper and disorder by which
our understandings are confounded, that we cannot comprehend the method
of God’s works, even when it is most apparent. We are to notice, that
the inspired penman is not speaking here of the work of God in the
creation of the heavens and earth, nor of his providential government of
the world in general, but only of the judgments which he executes
amongst men. He calls the works of God great, and his thoughts deep,
because he governs the world in quite another manner than we are able to
comprehend. Were things under our own management, we would entirely
invert the order which God observes; and, such not being the case, we
perversely expostulate with God for not hastening sooner to the help of
the righteous, and to the punishment of the wicked. It strikes us as in
the highest degree inconsistent with the perfections of God, that he
should bear with the wicked when they rage against him, when they rush
without restraint into the most daring acts of iniquity, and when they
persecute at will the good and the innocent; — it seems, I say, in our
eyes to be intolerable, that God should subject his own people to the
injustice and violence of the wicked, while he puts no check upon
abounding falsehood, deceit, rapine, bloodshed, and every species of
enormity. Why does he suffer his truth to be obscured, and his holy name
to be trampled under foot? This is that greatness of the Divine
operation, that depth of the Divine counsel, into the admiration of
which the Psalmist breaks forth. It is no doubt true, that there is an
incomprehensible depth of power and wisdom which God has displayed in
the fabric of the universe; but what the Psalmist has specially in view
is, to administer a check to that disposition which leads us to murmur
against God, when he does not pursue our plan in his providential
managements. When anything in these may not agree with the general ideas
of men, we ought to contemplate it with reverence, and remember that
God, for the better trial of our obedience, has lifted his deep and
mysterious judgments far above our conceptions.

<span id="xxvii.ii-p7"></span><span id="xxvii.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.ii-p8"></span>**6** *The foolish man shall not know
them.* This is added with propriety, to let us know that the fault lies
with ourselves, in not praising the Divine judgments as we ought. For
although the Psalmist had spoken of them as deep and mysterious, he here
informs us that they would be discerned without difficulty, were it not
for our stupidity and indifference. By *the foolish,* he means
unbelievers in general, tacitly contrasting them with believers who are
divinely enlightened by the word and Spirit. The ignorance and blindness
to which he alludes have possession of all without exception, whose
understandings have not been illuminated by Divine grace. It ought to be
our prayer to God, that he would purge our sight, and qualify us for
meditation upon his works. In short, the Psalmist vindicates the
incomprehensible wisdom of God from that contempt which proud men have
often cast upon it, charging them with folly and madness in acting such
a part; and he would arouse us from that insensibility which is too
prevalent, to a due and serious consideration of the mysterious works of
God.

<span id="xxvii.ii-p9"></span><span id="xxvii.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.ii-p10"></span>**7** *When the wicked flourish as the
grass.* He points out, and exposes, by a striking and appropriate
figure, the folly of imagining that the wicked obtain a triumph over
God, when he does not, it may be, immediately bring them under
restraint. He makes an admission so far — he grants that they spring up
and flourish — but adds immediately, by way of qualification, that they
flourish, like the grass, only for a moment, their prosperity being
brief and evanescent. In this way he removes what has been almost a
universal stumbling-block and ground of offense; for it would be
ridiculous to envy the happiness of men who are doomed to be speedily
destroyed, and of whom it may be said, that to-day they flourish, and
to-morrow they are cut down and wither, (<span
id="xxvii.ii-p10.1"></span>[Ps
129:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa129.htm#006.md)<span
id="xxvii.ii-p10.1"></span>.) It will be shown, when we come to consider
the psalm now quoted, that the herbs to which the wicked are compared
are such as grow on the roofs of houses, which want depth of soil, and
die of themselves, for lack of nourishment. In the passage now before
us, the Psalmist satisfies himself with using simply the figure, that
the prosperity of the wicked draws after it the speedier destruction, as
the grass when it is full grown is ready for the scythe. There is an
antithesis drawn, too, between the shortness of their continuance and
the everlasting destruction which awaits them; for they are not said to
be cut down that they may flourish again, as withered plants will
recover their vigor, but to be condemned to eternal perdition.  <span
id="fr_590"></span>[591](#fn_590.md) When he says of God, that he sits
*exalted for evermore,* some understand him to mean, that God holds the
power and office of governing the world, and that we may be certain
nothing can happen by chance when such a righteous governor and judge
administers the affairs of the world. Various other meanings have been
suggested. But it seems to me that the Psalmist compares the stability
of God’s throne with the fluctuating and changeable character of this
world, reminding us that we must not judge of Him by what we see in the
world, where there is nothing of a fixed and enduring nature. God looks
down undisturbed from the altitude of heaven upon all the changes of
this earthly scene, which neither affect nor have any relation to him.
And this the Psalmist brings forward with another view than simply to
teach us to distinguish God from his creatures, and put due honor upon
his majesty; he would have us learn in our contemplations upon the
wonderful and mysterious providence of God, to lift our conceptions
above ourselves and this world, since it is only a dark and confused
view which our earthly minds can take up. It is with the purpose of
leading us into a proper discovery of the Divine judgments which are not
seen in the world, that the Psalmist, in making mention of the majesty
of God, would remind us, that he does not work according to our ideas,
but in a manner corresponding to his own eternal being. We, short-lived
creatures as we are, often thwarted in our attempts, embarrassed and
interrupted by many intervening difficulties, and too glad to embrace
the first opportunity which offers, are accustomed to advance with
precipitation; but we are taught here to lift our eyes unto that eternal
and unchangeable throne on which God sits, and in wisdom defers the
execution of his judgments. The words accordingly convey more than a
simple commendation of the glorious being of God; they are meant to help
our faith, and tell us that, although his people may sigh under many an
anxious apprehension, God himself, the guardian of their safety, reigns
on high, and shields them with his everlasting power.

<span id="xxvii.iii"></span>

<span id="xxvii.iii-p1"></span><span id="xxvii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
92:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#009.md)<span
id="xxvii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.iii-p2"></span>**9.** For, lo! thine enemies, O Jehovah!
for, lo, thine enemies shall perish; all the workers of iniquity shall
be scattered.  <span id="fr_591"></span>[592](#fn_591.md) **10.** But my
horn shalt thou exalt, like the horn of an unicorn:  <span
id="fr_592"></span>[593](#fn_592.md) I have been profusely anointed with
fresh oil.  <span id="fr_593"></span>[594](#fn_593.md) **11.** And mine
eyes shall see it on mine enemies: mine ears shall hear it upon those
who rise up against me, upon those who persecute me.

<span id="xxvii.iii-p6"></span> 

<span id="xxvii.iii-p7"></span><span id="xxvii.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.iii-p8"></span>**9** *For, lo! thine enemies, O
Jehovah!* From what was already said in the verse preceding, the
Psalmist concludes it to be impossible that God should not overthrow his
enemies. This, as I have already observed, clearly shows that it was his
design to establish our faith under the strong temptations to which it
is subjected, and, more especially, to remove that offense out of the
way, which has disturbed the minds of many, and led them astray; — we
refer to the prosperity of the wicked, and its effect in attaching a
certain perplexity to the judgments of God. As our faith is never called
to a more sharp and arduous trial than upon this point, the Psalmist
delivers the truth, which he announces with much force of expression,
using both exclamations and repetition. First, he declares the
destruction of God’s enemies to be as certain as if it had already taken
place, and he had witnessed it with his own eyes; then he repeats his
assertion: and from all this we may see how much he had benefited by
glancing with the eye of faith beyond this world to the throne of God in
the heavens. When staggered in our own faith at any time by the
prosperity of the wicked, we should learn by his example to rise in our
contemplations to a God in heaven, and the conviction will immediately
follow in our minds that his enemies cannot long continue to triumph.
The Psalmist tells us who they are that are God’s enemies. God hates
none without a cause; nay, so far as men are the workmanship of his
hand, he embraces them in his fatherly love. But as nothing is more
opposed to his nature than sin, he proclaims irreconcilable war with the
wicked. It contributes in no small degree to the comfort of the Lord’s
people, to know that the reason why the wicked are destroyed is, their
being necessarily the objects of God’s hatred, so that he can no more
fail to punish them than deny himself.  <span
id="fr_594"></span>[595](#fn_594.md)

<span id="xxvii.iii-p10"></span>The Psalmist, shortly afterwards, shows
that he intended this to be a ground of comfort and hope under all
cares, griefs, anxieties, and embarrassments. He speaks under the figure
of *oil* of enjoying Divine blessings, and by *green* or *fresh* oil is
meant, such as has not become corrupted, or unfit for use by age. It is
noticeable that he appropriates, and improves for his own individual
comfort, that grace of God which is extended to all the Lord’s people
without exception; and would teach us by this that mere general doctrine
is a cold and unsatisfactory thing, and that each of us should improve
it particularly for himself, in the persuasion of our belonging to the
number of God’s children. In one word, the Psalmist promises himself the
protection of God, under whatever persecutions he should endure from his
enemies, whether they were secret, or more open and violent, that he may
encourage himself to persevere with indefatigable spirit in the world’s
conflict. We may judge from this how absurd is the opinion of the
Rabbin, who conjectured that Adam was the author of this psalm  <span
id="fr_595"></span>[596](#fn_595.md) — as if it were credible that his
posterity should have set themselves up in rebellion against him.

<span id="xxvii.iv"></span>

<span id="xxvii.iv-p1"></span><span id="xxvii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
92:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#012.md)<span
id="xxvii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.iv-p2"></span>**12.** The righteous shalt flourish like
the palm-tree,  <span id="fr_596"></span>[597](#fn_596.md) he shall be
multiplied as the cedar in Lebanon.  <span
id="fr_597"></span>[598](#fn_597.md) **13.** Those who are planted in the
house of Jehovah shall flourish in the courts of our God. **14.** They
shall still bud forth in old age; they shall be fat and green; **15.**
That they may show that Jehovah is upright, my rock, and that there is
no iniquity in him.

<span id="xxvii.iv-p5"></span> 

<span id="xxvii.iv-p6"></span><span id="xxvii.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.iv-p7"></span>**12** *The righteous shall flourish like
the palm-tree.* He now passes to the consideration of another general
truth, That though God may exercise his people with many trials, subject
them to hardships, and visit them with privations, he will eventually
show that he had not forgotten them. We need not be surprised that he
insists so explicitly and carefully upon this point, as nothing is more
difficult than for the saints of God to entertain expectations of being
raised up and delivered when they have been reduced almost to the state
of the dead, and it does not appear how they can live. Some think the
cedar is mentioned from the fragrancy of its smell, and the palm for the
sweetness of its fruit; but this is too subtile a meaning to attach to
the words. The sense seems simply, that though the righteous may appear
for a time to be withered, or to have been cut down, they will again
spring up with renewed vigor, and flourish as well and as fair in the
Church of God as the stateliest trees upon Lebanon. The expression which
is employed — *planted in the house of the Lord* — gives the reason of
their vigorous growth; nor is it meant that they have merely a place
there, (which can be said even of hypocrites,) but that they are firmly
fixed, and deeply rooted in it, so as to be united to God. The Psalmist
speaks of *the courts* of the Lord, because none but the priests were
allowed to enter the holy place; the people worshipped in the court. By
*those who are planted* in the Church he means such as are united to God
in real and sincere attachment, and insinuates that their prosperity
cannot be of a changeable and fluctuating nature, because it is not
founded upon anything that is in the world. Nor indeed can we doubt that
whatever has its root, and is founded in the sanctuary, must continue to
flourish and partake of a life which is spiritual and everlasting. It is
in this sense that he speaks of their *still budding forth,* and being
*fat,* even in old age, when the natural sap and juices are generally
dried up. The language amounts to saying that they are exempt from the
ordinary lot of men, and have a life which is taken from under the
common law of nature.  <span id="fr_598"></span>[599](#fn_598.md) It is
thus that Jacob, speaking of the great renovation which should take
place in the Church, mentions, that at that happy period he who was an
hundred years old should be a child, meaning that, though old age
naturally tends to death, and one who has lived a hundred years is upon
the very borders of it, yet in the kingdom of Christ; a man would be
reckoned as being merely in his childhood, and starting in life, who
entered upon a new century. This could only be verified in the sense,
that after death we have another existence in heaven.

<span id="xxvii.iv-p10"></span><span id="xxvii.iv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.iv-p11"></span>**15.** *That they may show that Jehovah
is upright.* It is evident from this verse that the great object of the
Psalmist is, to allay that disquietude of mind which we are apt to feel
under the disorder which reigns apparently in the affairs of this world;
and to make us cherish the expectation, (under all that may seem severe
and trying in our lot, and though the wicked are in wealth and power,
flourish, and abound in places and distinctions,) that God will bring
light and order eventually out of confusion*. That they may show,* it is
said particularly, *that the Lord is upright;* for through the influence
of our corruption we are apt to conclude, when things do not proceed as
we would wish in the world, that God is chargeable not only with neglect
but with unrighteousness, in abandoning his people, and tolerating the
commission of sin. When God displays his justice in proceeding to
execute vengeance upon the wicked, it will be seen at once, that any
prosperity which they enjoyed was but the forerunner of a worse
destruction in reserve for them. The Psalmist, in calling God *his
rock,* shows a second time that he reckoned himself amongst the number
of those in whom God would illustrate his justice by extending towards
them his protection.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_584"></span>[585](cc10026.htm#fr_584.md) <span
id="xxvii.i-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p6"></span> “<span id="xxvii.i-p6.1"></span>Car selon
que nos pensees sont volages, si elles sont distraittes ca et la, elles
s’alienent facilement de Dieu.”

<span id="fn_585"></span>[586](cc10026.htm#fr_585.md) <span
id="xxvii.i-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p7"></span> “<span id="xxvii.i-p7.1"></span>Que si
nous commencons au matin de louer Dieu, il faut continuer ses louanges
jusques a la derniere partie de la nuit; pource que sa bonte et fidelite
meritent cela.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_586"></span>[587](cc10026.htm#fr_586.md) <span
id="xxvii.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p9"></span> “<span id="xxvii.i-p9.1"></span>Mais
pource que c’estoit un rudiment fort utile au peuple ancien.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_587"></span>[588](cc10026.htm#fr_587.md) <span
id="xxvii.i-p9.3"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p10"></span> But although Calvin held the use of
instrumental music in public worship to be inconsistent with the genius
of the Christian dispensation, he regarded the celebration of the
praises of God with the melody of the human voice as an institution of
great solemnity and usefulness. He knew that psalm-singing is sanctioned
by the apostles, and that music has a powerful influence in exciting the
mind to ardor of devotion; and to him belongs the merit of having, with
the advice of Luther, formed the plan of establishing, as a principal
branch of public worship in the Reformed Churches, the singing of
psalms, translated into the vernacular language, and adapted to plain
and easy melodies, which all the people might learn, and in which they
all might join. Immediately upon the publication of Clement Marot’s
version of David’s Psalms into French rhymes at Paris, he introduced it
into his congregation at Geneva, set to plain and popular music; and it
soon came into universal use throughout the numerous congregations of
the Reformed Church of France. At length Marot’s Psalms formed an
appendix to the Catechism at Geneva, and became a characteristic mark or
badge of the Calvinistic worship and profession. Marot’s translation,
which did not aim at any innovation in the public worship, and which he
dedicated to his master Francis I., and the ladies of France, received
at first the sanction of the Sorbonne, as containing nothing contrary to
sound doctrine. But Calvin knew the character of the book better than
the doctors of the Sorbonne, and having, by his influence, obtained its
introduction into the worship of the Protestant Church of France, it
contributed so much, in consequence of its extraordinary popularity, to
the advancement of the Reformed cause in that country, that it was
interdicted under the most severe penalties; and, in the language of the
Romish Church, psalm-singing and heresy became synonymous terms. —
*Warton*’*s* *History of English Poetry*, volume 3, pages 164, 165.

<span id="fn_588"></span>[589](cc10026.htm#fr_588.md) <span
id="xxvii.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p13"></span><span id="xxvii.i-p13.1"></span> “<span
id="xxvii.i-p13.2"></span><span id="xxvii.i-p13.3"></span>Comme aussi la
cause de nostre paresse brutale est, que nous avons perdu tout goust
quand il est question dee savourer la fin des oeuvres <span
id="xxvii.i-p13.4"></span>de<span id="xxvii.i-p13.5"></span> Dieu<span
id="xxvii.i-p13.6"></span>.”

<span id="fn_589"></span>[590](cc10026.htm#fr_589.md) <span
id="xxvii.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.ii-p6"></span> “<span id="xxvii.ii-p6.1"></span>Pource
que la confusion difforme laquelle se voit en la vie des hommes,
obscurcit grandement l’ordre de la providence de Dieu.”

<span id="fn_590"></span>[591](cc10026.htm#fr_590.md) <span
id="xxvii.ii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xxvii.ii-p11"></span> “<span id="xxvii.ii-p11.1"></span>Comme
s’il disoit qu’ils ne sont point retranchez, afin que sur le prim-temps
ils rejettent derechef, ainsi que les herbes mortes reprenent nouvelle
vigueur, mais qu’ils sont condamnez a perdition eternelle. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_591"></span>[592](cc10026.htm#fr_591.md) <span
id="xxvii.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.iii-p3"></span> Hammond reads “separated,” and supposes
that this may be a judicial phrase, denoting the discrimination made
betwixt men, as that which will be effected betwixt the sheep and the
goats at the last day. <span id="xxvii.iii-p3.1"></span>[Mt
25:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#032.md)<span id="xxvii.iii-p3.1"></span>
— “All the nations shall be gathered together or assembled before him”
as a judge, “and, <span id="xxvii.iii-p3.2"></span>ἀφοριεῖ αὐτους ἀπ᾿
αλλήλων, he shall separate them one from another, as a shepherd, <span
id="xxvii.iii-p3.3"></span>ἀφορίζει, separates the sheep from the
goats.” For this interpretation we have the authority of the Chaldee,
which paraphrases the clause thus, “In the world to come the workers of
iniquity shall be separated from the congregation of the just.” If this
sense is admitted, the passage corresponds with these words in the fifth
verse of the first psalm, “The ungodly shall not stand in the judgment,
nor sinners in the congregation of the righteous.” The LXX., however,
render the original word, <span id="xxvii.iii-p3.4"></span>יתפרדו,
*yithparedu*, by <span id="xxvii.iii-p3.5"></span>διασκορπισθήσονται,
“shall be scattered;” and the Syriac gives a similar version. Thus it
may denote the *scattering* of enemies, which have been vanquished in
battle and put to flight.

<span id="fn_592"></span>[593](cc10026.htm#fr_592.md) <span
id="xxvii.iii-p3.6"></span>

<span id="xxvii.iii-p4"></span> The horn is worn over all the East, and
is the symbol of strength and power. It adorns the heads of all princely
personages in Oriental mythology. Large horns, representing the glory of
deity, are planted on the heads of their idols, or placed in their
hands. The horn is therefore frequently employed in Scripture as the
emblem of power and authority; and when the Psalmist affirms that God
would exalt his horn, it expresses his assurance of victory over his
enemies. As to the animal meant by “the unicorn,” great variety of
interpretations has obtained both among ancient and modern critics. The
most probable opinion is that of Bochart, who, supporting himself by
numerous quotations from Arabian and other Eastern writers, concludes
that the <span id="xxvii.iii-p4.1"></span>ראם, *reem*, of Scripture, is
a species of wild goat of a snow-white color, having long and sharp
horns, and distinguished by carrying their heads very high.

<span id="fn_593"></span>[594](cc10026.htm#fr_593.md) <span
id="xxvii.iii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xxvii.iii-p5"></span> “The verb in the Hebrew expresses much
more than a superficial unction, viz., a penetration of the whole
substance of the man’s person by the oil. See Parkhurst’s Lexicon, under
<span id="xxvii.iii-p5.1"></span>בל: — *fresh oil*; rather *invigorating
oil*.” — *Horsley* The original word for *fresh* signifies *green* But,
as Harmer observes, “We are not to suppose the Psalmist means oil of a
green color. We are to understand the word as signifying precious,
fragrant oil, such as princes in times of prosperity were anointed
with.” — *Harmer*’*s Observations*, volume 3, page 257.

<span id="fn_594"></span>[595](cc10026.htm#fr_594.md) <span
id="xxvii.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.iii-p9"></span> “<span id="xxvii.iii-p9.1"></span>Qu’il
faut necessairement qu’ils soyent hays de Dieu, lequel ne se peut
renoncer soy mesme.”

<span id="fn_595"></span>[596](cc10026.htm#fr_595.md) <span
id="xxvii.iii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.iii-p11"></span> These Rabbins say that Adam composed it
immediately after the creation before the Sabbath. The Chaldee
paraphrase entitles the psalm, “A hymn or song which the first man spoke
concerning the Sabbath-day.” But had it been a composition of Adam’s,
one would think it should have been placed at the head of this
collection of psalms. Besides, there were no musical instruments at that
time for this psalm to be sung upon, (see verse 3;) for Tubal was the
father of them that handle the harp and organ; nor, as Calvin observes,
had Adam numerous enemies and wicked men who rose up against him, to
which reference is made in verses 7, 9, 11. We may therefore justly
regard the Jewish tradition, which ascribes the composition of this
psalm to Adam, as fabulous, having no other foundation but the invention
and fancy of some of their Rabbins.

<span id="fn_596"></span>[597](cc10026.htm#fr_596.md) <span
id="xxvii.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.iv-p3"></span> The palm is one of the noblest and most
beautiful of trees. It is more remarkable than any other tree for its
*straight*, *upright* growth, and hence its Hebrew name <span
id="xxvii.iv-p3.1"></span>תמר *tamar* It frequently rises to the height
of more than a hundred feet; and its leaves, when it arrives at
maturity, are often six or eight feet in length, and broad in
proportion. At the age of thirty it attains its greatest vigor, and
continues in full strength and beauty for seventy years longer,
producing every year about three or four hundred weight of dates. It is
crowned at the top with a large tuft of spiralling leaves about four
feet long, which never fall off, but always continue in the same
flourishing verdure. And it has been said that when loaded with any
weight it possesses the quality of resisting it, and of rising upwards
and bending the contrary way, to counterbalance the pressure. This tree,
then, so distinguished for its uprightness, loftiness, fecundity,
longevity, perpetual verdure, and power of resistance, is employed with
great elegance to express the spiritual beauty, elevation, fruitfulness,
constancy, patience, and victory of the righteous.

<span id="fn_597"></span>[598](cc10026.htm#fr_597.md) <span
id="xxvii.iv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xxvii.iv-p4"></span> The cedars of Lebanon are a favourite
image with the sacred writers. They grow to a prodigious size, rise to
an enormous height, and spread their branches to a great extent,
affording a grateful shade. They continue to flourish for more than a
thousand years; and, when cut down, their wood is so durable that it has
obtained the reputation of being incorruptible. How striking, then, the
image, “The righteous shall grow like a cedar in Lebanon,” like that
massy, lofty, umbrageous, and incorruptible tree, which continues to
flourish from generation to generation, which survives empires, and is
still vigorous when a thousand years have passed over it.

<span id="fn_598"></span>[599](cc10026.htm#fr_598.md) <span
id="xxvii.iv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.iv-p8"></span> “*They shall still bring forth fruit in
old age*. Being thus planted and watered, they shall not only bring
forth the fruits of righteousness, but shall continue and go on to do
so, and even when they are grown old; contrary to all other trees,
which, when old, cease bearing fruit; but so do not the righteous; grace
is often in the greatest vigor when nature is decayed; witness Abraham,
Job, David, Zechariah, and Elisabeth, and good old Simeon, who went to
the grave like shocks of corn fully ripe.” — *Dr Gill*.

<span id="xxvii.iv-p9"></span> 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Translation of Psalms 67-92](cc10027.md)
