[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc10020)  [Next](cc10022) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 10: Psalms, Part III*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxii"></span>

<span id="xxii-p1"></span>PSALM 87

<span id="xxii-p2"></span>A Psalm or Song of the sons of Korah.

<span id="xxii-p3"></span>It is evident, from constant observation,
that, so long as the children of this world are in prosperity, they are
well satisfied with their condition, and mightily extol it, while they
look upon the Church with proud contempt; and even after having endured
calamities, they are not so subdued by them as to renounce the foolish
presumption by which they are intoxicated. Meanwhile they recklessly
despise all religion, and the worship of God, because, contenting
themselves with pleasures, riches, and the splendor of honor, they fancy
themselves to be happy without him. And then it often happens, that the
Lord pampers them with all kind of good things, purposing at length to
inflict upon them merited punishment for their ingratitude, when the fit
season shall have arrived; while, on the contrary, he loads his Church
with various and grievous afflictions, or, at least, keeps her in a low
and despised condition, so that she may seem to herself to be miserable,
or she is at least exposed to the contempt of others. That the faithful
may not be deceived with this shadowy appearance of things, it is of
importance to recall their attention to a different subject, that they
may be persuaded of the truth of what is stated in <span
id="xxii-p3.1"></span>[Ps 33:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#012)<span
id="xxii-p3.1"></span>,

<span id="xxii-p4"></span>“Blessed is the nation whose God is the Lord;
and the people whom he hath chosen for his own inheritance.”  
(<span id="xxii-p4.2"></span>[Ps
33:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#012)<span id="xxii-p4.2"></span>)

<span id="xxii-p5"></span>What we are taught in this psalm may be summed
up in this, That the Church of God far excels all the kingdoms and
politics of the world, inasmuch as she is watched over, and protected by
Him in all her interests, and placed under his government; that, in the
first place, amidst the violent commotions and dreadful storms with
which the whole world is often shaken, she may continue safe; and, in
the second place, and principally, that being wonderfully preserved by
the protection of the same God, she may at length, after the toil and
struggle of a protracted warfare, be crowned with the triumphant laurels
of her high calling. It is in truth a singular benefit of God, and at
the same time, a signal miracle, that, amidst the great and various
revolutions of the kingdoms of this world, he enlarges her continually
from age to age, and preserves her from destruction; so that in the
whole world there is nothing enduring but the Church. As, however, it
often happens, that whilst the wicked abound in riches, and have
lavished upon them worldly possessions and authority, the afflicted
Church is tossed amidst many dangers, or rather, is so overwhelmed with
impetuous floods as to seem to be entirely shipwrecked, her happiness
must be considered as consisting principally in this, that she has
reserved for her an everlasting state in heaven.

<span id="xxii-p6"></span>An attention to the time when this psalm was
composed will contribute, in no small degree, to a clear understanding
of its contents. Although the people had returned from their captivity
in Babylon; although the Church of God had been again gathered together,
and united into one body after a long dispersion; although the temple
had been rebuilt, the altar set up, and the service of God restored;
yet, as of a vast multitude of people, there was only a small portion
remaining, which made the condition of the Church very low and despised,
— as the number left was daily diminished by their enemies, — and as the
temple was far inferior in magnificence to what it originally was; — all
this being considered, the faithful had hardly any ground to entertain
favorable hopes as to the future. It certainly seemed impossible that
they would ever again be raised to their former state from which they
had fallen. There was, therefore, reason to apprehend that the minds of
the godly, both from the remembrance of the overthrow which they had
already experienced, and from the weight of the present miseries with
which they were oppressed, would faint and finally sink into despair.
That they might not succumb under such heavy adversities, the Lord not
only promises in this psalm that they would recover what they had lost,
but also encourages them in the hope of an incomparable glory with which
the Church should yet be invested, according to that prophecy of Haggai,

<span id="xxii-p7"></span>“The glory of this latter house shall be
greater than of the former.” (<span id="xxii-p7.1"></span>[Hag
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#009)<span id="xxii-p7.1"></span>)

<span id="xxii-p8"></span>Last of all, it remains that we learn to
accommodate this psalm to our own circumstances, and study to derive
from it the lessons which it is fitted to convey. The consolation
contained in it ought to have had such influence on the godly of that
age, as to have made them not only stand erect in the midst of their
adversities, but also to have raised them from the grave, and lifted
them up to heaven. In the present day, when we know that whatever was
foretold by the Spirit has been fulfilled, we are more than ungrateful
if the experience of the fathers, added to the words of the Spirit, does
not more powerfully confirm our faith. It is impossible to express in
language adequate to the subject the glory with which Christ beautified
his Church by his advent. Then the true religion which before had been
shut up within the narrow limits of Judea was spread abroad through the
whole world. Then God, who had been known only by one family, began to
be called upon in the different languages of all nations. Then the
world, which had been miserably rent in pieces by innumerable sects of
superstition and error, was gathered together into a holy unity of
faith. Then all men, vying with each other, associated themselves in
companies to the society of the Jews, whom they had before abhorred.
Then the kings of the earth and their people voluntarily yielded
themselves to the yoke of Christ; wolves and lions were converted into
lambs; the gifts of the Holy Spirit were poured out upon the faithful, —
gifts which far surpassed all the glory, all the riches, and grandeur,
and precious ornaments of the world.  <span
id="fr_492"></span>[493](#fn_492) The body of the Church also was
gathered together out of countries far distant from each other, and was
increased and preserved in a wonderful manner. The gospel was spread far
and wide within a period of time incredibly short, and equally
extraordinary was the rich harvest of fruit with which the preaching of
it was succeeded. Although, therefore, the renown of the Church had
never been celebrated by this prophecy, yet the goodly and unequalled
condition of that age, which may be called the Golden Age, clearly
demonstrate that she was truly the heavenly kingdom of God. It was
however requisite, even at that period, that the faithful should form
their estimate of her excellence by something higher than carnal sense
or reason. At the time when she flourished most, it was not purple,
gold, and precious stones, which imparted to her the splendor which
invested her, but the blood of martyrs. Rich she was in the graces of
the Spirit, and yet poor and destitute of earthly possessions. Beautiful
and glorious in holiness before God and the angels, she was nevertheless
contemptible in the eyes of the world. Without she had many avowed
enemies, who either exercised towards her fierce and cruel persecution,
or by indirect acts practiced against her, the worst that craft could
suggest; while within were alarms and treachery. In short, her dignity,
venerable indeed, but yet spiritual, lay as yet hidden beneath the cross
of Christ. The consolation, therefore, contained in this psalm was very
seasonable, even at that time, for encouraging the faithful to wait for
a more perfect state of the Church But the case stands otherwise with
us. It has already long ago come to pass,  <span
id="fr_493"></span>[494](#fn_493) through the default of our fathers,
that that renowned beauty of the Church has lain polluted and disfigured
under the feet of the wicked. And at the present day, overwhelmed with
the load of our sins, she groans under miserable desolation, under the
scornful reproaches of the devil and the world, under the cruelty of
tyrants, and under the wicked calumnies of enemies; so that the children
of this world, who wish to live at ease, desire nothing less than to be
accounted among the people of God. Whence we may perceive the more
clearly how much benefit may be derived from this psalm; and, at the
same time, how necessary it is to meditate upon it continually. The
title does not so much refer to the authors of the psalm as to the chief
musicians to whom it was committed to be sung. It is, however, possible
that some Levite of the family of Korah composed it.

<span id="xxii.i"></span>

<span id="xxii.i-p1"></span><span id="xxii.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
87:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#001)<span id="xxii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.i-p2"></span>**1.** His foundations are in the holy
mountains. **2.** Jehovah loveth the gates of Zion above all the
dwellings of Jacob. **3.** Glorious things are spoken of thee, O city of
God! Selah.

<span id="xxii.i-p3"></span> 

<span id="xxii.i-p4"></span><span id="xxii.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.i-p5"></span>**1** *His foundations are in the holy
mountains.* Those who conceive that Jerusalem is here meant, as if it
were said to *be founded upon the holy mountains,* are in my judgment
mistaken; for the relative is in the masculine gender. Some learned men,
I am aware, defend this opinion, by supposing that the words, *the
people,* are to be supplied, although it is the capital of Judea which
is specified. But it is unnecessary for me to say any thing to prove
what is apparent to all, that this exposition is forced. Some Jewish
interpreters have thought it most probable that this opening sentence is
to be referred to the psalm itself; and, accordingly, they explain
*foundations* as denoting metaphorically the theme, or subject of the
poem, because it treats of the holy city Jerusalem, which was situated
upon mountains. But I am surprised that they should have been mistaken
in a matter so very obvious. It being quite a common thing among the
Hebrews to put a relative without its antecedent,  <span
id="fr_494"></span>[495](#fn_494) this manner of speaking ought not to
seem harsh or strange. The name of God is mentioned a little after; and
we know that he is everywhere represented as having founded Jerusalem.

<span id="xxii.i-p7"></span>Some by *the mountains* understand Moriah
and Zion,  <span id="fr_495"></span>[496](#fn_495) which were the two
tops of a mountain cleft into two, but this is too forced. As the
country was mountainous, we are rather to understand the prophet as
having in his eye the several neighboring and contiguous mountains which
formed a chain around Jerusalem; for we will see in another place that
Jerusalem was surrounded by mountains, (<span
id="xxii.i-p8.8"></span>[Ps 125:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa125.htm#002)<span
id="xxii.i-p8.8"></span>.) The true and natural meaning then is, that
God chose the holy mountains in order to found and erect his city in the
midst of them. For a little after, in the prosecution of the subject,
these words occur, “The Highest himself shall establish her.” He is
indeed the founder of other cities also; yet we do not read of him
saying with respect to any other city,

<span id="xxii.i-p9"></span>“This is my rest for ever; here will I
dwell; for I have desired it,”  
(<span id="xxii.i-p9.2"></span>[Ps
132:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#014)<span id="xxii.i-p9.2"></span>.)

<span id="xxii.i-p10"></span>There is this difference, which is always
to be remembered, that while other cities were founded and built by the
guidance and power of God, merely for the sake of civil government,
Jerusalem was his peculiar sanctuary, and his royal seat. Isaiah also
uses a similar form of expression, (<span id="xxii.i-p10.1"></span>[Isa
14:32](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#032)<span id="xxii.i-p10.1"></span>,)
“The Lord hath founded Zion, and the poor of his people shall trust in
it.” Besides, although the whole country of Judea was consecrated to
God, yet he is said to have rejected all the other cities, and to have
chosen this one for himself in which to reign. Here the question is not
about earthly polity, but spiritual government; for the pure religion,
and the true worship of God, and the doctrine of godliness, were at that
time to be found nowhere but in Jerusalem.

<span id="xxii.i-p11"></span><span id="xxii.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.i-p12"></span>**2** *Jehovah loveth the gates of Zion
above all the dwellings of Jacob.* Here we are taught that all the
excellence of the holy city depended on the free choice which God had
made of it. With this agrees what is stated in <span
id="xxii.i-p12.1"></span>[Ps. 78:60](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#060),
[67](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#067)<span id="xxii.i-p12.1"></span>,
that God rejected Shiloh, the tribe of Ephraim, and the tabernacle of
Joseph, that he might dwell in Zion which he loved. The prophet then
points out the cause why God preferred that one place before all others;
and the cause which he assigns is, not the worth of the place itself,
but the free love of God. If it is demanded why Jerusalem was so highly
distinguished, let this short answer be deemed sufficient, *Because it
so pleased God.* To this the divine love is to be traced as its source;
but the end of such a choice was, that there might be some fixed place
in which the true religion should be preserved, and the unity of the
faith maintained, until the advent of Christ, and from which it might
afterwards flow into all the regions of the earth. This, then, explains
why the prophet celebrates Jerusalem as possessing the high distinction
of having God for its master-builder, its founder and protector.
Farther, he attributes to the divine favor and adoption whatever
excellence it possessed above other places. In putting *Zion* for
Jerusalem, and the *gates* for the whole compass of the city, there is a
double synecdoche.

<span id="xxii.i-p13"></span><span id="xxii.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.i-p14"></span>**3** *Glorious things are spoken of thee,
O city of God!* The reading literally is, *That which is spoken in thee
are glorious things.* We must consider the design of the prophet, or
rather the object of the Spirit of God, speaking by the mouth of the
prophet. From the low and despised condition of the whole people, from
the many and terrible enemies who pressed hard upon them on all sides,
from the small number who had sufficient courage to surmount the
obstacles in their way, from the new and unlooked-for changes which were
daily springing up, from the danger there was lest the state of affairs
gradually sinking more and more into decay, should at length become
desperate, it was difficult to cherish the hope that the holy city would
be restored. That despair might not overcome the hearts of the faithful,
and cause them to fail, there is set before them the supporting and
consolatory consideration, that the Lord hath spoken differently
concerning the future condition of the Church. Their attention, there
can be no doubt, is called away from the present aspect of things, and
directed to the promises which inspired them with the hope of the
wonderful glory with which she should be adorned. Although, therefore,
nothing appeared to the eye of sense and reason, calculated greatly to
rejoice the heart, yet the prophet would have them encouraged by the
word to stand as it were on a watch-tower, waiting patiently for the
fulfillment of what God had promised. In this way they were admonished,
first, to direct their attention to the ancient prophecies, and to keep
in remembrance, especially those which are contained in Isaiah from the
fortieth chapter (<span id="xxii.i-p14.1"></span>[Isaiah
40](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#000)<span id="xxii.i-p14.1"></span>) to
the end of the book; and, secondly, to give ear to the servants of God,
who at that time preached the kingdom of Jesus Christ. Whence it follows
that a right judgment cannot be formed of the happiness of the Church,
except when we estimate it according to the standard of God’s word.

<span id="xxii.ii"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii-p1"></span><span id="xxii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
87:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#004)<span id="xxii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii-p2"></span>**4.** I will make mention of Rahab,  <span
id="fr_496"></span>[497](#fn_496) and Babel among them that know me:
behold the Philistines, and Tyre, with Ethiopia,  <span
id="fr_497"></span>[498](#fn_497) he is born there!  <span
id="fr_498"></span>[499](#fn_498) Selah. **5.** And it shall be said of
Zion, Man and man is born in her: and the Most High himself will
establish her. **6.** The Lord will recount when he writeth the peoples,
he is born there. Selah.

<span id="xxii.ii-p6"></span> 

<span id="xxii.ii-p7"></span><span id="xxii.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii-p8"></span>**4** *I will make mention of Rahab and
Babel.* The name of *Rahab* is put for Egypt in many other parts of
Scripture; and this signification is very suitable to the present
passage, the object of which is to portray the magnificent amplitude of
the Church, which as yet was only matter of hope. It is therefore said
that those who formerly were deadly enemies, or entire strangers, shall
not only become familiar friends, but shall also be ingrafted into one
body, that they may be accounted citizens of Jerusalem. In the first
clause it is said, *I will make mention of Egypt and Babylon among my
household.* In the second, it is added, that the Philistines, Tyrians,
and Ethiopians, who hitherto had been so much at variance with the
people of God, shall now be brought into as cordial harmony with them as
if they were Jews by birth. What a glorious distinction of the Church,
that even those who held her in contempt shall come flocking to her from
every quarter, and that those who desired to see her completely cut up
and destroyed, shall consider it the highest honor to have a place among
the number of her citizens, and to be accounted such! All of them shall
voluntarily renounce their own countries in which they had before
proudly boasted. Wherever they may have been born, whether in Palestine,
or Ethiopia, or Tyre, they shall profess themselves citizens of the holy
city.

<span id="xxii.ii-p9"></span>The Hebrew doctors explain this passage as
meaning, that there shall spring from other nations very few who shall
excel either in mental endowment or in virtuous attainment, but that in
Israel such persons will be very numerous. Scarcely, say they, will
there be found among the Tyrians, the Egyptians, the Ethiopians, and
other nations, a man to each of them worthy of praise; so that if such
an one be found among them, he may be pointed at with the finger, on
account of his rarity; but *in Zion man and man shall be born;*  <span
id="fr_499"></span>[500](#fn_499) that is to say, the number of such men
among the Jews shall be great. Christian doctors are almost unanimous in
referring these words to Christ, and think that the cause is here
assigned why those who hitherto were strangers, and even mortal enemies
to each other, are now to be numbered among the citizens of Jerusalem,
namely, because Christ shall be born there,  <span
id="fr_500"></span>[501](#fn_500) whose office it is to gather together
into the unity of faith and hope of eternal life, men who were scattered
like members torn from the body. The first of these interpretations
being altogether forced, needs no refutation. Moreover, it is very
evident that the Jews, actuated by a foolish ambition, wrest this
passage as it were purposely. The exposition of the Christian doctors
is, at first sight, plausible from its ingenuity; but it is destitute of
solidity. The words clearly imply, that whatever nation men may belong
to, they shall willingly renounce their own country, to be enrolled in
the Register of the chosen people. When it is said, that *they are born
there,* this does not mean that they are natives of the country, and
have been brought up in it from their birth, but that they are its
citizens. What is added afterwards, *The Most High himself will
establish her,* may, with equal propriety, be translated, *will order
her;* it being the work of God specially to govern his Church by his
word.

<span id="xxii.ii-p12"></span><span id="xxii.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii-p13"></span>**5** *And it shall be said of Zion, Man
and man is born in her.* It is asserted, in the 4th verse, That new
citizens shall be gathered into the Church of God from different parts
of the world; and here the same subject is prosecuted. Another figure is
however employed, which is, that strangers by birth shall be accounted
among the holy people, just as if they were descended from Abraham. It
had been stated in the preceding verse, that the Chaldeans and Egyptians
would be added to the household of the Church; and that the Ethiopians,
Philistines, and Tyrians, would be enrolled among her children. Now, it
is added, by way of confirmation, that the number of the new progeny
shall be exceeding great, so that the city which had been for a time
uninhabited, and afterwards only half filled with a few people, shall be
crowded with a vast population. The prophet Isaiah describes more at
length what is here promised, in a few words,

<span id="xxii.ii-p14"></span>“Sing, O barren, thou that didst not bear;
break forth into singing, and cry aloud, thou that didst not travail
with child: for more are the children of the desolate than the children
of the married wife, saith the Lord. Enlarge the place of thy tent, and
let them stretch forth the curtains of thine habitations: spare not,
lengthen thy cords, and strengthen thy stakes: for thou shalt break
forth on the right hand and on the left; and thy seed shall inherit the
Gentiles, and make the desolate cities to be inhabited.” (<span
id="xxii.ii-p14.1"></span>[Isa
54:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#001)<span id="xxii.ii-p14.1"></span>)

<span id="xxii.ii-p15"></span>Also,

<span id="xxii.ii-p16"></span>“Lift up thine eyes round about, and see;
all they gather themselves together, they come to thee: thy sons shall
come from far, and thy daughters shall be nursed at thy side.”  
(<span id="xxii.ii-p16.2"></span>[Isa
60:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#004)<span id="xxii.ii-p16.2"></span>)

<span id="xxii.ii-p17"></span>And, in the 44th chapter, at the 5th
verse, we meet with almost the same language as in the passage before
us, or at least what comes very near to it: “One shall say, I am the
Lord’s; and another shall call himself by the name of Jacob; and another
shall subscribe with his hand unto the Lord, and surname himself by the
name of Israel.” Nor is the word *born* inappropriately employed to
express the fact, that the Egyptians, Chaldeans, and such like, shall be
of the flock of God’s people. Although Zion was not the place of their
natural birth, but they were to be grafted into the body of the holy
people by adoption; yet as the way by which we enter into the Church is
a second birth, this form of expression is used with great propriety.
The condition upon which Christ espouses the faithful to himself is,
that they should forget their own people and their father’s house,
(<span id="xxii.ii-p17.1"></span>[Ps
45:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#011)<span
id="xxii.ii-p17.1"></span>,) and that, being formed into new creatures,
and born again of incorruptible seed, they should begin to be the
children of God as well as of the Church, (<span
id="xxii.ii-p17.2"></span>[Ga
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#019)<span id="xxii.ii-p17.2"></span>.)
And the ministry of the Church, and it alone, is undoubtedly the means
by which we are born again to a heavenly life. By the way, we should
remember the difference which the Apostle sets forth as subsisting
between the earthly Jerusalem, — which, being herself a bondwoman,
brings forth children also in bondage, — and the heavenly Jerusalem,
which brings forth free children by the instrumentality of the Gospel.

<span id="xxii.ii-p18"></span>In the second part of the verse, there is
expressed the stability and enduring character of Zion. It often
happens, that in proportion to the rapidity with which cities rise to
distinguished eminence, is the shortness of the continuance of their
prosperity. That it may not be thought that the prosperity of the Church
is of such a perishable and transitory nature, it is declared, that *the
Most High himself will establish her* It is not surprising, as if it had
been said, to find other cities shaken, and subject from time to time to
a variety of vicissitudes; for they are carried round with the world in
its revolutions, and do not enjoy everlasting defenders. But it is the
very reverse with respect to the new Jerusalem, which, being founded
upon the power of God, will continue even when heaven and earth shall
fall into ruins.

<span id="xxii.ii-p19"></span><span id="xxii.ii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii-p20"></span>**6** *The Lord will recount, when he
writeth the peoples.* The meaning is, that Zion will acquire such renown
as to excite all men with the greatest earnestness to desire to be
admitted into the number and rank of her citizens. It is a highly
honorable condition which is spoken of, the language implying, that when
God shall take a census of the people on whom he will be graciously
pleased to confer the highest honor, he will write them as belonging to
Zion, rather than to Babylon or any other cities; for to be one of the
common people among the citizens of Zion, will be a greater distinction
than to be invested with the highest rank anywhere else. We are, at the
same time, taught that the cause to which we are to trace the sudden
elevation of these aliens to so great honor, is the favor of God. Those
who are the bondslaves of Satan and of sin will assuredly never be able
to obtain, by any efforts of their own, the right of citizenship in the
heavenly Jerusalem. It is the Lord’s peculiar work to divide people into
their respective ranks, distinguishing one from another, as seemeth good
to him, all men being on a level by nature. This passage is to be
understood as referring to effectual calling. God, it is true, wrote the
names of his children in the Book of Life before the creation of the
world; but he enrols them in the catalogue of his saints, only when,
having regenerated them by the Spirit of adoption, he impresses his own
mark upon them.

<span id="xxii.iii"></span>

<span id="xxii.iii-p1"></span><span id="xxii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
87:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#007)<span id="xxii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.iii-p2"></span>**7.** And the singers as the players upon
instruments: all my springs are in thee.  <span
id="fr_501"></span>[502](#fn_501)

<span id="xxii.iii-p6"></span> 

<span id="xxii.iii-p7"></span><span id="xxii.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.iii-p8"></span>The meaning of this verse is obscure,
partly from its abrupt brevity, and partly from the ambiguity of one
word. The word *springs* is, beyond all controversy, to be here taken
metaphorically; but interpreters are not agreed as to the explanation of
the metaphor. Some understand it as denoting *hopes,* some *affections,*
and others *thoughts.* Did the idiom of the language admit, I would
willingly subscribe to the opinion of those who translate it *melodies*
or *songs.* But as this might be considered unsupported by the usage of
the Hebrew term, I am rather inclined to adopt, as most suitable to the
subject in hand, the opinion that *lookings* is the proper translation,
the root of the word signifying *an eye.* It is as if the Psalmist had
said, I will always be earnestly looking, as it were, with fixed eyes
upon thee.

<span id="xxii.iii-p9"></span>Let us now inquire what is meant by the
other clause, *The singers as the players upon instruments.* This, it is
true, is an abrupt form of expression; but the sense, about which there
is a general agreement, is, that so great will be the ground for
rejoicing, that the praises of God will resound in Zion continually,
with the energy of the living voice, as well as with musical
instruments. This, then, is a confirmation of what was spoken before
concerning the glorious restoration of Zion; for by the greatness of the
joy, and the manifold harmony and melody of praises, is portrayed the
happiness which shall prevail in the midst of it. At the same time, we
have here described the great design of all the gifts which God has
conferred upon his Church with so liberal a hand; namely, that the
faithful, by hymns and songs, should testify their remembrance of his
benefits and gratefully acknowledge them.  <span
id="fr_502"></span>[503](#fn_502) The Hebrew word <span
id="xxii.iii-p10.2"></span>חוללים*, cholelim,* which we have rendered
*the players upon instruments,* is translated by some, *those who dance
to the sound of instruments.*  <span id="fr_503"></span>[504](#fn_503)
But this is a matter of no great importance, it being enough to consider
the meaning, in short, as this, that there will be a continual concert
of God’s praises in the Church, where he unfolds the treasures of his
grace, and that the faithful will be heard singing successively and in
response. Moreover, the prophet shows his singular love to the Church,
and the singular care and zeal which he exercised about her, to
encourage and stir up all the godly, by his example, to cultivate and
manifest the same zeal, agreeably to what is stated in another psalm,

<span id="xxii.iii-p12"></span>“If I forget thee, O Jerusalem! let my
right hand forget her cunning. If I do not remember thee, let my tongue
cleave to the roof of my mouth; if I prefer not Jerusalem above my chief
joy.” (<span id="xxii.iii-p12.1"></span>[Ps
137:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#005)<span
id="xxii.iii-p12.1"></span>)

<span id="xxii.iii-p13"></span>All our affections are then settled on
the Church, when, gathered in from the vague and vain objects by which
they are distracted, and regarding with indifference the honors,
pleasures, riches, and pageantries of the world, they find enough to
engage and satisfy them in the spiritual glory of Christ’s kingdom, and
in that alone.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_492"></span>[493](cc10021.htm#fr_492) <span
id="xxii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxii-p9"></span> “<span id="xxii-p9.1"></span>Que des le
ventre de sa mere il est serviteur domestique de Dieu, et comme nay d’un
sien serviteur en la maison.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_493"></span>[494](cc10021.htm#fr_493) <span
id="xxii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xxii-p10"></span> “<span id="xxii-p10.1"></span>Lesquels
surmontoyent de beaucoup toute la gloire, toutes les richesses et
magnificences et les precieux ornemens du monde.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_494"></span>[495](cc10021.htm#fr_494) <span
id="xxii.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.i-p6"></span> “<span id="xxii.i-p6.1"></span>Il est
advenu desja de pieca.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_495"></span>[496](cc10021.htm#fr_495) <span
id="xxii.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.i-p8"></span> As examples of this, see <span
id="xxii.i-p8.1"></span>[2 Sam. 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#019),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#025)<span id="xxii.i-p8.1"></span>;
<span id="xxii.i-p8.2"></span>[Ps
114:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#002)<span id="xxii.i-p8.2"></span>;
<span id="xxii.i-p8.3"></span>[So
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#002)<span id="xxii.i-p8.3"></span>;
<span id="xxii.i-p8.4"></span>[Isa.
23:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#001), [Isa.
26:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#001), Isa. 330:4, [Isa.
41:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#002), [Isa.
55:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#004)<span id="xxii.i-p8.4"></span>;
<span id="xxii.i-p8.5"></span>[Jer
33:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#002)<span id="xxii.i-p8.5"></span>;
<span id="xxii.i-p8.6"></span>[La
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#001)<span id="xxii.i-p8.6"></span>;
<span id="xxii.i-p8.7"></span>[Na
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#008)<span id="xxii.i-p8.7"></span>.

<span id="fn_496"></span>[497](cc10021.htm#fr_496) <span
id="xxii.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii-p3"></span> Warner, who adopts this opinion, observes:
— “Though the hills round about Jerusalem (<span
id="xxii.ii-p3.1"></span>[Ps
125:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa125.htm#002)<span id="xxii.ii-p3.1"></span>)
were all *holy*, from their proximity to the *holy city*, yet those of
Zion and Moriah (<span id="xxii.ii-p3.2"></span>[Ps
48:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#002)<span id="xxii.ii-p3.2"></span>)
were more especially so, as on them were built the tabernacle, the
palace of David, and the temple of Solomon.”

<span id="fn_497"></span>[498](cc10021.htm#fr_497) <span
id="xxii.ii-p3.3"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii-p4"></span> *Rahab* is a poetical name of Egypt,
(<span id="xxii.ii-p4.1"></span>[Isa.
30:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#007), [Isa.
51:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#009), [Ps.
87:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#004), [Ps.
89:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#011)<span id="xxii.ii-p4.1"></span>.)
It signifies *pride* or *fierceness*, and seems to have been given to
Egypt by the Jews, in memorial of the cruel tyranny which had been
exercised over them by the Egyptians during their bondage among that
people.

<span id="fn_498"></span>[499](cc10021.htm#fr_498) <span
id="xxii.ii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii-p5"></span> “*Ethiopia*, the land of Cush, which was
in Arabia.” — *Williams*.

<span id="fn_499"></span>[500](cc10021.htm#fr_499) <span
id="xxii.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii-p10"></span> “These nations, as amongst those best
known to the Jews, typify the entire Gentile world; and are intended to
declare the accession of all the earth to the faith of Christianity.” —
*Tucker*.

<span id="fn_500"></span>[501](cc10021.htm#fr_500) <span
id="xxii.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii-p11"></span> “*But of Zion it shall be said*, He and
He *were born there*; *i*.*e*., not one, but many men of note.” —
*Geddes*.

<span id="fn_501"></span>[502](cc10021.htm#fr_501) <span
id="xxii.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.iii-p3"></span> Horsley, who takes this view, translates
—

<span id="xxii.iii-p4"></span>“And every one shall say of Zion,  
He was born there:”

<span id="xxii.iii-p5"></span>on which he has the following note: —
“<span id="xxii.iii-p5.1"></span>*Unusquisque*, every one. Every one
shall confess, to the honor of the Israelites, that the Savior was a
native Jew.” Dimock objects to this, observing that Christ was not born
at Jerusalem.

<span id="fn_502"></span>[503](cc10021.htm#fr_502) <span
id="xxii.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.iii-p10"></span> Cresswell connects the second clause of
this verse with the first, in this manner: — “Singers also, and players
upon the pipe, shall chant, ‘All my wells are in thee;’” *i*.*e*., says
he, “all my sources of refreshment, of hope, and of salvation, are in
thee, O Zion!” He adds, “The phrase, *wells of salvation*, occurs in
<span id="xxii.iii-p10.1"></span>[Isa
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#003)<span id="xxii.iii-p10.1"></span>,
the Hebrew word being the same as that which, in our two English
versions of the Psalms, is translated *springs* and *fountains*.”
Walford connects the two clauses in the same manner, “They sing with
musical instruments, ‘All my springs are in thee.’” “The persons who are
here said to sing,” he observes, “accompanied by musical instruments,
are the people spoken of in verse 6. They are described as uniting in a
joyful song of praise and thanksgiving; and the burden of their song is,
‘All my springs are in thee.’ Springs or fountains are a constant image
for the blessings which are productive of refreshment and happiness.
These new-born converts are, therefore, represented as joining the
universal Church, and offering ascriptions of praise to God, who is the
overflowing source of all the streams of good, which refresh and bless
the people.”

<span id="fn_503"></span>[504](cc10021.htm#fr_503) <span
id="xxii.iii-p10.3"></span>

<span id="xxii.iii-p11"></span> “<span id="xxii.iii-p11.1"></span>Afin
que les fideles en chantant Pseaumes et Cantiques monstrent la
souvenance qu’ils ont des benefices receus, et luy en facent
recognoissance.” — *Fr*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 88](cc10022)
