[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc10018)  [Next](cc10020.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 10: Psalms, Part III*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xx"></span>

<span id="xx-p1"></span>PSALM 85

<span id="xx-p2"></span>God having afflicted his people with new
troubles and calamities, after their return from their captivity in
Babylon, they, in the first place, make mention of their deliverance as
an argument why he should not leave unfinished the work of his grace.
Then they complain of the long continuance of their afflictions. And, in
the third place, inspired with hope and confidence, they triumph in the
blessedness promised them; for their restoration to their own country
was connected with the kingdom of Christ, from which they anticipated an
abundance of all good things.  <span id="fr_471"></span>[472](#fn_471.md)

<span id="xx-p4"></span>To the chief musician, a Psalm of the sons of
Korah.

<span id="xx.i"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p1"></span><span id="xx.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
85:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#001.md)<span id="xx.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p2"></span>**1.** O Jehovah! thou hast been favorable to
thy land: thou hast brought back the captivity of Jacob. **2.** Thou
hast taken away the iniquity  <span id="fr_472"></span>[473](#fn_472.md) of
thy people: thou hast covered all their sins. Selah. **3.** Thou hast
turned away all thy anger: thou hast drawn back the fury of thy
indignation. **4.** Turn us, O God of our salvation! and cause thy anger
against us to cease.

<span id="xx.i-p4"></span> 

<span id="xx.i-p5"></span><span id="xx.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p6"></span>**1** *O Jehovah! thou hast been favorable to
thy land.* Those who translate these words in the future tense, in my
opinion, mar their meaning. This psalm, it is probable, was endited to
be sung by the people when they were persecuted by the cruel tyranny of
Antiochus; and from the deliverance wrought for them in the past, they
were encouraged to expect in the future, fresh and continued tokens of
the divine favor, — God having thereby testified, that their sins,
however numerous and aggravated, could not efface from his memory the
remembrance of his covenant, so as to render him inexorable towards the
children of Abraham, and deaf to their prayers.  <span
id="fr_473"></span>[474](#fn_473.md) Had they not previously experienced
such remarkable proofs of the divine goodness, they must necessarily
have been overwhelmed with the load of their present afflictions,
especially when so long protracted. The cause of their deliverance from
captivity they attribute to the free love with which God had embraced
the land which he had chosen for himself. Whence it follows, that the
course of his favor was unintermitted; and the faithful also were
inspired with confidence in prayer, by the reflection that, mindful of
his choice, he had shown himself merciful to his own land. We have
elsewhere had occasion to remark, that nothing contributes more
effectually to encourage us to come to the throne of grace, than the
remembrance of God’s former benefits. Our faith would immediately
succumb under adversity, and sorrow would choke our hearts, were we not
taught to believe from the experience of the past, that he is inclined
compassionately to hear the prayers of his servants, and always affords
them succor when the exigencies of their circumstances require it;
especially as there remains at all times the same reason for continuing
his goodness. Thus the prophet happily applies to believers of his own
day, the benefits which God in old time bestowed upon their fathers,
because both they and their fathers were called to the hope of the same
inheritance.

<span id="xx.i-p8"></span><span id="xx.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p9"></span>**2** *Thou hast taken away the iniquity of
thy people.* It was very natural for the faithful to feel alarmed and
perplexed on account of their sins, and therefore the prophet removes
all ground for overwhelming apprehension, by showing them, that God, in
delivering his people, had given an irrefragable proof of free
forgiveness. He had before traced this deliverance to the mere good
pleasure and free grace of God as its source; but after it was wrought,
the iniquities of the people having separated between them and their
God, and estranged them from him, it was necessary that the remedy of
pardon should be brought to their aid. In saying that *their iniquities
were taken away,* he does not refer to the faithful being reformed and
purged from their sins, in other words, to that work by which God,
sanctifying them by the Spirit of regeneration, actually removes sin
from them. What he intended to say he explains immediately after. The
amount, in short, is, that God was reconciled to the Jews by not
imputing their sins to them. When God is said *to cover sins,* the
meaning is, that he buries them, so that they come not into judgment, as
we have shown more at large on the 32nd psalm, at the beginning. When,
therefore, he had punished the sins of his people by captivity, it being
his will to restore them again to their own country, he removed the
great impediment to this, by blotting out their transgressions; for
deliverance from punishment depends upon the remission of sin. Thus we
are furnished with an argument in confutation of that foolish conceit of
the Sophists, which they set forth as some great mystery, That God
retains the punishment although he forgive the fault; whereas God
announces in every part of his word, that his object in pardoning is,
that being pacified, he may at the same time mitigate the punishment. Of
this we have an additional confirmation in the following verse, where we
are informed, that God was mercifully inclined towards his people, that
he might withdraw his hand from chastising them. What answer in any
degree plausible can be given to this by the Sophists, who affirm that
God would not be righteous did he not, after he had forgiven the fault,
execute punishment according to the strict demands of his justice? The
sequence of the pardon of sin is, that God by his blessing testifies
that he is no longer displeased.

<span id="xx.i-p10"></span><span id="xx.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p11"></span>**4** *Turn us, O God of our salvation!* The
faithful now make a practical application to themselves, in their
present circumstances, of what they had rehearsed before concerning
God’s paternal tenderness towards his people whom he had redeemed. And
they attribute to him, by whom they desire to be restored to their
former state, the appellation, *O God of our salvation!* to encourage
themselves, even in the most desperate circumstances, in the hope of
being delivered by the power of God. Although to the eye of sense and
reason there may be no apparent ground to hope favourably as to our
condition, it becomes us to believe that our salvation rests secure in
his hand, and that, whenever he pleases, he can easily and readily find
the means of bringing salvation to us. *God’s anger* being the cause and
origin of all calamities, the faithful beseech him to remove it. This
order demands our special attention; for so effeminate and faint-hearted
in bearing adversity are we, that no sooner does God begin to smite us
with his little finger, than we entreat him, with groaning and
lamentable cries, to spare us. But we forget to plead, what should
chiefly engage our thoughts, that he would deliver us from guilt and
condemnation; and we forget this because we are reluctant to descend
into our own hearts and to examine ourselves.

<span id="xx.ii"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p1"></span><span id="xx.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
85:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#005.md)<span id="xx.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p2"></span>**5.** Wilt thou be wroth against us for
ever? wilt thou prolong thy displeasure from age to age? **6.** Wilt
thou not turn again and quicken us? and thy people will rejoice in thee.
**7.** Show us thy mercy, O Jehovah! and grant us thy salvation. **8.**
I will hear what God Jehovah will speak: surely he will speak peace to
his people and to his meek ones, and they will not turn again to folly.

<span id="xx.ii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xx.ii-p4"></span><span id="xx.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p5"></span>**5** *Wilt thou be wroth against us for
ever?* Here the godly bewail the long continuance of their afflictions,
and derive an argument in prayer from the nature of God, as it is
described in the law, —

<span id="xx.ii-p6"></span>“The Lord, The Lord God, merciful and
gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth, keeping
mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, and transgression, and sin,”  
(<span id="xx.ii-p6.2"></span>[Exod.
34:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#006.md),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#007)<span id="xx.ii-p6.2"></span>,.md)

<span id="xx.ii-p7"></span>— a truth which has also been brought under
our notice in <span id="xx.ii-p7.1"></span>[Ps
30:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#005.md)<span id="xx.ii-p7.1"></span>,
“For his anger endureth but a moment; in his favor is life: weeping may
endure for a night, but joy cometh in the morning.” It thus becomes us,
when we engage in prayer, to meditate upon the Divine promises that we
may be furnished with suitable expressions. It may seem, at first view,
that these devout Jews find fault with God, as if he exhibited his
character to them in a light very different from that in which he was
wont to exhibit it; but the object they had in view undoubtedly was to
obtain, in the struggle they were resolutely maintaining against
temptation, hope of relief from the contemplation of the nature of God;
as if they laid it down as a fixed principle, that it is impossible for
Him to be angry for ever. We may observe, by the way, that it is
evident, from their praying in this manner, that they were weighed down
with such an oppressive load of calamities, as to be almost unable any
longer to endure them. Let us therefore learn, that although God may not
immediately grant us manifest tokens of his returning favor, yet we must
not cease to persevere in earnest prayer. If it is objected, that then
God has promised in vain that his anger would be of short duration, I
answer, that if we entertain suitable views of our own sins, his anger
will assuredly appear to be always of short continuance; and if we call
to remembrance the everlasting course of his mercy, we will confess that
his anger endures but for a moment. As our corrupt nature is ever
relapsing into the wanton indulgence of its native propensities,
manifold corrections are indispensably necessary to subdue it
thoroughly.

<span id="xx.ii-p8"></span><span id="xx.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p9"></span>The godly, still dwelling on the same theme,
ask, in the 6th verse, whether *God will not turn again and quicken
them* Being fully convinced of the truth of this principle, That the
punishments with which God chastises his children are only temporary;
they thereby encourage themselves in the confident expectation, that
although he may be now justly displeased, and may have turned away his
face from them, yet, when they implore his mercy, he will be entreated,
and raising the dead to life again, will turn their mourning into
gladness. By the word *quicken,* they complain that they almost resemble
persons who are dead, or that they are stunned and laid prostrate with
afflictions. And when they promise themselves matter of rejoicing, they
intimate that in the meantime they are well nigh worn out with sorrow.

<span id="xx.ii-p10"></span><span id="xx.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p11"></span>**7.** *Show us thy mercy, O Jehovah!* In
these words there is the same contrast as in the preceding sentence. In
supplicating that mercy may be extended to them, and deliverance granted
them, they confess that they are deprived of all sense of both these
blessings. Such having been the state of the saints in old time, let us
learn, even when we are so oppressed with calamities as to be reduced to
extremity, and on the brink of despair, to betake ourselves
notwithstanding to God. *Mercy* is appropriately put in the first place;
and then there is added *salvation,* which is the work and fruit of
mercy; for no other reason can be assigned why God is induced to show
himself our Savior, but that he is merciful. Whence it follows, that all
who urge their own merits before Him as a plea for obtaining his favor,
are shutting up the way of salvation.

<span id="xx.ii-p12"></span><span id="xx.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p13"></span>**8.** *I will hear what God Jehovah will
speak.* The prophet, by his own example, here exhorts the whole body of
the Church to quiet and calm endurance. As he had burst forth under the
influence of strong emotion into a degree of vehemence, he now restrains
himself as it were with a bridle; and in all our desires, be they never
so devout and holy, we must always beware of their running to excess.
When a man gives indulgence to his own infirmity, he is easily carried
beyond the bounds of moderation by an undue ardor. For this reason the
prophet enjoins silence, both upon himself and others, that they may
patiently wait God’s own time. By these words, he shows that he was in a
composed state of mind, and, as it were, continued silent, because he
was persuaded that the care of God is exercised about his Church. Had he
thought that fortune held the sovereignty of the world, and that mankind
are whirled round by a blind impulse, he would not, as he does, have
represented God as sustaining the function of governing. *To speak,* in
this passage, is equivalent *to command,* or *to appoint.* It is, as if
he had said, Being confident that the remedy for our present calamities
is in the hand of God, I will remain quiet until the fit time for
delivering the Church arrive. As then the unruliness of our passions
murmur, and raise an uproar against God, so patience is a kind of
silence by which the godly keep themselves in subjection to his
authority. In the second clause of the verse, the Psalmist comes to the
conclusion, that the condition of the Church will be more prosperous:
*Surely he will speak peace to his people, and to his meek ones.* As God
rules supreme over the affairs of men, he cannot but provide for the
welfare of his Church, which is the object of his special love. The word
*peace,* we have elsewhere shown, is employed by the Hebrews to denote
prosperity; and, accordingly, what is here expressed is, that the
Church, by the Divine blessing, will prosper. Moreover, by the word
*speak,* it is intimated that God will not fail to regard his promises.
The Psalmist might have spoken more plainly of Divine Providence, as for
instance in these terms, “I will look to what God will do;” but as the
benefits bestowed upon the Church flow from the Divine promises, he
makes mention of God’s *mouth* rather than of his *hand;* and, at the
same time, he shows that patience depends upon the quiet hearing of
faith. When those to whom God speaks peace are not only described as
*his people,* but also as *his meek ones,* this is a mark by which the
genuine people of God are distinguished from such as bear merely the
title of his people. As hypocrites arrogantly claim to themselves all
the privileges of the Church, it is requisite to repel and exhibit the
groundlessness of their boasting, in order to let them know that they
are justly excluded from the promises of God.

<span id="xx.ii-p14"></span>*And they will not turn again to folly.* The
particle rendered *and* has usually been explained in this way: *That
they may not turn again to folly;* as if this clause were added to
express the fruit of the Divine goodness. As God, in dealing graciously
with his people, allures them to himself, that they may continue
obedient to him, the prophet, as these interpreters contend, maintains
that they will not again return to folly, because the Divine goodness
will serve as a bridle to restrain them. This exposition is admissible;
but it will be more suitable to refer the sentence to the whole subject
comprised in the passage — to regard it, in short, as meaning, that
after God has sufficiently chastised his Church, he will at length show
himself merciful to her, that the saints, taught by chastisements, may
exercise a stricter vigilance over themselves in future. The cause is
shown why God suspends and delays the communications of his grace. As
the physician, although his patient may experience some alleviation of
his disease, keeps him still under medicinal treatment, until he become
fully convalescent, and until, the cause of his disease being removed,
his constitution become invigorated, — for to allow him all at once to
use whatever diet he chose, would be highly injurious to him; — so God,
perceiving that we are not completely recovered from our vices to
spiritual health in one day, prolongs his chastisements: without which
we would be in danger of a speedy relapse. Accordingly, the prophet, to
assuage the grief with which the protracted duration of calamities would
oppress the faithful, applies this remedy and solace, That God purposely
continues his corrections for a longer period than they would wish, that
they may be brought in good earnest to repent, and excited to be more on
their guard in future.

<span id="xx.iii"></span>

<span id="xx.iii-p1"></span><span id="xx.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
85:9-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#009.md)<span id="xx.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xx.iii-p2"></span>**9.** Surely  <span
id="fr_474"></span>[475](#fn_474.md) his salvation is near to them that
fear him, that glory may dwell in our land. **10.** Mercy and truth
shall meet together; righteousness and peace shall kiss each other.
**11.** Truth shall spring \[or bud\] out of the earth; and
righteousness shall look down from heaven. **12.** Likewise, Jehovah
will grant prosperity: and our land shall yield her increase. **13.**
Righteousness shall go before him; and set her steps in the way.

<span id="xx.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xx.iii-p5"></span><span id="xx.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xx.iii-p6"></span>**9** *Surely his salvation is near to them
that fear him.* Here the Psalmist confirms the statement made in the
preceding verse. He encourages both himself and other servants of God in
the hope, that although to outward appearance God was far off from his
people, yet deliverance was near at hand; because it is certain, that
God secretly regards those whom he seems openly to neglect. If it is
considered preferable to take the particle <span
id="xx.iii-p6.1"></span>אך, *ach,* adversatively, Yet *his salvation,*
etc., — a sense in which it is often used in Hebrew — the sentence will
be fuller. The prophet had just now said, that God continues to lengthen
out the chastisement of his people, when he perceives that they are too
prone to fall anew into sin; and here, lest his slowness in removing the
stroke of his hand should prove too much for their patience, he
qualifies the above statement, by observing, that even when the Divine
help seems slowest in coming it is then near at hand. *The glory* which
in the second part of the verse he anticipates *will dwell in the land,*
is undoubtedly set in opposition to the ruinous appearance it then
presented to the eye, which was a token of the dreadful anger of God,
and which consigned the land to ignominy and reproach.  <span
id="fr_475"></span>[476](#fn_475.md) By this language, therefore, he
encourages himself and other genuine believers to repentance, putting
them in mind, that the grievous oppression, accompanied with insult and
derision, to which they were subjected by the tyranny of their enemies,
was to be ascribed entirely to their having driven away the salvation of
God from them by their sins.

<span id="xx.iii-p13"></span><span id="xx.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xx.iii-p14"></span>**10.** *Mercy and truth shall meet
together.* Here the verbs are in the past tense; but it is evident from
the scope of the passage, that they should be translated into the
future. I cordially embrace the opinion which is held by many, that we
have here a prophecy concerning the kingdom of Christ. There is no
doubt, that the faithful lifted up their eyes to Him, when their faith
had need of encouragement and support in reference to the restoration of
the Church; and especially after their return from Babylon. Meanwhile,
the design of the prophet is, to show how bountifully God deals with his
Church, after he is reconciled to her. The fruits which he represents as
springing from this reconciliation are, first, that *mercy and truth
meet together;* and, secondly, that *righteousness and peace embrace
each other* From these words, Augustine deduces a beautiful sentiment,
and one fraught with the sweetest consolation, That the mercy of God is
the origin and source of all his promises, from whence issues the
righteousness which is offered to us by the gospel, while from that
righteousness proceeds the peace which we obtain by faith, when God
justifies us freely. According to him, *righteousness* is represented
*as looking down from heaven,* because it is the free gift of God, and
not acquired by the merit of works; and that it comes from heaven,
because it is not to be found among men, who are by nature utterly
destitute of it. He also explains *truth springing out of the earth* as
meaning, that God affords the most incontestable evidence of his
faithfulness, in fulfilling what he has promised. But as we ought rather
to seek after the solid truth, than exercise our ingenuity in searching
out refined interpretations, let us rest contented with the natural
meaning of the passage, which is, that mercy, truth, peace, and
righteousness, will form the grand and ennobling distinction of the
kingdom of Christ. The prophet does not proclaim the praises of men, but
commends the grace which he had before hoped for, and supplicated from
God only; thus teaching us to regard it as an undoubted truth, that all
these blessings flow from God. By the figure synecdoche, some parts
being put for the whole, there is described in these four words all the
ingredients of true happiness. When cruelty rages with impunity, when
truth is extinguished, when righteousness is oppressed and trampled
under foot, and when all things are embroiled in confusion, were it not
better that the world should be brought to an end, than that such a
state of things should continue? Whence it follows, that nothing can
contribute more effectually to the promotion of a happy life, than that
these four virtues should flourish and rule supreme. The reign of
Christ, in other parts of Scripture, is adorned with almost similar
encomiums. If, however, any one would rather understand *mercy and
truth* as referring to God, I have no disposition to enter into dispute
with him.  <span id="fr_476"></span>[477](#fn_476.md) *The springing of
truth out of the earth,* and *the looking down of righteousness from
heaven,* without doubt imply, that truth and righteousness will be
universally diffused, as well above as beneath, so as to fill both
heaven and earth. It is not meant to attribute something different to
each of them, but to affirm in general, that there will be no corner of
the earth where these qualities do not flourish.

<span id="xx.iii-p16"></span><span id="xx.iii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xx.iii-p17"></span>**12.** *Likewise, Jehovah will grant
prosperity.* Some take this verse allegorically, and interpret it of the
increase of spiritual blessings; but this does not agree with the
particle <span id="xx.iii-p17.1"></span>גם*, gam,* rendered *likewise,*
by which the prophet, in my opinion, intends to express the completeness
of that blessedness of which he had spoken. He therefore mentions the
*fruit of the earth,* as an additional proof of God’s surpassing
beneficence. The chief happiness of the Church is comprehended in these
four blessings which he had specified; but the provision which is
required for the support of our bodies ought not to be considered as
unworthy of attention, provided our care about this matter is kept
within proper bounds. If it is objected that these two subjects — the
spiritual kingdom of Christ, and the fruitfulness of the earth, are
improperly intermingled, it may be easily observed in reply, that there
is nothing at all incongruous in this, when we consider that God, while
he bestows upon his people spiritual blessings, gives them, in addition
to these, some taste of his fatherly love, in the outward benefits which
relate to the life of the body; it being evident from the testimony of
Paul, that

<span id="xx.iii-p18"></span>“godliness is profitable unto all things,
having promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to come,”
(<span id="xx.iii-p18.1"></span>[1Ti
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#008)<span id="xx.iii-p18.1"></span>..md)

<span id="xx.iii-p19"></span>But let it be observed, that the faithful
generally have only granted to them a limited portion of the comforts of
this transitory life: that they may not be lulled asleep by the
allurements of earth. I have therefore said, that, while on earth, they
only taste of God’s fatherly love, and are not filled with an
overflowing abundance of the good things of this world. Moreover, we are
taught from this verse, that the power and capacity of the earth to
produce fruit for the sustenance of our bodies was not given to it once
for all, — as the heathen imagine God at the first creation to have
adapted each element to its proper office, while he now sits in heaven
in a state of indolence and repose; — but that the earth is from year to
year rendered fruitful by the secret influence of God, who designs
hereby to afford us a manifestation of his goodness.

<span id="xx.iii-p20"></span><span id="xx.iii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xx.iii-p21"></span>**13.** *Righteousness shall go before
him.* The word *righteousness* is taken by some for *a righteous
person;* but this is unnatural. Viewed in this light, the passage,
indeed, contains the useful and important truth, That the righteous man
will walk before God, and will make it his object to regulate all his
actions according to the principles of moral rectitude. But there being
no necessity for wresting the word *righteousness* so violently, it will
be better to adopt the more correct and simple view, which is, that
under the reign of Christ order will be so well established, that
righteousness will walk before God, and occupy every path. The prophet
seems thus to call back the attention of the faithful to what
constitutes the chief elements of blessedness; for although God may
grant to his servants an abundant supply of sustenance for the body, it
is unbecoming for them to have their hearts set upon this. And in truth,
one difference between us and the lower animals is, that God, instead of
pampering and stuffing our bellies, for the mere gratification of our
animal appetites, directs our views to higher and more important
objects. When it is said that *righteousness shall go before God,* the
meaning is, that the prevalence and unobstructed course of
righteousness, which is equivalent to *setting her steps in the way,* is
to be attributed to the appointment of God. Isaiah, on the contrary,
complains that equity, instead of setting her steps in the way, is
prohibited from making her appearance in public, and meets with a
universal repulse. “And judgment is turned away backward, and justice
standeth afar off: for truth is fallen in the street, and equity cannot
enter,” (<span id="xx.iii-p21.1"></span>[Isa
59:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#014)<span id="xx.iii-p21.1"></span>..md)
In this psalm prayers and holy meditations, engaged in with the view of
nourishing and confirming faith, together with praises and
thanksgivings, are intermingled. It having been difficult in the
judgment of carnal reason for David to escape from the distresses with
which he was environed, he sets in opposition to its conclusions the
infinite goodness and power of God. Nor does he simply request
deliverance from his enemies; but he also prays that the fear of God may
be implanted and firmly established in his heart.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_471"></span>[472](cc10019.htm#fr_471.md) <span
id="xx-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xx-p3"></span> “<span id="xx-p3.1"></span>נשאת עון, *nasata
avon*, ‘Thou hast borne, or carried away, the iniquity. An allusion to
the ceremony of the *scape-goat*.” — *Dr Adam Clarke* “It is a maxim
among the Jewish doctors,” says Hammond, “that captivity is one way of
expiation, and so to return from thence was a sure indication that the
sin for which it was inflicted was remitted or done away. This, saith
Abarbanel, on <span id="xx-p3.2"></span>[Leviticus
16](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#000.md)<span id="xx-p3.2"></span>, was
adumbrated in the *Azazel*, or *scape-goat*, which, as the other that
was slain, was a *sin-offering*, as appears, <span
id="xx-p3.3"></span>[Le 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#005.md)<span
id="xx-p3.3"></span>. ‘He shall take two kids for a sin-offering.’ And
then the ‘confessing the sins over him,’ mentioned <span
id="xx-p3.4"></span>[Le 16:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#021.md)<span
id="xx-p3.4"></span>, (‘Aaron shall lay both his hands on the head of
the live goat, and confess over him all the iniquities of the children
of Israel, etc., putting them on the head of the goat: And the goat
shall bear upon him all their iniquities into a land of separation,’
<span id="xx-p3.5"></span>[Le
16:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#022)<span id="xx-p3.5"></span>,.md)
shows that they were to carry their sins with them into the land of
their captivity, meant by *the land of separation*, that *land*
whatsoever it was, whither the Divine Providence had designed their
deportation. From whence therefore being now returned, their *sins*, for
which they were thus punished, are supposed to be left behind them, no
more to be laid to their charge, if their return to their former *sins*
do not cause them to be called to remembrance.”

<span id="fn_472"></span>[473](cc10019.htm#fr_472.md) <span
id="xx.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p3"></span> “<span id="xx.i-p3.1"></span>Ne faire qu’il
ne fust enclin et pitie envers les enfans d’Abraham pour exaucer leurs
prieres.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_473"></span>[474](cc10019.htm#fr_473.md) <span
id="xx.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p7"></span> “<span id="xx.i-p7.1"></span>Ou, si est ce
*que*.” — *Fr*. *marg*. “Or, Yet.”

<span id="fn_474"></span>[475](cc10019.htm#fr_474.md) <span
id="xx.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xx.iii-p3"></span> Walford, who thinks that the composition of
this psalm is referable to some period subsequent to the return of God’s
ancient people from Babylon, explains this concluding clause of the 9th
verse as follows: — “The glory that is here spoken of is that which was
formerly enjoyed, when they were surrounded on all sides by prosperity;
and when especially they were favored with the tokens of the divine
presence, in the performance of all the instituted worship of the
sanctuary, when the ark, the temples etc., were in their pristine beauty
and splendor.”

<span id="fn_475"></span>[476](cc10019.htm#fr_475.md) <span
id="xx.iii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xx.iii-p7"></span> *Mercy* and *truth* are very generally
applied by commentators to God; and the passage is understood as the
celebration of the harmony of the divine attributes in the salvation of
man. The description is one of great beauty and sublimity. “How
admirable,” says Bishop Lowth, in illustrating this verse, “is that
celebrated personification of the divine attributes by the Psalmist; How
just, elegant, and splendid does it appear, if applied only according to
the literal sense, to the restoration of the Jewish nation from the
Babylonish captivity! but if interpreted as relating to that sublimer,
more sacred, and mystical sense, which is not obscurely shadowed under
the ostensible image, it is certainly uncommonly noble and elevated,
mysterious and sublime.” — (*Lowth*’*s Lectures on Hebrew Poetry*,
volume 1, page 284.)

<span id="xx.iii-p8"></span>Dr Adam Clarke gives a turn to the text,
which still more heightens its effect. “It would be more simple,” says
he, “to translate the original,

<span id="xx.iii-p9"></span>‘Mercy and truth have met on the way;  
Righteousness and peace have embraced.’

<span id="xx.iii-p10"></span>This is a remarkable text, and much has
been said on it: but there is a beauty in it, which I think has not been
noticed.

<span id="xx.iii-p11"></span>“*Mercy* and *peace* are on one side:
*truth* and *righteousness* on the other. *Truth* requires
*righteousness*; *mercy* calls for *peace*.

<span id="xx.iii-p12"></span>“They meet together on the way; one going
to make inquisition for sin, the other to plead for reconciliation.
Having met, their differences on certain considerations (not here
particularly mentioned) are adjusted: their mutual claims are blended
together in one common interest; on which *peace* and *righteousness*
immediately embrace. Thus *righteousness* is given to *truth*; and
*peace* is given to *mercy*. “Now, *Where* did these meet? — In Christ
Jesus. “When were they reconciled? — When He poured out His life on
Calvary.”

<span id="fn_476"></span>[477](cc10019.htm#fr_476.md) <span
id="xx.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xx.iii-p15"></span> “<span id="xx.iii-p15.1"></span>Pource
qu’on luy defend de se trouver en public et que chacun la repousse.” —
*Fr*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 86](cc10020.md)
