[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc10004)  [Next](cc10006) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 10: Psalms, Part III*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi"></span>

<span id="vi-p1"></span><span id="vi-p1.1"></span>PSALM 71  <span
id="fr_99"></span>[100](#fn_99)

<span id="vi-p3"></span>David, having spoken at the outset of his
confidence in God, partly calls upon him for deliverance, and partly
complains of the pride of his enemies. At length, to confirm his faith,
he prepares himself for yielding a grateful ascription of praise for the
benefits which God had conferred upon him.

<span id="vi.i"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p1"></span><span id="vi.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
71:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#001)<span id="vi.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p2"></span>**1.** In thee, O Jehovah! do I put my trust;
let me not be put to confusion for ever. **2.** Deliver me in thy
righteousness, and rescue me: incline thy ear to me, and save me. **3.**
Be thou to me for a rock of strength,  <span
id="fr_100"></span>[101](#fn_100) \[or for a strong rock,\] into which I
may at all times enter: thou hast given commandment to save me; for thou
art my tower and my fortress. **4.** O my God! deliver me from the hand
of the wicked man; from the hand of the perverse and violent man.

<span id="vi.i-p4"></span> 

<span id="vi.i-p5"></span><span id="vi.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p6"></span>**1.** *In thee, O Jehovah! do I put my
trust.* It has been thought that the occasion of the composition of this
psalm was the conspiracy of Absalom; and the particular reference which
David makes to his old age renders this conjecture not improbable. As
when we approach God, it is faith alone which opens the way for us,
David, in order to obtain what he sought, protests, according to his
usual manner, that he does not pour forth at the throne of grace
hypocritical prayers, but betakes himself to God with sincerity of
heart, fully persuaded that his salvation is laid up in the Divine hand.
The man whose mind is in a state of constant fluctuation, and whose hope
is divided by being turned in different directions, in each of which he
is looking for deliverance, or who, under the influence of fear,
disputes with himself, or who obstinately refuses the Divine assistance,
or who frets and gives way to restless impatience, is unworthy of being
succoured by God. The particle <span id="vi.i-p6.1"></span>לעולם,
*leolam,* in the end of the first verse, which we have translated *for
ever,* admits of a twofold sense, as I have shown on <span
id="vi.i-p6.3"></span>[Psalm 31:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#001)<span
id="vi.i-p6.3"></span>. It either tacitly implies a contrast between the
present calamities of David and the happy issue which he anticipated; as
if he had said, Lord, I lie in the dust at present as one confounded;
but the time will come when thou wilt grant me deliverance. Or *not to
be ashamed for ever,* means never to be ashamed. As these verses almost
correspond with the beginning of the 31st psalm, I would refer to that
place for those explanatory remarks which I here purposely omit, not
wishing to tax the patience of my readers by unnecessary repetition.

<span id="vi.i-p7"></span>In these words of the third verse, *Into which
I may at all times enter,* which are not to be found in the other psalm,
David briefly prays that he may have so ready and easy access to God for
succor, as to find in him a secure refuge whenever threatened by any
immediate danger. Lord! as if he had said, let me always find ready
succor in thee, and do thou meet me with a smile of benignity and grace,
when I betake myself to thee. The expression which follows, *Thou hast
given commandment to save me,* is resolved by some interpreters into the
optative mood; as if David requested that he might be committed to the
guardianship of angels. But it is better to retain the past tense of the
verb, and to understand him as encouraging himself, from his experience
in times past, to hope for a happy issue to his present calamities. Nor
is there any necessity for limiting to the angels the verb, *thou hast
given commandment.* God, no doubt, employs them in defending his people;
but as he is possessed of innumerable ways of saving them, the
expression, I conceive, is used indefinitely, to teach us that he gives
commandment concerning the salvation of his servants, according as he
has purposed, whenever he gives some manifest token of his favor toward
them in his providence; and what he has determined in his own mind, he
executes sometimes by his nod alone, and sometimes by the
instrumentality of men or other creatures. Meanwhile, David would
intimate that such is the all-sufficient power of God intrinsically
considered, that without having recourse to any foreign aid, his
commandment alone is abundantly adequate for effecting our salvation.

<span id="vi.i-p8"></span><span id="vi.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p9"></span>**4.** *O my God! deliver me from the hand of
the wicked man.* Here he uses the singular number; but he is not to be
understood as indicating one man only.  <span
id="fr_101"></span>[102](#fn_101) It is highly probable that he
comprehends the whole host of the enemies who assaulted him. We have
elsewhere had occasion to observe how greatly it contributes to inspire
us with the confidence of obtaining our requests, when we are so assured
of our own integrity, as to be able freely to complain before God that
we are unjustly and wickedly assaulted by our enemies; for we ought not
to doubt that God, who has promised to become the defender of those who
are unjustly oppressed, will, in that case, undertake our cause.

<span id="vi.ii"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p1"></span><span id="vi.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
71:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#005)<span id="vi.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p2"></span>**5.** For thou art my expectation, \[or
hope,\] O Lord Jehovah! My trust from my youth. **6.** Upon thee have I
leaned \[or have I been sustained\] from the womb:  <span
id="fr_102"></span>[103](#fn_102) thou art he that took me out of my
mother’s bowels: my praise is continually of thee. **7.** I have been as
a prodigy to the great ones,  <span id="fr_103"></span>[104](#fn_103)
and yet  <span id="fr_104"></span>[105](#fn_104) thou art my strong
confidence. **8.** My mouth shall be filled with thy praise and with thy
glory daily.

<span id="vi.ii-p6"></span> 

<span id="vi.ii-p7"></span><span id="vi.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p8"></span>**5.** *For thou art my expectation, O Lord
Jehovah!* The Psalmist here repeats what he had said a little before
concerning his trust or confidence. But some, perhaps, may be inclined
to refer this sentence rather to the matter or ground afforded him for
hope and confidence than to the emotions of his heart; supposing him to
mean, that by the benefits which God had conferred upon him, he was
furnished with well-grounded hope. And certainly he does not here simply
declare that he hoped in God, but with this he conjoins experience, and
acknowledges that even from his youth he had received tokens of the
Divine favor, from which he might learn, that confidence is to be
reposed in God alone. By adverting to what God had done for him,  <span
id="fr_105"></span>[106](#fn_105) he expresses the real cause of faith,
(if I may so speak;) and from this we may easily perceive the powerful
influence which the remembrance of God’s benefits had in nourishing his
hope.

<span id="vi.ii-p10"></span><span id="vi.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p11"></span>**6.** *Upon thee have I been sustained from
the womb.* This verse corresponds with the preceding, except that David
proceeds farther. He not only celebrates the goodness of God which he
had experienced from his childhood, but also those proofs of it which he
had received previous to his birth. An almost similar confession is
contained in <span id="vi.ii-p11.1"></span>[Ps.
22:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#010)<span id="vi.ii-p11.1"></span>, by
which is magnified the wonderful power and inestimable goodness of God
in the generation of men, the way and manner of which would be
altogether incredible, were it not a fact with which we are quite
familiar. If we are astonished at that part of the history of the flood,
in which Moses declares (<span id="vi.ii-p11.2"></span>[Ge
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#013)<span id="vi.ii-p11.2"></span>)
that Noah and his household lived ten months amidst the offensive
nuisance produced by so many living creatures, when he could not draw
the breath of life, have we not equal reason to marvel that the infant,
shut up within its mother’s womb, can live in such a condition as would
suffocate the strongest man in half an hour? But we thus see how little
account we make of the miracles which God works, in consequence of our
familiarity with them. The Spirit, therefore, justly rebukes this
ingratitude, by commending to our consideration this memorable instance
of the grace of God, which is exhibited in our birth and generation.
When we are born into the world, although the mother do her office, and
the midwife may be present with her, and many others may lend their
help, yet did not God, putting, so to speak, his hand under us, receive
us into his bosom, what would become of us? and what hope would there be
of the continuance of our life? Yea, rather, were it not for this, our
very birth would be an entrance into a thousand deaths. God, therefore,
is with the highest propriety said *to take us out of our mother’s
bowels* To this corresponds the concluding part of the verse, *My praise
is continually of thee;* by which the Psalmist means that he had been
furnished with matter for praising God without intermission.

<span id="vi.ii-p12"></span><span id="vi.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p13"></span>**7.** *I have been as a prodigy to the
great ones.* He now makes a transition to the language of complaint,
declaring that he was held in almost universal abhorrence by reason of
the great calamities with which he was afflicted. There is an apparent,
although only an apparent, discrepancy between these two statements;
first, that he had always been crowned with the benefits of God; and,
secondly, that he was accounted as a prodigy on account of his great
afflictions; but we may draw from thence the very profitable doctrine,
that he was not so overwhelmed by his calamities, heavy though they
were, as to be insensible to the goodness of God which he had
experienced. Although, therefore, he saw that he was an object of
detestation, yet the remembrance of the blessings which God had
conferred upon him, could not be extinguished by the deepest shades of
darkness which surrounded him, but served as a lamp in his heart to
direct his faith. By the term *prodigy*  <span
id="fr_106"></span>[107](#fn_106) is expressed no ordinary calamity. Had
he not been afflicted in a strange and unusual manner, those to whom the
miserable condition of mankind was not unknown would not have shrunk
from him with such horror, and regarded him as so repulsive a spectacle.
It was, therefore, a higher and more commendable proof of his constancy,
that his spirit was neither broken nor enfeebled with sham but reposed
in God with the stronger confidence, the more he was cast off by the
world. The sentence is to be explained adversatively, implying that,
*although* men abhorred him as a monster, yet, by leaning upon God, he
continued in despite of all this unmoved. If it should be thought
preferable to translate the word <span id="vi.ii-p14.4"></span>רבים,
*rabbim,* which I have rendered *great ones,* by the word *many,* the
sense will be, That David’s afflictions were generally known, and had
acquired great notoriety, as if he had been brought forth upon a stage
and exposed to the view of the whole people. But in my opinion it will
be more suitable to understand the word of *great men,* or *the nobles.*
There is no heart so strong and impervious to outward influences as not
to be deeply pierced when those who are considered to excel in wisdom
and judgment, and who are invested with authority, treat a suffering and
an afflicted man with such indignity, that they shrink with horror from
him, as if he were a monster. In the next verse, as if he had obtained
the desire of his heart, he expresses it to be his resolution to yield a
grateful acknowledgement to God. To encourage himself to hope with the
greater confidence for a happy issue to his present troubles, he
promises loudly to celebrate the praises of God, and to do this not only
on one occasion, but to persevere in the exercise without intermission.

<span id="vi.iii"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p1"></span><span id="vi.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
71:9-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#009)<span id="vi.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p2"></span>**9.** Cast me not off in the time of my old
age: forsake me not in the declining of my strength. **10.** For my
enemies have said of me, and those who watch for my life have taken
counsel together, **11.** Saying, God hath forsaken him; follow after
him, and ye shall take him: for there is none to deliver him. **12.** O
God! be not far from me: my God: hasten to my aid. **13.** Let those who
are enemies to my life be confounded  <span
id="fr_107"></span>[108](#fn_107) and fail: let those who seek my hurt
be covered with reproach and shame.

<span id="vi.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="vi.iii-p5"></span><span id="vi.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p6"></span>**9.** *Cast me not off in the time of my
old age.* David having just now declared that God had been the protector
of his life at his birth, and afterwards his foster-father in his
childhood, and the guardian of his welfare during the whole course of
his past existence; being now worn out with age, casts himself anew into
the fatherly bosom of God. In proportion as our strength fails us — and
then necessity itself impels us to seek God — in the same proportion
should our hope in the willingness and readiness of God to succor us
become strong. David’s prayer, in short, amounts to this: “Do thou, O
Lord, who hast sustained me vigorous and strong in the flower of my
youth, not forsake me now, when I am decayed and almost withered, but
the more I stand in need of thy help, let the decrepitude and
infirmities of age move thee to compassionate me the more.” From this
verse expositors, not without good reason, conclude that the conspiracy
of Absalom is the subject treated of in this psalm. And certainly it was
a horrible and tragical spectacle, which tended to lead, not only the
common people, but also those who excelled in authority, to turn away
their eyes from him, as they would from a detestable monster, when the
son, having driven his father from the kingdom, pursued him even through
the very deserts to put him to death.

<span id="vi.iii-p7"></span><span id="vi.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p8"></span>**10.** *For my enemies have said of me,
etc.* He pleads, as an argument with God to show him mercy, the
additional circumstance, that the wicked took greater license in cruelly
persecuting him, from the belief which they entertained that he was
rejected and abandoned of God. The basest of men, as we all know, become
more bold and audacious, when, in tormenting the innocent, they imagine
that this is a matter in which they have not to deal with God at all.
Not only are they encouraged by the hope of escaping unpunished; but
they also boast that all comes to pass according to their wishes, when
no obstacle presents itself to restrain their wicked desires. What
happened to David at that time is almost the ordinary experience of the
children of God; namely, that the wicked, when once they come to believe
that it is by the will of God that his people are exposed to them for a
prey, give themselves uncontrolled license in doing them mischief.
Measuring the favor of God only by what is the present condition of men,
they conceive that all whom he suffers to be afflicted are despised,
forsaken, and cast off by him. Such being their persuasion, they
encourage and stimulate one another to practice every thing harassing
and injurious against them, as persons who have none to undertake and
avenge their cause. But this wanton and insulting  <span
id="fr_108"></span>[109](#fn_108) procedure on their part ought to
encourage our hearts, since the glory of God requires that the promises
which he has so frequently made of succouring the poor and afflicted
should be actually performed. The ungodly may flatter themselves with
the hope of obtaining pardon from him; but this foolish imagination does
not by any means lessen the criminality of their conduct. On the
contrary, they do a double injury to God, by taking away from him that
which especially belongs to him.

<span id="vi.iii-p10"></span><span id="vi.iii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p11"></span>**12.** *O God! be not far from me.* It is
scarcely possible to express how severe and hard a temptation it was to
David, when he knew that the wicked entertained the persuasion that he
was rejected of God. They did not without consideration circulate this
report; but after having seemed wisely to weigh all circumstances, they
gave their judgment on the point as of a thing which was placed beyond
all dispute. It was therefore an evidence of heroic fortitude on the
part of David,  <span id="fr_109"></span>[110](#fn_109) thus to rise
superior to their perverse judgments, and, in the face of them all, to
assure himself that God would be gracious to him, and to betake himself
familiarly to him. Nor is it to be doubted that, in calling God *his
God,* he makes use of this as a means of defending himself from this
hard and grievous assault.

<span id="vi.iii-p13"></span><span id="vi.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p14"></span>While invoking the aid of God, he at the
same time prays (verse 13) that his enemies may be filled with shame
until they be consumed. These words, however, may not improperly be read
in the future tense; for it is frequently the practice of David, after
having ended his prayer, to rise up against his enemies, and, as it
were, to triumph over them. But I have followed that which seems more
agreeable to the scope of the passage. Having had occasion elsewhere to
explain this imprecation, it is unnecessary for me to repeat, in this
place, what I have previously said.

<span id="vi.iv"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p1"></span><span id="vi.iv-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
71:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#014)<span id="vi.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p2"></span>**14.** But I will hope continually, and will
add  <span id="fr_110"></span>[111](#fn_110) to all thy praise. **15.**
My mouth shall recount thy righteousness and thy salvation daily; for I
know not the number thereof. **16.** I will go in the strengths of the
Lord Jehovah! I will make mention of thy righteousness only.

<span id="vi.iv-p4"></span> 

<span id="vi.iv-p5"></span><span id="vi.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p6"></span>**14.** *But I will hope continually.* David
again, as having obtained the victory, prepares himself for
thanksgiving. There is, however, no doubt, that during the time when the
wicked derided his simplicity, he struggled manfully amidst his
distresses, as may be gathered from the word *hope.* Although, to
outward appearance, there was no prospect of deliverance from his
troubles, and although the wicked ceased not proudly to pour contempt
upon his trust in God, he nevertheless determined to persevere in the
exercise of hope; even as it is a genuine proof of faith, to look
exclusively to the Divine promise, in order to be guided by its light
alone amidst the thickest darkness of afflictions. The strength, then,
of the hope of which David speaks, is to be estimated by the conflicts
which he at that time sustained. In saying, *I will add to all thy
praises,* he shows the confidence with which he anticipated a desirable
escape from his troubles. It is as if he had said — Lord, I have been
long accustomed to receive benefits from thee, and this fresh accession
to them, I doubt not, will furnish me with new matter for celebrating
thy grace.

<span id="vi.iv-p7"></span><span id="vi.iv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p8"></span>**15.** *My mouth shall recount thy
righteousness* Here he expresses more clearly what sacrifice of praise
he resolved to present to God, promising to proclaim continually his
righteousness and salvation. I have often before had occasion to
observe, that *the righteousness of God* does not mean that property of
his nature by which he renders to every man his own, but the
faithfulness which he observes towards his own people, when he
cherishes, defends, and delivers them. Hence the inestimable consolation
which arises from learning that our salvation is so inseparably linked
with the righteousness of God, as to have the same stability with this
Divine attribute. *The salvation of God,* it is very evident, is taken
in this place actively. The Psalmist connects this salvation with
righteousness, as the effect with the cause; for his confident
persuasion of obtaining salvation proceeded solely from reflecting that
God is righteous, and that he cannot deny himself. As he had been saved
so often, and in so many different ways, and so wonderfully, he engages
to apply himself continually to the celebration of the grace of God. The
particle <span id="vi.iv-p8.1"></span>כי, *ki,* which we have translated
*for,* is by some rendered adversatively *although,* and explained in
this way: Although the salvation of God is to me incomprehensible, and
transcends my capacity, yet I will recount it. But the proper
signification of the word is more suitable in this place, there being
nothing which ought to be more effectual in kindling and exciting our
hearts to sing the praises of God, than the innumerable benefits which
he has bestowed upon us. Although our hearts may not be affected from
having experienced only one or two of the Divine benefits; although they
may remain cold and unmoved by a small number of them, yet our
ingratitude is inexcusable, if we are not awakened from our torpor and
indifference when an innumerable multitude of them are lavished upon us.
Let us learn then not to taste of the goodness of God slightly, and, as
it were, with loathing, but to apply all our faculties to it in all its
amplitude, that it may ravish us with admiration. It is surprising that
the authors of the Greek version ever thought of translating this
clause, *I have not known learning,*  <span
id="fr_111"></span>[112](#fn_111) an error unworthy of being noticed,
were it not that some fanatics in former times, to flatter themselves in
their ignorance, boasted that, after the example of David, all learning
and liberal sciences should be despised; even as, in the present day,
the Anabaptists have no other pretext for boasting of being spiritual
persons, but that they are grossly ignorant  <span
id="fr_112"></span>[113](#fn_112) of all science.

<span id="vi.iv-p15"></span><span id="vi.iv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p16"></span>**16.** *I will go in the strength of the
Lord Jehovah!* This may also very properly be translated, *I will go
into the strengths;* and this interpretation is not less probable than
the other. As fear and sorrow take possession of our minds in the time
of danger, from our not reflecting with that deep and earnest attention
which becomes us upon the power of God; so the only remedy for
alleviating our sorrow in our afflictions is to enter into God’s
strengths, that they may surround and defend us on all sides. But the
other reading, which is more generally received, I have thought proper
to retain, because it also is very suitable, although interpreters
differ as to its meaning. Some explain it, I will go forth to battle
depending upon the power of God. But this is too restricted. *To go* is
equivalent to abiding in a steady, settled, and permanent state. True
believers, it must indeed be granted, so far from putting forth their
energies without difficulty, and flying with alacrity in their heavenly
course, rather groan through weariness; but as they surmount with
invincible courage all obstacles and difficulties, not drawing back, or
declining from the right way, or at least not failing through despair,
they are on this account said to go forward until they have arrived at
the termination of their course. In short, David boasts that he will
never be disappointed of the help of God till he reach the mark. And
because nothing is more rare or difficult in the present state of
weakness and infirmity than to continue persevering, he collects all his
thoughts in order to rely with entire confidence exclusively on the
righteousness of God. When he says that he will be mindful of *it* ONLY,
the meaning is, that, forsaking all corrupt confidences with which
almost the whole world is driven about, he will depend wholly upon the
protection of God, not allowing himself to wander after his own
imaginations, or to be drawn hither and thither by surrounding objects.

<span id="vi.iv-p17"></span>Augustine quotes this text more than a
hundred times as an argument to overthrow the merit of works, and
plausibly opposes the righteousness which God gratuitously bestows to
the meritorious righteousness of men. It must, however, be confessed
that he wrests the words of David, and puts a sense upon them foreign to
their genuine meaning, which simply is, that he does not rely upon his
own wisdom, nor upon his own skill, nor upon his own strength, nor upon
any riches which he possessed, as a ground for entertaining the
confident hope of salvation, but that the only ground upon which he
rests this hope is, that as God is righteous, it is impossible for God
to forsake him. *The righteousness of God,* as we have just now
observed, does not here denote that free gift by which he reconciles men
to himself, or by which he regenerates them to newness of life; but his
faithfulness in keeping his promises, by which he means to show that he
is righteous, upright, and true towards his servants. Now, the Psalmist
declares that the righteousness of God alone will be continually before
his eyes, and in his memory; for unless we keep our minds fixed upon
this alone, Satan, who is possessed of wonderful means by which to
allure, will succeed in leading us astray after vanity. As soon as hopes
from different quarters begin to insinuate themselves into our minds,
there is nothing of which we are more in danger than of falling away.
And whoever, not content with the grace of God alone, seeks elsewhere
for the least succor, will assuredly fall, and thereby serve as an
example to teach others how vain it is to attempt to mingle the stays of
the world with the help of God. If David, in regard to his mere external
condition in life, could remain stable and secure only by renouncing all
other confidences, and casting himself upon the righteousness of God;
what stability, I pray you to consider, are we likely to have, when the
reference is to the spiritual and everlasting life, if we fall away, let
it be never so little, from our dependence upon the grace of God? It is,
therefore, undeniable that the doctrine invented by the Papists, which
divides the work of perseverance in holiness between man’s free will and
God’s grace,  <span id="fr_113"></span>[114](#fn_113) precipitates
wretched souls into destruction.

<span id="vi.v"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p1"></span><span id="vi.v-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
71:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#017)<span id="vi.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p2"></span>**17.** O God! thou hast taught me from my
youth; and hitherto will I announce thy wondrous works. **18.** And
still, O God! when I am old and grey-headed, forsake me not, until I
declare thy strength to the generation, and thy power to all who are to
come. **19.** And thy righteousness, O God! Is very high: for thou hast
done great things: O God! who is like thee?

<span id="vi.v-p3"></span> 

<span id="vi.v-p4"></span><span id="vi.v-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p5"></span>**17.** *O God! thou hast taught me from my
youth.* The Psalmist again declares the great obligations under which he
lay to God for his goodness, not only with the view of encouraging
himself to gratitude, but also of exciting himself to continue
cherishing hope for the time to come: which will appear from the
following verse. Besides, since God teaches us both by words and deeds,
it is certain that the second species of teaching is here referred to,
the idea conveyed being, that David had learned by continual experience,
even from his infancy, that nothing is better than to lean exclusively
upon the true God. That he may never be deprived of this practical
truth, he testifies that he had made great proficiency in it. When he
promises to become a publisher of God’s wondrous works, his object in
coming under this engagement is, that by his ingratitude he may not
interrupt the course of the Divine beneficence.

<span id="vi.v-p6"></span>Upon the truth here stated, he rests the
prayer which he presents in the 18th verse, that he may not be forgotten
in his old age. His reasoning is this: Since thou, O God! hast from the
commencement of my existence given me such abundant proofs of thy
goodness, wilt thou not stretch forth thy hand to succor me, when now
thou seest me decaying through the influence of old age? And, indeed,
the conclusion is altogether inevitable, that as God vouchsafed to love
us when we were infants, and embraced us with his favor when we were
children, and has continued without intermission to do us good during
the whole course of our life, he cannot but persevere in acting toward
us in the same way even to the end. Accordingly, the particle <span
id="vi.v-p6.2"></span>גם, *gam,* which we have translated *still,* here
signifies *therefore;* it being David’s design, from the consideration
that the goodness of God can never be exhausted, and that he is not
mutable like men, to draw the inference that he will be the same towards
his people in their old age, that he was towards them in their
childhood. He next supports his prayer by another argument, which is,
that if he should fail or faint in his old age, the grace of God, by
which he had been hitherto sustained, would at the same time soon be
lost sight of. If God were immediately to withdraw his grace from us
after we have but just tasted it slightly, it would speedily vanish from
our memory. In like manner, were he to forsake us at the close of our
life, after having conferred upon us many benefits during the previous
part of it, his liberality by this means would be divested of much of
its interest and attraction. David therefore beseeches God to assist him
even to the end, that he may be able to commend to posterity the
unintermitted course of the Divine goodness, and to bear testimony, even
at his very death, that God never disappoints the faithful who betake
themselves to him. By *the generation* and *those who are to come,* he
means the children and the children’s children to whom the memorial of
the loving-kindness of God cannot be transmitted unless it be perfect in
all respects, and has completed its course. He mentions *strength and
power* as the effects of God’s righteousness. He is, however, to be
understood by the way as eulogising by these titles the manner of his
deliverance, in which he congratulates himself; as if he had said, that
God, in the way in which it was accomplished, afforded a manifestation
of matchless and all-sufficient power.

<span id="vi.v-p7"></span><span id="vi.v-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p8"></span>**19.** *And thy righteousness, O God! is very
high.*  <span id="fr_114"></span>[115](#fn_114) Some connect this verse
with the preceding, and repeating the verb *I will declare,* as common
to both verses, translate, And *I will declare thy righteousness, O
God!* But this being a matter of small importance, I will not dwell upon
it. David prosecutes at greater length the subject of which he had
previously spoken. In the first place, he *declares* that *the
righteousness of God is very high;* secondly, that it wrought mightily;
and, finally, he exclaims in admiration, *Who is like thee?* It is
worthy of notice, that the righteousness of God, the effects of which
are near to us and conspicuous, is yet placed on high, inasmuch as it
cannot be comprehended by our finite understanding. Whilst we measure it
according to our own limited standard, we are overwhelmed and swallowed
up by the smallest temptation. In order, therefore, to give it free
course to save us, it behoves us to take a large and a comprehensive
view — to look above and beneath, far and wide, that we may form some
due conceptions of its amplitude. The same remarks apply to the second
clause, which makes mention of the works of God: *For thou hast done*
*great things.* If we attribute to his known power the praise which is
due to it, we will never want ground for entertaining good hope.
Finally, our sense of the goodness of God should extend so far as to
ravish us with admiration; for thus it will come to pass that our minds,
which are often distracted by an unholy disquietude, will repose upon
God alone. If any temptation thrusts itself upon us, we immediately
magnify a fly into an elephant; or rather, we rear very high mountains,
which keep the hand of God from reaching us; and at the same time we
basely limit the power of God. The exclamation of David, then, *Who is
like thee?* tends to teach us the lesson, that we should force our way
through every impediment by faith, and regard the power of God, which is
well entitled to be so regarded, as superior to all obstacles. All men,
indeed, confess with the mouth, that none is like God; but there is
scarce one out of a hundred who is truly and fully persuaded that He
alone is sufficient to save us.

<span id="vi.vi"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p1"></span><span id="vi.vi-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
71:20-24](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#020)<span id="vi.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p2"></span>**20.** Thou hast made me to see great and
sore troubles, but turning, thou wilt quicken me, and turning  <span
id="fr_115"></span>[116](#fn_115) thou wilt lift me up from the deep
places of the earth.  <span id="fr_116"></span>[117](#fn_116) **21.**
Thou wilt multiply my greatness; and turning, thou wilt comfort me.
**22.** I will also, O my God: praise thee, for thy truth, with the
psaltery; I will sing to thee with the harp, O Holy One of Israel!
**23.** My lips shall rejoice when I sing to thee; and my soul, which
thou hast redeemed. **24.** My tongue also shall daily declare thy
righteousness: for they who seek my hurt are confounded and brought to
shame.

<span id="vi.vi-p5"></span> 

<span id="vi.vi-p6"></span><span id="vi.vi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p7"></span>**20.** *Thou hast made me to see great and
sore troubles.* The verb *to see* among the Hebrews, as is well known,
is applied to the other senses also. Accordingly, when David complains
that calamities had been *shown* to him, he means that he had suffered
them. And as he attributes to God the praise of the deliverances which
he had obtained, so he, on the other hand, acknowledges that whatever
adversities he had endured were inflicted on him according to the
counsel and will of God. But we must first consider the object which
David has in view, which is to render by comparison the grace of God the
more illustrious, in the way of recounting how hardly he had been dealt
with. Had he always enjoyed a uniform course of prosperity, he would no
doubt have had good reason to rejoice; but in that case he would not
have experienced what it is to be delivered from destruction by the
stupendous power of God. We must be brought down even to the gates of
death before God can be seen to be our deliverer. As we are born without
thought and understanding, our minds, during the earlier part of our
life, are not sufficiently impressed with a sense of the Author of our
existence; but when God comes to our help, as we are lying in a state of
despair, this resurrection is to us a bright mirror from which is seen
reflected his grace. In this way David amplifies the goodness of God,
declaring, that though plunged in a bottomless abyss, he was
nevertheless drawn out by the divine hand, and restored to the light.
And he boasts not only of having been preserved perfectly safe by the
grace of God, but of having also been advanced to higher honor — a
change which was, as it were, the crowning of his restoration, and was
as if he had been lifted out of hell, even up to heaven. What he repeats
the third time, with respect to *God’s turning,* goes to the
commendation of Divine Providence; the idea which he intends to be
conveyed being, that no adversity happened to him by chance, as was
evident from the fact that his condition was reversed as soon as the
favor of God shone upon him.

<span id="vi.vi-p8"></span><span id="vi.vi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p9"></span>**22.** *I will also, O my God! praise thee.*
He again breaks forth into thanksgiving; for he was aware that the
design of God, in so liberally succouring his servants, is, that his
goodness may be celebrated. In speaking of employing *the psaltery* and
*the harp* in this exercise, he alludes to the generally prevailing
custom of that time. To sing the praises of God upon the harp and
psaltery unquestionably formed a part of the training of the law, and of
the service of God under that dispensation of shadows and figures; but
they are not now to be used in public thanksgiving. We are not, indeed,
forbidden to use, in private, musical instruments, but they are banished
out of the churches by the plain command of the Holy Spirit, when Paul,
in <span id="vi.vi-p9.2"></span>[1Co
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#013)<span id="vi.vi-p9.2"></span>,
lays it down as an invariable rule, that we must praise God, and pray to
him only in a known tongue. By the word *truth,* the Psalmist means that
the hope which he reposed in God was rewarded, when God preserved him in
the midst of dangers. The promises of God, and his truth in performing
them, are inseparably joined together. Unless we depend upon the word of
God, all the benefits which he confers upon us will be unsavoury or
tasteless to us; nor will we ever be stirred up either to prayer or
thanksgiving, if we are not previously illuminated by the Divine word.
So much the more revolting, then, is the folly of that diabolical man,
Servetus, who teaches that the rule of praying is perverted, if faith is
fixed upon the promises; as if we could have any access into the
presence of God, until he first invited us by his own voice to come to
him.

<span id="vi.vi-p10"></span><span id="vi.vi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p11"></span>**23.** *My lips shall rejoice*  <span
id="fr_117"></span>[118](#fn_117) *when I sing to thee.* In this verse
David expresses more distinctly his resolution not to give thanks to God
hypocritically, nor in a superficial manner, but to engage with
unfeigned earnestness in this religious exercise. By the figures which
he introduces, he briefly teaches us, that to praise God would be the
source of his greatest pleasure; and thus he indirectly censures the
profane mirth of those who, forgetting God, confine their
congratulations to themselves in their prosperity. The scope of the last
verse is to the same effect, implying that no joy would be sweet and
desirable to him, but such as was connected with the praises of God, and
that to celebrate his Redeemer’s praises would afford him the greatest
satisfaction and delight.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_99"></span>[100](cc10005.htm#fr_99) <span
id="vi-p1.2"></span>

<span id="vi-p2"></span>”Although this psalm has no title, it is by
general consent ascribed to David, and supposed to have been composed
during Absalom’s revolt, as he mentions his old age, and his danger of
perishing. It is almost a copy of <span id="vi-p2.1"></span>[Psalm
31](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#000)<span id="vi-p2.1"></span>; and, as
the passages in the present psalm, which refer to his advanced age, are
wanted in the other, it seems as if the 31st psalm (written probably
during the persecution of Saul) was taken and adapted, by a little
alteration and addition, to his latter afflictions.” — *Illustrated
Commentary upon the Bible*.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[101](cc10005.htm#fr_100) <span
id="vi.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p3"></span> In the Hebrew it is, “Be thou to me for a
rock of habitation.” But instead of <span id="vi.i-p3.1"></span>מעון,
*maon*, “habitation,” many of Dr Kennicott’s and De Rossi’s MSS. have
<span id="vi.i-p3.2"></span>מעוז, *maoz*, “munition,” or “defense.” “Be
thou my rock of defence.”

<span id="fn_101"></span>[102](cc10005.htm#fr_101) <span
id="vi.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p10"></span> At the same time, it may be observed, that
if this psalm was written during the rebellion of Absalom, this cruel
son or Achitophel may be the person whom David has here in his eye, and
describes in the singular number. If he refers to his own son, how deep
must have been his agony of soul to be under the necessity of appealing
to God in his present distressing circumstances, against an unnatural
and wicked child, around whom all the affections of his heart were
intwined! What Calvin renders, in the last clause of the verse, “the
violent man,” is literally “leavened man.” Leaven seems to be an image
for deep and inveterate depravity of any kind. “Beware of the leaven of
the Pharisees and of the Sadducees,” said our Lord. — (<span
id="vi.i-p10.1"></span>[Mt 16:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#006)<span
id="vi.i-p10.1"></span>; see also <span id="vi.i-p10.2"></span>[1Co
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#008)<span id="vi.i-p10.2"></span>.)

<span id="fn_102"></span>[103](cc10005.htm#fr_102) <span
id="vi.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p3"></span> “<span id="vi.ii-p3.1"></span>Des le ventre
*de ma mere*.” — *Fr* “From the womb *of my mother*.”

<span id="fn_103"></span>[104](cc10005.htm#fr_103) <span
id="vi.ii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p4"></span> “<span id="vi.ii-p4.1"></span>Ou, a
plusieurs.” — *Fr* *marg* “Or, to many.”

<span id="fn_104"></span>[105](cc10005.htm#fr_104) <span
id="vi.ii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p5"></span> “<span id="vi.ii-p5.1"></span>Et
*toutesfois*.” — *Fr*

<span id="fn_105"></span>[106](cc10005.htm#fr_105) <span
id="vi.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p9"></span> In the Latin version it is, “<span
id="vi.ii-p9.1"></span>Ab affectu ipso;” which is probably a mistake for
“<span id="vi.ii-p9.2"></span>Ab effecto ipso.” In the French version it
is, “<span id="vi.ii-p9.3"></span>Par l’effet mesme.”

<span id="fn_106"></span>[107](cc10005.htm#fr_106) <span
id="vi.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p14"></span> Green reads, “I am become a gazing-stock to
the multitude.” Horsley, “‘I am become a prodigious sight to the many.’
*A prodigious sight*, ‘a sign which shall be spoken against,’ <span
id="vi.ii-p14.1"></span>[Lu 2:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#034)<span
id="vi.ii-p14.1"></span>.” “‘I am become, as it were, a portentous sign
unto many.’ Many are willing to persuade themselves that my trials
proceed directly from God’s wrath, and are intended to warn them against
pursuing a like course of conduct.” — *French and Skinner* “*A monster*,
*i* *e*., the supposed object of God’s signal displeasure. Comp. <span
id="vi.ii-p14.2"></span>[Isa. 20:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa020.htm#003),
[Ezek. 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#006), [Ezek.
24:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#024),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#027)<span id="vi.ii-p14.2"></span>.” —
*Cresswell* But others suppose that <span id="vi.ii-p14.3"></span>כמופת,
*hemopheth*, *as a prodigy*, implies that the great and many dangers to
which he had been exposed, and the extraordinary deliverances from them
which he had experienced, marked him out as an object of wonder, so that
men looked upon him as if he were exempted from the common lot of
mankind, as if he possessed a charmed life, and were invulnerable to all
assaults; and the second member of the verse has been viewed as the
reason why he was so regarded: “for thou art my strong refuge.”

<span id="fn_107"></span>[108](cc10005.htm#fr_107) <span
id="vi.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p3"></span> Others read, “Those who are enemies to my
life shall be confounded,” etc., understanding the words to be prophetic
denunciations.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[109](cc10005.htm#fr_108) <span
id="vi.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p9"></span> “<span id="vi.iii-p9.1"></span>Atqui
proterva haec eorum insultatio.” — *Lat*. “<span
id="vi.iii-p9.2"></span>Mais cest enrage desdain et outrage.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[110](cc10005.htm#fr_109) <span
id="vi.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p12"></span> “<span id="vi.iii-p12.1"></span>Parquoy
c’a este une vertu a David plus qu’humaine.” — *Fr*. “It was therefore
fortitude more than human for David.”

<span id="fn_110"></span>[111](cc10005.htm#fr_110) <span
id="vi.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p3"></span> Horsley reads, “‘I shall be added,’ or ‘made
an addition;’ literally, ‘be-made-to-be-added to the sum of thy
praise.’” “The sense is,” says he, “that the mercies to the Psalmist
would furnish the servants of God with a new topic of praise and
thanksgiving.”

<span id="fn_111"></span>[112](cc10005.htm#fr_111) <span
id="vi.iv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p9"></span> The present reading of the Septuagint is,
<span id="vi.iv-p9.1"></span>Οὐκ ἔγνων πραγματείας, “I know not the
affairs *of men*;” but Nobilius, in his Notes on the Septuagint,
observes, that in some Greek copies it is, <span
id="vi.iv-p9.2"></span>γραμματείας, “learning,” of which reading
Augustine makes mention; and as the Vulgate reads, “<span
id="vi.iv-p9.3"></span>literaturam,” “learning,” this makes it more
probable that the ancient reading of the LXX. was not <span
id="vi.iv-p9.4"></span>πραγματείας, but <span
id="vi.iv-p9.5"></span>γραμματειάς. Horsley has followed the LXX. He
considers this clause as the commencement of a new sentence, and
connects it with the 16th verse thus: —

<span id="vi.iv-p10"></span>“Although I am no proficient in learning;  
I will enter upon \[the subject of\] the Lord Jehovah’s great might;  
I will commemorate thy righteousness.”

<span id="vi.iv-p11"></span>In a foot-note he refers to <span
id="vi.iv-p11.1"></span>[Joh 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#015)<span
id="vi.iv-p11.1"></span>, “How knoweth this man letters, having never
learned?” and to <span id="vi.iv-p11.2"></span>[Matt.
13:54](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#054),
[56](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#056)<span id="vi.iv-p11.2"></span>; and
in an additional note he says, “It is strange that Houbigant should
treat an interpretation with contempt, which is supported by the
versions of the LXX., Jerome, and the Vulgate; which the Hebrew words
will naturally bear, and which gives great spirit to the sentiment.”
Street reads: —

<span id="vi.iv-p12"></span>“Though I am ignorant of books,  
I will proceed with strength,” etc.;

<span id="vi.iv-p13"></span>and observes, that “The word <span
id="vi.iv-p13.1"></span>מספר signifies *number*, but <span
id="vi.iv-p13.2"></span>ספר, signifies *an epistle*, *a book*.”

<span id="fn_112"></span>[113](cc10005.htm#fr_112) <span
id="vi.iv-p13.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p14"></span> “<span id="vi.iv-p14.1"></span>Expertes.” —
*Lat*. “<span id="vi.iv-p14.2"></span>Gros asniers. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_113"></span>[114](cc10005.htm#fr_113) <span
id="vi.iv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p18"></span> That is, which represents this work as
performed, partly by God, and partly by a power which man has in himself
underived from God.

<span id="fn_114"></span>[115](cc10005.htm#fr_114) <span
id="vi.v-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p9"></span> “<span id="vi.v-p9.1"></span>Usque in
excelsum.” — *Lat* “<span id="vi.v-p9.2"></span>Est eslevee jusques en
haut.” — *Fr*. “<span id="vi.v-p9.3"></span>אד מרום, *ad marom* — is up
to the exalted place, — reaches *up to heaven* The mercy of God fills
all *space* and *place* It crowns in the heavens what it governed upon
earth.” — *Dr Adam Clarke*

<span id="fn_115"></span>[116](cc10005.htm#fr_115) <span
id="vi.vi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p3"></span> “<span id="vi.vi-p3.1"></span>Et to
retournant, estant appaise.” — *Fr*. “And returning, being appeased.”

<span id="fn_116"></span>[117](cc10005.htm#fr_116) <span
id="vi.vi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p4"></span> “*The depths of the earth*, expressive of
the lowest state of misery and suffering.” — *Hewlett*.

<span id="fn_117"></span>[118](cc10005.htm#fr_117) <span
id="vi.vi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p12"></span> “The original word <span
id="vi.vi-p12.1"></span>רנם expresses a brisk, vibratory motion, like
that of the lips in singing a lively air, or of the feet in dancing.
Hence, figuratively, it signifies *to rejoice* or *exult* In this
passage, it may be understood literally of *the lips*, and figuratively
of the soul. And the English language having no corresponding verb which
may be taken literally in reference to one subject, and figuratively in
reference to another, it might be better to express its sense in
connection with each, by two different verbs, thus: —

<span id="vi.vi-p13"></span>“My lips shall move briskly, when I sing
unto thee,  
And my soul shall rejoice, which thou, etc.”

<span id="vi.vi-p14"></span> — *Horsley*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 72](cc10006)
