[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc10021)  [Next](cc10023) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 10: Psalms, Part III*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxiii"></span>

<span id="xxiii-p1"></span>PSALM 88

<span id="xxiii-p2"></span>This psalm contains very grievous
lamentations, poured forth by its inspired penman when under very severe
affliction, and almost at the point of despair. But he, at the same
time, whilst struggling with sorrow, declares the invincible
steadfastness of his faith; which he displayed in calling upon God to
deliver him, even when he was in the, deep darkness of death.  <span
id="fr_504"></span>[505](#fn_504)

<span id="xxiii-p4"></span>A Song or Psalm of the sons of Korah. To the
chief musician upon Machalath, to make humble. An instruction of Heman,
the Ezrahite.

<span id="xxiii-p5"></span>Heman, whose name appears in the inscription,
is probably the same person who is mentioned in sacred history, <span
id="xxiii-p5.1"></span>[1Ki 4:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#031)<span
id="xxiii-p5.1"></span>, where Solomon, when commended for his wisdom,
is compared with Ethan, Heman, Chalcol, and Darda.  <span
id="fr_505"></span>[506](#fn_505) It is, therefore, not surprising that
a man, so highly distinguished by the spirit of wisdom, was the author
of this psalm. Some translate <span id="xxiii-p6.1"></span>על-מהלת,
*al-machalath, upon infirmity;*  <span id="fr_506"></span>[507](#fn_506)
but it is probable, according to the ordinary use of the word, that it
denotes either some instrument of music, or the beginning of some song.
 <span id="fr_507"></span>[508](#fn_507) Of the other words I have
already sufficiently spoken elsewhere. Moreover, it is of importance to
bear in mind, that in the person of one man there is presented to our
view an example at once of rare affliction and of singular patience.
God, in so sorely exercising Heman, whom he had adorned with such
excellent gifts to be an example to others, did not do this for the sake
of his servant only. His object was to present common matter of
instruction to all his people. Carrying out this object, Heman
ascending, as it were, an elevated stage, testifies to the whole Church
his infirmities as well as his faith and constancy. It greatly concerns
us to look upon such a distinguished servant of God, and one who was so
eminently adorned with the graces of the Holy Spirit, thus overwhelmed
with so heavy a burden of afflictions as made him mournfully complain
that he differed nothing from a dead man, — it greatly concerns us, I
say, to look on this spectacle, that our distresses, however grievous,
may not overwhelm us with despair; or if we should at times be ready to
faint through weariness, care, grief, sorrow, or fear, that we may not
on that account despond, especially when we see that it is not without
the highest effort that the holy prophet emerges from this profound
darkness into the cheering light of hope. We should rather rest assured
that the Spirit of God, by the mouth of Heman, has here furnished us
with a form of prayer for encouraging all the afflicted who are, as it
were, on the brink of despair to come to himself.

<span id="xxiii.i"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p1"></span><span id="xxiii.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
88:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#001)<span id="xxiii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p2"></span>**1.** O Jehovah! God of my salvation! I
cry day and night before thee. **2.** Let my prayer come into thy
presence: incline thy ear to my cry; **3.** For my soul is filled with
troubles; and my life is drawing near to the grave. **4.** I am numbered
with them that go down to the pit: I have been as a man who hath no
strength: **5.** Free among the dead, like the slain who lie in the
grave, whom thou rememberest no more, and who are cut off from thy hand.

<span id="xxiii.i-p3"></span> 

<span id="xxiii.i-p4"></span><span id="xxiii.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p5"></span>**1** *O Jehovah! God of my salvation!* Let
me call upon you particularly to notice what I have just now stated,
that although the prophet simply, and without hyperbole, recites the
agony which he suffered from the greatness of his sorrows, yet his
purpose was at the same time to supply the afflicted with a form of
prayer that they might not faint under any adversities, however severe,
which might befall them. We will hear him by and by bursting out into
vehement complaints on account of the grievousness of his calamities;
but he seasonably fortifies himself by this brief exordium, lest,
carried away with the heat of his feelings, he might become chargeable
with complaining and murmuring against God, instead of humbly
supplicating Him for pardon. By applying to Him the appellation of *the
God of his salvation,* casting, as it were, a bridle upon himself, he
restrains the excess of his sorrow, shuts the door against despair, and
strengthens and prepares himself for the endurance of the cross. When he
speaks of his crying and importunity, he indicates the earnestness of
soul with which he engaged in prayer. He may not, indeed, have given
utterance to loud cries; but he uses the word *cry,* with much
*propriety’,* to denote the great earnestness of his prayers. The same
thing is implied when he tells us that he continued crying *days and
nights.* Nor are the words *before thee* superfluous. It is common for
all men to complain when under the pressure of grief; but they are far
from pouring out their groanings before God. Instead of this, the
majority of mankind court retirement, that they may murmur against him,
and accuse him of undue severity; while others pour forth their cries
into the air at random. Hence we gather that it is a rare virtue to set
God before our eyes, that we may address our prayers to him.

<span id="xxiii.i-p6"></span><span id="xxiii.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p7"></span>**3** *For my soul is filled with
troubles.* These words contain the excuse which the prophet pleads for
the excess of his grief. They imply that his continued crying did not
proceed from softness or effeminacy of spirit, but that from a due
consideration of his condition, it would be found that the immense
accumulation of miseries with which he was oppressed was such as might
justly extort from him these lamentations. Nor does he speak of one kind
of calamity only; but of calamities so heaped one upon another that his
heart was filled with sorrow, till it could contain no more. He next
particularly affirms that his life was not far from the grave. This idea
he pursues and expresses in terms more significant in the following
verse, where he complains that he *was,* as it were, dead. Although he
breathed still among the living, yet the many deaths with which he was
threatened on all sides were to him so many graves by which he expected
to be swallowed up in a moment. And he seems to use the word <span
id="xxiii.i-p7.1"></span>גבר*, geber,* which is derived from <span
id="xxiii.i-p7.2"></span>גבר*, gabar, he prevailed,* or *was strong,*
 <span id="fr_508"></span>[509](#fn_508) in preference to the word which
simply signifies *man,* — the more emphatically to show that his
distresses were so great and crushing as to have been sufficient to
bring down the strongest man.

<span id="xxiii.i-p9"></span><span id="xxiii.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p10"></span>**5** *Free among the dead, lie the slain
who lie in the grave.* The prophet intended to express something more
distressing and grievous than common death. First, he says, that *he was
free among the dead,* because he was rendered unfit for all the business
which engages human life, and, as it were, cut off from the world. The
refined interpretation of Augustine, that Christ is here described, and
that he is said to be free among the dead, because he obtained the
victory over death by a special privilege, that it might not have
dominion over him, has no connection with the meaning of the passage.
 <span id="fr_509"></span>[510](#fn_509) The prophet is rather to be
understood as affirming, that having finished the course of this present
life, his mind had become disengaged from all worldly solicitude; his
afflictions having deprived him of all feeling.  <span
id="fr_510"></span>[511](#fn_510) In the next place, comparing himself
with *those who have been wounded,* he bewails his condition as worse
than if, enfeebled by calamities, he were going down to death by little
and little; for we are naturally inspired with horror at the prospect of
a violent death.

<span id="xxiii.i-p13"></span>What he adds, that *he is forgotten of
God, and cut off from his hand* or *guardianship,* is apparently harsh
and improper, since it is certain that the dead are no less under the
Divine protection than the living. Even wicked Balaam, whose purpose it
was to turn light into darkness, was, nevertheless, constrained to cry
out,

<span id="xxiii.i-p14"></span>“Let me die the death of the righteous,  
and let my last end be like his,” (<span id="xxiii.i-p14.2"></span>[Nu
23:10](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#010)<span
id="xxiii.i-p14.2"></span>.)

<span id="xxiii.i-p15"></span>To say, then, that God is no longer
mindful of man after he is dead, might seem to be the language of a
heathen. To this it may be answered, That the prophet speaks according
to the opinion of the generality of men; just as the Scriptures, in like
manner, when treating of the providence of God, accommodate their style
to the state of the world as presented to the eye, because our thoughts
ascend only by slow degrees to the future and invisible world. I,
however, think, that he rather gave utterance to those confused
conceptions which arise in the mind of a man under affliction, than that
he had an eye to the opinion of the ignorant and uninstructed part of
mankind. Nor is it wonderful that a man endued with the Spirit of God
was, as it were, so stunned and stupified when sorrow overmastered him,
as to allow unadvised words to escape from his lips. Although faith in
the truth that God extends his care both to the living and the dead is
deeply rooted in the hearts of all his genuine servants, yet sorrow
often so overclouds their minds as to exclude from them for the time all
remembrance of his providence. From perusing the complaints of Job, we
may perceive, that when the minds of the godly are preoccupied with
sorrow, they do not immediately pierce to the consideration of the
secret providence of God, which yet has been before the subject of their
careful meditation, and the truth of which they bear engraven on their
hearts. Although the prophet, then, was persuaded that the dead also are
under the Divine protection, yet, in the first paroxysm of his grief, he
spoke less advisedly than he ought to have done; for the light of faith
was, as it were, extinguished in him, although, as we shall see, it soon
after shone forth. This it will be highly useful particularly to
observe, that, should we be at any time weakened by temptation, we may,
nevertheless, be kept from falling into despondency or despair.

<span id="xxiii.ii"></span>

<span id="xxiii.ii-p1"></span><span id="xxiii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
88:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#006)<span id="xxiii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.ii-p2"></span>**6.** Thou hast laid me in the lowest
pit, in dark places, in the deeps. **7.** Thy indignation lieth heavy
upon me; and thou hast afflicted me with all thy waves. Selah. **8.**
Thou hast removed my acquaintances from me: thou hast made me to be
abhorred by them: I am shut up that I cannot go forth. **9.** My eye
mourneth because of my affliction; I invoke thee, O Jehovah! daily: I
stretch out my hands to thee.

<span id="xxiii.ii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xxiii.ii-p4"></span><span id="xxiii.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.ii-p5"></span>**6** *Thou hast laid me in the lowest
pit.* The Psalmist now acknowledges more distinctly, that whatever
adversities he endured proceeded from the Divine hand. Nor indeed will
any man sincerely betake himself to God to seek relief without a
previous persuasion that it is the Divine hand which smites him, and
that nothing happens by chance. It is observable that the nearer the
prophet approaches God the more is his grief embittered; for nothing is
more dreadful to the saints than the judgment of God.

<span id="xxiii.ii-p6"></span><span id="xxiii.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.ii-p7"></span>Some translate the first clause of the 7th
verse, *Thy indignation hath approached upon me;* and the Hebrew word
<span id="xxiii.ii-p7.1"></span>סמך, *samach,* is sometimes to be taken
in this sense. But from the scope of the passage, it must necessarily be
understood here, as in many other places, in the sense of *to surround,*
or *to lie heavy upon;* for when the subject spoken of is a man sunk
into a threefold grave, it would be too feeble to speak of the wrath of
God as merely approaching him. The translation which I have adopted is
peculiarly suitable to the whole drift of the text. It views the prophet
as declaring, that he sustained the whole burden of God’s wrath; seeing
*he was afflicted with His waves.* Farther, as so dreadful a flood did
not prevent him from lifting up his heart and prayers to God, we may
learn from his example to cast the anchor of our faith and prayers
direct into heaven in all the perils of shipwreck to which we may be
exposed.

<span id="xxiii.ii-p8"></span><span id="xxiii.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.ii-p9"></span>**8** *Thou hast removed my acquaintances
from me.* He was now destitute of all human aid, and *that* also he
attributes to the anger of God, in whose power it is either to bend the
hearts of men to humanity, or to harden them, and render them cruel.
This is a point well worthy of our attention; for unless we bear in mind
that our destitution of human aid in any case is owing to God’s
withdrawing his hand, we agitate ourselves without end or measure. We
may indeed justly complain of the ingratitude or cruelty of men whenever
they defraud us of the just claims of duty which we have upon them; but
still this will avail us nothing, unless we are thoroughly convinced
that God, being displeased with us, takes away the means of help which
he had destined for us; just as it is easy for him, whenever he pleases,
to incline the hearts of all men to stretch forth their hand to succor
us. The prophet, as an additional and still more grievous element in his
distressed condition, tells us that his friends *abhorred him.*  <span
id="fr_511"></span>[512](#fn_511) Finally, he concludes by observing,
that he could perceive no way of escape from his calamities: *I am shut
up that I cannot go forth.*  <span id="fr_512"></span>[513](#fn_512)

<span id="xxiii.ii-p12"></span><span id="xxiii.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.ii-p13"></span>**9.** *My eye mourneth because of my
affliction.* To prevent it from being supposed that he was iron-hearted,
he again repeats that his afflictions were so severe and painful as to
produce manifest traces of his sorrow, even in his countenance and eyes
— a plain indication of the low condition to which he was reduced. But
he, notwithstanding, testifies that he was not drawn away from God, like
many who, secretly murmuring in their hearts, and, to use a proverbial
expression, chafing upon the bit, have nothing farther from their
thoughts than to disburden their cares into the bosom of God, in order
to derive comfort from Him. In speaking of *the stretching out of his
hands,* he puts the sign for the thing signified. I have elsewhere had
an opportunity of explaining the import of this ceremony, which has been
in common use in all ages.

<span id="xxiii.iii"></span>

<span id="xxiii.iii-p1"></span><span id="xxiii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
88:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#010)<span
id="xxiii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.iii-p2"></span>**10.** Wilt thou perform a miracle for
the dead? shall the dead  <span id="fr_513"></span>[514](#fn_513) arise
to praise thee? Selah. **11.** Shall thy loving kindness be declared in
the grave? thy truth in destruction?  <span
id="fr_514"></span>[515](#fn_514) **12.** Shall thy wonders be known in
darkness? and thy righteousness in the land of forgetfulness? **13.**
But to thee have I cried, O Jehovah! and in the morning my prayer shall
come before thee.  <span id="fr_515"></span>[516](#fn_515)

<span id="xxiii.iii-p6"></span> 

<span id="xxiii.iii-p7"></span><span id="xxiii.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.iii-p8"></span>**10.** *Wilt thou perform a miracle for
the dead?* By these words the prophet intimates, that God, if he did not
make haste to succor him, would be too late, there being scarce anything
betwixt him and death; and that therefore this was the critical
juncture, if God was inclined to help him, for should the present
opportunity not be embraced another would not occur. He asks how long
God meant to delay, — if he meant to do so till death intervened, that
he might raise the dead by a miracle? He does not speak of the
resurrection at the last day, which will surpass all other miracles, as
if he called it in question; yet he cannot be vindicated from the charge
of going to excess, for it does not belong to us to prescribe to God the
season of succouring us. We impeach his power if we believe not that it
is as easy for him to restore life to the dead as to prevent, in proper
season, the extreme danger which may threaten us from actually lighting
upon us. Great as has been the constancy of the saints, it has always
had some mixture of the infirmity of the flesh, which has rendered it
necessary for God, in the exercise of his fatherly clemency, to bear
with the sin with which even their very virtues have been to a degree
contaminated. When the Psalmist asks, *Shall thy loving-kindness be
declared in the grave?* he does not mean that the dead are devoid of
consciousness; but he pursues the same sentiment which he had previously
stated, That it is a more seasonable time to succor men, whilst in the
midst of danger they are as yet crying, than to raise them up from their
graves when they are dead. He reasons from what ordinarily happens; it
not being God’s usual way to bring the dead out of their graves to be
witnesses and publishers of his goodness. To God’s *loving-kindness* or
*mercy* he annexes his *truth* or *faithfulness;* for when God delivers
his servants he gives a confirmation of his faithfulness to his
promises. And, on the other hand, he is influenced to make his promises
by nothing but his own pure goodness. When the prophet affirms, that the
divine faithfulness as well as the divine goodness, power, and
righteousness, *are not known in the land of forgetfulness,* some
deluded persons foolishly wrest the statement to support a gross error,
as if it taught that men were annihilated by death. He speaks only of
the ordinary manner in which help is extended by God, who has designed
this world to be as a stage on which to display his goodness towards
mankind.

<span id="xxiii.iii-p9"></span><span id="xxiii.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.iii-p10"></span>**13.** *But to thee have I cried, O
Jehovah!* There may have been a degree of intemperateness in the
language of the prophet, which, as I have granted, cannot be altogether
vindicated; but still it was a sign of rare faith and piety to persevere
as he did with never-failing earnestness in prayer. This is what is
meant when he says, that *he made haste in the morning;* by which he
would have us not to imagine that he slowly and coldly lingered till he
was constrained by dire necessity. At the same time, he modestly
intimates by these words, that his pining away in long continued
miseries was not owing to his own sluggishness, as if he had not sought
God. This is an example particularly worthy of notice, that we may not
become discouraged if it happen sometimes that our prayers are for a
time unsuccessful, although they may proceed from the heart, and may be
assiduously persevered in.

<span id="xxiii.iv"></span>

<span id="xxiii.iv-p1"></span><span id="xxiii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
88:14-18](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#014)<span
id="xxiii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.iv-p2"></span>**14.** Wherefore, O Jehovah! wilt thou
reject my soul? and hide thy face from me? **15.** I am afflicted, and
ready to die from my youth; I have suffered thy terrors by doubting.
**16.** Thy wraths have passed over me: thy terrors have cut me off.
**17.** They have daily encompassed me like waters: they have surrounded
me together. **18.** Thou hast put far from me friend and companion: and
my acquaintances are darkness.  <span id="fr_516"></span>[517](#fn_516)

<span id="xxiii.iv-p4"></span> 

<span id="xxiii.iv-p5"></span><span id="xxiii.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.iv-p6"></span>**14.** *Wherefore, O Jehovah! wilt thou
reject my soul?* These lamentations at first sight would seem to
indicate a state of mind in which sorrow without any consolation
prevailed; but they contain in them tacit prayers. The Psalmist does not
proudly enter into debate with God, but mournfully desires some remedy
to his calamities. This kind of complaint justly deserves to be reckoned
among the unutterable groanings of which Paul makes mention in <span
id="xxiii.iv-p6.1"></span>[Ro
8:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#026)<span id="xxiii.iv-p6.1"></span>.
Had the prophet thought himself rejected and abhorred by God, he
certainly would not have persevered in prayer. But here he sets forth
the judgment of the flesh, against which he strenuously and
magnanimously struggled, that it might at length be manifest from the
result that he had not prayed in vain. Although, therefore, this psalm
does not end with thanksgiving, but with a mournful complaint, as if
there remained no place for mercy, yet it is so much the more useful as
a means of keeping us in the duty of prayer. The prophet, in heaving
these sighs, and discharging them, as it were, into the bosom of God,
doubtless ceased not to hope for the salvation of which he could see no
signs by the eye of sense. He did not call God, at the opening of the
psalm, *the God of his salvation,* and then bid farewell to all hope of
succor from him.

<span id="xxiii.iv-p7"></span><span id="xxiii.iv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.iv-p8"></span>The reason why he says that *he was ready
to die*  <span id="fr_517"></span>[518](#fn_517) *from his youth,*
(verse 15,) is uncertain, unless it may be considered a probable
conjecture that he was severely tried in a variety of ways, so that his
life, as it were, hung by a thread amidst various tremblings and fears.
Whence also we gather that *God’s wraths and terrors,* of which he
speaks in the 16th verse, were not of short continuance. He expresses
them in the 17th verse as having encompassed him *daily.* Since nothing
is more dreadful than to conceive of God as angry with us, he not
improperly compares his distress to a flood. Hence also proceeded his
*doubting.*  <span id="fr_518"></span>[519](#fn_518) for a sense of the
divine anger must necessarily have agitated his mind with sore
disquietude. But it may be asked, How can this wavering agree with
faith? It is true, that when the heart is in perplexity and doubt, or
rather is tossed hither and thither, faith seems to be swallowed up. But
experience teaches us, that faith, while it fluctuates amidst these
agitations, continues to rise again from time to time, so as not to be
overwhelmed; and if at any time it is at the point of being stifled, it
is nevertheless sheltered and cherished, for though the tempests may
become never so violent, it shields itself from them by reflecting that
God continues faithful, and never disappoints or forsakes his own
children.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_504"></span>[505](cc10022.htm#fr_504) <span
id="xxiii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii-p3"></span> “*As* *well the singers as players*, or
*dancers*, *shall be there*; *i* *e*., the whole chorus of joy and
praise. Dr Chandler renders it, ‘They shall sing like those that lead up
the dance;’ *i* *e*., with joy and exultation.” — *Williams* Symmachus
and Aquila translate the text:— ...<span id="xxiii-p3.1"></span>Και
ἁδοντες ὡς χωροι, πασαι πηγαι εν σοι:“And they shall sing as in leading
up a dance; ‘All my fountains are in thee.’”

<span id="fn_505"></span>[506](cc10022.htm#fr_505) <span
id="xxiii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xxiii-p6"></span> There are various opinions as to the
occasion of the composition of this psalm. Dr Kennicott conceives it to
be the prayer of a person shut up in a separate house because of the
leprosy, who seems to have been in the last stage of that distemper;
this disease, under the Mosaic dispensation, having been supposed to
come from the immediate stroke of God. Kimchi is of opinion that it was
written in the name of the Jewish people during the captivity, in the
language of a poor slave under his chains. Bishop Patrick supposes that
Heman, the author of it, was during the same period cast into a dark
prison, (see verses 5, 6,) or, that he was otherwise as miserably
treated, as if he had been in a dungeon; and that he here bewails his
private calamity.

<span id="fn_506"></span>[507](cc10022.htm#fr_506) <span
id="xxiii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xxiii-p7"></span> The Heman mentioned in that text has been
supposed by some to be the son of Zerah, one of Judah’s sons, by his
daughter-in-law Tamar, spoken of in <span id="xxiii-p7.2"></span>[1Ch
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#006)<span id="xxiii-p7.2"></span>. If
these two passages refer to the same persons, then as the grandchildren
of Judah are called in <span id="xxiii-p7.3"></span>[1Ki
4:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#031)<span id="xxiii-p7.3"></span>, the
sons of Mahol, it would follow that Mahol was either another name of
Zerah or the name of his wife. If this Heman was the author of the psalm
before us, and if Ethan, his brother, wrote the subsequent psalm, as
they lived at least one hundred and seventy years before Moses, these
poems are the oldest poetical compositions extant, and the most ancient
part of divine revelation. This, however, is far from being certain.
Heman, the grandson of Judah, may have been the author of the 78th
psalm; but the 79th could not have been written by Ethan, his brother,
as it speaks of transactions that took place long after his time, at
least as late as the days of David, who is particularly mentioned in it.
Calvin obviously considers this Heman to have lived in the time of David
or Solomon. There is a person of the same name who was constituted by
David one of the chiefs of the sacred singers, <span
id="xxiii-p7.4"></span>[1Ch 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1025.htm#001)<span
id="xxiii-p7.4"></span>. But he was a Levite, whereas the present Heman
is called an Ezrahite, which is understood to denote a descendant from
Zerah, the son of Judah. If, therefore, the chief musician in the time
of David be intended, some transcriber must have erroneously applied to
him the term *Ezrahite*. But if the psalm, as is supposed by many, was
written during the Babylonish captivity, it must have been written by a
different person.

<span id="fn_507"></span>[508](cc10022.htm#fr_507) <span
id="xxiii-p7.5"></span>

<span id="xxiii-p8"></span> Street renders the title, “An instructive
psalm in sickness, through affliction, by Aiman, the Ezrahite.” He
observes, “<span id="xxiii-p8.1"></span>מחלה, *sickness*, is used, <span
id="xxiii-p8.2"></span>[Ex 23:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#025)<span
id="xxiii-p8.2"></span>. The word <span id="xxiii-p8.3"></span>מהלת, is
the construct form of it.” He adds — “The title thus translated agrees
with the matter contained in the psalm.”

<span id="fn_508"></span>[509](cc10022.htm#fr_508) <span
id="xxiii.i-p7.3"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p8"></span> See volume 2, page 320, note 2. Some
consider the words <span id="xxiii.i-p8.2"></span>מחלת לענות, *Machalath
Leannoth*, which Calvin renders “Machalath, to make humble,” as together
denoting an instrument of music. “For my part,” says Dr Morison, “I lean
to the idea that these words are intended to denote some musical
instrument of the plaintive order; and in this opinion Kimchi and other
Jewish writers perfectly agree. They assert that it was a
wind-instrument, answering very much to the flute, and employed mainly
in giving utterance to sentiments of grief, upon occasions of great
sorrow and lamentation.”

<span id="fn_509"></span>[510](cc10022.htm#fr_509) <span
id="xxiii.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p11"></span> <span id="xxiii.i-p11.1"></span>גבר
*geber*, therefore, denotes a *man* “when in vigorous manhood; who is
neither a boy nor an old man, yet it is applied to Balaam, when old, in
<span id="xxiii.i-p11.2"></span>[Nu
24:4](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#004)<span id="xxiii.i-p11.2"></span>.”
— *Bythner*

<span id="fn_510"></span>[511](cc10022.htm#fr_510) <span
id="xxiii.i-p11.3"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p12"></span> “‘Free among the dead,’ *inter mortuos
liber*,” says Dr Adam Clarke, “has been applied by the Fathers to our
Lord’s voluntary death: all others were *obliged* to die; He alone *gave
up his life*, and could take it again, (<span
id="xxiii.i-p12.1"></span>[Joh
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#018)<span
id="xxiii.i-p12.1"></span>.) He went into the grave and came out when he
*chose*. The dead are *bound* in the grave: *He* was *free*, and not
obliged to continue in that state as they were.”

<span id="fn_511"></span>[512](cc10022.htm#fr_511) <span
id="xxiii.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.ii-p10"></span> This verse has been supposed to contain
a reference to the condition of the leper under the law, which much
resembled the picture here drawn. <span id="xxiii.ii-p10.1"></span>חפשי,
*chophshi*, from <span id="xxiii.ii-p10.2"></span>חפש, *chophash*, “is
*free*,” says Hammond, (“in opposition to *servitude*,) *manumitted*,
*set at liberty* The use of this word may more generally be taken from
<span id="xxiii.ii-p10.3"></span>[2Ch
26:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2026.htm#021)<span
id="xxiii.ii-p10.3"></span>, where of Uzziah, being a leper, it is said,
that he dwelt, <span id="xxiii.ii-p10.4"></span>בית החפשית, ‘in an house
of freedom, for he was cut off from the house of the Lord.’ The meaning
is, that after the manner of the lepers, he was excluded from the
temple, and dwelt, <span id="xxiii.ii-p10.5"></span>בר מן ירושלם, saith
the Chaldee, there, in some place without Jerusalem, which is therefore
called the ‘house of freedom,’ because such as were there were exempt
from the common affairs, and shut up from the conversation of men. And
in comparison with these, they that are, as it were, dead and laid in
their graves, are here said to be free, *i* *e*., removed from all the
affairs and conversation of the world.”

<span id="fn_512"></span>[513](cc10022.htm#fr_512) <span
id="xxiii.ii-p10.6"></span>

<span id="xxiii.ii-p11"></span> “This verse,” observes Dr Adam Clarke,
“has been supposed to express the state of a leper, who, because of the
infectious nature of his disease, is separated from his family, — is
abominable to all, and at last shut up in a separate house, whence he
does not come out to mingle with society.” “Heman means,” says Walford,
“either that the character of his disease was such that men could not
endure to be near him, or that the state of his mind was so disordered
that he became wearisome and intolerable; perhaps he includes both.”

<span id="fn_513"></span>[514](cc10022.htm#fr_513) <span
id="xxiii.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.iii-p3"></span> According to Cresswell, the meaning of
this clause is, “That the Psalmist confined himself to his house from
the fear of encountering, if he were abroad, the revilings of his former
friends.” Walford explains it as follows — “Either his state of feeling
was such as induced him to withdraw himself altogether from society, or
he was so environed by hopeless misery, that he regarded himself as a
wretch confined in a dungeon, whence he could not escape.” Horsley
reads, “I am shut up apart, and am not permitted to come out.” He
observes, that *shut up apart* is the proper sense of <span
id="xxiii.iii-p3.1"></span>כלא, and adds, that “when it denotes
confinement, it always implies solitary confinement.”

<span id="fn_514"></span>[515](cc10022.htm#fr_514) <span
id="xxiii.iii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xxiii.iii-p4"></span> The Hebrew word for *the dead*, in the
first clause of the verse, is <span id="xxiii.iii-p4.1"></span>מתים,
*methim*; here it is <span id="xxiii.iii-p4.2"></span>רפאים, *rephaim*
This last “Hebrew word,” says Parkhurst, “means ‘dead bodies reduced,’
or ‘resolved into their original dust.’ I know not (he adds) of any one
English word that will express it: *remains*, or relics, come as near to
it as any that I can recollect. It is several times put after <span
id="xxiii.iii-p4.3"></span>מתים, ‘the dead,’ as of more intense
signification.” (See Parkhurst’s Lexicon,<span
id="xxiii.iii-p4.4"></span>רפא, 2.) “<span
id="xxiii.iii-p4.5"></span>Mortui, qui vivere desierunt, manes, proprie
*flaccidi*.” — *Simonis* According to Dr Adam Clarke, <span
id="xxiii.iii-p4.6"></span>רפאים, *rephaim*, means “the manes or
departed spirits.” The Chaldee paraphrases this word “the carcases that
are putrefied in the dust.”

<span id="fn_515"></span>[516](cc10022.htm#fr_515) <span
id="xxiii.iii-p4.7"></span>

<span id="xxiii.iii-p5"></span> “<span id="xxiii.iii-p5.1"></span>C’est,
la mort.” — *Fr*. *marg*. “That is, death.”

<span id="fn_516"></span>[517](cc10022.htm#fr_516) <span
id="xxiii.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.iv-p3"></span> *Or prevent thee* — Come before the usual
hour of morning prayer. — See <span id="xxiii.iv-p3.1"></span>[Mr
1:35](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#035)<span id="xxiii.iv-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_517"></span>[518](cc10022.htm#fr_517) <span
id="xxiii.iv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.iv-p9"></span> “<span id="xxiii.iv-p9.1"></span>C’est,
se cachent.” — *Fr*. *marg*. “That is, hide themselves.” Walford reads,
“The darkness of death is my associate;” on which he has the following
note: — “*The darkness of death*. I take this literally to mean, ‘My
acquaintance, or he that knoweth me, is darkness personified:’ — <span
id="xxiii.iv-p9.2"></span>orcus, abaddon.”

<span id="fn_518"></span>[519](cc10022.htm#fr_518) <span
id="xxiii.iv-p9.3"></span>

<span id="xxiii.iv-p10"></span> The original word for “ready to die” is
<span id="xxiii.iv-p10.1"></span>גוע, *goveang* It is literally, *I
labour*,or *pant for breath*, *I breathe with pain and difficulty*, as a
person in great affliction and distress. The verb sometimes signifies
*to expire*; but it does not so strictly express as imply *death*, from
the obstruction of breathing that accompanies it. (See Parkhurst’s
Lexicon, <span id="xxiii.iv-p10.2"></span>גגע, 1, 2.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 89](cc10023)
