[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](egt03)  [Next](egt05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

# I.--LIFE OF THE AUTHOR.

Abû'l-Majd Majdûd b. Adam Sanâ'î <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md) was
born at <u>Gh</u>azna, and lived in the reign of Bahrâmshâh (A.H.
512-548, A.D. 1118-1152). Ouseley says of him that he "while yet young
became one of the most learned, devout, and excellent men of the age
which he adorned. His praise was on every tongue; for, in addition to
his accomplishments in the Sufi philosophy, he possessed a kind and
benevolent heart, delightful manners, and a fine taste for poetry . . .
. Sanâî in early life retired from the world and its enjoyments, and the
reason for his doing so is supposed to have arisen from the following
circumstance.

"He had frequented the courts of kings and princes, and celebrated their
virtue and generous actions. When Sultan Ibrahim of Ghazni determined
upon attacking the infidel idolaters of India, Hakim Sanâî composed a
poem in his praise, and was hurrying to the court to present it before
that monarch's departure. There was at that time in Ghazni a madman
known as Lâi Khûr (the ox-eater), who often in his incoherent wanderings
uttered sentiments and observations worthy of a sounder head-piece; he
was addicted to drinking wine, and frequented the bath. It so happened
that Sanâî, in passing a garden, heard the notes of a song, and stopped
to listen. After some time the singer, who was Lâi Khûr, addressing the
cup-bearer,

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

said, 'Saki, fill a bumper, that I may drink to the blindness of our
Sultan, Ibrahim.' The Saki remonstrated and said it was wrong to wish
that so just a king should become blind. The madman answered that he
deserved blindness for his folly in leaving so fine a city as Ghazni,
which required his presence and care, to go on a fool's errand in such a
severe winter. Lâi Khûr then ordered the Saki to fill another cup, that
he might drink to the blindness of Hakim Sanaî. The cup-bearer still
more strongly remonstrated against this, urging the universally esteemed
character of the poet, whom everyone loved and respected. The madman
contended that Sanâî merited the malediction even more than the king,
for with all his science and learning, he yet appeared ignorant of the
purposes for which the Almighty had created him; and when he shortly
came before his Maker, and was asked what he brought with him, he could
only produce panegyrics on kings and princes,--mortals like himself.
These words made so deep an impression on the sensitive mind of the
pious philosopher, that he secluded himself from the world forthwith,
and gave up all the luxuries and vanities of courts.

"Sirâjuddin Ali, in his 'Memoirs of the Poets,' says, that in
consequence of the sudden impression occasioned by Lâi Khûr's remarks,
Sanâî sought instruction from the celebrated Sheikh Yusef Hamdani, whose
cell was called the 'Kaabah of Khorâsân.'

"It was about this time that Behrâm Shah offered him his sister in
marriage, which honour, however, he gratefully declined, and almost
immediately set out on a pilgrimage to Mecca and Medinah. It is to the
refusal of the royal bride that he alludes in his Hedîkeh, as an apology
to the king, in the following lines:--'I am not a person desirous of
gold or of a wife, or of exalted station; by my God, I neither seek them
nor wish them. If through thy grace and favour thou wouldest even offer
me thy crown, I swear by thy head I should not accept it.'" The account
of Sanâ'î's conversion contained in the foregoing extract is probably,
as Browne says, of little historical value.

Sanâ'î composed the present work after his return from the pilgrimage;
according to most copies he completed it in A.H. 525 (A.D. 1131), though
some MSS. have A.H. 534 or 535 (A.D. 11391141).

Sanâ'î was attacked during his lifetime on account of his alleged
unorthodoxy; but a fatwa was published by the <u>Kh</u>alîfa's court at

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

Ba<u>gh</u>dâd, vindicating his orthodoxy against his calumniators. His
commentator \`Abdu'l-La<u>t</u>îf, if in his Preface (v. *post*.)
mentions the suspicions of the various sects on the subject of the
<u>H</u>akîm's heresies.

Several dates are given for the <u>H</u>akîm's death. His disciple
Muhammad b. \`Ali al-Raffâ (Raqqâm), in a preface to the work preserved
in one of the Bodleian MSS., gives Sunday, the 11th <u>Sh</u>a\`bân A.H.
525 (A.D. 1131). This date, however, fell on a Thursday; the 11th
<u>Sh</u>a\`bân of the year A.H. 545 (A.D. 1150), which is the date
given by Taqî Kâshî and the *Âta<u>sh</u>kada*, was, however, a Sunday.
Daulat<u>sh</u>âdh and <u>H</u>âjî <u>Kh</u>alfa give A.H. 576 (A.D.
1180, 1181). Since the poet completed his
*<u>T</u>arîqu't-Ta<u>h</u>qîq* in A.H. 528, the earliest of the three
dates is impossible; the second would appear -to be the most probable.

Besides the *<u>H</u>adîqatu'l-<u>H</u>aqîqat*, the first chapter of
which is here presented, Sanâ'î wrote the
*<u>T</u>arîqu't-Ta<u>h</u>qîq* ("Path of Verification"),
*<u>Gh</u>arîb-nâma* ("Book of the Stranger"), *Sairu'l-\`ibâd
ila'l-Ma\`âd* ("Pilgrimage of \[God's\] servants to the Hereafter"),
*Kâr-nâma* Book of Deeds "), *\`I<u>sh</u>q-nâma* (" Book of Love "),
and *\`Aql-nâma* ("Book of Reason"), as well as a *Dîwân*, or collection
of shorter poems in various metres. All these works, with the exception
of the *<u>H</u>aqîqa* and the *Dîwân*, are said by Prof. Browne, from
whom the above list is taken, to be very rare.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[vii:1](egt04.htm#fr_0.md) For the facts contained
in the following sketch I am indebted to Sir Gore Ouseley's
"Biographical Notices of the Persian Poets," Lond., Or. Trans. Fund,
1846; Rieu's and Ethé's Catalogues; and Prof. Browne's "A Literary
History of Persia," Vol. II.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II.--Manuscripts and Lithographs.](egt05.md)
