[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](egt06)  [Next](egt08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_xxi">p. xxi</span>

# IV.--THE COMMENTATORS.

Khwâja \`Abdu'l-La<u>t</u>îf b. \`Abdullâh al-\`Abbâsî, already so
frequently mentioned, explains to us in his Preface, the
*Mirâtu'l-<u>H</u>adâ'iq*, what he has attempted in his commentary on
the *<u>H</u>adîqa*. He states that he was writing in A.H. 1038, in the
second year of the reign of the Emperor <u>Sh</u>ahjahân, that he had
already completed his work on Jalâlu'd-Dîn Rûmî's Mathnawî, and that he
had in A.H. 1037 settled down to work on the *<u>H</u>adîqa*. 'What he
professes to have done for the text of that work has been mentioned in
the last section; the objects he has aimed at in the way of commentary
and explanation are the following:--

<span id="page_xxii">p. xxii</span>

Firstly, he has followed up the references to passages in the Qur'ân,
has given these passages with their translations, and a statement of the
sûra in which they are to be found. Secondly, the traditions referred to
are also quoted. Thirdly, obscure passages have been annotated, and
strange or curious Arabic and Persian words have been explained, after
an investigation into their meanings in trustworthy books. Fourthly,
certain signs have been used in transcribing the text, in order to fix
the signification of various letters; thus the *yâ'i kitâbî* is denoted
by \#\#\# subscript, the *yâ'i majhûl* similarly by \#\#\#, the *yâ'i
ma'rûf* by \#\#\#, the Persian \# (\#) by \#, the Arabic \# by \#, and
so on. Again the vocalization has been attended to in words which are
often mispronounced; thus ignorant people often substitute
*fat<u>h</u>a* for *kasra* in such words as *\`<u>kh</u>izâna'*, of
which the *Qâmûs* says "*<u>Kh</u>izâna* is never pronounced with
*fat<u>h</u>a*"; '*<u>Sh</u>amâl*', meaning the North wind, should be
pronounced with *fat<u>h</u>a*, not *kasra*, as is often done. The
*izâfat*, *jazm*, and other orthographical signs have often been written
in the text; and finally a glossary of the less known words has been
added in the margin. Since it is inconvenient to have text and
commentary separate, "in this copy the whole stability of the text has
been dissolved, and the text bears the commentary along with it
(\#\#\#), i.e., text and commentary are intermingled, the commentary not
being written in the margin, but each annotation immediately after the
word or line to which it applies. These researches the author has also
written out separately, and called them
"*La*<u>t</u>*â'ifu'l<u>-</u>Hadâ'iq min Nafâ'isi'l-Da<u>q</u>â'iq*."
The date is again given as A.H. 1038.

It appears then that the original form of the commentary was not that of
marginal notes, as it is presented in A and L; that it was completed in
1038 A.H., and, in its separate form, was called the
*La*<u>t</u>*â'ifu'l<u>-</u>Hadâ'iq*. That this is the name of the
commentary we know and possess, seems to have been the opinion of the
scholar who prepared the Lucknow lithograph, which is entitled "Sanâ'î's
*<u>H</u>adîqa*, with the commentary
*La*<u>t</u>*â'ifu'l<u>-</u>Hadâ'iq*."

Besides the preface just considered, there is also another, found in
both A and L, called the *Râsta-i <u>Kh</u>iyâbân*, written especially,
it would seem, as an introduction to the commentary
*La*<u>t</u>*â'ifu'l<u>-</u>Hadâ'iq*. After dwelling on the unworthiness
of the writer, \`Abdu'l-La<u>t</u>îf

<span id="page_xxiii">p. xxiii</span>

states that the interpretations given by him are not mere expressions of
private opinion, but are derived from the best Arabic and Persian books;
the emendations of the text are all derived from authentic MSS., and are
in accordance with the judgment of discerning men; everything has been
weighed and discussed by the learned. He does not, however, say that
these explanations are the only ones, nor that he has commented on every
line that to some people would seem to require it. Though his work may
seem poor now while he is alive, it may grow in the esteem of men after
his death. The work has been done in the intervals of worldly business,
while occupied with affairs of government. There follows a lengthy
eulogy of his friend Mîr \`Imâdu'd-Dîn Ma<u>h</u>mûd al-Hamadâni, called
Ilâhî, two *târî<u>kh</u>s* by whom close this preface. The first

târî<u>kh</u> says that the work having been begun in the year 1040. all
the correction and revision was completed in 1042 (\#\#\#); the second
simply gives the date 1040.

These dates evidently cannot refer to the edition and commentary as
first written; since we have seen that the text and the
*La*<u>t</u>*â'ifu'l<u>-</u>Hadâ'iq* are referred to by
\`Abdu'l-La<u>t</u>îf in 1038 as having been completed. It would seem
that the editor had either been at work on another, revised and improved
edition; or, as is assumed in the India Office Catalogue (No. 923), on
an abridgment of his earlier work. Lastly, we have the date 1041 for the
completed work of which A is a copy (see description of contents of A,
in Section II, p. xi); and this seems to represent the final form of the
work. in which the annotations are written in the margin, not, as at
first, intermingled in the text.

In the India Office Catalogue the series of events is interpreted
somewhat differently. The commentary as it appears in A (and L, the only
form, apparently, in which we possess it) is stated to be an abridgement
from a larger commentary, the *La*<u>t</u>*â'ifu'l<u>-</u>Hadâ'iq*;
according to the preface (the Catalogue states) the larger work wa-.
begun in 1040 and completed in 1042. It is with diffidence that I
venture to question this presentation of the facts; but A, in the
description of which the above statements occur, does not contain the
preface called *Mirâtu'l-<u>H</u>adâ'iq*, and therefore presents no
indication that the text and *La*<u>t</u>*â'ifu'l<u>-</u>Hadâ'iq* had
already been completed in

<span id="page_xxiv">p. xxiv</span>

1038\. That the work done between 1040 and 1042 consisted in the
preparation of the original *La*<u>t</u>*â'ifu'l<u>-</u>Hadâ'iq* is,
from the statement of the *Mirâtu'l-<u>H</u>adâ'iq*, impossible. We have
seen, moreover, that the tradition in India is that the commentary as we
have it, as it appears in A and L, is the
*La*<u>t</u>*â'ifu'l<u>-</u>Hadâ'iq* itself., and not an abridgement. I
do not gather from the India Office Catalogue or elsewhere that
two-commentaries, a larger and a smaller, are actually in existence;
there may be other evidences of their former existence of which I am
ignorant, but so far merely as my own knowledge goes, I can see no
reason for assuming two commentaries, and would look on the labours of
1040-1042 in the light of revision and rearrangement, a work which was
perhaps only finally completed in 1044, the date given in A for the
completion of the work. Besides his work on the *<u>H</u>adîqa*,
\`Abdu'l-La<u>t</u>îf had previously, as has been mentioned, published a
revised and annotated edition of Jalâlu'd-Dîn Rûmî's Mathnawî,
commentaries on the same poem, and a special glossary, the lithographed
at Lucknow in A.D. 1877 under the title *Farhang-i Ma<u>th</u>nawî*. He
died in 1048 or 1049 A.H. (A.D. 1638, 1639).

A general description of the volume containing the other commentary
which I have used in the preparation of the notes appended to the
present translation, has already been given. Of the authors, or author
and scribe, Mirzâ \`Alâu'd-Dîn A<u>h</u>mad of Lûhârû, called \`Alâ'î,
and Maulavî Muhammad Ruknu'd-Dîn of Hi

<u>ss</u>ar, I know no more, than is to be gathered from their prefaces.

Their commentary is of slight value as compared with that of
\`Abdu'l-La<u>t</u>îf: that is to say, that part of it which is
original. The commentary is considerably more bulky than
\`Abdu'l-La<u>t</u>îf's, perhaps between two and three times as
extensive; but it includes, without one word of acknowledgment, the
whole of \`Abdu'l-La<u>t</u>îf's work. This is, in the great majority of
cases, reproduced verbatim; in some instances a paraphrase of
\`Abdu'l-La<u>t</u>îf's commentary has been attempted, and in certain of
these it is plain that the authors did not understand the sense of what
they paraphrased. Of their own work, a certain amount is superfluous,
the sense of the text being immediately obvious; a certain amount is
mere paraphrase of Sanâ'î's words: and another portion consists in an
attempt to read

<span id="page_xxv">p. xxv</span>

mystical meanings into the original in passages which, as it seems, were
never intended by the author to bear them. Notwithstanding these facts,
I have, as will be seen, quoted freely in my notes from their
commentary; for a certain portion of their work is helpful, and
moreover, it seemed to me to be of interest to give in this way a
specimen of present-day Indian thought and criticism in the field of

<u>S</u>ûfîistic philosophy. I cannot, however, leave the subject of
Sanâ'î's commentators without expressing my sorrow that scholars should
have existed who were not only capable of such wholesale theft, but even
lauded themselves on the results of it; witness the extravagant praise
of \`Alâ'î in Ruknu'd-Dîn's preface; and again the words

Praise be to God! There has never been. such a commentator of the
*<u>H</u>adîqa*, nor will be; or if there is. it will be an imitation or
a theft from this king of commentators!" There is also no indication
that the volume comprises only one out of ten chapters of the
*<u>H</u>adîqa*; it is everywhere implied that the. complete
*<u>H</u>adîqa* is presented.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: V.--The <u>H</u>adÎqatu'l-haqîqat.](egt08)
