[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](egt09)  [Next](egt11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# The First Book of the <u>H</u>adîqatu'-l-H<u>a</u>qîqat of Sanâ'î.

IN THE NAME OF GOD, THE MERCIFUL, THE COMPASSIONATE.

O Thou who nurturest the mind, who adornest the body, O Thou who givest
wisdom, who showest mercy on the foolish, Creator and Sustainer of earth
and time, Guardian and Defender of dweller and dwelling; dwelling and
dweller, all is of Thy creation; time and earth, all is under Thy
command; fire and wind, water and the firm ground, all are under the
control of Thy omnipotence, O Thou the Ineffable. From thy throne to
earth, all is but a particle of what Thou hast created; the living
intelligence is Thy swift messenger. Every tongue that moves within the
mouth possesses life for the purpose of praising Thee; Thy great and
sacred names are a proof of Thy bounty and beneficence and mercy. Each
one of them is greater than heaven and earth and angel; they are a
thousand and one, and they are ninety-nine; each one of them is related
to one of man's needs, but those who are not in Thy secrets are excluded
from them. O Lord, of thy grace and pity admit this heart and soul to a
sight of Thy name!

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

Infidelity and faith, both travelling on Thy road, exclaim, He is alone,
He has no partner. The Creator, the Bounteous, the Powerful is He; the
One, the Omnipotent,--not like unto us is He, the Living, the Eternal,
the All-knowing, the Potent, the Feeder of creation, the Conqueror and
the Pardoner. He causes movement, and causes rest; He it is who is
alone, and ha; no partner; to whatever thing thou ascribest fundamental
existence, that thou assertest to be His partner; beware!

Our weakness is a demonstration of His perfection; His omnipotence is
the deputy of His names. Both *No* and *He* returned from that mansion
of felicity with pocket and purse empty. What is there above
imagination, and reason, and perception, and thought, except the mind of
him who knows God? for to a knower of God, wherever he is, in whatever
state, the throne of God is as a carpet under his shoe. The seeing soul
knows praise is folly, if given to other than the Creator; He who from
earth can create the body, and make the wind the register of speech, the
Giver of reason, the Inspirer of hearts, who calls forth the soul, the
Creator of causes;--generation and corruption, all is his work; He is
the source of all creation, and the place to which it returns all comes
from Him and all returns to Him; good and evil all proceeds to Him. He
creates the freewill of the good and of the wicked; He is the Author of
the soul, the Originator of wisdom; He from nothing created thee
something; thou wert of no account, and He exalted thee.

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

No mind can reach a comprehension of His mode of being; the reason and
soul know not His perfection. The mind of Intelligence is dazzled by His
majesty, the soul's eye is blinded before His perfection. The Primal
Intelligence is a product of His nature,--it He admitted to a knowledge
of himself. Imagination lags before the glory of His essence;
understanding moves confined before His nature's mode of being. His
fire, which in haughtiness He made His carpet, burnt the wing of reason;
the soul is a serving-man in His pageant, reason a novitiate in His
school. What is reason in this guest-house? only a crooked writer of the
script of God.

What of this intelligence, agitator of trifles? What of this changing
inconstant nature?, When He shows to intelligence the road to Himself,
then only can intelligence fitly praise Him. Since Intelligence was the
first of created things, Intelligence is above all choicest things
besides; yet Intelligence is but one word out of His record, the Soul
one of the foot-soldiers at His door. Love He perfected through a
reciprocal love; but intelligence He tethered even by intelligence.
Intelligence, like us, is bewildered on the road to His nature, like us
confounded. He is intelligence of intelligence, and soul of soul; and
what is above that, that He is. How through the promptings of reason and
soul and senses can one come to know God? But that God showed him the
way, how could man ever have become acquainted with Divinity?

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: ON THE KNOWLEDGE OF GOD.](egt11.md)
