[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](egt26)  [Next](egt28) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

# \[ON BEING SILENT.\]

The path of religion is neither in works nor words; there are no
buildings thereon, but only desolation. Whoso becomes silent to pursue
the path, his speech is life and sweetness; if he speaks, it will not be
out of ignorance, and if he is silent, it will not be from sloth; when
silent, he is not devising frivolity; when speaking, he scatters abroad
no trifling talk.

Those fools, the thieves and pickpockets, keep their knowledge to use in
highway robbery. Thou seest, O Master, thou of many words, that thou
hadst better have light in thy heart than words; when thou becomest
silent, thou art most eloquent, but if thou speakest, thou art like a
captain of war. '*Kun*,' consists of two letters, both voiceless; '*Hû*'
consists of two letters, both silent. Doubt not concerning these words
of mine; open thine eyes, pay heed for a little.

There exists the dog, and the stone; the stove of the bath, and the
slave; but thou art excellent, like a jewel inside a casket. The king
uses his silver for his daily needs, but his ruby be keeps for his
treasure-house; silver is evil in its own ill-starred nature, the ruby
is joyous because it is full of blood within.

The family of Barmak became great through their liberality; they were,
so to say, close companions of generosity. Though fate

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

pronounced their destruction, their name endures, indestructible as the
spirit. The people of this generation, though amiable, are impudent as
flies and wanton; in word they are all sweet as sugar, but when it comes
to generosity, they tear men's hearts and burn their souls.

When He had adorned thy soul within thee, He held up before thee the
mirror of the light; till pride made thee quick to anger, and thou
lookedst upon thyself with the evil eye.

He has balanced day and night by the ruler of his justice, not by chance
or at random.

While Reason digs for the secret, thou hast reached thy goal on the
plain of Love.

The heart and soul of the seeker after God are concealed, but his tongue
proclaims in truth, '*I am God*.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: THE PARABLE OF THOSE WHO HEED NOT.](egt28)
