[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](egt25)  [Next](egt27) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

# \[OF THE TRAVELLER ON THE PATH.\]

A man should be like Abraham, that, through God, his shadow may become a
shady place; in fear of him and by his teaching the universe dares to
breathe; Pharaoh is destroyed by the mighty aid of a Moses whom God
assists.

To the wayfarer towards God on the path of love His cheek is the dawn of
morning; (who but He can tear away the veil by day,

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

or hang the veil by night?) His mind is snatched away from bonds of
earth; the spiritual rule of the world is made manifest to him. He
treads the Throne under his feet like a carpet; he is an owl, but boars
with him a phœnix. He becomes lord of this abode and that, the loyal
slave of God; the pure Intelligence reveals its face to man, and
beautifies his body with its own light. The bounty of God throws its
shade over his heart; then he says, '*How He prolongs the shadow*.'
(Qur. 25:47) When his soul feels the touch of God, '*We make the sun*'
reveals its face to him (Qur. 25:48). The dumb all find tongues when
they receive the perfume of life from his soul.

In His path the lovers recite to their souls the verse '*Every creature
on the earth is subject to decay*;' (Qur. 55:26) the heavens, and the
natural world and its varied colours seem vile to his perception. Whoso
is turned away from this wine, for him all its fragrance and colour is
destroyed; so that when with new ear thou shalt hear the shouts of '*He
is One, He has no partner*,' thou shalt no longer in madness desire the
varied colours, even though thy Jesus be the dyer. Thou shalt take what
thou wilt of the colours, put them into one jar, and bring them out
again;-listen truly, and not in folly: this saying is not for fools;-all
these deceitful colours the jar of the Unity makes one colour. Then
being now of one colour, all has become Him; the rope becomes slender
when reduced to a single strand.

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: ON BEING SILENT.](egt27)
