[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](egt36)  [Next](egt38.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

# CONCERNING THE PIOUS DISCIPLE AND THE GREAT MASTER.

Thaurî, by way of obsequiousness and in anxiety to acquire a good
reputation, asked an excellent question of Bâyazîd Bis<u>t</u>âmi;
weeping, he said, "O Master, tell me, who is unjust?" His master,

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

giving him a draught out of the law, answered him and said, "Unjust is
that ill-fated one who for one! moment of the day and night in
negligence forgets Him: he is nest His submissive slave." If thou forget
Him for one breath, there is none so shamelessly unjust as thou; but if
thou be present and commemorate His name, thy being is lost in the
fulfilment of His commands. So think upon Him that in thy heart and
soul. thou lapse not into forgetfulness even for an instant. Keep in
mind this saying of that ever-watchful traveller on this road, the
impetuous lion. '*And worship thou the Lord in prayer as if thou sawest
Him*;' and if thou do not thus, thou wilt be forced to cry '*Help,
help!*' So worship Him in both worlds, as if thou sawest Him with thine
outward eye; though thine eye sees Him not, thy Creator sees thee.

The commemoration of God exists only in the path of conflict it exists
not in the assembly of the contemplation: though remembrance of Him be
thy guide at first, in the end remembrance is naught.

Inasmuch as the diver seeks pearls in the seas, it is the water too that
kills his cry; in absence the dove calls 'where?'--if present,

49

why recite 'He'? Those in His presence are rich in His majesty; weep
thou, if absence is thy portion.

Listen to the ringdove's plaint of yearning,--two grains of barley
changes it into joy; but he who seeks the only true contentment, seeks
the light of the Unity in the grave. To him the tomb is the garden of
Paradise; heaven is unlovely in his eyes. Then wilt thou be present,
when in the abode of peace thou art present in soul, not in body; whilst
thou art in this land of fruitless search, thou art either all back or
all front; but when the soul of the seeker has gone forward a few paces
out of this land, love seizes the bridle. Unbelief is death, religion
life,--this is the pith of all that men have said.

Whoso for one moment takes delight in himself, he is imprisoned in hell
and anguish for years. Who then shall have this honour and high dignity
conferred upon him? Only he who possesses the principle of Islâm; in
loving, and in striving towards that world, one must not talk about
one's life; those who travel on this road know nothing of grief for life
and sorrow of soul. When thou hast passed out of this world of fruitless
search, then seek thou in that the fountain of life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: CONCERNING THE HOUSE OF DECEPTION.](egt38.md)
