[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](egt29)  [Next](egt31.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

# AGAIN THE PARABLE OF THOSE WHO HEED NOT.

Dost thou not see how the nurse in the earliest days of its childhood
sometimes ties the little one in its cradle, and at times is ever laying
it on her bosom; sometimes strikes it hard and sometimes soothes it;
sometimes puts it away from her and repels it, sometimes kindly kisses
its cheek and again caresses it and bears its grief? A stranger is angry
with the nurse when he sees this, and sighs; he says to it, The nurse is
not kind, the child is of little account with

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

her. How shouldst thou know that the nurse is right? Such is always the
condition of her work.

God too, according to his compact, performs his whole duty towards his
slave; He gives the daily food that is required, sometimes
disappointment, sometimes victory; sometimes He sets a jewelled crown
upon his head, sometimes He leaves him needy with only a copper.

Be thou contented with God's ordinance; or if not, then cry aloud and
complain before the Qâ<u>z</u>î, that he may release thee from His
decree! A fool is he who thinks thus! Whatever it is,--whether
misfortune or prosperity,--it is an unmixed blessing, and the evil only
transitory. He who brings the world into being with '*Be, and it
was*,'--how, how shall He do evil to the creatures of the world? Good
and evil exist not in the world of the Word; the names 'good' and 'evil'
belong to thee and to me. When God created the regions of the earth He
created no absolute evil; death is destruction for this one, but wealth
for that; poison is food to this, and death to that.

If the face of the mirror were black like its back, no one would look at
it; the usefulness belongs to the face of the mirror, even though its
back be stuffed with jewels. The bright-faced sun is good, be its back
black or white; if the peacock's foot were like its feathers, it would
shine splendid both by night, and day.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IN PRAISE OF HIS OMNIPOTENCE.](egt31.md)
