[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](egt30)  [Next](egt32.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

# IN PRAISE OF HIS OMNIPOTENCE.

He is the Pourtrayer of the outward forms of our earthly bodies; He is
the Discerner of the images of our inmost hearts. He is the Creator of
existent and non-existent, the Maker of the hand and what it holds. He
made a wheel of pure emerald, and on the wheel

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

he bound silver jars; He caused a candle and candlestick to revolve in
the heavens in the path of the ignoble. Before His creation was
non-existence; eternal being belongs to His Essence alone. He made
Intelligence proclaimer of His power; He made matter capable of
receiving form. To Intelligence He gave the path of vigilance; what
thinkest thou of Intelligence?

How can the artist of the pen picture forth in man the image of the
Eternal? Fire and wind and water and earth and sky, and Reason and
Spirit above the sky, and the angels in the middle place, wisdom and
life and abstract form,--know, that all come into being by command, and
the command is God's.

He is the origin and root of material things, the Creator of
beneficence, and thanks, and the thankful man. In the high-road from
this life to the next He has associated action and power with this world
of generation and corruption. In the world of the Word His Omnipotence
made power pregnant with action, made its place for whatever comes into
action, created its product for whatever possesses power.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: ON THE PROVERBS AND ADMONITIONS 'POVERTY IS BLACKNESS OF THE
FACE' (THE RECITAL OF PROVERBS IS THE BEST OF DISCOURSES) AND 'THE WORLD
IS A HOUSE OF DEPARTURE AND CHANGING AFFAIRS AND MIGRATION.'](egt32.md)
