[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](egt53)  [Next](egt55) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

# ON THE INTERPRETATION OF THE DREAM.

In the phantoms of sleep He has ordained for men of understanding both
fear and hope. When a man has laid down his head in sleep, his
tent-ropes are severed. As long as men are in the world

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

of causes, they are all in a boat, and all asleep; waiting for what
their soul shall see in sleep, of what awaits them of reward and
punishment.

A fierce fire means the heat of anger; a spring of water is a beloved
child.

To weep in a dream is a provision of happiness afterwards; slavery means
immunity from disgrace. Playing at draughts or chess in sleep brings war
and conquest and misery.

Water in a dream, if it be pure and sweet and clean and wholesome, is
daily bread lawfully earned; but if it be muddy, know that it means an
unhappy life;--though it be water, deem it fire itself. Earth in a dream
brings food; to the farmer it indicates prosperity. A wind, if it be
either hot or cold, is equally a store of grief and pain., but if it be
temperate to the skin it is grief to an enemy and joy to a friend.

To give anything to the dead in a dream is loss of wealth and property.
Laughter is anxiety and dangers; silence is affection for one's wealth.
To drink water and have one's thirst increased is knowledge, for one is
never satiated with it. And he who is naked in his dream falls into
disgrace, like the drunken libertine. A drum in a dream,--the secret
leaks out; a trumpet in a dream results in a

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

quarrel. Bonds and fetters area repentance of Na

<u>s</u>ûh; to see a garden is food for the soul. Fruit in a dream is a
stipend from the king, not at once, but at some future time; when the
time comes for him to obtain it, the man who saw the dream will attain
thereby to affluence.

When a man sees his own hand outstretched, he will be of singular
generosity and munificence; but if his hands be withdrawn, he will
surround himself with an army by his stinginess. The hands are brother
and sister, the left the girl, the right the boy; the fingers represent
sons; the teeth refer to father and mother; daughters are represented by
the breast and nipple. Hidden wealth and riches are shown as the belly;
in a dream, the liver and heart are a store of wealth. The leg and knee
are weariness and trouble. The brain is hidden wealth; the side a woman,
for veil the skin drawn round her body. The organ of generation is a
son,--good or bad, ugly or fair, wretched or fortunate.

To wash the hands is despair in regard to the matter in hand: to dance
is impudence and deceit. Bathing drawers and can and implements of
bathing all point to servants; and he who in his dream plays upon the
lute will certainly marry in haste. To wrestle with another is to
conquer and to harass; and he who takes medicine in his dream escapes
from pain and sorrow and torment.

Perfume in a dream is of two kinds, one meaning pleasure, the other
nothing but affliction; the kind that is rubbed on brings pleasure, that
which they scatter about, trouble. Since by smoke is meant an

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

increase of trouble, such an one's comfort will be small compared with
his distress. A sick man, and perfume, and a new coat, is bad, the bad
that I represent to thee as good. To dance in a boat in a dream means
danger from drowning, and brings wretchedness; but for one who is in
prison, to dance is of good omen.

Whoever sees blood running from his body will find that happiness is
denied him; permitted him, however, if he does not see a wound; but
otherwise, if a wound be there, his affairs will cause him heavy
trouble; he will be captive in sorrow's hands. And if a woman dreams of
menstruating, she will give birth to a dead child. If a sick man seeing
meat in a dream, eats of it, hope not for his recovery. To dream of
drunkenness and madness from drinking wine, if it be Arabian wine, is
bad; if Persian, deem it a livelihood, honour, and good-fortune. Milk in
a dream is profit from one's possessions, an ample and lawful
subsistence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: ON DREAMS OF VESSELS AND GARMENTS.](egt55)
