[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](egt64)  [Next](egt66) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

# ON INTIMATE FRIENDSHIP AND ATTACHMENT.

There is no injury in the world for thee like thy prosperity; there is
no such enduring imprisonment as thy existence: '*the light has*
*appeared*'

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

it is that bestows favours, '*the lie has failed*' is both life and
body. Wishest thou the Invisible? take Self out of the path, what has
imperfection to do with the mansion of Invisibility? Thou art full of
fault, yet intendest the invisible world;--it is above all impossible in
incredulity and doubt. The chains of thy selfhood will not fall from the
two feet of thy nature under the compulsion of thy folly; when thy being
appears to thee as a veil, thy understanding will have fallen under thy
anger.

Abandon talk, and bid farewell to thy lower self; if thou canst not,
then turn thy two eyes into rivers, day and night in thy separation from
God grieve over thy understanding, no longer employ it to meditate evil;
free it from this tether,--then has thy task become easy for thee. When
thou findest thy sustenance in the Soul, thou wilt look out on the land
from the window of the angel world.

How long wilt thou say, "What is the arriving? In the path of religion
what is it to be chosen?" Lay bonds upon thyself, then wilt thou be
chosen; plant thy foot upon thy head,--then wilt thou have arrived. As
long as thou art a biter, thou art not chosen; whilst thou inclinest to
this world, thou hast not arrived.

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

How shall a true son of Adam be such a biter as thou, or how shall devil
or wild beast rend as thou dost? Thou art ever heedless and arrogant, a
beast of prey and a devil, far removed from man's estate; like a tiger
ever malevolent; the people of the world in distress through thy evil
disposition. Upon this high road of debasement thou wilt attain to
Self,--thou wilt not attain to Him.

The Kufan has given forth but one verse about the

<u>S</u>ûfî; what has Love to do with the decision of Quraishite or
Kufan;

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

or the

<u>S</u>ûfî and his love with 'Further, it is in the tradition,' with
negation and affirmation, and '*It is lawful*' and '*It is not lawful*'?
The

<u>S</u>ûfîs have lifted up their hands, and for '*Yes*' have
substituted '*No*.'

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

The earth-scatterers in the bridal-chamber of His affection, and those
who sit by the road which leads to the cell of His sanctity, all are
moon-bright signs on the curtain of jealousy, immersed in tears from
foot to head; all are recipients of His clemency, all captive to the
knowledge of Him. Lay down thy burden of Self, that so thou mayest
become the beloved of every street. The pure eye sees the purity of
religion: when the eye is pure, it sees purely. Those who are not
steadfast in Him are covered with dust; those who wear His crown are
kings indeed. Take off thy head this many-coloured cloak; hold to a
garment of one colour, like \`Isâ, (*Jesus*) that like him thou mayest
walk upon the water, and make of sun and moon thy fellow-travellers.
Take all of self away from thyself, and then with that same breath speak
the story of Adam. Till thy Self becomes small as an atom to thee, thou
canst not possibly reach that place; that desire will never harmonize
with Self; rise, and without thy Self pursue thy path.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: HE WHO IS INDIFFERENT TO THE WORLD FINDS A KINGDOM THAT SHALL NOT
WANE. (Qur. 20:118)](egt66)
