[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](egt70)  [Next](egt72) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

# ON FAILURE TO PRAY ARIGHT

Bû Shu\`aib al-Ubayy was a leader in religion whom everyone used to
praise; one who rose in the night and fasted continually, one who was
distinguished in that age for his asceticism. He betook himself from the
city to a cell on the mountain, and made his escape from pain and
sorrow.

It chanced that a certain woman had an affection for him; she said, "O
<u>Sh</u>ai<u>kh</u>, would it be fitting for thee to have a wife? If
thou wilt, I place myself at thy disposal, and will willingly become thy
wife; my soul will cheerfully be satisfied with little, and. I shall
never think of my former ease." He answered, "Excellent; it is very
fitting; I approve. If thou art satisfied, I am content."

She was a modest woman called Jauhara, and had a full share of beauty
and grace; chaste, refined, of sweet disposition, an incarnation of good
deeds; content with the decree of the revolving heavens, she left the
city for the hermit's cell, and there seeing a piece of matting lying on
the floor, she straightway took it up. The

devout Bû Shu\`aib said to her, "O thou, now my cherished wife, why hast
thou taken up the carpet? For the black earth is only the place for our
shoes." She said, "I did it because it was best so; for I have heard you
say that any act of devotion is best performed when no screen
interposes; and the mat was an obstacle between my forehead and the
actual earth.

Every night Bû Shu\`aib's daily meal consisted of two round cakes for
his querulous belly; with these two barley-cakes that pious man broke
his fast and was always content. But he fell ill from the risings that
so affected his nights; and so, being helpless, the good man, because of
the weakness brought on by fasting, said the *jarz* and *sunnah* prayers
that night sitting. His wife laid one cake before him, and gave him a
drop of vinegar,--nothing more. Said the <u>Sh</u>ai<u>kh</u>, "O wife,
my allowance is more than this! Why is it so little, wife! She said,
"Because the worshipper who says his prayers sitting receives only half
the full reward; and if thou sittest to say thy prayers, thou eatest the
half of thy usual allowance. Ask no more from me, O Shaikh, than half
thy dole; I have warned thee. For the portion that belongs to prayers
said sitting is the half of the reward given for those said standing;
why expect the reward of the whole when thou performest but half thy
devotions? Perform the whole, and then ask for the whole reward;
otherwise such worship is absolutely wrong."

O thou, in the path of sincerity thou art feebler than a woman, laggest
far behind such of thy fellow-creatures as she. By such prayer as comes
not from the heart thou canst not anywise obtain thy soul's release. No
one regards as of any worth the service whose life

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

principle comes not from the heart; for a bone is of itself no delicacy
on one's plate without the marrow. Know that at the resurrection no
prayer that is imperfect will be taken into account; the marrow of
prayer consists in lowliness, and if there be not lowliness it will not
be received. A man must come to prayer as one wounded, sorrowing, and in
poverty; and if there be not lowliness and trust the devil derides him.

Whoso is wholly taken up with fasting and prayer, poverty ever locks the
door of his soul; in this world of deceit and desire, in this
hundred-thousand-years-enduring cage, the cap of thy degree is the
compliment thou offerest it; but thy head is greater than the cap.

Whoso enters into prayer with fitting preparation, the reward of his
prostration is the eave of the West.

Go then, perform thy prayers without breath of desire, for the dew of
desire utterly corrupts them; the baseness of thy prayers and thy
fasting is such that the slipper of thy foot is the only present in thy
hand.

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

Speak in pleasant tones on coming to the mountain; why offer it the
braying of an ass? Thou hast raised up a hundred thousand ruffians in
the path of prayer, who drown thy cries. It must needs be that the words
of thy prayer come back in their entirety, like an echo, from the
mountain of the world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: ON LAUD AND PRAISE.](egt72)
