[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](egt77)  [Next](egt79.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

# ON DEVOTION TO GOD.

Say "Grind sleep under the foot of the horsemen of thy thought:" for
this is of Thy Court. When Thou strikest off the head of him in whom
Self no long dwells, he rejoices in Thee, like a candle. If I have Thee,
what care I for intellect, and honour, and gold? Thou art both world and
faith; what care I for aught else? Do Thou give me a heart, and then see
Thou my valour; call me to be Thy fox, and see how like a tiger I shall
be. If I fill my quiver with Thy arrows, I grip Mount Qâf by loins and
armpits. Thou art his Friend who is not knowledgeless; Thou belongest to
him who belongs not to Self. No one who regards Self can see God; he who
looks at Self is not one of the faith; if thou art a man of the Path,
and of the true religion, cease for a time to contemplate thyself.

O God, Omnipotent, Forgiving, drive not Thy servant, from Thy door; make
me Thy captive; take away my indifference; make me athirst for
Thee,--give me not water! Why should I seek my soul in this or that? my
pain itself leads me to Thee, my goal.

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

Like an ass without headstall before its greens, thou now beginnest to
employ thy worthless life. Thou idly wanderest from city to city; seek
thy ass on that road where thou hast lost it. If they have stolen thy
ass from thee in \`Irâq, why art thou to be seen in Yazd and Rai?

Till thou becomest perfect, there is a bridge for thee; when thou hast
become perfect, what matters sea or bridge to thee? Let thy burden on
this road be thine own right-doing and knowledge, and

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

trouble not thyself about any bridge. Make not for the boat, for it is
not safe; he who goes by boat knows nothing of the sea; it would be a
strange sight to see a duck, however young and inexperienced, seeking
for a boat. Though a duckling be born but yesterday, it goes up to its
breast in the water. Be thou as a duck,--religion the stream; fear not
the fordless sea's abyss; the duckling swims in the midst of the sea of
\`Umân, whence the ignorant boatman turns back. O Lord, for the honour
of Adam, confound these fools of the world!

If thou maintain thy foot in the path of the Eternal, thou wilt hold the
sea in thy hand; the surface of the outer encircling ocean is a bridge
to the foot that speaks with the Eternal.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: OF HIS MERCY.](egt79.md)
