[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](egt72)  [Next](egt74) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

# ON POVERTY AND PERPLEXITY.

He hears the heart's low voice of supplication. He knows when the
heart's secret rises up to Him; when supplication opens the door of the
heart, its desire comes forward to meet it; the '*Here am I*' of the
Friend goes out to welcome the heart's cry of '*O Lord*' as it ascends
from the high road of acquiescence. One cry of '*O Lord*' from
thee,--from Him two hundred times comes '*Here am I*' one '*Peace*' from
thee,--a thousand times He answers '*And on thee*'; let men do good or
ill, His mercy and His bounty still proceed.

Poverty is an ornament in His court,--thou bringest thy worldly
stock-in-trade and its profits as a present; but thy long grief is what
He will accept, His abundance will receive thy neediness. Bilâl whose
body's skin was black as a sweetheart's locks, was a friend in His
court; his outward garment became as a black mole of amorous allurement
upon the face of the maidens of Paradise.

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

O Thou who marshallest the company of darwîshes, O Thou who watchest the
sorrow of the sore at heart, heal him who is now like unto a quince, I
make him like the bowstring who is now bent as the bow. I am utterly
helpless in the grasp of poverty; O Thou, who rulest the affairs of men,
rule mine. I am solitary in the land of the angels, lonely in the glory
of the world of might; the verse of my knowledge I has not even a
beginning, but the excess of in yearning has no end.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: ON BEING GLAD IN GOD MOST HIGH, AND HUMBLING ONESELF BEFORE
HIM](egt74)
