[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](egt85)  [Next](egt87.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

# OF THE RECITAL OF THE SECRET OF THE QUR'ÂN.

Tongue cannot tell the secret of the Qur'ân, for His intimates keep it
concealed; the Qur'ân indeed knows its own secret,--hear it from itself,
for itself knows it. Except by the soul's eye none knows the mea, surer
of words from the true reader of the Qur'ân;--I will not take upon
myself to say that thou truly knowest the Qur'ân though thou be
\`U<u>th</u>mân.

The world is like the summer's heat, its people like drunkards therein,
all wandering in the desert of indifference; death the shepherd, men his
flock; and in this waste of desire and wretchedness the hot sand shows
as running water. The Qur'ân is as the cool water of Euphrates, whilst
thou art like a thirsty sinner on the plain of the Judgment. The letter
and Qur'ân hold thou as cup and water; drink the water, gaze not on the
vessel. Because it is summer, thy home seems to thee a mine of enmity;
because the water is cold, the vessel of turquoise, thou usest not to
fast. To the pure heart suffering will tell in a cry of anguish the
secret of the pure Qur'ân; how can Reason discover its interpretation?
But a delight in it finds out its inmost secret.

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

Though the written characters are not of the word, the scent of Yûsuf is
in his garment; the fair Yûsuf was cast away in Egypt, but the scent
reached Ya'qûb in Canaan. The letter of the Qur'ân is to its sense as
thy clothes to thy life; the letter may be uttered by the tongue, its
soul can be read but by the soul. The letter is as the shell, the true
Qur'ân the pearl; the heart of the free-born desires not the shell.
Though its words are fair and finely traced, though the mountain becomes
as carded wool before them, make music, of them in thy heart like Moses,
not outwardly like the treble of the pipes. When the soul recites the
Qur'ân it enjoys a luscious morsel; whoso hears it, mends his ragged
robe. The words, the voice, the letters of the verses, are as three
stalks in bowls of vegetables. Though the husk is not fair nor sweet,
still it guards the kernel; but through thy impurity the mystery becomes
a song, the word of God a tune through thy folly.

Whilst thou art in this tomb appointed for us, this residence contrived
for us, in this world full of objects of pursuit, this abode of deceit,
look with thy earthly sight upon the willow, and with thy soul upon the

<u>t</u>ûbâ-tree; read with thy tongue the letter, and the sense with
thy soul.

Sacrifice, to honour the Qur'ân, thy reason before its discourse; reason
is no guide to its mysteries; reason is impotent here. Thou art now
shameless, deceitful; thou art not worthy to have the curtain of the
mystery drawn aside; thou knowest naught of its secret, hast

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

not yet arrived at \`Arafât. So long as thou desirest pleasure and
cherishest desire, play as a child,--thou art not man enough for this.

But when wisdom has conquered the world of desire, pure goodness
succeeds to evil; the devil of passion flies to Hell, and Sulaimân
regains his ring; the Qur'ân's secret routs the demon;--what wonder if
he flies in terror from the Qur'ân?

Wait, for when the day of true religion dawns, the night of thought and
fancy and sense flies away. When the veiled ones of the unseen world see
that thou art stainless, they will lead thee into the invisible abode
and reveal to thee their faces; and disclosing to thee the secret of the
Qur'ân, they will withdraw the veil of letters. The earthy will have a
reward of earth, the pure shall see purity. An understanding of the
Qur'ân dwells not in the brain where pride starts up; the ass is dumb as
a mere stone, and lends not his ear to the secret of God's word,--turns
away from hearing the Qur'ân and pays no heed to the sûra's secret; but
if the mind be disciplined of God it shall discover in the sûra the
secret of the Qur'ân.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IN THE RECITAL OF THE MIRACLE WROUGHT BY THE QUR'ÂN.](egt87.md)
