[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](egt83)  [Next](egt85) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

# TO REMEMBER THE WORDS OF THE ALL-KNOWING LORD

RENDERS EASY THE ACCOMPLISHMENT OF THE AIM. GOD MOST HIGH HAS SAID, SAY,
IF MEN AND JINNS CONSPIRED TO BRING THE LIKE OF THIS QUR'ÂN, THEY COULD
NOT BRING ITS LIKE, NOT THOUGH THEY HELPED EACH OTHER. (Qur. 17:90) AND
SAID THE PROPHET (ON WHOM BE MERCY AND PEACE), THE QUR'ÂN IS RICHES;
THERE IS NO POVERTY IF IT BE GIVEN, AND THERE IS NO RICHES BESIDE IT.
AND HE SAID (PEACE BE UPON HIM), THE QUR'ÂN IS A MEDICINE FOR EVERY
DISEASE EXCEPT DEATH.

By reason of its beauty and its pleasantness the discourse of the Qur'ân
has no concern with clang of voice or travail of the letter; how shall
phenomenal existence weigh its true nature, or written characters
contain its discourse? Thought is bewildered before its outward shape,
understanding stupefied before the secret of its sûras; full of meaning
and beautiful are its words and sûras, ravishing and enchanting is its
outward form. From it earth's produce and the sons of the angel-world
have ever drawn their strength and nurture; in the loosing of
perplexities its hidden meaning is souls' repose and hearts' ease. The
Qur'ân is balm for the wounded heart, and medicine for the pain of the
sore at heart. Do thou, if thou art not a parrot nor a donkey nor an
ass, surely hold the word of God to be the root of the faith,

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

and the cornerstone of piety, a, mine of rubies, a treasure of spiritual
meaning. It is the canon of the wisdom of the wise, the standard of the
practice of the learned; to praise it is joy to the soul, to look on it
is solace to the mind. Its verses are healing to the soul of the pious,
its banner is pain and grief to the evil-doer; it has thrown the
Universal Reason into affliction, has made the Universal Soul sit down
in widowhood. Reason and Soul but hold men back from its true essence;
the eloquent are impotent to rival its manner.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: ON THE GLORY OF THE QUR'ÂN.](egt85)
