[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](egt79)  [Next](egt81) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

# OF HIM WHO FEEDS ME AND GIVES ME DRINK.

When they capture the hawk in the wilds, they secure it neck and feet;
they quickly cover up both its eyes and proceed to teach it to hunt. The
hawk becomes accustomed and habituated to the strangers, and shuts its
eyes upon its old associates; it is content with little food and thinks
no more of what it used to eat. The falconer then becomes its attendant,
and allows it to look out of one corner of an eye, so that

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

it may only see himself, and come to prefer him before all others. From
him it takes all its food and drink, and sleeps not for a moment apart
from him. Then he opens one of its eyes completely, and it looks
contentedly, not angrily, upon him; it abandons its former habits and
disposition, and cares not to associate with any other. And now it is
fit for the assembly and the hand of kings, and with it they grace the
chase. Had it not suffered hardship it would still have been
intractable, and would have flown out at everyone it saw.

Others are heedless,--do thou be wise, and on this path keep thy tongue
silent. The condition laid on such an one is that he should receive all
food and drink from the Causer, not from the causes. Go, suffer
hardship, if thou wouldst be cherished; and if not, be content with the
road to Hell. None ever attained his object without enduring hardship;
till thou burn them, what difference canst thou see between the willow
and aloes wood?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: OF THE MULTITUDE; THEY ARE LIKE CATTLE--NAY. THEY ARE MORE
ERRING.](egt81)
