[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](egt86)  [Next](egt88.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

# IN THE RECITAL OF THE MIRACLE WROUGHT BY THE QUR'ÂN.

O thou, who hast got into thy palm but the ocean's foam, and of thy
possessions hast made the semblance of an array; thou hast not laid hold
of the pearl's true substance, for that thou art occupied only
concerning the shell; withhold thy hand from these lack-lustre shells,
and bring up the bright pearl from the ocean depths. The pearl without
its shell is cherished in the heart, the shell without its pearl is clay

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

to be thrown aside; the pearl's value comes not from the shell,--the
arrow's value comes from its hitting the mark.

He who knows of his own sight the pebbles of the sea-bottom will not
mistake sheep's dung for pearls of the sea; while he who stands aside on
this stream's shore can lay no claim to its shining pearls.

The, lines of the Qur'ân are like unto faith's shore, for it gives ewe
to heart and soul; its bounty and its might are as the encircling sea
around the soul's world; its depths are full of pearls and jewels, its
shores abound in aloes-wood and ambergris; knowledge of first and last
is scattered from it for benefit of soul and body both.

Be pure, that the hidden meanings may appear to thee from out the cage
of the letters, for till a man come forth from his impurity how can the
Qur'ân come forth from its letters? As long as thou art veiled inside
thy Self, what difference, to thee or to thy understanding,

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

is there between evil and good? In the letter of the Qur'ân is no
healing for thy soul,--the goat grows not fat on the goatherd's call;
nor soon nor late the water of his dream satisfies the thirsty one in
his helplessness. Thou, who art in thraldom to pen and ink, canst not
distinguish between face and veil; in the world of the Word at least,
the word's outward characters are not esteemed to be its life.

When thou settest foot in that country. He will teach thee the alphabet
of sincerity, and when thou shalt recite the alphabet of the faith thou
shalt know sun and Pleiades for thy father and ancestors; such is the
way of the loyal followers, and such too is the alphabet of the lovers.

Dark is the veil on the face of day; the verse of its conceits is very
subtle. If thou wouldst have a treasure for thy soul and heart, recite
with heart and soul a verse from it; that in it thou mayest find the
jewel of the truth, the essential basis of thy faith; that thou mayest
find the casket of the incomparable pearl, and know the pure gold from
the silver; that glorious as the sun and moon there may appear to thee
from behind the dark screen its own beautiful face, like a bride who
comes forth lovely and joyous from out her gauzy veil.

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: OF THE GUIDANCE OF THE QUR'ÂN.](egt88.md)
