[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](egt92)  [Next](egt94.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

# THE COMPARISON OF THE CREATION OF ADAM AND OF JESUS SON OF MARY (ON BOTH OF WHOM BE PEACE!).

Adam's father in this world was the same breath which begot the son of
Mary; that which became his body was of the nature of humanity, and that
which became his soul was of the fragrance of that breath. Whoso has in
him that breath, is an Adam; and whoso has it not, is an effigy
belonging to this world only. When Adam received that breath from the
power of God his soul became conscious, and hastening towards the
Universal Soul he asked, "What canst thou tell me of this breath?" Soul
replied, "My cup and robe are empty; my robe and cup hold naught of
it,--this precious gift has been given freely."

Wheresoever thou wilt incline, let it be in accordance with this breath;
incline not towards thyself in opposition to it; and soar above the
snares of earth, gaining the abode of Godhead, viewing the confines of
the spirit-land, like Jesus, with the eye of thy divinity.

Claim no distinction for thyself in thy village, for thou art only
distinguished in that to be naught is better than such distinction.

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

Like a dot on the die used as a tool of the game, thou thinkest thyself
to be something, but that something is naught; thou art indeed a unit,
but like the dots on the dice hast a name merely for purposes of
counting.

Fortunate is he who has effaced himself from the world; none seeks him,
nor seeks he anyone. Whoso is caught in the bonds of this world, is a
gainer if he escape from its forces; for this world is the source of
pain and sorrow, and the wise man calls it 'the house of lodging.' Since
in the light of reason and clear sight two flights at the proper time
are as good as three victories, so thou, O full of excellencies, art a
fool, if at this river thou stayest on the bridge or in the cave.

Let the guide of thy bodily and of thy spiritual life be for this world
wisdom, for the other thy faith; fortunate is he whose guide is wisdom,
for both worlds are his submissive servants. When the fruition of desire
is attained, the go-between's talk becomes a heaviness; though she sets
the business going, yet when the closet is reached she is only a bore to
thee.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: TO COMMEMORATE THE PROPHETS IS BETTER THAN SPEAKING OF
FOOLS.](egt94.md)
