[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](egt90)  [Next](egt92.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

# ON THE SWEETNESS. OF THE QUR'ÂN.

How shalt thou taste the flavour and delight of the Qur'ân, since thou
chantest it without comprehension? Come forth through the door of the
body into the landscape of the soul; come and view the garden of the
Qur'ân, that all things may appear before thy soul,--what has been, what
is, and what shall be, the world's dry and moist, within and without,
whatsoever has been created by '*Be, and it was*,' the decrees ordained
by Him,--all will be made plain to thee through it. God's attributes
shall obey thee, and shall truly recount their narrations before thee.

When the hearer hears God's word, the utterance of it causes him to
tremble.' Till thou see with the eye of purity, how canst thou recite
the sûra *I<u>kh</u>lâs*? (Qur, 112:1)--a sûra like a cypress of
<u>Gh</u>âtfar, its rhythm like the violets of

<u>T</u>abaristân. The Qur'ân's loftiness and sublimity, if thou

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

ask thy preceptor, are as the throne and seat of God; its letters are
the wings of the Spirit, the curtain of the Light; its diacritical
points black moles on the checks of the virgins of Paradise. Regard thou
in this wise its outward form, that so thou mayest understand the secret
of its sûras; that it may place an *alif* in thy mind, and put *bâ* and
*tâ* underneath thy feet; and, for the sake of life and wisdom, may
dispose of thy fair Yûsuf for eighteen worthless pieces, (Qur.
12:20)--for in the street of the love of Unity and true wisdom beauty is
valued no higher than this.

The crucible of desire shall try him, and afterwards he shall be made
like gold of the mine; yet again is the crucible prepared, that in it
all fraud and deceit may be melted out; then when the pure metal becomes
soft, it is polished and made an ornament for its possessor's crown. The
diadem and crown of every lord of rectitude and faith are such as this.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: ON THE HEARING OF THE QUR'ÂN.](egt92.md)
