<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Japan](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](atfj17)  [Next](atfj19) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan*, by Richard Gordon Smith,
\[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

<span id="img_19"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![19. Murakami
Yoshiteru Does 'Harakiri' and Throws His Entrails at the
Enemy](tn/19.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/19.jpg)  
19. Murakami Yoshiteru Does 'Harakiri' and Throws His Entrails at the
Enemy  
</span>

### XVI

### MURAKAMI YOSHITERU'S FAITHFULNESS

MURAKAMI YOSHITERU—We shall call him Yoshiteru for short—was one of the
faithful retainers of Prince Morinaga, third son of the Emperor Godaigo,
who reigned from 1319 to 1339. When I say 'reigned,' I mean that Godaigo
was Emperor; but there was a Regent at the time, Hojo Takatoki, who
ruled with harshness and great selfishness.

With the exception of young Prince Morinaga, the Imperial family
appeared to take things easily. They preferred quietude and comfort to
turbulence and quarrelling. Prince Morinaga was different.
Fiery-tempered and proud, he thought that Hojo Takatoki was usurping the
Emperor's rights. The man, he said, was nothing more by birth than one
of the Emperor's subjects, and had no business to be made Regent.

Naturally these opinions led to trouble, and it was not very long before
Prince Morinaga was obliged to leave the capital suddenly, with his
followers, of whom there were some hundreds, not enough to fight Hojo
Takatoki at the time.

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

Prince Morinaga had made up his mind that it would be better to live
independently in Yamato than to be under the sway of Hojo Takatoki, as
were his father and his elder brothers. Having collected the most
faithful of his followers—of whom the most notable was the hero of our
story, Murakami Yoshiteru,—the Prince left the capital in disguise, and
started for Yoshino in Yamato. There, in the wild mountains, he intended
to build a castle, in which to dwell for the rest of his days
independent of the Regent, whom he held in much loathing.

Prince Morinaga carried with him an Imperial flag, which, he expected,
would gain for him sympathy and help even in the wild Yamato Province.
Though from Kioto the then capital to the borders of Yamato is, in a
direct line, only about thirty miles, the whole country is mountainous
and wild; roads are non-existent, mountain paths taking their place.
Consequently, it was noon on the fifth day before the Prince found
himself at a little border village called Imogase. Here he found his way
blocked as it were by a guard-house, the soldiery of which had been
chosen from among Imogase villagers, headed by one Shoji, a rough and
disagreeable man.

When Prince Morinaga and his party of about eighty followers dressed as
*yamabushi* (fighting monks) arrived, flying the standard, they were
called to a halt by the village guard, and told that they could go no
farther into Yamato without leaving one of themselves as hostage. The
Prince was too haughty to speak to the villagers and explain, and,
unfortunately, Murakami Yoshiteru, his most trusted leader, could not be
found, for he had remained some miles behind to gather straw and make a

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

new pair of waraji (straw shoes). Shoji, leader of the Imogase
villagers, was firm in his demand that one of the party should be left
behind until their return. For some twenty minutes matters stood thus.
Neither side wanted to fight. At last Shoji said:

'Well, you may say that you are a prince! I am a simple villager, and I
don't know. You may carry the Imperial flag; but when you are dressed
like *yamabushi* it does not look exactly as if you were a prince. As I
don't want trouble, and you want to pass without trouble, -my orders
being that out of all parties of over ten armed people I am to hold one
as a hostage,—the only suggestion that I can make is that I keep as
hostage this Imperial flag.'

The prince, glad enough to save leaving one of his faithful followers,
gave the standard to Shoji as hostage, and then he and his party were
allowed to pass into Yamato. They proceeded on their way. Not
half-an-hour after they had passed, Murakami Yoshiteru arrived at the
guard-house, having made himself a pair of straw shoes, to take the
place of his old ones; and his surprise at seeing his master's flag in
such low hands was equalled by his anger.

'What is the meaning of this?' he asked.

Shoji explained what had happened.

On hearing the story Murakami lost control of his temper. He flew into a
violent passion. He reviled Shoji and his men as a set of low
blackguards who scarcely had a right to look at the Imperial standard of
Japan, much less to dare to touch it; and with that he began a general
assault on the village guard, killing three

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

or four and putting the rest to flight. Murakami then seized the
standard, and ran on with it until, towards evening, he came up with the
Prince and his party, who were overjoyed at what he had done and at the
recovery of the flag.

Two days later the party reached Yoshino, and in the vicinity of this
place they built a fortress, where for some months they dwelt in peace.
It was not long, however, before the Regent heard of the prince's
whereabouts, and he soon sent a small army after him. For two days the
fort was desperately attacked; on the third the outer gates were taken;
two-thirds of the prince's men were dead'. Murakami, had been wounded
three times, and his life could not last long. Faithful to the end, he
rushed to his prince, saying, 'Master, I am wounded unto death. In less
than half-an-hour our enemies will have conquered us, for we have but
few men left. Your Highness is unwounded, and can in disguise escape
when the end comes. Give me quick your armour, and let me pretend that I
am your Highness. I will show our enemies how a prince can die.'

Changing clothes hastily, and donning the prince's armour, Murakami,
bleeding badly from his wounds, and already more dead than alive with
weakness from the loss of blood, regained the wall, and struggling up
the last steps he reached a point where he could see and be seen by the
whole of the enemy.

'I am Prince Morinaga!' shouted he. 'Fate is against me, though I am in
the right. Sooner or later Heaven's punishment will come down on you.
Until then my curses upon you, and take a lesson as to how a

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

prince can die, emulating it, if you dare, when your time comes!'

With this Murakami Yoshiteru drew his short sword across his abdomen,
and, seizing his quivering entrails, he flung them into the midst of his
enemies, his dead body falling directly afterwards.

His head was taken to the Regent in Kioto as the head of Prince
Morinaga, who escaped to plot in the future.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XVII. A Story of Oki Islands](atfj19)

</div>
