<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Japan](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](atfj50)  [Next](atfj52) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan*, by Richard Gordon Smith,
\[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_307">p. 307</span>

<span id="img_55"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![55. Kyuzaemon Sees
the 'Yuki Onna.'](tn/55.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/55.jpg)  
55. Kyuzaemon Sees the 'Yuki Onna.'  
</span>

### XLIX

### THE SNOW GHOST

PERHAPS there are not many, even in Japan, who have heard of the 'Yuki
Onna' (Snow Ghost). It is little spoken of except in the higher
mountains, which are continually snowclad in the winter. Those who have
read Lafcadio Hearn's books will remember a story of the Yuki Onna, made
much of on account of its beautiful telling, but in reality not better
than the following.

Up in the northern province of Echigo, opposite Sado Island on the Japan
Sea, snow falls heavily. Sometimes there is as much as twenty feet of it
on the ground, and many are the people who have been buried in the snows
and never found until the spring. Not many years ago three companies of
soldiers, with the exception of three or four men, were destroyed in
Aowomori; and it was many weeks before they were dug out, dead of
course.

Mysterious disappearances naturally give rise to fancies in a fanciful
people, and from time immemorial the Snow Ghost has been one with the
people of the North; while those of the South say that those of the
North take so much saké that they see snow-covered trees as women.

<span id="page_308">p. 308</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Be that as it may,
I must explain what a farmer called Kyuzaemon saw.

In the village of Hoi, which consisted only of eleven houses, very poor
ones at that, lived Kyuzaemon. He was poor, and doubly unfortunate in
having lost both his son and his wife. He led a lonely life.

In the afternoon of the 19th of January of the third year of Tem-po—that
is, 1833—a tremendous snowstorm came on. Kyuzaemon closed the shutters,
and made himself as comfortable as he could. Towards eleven o'clock at
night he was awakened by a rapping at his door; it was a peculiar rap,
and came at regular intervals. Kyuzaemon sat up in bed, looked towards
the door, and did not know what to think of this. The rapping came
again, and with it the gentle voice of a girl. Thinking that it might be
one of his neighbour's children wanting help, Kyuzaemon jumped out of
bed; but when he got to the door he feared to open it. Voice and rapping
coming again just as he reached it, he sprang back with a cry: 'Who are
you? What do you want?'

'Open the door! Open the door!' came the voice from outside.

'Open the door! Is that likely until I know who you are and what you are
doing out so late and on such a night?'

'But you must let me in. How can I proceed farther in this deep snow? I
do not ask for food, but only for shelter.'

'I am very sorry; but I have no quilts or bedding. I can't possibly let
you stay in my house.'

'I don't want quilts or bedding,—only shelter,' pleaded the voice.

<span id="page_309">p. 309</span>

'I can't let you in, anyway,' shouted Kyuzaemon. 'It is too late and
against the rules and the law.'

Saying which, Kyuzaemon rebarred his door with a strong piece of wood,
never once having ventured to open a crack in the shutters to see who
his visitor might be. As he turned towards his bed, with a shudder he
beheld the figure of a woman standing beside it, clad in white, with her
hair down her back. She had not the appearance of a ghost; her face was
pretty, and she seemed to be about twenty-five years of age. Kyuzaemon,
taken by surprise and very much alarmed, called out:

'Who and what are you, and how did you get in? Where did you leave your
geta.' <span id="fr_47"></span>[1](#fn_47)

'I can come in anywhere when I choose,' said the figure, 'and I am the
woman you would not let in. I require no clogs; for I whirl along over
the snow, sometimes even flying through the air. I am on my way to visit
the next village; but the wind is against me. That is why I wanted you
to let me rest here. If you will do so I shall start as soon as the wind
goes down; in any case I shall be gone by the morning.'

'I should not so much mind letting you rest if you were an ordinary
woman. I should, in fact, be glad; but I fear spirits greatly, as my
forefathers have done,' said Kyuzaemon.

'Be not afraid. You have a butsudan?' <span
id="fr_48"></span>[2](#fn_48) said the figure.

'Yes: I have a butsudan,' said Kyuzaemon; 'but what can you want to do
with that?'

<span id="page_310">p. 310</span>

'You say you are afraid of the spirits, of the effect that I may have
upon you. I wish to pay my respects to your ancestors' tablets and
assure their spirits that no ill shall befall you through me. Will you
open and light the butsudan?'

'Yes,' said Kyuzaemon, with fear and trembling: 'I will open the
butsudan, and light the lamp. Please pray for me as well, for I am an
unfortunate and unlucky man; but you must tell me in return who and what
spirit you are.'

'You want to know much; but I will tell you,' said the spirit. 'I
believe you are a good man. My name was Oyasu. I am the daughter of
Yazaemon, who lives in the next village. My father, as perhaps you may
have heard, is a farmer, and he adopted into his family, and as a
husband for his daughter, Isaburo. Isaburo is a good man; but on the
death of his wife, last year, he forsook his father-in—law and went back
to his old home. It is principally for that reason that I am about to
seek and remonstrate with him now.'

'Am I to understand,' said Kyuzaemon, 'that the daughter who was married
to Isaburo was the one who perished in the snow last year? If so, you
must be the spirit of Oyasu or Isaburo's wife?'

'Yes: that is right,' said the spirit. 'I was Oyasu, the wife of
Isaburo, who perished now a year ago in the great snowstorm, of which
to-morrow will be the anniversary.'

Kyuzaemon, with trembling hands, lit the lamp in the little butsudan,
mumbling 'Namu Amida Butsu; Namu Amida Butsu' with a fervour which he
had never felt before. When this was done he saw the figure of the

<span id="page_311">p. 311</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Yuki Onna (Snow
Spirit) advance; but there was no sound of footsteps as she glided to
the altar.

Kyuzaemon retired to bed, where he promptly fell asleep; but shortly
afterwards he was disturbed by the voice of the woman bidding him
farewell. Before he had time to sit up she disappeared, leaving no sign;
the fire still burned in the butsudan.

Kyuzaemon got up at daybreak, and went to the next village to see
Isaburo, whom he found living with his father-in-law, Yazaemon.

'Yes,' said Isaburo: 'it was wrong of me to leave my late wife's father
when she died, and I am not surprised that on cold nights when it snows
I have been visited continually by my wife's spirit as a reproof. Early
this morning I saw her again, and I resolved to return. I have only been
here two hours as it is.'

On comparing notes Kyuzaemon and Isaburo found that directly the spirit
of Oyasu had left the house of Kyuzaemon she appeared to Isaburo, at
about half-an-hour after midnight, and stayed with him until he had
promised to return to her father's house and help him to live in his old
age.

That is roughly my story of the Yuki Onna. All those who die by the snow
and cold become spirits of snow, appearing when there is snow; just as
the spirits of those who are drowned in the sea only appear in stormy
seas.

Even to the present day, in the north, priests say prayers to appease
the spirits of those who have died by snow, and to prevent them from
haunting people who are connected with them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_47"></span>[309:1](atfj51.htm#fr_47) Clogs.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[309:2](atfj51.htm#fr_48) Family altar, in which
the figures of various gods are set, and also the family mortuary
tablets.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: L. The Snow Tomb](atfj52)

</div>
