<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Japan](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](atfj00)  [Next](atfj02) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan*, by Richard Gordon Smith,
\[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

# Preface

THE stories in this volume are transcribed from voluminous illustrated
diaries which have been kept by me for some twenty years spent in travel
and in sport in many lands—the last nine of them almost entirely in
Japan, while collecting subjects of natural history for the British
Museum; trawling and dredging in the Inland Sea, sometimes with success,
sometimes without, but in the end contributing to the treasury some
fifty things new to Science, and, according to Sir Edwin Ray Lankester,
'adding greatly to the knowledge of Japanese Ethnology.' As may be
supposed, such a life has brought me into close contact with the
people—the fisher, the farmer, the priest, the doctor, the children, and
all others from whom there is a possibility of extracting information.
Many and weird are the tales I have been told. In this volume the
Publishers prefer to have a mixture—stories of Mountains, of Trees, of
Flowers, of Places in History, and Legends. For the general results
obtained in my diaries I have to thank our late Minister in Tokio, Sir
Ernest Satow; the

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Ministers and
Vice-Ministers of Foreign Affairs and of Agriculture, who gave me many
letters of introduction; my dear friend Mr. Hattori, Governor of Hiogo
Prefecture; the translators of the original notes and manuscripts (often
roughly written in Japanese), among whom are Mr. Ando, Mr. Matsuzaki,
and Mr. Watanabe; and Mr. Mo-No-Yuki, who drew and painted the
illustrations from sketches of my own, which must often have grated on
his artistic ideas, keeping him awake in reflection on the crudeness of
the European sense of art.

To my faithful interpreter Yuki Egawa also are due my thanks for
continual efforts to find what I wanted; and to many Japanese peasants
and fishermen, whose good-nature, kindness, and hospitality have
endeared them to me for ever. Well is it that they, so worthy a people,
have so worthy a Sovereign.

R. GORDON SMITH.

<span class="small">*June* 1908.</span>

 

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](atfj02)

</div>
