<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Japan](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](atfj02)  [Next](atfj04.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan*, by Richard Gordon Smith,
\[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

<span id="img_02"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![2. The Spirit of O Ko
appears to Konojo as O Kei San](tn/02.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/02.jpg.md)  
2. The Spirit of O Ko appears to Konojo as O Kei San  
</span>

# ANCIENT TALES AND FOLKLORE OF JAPAN

### I

### THE GOLDEN HAIRPIN <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md)

UP in the northern city of Sendai, whence come the best of Japanese
soldiers, there lived a samurai named Hasunuma.

Hasunuma was rich and hospitable, and consequently much thought of and
well liked. Some thirty-five years ago his wife presented him with a
beautiful daughter, their first child, whom they called 'Ko,' which
means 'Small' when applied to a child, much as we say 'Little Mary or
Little Jane.' Her full name was really 'Hasu-ko,' which means 'Little
Lily'; but here we will call her 'Ko' for short.

Exactly on the same date, 'Saito,' one of Hasunuma's friends and also a
samurai, had the good fortune to have a son. The fathers decided that,
being such old friends, they would wed their children to each other when
old enough to marry; they were very happy over the idea, and so were
their wives. To make the engagement of the

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

babies more binding, Saito handed to Hasunuma a golden hairpin which had
long been in his family, and said:

'Here, my old friend, take this pin. It shall be a token of betrothal
from my son, whose name shall be Kônojô, to your little daughter Ko,
both of whom are now aged two weeks only. May they live long and happy
lives together.'

Hasunuma took the pin, and handed it to his wife to keep; then they
drank saké to the health of each other, and to the bride and bridegroom
of some twenty years thence.

A few months after this Saito, in some way, caused displeasure to his
feudal lord, and, being dismissed from service, left Sendai with his
family—whither no one knew.

Seventeen years later O Ko San was, with one exception, the most
beautiful girl in all Sendai; the exception was her sister, O Kei, just
a year younger, and as beautiful as herself.

Many were the suitors for O Ko's hand; but she would have none of them,
being faithful to the engagement made for her by her father when she was
a baby. True, she had never seen her betrothed, and (which seemed more
curious) neither she nor her family had ever once heard of the Saito
family since they had left Sendai, over sixteen years before; but that
was no reason why she, a Japanese girl, should break the word of her
father, and therefore O Ko San remained faithful to her unknown lover,
though she sorrowed greatly at his non-appearance; in fact, she secretly
suffered so much thereby that she sickened, and three months later died,
to the grief of all who knew her and to her family's serious distress.

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

On the day of O Ko San's funeral her mother was seeing to the last
attentions paid to corpses, and smoothing her hair with the golden pin
given to Ko San or O Ko <span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1.md) by Saito in
behalf of his son Kônojô. When the body had been placed in its coffin,
the mother thrust the pin into the girl's hair, saying:

'Dearest daughter, this is the pin given as a memento to you by your
betrothed, Kônojô. Let it be a pledge to bind your spirits in death, as
it would have been in life; and may you enjoy endless happiness, I
pray.'

In thus praying, no doubt, O Ko's mother thought that Kônojô also must
be dead, and that their spirits would meet; but it was not so, for two
months after these events Kônojô himself, now eighteen years of age,
turned up at Sendai, calling first on his father's old friend Hasunuma.

'Oh, the bitterness and misfortune of it all!' said the latter. 'Only
two months ago my daughter Ko died. Had you but come before then she
would have been alive now. But you never even sent a message; we never
heard a word of your father or of your mother. Where did you all go when
you left here? Tell me the whole story.'

'Sir,' answered the grief-stricken Kônojô, 'what you tell me of the
death of your daughter, whom I had hoped to marry, sickens my heart, for
I, like herself, had been faithful, and I hoped to marry her, and
thought daily of her. When my father took my family away from Sendai, he
took us to Yedo; and afterwards we went north to

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Yezo Island, where
my father lost his money and became poor. He died in poverty. My poor
mother did not long survive him. I have been working hard to try and
earn enough to marry your daughter Ko; but I have not made more than
enough to pay my journey down to Sendai. I felt it my duty to come and
tell you of my family's misfortune and my own.'

The old samurai was much touched by this story. He saw that the most
unfortunate of all had been Kônojô.

'Kônojô,' he said, 'often have I thought and wondered to myself, Were
you honest or were you not? Now I find that you have been truly
faithful, and honest to your father's pledge. But you should have
written—you should have written! Because you did not do so, sometimes we
thought, my wife and I, that you must be dead; but we kept this thought
to ourselves, and never told Ko San. Go to our Butsudan; <span
id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2.md) open the doors of it, and burn a joss stick
to Ko San's mortuary tablet. It will please her spirit. She longed and
longed for your return, and died of that sane longing—for love of you.
Her spirit will rejoice to know that you have come back for her.'

Kônojô did as he was bid.

Bowing reverently three times before the mortuary tablet of O Ko San, he
muttered a few words of prayer in her behalf, and then lit the
incense-stick and placed it before the tablet.

After this exhibition of sincerity Hasunuma told the young fellow that
he should consider him as an adopted son, and that he must live with
them. He could have

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

the small house in the garden. In any case, whatever his plans for the
future might be, he must remain with them for the present.

This was a generous offer, worthy of a samurai. Kônojô gratefully
accepted it, and became one of the family. About a fortnight afterwards
he settled himself in the little house at the end of the garden.
Hasunuma, his wife, and their second daughter, O Kei, had gone, by
command of the Daimio, to the Higan, a religious ceremony held in March;
Hasunuma also always worshipped at his ancestral tombs at this time.
Towards the dusk of evening they were returning in their palanquins.
Kônojô stood at the gate to see them pass, as was proper and respectful.
The old samurai passed first, and was followed by his wife's palanquin,
and then by that of O Kei. As this last passed the gate Kônojô thought
he heard something fall, causing a metallic sound. After the palanquin
had passed he picked it up without any particular attention.

It was the golden hairpin; but of course, though Kônojô's father had
told him of the pin, Kônojô had no idea that this was it, and therefore
he thought nothing more than that it must be O Kei San's. He went back
to his little house, closed it for the night, and was about to retire
when he heard a knock at the door. 'Who is there?' he shouted. 'What do
you want?' There came no answer, and Kônojô lay down on his bed,
thinking himself to have been mistaken. But there came another knock,
louder than the first; and Kônojô jumped out of bed, and lit the
ando. <span id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3.md) 'If not a fox or a badger,'

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

thought he, 'it must be some evil spirit come to disturb me.'

On opening the door, with the ando in one hand, and a stick in the
other, Kônojô looked out into the dark, and there, to his astonishment,
he beheld a vision of female beauty the like of which he had never seen
before. 'Who are you, and what do you want?' quoth he.

'I am O Kei San, O Ko's younger sister,' answered the vision. 'Though
you have not seen me, I have several times seen you, and I have fallen
so madly in love with you that I can think of nothing else but you. When
you picked up my golden pin to-night on our return, I had dropped it to
serve as an excuse to come to you and knock. You must love me in return;
for otherwise I must die!'

This heated and outrageous declaration scandalised poor Kônojô.
Moreover, he felt that it would be doing his kind host Hasunuma a great
injustice to be receiving his younger daughter at this hour of the night
and make love to her. He expressed himself forcibly in these terms.

'If you will not love me as I love you, then I shall take my revenge,'
said O Kei, 'by telling my father that you got me to come here by making
love to me, and that you then insulted me.'

Poor Kônojô! He was in a nice mess. What he feared most of all was that
the girl would do as she said, that the samurai would believe her, and
that he would be a disgraced and villainous person. He gave way,
therefore, to the girl's request. Night after night she visited him,
until nearly a month had passed. During

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

this time Kônojô had learned to love dearly the beautiful O Kei. Talking
to her one evening, he said:

'My dearest O Kei, I do not like this secret love of ours. Is it not
better that we go away? If I asked your father to give you to me in
marriage he would refuse, because I was betrothed to your sister.'

'Yes,' answered O Kei: 'that is what, I also have been wishing. Let us
leave this very night, and go to Ishinomaki, the place where (you have
told me) lives a faithful servant of your late father's, called Kinzo.'

'Yes: Kinzo is his name, and Ishinomaki is the place. Let us start as
soon as possible.'

Having thrust a few clothes into a bag, they started secretly and late
that night, and duly arrived at their destination. Kinzo was delighted
to receive them, and pleased to show how hospitable he could be to his
late master's son and the beautiful lady.

They lived very happily for a year. Then one day O Kei said:

'I think we ought to return, to my parents now. If they were angry with
us at first they will have got over the worst of it. We have never
written. They must be getting anxious as to my fate as they grow older.
Yes: we ought to go.'

Kônojô agreed. Long had he felt the injustice he was doing Hasunuma.

Next day they found themselves back in Sendai, and Kônojô could not help
feeling a little nervous as he approached the samurai's house. They
stopped at the outer gate, and O Kei said to Kônojô, 'I think it will be
better for you to go in and see my father and mother

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

first. If they get very angry show them this golden pin.

Kônojô stepped boldly up to the door, and asked for an interview with
the samurai.

Before the servant had time to return, Kônojô heard the old man shout,
'Kônojô San! Why, of course! Bring the boy in at once,' and he himself
came out to welcome him.

'My dear boy,' said the samurai, 'right glad am I to see you back again.
I am sorry you did not find your life with us good enough. You might
have said you were going. But there—I suppose you take after your father
in these matters, and prefer to disappear mysteriously. You are welcome
back, at all events.'

Kônojô was astonished at this speech, and answered:

'But, sir, I have come to beg pardon for my sin.'

'What sin have you committed?' queried the samurai in great surprise,
and drawing himself up, in a dignified manner.

Kônojô then gave a full account of his love-affair with O Kei. From
beginning to end he told it all, and as he proceeded the samurai showed
signs of impatience.

'Do not joke, sir! My daughter O Kei San is not a subject for jokes and
untruths. She has been as one dead for over a year—so ill that we have
with difficulty forced gruel into her mouth. Moreover, she has spoken no
word and shown no sign of life.'

'I am neither stating what is untrue nor joking,' said Kônojô. 'If you
but send outside, you will find O Kei in the palanquin, in which I left
her.'

A servant was immediately sent to see, and returned,

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

stating that there was neither palanquin nor any one at the gate.

Kônojô, seeing that the samurai was now beginning to look perplexed and
angry, drew the golden pin from his clothes, saying:

'See! if you doubt me and think I am lying, here is the pin which O Kei
told me to give you!'

'Bik-ku-ri-shi-ta-!' <span id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4.md) exclaimed O Kei's
mother. 'How came this pin into your hands? I myself put it into Ko
San's coffin just before it was closed.'

The samurai and Kônojô stared at each other, and the mother at both.
Neither knew what to think, or what to say or do. Imagine the general
surprise when the sick O Kei walked into the room, having risen from her
bed as if she had never been ill for a moment. She was the picture of
health and beauty.

'How is this?' asked the samurai, almost shouting. 'How is it, O Kei,
that you have come from your sickbed dressed and with your hair done and
looking as if you had never known a moment of illness?'

'I am not O Kei, but the spirit of O Ko,' was the answer. 'I was most
unfortunate in dying before the return of Kônojô San, for had I lived
until then I should have become quite well and been married to him. As
it was, my spirit was unhappy. It took the form of my dear sister O Kei,
and for a year has lived happily in her body with Kônojô. It is appeased
now, and about to take its real rest.'

'There is one condition, however, Kônojô, which I must make,' said the
girl, turning to him. 'You must

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

marry my sister O Kei. If you do this my spirit will rest truly in
peace, and then O Kei will become well and strong. Will you promise to
marry O Kei?'

The old samurai, his wife, and Kônojô were all amazed at this. The
appearance of the girl was that of O Kei; but the voice and manners were
those of O Ko. Then, there was the golden hairpin as further proof. The
mother knew it well. She had placed it in Ko's hair just before the tub
coffin was closed. Nobody could undeceive her on that point.

'But,' said the samurai at last, 'O Ko has been dead and buried for more
than a year now. That you should appear to us puzzles us all. Why should
you trouble us so?'

'I have explained already,' resumed the girl. 'My spirit could not rest
until it had lived with Kônojô, whom it knew to be faithful. It has done
this now, and is prepared to rest. My only desire is to see Kônojô marry
my sister.'

Hasunuma, his wife, and Kônojô held a consultation. They were quite
prepared that O Kei should marry, and Kônojô did not object.

All things being settled, the ghost-girl held out her hand to Kônojô
saying:

'This is the last time you will touch the hand of O Ko. Farewell, my
dear parents! Farewell to you all! I am about to pass away.'

Then she fainted away, and seemed dead, and remained thus for half an
hour; while the others, overcome with the strange and weird things which
they had seen and heard, sat round her, hardly uttering a word.

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

At the end of half an hour the body came to life, and standing up, said:

'Dear parents, have no more fear for me. I am perfectly well again; but
I have no idea how I got down from my sick-room in this costume, or how
it is that I feel so well.'

Several questions were put to her; but it was quite evident that O Kei
knew nothing of what had happened—nothing of the spirit of O Ko San, or
of the golden hairpin!

A week later she and Kônojô were married, and the golden hairpin was
given to a shrine at Shiogama, to which, until quite recently, crowds
used to go and worship.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[1:1](atfj03.htm#fr_0.md) This story savours of
'Botan Dôrô,' or Peony Lantern story, told both by Mitford and by
Lafcadio Hearn. In this instance, however, the spirit of the dead sister
passes into the body of the living one, assumes her form, leaves her
sick and ill for over a year, and then allows her to reappear as if she
had never been ill at all. It is the first story of its kind I have
heard.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[3:1](atfj03.htm#fr_1.md) 'O' means Honourable Miss;
'San' means Miss. Either will do; but *Ko* is the name.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[4:1](atfj03.htm#fr_2.md) Family shrine.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[5:1](atfj03.htm#fr_3.md) Lamp.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[9:1](atfj03.htm#fr_4.md) An exclamation, such as
'Great Scot!'

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II. The Spirit Of The Willow Tree](atfj04.md)

</div>
