<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Japan](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](atfj12)  [Next](atfj14) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan*, by Richard Gordon Smith,
\[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

<span id="img_14"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![14. Okawa Plunges the
Hosokawa Deed Into His Stomach](tn/14.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/14.jpg)  
14. Okawa Plunges the Hosokawa Deed Into His Stomach  
</span>

### XI

### PRINCE HOSOKAWA'S MOST VALUABLE TITLE-DEEDS <span id="fr_25"></span>[1](#fn_25)

SEVERAL hundred years ago there dwelt in lands of the Hosokawas a widow
and her daughter, a beautiful girl of seventeen, named Kazuye. O Kazuye
San's father had been foully murdered some six months before, and both
Kazuye and her mother had made up their minds to devote their fortune
and their lives to bringing the criminals to justice. In these efforts
they received no help, but spent the whole of their money, until at last
they were almost forced to beg in the street for food. Day after day,
however, they continued to pray in the temple for help, and never once
lost heart or weakened in their purpose. O Kazuye told her mother that
were she fortunate enough to gain the affections of a man, even he
should be sacrificed in the effort after vengeance.

One day it came to pass that the poverty-stricken appearance of Kazuye
and her mother, returning as usual from praying in the temple, aroused
the mirth of a party

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

of roughs, who proceeded to insult them. A handsome young samurai, Okawa
Jomoyemon, happened to come along. Drawing his sword, he very soon put
the roughs to flight. Having done this, and bowing low, he asked whom he
had the honour of serving.

O Kazuye answered for her mother, and quickly recognised that this
handsome youth was just such as she had longed to meet, so that he might
fall in love and wish to help her in seeking out the murderer of her
father. Therefore, not unnaturally, she encouraged him; and he fell in
love with her. In the meanwhile an old friend of Kazuye's father,
feeling great sorrow for her, had found a place for her in Prince
Hosokawa's household; and there she won such favour in the eyes of the
Prince (or, as the title then was, Daimio) that the other maids began to
be jealous.

It happened that one evening Okawa, now desperately in love with O
Kazuye, in spite of being the retainer of another Daimio, felt that he
must see her at all costs. He arranged a secret meeting, and eventually
found his way to Kazuye's apartment. Still full of desire for vengeance,
she seized upon the occasion to pour forth her story and implore
assistance.

Okawa, being a true knight-errant, vowed that he would speak no more of
love until he himself had hunted down and killed the murderers of
Kazuye's father. Just as he had finished making this vow, one of the
jealous maids (who had been listening) made her presence known, and
rushed off to tell her mistress.

What was to be done? Okawa, the retainer of another Daimio, caught in
the castle secretly conversing

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

with one of the Hosokawa maids of honour! Surely both he and she would
suffer death! O Kazuye was not long in thinking. She hid her lover in an
old armour-case. That, however, was no use. She was instantly summoned
into the presence of the Daimio, and the armour-chest was carried in as
well.

The Daimio, furiously angry, ordered that O Kazuye should be killed.
Okawa spoke up. He said that she was in no way responsible for this
secret meeting, that the fault was entirely his; and begged that he
might be allowed to die in place of her. Moreover, he told, the whole
story of Kazuye's life, and mentioned that her ambition in life was to
avenge the death of her father.

The Daimio was greatly touched. Recognising the chivalry on both sides,
he took Okawa into his own service, promising at the same time to aid
them both in fulfilling their purpose.

Tears of gratitude came into Okawa's eyes, and he vowed there and then
to sacrifice his life for Hosokawa on the very first opportunity.

After about a year had passed a great fire broke out in the castle. It
was so sudden that nothing could be done. The wind, fanning the flames,
barely gave time for the people to escape, much less to carry off the
family valuables.

When all were clear of the burning mass the Daimio suddenly remembered
that his title-deeds would be lost, and that such a disaster would be
dangerous for his family. Realising this, he jumped from his horse, and
was about to dash back to try and recover them; but his retainers held
him, fearing that he would die.

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

Okawa, hearing this, thought with delight that now an opportunity had
come to him to save his new master and pay him for the kindness to
himself and Kazuye. He rushed into the burning mass, and, having broken
open the iron safe, seized the valuable documents. Then he found escape
impossible. He was cut off by fire on all sides, and plainly saw that
both he and the papers must be burned. At this moment a thought came to
him. Though he must be burned, possibly his body might save the
documents. Drawing his short sword, he deliberately disembowelled
himself, and thrust the roll of papers into his stomach. Then he flung
himself on the flaming floor and died. The fire went on. Poor Okawa was
charred beyond recognition.

When the fire was over his body was recovered, and inside the roasted
corpse was found the blood-stained roll of papers on which the Hosokawa
family depended. From that time on, the document has been called
'Hosokawa no chi daruma'—the blood-stained document of the Hosokawas.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_25"></span>[71:1](atfj13.htm#fr_25) Told to me by Mr.
Matsuzaki, and said to be perfectly true, the document in question being
in possession of the present Prince Hosokawa.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XII. The Story of Kato Sayemon](atfj14)

</div>
