<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Japan](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](atfj32)  [Next](atfj34) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan*, by Richard Gordon Smith,
\[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

<span id="img_36"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![36. The Spirit of
Fuji Shows Yosoji the Health-Giving Stream](tn/36.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/36.jpg)  
36. The Spirit of Fuji Shows Yosoji the Health-Giving Stream  
</span>

### XXXI

### YOSOJI'S CAMELLIA TREE

IN the reign of the Emperor Sanjo began a particularly unlucky time. It
was about the year 1013 A. D. when Sanjo came to the throne—the first
year of Chowa. Plague broke out. Two years later the Royal Palace was
burned down, and a war began with Korea, then known as 'Shiragi.'

In 1016 another fire broke out in the new Palace. A year later the
Emperor gave up the throne, owing to blindness and for other causes. He
handed over the reins of office to Prince Atsuhara, who was called the
Emperor Go Ichijo, and came to the throne in the first year of Kwannin,
about 1017 or 1018. The period during which the Emperor Go Ichijo
reigned—about twenty years, up to 1036—was one of the worst in Japanese
history. There were more wars, more fires, and worse plagues than ever.
Things were in disorder generally, and even Kyoto was hardly safe to
people of means, owing to the bands of brigands. In 1025 the most
appalling outbreak of smallpox came; there was hardly a village or a
town in Japan which escaped.

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

It is at this period that our story begins. Our heroine (if such she may
be called) is no less a deity than the goddess of the great mountain of
Fuji, which nearly all the world has heard of, or seen depicted.
Therefore, if the legend sounds stupid and childish, blame only my way
of telling it (simply, as it was told to me), and think of the Great
Mountain of Japan, as to which anything should be interesting; moreover,
challenge others for a better. I have been able to find none myself.

During the terrible scourge of smallpox there was a village in Suruga
Province called Kamiide, which still exists, but is of little
importance. It suffered more badly than most other villages. Scarce an
inhabitant escaped. A youth of sixteen or seventeen years was much
tried. His mother was taken with the disease, and, his father being
dead, the responsibility of the household fell on Yosoji—for such was
his name.

Yosoji procured all the help he could for his mother, sparing nothing in
the way of medicines and attendance; but his mother grew worse day by
day, until at last her life was utterly despaired of. Having no other
resource left to him, Yosoji resolved to consult a famous fortuneteller
and magician, Kamo Yamakiko.

Kamo Yamakiko told Yosoji that there was but one chance that his mother
could be cured, and that lay much with his own courage. 'If,' said the
fortune-teller, 'you will go to a small brook which flows from the
southwestern side of Mount Fuji, and find a small shrine near its
source, where Oki-naga-suku-neo <span id="fr_35"></span>[1](#fn_35) is
worshipped, you may be able to cure your mother by bringing her water

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

therefrom to drink. But I warn you that the place is full of dangers
from wild beasts and other things, and that you may not return at all or
even reach the place.'

Yosoji, in no way discouraged, made his mind up that he would start on
the following morning, and, thanking the fortune-teller, went home to
prepare for an early start.

At three o'clock next morning he was off.

It was a long and rough walk, one which he had never taken before; but
he trudged gaily on, being sound of limb and bent on an errand of
deepest concern.

Towards midday Yosoji arrived at a place where three rough paths met,
and was sorely puzzled which to take. While he was deliberating the
figure of a beautiful girl clad in white came towards him through the
forest. At first Yosoji felt inclined to run; but the figure called to
him in silvery notes, saying:

'Do not go. I know what you are here for. You are a brave lad and a
faithful son. I will be your guide to the stream, and—take my word for
it—its waters will cure your mother. Follow me if you will, and have no
fear, though the road is bad and dangerous.'

The girl turned, and Yosoji followed in wonderment.

In silence the two went for fully four miles, always upwards and into
deeper and more gloomy forests. At last a small shrine was reached, in
front of which were two Torii's, and from a cleft of a rock gurgled a
silvery stream, the clearness of which was such as Yosoji had never seen
before.

'There,' said the white-robed girl, 'is the stream of which you are in
search. Fill your gourd, and drink of

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

it yourself, for the waters will prevent you catching the plague. Make
haste, for it grows late, and it would not be well for you to be here at
night. I shall guide you back to the place where I met you.'

Yosoji did as he was bid, drinking, and then filling the bottle to the
brim.

Much faster did they return than they had come, for the way was all
downhill. On reaching the meeting of the three paths Yosoji bowed low to
his guide, and thanked her for her great kindness; and the girl told him
again that it was her pleasure to help so dutiful a son.

'In three days you will want more water for your mother,' said she, 'and
I shall be at the same place to be your guide again.'

'May I not ask to whom I am indebted for this great kindness?' asked
Yosoji.

'No: you must not ask, for I should not tell you,' answered the girl.
Bowing again, Yosoji proceeded on his way as fast as he could, wondering
greatly.

On reaching home he found his mother worse. He gave her a cup of the
water, and told her of his adventures. During the night Yosoji awoke as
usual to attend to his mother's wants, and to give her another bowl of
water. Next morning he found that she was decidedly better. During the
day he gave her three more doses, and on the morning of the third day he
set forth to keep his appointment with the fair lady in white, whom he
found seated waiting for him on a rock at the meeting of the three
paths.

'Your mother is better I can see from your happy face,' said she. 'Now
follow me as before, and make

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

haste. Come again in three days, and I will meet you. It will take five
trips in all, for the water must be taken fresh. You may give some to
the sick villagers as well.'

Five times did Yosoji take the trip. At the end of the fifth his mother
was perfectly well, and must thankful for her restoration; besides
which, most of the villagers who had not died were cured. Yosoji was the
hero of the hour. Every one marvelled, and wondered who the white-robed
girl was; for, though they had heard of the shrine of Oki-naga-suku-neo,
none of them knew where it was, and but few would have dared to go if
they had known. Of course, all knew that Yosoji was indebted in the
first place to the fortune-teller Kamo Yamakiko, to whom the whole
village sent presents. Yosoji was not easy in his mind. In spite of the
good he had brought about, he thought to himself that he owed the whole
of his success in finding and bringing the water to the village to his
fair guide, and he did not feel that he had. shown sufficient gratitude.
Always he had hurried home as soon as he had got the precious water,
bowing his thanks. That was all, and now he felt as if more were due.
Surely prayers at the shrine were due, or something; and who was the
lady in white? He must find out. Curiosity called upon him to do so.
Thus Yosoji resolved to pay one more visit to the spring, and started
early in the morning.

Now familiar with the road, he did not stop at the meeting of the three
paths, but pursued his way directly to the shrine. It was the first time
he had travelled the road alone, and in spite of himself he felt afraid,
though he could not say why. Perhaps it was the oppressive

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

gloom of the mysterious dark forest, overshadowed by the holy mountain
of Fuji, which in itself was more mysterious still, and filled one both
with superstitious and religious feelings and a feeling of awe as well.
No one of any imagination can approach the mountain even to-day without
having one or all of these emotions.

Yosoji, however, sped on, as fast as he could go, and arrived at the
shrine of Oki-naga-suku-neo. He found that the stream had dried up.
There was not a drop of water left. Yosoji flung himself upon his knees
before the shrine and thanked the God of Long Breath that he had been
the means of curing his mother and the surviving villagers. He prayed
that his guide to the spring might reveal her presence, and that he
might be enabled to meet her once more to thank her for her kindness.
When he arose Yosoji saw his guide standing beside him, and bowed low.
She was the first to speak.

'You must not come here,' she said. 'I have told you so before. It is a
place of great danger for you. Your mother and the villagers are cured.
There is no reason for you to come here more.'

'I have come,' answered Yosoji, 'because I have not fully spoken my
thanks, and because I wish to tell you how deeply grateful I am to you,
as is my mother and as are the whole of our villagers. Moreover, they
all as well as I wish to know to whom they are indebted for my guidance
to the spring. Though Kamo Yamakiko told me of the spring, I should
never have found it but for your kindness, which has now extended over
five weeks. Surely you will let us know to whom we are so much

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

indebted, so that we may at least erect a shrine in our temple?'

'All that you ask is unnecessary. I am glad that you are grateful. I
knew that one so truly filial as you must be so, and it is because of
your filial piety and goodness that I guided you to this health-giving
spring, which, as you see, is dry, having at present no further use. It
is unnecessary that you should know who I am. We must now part: so
farewell. End your life as you have begun it, and you shall be happy.'
The beautiful maiden swung a wild camellia branch over her head as if
with a beckoning motion, and a cloud came down from the top of the Mount
Fuji, enveloping her at first in mist. It then arose, showing her figure
to the weeping Yosoji, who now began to realise that he loved the
departing figure, and that it was no less a figure than that of the
great Goddess of Fujiyama. Yosoji fell on his knees and prayed to her,
and the goddess, acknowledging his prayer, threw down the branch of wild
camellia.

Yosoji carried it home, and planted it, caring for it with the utmost
attention. The branch grew to a tree with marvellous rapidity, being
over twenty feet high in two years. A shrine was built; people came to
worship the tree; and it is said that the dewdrops from its leaves are a
cure for all eye-complaints.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_35"></span>[190:1](atfj33.htm#fr_35) The God of Long
Breath.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXXII. Whales](atfj34)

</div>
