<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Japan](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](atfj25)  [Next](atfj27.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan*, by Richard Gordon Smith,
\[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

<span id="img_01"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![1. Iganosuke Dives
for the Pipe and Finds the Idol](tn/01.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/01.jpg.md)  
1. Iganosuke Dives for the Pipe and Finds the Idol  
</span>

### XXIV

### THEFT AND RECOVERY OF A GOLDEN KWANNON

IN the period of Gen-roku, which lasted from 1688 to 1704, when the
Shogun or military ruler Tsunayoshi's power was in full sway, he
presented a solid gold figure of Kwannon, the Goddess of Mercy, to each
of the three leading families of the provinces of Kii, Mito, and Owari,
and they were considered as of the highest and greatest value by each of
these leading Lords or Daimios, who had them kept in their inner
palaces, so that they were almost impossible to get at, and were
considered at least absolutely safe from robbers; but even in spite of
this the Lord of Kii took additional precautions by always having a man
night and day to guard his idol.

At the same period lived a most redoubtable robber whose name was
Yayegumo. He was more than an ordinary robber, and was what the people
called a 'fuin-kiri,' which means 'seal breaker' or 'seal cutter'; a
first-class burglar, in fact, who never descended to robbing the poor,
but only robbed the richest and most difficult palaces and castles that
were to be got at, taking from

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

them only the highest and most valuable treasures they possessed.

This bold robber broke into the Lord of Kii's Palace—no one knew
how—took the idol of Kwannon, and left his name written on a piece of
paper. The Lord of Kii, very angry, sent for the guard, whose name was
Mumashima Iganosuke, and reprimanded him severely, asking him what
excuse he had to make. 'None, my lord: tiredness overcame me and I
slept. There is but one way in which I can show my regret, and that I
will do by destroying myself.'

The Lord of Kii, who was a man of wisdom, answered that before he did
this it would be more useful if Iganosuke would follow up the robber and
try to recover the idol. Iganosuke, who had always been a faithful
servant, readily consented, and, having obtained indefinite leave, went
away. For fully four months he was quite unsuccessful, though he had
travelled half over the country. At last he heard reports of robberies
in Chugoku, and then later in Shikoku Province. Hurrying down from Izumo
to Okayama, he there got on board a ship bound across the Inland Sea for
Takamatsu, in Shikoku. The weather was fine and the sea smooth, and
Iganosuke was in high spirits, for he had heard that one or two of the
robberies had undoubtedly been done by Yayegumo, and he felt that at
last he must be getting nearer the man he wished to catch—perhaps, even,
he was on that very boat! Who could tell? Thinking of these
possibilities, Iganosuke kept very much to himself, watching the people,
whose spirits all seemed to be affected by the beautiful weather, for,
though mostly strangers, they were all sociable.

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

Among them was a good-looking young samurai who had attracted Iganosuke
by his refined appearance, as also by a beautiful gold pipe which he
drew out from its case and smoked while chatting to his neighbour. By
and by a samurai of some sixty years of age came up to the young man,
and said:

'Sir, I have lost my pipe and tobacco-pouch somewhere on this ship. I am
a confirmed smoker, and almost dying for a whiff of tobacco. Might I
borrow yours for a moment or two?'

The young samurai handed both his pipe and his pouch to the old man with
a bow, saying that this afforded him great pleasure.

The old samurai, after his three puffs of the pipe, was about to empty
out the ash and refill it. To do so, without thinking what he was about,
he knocked the pipe on the outside of the ship. To his horror the
gankubi (the bowl) dropped off into the sea. The old man knew that the
pipe was gold and of great value, and was utterly confused. He did not
know what to say. His apologies were profuse; but they did not bring
back the end of the pipe. The young samurai, of course, was much
annoyed; but it would be no use getting angry. In any case that would
have been an excessively vulgar proceeding, more especially with so old
a man. He said:

'Ah! the pipe was given to me by the lord of my clan for meritorious
service rendered in the big hunt last year, and truly I do not know how
I shall be able to face the disgrace of incurring his anger.' He grew
pale as he mused.

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

The old samurai felt more sorry than ever when he heard this, and said:

'There is only one way I see that you can face your lord, and that is by
my death. I also was a samurai of some importance when younger, and know
how to conduct myself. It is right that I should disembowel myself as an
apology to you for my carelessness.' And, saying this, the old samurai
drew his right arm and shoulder from under his kimono.

Surprised at the old man's high sense of honour, the young samurai
seized the hand in which he held his sword and prevented him, saying:

'That will really do no good. It would not make it easier for me to
explain to my lord. Your death can bring no apology to him. It was I to
whom he gave the pipe, and it is I who have lost it by lending it to
you. It is I, therefore, who should offer the apology to my lord by
doing harakiri!' Then the young samurai prepared to kill himself.

Iganosuke, who had been watching the incident, stepped forward and said:

'Gentlemen, I also am a samurai, and I have heard what you say. Let me
say that, though the pipe-end has fallen into the sea, it in no way
follows that it is lost beyond recovery. Both of you appear to me to be
unnecessarily hasty. I am a good diver and swimmer; our ship is
becalmed; and the water hereabouts is not very deep. I am quite ready to
try and help you to recover the pipe if you will allow me.'

Of course, both the other samurai were pleased at this idea, of which,
being no swimmers themselves, they had

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

never thought, And Iganosuke. lost no time in throwing off his kimono
and diving into the sea, where he was thoroughly at home, having been in
his younger days so expert a swimmer that he gave lessons to many of the
samurai at Kii.

Down he went to the bottom, finding not much more than seven Japanese
fathoms of five feet each. The bottom was composed almost entirely of
stones and was very clear. Iganosuke had not moved many feet along
before he saw the end of the gold pipe, and at the same time something
else gleaming between the stones. Thrusting the pipe between his teeth,
he seized the other object, and to his great astonishment found it to be
no less a thing than the gold figure of Kwannon which had been stolen
from the castle of the Lord of Kii.

Carefully returning to the surface, Iganosuke scrambled on board, and
handed the pipe-end to the grateful young samurai, who, with the old
one, bowed to the ground.

When Iganosuke had thrown on his clothes, he said:

'I am a retainer of the Lord of Kii, and I have come from our castle of
Takegaki to hunt for the robber who stole the very figure of Kwannon
which I have just by good fortune while looking for your pipe recovered.
Is it not wonderful? Truly the old saying, "Nasakewa hito no tame
naradzu" <span id="fr_30"></span>[1](#fn_30.md) is quite true!'

Then the old man, in a wild state of delight, cried: 'Even more curious
is this. My name is Matsure Fujiye of Takamatsu. Only a month ago the
robber whom you name Yayegumo Fuin-kiri, the seal-breaker, came into the
bedroom of my lord, and was about to steal great

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

valuables, when I, who was on guard, tried to take him. Though an old
man, I am a fencer; but he was too clever for me and escaped. I followed
him down to the beach, but was not fast enough, and he got away. Since
then I have always wondered what he had in his kimono pockets, for the
bright rays of some gilded thing shot out of them. The robber had not
got far from the shore before a great storm arose. He was wrecked and
drowned. Both his body and the boat were recovered some days later, and
I identified them; but there was nothing in his pocket. It is clear that
when his boat upset the robber lost the Kwannon, which must have been
what I saw shining out of his pocket.'

Truly this was a wonderful string of coincidences!

Iganosuke, who had no further cause to travel, returned to the Lord of
Kii, and reported his adventures and good fortune. So much pleased was
the Daimio, he gave Iganosuke a present.

The figure of the gold Kwannon was better guarded than ever before.
Undoubtedly it had miraculous power, and it may still be among the
treasures of Kii.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_30"></span>[148:1](atfj26.htm#fr_30.md) Favour is not for
other people.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXV. Saigyo Hoshi's Rock](atfj27.md)

</div>
