<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Japan](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](atfj24)  [Next](atfj26.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan*, by Richard Gordon Smith,
\[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

<span id="img_28"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![28. O Kinu San
Inspects the Place Where Takadai Jiro Committed Suicide](tn/28.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/28.jpg.md)  
28. O Kinu San Inspects the Place Where Takadai Jiro Committed Suicide  
</span>

### XXIII

### THE DIVING-WOMAN OF OISO BAY

OISO, in the Province of Sagami, has become such a celebrated place as
the chosen residence of the Marquis Ito and of several other high
Japanese personages, that a story of a somewhat romantic nature, dating
back to the Ninan period, may be interesting.

During one of the earlier years of the period, which lasted from '116 to
1169 A. D., a certain knight, whose name was Takadai Jiro, became ill in
the town of Kamakura, where he had been on duty, and was advised to
spend the hot month of August at Oiso, and there to give himself perfect
rest, peace, and quietness.

Having obtained permission to do this, Takadai Jiro lost no time in
getting to the place and settling himself down, as comfortably as was
possible, in a small inn which faced the sea. Being a landsman who (with
the exception of his service at Kamakura) had hardly ever seen the sea,
Takadai was pleased to dwell in gazing at it both by day and by night,
for, like most Japanese of high birth, he was poetical and romantic.

After his arrival at Oiso, Takadai felt weary and dusty. As soon as he
had secured his room he threw off his

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

clothes and went down to bathe. Takadai, whose age was about twenty-five
years, was a good swimmer, and plunged into the sea without fear, going
out for nearly half-a-mile. There, however, misfortune overtook him. He
was seized with a violent cramp and began to sink. A fishing-boat
sculled by a man and containing a diving-girl happened to see him and
went to the rescue; but by this time he had lost consciousness, and had
sunk for the third time.

The girl jumped overboard and swam to the spot where he had disappeared,
and, having dived deep, brought him to the surface, holding him there
until the boat came up, when by the united efforts of herself and her
father Takadai was hauled on board, but not before he had realised that
the soft arm that clung round his neck was that of a woman.

When he was thoroughly conscious again, before they had reached the
shore, Takadai saw that his preserver was a beautiful ama (diving-girl)
aged not more than seventeen. Such beauty he had never seen before—not
even in the higher circles in which he was accustomed to move. Takadai
was in love with his brave saviour before the boat had grounded on the
pebbly beach. Determined in some way to repay the kindness he had
received, Takadai helped to haul their boat up the steep beach and then
to carry their fish and nets to their little thatched cottage, where he
thanked the girl for her noble and gallant act in saving him, and
congratulated her father on the possession of such a daughter. Having
done this, he returned to his inn, which was not more than a few hundred
yards away.

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

From that time on the soul of Takadai knew no peace. Love of the maddest
kind was on him. There was no sleep for him at night, for he saw nothing
but the face of the beautiful diving-girl, whose name (he had
ascertained) was Kinu. Try as he might, he could not for a moment put
her out of his mind. In the daytime it was worse, for O Kinu was not to
be seen, being out at sea with her father, diving for the haliotis shell
and others; and it was generally the dusk of evening before she
returned, and then, in the dim light, he could not see her.

Once, indeed, Takadai tried to speak to O Kinu; but she would have
nothing to say to him, and continued busying herself in assisting her
father to carry the nets and fish up to their cottage. This made Takadai
far worse, and he went home wild, mad, and more in love than ever.

At last his love grew so great that he could endure it no longer. He
felt that at all events it would be a relief to declare it. So he took
his most confidential servant into the secret, and despatched him with a
letter to the fisherman's cottage. O Kinu San did not even write an
answer, but told the old servant to thank his master in her behalf for
his letter and his proposal of marriage. 'Tell him also,' said she,
'that no good could come of a union between one of so high a birth as he
and one so lowly as I. Such a badly matched pair could never make a
happy home.' In answer to the servant's expostulation, she merely added,
'I have told you what to tell your master: take him the message.'

Takadai Jiro, on hearing what O Kinu had said, was not angry. He was
simply astonished. It was beyond

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

his belief that a fisher-girl could refuse such an offer in marriage as
himself—a samurai of the upper class. Indeed, instead of being angry,
Takadai was so startled as to be rather pleased than otherwise; for he
thought that perhaps he had taken the fair O Kinu San a little too
suddenly, and that this first refusal was only a bit of coyness on her
part that was not to be wondered at. 'I will wait a day or two,' thought
Takadai. 'Now that Kinu knows of my love, she may think of me, and so
become anxious to see me. I will keep out of the way. Perhaps then she
will be as anxious to see me as I am to see her.'

Takadai kept to his own room for the next three days, believing in his
heart that O Kinu must be pining for him. On the evening of the fourth
day he wrote another letter to O Kinu, more full of love than the first,
despatched his old servant, and waited patiently for the answer.

When O Kinu was handed the letter she laughed and said:

'Truly, old man, you appear to me very funny, bringing me letters. This
is the second in four days, and never until four days ago have I had a
letter addressed to me in my life. What is this one about, I wonder?'

Saying this, she tore it open and read, and then, turning to the
servant, continued: 'It is difficult for me to understand. If you gave
my message to your master correctly he could not fail to know that I
could not marry him. His position in life is far too high. Is your
master quite right in his head?'

'Yes: except for the love of you, my young master is

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

quite right in his head; but since he has seen you he talks and thinks
of nothing but you, until even I have got quite tired of it, and
earnestly pray to Kwannon daily that the weather may get cool, so that
we may return to our duties at Kamakura. For three full days have I had
to sit in the inn listening to my young master's poems about your beauty
and his love. And I had hoped that every day would find us fishing from
a boat for the sweet aburamme fish, which are now fat and good, as every
other sensible person is doing. Yes: my master's head was right enough;
but you have unsettled it, it seems. Oh, do marry him, so that we shall
all be happy and go out fishing every day and waste no more of this
unusual holiday.'

'You are a selfish old man,' answered O Kinu. 'Would you that I married
to satisfy your master's love and your desire for fishing? I have told
you to tell your master that I will not marry him, because we could not,
in our different ranks of life, become happy. Go and repeat that
answer.'

The servant implored once more; but O Kinu remained firm, and finally he
was obliged to deliver the unpleasant message to his master.

Poor Takadai! This time he was distressed, for the girl had even refused
to meet him. What was he to do? He wrote one more imploring letter, and
also spoke to O Kinu's father; but the father said, 'Sir, my daughter is
all I have to love in the world: I cannot influence her in such a thing
as her love. Moreover, all our diving-girls are strong in mind as well
as in body, for constant danger strengthens their nerves: they are not
like the weak

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

farmers' girls, who can be influenced and even ordered to marry men they
hate. Their minds are, oftener than not, stronger than those of us men.
I always did what Kinu's mother told me I was to do, and could not
influence Kinu in such a thing as her marriage. I might give you my
advice, and should do so; but, sir, in this case I must agree with my
daughter, that, great as the honour done to her, she would be unwise to
marry one above her own station in life.'

Takadai's heart was broken. There was nothing more that he could say and
nothing more that he could do. Bowing low, he left the fisherman and
retired forthwith to his room in the inn, which he never left, much to
the consternation of his servant.

Day by day he grew thinner, and as the day approached for his return
from leave, Takadai was far more of an invalid than he had been on his
arrival at Oiso. What was he to do? The sentiment of the old proverb
that 'there are as good fish in the sea as ever came out of it' did not
in any way appeal to him. He felt that life was no longer worth having.
He resolved to end it in the sea, where his spirit might perhaps linger
and catch sight occasionally of the beautiful diving-girl who had
bewitched his heart.

Takadai that evening wrote a last note to Kinu, and as soon as the
villagers of Oiso were asleep he arose and went to the cottage, slipping
the note under the door. Then he went to the beach, and, after tying a
large stone to a rope and to his neck, he got into a boat and rowed
himself about a hundred yards from shore, where he took the stone in his
arms and jumped overboard.

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

Next morning O Kinu was shocked to read in the note that Jiro Takadai
was to kill himself for love of her. She rushed down to the beach, but
could see only an empty fishing-boat some three or four hundred yards
from shore, to which she swam. There she found Takadai's tobacco box and
his juro (medicine box). O Kinu thought that Takadai must have thrown
himself into the sea somewhere hereabouts: so she began to dive, and was
not long before she found the body, which she brought to the surface,
after some trouble on account of the weight of the stone which the arms
rigidly grasped. O Kinu took the body back to shore, where she found
Takadai's old servant wringing his hands in grief.

The body was taken back to Kamakura, where it was buried. O Kinu was
sufficiently touched to vow that she would never marry any one. True,
she had not loved Takadai; but he had loved, and had died for her. If
she married, his spirit would not rest in peace.

No sooner had O Kinu mentally undertaken this generous course than a
strange thing came to pass.

Sea-gulls, which were especially uncommon in Oiso Bay, began to swarm
into it; they settled over the exact spot where Takadai had drowned
himself. In stormy weather they hovered over it on the wing; but they
never went away from the place. Fishermen thought it extraordinary; but
Kinu knew well enough that the spirit of Takadai must have passed into
the gulls, and for it she prayed regularly at the temple, and out of her
small savings built a little tomb sacred to the memory of Takadai Jiro.

By the time Kinu was twenty years of age her beauty

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

was celebrated, and many were the offers she had in marriage; but she
refused them all, and kept her vow of celibacy. During her entire life
the sea-gulls were always on the spot where Takadai had been drowned.
She died by drowning in a severe typhoon some nine years later than
Takadai; and from that day the sea-gulls disappeared, showing that his
spirit was now no longer in fear of O Kinu marrying.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXIV. Theft And Recovery of a Golden Kwannon](atfj26.md)

</div>
