<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Japan](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](atfj33)  [Next](atfj35) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan*, by Richard Gordon Smith,
\[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

<span id="img_37"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![37. Yoda Emon Finds
Himself on a Whale's Back](tn/37.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/37.jpg)  
37. Yoda Emon Finds Himself on a Whale's Back  
</span>

### XXXII

### WHALES

THERE are many stories and superstitions regarding whales. I take one,
dating back to the period of 'Hoen' (1135), which will show the
veneration and the fear in which the Japanese have always held these
creatures. I will annex the translation by Mr. Ando, of our Consulate,
of a newspaper paragraph of date February 12, 1907, showing that the
superstitions are still current.

Some hundred and seventy-two years ago, when the 'Hoen' period began,
the shrine of Atsuta at Nagoya was burned down. For some reason this
calamity was said at the time to have happened because the head
shrine-watcher, Yoda Emon, had startled one of the gods. <span
id="fr_36"></span>[1](#fn_36)

Well, at any rate the holy shrine was burned down, and the caretaker was
exiled to Oshima Island, in Idzu

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Province, now
generally known as 'Vries' Island. It is the largest and most northerly
of the group of islands which run in a chain towards the south-east. The
nearest to Oshima is Toshi Island, often named Rishima, of which our
story is told.

Yoda Emon was a man of active mind and pursuits. Perhaps that is why he
startled the god who caused the fire at Atsuta. In any case, he felt his
exile greatly. He could gain no news of home or family, and he fretted
and worried himself to such an extent that at last his nights became
sleepless and he thought to himself that if some relief to his mind did
not come soon he must either kill himself or go mad.

At last it occurred to him that possibly he might get permission to go
fishing; and the permission was given him, on condition that he kept
within a mile of the shore. Day after day Yoda took the boat which was
lent him, and returned generally with a goodly supply of fish, singing
to himself as he rowed in to and out from the shore. He soon managed to
sleep soundly and regain his strength. After a month or two Yoda became
quite a popular person, giving his fish away free to any who chose to
take them, and he was soon allowed a wider range than the one-mile
limit. He became an expert sailor, and had it not been for the loss of
his family he would have been quite happy in his new home. One day, the
morning being calm, Yoda ventured farther away than usual, hoping to
capture some of the larger fish which were reputed to be plentiful some
ten miles from Toshishima. He was lucky, and landed three magnificent
fish of the mackerel family, known as 'sara'

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

in Japan, 'seer' in India, and 'albacore' with us in England, who never
see them. Unfortunately, after this the wind, instead of springing up
from the south-east as usual, came out from the north-west, and, instead
of being able to return to Oshima, Yoda found himself being blown
farther from it. The wind came stronger and stronger, until a gale was
blowing, and soon the currents caused a high and breaking sea. Darkness
set in, and Yoda thought to himself that this was a visitation upon him
for having caught fish. 'Oh,' cried he aloud, 'what foolish sin have I
now committed? Surely my position as a banished priest should have told
me that I was sinning in catching fish!' He flung himself on the bottom
of the boat and prayed; but his prayers availed him nothing, for the
wind increased in force, and so did the sea. Long after midnight a big
wave smashed the boat to splinters. Half-stunned, half-drowned, Yoda
clung to the large oar, and so remained for some three hours.

At last he felt himself being bumped against what he took to be a rock,
and letting go the oar scrambled on to it more dead than alive. After
many efforts, so exhausted was he and so numbed, he sat there only
half-conscious in the dark.

Towards morning the turn of tide caused the sea to smooth down, and as
the sun rose Yoda found to his horror that it was no rock upon which he
sat, but the back of a live whale of gigantic size. Yoda knew neither
what to do nor what to think; he dared not move, for fear of disturbing
the whale's repose. Not even when the animal blew water and air from its
spout-hole did he

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

venture to turn his body. But silently he muttered prayers all the time.
At last, when the sun was full up, the whale began to turn round, and as
it did so Yoda saw a large fishing-boat not more than half a mile away.
He shouted and shouted at the top of his voice, trying to attract
attention; but move he dared not, lest the whale should leave him. The
wind was still high; but the sea was smooth.

Suddenly the fishing-boat changed its course, and the whale lay still
again, basking in the sunshine. The boat advanced rapidly, and when
about eighty feet from the whale brought up to the wind and lay still. A
life-line with a buoy attached was drifted towards the whale, and when
it was near enough Yoda slid off to take it, and was hauled into the
boat, thoroughly thankful for his rescue. As soon as Yoda was on board,
the boat began to roll, for the whale lashed his tail and was playing
about, causing quite a heavy sea; but, to the relief of all, the
creature headed south for the open Pacific.

The crew on the fishing-boat belonged to Toshi Island, and had heard of
Yoda Emon, and, being good-natured fellows, felt sorry for him in his
exile. After his astonishing adventure with the whale, they did not in
the least mind taking him back to Oshima, which they reached about
sundown.

Yoda immediately reported himself, and was congratulated on his
extraordinary escape.

After this Yoda gave up fishing, and submitted without grumbling to the
severe discipline of his exile. On the occasion of Prince Tanin
ascending the throne, an ordinance was issued giving freedom to many
prisoners

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

and exiles. Yoda Emon was among them, and was given permission to return
home; but he said he had made so many friends on the island, and his
life had been saved so miraculously, that he preferred to live where he
was. And he obtained official permission to do so, and to send for his
family, which after building a house he did. In the first year of Koji
1142-1141., Yoda was made Mayor of Shichito—that is the seven islands
lying round or south of Oshima and including itself. 'Now,' thought he,
'I shall be able to repay the kindness that the whale showed me in
saving my life!' And he issued an order that no whales were to be chased
or killed anywhere near the islands over which he had jurisdiction. At
first there was some grumbling; but the Government sent messengers to
Oshima to say that the Emperor approved Yoda Emon's order, and
furthermore, that during Yoda's life no whale was to be killed anywhere
in Shichito.

 

WHALE AND WHALER.—Some years ago there lived a wealthy fisherman called
Matsushima Tomigoro at Matsushima, in Nagasaki. He made a large fortune
by whale-fishing. One night he dreamed a strange dream. A whale (zato
kujira), carrying a baby whale, appeared before his pillow, and
requested him to let her and the baby go safely—they were going to pass
a certain part of the sea at a certain time and date. Matsushima
heartlessly did not accede, but took advantage of the information. He
put a net in the said sea at the due time, and caught a whale and her
baby. Not long after, the cruel fisherman began to reap the harvest of
his

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

mercilessness. Misfortune after misfortune befell him, and all his
wealth disappeared. 'It must be the result of his cruelty in killing the
whale and its baby,' said the neighbours; and for some time they never
caught whales carrying babies. (Translated by Mr. Ando.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_36"></span>[196:1](atfj34.htm#fr_36) The gods principally
worshipped at Atsuta are the Sun Goddess Amateras, her brother
Susa-no-o, Prince Yamato-take, his wife Miyazu-hime, and her brother
Take-ino-tane; but the object most venerated is the sword called
'Kusa-nagi no Tsurugi,' one of the three principal antique objects which
form the Imperial Regalia of Japan, and of which I have previously told
a story or two, notably that of 'Yamato-dake no Mikoto' ([p.
56](atfj10.htm#page_56) *et seq*.).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXXIII. The Holy Cherry Tree of Musubi-no-Kami Temple](atfj35)

</div>
