<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Japan](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](atfj46)  [Next](atfj48) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan*, by Richard Gordon Smith,
\[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_287">p. 287</span>

<span id="img_51"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![51. Kikuo Prays at
the Grave of his Feudal Lord](tn/51.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/51.jpg)  
51. Kikuo Prays at the Grave of his Feudal Lord  
</span>

### XLV

### THE CHRYSANTHEMUM HERMIT

MANY years ago there lived at the foot of the Mountains of Nambu, in
Adachi gun, Saitama Prefecture, an old man named Kikuo, which means
Chrysanthemum-Old-Man.

Kikuo was a faithful retainer of Tsugaru; he was then called Sawada
Hayato. Kikuo was a man of great bodily strength and fine appearance,
and had much to do with the efficiency of the small fighting force which
protected the feudal lord, the castle, and the estates.

Nevertheless, an evil day came. The feudal lord's small force was
overthrown; the estates and castle were lost. The lord and his faithful
retainer, with the few survivors, escaped to the mountains, where they
continued to think that a day might come when they would be able to have
their revenge.

During the enforced idleness Kikuo, knowing his lord's love of flowers
(especially of the chrysanthemum), made his mind up to devote all his
spare time to making chrysanthemum beds. This, he thought, would lessen
the pain of defeat and exile.

<span id="page_288">p. 288</span>

The feudal lord was greatly pleased; but his cares and anxieties were
not abated. He sickened and died in great poverty, much to the sorrow of
Kikuo and the rest of his followers. Kikuo wept night and day over the
humble and lonely grave; but he busied himself again to please the
spirit of his lord by planting chrysanthemums round the tomb and tending
them daily. By and by the border of flowers was thirty yards broad—to
the wonder of all who saw. It was because of this that Hayato got the
name of Chrysanthemum-Old-Man.

The chrysanthemum is in China a holy flower. Ancient history tells of a
man called Hoso (great grandson of the Emperor Juikai) who lived to the
age of 800 years without showing the slightest sign of decay. This was
attributed to his drinking the dew of the chrysanthemum. Besides his
devotion to flowers, Kikuo delighted in children; from the village he
called them to his poor hut, and as there was no schoolmaster he taught
them to write, to read, and jujitsu. The children loved him, and the
good villagers revered him as if he were a kind of god.

In about his eighty-second year Kikuo caught cold, and the fever which
came with it gave him great pain.

During the daytime his pupils attended to his wants; but at night the
old man was alone in his cottage.

One autumn night he awoke and found standing about his veranda some
beautiful children. They did not look quite like any children he knew.
They were too beautiful and noble-looking to belong to the poor of the
village.

'Kikuo Sama,' cried two of them, 'do not fear us,

<span id="page_289">p. 289</span>

though we are not real children. We are the spirits of the chrysanthemum
which you love so much, and of which you have taken such care. We have
come to tell you how sorry we are to see you so ill, although we have
heard that in China there once lived a man called Hoso who lived for 800
years by drinking the dew which falls from the flowers. We have tried
all we can to prolong your life; but we find that the Heavens do not
allow that you should live to a much greater age than you have already
reached. In thirty more days you will die. Make ready, therefore, to
depart.'

Saying this, they all wept bitterly.

'Good-bye, then,' said Kikuo. 'I have no further hopes of living. Let my
death be easy. In the next world I may be able to serve my old lord and
master. The only thing that makes me sad to leave this world is you: I
must for ever regret to leave my chrysanthemums!' Saying this, he smiled
at them in affection.

'You have been very kind to us,' said the Kiku spirits, 'and we love you
for it. Man rejoices at birth, and feels sad at death; yet now you shed
no tears. You say you do not mind dying except for leaving us. If you
die we shall not survive, for it would be useless misery. Believe us
when we say that we shall die with you.'

As the spirits of the chrysanthemums finished speaking a puff of wind
came about the house, and they disappeared. As the day dawned the old
man grew worse, and, strange to say, all the chrysanthemums began to
fade—even those which were just beginning to bloom;—the leaves crumpled
up and dried.

As the spirits had foretold, at the end of the thirtieth

<span id="page_290">p. 290</span>

day the old man died. The Kiku flowers died then. Not one was left in
the whole district. The villagers could not account for it. They buried
the old man near his lord, and, thinking to honour and please him,
planted, time after time, chrysanthemums near his grave; but all faded
and died as soon as they were planted.

The two little graves were at last given up, and they remain in their
solitude, with wild grasses only growing about them.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XLVI. The Princess Peony](atfj48)

</div>
