<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Japan](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](atfj49)  [Next](atfj51) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan*, by Richard Gordon Smith,
\[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_302">p. 302</span>

<span id="img_54"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![54. Jirohei Clings to
the Cherry Tree Even in Death](tn/54.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/54.jpg)  
54. Jirohei Clings to the Cherry Tree Even in Death  
</span>

### XLVIII

### THE 'JIROHEI' CHERRY TREE, KYOTO

THE Japanese say that ghosts in inanimate nature generally have more
liveliness than ghosts of the dead. There is an old proverb which says
something to the effect that 'the ghosts of trees love not the willow';
by which, I suppose, is meant that they do not assimilate. In Japanese
pictures of ghosts there is nearly always a willow tree. Whether
Hokusai, the ancient painter, or Okyo Maruyama, a famous painter of
Kyoto of more recent date, was responsible for the pictures with ghosts
and willow trees, I do not know; but certainly Maruyama painted many
ghosts under willow trees—the first from his wife, who lay sick.

Exactly what this has to do with the following story I cannot see; but
my story-teller began with it.

In the northern part of Kyoto is a Shinto temple called Hirano. It is
celebrated for the fine cherry trees that grow there. Among them is an
old dead tree which is called 'Jirohei,' and is much cared for; but the
story attached to it is little known, and has not been told, I believe,
to a European before.

<span id="page_303">p. 303</span>

During the cherry blossom season many people go to view the trees,
especially at night.

Close to the Jirohei cherry tree, many years ago, was a large and
prosperous tea-house, once owned by Jirohei, who had started in quite a
small way. So rapidly did he make money, he attributed his success to
the virtue of the old cherry tree, which he accordingly venerated.
Jirohei paid the greatest respect to the tree, attending to its wants.
He prevented boys from climbing it and breaking its branches. The tree
prospered, and so did he.

One morning a samurai (of the blood-and-thunder kind) walked up to the
Hirano Temple, and sat down at Jirohei's tea-house, to take a long look
at the cherry blossom. He was a powerful, dark-skinned, evil-faced man
about five feet eight in height.

'Are you the landlord of this tea-house?' asked he.

'Yes, sir,' Jirohei answered meekly: 'I am. What can I bring you, sir?'

'Nothing: I thank you,' said the samurai. 'What a fine tree you have
here opposite your tea-house!'

'Yes, sir: it is to the fineness of the tree that I owe my prosperity.
Thank you, sir, for expressing your appreciation of it.'

'I want a branch off the tree,' quoth the samurai, 'for a geisha.'

'Deeply as I regret it, I am obliged to refuse your request. I must
refuse everybody. The temple priests gave orders to this effect before
they let me erect this place. No matter who it may be that asks, I must
refuse. Flowers may not even be picked off the tree, though they may be
gathered when they fall. Please, sir, remember

<span id="page_304">p. 304</span>

that there is an old proverb which tells us to cut the plum tree for our
vases, but not the cherry!'

'You seem to be an unpleasantly argumentative person for your station in
life,' said the samurai. 'When I say that I want a thing I mean to have
it: so you had better go and cut it.'

'However much you may be determined, I must refuse,' said Jirohei,
quietly and politely.

'And, however much you may refuse, the more determined am I to have it.
I as a samurai said I should have it. Do you think that you can turn me
from my purpose? If you have not the politeness to get it, I will take
it by force.' Suiting his action to his words, the samurai drew a sword
about three feet long, and was about to cut off the best branch of all.
Jirohei clung to the sleeve of his sword arm, crying:

'I have asked you to leave the tree alone; but you would not. Please
take my life instead.'

'You are an insolent and annoying fool: I gladly follow your request';
and saying this the samurai stabbed Jirohei slightly, to make him let go
the sleeve. Jirohei did let go; but he ran to the tree, where in a
further struggle over the branch, which was cut in spite of Jirohei's
defence, he was stabbed again, this time fatally. The samurai, seeing
that the man must die, got away as quickly as possible, leaving the cut
branch in full bloom on the ground.

Hearing the noise, the servants came out of the house, followed by
Jirohei's poor old wife.

It was seen that Jirohei himself was dead; but he clung to the tree as
firmly as in life, and it was fully an hour before they were able to get
him away.

<span id="page_305">p. 305</span>

From this time things went badly with the tea-house. Very few people
came, and such as did come were poor and spent but little money.
Besides, from the day of the murder of Jirohei the tree had begun to
fade and die; in less than a year it was absolutely dead. The tea-house
had to be closed for want of funds to keep it open. The old wife of
Jirohei had hanged herself on the dead tree a few days after her husband
had been killed.

People said that ghosts had been seen about the tree, and were afraid to
go there at night. Even neighbouring tea-houses suffered, and so did the
temple, which for a time became unpopular.

The samurai who had been the cause of all this kept his secret, telling
no one but his own father what he had done; and he expressed to his
father his intention of going to the temple to verify the statements
about the ghosts. Thus on the third day of March in the third year of
Keio (that is, forty-two years ago) he started one night alone and well
armed, in spite of his father's attempts to stop him. He went straight
to the old dead tree, and hid himself behind a stone lantern.

To his astonishment, at midnight the dead tree suddenly came out into
full bloom, and looked just as it had been when he cut the branch and
killed Jirohei.

On seeing this he fiercely attacked the tree with his keen-edged sword.
He attacked it with mad fury, cutting and slashing; and he heard a
fearful scream which seemed to him to come from inside the tree.

After half an hour he became exhausted, but resolved to wait until
daybreak, to see what damage he had wrought. When day dawned, the
samurai found his father lying on

<span id="page_306">p. 306</span>

the ground, hacked to pieces, and of course dead. Doubtless the father
had followed to try and see that no harm came to the son.

The samurai was stricken with grief and shame. Nothing was left but to
go and pray to the gods for forgiveness, and to offer his life to them,
which he did by disembowelling himself.

From that day the ghost appeared no more, and people came as before to
view the cherry-bloom by night as well as by day; so they do even now.
No one has ever been able to say whether the ghost which appeared was
the ghost of Jirohei, or that of his wife, or that of the cherry tree
which had died when its limb had been severed.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XLIX. The Snow Ghost](atfj51)

</div>
