<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Japan](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](atfj22)  [Next](atfj24.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan*, by Richard Gordon Smith,
\[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

<span id="img_25"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![25. O Tsuru Sees the
Giant Carp](tn/25.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/25.jpg.md)  
25. O Tsuru Sees the Giant Carp  
</span>

### XXI

### CHIKUBU ISLAND, LAKE BIWA

MANY years ago, when I was a boy, there was a song about a Chinaman. It
began:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">In China once there lived a man,  
And his name was Ding-dong-dang.  
His legs were long, and his feet were small,  
And this Chinese man couldn't walk at all.</span>

</div>

<span class="small">Chorus:</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Chi-chi-Margie, Chi-chi-Marah,  
Ding-dong, ding-dong, ding-dong dah,  
Kossi-kossi-ki, kossi-kossi-ka,  
Chikubu, Chikubu, Chikubu Chang.</span>

</div>

Little in those days did I think that I should come across an island—or
any other place, for the matter of that—which bore the name of part of
this wild and idiotic chorus, 'Chikubu, Chikubu, Chikubu Chang.' It
sounds truly wild. Well, so it is. I have found an island on Lake Biwa
which is pronounced and spelt exactly as in the chorus of this song of
my youth. 'Chikubu' is there, and I am puzzled to know where the
composer found it. In my Japanese I can't find it.

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> However, let us to
the story. It is not a very good one; but, as it relates to the only
island of importance in the lake, it is worth chronicling.

Chikubu-shima is situated about two-thirds up towards the north-western
end of Lake Biwa, in Omi Province. The lake is some thirty-five miles
long and twelve broad. The island is holy, I believe, and it is said to
have been caused by an earthquake nearly 600 years B.C. Fuji Mountain
made its appearance at the same time. Thus we have (so far as we like to
believe it) the geographical pedigree of Lake Biwa and its principal
island.

The nearest land to Chikubu is Tsuzurao Cape, which is about two miles
away. There, some three hundred years ago, dwelt two sisters, O Tsuru
and Kame. They were fifteen and eleven respectively, and dwelt with
their old and only uncle, their father and mother and all their other
relations being dead. Tsuru (the crane) and Kame (the turtle) were
devoted to each other; in fact, the poor girls clung to each other as
the remnants of a family should cling. They loved each other. They were
inseparable.

At that time there was much fear among the inhabitants of Tsuzurao Point
of a large carp—a carp of such size that it was called 'The Master of
Lake Biwa.' It was said that this fish ate dogs, cats, and sometimes
people, if they were unwise enough to swim into water sufficiently deep
for him to manœuvre in. His principal hover was in the waters
surrounding Chikubu Island, at the northern end of the lake.

When O Tsuru reached the age of fifteen, and her sister O Kame was
eleven, O Tsuru became sick with

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

consumption; from bad she grew worse, and her poor little sister O Kame
became quite disconsolate; she cried because of her sister's illness,
and went by herself to pray at all the temples in the neighbourhood. Day
after day she thought of nothing but her sister's illness; but all she
did, poor child, was in vain. O Tsuru became worse.

In her great distress O Kame thought that she should venture to the wild
and sacred island of Chikubu, there to pray to the Goddess of Mercy,
Kwannon. To do so with any chance of her prayers being heard, it was
necessary that she should go alone. She would row off secretly that
night.

After darkness had come and her uncle's household had gone to sleep, O
Kame crept forth and went down to the edge of the lake, where her
uncle's boat and many others lay. Getting into one, the lightest she
could find, she sculled towards Chikubu Island. The sky was clear and
the water glistened.

In less than an hour this whole-hearted child of Nippon was kneeling
before the ever-pleasing and soothing figure of Kwannon, the goddess
ever ready to listen to the prayers of the unhappy; and there she prayed
to the full extent of her feelings, weeping between-times in sorrow for
the sickness of her sister.

When poor O Kame had finished praying she got into her boat and began to
row back to Tsuzurao. She had got within half-a-mile of that place when
a terrible storm arose, and in the third squall her boat was capsized. O
Kame was no swimmer, and as she sank into the depths of the lake the
giant carp saw her, and instantly carried her off and devoured her.

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

Next morning there was consternation at Tsuzurao. When it was found that
both O Kame San and one of the fishermen's boats were missing it was
naturally surmised that she had gone out on the lake, and probably to
Chikubu Island to pray to Kwannon.

Boats went off in search; but nothing could be found, save the marks of
her footsteps from the shore to the shrine dedicated to Kwannon. On
hearing this sad news, O Tsuru, who lay nigh unto death, became worse;
but in spite of her sad condition she could not bear the idea of
lingering on in the world without her sister O Kame. Consequently she
resolved to destroy her life as near as she could think to the place
where O Kame had died, so that her spirit might journey with hers until
perhaps they should become born again together. At all events, it was
clearly her duty to follow her sister.

When the dusk of evening arrived O Tsuru crept out from her room and
gained the beach, where she, like her little sister, took the lightest
boat which she could find, and rowed herself out, in spite of her
weakness, to a spot where she thought that the carp might have killed
her sister. There, standing in the bows of the boat, she cried aloud:

'Oh, mighty carp, that hast devoured my sister, devour me also, that our
spirits may follow the same path and become reunited. It is for this I
cast myself into the lake!

So saying, O Tsuru shut her eyes and jumped into the water. Down, down,
down she went, until she reached the bottom. No sooner had she alighted
there, feeling (curiously enough) no effects of being under water, than
she heard her name called.

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

'Strange indeed,' thought she, 'that I should hear my name at the bottom
of Lake Biwa!'

She opened her eyes, and beheld standing beside her an old priest. O
Tsuru asked him who he was, and why he had called her.

'I was a priest,' he explained. 'Perhaps I am one now. At all events, I
often come to the bottom of the lake. I know all about your little
sister Kame, of her faithfulness and affection for you, and of yours for
her; I know also of the storm which capsized her boat when she had been
praying to Kwannon on Chikubu Island, and of her being taken and eaten
by that horrible carp. Believe me, none of these are reasons why you
should take your own life. Go back on earth, rather, and pray to Buddha
for your sister's blessing and for her soul. I will see that you are
avenged on the carp, and I will see that you get well and strong. Take
my hand, so, and I will take you back on shore.'

Having said this and carried Tsuru to land, the priest disappeared. For
some time she lay unconscious; but when she came fully to her senses O
Tsuru found herself on Chikubu Island, and, feeling considerably
stronger than she had felt for some time, she went to the shrine
dedicated to Kwannon, and passed the remainder of the night in prayer.

In the morning, having gone to the beach, she saw boats in the distance
coming from Tsuzurao Point; but (what was more extraordinary) there lay,
not ten feet from the shore where she stood, an enormous carp, fully
nine feet in length, dead!

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

Among the search-boats that arrived was one containing her uncle and a
priest.

Tsuru told her story. The carp was buried at a small promontory on the
island, which is called Miyazaki. It was named Koizuka Miya-zaki (the
Carp's Grave at Temple Cape).

O Tsuru lived to a ripe old age, and was never ill again. History tells
of her at the age of seventy informing Ota Nobunaga, who came to destroy
temples in the neighbourhood, that if he touched the shrines on Chikubu
Island she herself would see to his destruction.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXII. Reincarnation](atfj24.md)

</div>
