<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fjo16)  [Next](fjo18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B003C1R142/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Notes on the Folklore of the Fjort*, by Richard Edward Dennett,
\[1898\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# XIV. THE CHIMPANZEE AND GORILLA.

A NATIVE friend of mine, who considers himself a great hunter and
naturalist, told me that, his plantations having suffered severely from
the depredations of the gorilla, he had determined to follow up his
tracks, and kill him, if possible. After having journeyed a long
distance, he at last came up to the gorilla's camp. The gorilla was up a
tree, at the foot of which was a large heap of fruits of different
kinds. He resolved upon the bold course of getting as near this fruit as
he could, waiting until the gorilla should come down. Hardly had he got
himself safely in his chosen position, when a chimpanzee, club in hand,
came leisurely along, evidently looking about for food.

"Oh la! What fool has left his food in such a place, I wonder, right in
the public footpath? I need go no further."

Thereupon the chimpanzee sat himself down, and began to enjoy a really
good feed. He had not been there very long, however, before the gorilla
came quietly down the tree. He quietly seated himself opposite to the
chimpanzee, and commenced to eat also.

"Here, you!" said the chimpanzee, "what do you mean by eating my fruit?
Can't you go and find some for yourself?"

The gorilla made no reply, but went on eating. The chimpanzee got
excited, and began to abuse the gorilla. The gorilla looked at him. Then
the chimpanzee struck the gorilla. The gorilla smiled, and pushed him
aside. The chimpanzee took his club, and hit the gorilla with all his
might. The gorilla then raised his long arm, and gave the chimpanzee one
fearful blow, which stretched him dead at his feet.

"I did not wait to see any more," said my friend, "but ran away as hard
as I could."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XV. The Antelope And The Leopard.](fjo18)

</div>
