<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fjo20)  [Next](fjo22) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B003C1R142/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Notes on the Folklore of the Fjort*, by Richard Edward Dennett,
\[1898\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# XVIII. KILLING A LEOPARD.

I CLOSED the autobiography of a Fjort in "Seven Years among the Fjort"
thus: "We were obliged to hurry back to town, however, as notice was
brought to us that some one had killed a leopard. The custom is that
when a leopard is killed, the people of the different towns in that
district can loot each other's towns to their hearts' content, and on
the day fixed for the delivery of the leopard to the king, the destroyer
of the leopard can take it through any of the towns he chooses, having
the right to appropriate any article he may meet in his road that is not
inside a shimbec or other dwelling."

I can now tell you more of this custom. The slayer, it seems, is himself
tied up, and the head of the leopard is carefully wrapped up in cloth.
Both are then taken to the king, who addresses the slayer thus:

"My son, why have you slain this man?"

"Father," answers the slayer, "he is a very dangerous man and has taken
the life of many. of your people's sheep and fowls."

"Thou hast done well, my son. Count now the hairs of his whiskers. As
thou knowest, there should be three times nine hairs, and for every one
that is missing must thou pay me two pieces of cloth."

"Father, they are all there."

"Then pull them out carefully; take also his teeth, his claws, and his
skin, and prepare them for my use."

This the hunter does and presents them to the king.

Then the king again addresses him:

"My son, thou art a great hunter and must need someone to cook thy food
for thee when thou goest out hunting. Take therefore this young girl as
thy slave, or concubine."

"But father, look! I am not in a fit state to receive such a gift; my
clothes are worn and tattered."

"Thou sayest but what is the truth, my son. Take therefore these clothes
and dress thyself."

"Yea, father, thou art too good to me; but I have no one to cut wood for
such a beautiful creature."

"There, there, take this small boy to cut wood for her, and this man to
carry thy gun."

"I clap my hands to thee, father, and thank thee."

Then the king has to give a grand feast in honour of the event.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XIX. The Gazelle And The Leopard.](fjo22)

</div>
