<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fjo33)  [Next](fjo35) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B003C1R142/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Notes on the Folklore of the Fjort*, by Richard Edward Dennett,
\[1898\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# XXXI. THE THREE BROTHERS.

IN the beginning, when KaCongo had still one mother, and the whole
family yet lived on grass and roots, and knew not how to plant, a woman
brought forth three babes at one birth.

"Oh, what am I to do with them?" she cried. "I do not want them; I will
leave them here in the grass." And the three little ones were very
hungry, and looked about them for food. They walked and walked a long
long way, until at last they came to a river, which they crossed.

They saw bananas, and palm-trees, and mandioca, growing in great
quantities, but dared not eat the fruit thereof. Then the river-spirit
called to them, and told them to eat of these good things. And the
tiniest of the three tried a banana and found it very sweet. Then the
other two ate them, and found them very good. And after this they ate of
the other trees, and so grew up well nurtured and strong; and they
learnt how to become carpenters and blacksmiths, and built themselves
houses. The river-spirit supplied them with women for wives; and soon
they multiplied and created a town of their own.

A man who had wandered far from his town came near to where the three
brothers had built their home, and was astonished as he approached it,
to bear voices. This man happened to be the father of the three
brothers. So he returned to his town, without having entered the
village, to tell his wife that he had found her children. Then the old
woman set out with her husband to seek for her children, and wandered
and wandered on, until she was too tired to go any further, when she
sank down by the wayside to rest.

Now one of the children of the three brothers came across the old woman,
and was afraid, and ran back to tell his father.

Then the three brothers set out with the intention of killing the
intruder; but the river-spirit called out to them, and told them -not to
kill her, but to take her to their home, and feed her, for she was their
mother. And they did so.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXXII. Death And Burial Of The Fjort.](fjo35)

</div>
