<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fjo37)  [Next](fjo39) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B003C1R142/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Notes on the Folklore of the Fjort*, by Richard Edward Dennett,
\[1898\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# NZAMBI'S DAUGHTER AND HER SLAVE.

Nzambi had a most beautiful daughter, and she took the greatest care of
her. As the child grew up, she was kept within the house, and never
allowed to go outside, her mother alone waiting upon her. And when she
arrived at the age of puberty, her mother determined to send her to a
town a long way off, that she might be undisturbed while she underwent
her purification in the paint-house.

She gave her child a slave; and unnoticed these two left Nzambi's town
for the distant place where the paint-house was situated.

"Oh, see there, slave! what is that?"

"Give me your anklets, and I will tell you," answered the slave.

The daughter of Nzambi gave the slave the anklets.

"That is a snake."

And then they walked along for some time, when suddenly the daughter of
Nzambi said: "Oh, slave, what is that?"

"Give me your two new cloths, and I will tell you."

She gave the slave the two cloths.

"That is an antelope."

They had not gone far when the daughter again noticed something strange.

"Slave, tell me what that thing is? Give me your bracelets."

The girl gave the slave her bracelets.

"That thing is an eagle."

The princess thought it wonderful that the slave should know so much
more than she did; and when she caught sight of a thing rising gently
from the ground, she turned to her again and asked: "And what is that?

"Give me your coral necklace."

The girl gave the slave the coral.

"That is a butterfly."

The next time she asked the slave for information, the slave made her
change her clothes with her; so that while she was nearly naked, the
slave was dressed most beautifully. And in this fashion they arrived at
their destination, and delivered their message to the prince.

After the proper preparations they placed the slave in the paint-house,
with all the ceremony due to a princess; and they set the daughter of
Nzambi to mind the plantations. In her innocence and ignorance the
daughter of Nzambi at first thought all this was in order, and part of
what she had to go through; but in a very short time she began to
realize her position, and to grieve about it. She used to sing plaintive
songs as she minded the corn, of how she had been mistaken for a slave,
while her slave was honoured as a princess. And the people thought her
mad. But one day a trade-caravan passed her and she asked the trader
where he was going, and he answered: "To Nzambi's town."

"Will you then take a message to Nzambi for me."

The trader gladly assented.

"Then tell her that her daughter is as a slave watching the plantations,
while the slave is in the paint-house."

He repeated the message; and when she had said that it was correct, he
went on his way and delivered it to Nzambi.

Nzambi and her husband immediately set out in their hammock, accompanied
by many followers, for the town where she had sent her daughter. And
when she arrived she was greatly shocked to see her daughter in that
mean position, and would have punished the prince, had she not seen that
he and his people were not to blame.

They called upon the slave to come out of the paint-house. But she was
afraid, and would not. Then they entered, and having stripped her of all
her borrowed plumes, they shut her within the house and burnt her.

Mr. Dennett also informs me that, in districts occupied by Fjort south
of the Congo, the high roads from the sea to the capital town are called
"the footsteps of Nzambi." We now pass on to the consideration of the
cult which has Nzambi for its central object, namely the cult of
Nkissism. Mr. Dennett says:--

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Nkissism.](fjo39)

</div>
