[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](seil27)  [Next](seil29) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002B561B4/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Spiritual Exercises of St. Ignatius of Loyola*, \[1914\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### TO GET KNOWLEDGE AS TO WHAT MATTERS AN ELECTION OUGHT TO BE MADE ABOUT, AND IT CONTAINS FOUR POINTS AND ONE NOTE

**First Point**. The first Point: It is necessary that everything about
which we want to make an election should be indifferent, or good, in
itself, and should be allowed within our Holy Mother the hierarchical
Church, and not bad nor opposed to her.

**Second Point**. Second: There are some things which fall under
unchangeable election, such as are the priesthood, marriage, etc. There
are others which fall under an election that can be changed, such as are
to take benefices or leave them, to take temporal goods or rid oneself
of them.

**Third Point**. Third: In the unchangeable Election which has already
been once made -- such as marriage, the priesthood, etc. -- there is
nothing more to choose, because one cannot release himself; only it is
to be seen to that if one have not made his election duly and ordinately
and without disordered tendencies, repenting let him see to living a
good life in his election. It does not appear that this election is a
Divine vocation, <span id="fr_14"></span>[15](seil83.htm#fn_14) as being
an election out of order and awry. Many err in this, setting up a
perverse or bad election as a Divine <span
id="fr_15"></span>[16](seil83.htm#fn_15) vocation; for every Divine
vocation is always pure and clear, without mixture of flesh, or of any
other inordinate tendency.

**Fourth Point**. Fourth: If some one has duly and ordinately made
election of things which are under election that can be changed, and has
not yielded to flesh or world, there is no reason for his making
election anew, but let him perfect himself as much as he can in that
already chosen.

**Note**. It is to be remarked that if such election that can be changed
was not made sincerely and well in order, then it helps to make the
election duly, if one has a desire that fruits notable and very pleasing
to God our Lord should come from him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Times for Making Election](seil29)
