[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](seil22)  [Next](seil24) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002B561B4/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Spiritual Exercises of St. Ignatius of Loyola*, \[1914\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE SAME FOURTH DAY LET MEDITATION BE MADE ON

##### THREE PAIRS OF MEN IN ORDER TO EMBRACE WHAT IS BEST

**Prayer**. The usual Preparatory Prayer.

**First Prelude**. The first Prelude is the narrative, which is of three
pairs of men, and each one of them has acquired ten thousand ducats, not
solely or as they ought <span id="fr_12"></span>[13](seil83.htm#fn_12)
for God's love, and all want to save themselves and find in peace God
our Lord, ridding themselves of the weight and hindrance to it which
they have in the attachment for the thing acquired.

**Second Prelude**. The second, a composition, seeing the place. It will
be here to see myself, how I stand before God our Lord and all His
Saints, to desire and know what is more pleasing to His Divine Goodness.

**Third Prelude**. The third, to ask for what I want. Here it will be to
ask grace to choose what is more to the glory of His Divine Majesty and
the salvation of my soul.

**First Pair**. The first Pair would want to rid themselves of the
attachment which they have to the thing acquired, in order to find in
peace God our Lord, and be able to save themselves, and they do not
place the means up to the hour of death.

**Second Pair**. The second want to rid themselves of the attachment,
but want so to rid themselves of it as to remain with the thing
acquired, so that God should come where they want, and they do not
decide to leave it in order to go to God, although it would be the best
state for them

**Third Pair**. The third want to rid themselves of the attachment, but
want so to rid themselves of it that they have even no liking for it, to
keep the thing acquired or not to keep it, but only want to want it or
not want it according as God our Lord will put in their will and as will
appear to them better for the service and praise of His Divine Majesty;
and meanwhile they want to reckon that they quit it all in attachment,
forcing themselves not to want that or any other thing, unless only the
service of God our Lord move them: so that the desire of being better
able to serve God our Lord moves them to take the thing or leave it.

**Three Colloquies**. I will make the same three Colloquies which were
made in the Contemplation preceding, on the Two Standards.

**Note**. It is to be noted that when we feel a tendency or repugnance
against actual poverty, when we are not indifferent to poverty or
riches, it is very helpful, in order to crush such disordered tendency,
to ask in the Colloquies (although it be against the flesh) that the
Lord should choose one to actual poverty, and that one wants, asks and
begs it, if only it be the service and praise of His Divine Goodness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Fifth Day](seil24)
