[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](seil17)  [Next](seil19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002B561B4/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Spiritual Exercises of St. Ignatius of Loyola*, \[1914\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE SECOND CONTEMPLATION

##### IS ON THE NATIVITY

**Prayer**. The usual Preparatory Prayer.

**First Prelude**. The first Prelude is the narrative and it will be
here how Our Lady went forth from Nazareth, about nine months with
child, as can be piously meditated, <span
id="fr_8"></span>[9](seil83.htm#fn_8) seated on an ass, and accompanied
by Joseph and a maid, taking an ox, to go to Bethlehem to pay the
tribute which Caesar imposed on all those lands (p. 135).

**Second Prelude**. The second, a composition, seeing the place. It will
be here to see with the sight of the imagination the road from Nazareth
to Bethlehem; considering the length and the breadth, and whether such
road is level or through valleys or over hills; likewise looking at the
place or cave of the Nativity, <span
id="fr_9"></span>[10](seil83.htm#fn_9) how large, how small, how low,
how high, and how it was prepared.

**Third Prelude**. The third will be the same, and in the same form, as
in the preceding Contemplation.

**First Point**. The first Point is to see the persons; that is, to see
Our Lady and Joseph and the maid, and, after His Birth, the Child Jesus,
I making myself a poor creature and a wretch of an unworthy slave,
looking at them and serving them in their needs, with all possible
respect and reverence, as if I found myself present; and then to reflect
on myself in order to draw some profit.

**Second Point**. The second, to look, mark and contemplate what they
are saying, and, reflecting on myself, to draw some profit.

**Third Point**. The third, to look and consider what they are doing, as
going a journey and laboring, that the Lord may be born in the greatest
poverty; and as a termination of so many labors -- of hunger, of thirst,
of heat and of cold, of injuries and affronts -- that He may die on the
Cross; and all this for me: then reflecting, to draw some spiritual
profit.

Colloquy. I will finish with a Colloquy as in the preceding
Contemplation, and with an OUR FATHER.

### THE THIRD CONTEMPLATION

##### WILL BE A REPETITION OF THE FIRST AND SECOND EXERCISE

After the Preparatory Prayer and the three Preludes, the repetition of
the first and second Exercise will be made, noting always some more
principal parts, where the person has felt some knowledge, consolation
or desolation, making likewise one Colloquy at the end, and saying an
OUR FATHER.

In this repetition, and in all the following, the same order of
proceeding will be taken as was taken in the repetitions of the First
Week, changing the matter and keeping the form.

### THE FOURTH CONTEMPLATION

##### WILL BE A REPETITION OF THE FIRST AND SECOND

In the same way as was done in the above-mentioned repetition.

### THE FIFTH CONTEMPLATION

##### WILL BE TO BRING THE FIVE SENSES ON THE FIRST AND SECOND CONTEMPLATION

**Prayer**. After the Preparatory Prayer and the three Preludes, it is
helpful to pass the five senses of the imagination through the first and
second Contemplation, in the following way:

**First Point**. The first Point is to see the persons with the sight of
the imagination, meditating and contemplating in particular the details
about them and drawing some profit from the sight.

**Second Point**. The second, to hear with the hearing what they are, or
might be, talking about and, reflecting on oneself, to draw some profit
from it.

**Third Point**. The third, to smell and to taste with the smell and the
taste the infinite fragrance and sweetness of the Divinity, of the soul,
and of its virtues, and of all, according to the person who is being
contemplated; reflecting on oneself and drawing profit from it.

**Fourth Point**. The fourth, to touch with the touch, as for instance,
to embrace and kiss the places where such persons put their feet and
sit, always seeing to my drawing profit from it.

**Colloquy**. One has to finish with one Colloquy as in the first and
second Contemplation, and with an OUR FATHER.

**First Note**. The first note is to remark for all this and the other
following Weeks, that I have only to read the Mystery of the
Contemplation which I have immediately to make, so that at any time I
read no Mystery which I have not to make that day or at that hour, in
order that the consideration of one Mystery may not hinder the
consideration of the other.

**Second Note**. The second: The first Exercise, on the Incarnation,
will be made at midnight; the second at dawn; the third at the hour of
Mass; the fourth at the hour of Vespers, and the fifth before the hour
of supper, being for the space of one hour in each one of the five
Exercises; and the same order will be taken in all the following.

**Third Note**. The third: It is to be remarked that if the person who
is making the Exercises is old or weak, or, although strong, has become
in some way less strong from the First Week, it is better for him in
this Second Week, at least sometimes, not rising at midnight, to make
one Contemplation in the morning, and another at the hour of Mass, and
another before dinner, and one repetition on them at the hour of
Vespers, and then the Application of the Senses before supper.

**Fourth Note**. The fourth: In this Second Week, out of all the ten
Additions which were mentioned in the First Week, the second, the sixth,
the seventh and in part the tenth have to be changed.

In the second it will be, immediately on waking up, to put before me the
contemplation which I have to make, desiring to know more the Eternal
Word incarnate, in order to serve and to follow Him more.

The sixth will be to bring frequently to memory the Life and Mysteries
of Christ our Lord, from His Incarnation down to the place or Mystery
which I am engaged in contemplating.

The seventh will be, that one should manage as to keeping darkness or
light, making use of good weather or bad, according as he feels that it
can profit and help him to find what the person desires who is
exercising himself.

And in the tenth Addition, he who is exercising himself ought to manage
himself according to the Mysteries which he is contemplating; because
some demand penance and others not.

All the ten Additions, then, are to be made with great care.

**Fifth Note**. The fifth note: In all the Exercises, except in that of
midnight and in that of the morning, the equivalent of the second
Addition will be taken in the following way: -- Immediately on
recollecting that it is the time of the Exercise which I have to make,
before I go, putting before myself where I am going and before Whom, and
summarizing a little the Exercise which I have to make, and then making
the third Addition, I will enter into the Exercise.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Second Day](seil19)
