[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](seil15)  [Next](seil17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002B561B4/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Spiritual Exercises of St. Ignatius of Loyola*, \[1914\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## SECOND WEEK

### THE CALL OF THE TEMPORAL KING

##### IT HELPS TO CONTEMPLATE THE LIFE OF THE KING ETERNAL

**Prayer**. Let the Preparatory Prayer be the usual one.

**First Prelude**. The first Prelude is a composition, seeing the place:
it will be here to see with the sight of the imagination, the
synagogues, <span id="fr_4"></span>[5](seil83.htm#fn_4) villages and
towns through which Christ our Lord preached.

**Second Prelude**. The second, to ask for the grace which I want: it
will be here to ask grace of our Lord that I may not be deaf to His
call, but ready and diligent to fulfill His most Holy Will.

**First Point**. The first Point is, to put before me a human king
chosen by God our Lord, whom all Christian princes and men reverence and
obey.

**Second Point**. The second, to look how this king speaks to all his
people, saying: "It is my Will to conquer all the land of unbelievers.
Therefore, whoever would like to come with me is to be content to eat as
I, and also to drink and dress, etc., as I: likewise he is to labor like
me <span id="fr_5"></span>[6](seil83.htm#fn_5) in the day and watch in
the night, etc., that so afterwards he may have part with me in the
victory, as he has had it in the labors."

**Third Point**. The third, to consider what the good subjects ought to
answer to a King so liberal and so kind, and hence, if any one did not
accept the appeal of such a king, how deserving he would be of being
censured by all the world, and held for a mean-spirited knight.

##### IN PART 2

The second part of this Exercise consists in applying the above parable
of the temporal King to Christ our Lord, conformably to the three Points
mentioned.

**First Point**. And as to the first Point, if we consider such a call
of the temporal King to his subjects, how much more worthy of
consideration is it to see Christ our Lord, King eternal, and before Him
all the entire world, which and each one in particular He calls, and
says: "It is My will to conquer all the world and all enemies and so to
enter into the glory of My Father; therefore, whoever would like to come
with Me is to labor with Me, that following Me in the pain, he may also
follow Me in the glory."

**Second Point**. The second, to consider that all those who have
judgment and reason will offer their entire selves to the labor.

**Third Point**. The third, those who will want to be more devoted and
signalise themselves in all service of their King Eternal and universal
Lord, not only will offer their persons to the labor, but even, acting
against their own sensuality and against their carnal and worldly love,
will make offerings of greater value and greater importance, saying:

"Eternal Lord of all things, I make my oblation with Thy favor and help,
in presence of Thy infinite Goodness and in presence of Thy glorious
Mother and of all the Saints of the heavenly Court; that I want and
desire, and it is my deliberate determination, if only it be Thy greater
service and praise, to imitate Thee in bearing all injuries and all
abuse and all poverty of spirit, and actual poverty, too, if Thy most
Holy Majesty wants to choose and receive me to such life and state."

**First Note**. This Exercise will be made twice in the day; namely, in
the morning on rising and an hour before dinner or before supper.

**Second Note**. For the Second Week and so on, it is very helpful to
read at intervals in the books of the Imitation of Christ, or of the
Gospels, and of lives of Saints.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: First Day: First Contemplation on The Incarnation](seil17)
