[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](seil10)  [Next](seil12.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002B561B4/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Spiritual Exercises of St. Ignatius of Loyola*, \[1914\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### FIRST EXERCISE

##### IT IS A MEDITATION WITH THE THREE POWERS ON THE FIRST, THE SECOND AND THE THIRD SIN

It contains in it, after one Preparatory Prayer and two Preludes, three
chief Points and one Colloquy.

**Prayer**. The Preparatory Prayer is to ask grace of God our Lord that
all my intentions, actions and operations may be directed purely to the
service and praise of His Divine Majesty.

**First Prelude**. The First Prelude is a composition, seeing the place.

Here it is to be noted that, in a visible contemplation or meditation --
as, for instance, when one contemplates Christ our Lord, Who is visible
-- the composition will be to see with the sight of the imagination the
corporeal place where the thing is found which I want to contemplate. I
say the corporeal place, as for instance, a Temple or Mountain where
Jesus Christ or Our Lady is found, according to what I want to
contemplate. In an invisible contemplation or meditation -- as here on
the Sins -- the composition will be to see with the sight of the
imagination and consider that my soul is imprisoned in this corruptible
body, and all the compound in this valley, as exiled among brute beasts:
I say all the compound of soul and body.

**Second Prelude**. The second is to ask God our Lord for what I want
and desire.

The petition has to be according to the subject matter; that is, if the
contemplation is on the Resurrection, one is to ask for joy with Christ
in joy; if it is on the Passion, he is to ask for pain, tears and
torment with Christ in torment.

Here it will be to ask shame and confusion at myself, seeing how many
have been damned for only one mortal sin, and how many times I deserved
to be condemned forever for my so many sins.

**Note**. Before all Contemplations or Meditations, there ought always
to be made the Preparatory Prayer, which is not changed, and the two
Preludes already mentioned, which are sometimes changed, according to
the subject matter.

**First Point**. The first Point will be to bring the memory on the
First Sin, which was that of the Angels, and then to bring the intellect
on the same, discussing it; then the will, wanting to recall and
understand all this in order to make me more ashamed and confound me
more, bringing into comparison with the one sin of the Angels my so many
sins, and reflecting, while they for one sin were cast into Hell, how
often I have deserved it for so many.

I say to bring to memory the sin of the Angels, how they, being created
in grace, not wanting to help themselves with their liberty to reverence
and obey their Creator and Lord, coming to pride, were changed from
grace to malice, and hurled from Heaven to Hell; and so then to discuss
more in detail with the intellect: and then to move the feelings more
with the will.

**Second Point**. The second is to do the same -- that is, to bring the
Three Powers -- on the sin of Adam and Eve, bringing to memory how on
account of that sin they did penance for so long a time, and how much
corruption came on the human race, so many people going the way to Hell.

I say to bring to memory the Second Sin, that of our First Parents; how
after Adam was created in the field of Damascus and placed in the
Terrestrial Paradise, and Eve was created from his rib, being forbidden
to eat of the Tree of Knowledge, they ate and so sinned, and afterwards
clothed in tunics of skins and cast from Paradise, they lived, all their
life, without the original justice which they had lost, and in many
labors and much penance. And then to discuss with the understanding more
in detail; and to use the will as has been said.

**Third Point**. The third is likewise to do the same on the Third
particular Sin of any one who for one mortal sin is gone to Hell -- and
many others without number, for fewer sins than I have committed.

I say to do the same on the Third particular Sin, bringing to memory the
gravity and malice of the sin against one's Creator and Lord; to discuss
with the understanding how in sinning and acting against the Infinite
Goodness, he has been justly condemned forever; and to finish with the
will as has been said.

**Colloquy**. Imagining Christ our Lord present and placed on the Cross,
let me make a Colloquy, how from Creator He is come to making Himself
man, and from life eternal is come to temporal death, and so to die for
my sins.

Likewise, looking at myself, what I have done for Christ, what I am
doing for Christ, what I ought to do for Christ.

And so, seeing Him such, and so nailed on the Cross, to go over that
which will present itself.

The Colloquy is made, properly speaking, as one friend speaks to
another, or as a servant to his master; now asking some grace, now
blaming oneself for some misdeed, now communicating one's affairs, and
asking advice in them.

And let me say an OUR FATHER.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Second Exercise: Meditation on Sins](seil12.md)
