[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](seil00)  [Next](seil02.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002B561B4/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Spiritual Exercises of St. Ignatius of Loyola*, \[1914\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### APPROBATION OF THE LATIN TEXTS

The Exercises were offered for ecclesiastical censure at Rome. The text
submitted was not, however, the one which is here reproduced, but two
Latin translations, one in more polished Latin -- since called the
Vulgate Version -- and one a literal rendering. The opinions expressed
on these versions, as also the formal approval of Paul III, are given
here, as applying quite entirely to the text from which the translations
were made.

#### VULGATE VERSION

We have read everything compiled in the volume: it has greatly pleased
us and seemed remarkably conducive to the salvation of souls. *The
Cardinal of Burgos*

We grant leave to print the work; it is worthy of all praise and very
profitable to the Christian profession. *PHILIP, Vicar.*

Such holy Exercises cannot but afford the greatest profit to any one who
studies them. They should therefore be received with open arms. *Fr.
Aegidius Foscararius,*  
*Master of the Sacred Palace*  
We have read these Spiritual Exercises, They greatly please us and we
judge them worthy of being received and highly esteemed by all who
practise the orthodox faith. *The Cardinal of Burgos*

We grant leave to print this work; it is worthy of all praise and very
profitable to the Christian profession. *PHILIP, Vicar.*

As the Christian religion cannot long subsist without some spiritual
exercises and meditations -- for the Psalmist says: In my meditation a
fire flames out -- I think none more appropriate than these, which
undoubtedly have had their source in the study of the Scriptures and in
long experience. *Fr. Aegidius Foscararius,*  
*Master of the Sacred Palace*

#### PAUL III, POPE FOR A PERPETUAL REMEMBRANCE

The cares of the pastoral charge of the whole flock of Christ entrusted
to Us and Our devotion to the glory and praise of God impel Us to
embrace what helps the salvation of souls and their spiritual profit,
and cause Us to hearken to those who petition Us for what can foster and
nourish piety in the faithful.

So Our beloved son, Francis de Borgia, Duke of Gandia, has lately
brought it to Our notice that Our beloved son Ignatius de Loyola,
General of the Society of Jesus, erected by Us in Our beloved City and
confirmed by Our Apostolic authority, has compiled certain instructions,
or Spiritual Exercises, drawn from Holy Writ and from experience in the
spiritual life, and has reduced them to an order which is excellently
adapted to move piously the souls of the faithful, and that they are
very useful and wholesome for the spiritual consolation and profit of
the same. This the said Duke Francis has come to know by report from
many places and by clear evidence at Barcelona, Valencia and Gandia.

Hence he has humbly begged Us to cause the aforesaid instructions and
Spiritual Exercises to be examined, so that their fruit may be more
spread, and more of the faithful may be induced to use them with greater
devotion. And he has begged Us, should We find them worthy, to approve
and praise them and out of Our Apostolic goodness to make other
provision in the premisses.

We, therefore, have caused these instructions and Exercises to be
examined, and by the testimony of and report made to Us by Our beloved
son John Cardinal Priest of the Title of St. Clement, Bishop of Burgos
and Inquisitor, Our venerable Brother Philip, Bishop of Saluciae, and
Our Vicar General in things spiritual at Rome, and Our beloved son
Aegidius Foscararius, Master of Our Sacred Palace, have found that these
Exercises are full of piety and holiness and that they are and will be
extremely useful and salutary for the spiritual profit of the faithful.

We have, besides, as We should, due regard to the rich fruits which
Ignatius and the aforesaid Society founded by him are constantly
producing everywhere in the Church of God, and to the very great help
which the said Exercises have proved in this.

Moved, then, by this petition, with the aforesaid authority, by these
presents, and of Our certain knowledge, We approve, praise, and favor
with the present writing the aforesaid instructions and Exercises and
all and everything contained in them, and We earnestly exhort all and
each of the faithful of both sexes everywhere to employ instructions and
Exercises so pious and to be instructed by them.

\[Here follow regulations for the diffusion of the book, and then
confirmatory clauses.\]

Given at St. Mark's in Rome under the seal of the Fisherman, 31 July,
1548, in the 14th year of Our Pontificate. *Blo. El. Fulginen.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Preface](seil02.md)
