[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](seil36)  [Next](seil38.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002B561B4/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Spiritual Exercises of St. Ignatius of Loyola*, \[1914\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECOND METHOD OF PRAYER

It is by contemplating the meaning of each word of the Prayer.

**Addition**. The same Addition which was in the First Method of Prayer
will be in this second.

**Prayer**. The Preparatory Prayer will be made according to the person
to whom the prayer is addressed.

**Second Method of Prayer**. The Second Method of Prayer is that the
person, kneeling or seated, according to the greater disposition in
which he finds himself and as more devotion accompanies him, keeping the
eyes closed or fixed on one place, without going wandering with them,
says FATHER, and is on the consideration of this word as long as he
finds meanings, comparisons, relish and consolation in considerations
pertaining to such word. And let him do in the same way on each word of
the OUR FATHER, or of any other prayer which he wants to say in this
way.

**First Rule**. The first Rule is that he will be an hour on the whole
OUR FATHER in the manner already mentioned. Which finished, he will say
a HAIL MARY, CREED, SOUL OF CHRIST, and HAIL, HOLY QUEEN, vocally or
mentally, according to the usual way.

**Second Rule**. The Second Rule is that, should the person who is
contemplating the OUR FATHER find in one word, or in two, matter so good
to think over, and relish and consolation, let him not care to pass on,
although the hour ends on what he finds. The hour finished, he will say
the rest of the OUR FATHER in the usual way.

**Third Rule**. The third is that if on one word or two of the OUR
FATHER one has lingered for a whole hour, when he will want to come back
another day to the prayer, let him say the above-mentioned word, or the
two, as he is accustomed; and on the word which immediately follows let
him commence to contemplate, according as was said in the second Rule.

**First Note**. It is to be noted that, the OUR FATHER finished, in one
or in many days, the same has to be done with the HAIL MARY and then
with the other prayers, so that for some time one is always exercising
himself in one of them.

**Second Note**. The second note is that, the prayer finished, turning,
in few words, to the person to whom he has prayed, let him ask for the
virtues or graces of which he feels he has most need.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Third Method of Prayer](seil38.md)
