[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](seil21)  [Next](seil23.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002B561B4/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Spiritual Exercises of St. Ignatius of Loyola*, \[1914\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE FOURTH DAY

##### MEDITATION ON TWO STANDARDS

The one of Christ, our Commander-in-chief and Lord; the other of
Lucifer, mortal enemy of our human nature.

**Prayer**. The usual Preparatory Prayer.

**First Prelude**. The First Prelude is the narrative. It will be here
how Christ calls and wants all under His standard; and Lucifer, on the
contrary, under his.

**Second Prelude**. The second, a composition, seeing the place. It will
be here to see a great field of all that region of Jerusalem, where the
supreme Commander-in-chief of the good is Christ our Lord; another field
in the region of Babylon, where the chief of the enemy is Lucifer.

**Third Prelude**. The third, to ask for what I want: and it will be
here to ask for knowledge of the deceits of the bad chief and help to
guard myself against them, and for knowledge of the true life which the
supreme and true Captain shows and grace to imitate Him.

**First Point**. The first Point is to imagine as if the chief of all
the enemy seated himself in that great field of Babylon, as in a
great <span id="fr_10"></span>[11](seil83.htm#fn_10.md) chair of fire and
smoke, in shape horrible and terrifying.

**Second Point**. The second, to consider how he issues a summons to
innumerable demons and how he scatters them, some to one city and others
to another, and so through all the world, not omitting any provinces,
places, states, nor any persons in particular.

**Third Point**. The third, to consider the discourse which he makes
them, and how he tells them to cast out nets and chains; that they have
first to tempt with a longing for riches -- as he is accustomed to do in
most cases <span id="fr_11"></span>[12](seil83.htm#fn_11.md) -- that men
may more easily come to vain honor of the world, and then to vast pride.
So that the first step shall be that of riches; the second, that of
honor; the third, that of pride; and from these three steps he draws on
to all the other vices.

So, on the contrary, one has to imagine as to the supreme and true
Captain, Who is Christ our Lord.

**First Point**. The first Point is to consider how Christ our Lord puts
Himself in a great field of that region of Jerusalem, in lowly place,
beautiful and attractive.

**Second Point**. The second, to consider how the Lord of all the world
chooses so many persons -- Apostles, Disciples, etc., -- and sends them
through all the world spreading His sacred doctrine through all states
and conditions of persons.

**Third Point**. The third, to consider the discourse which Christ our
Lord makes to all His servants and friends whom He sends on this
expedition, recommending them to want to help all, by bringing them
first to the highest spiritual poverty, and -- if His Divine Majesty
would be served and would want to choose them -- no less to actual
poverty; the second is to be of contumely and contempt; because from
these two things humility follows. So that there are to be three steps;
the first, poverty against riches; the second, contumely or contempt
against worldly honor; the third, humility against pride. And from these
three steps let them induce to all the other virtues.

**First Colloquy**. One Colloquy to Our Lady, that she may get me grace
from Her Son and Lord that I may be received under His standard; and
first in the highest spiritual poverty, and -- if His Divine Majesty
would be served and would want to choose and receive me -- not less in
actual poverty; second, in suffering contumely and injuries, to imitate
Him more in them, if only I can suffer them without the sin of any
person, or displeasure of His Divine Majesty; and with that a HAIL MARY.

**Second Colloquy**. I will ask the same of the Son, that He may get it
for me of the Father; and with that say the SOUL OF CHRIST.

**Third Colloquy**. I will ask the same of the Father, that He may grant
it to me; and say an OUR FATHER.

**Note**. This Exercise will be made at midnight and then a second time
in the morning, and two repetitions of this same will be made at the
hour of Mass and at the hour of Vespers, always finishing with the three
Colloquies, to Our Lady, to the Son, and to the Father; and that on The
Pairs which follows, at the hour before supper.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Three Pairs of Men](seil23.md)
