[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](seil14)  [Next](seil16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002B561B4/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Spiritual Exercises of St. Ignatius of Loyola*, \[1914\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### FIFTH EXERCISE

##### IT IS A MEDITATION ON HELL

It contains in it, after the Preparatory Prayer and two Preludes, five
Points and one Colloquy:

**Prayer**. Let the Preparatory Prayer be the usual one.

**First Prelude**. The first Prelude is the composition, which is here
to see with the sight of the imagination the length, breadth and depth
of Hell.

**Second Prelude**. The second, to ask for what I want: it will be here
to ask for interior sense of the pain which the damned suffer, in order
that, if, through my faults, I should forget the love of the Eternal
Lord, at least the fear of the pains may help me not to come into sin.

**First Point**. The first Point will be to see with the sight of the
imagination the great fires, and the souls as in bodies of fire.

**Second Point**. The second, to hear with the ears wailings, howlings,
cries, blasphemies against Christ our Lord and against all His Saints.

**Third Point**. The third, to smell with the smell smoke, sulphur,
dregs and putrid things.

**Fourth Point**. The fourth, to taste with the taste bitter things,
like tears, sadness and the worm of conscience.

**Fifth Point**. The fifth, to touch with the touch; that is to say, how
the fires touch and burn the souls.

**Colloquy**. Making a Colloquy to Christ our Lord, I will bring to
memory the souls that are in Hell, some because they did not believe the
Coming, others because, believing, they did not act according to His
Commandments; making three divisions:

**First, Second, and Third Divisions**. The first, before the Coming;
the second, during His life; the third, after His life in this world;
and with this I will give Him thanks that He has not let me fall into
any of these divisions, ending my life.

Likewise, I will consider how up to now He has always had so great pity
and mercy on me.

I will end with an OUR FATHER.

**Note**. The first Exercise will be made at midnight; the second
immediately on rising in the morning; the third, before or after Mass;
in any case, before dinner; the fourth at the hour of Vespers; the
fifth, an hour before supper.

This arrangement of hours, more or less, I always mean in all the four
Weeks, according as his age, disposition and physical condition help the
person who is exercising himself to make five Exercises or fewer.

### ADDITIONS

##### TO MAKE THE EXERCISES BETTER AND TO FIND BETTER WHAT ONE DESIRES

**First Addition**. The first Addition is, after going to bed, just when
I want to go asleep, to think, for the space of a HAIL MARY, of the hour
that I have to rise and for what, making a resume of the Exercise which
I have to make.

**Second Addition**. The second: When I wake up, not giving place to any
other thought, to turn my attention immediately to what I am going to
contemplate in the first Exercise, at midnight, bringing myself to
confusion for my so many sins, setting examples, as, for instance, if a
knight found himself before his king and all his court, ashamed and
confused at having much offended him, from whom he had first received
many gifts and many favors: in the same way, in the second Exercise,
making myself a great sinner and in chains; that is to say going to
appear bound as in chains before the Supreme Eternal Judge; taking for
an example how prisoners in chains and already deserving death, appear
before their temporal judge. And I will dress with these thoughts or
with others, according to the subject matter.

**Third Addition**. The third: A step or two before the place where I
have to contemplate or meditate, I will put myself standing for the
space of an OUR FATHER, my intellect raised on high, considering how God
our Lord is looking at me, etc.; and will make an act of reverence or
humility.

**Fourth Addition**. The fourth: To enter on the contemplation now on my
knees, now prostrate on the earth, now lying face upwards, now seated,
now standing, always intent on seeking what I want.

We will attend to two things. The first is, that if I find what I want
kneeling, I will not pass on; and if prostrate, likewise, etc. The
second; in the Point in which I find what I want, there I will rest,
without being anxious to pass on, until I content myself.

**Fifth Addition**. The fifth: After finishing the Exercise, I will,
during the space of a quarter of an hour, seated or walking leisurely,
look how it went with me in the Contemplation or Meditation; and if
badly, I will look for the cause from which it proceeds, and having so
seen it, will be sorry, in order to correct myself in future; and if
well, I will give thanks to God our Lord, and will do in like manner
another time.

**Sixth Addition**. The sixth: Not to want to think on things of
pleasure or joy, such as heavenly glory, the Resurrection, etc. Because
whatever consideration of joy and gladness hinders our feeling pain and
grief and shedding tears for our sins: but to keep before me that I want
to grieve and feel pain, bringing to memory rather Death and Judgment.

**Seventh Addition**. The seventh: For the same end, to deprive myself
of all light, closing the blinds and doors while I am in the room, if it
be not to recite prayers, to read and eat.

**Eighth Addition**. The eighth: Not to laugh nor say a thing
provocative of laughter.

**Ninth Addition**. The ninth: To restrain my sight, except in receiving
or dismissing the person with whom I have spoken.

**Tenth Addition**. The tenth Addition is penance.

This is divided into interior and exterior. The interior is to grieve
for one's sins, with a firm purpose of not committing them nor any
others. The exterior, or fruit of the first, is chastisement for the
sins committed, and is chiefly taken in three ways.

**First Way**. The first is as to eating. That is to say, when we leave
off the superfluous, it is not penance, but temperance. It is penance
when we leave off from the suitable; and the more and more, the greater
and better -- provided that the person does not injure himself, and that
no notable illness follows.

**Second Way**. The second, as to the manner of sleeping. Here too it is
not penance to leave off the superfluous of delicate or soft things, but
it is penance when one leaves off from the suitable in the manner: and
the more and more, the better -- provided that the person does not
injure himself and no notable illness follows. Besides, let not anything
of the suitable sleep be left off, unless in order to come to the mean,
if one has a bad habit of sleeping too much.

**Third Way**. The third, to chastise the flesh, that is, giving it
sensible pain, which is given by wearing haircloth or cords or iron
chains next to the flesh, by scourging or wounding oneself, and by other
kinds of austerity.

**Note.** What appears most suitable and most secure with regard to
penance is that the pain should be sensible in the flesh and not enter
within the bones, so that it give pain and not illness. For this it
appears to be more suitable to scourge oneself with thin cords, which
give pain exteriorly, rather than in another way which would cause
notable illness within.

**First Note**. The first Note is that the exterior penances are done
chiefly for three ends: First, as satisfaction for the sins committed;

Second, to conquer oneself -- that is, to make sensuality obey reason
and all inferior parts be more subject to the superior;

Third, to seek and find some grace or gift which the person wants and
desires; as, for instance, if he desires to have interior contrition for
his sins, or to weep much over them, or over the pains and sufferings
which Christ our Lord suffered in His Passion, or to settle some doubt
in which the person finds himself.

**Second Note**. The second: It is to be noted that the first and second
Addition have to be made for the Exercises of midnight and at daybreak,
but not for those which will be made at other times; and the fourth
Addition will never be made in church in the presence of others, but in
private, as at home, etc.

**Third Note.** The third: When the person who is exercising himself
does not yet find what he desires -- as tears, consolations, etc., -- it
often helps for him to make a change in food, in sleep and in other ways
of doing penance, so that he change himself, doing penance two or three
days, and two or three others not. For it suits some to do more penance
and others less, and we often omit doing penance from sensual love and
from an erroneous judgment that the human system will not be able to
bear it without notable illness; and sometimes, on the contrary, we do
too much, thinking that the body can bear it; and as God our Lord knows
our nature infinitely better, often in such changes He gives each one to
perceive what is suitable for him.

**Fourth Note**. The fourth: Let the Particular Examen be made to rid
oneself of defects and negligences on the Exercises and Additions. And
so in the SECOND, THIRD AND FOURTH WEEKS.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Call of the Temporal King](seil16)
