[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](seil79)  [Next](seil81.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002B561B4/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Spiritual Exercises of St. Ignatius of Loyola*, \[1914\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## IN THE MINISTRY OF DISTRIBUTING ALMS THE FOLLOWING RULES SHOULD BE KEPT

**First Rule**. The first: If I make the distribution to relatives or
friends, or to persons for whom I have an affection, I shall have four
things to see to, of which mention was made, in part, in the matter of
Election.

The first is, that that love which moves me and makes me give the alms,
should descend from above, from the love of God our Lord, so that I feel
first in me that the love, more or less, which I have to such persons is
for God; and that in the reason why I love them more, God appears.

**Second Rule**. The second: I want to set before me a man whom I have
never seen or known, and desiring all his perfection in the ministry and
condition which he has, as I would want him to keep the mean in his
manner of distributing, for the greater glory of God our Lord and the
greater perfection of his soul; I, doing so, neither more nor less, will
keep the rule and measure which I should want and judge to be right for
the other.

**Third Rule**. The third: I want to consider, as if I were at the point
of death, the form and measure which then I should want to have kept in
the office of my administration, and regulating myself by that, to keep
it in the acts of my distribution.

**Fourth Rule**. The fourth: Looking how I shall find myself on the Day
of Judgment, to think well how then I should want to have used this
office and charge of administration; and the rule which then I should
want to have kept, to keep it now.

**Fifth Rule**. The fifth: When some person feels himself inclined and
drawn to some persons to whom he wants to distribute alms, let him hold
himself back and ponder well the above-mentioned four Rules, examining
and testing his affection by them; and not give the alms until,
conformably to them, he has in all dismissed and cast out his disordered
inclination.

**Sixth Rule**. The sixth: Although there is no fault in taking the
goods of God our Lord to distribute them, when the person is called by
God our Lord to such ministry; still in the quantity of what he has to
take and apply to himself out of what he has to give to others, there
may be doubt as to fault and excess. Therefore, he can reform in his
life and condition by the above-mentioned Rules.

**Seventh Rule**. The seventh: For the reasons already mentioned and for
many others, it is always better and more secure in what touches one's
person and condition of life to spare more and diminish and approach
more to our High Priest, our model and rule, who is Christ our Lord;
conformably to what the third Council of Carthage, in which St.
Augustine was, determines and orders -- that the furniture of the Bishop
be cheap and poor. The same should be considered in all manners of life,
looking at and deciding according to the condition and state of the
persons; as in married life we have the example of St. Joachim and of
St. Ann, who, dividing their means into three parts, gave the first to
the poor, and the second to the ministry and service of the Temple, and
took the third for the support of themselves and of their household.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Notes on the Scruples and Persuasions of our Enemy](seil81.md)
