[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](seil32)  [Next](seil34.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002B561B4/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Spiritual Exercises of St. Ignatius of Loyola*, \[1914\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### RULES TO PUT ONESELF IN ORDER FOR THE FUTURE AS TO EATING

**First Rule**. The first rule is that it is well to abstain less from
bread, because it is not a food as to which the appetite is used to act
so inordinately, or to which temptation urges as in the case of the
other foods.

**Second Rule**. The second: Abstinence appears more convenient as to
drinking, than as to eating bread. So, one ought to look much what is
helpful to him, in order to admit it, and what does him harm, in order
to discard it.

**Third Rule**. The third: As to foods, one ought to have the greatest
and most entire abstinence, because as the appetite is more ready to act
inordinately, so temptation is more ready in making trial, on this head.
And so abstinence in foods, to avoid disorder, can be kept in two ways,
one by accustoming oneself to eat coarse foods; the other, if one takes
delicate foods, by taking them in small quantity.

**Fourth Rule**. The fourth: Guarding against falling into sickness, the
more a man leaves off from what is suitable, the more quickly he will
reach the mean which he ought to keep in his eating and drinking; for
two reasons: the first, because by so helping and disposing himself, he
will many times experience more the interior knowledge, consolations and
Divine inspirations to show him the mean which is proper for him; the
second, because if the person sees himself in such abstinence not with
so great corporal strength or disposition for the Spiritual Exercises,
he will easily come to judge what is more suitable to his bodily
support.

**Fifth Rule**. The fifth: While the person is eating, let him consider
as if he saw Christ our Lord eating with His Apostles, and how He drinks
and how He looks and how He speaks; and let him see to imitating Him. So
that the principal part of the intellect shall occupy itself in the
consideration of Christ our Lord, and the lesser part in the support of
the body; because in this way he will get greater system and order as to
how he ought to behave and manage himself.

**Sixth Rule**. The sixth: Another time, while he is eating, he can take
another consideration, either on the life of Saints, or on some pious
Contemplation, or on some spiritual affair which he has to do, because,
being intent on such thing, he will take less delight and feeling in the
corporal food.

**Seventh Rule**. The seventh: Above all, let him guard against all his
soul being intent on what he is eating, and in eating let him not go
hurriedly, through appetite, but be master of himself, as well in the
manner of eating as in the quantity which he eats.

**Eighth Rule**. The eighth: To avoid disorder, it is very helpful,
after dinner or after supper, or at another hour when one feels no
appetite for eating, to decide with oneself for the coming dinner or
supper, and so on, each day, the quantity which it is suitable that he
should eat. Beyond this let him not go because of any appetite or
temptation, but rather, in order to conquer more all inordinate appetite
and temptation of the enemy, if he is tempted to eat more, let him eat
less.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: First Contemplation](seil34.md)
