[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](seil31)  [Next](seil33.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002B561B4/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Spiritual Exercises of St. Ignatius of Loyola*, \[1914\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECOND DAY

##### SECOND CONTEMPLATION IN THE MORNING

#### FROM THE SUPPER TO THE GARDEN INCLUSIVELY

**Prayer**. The usual Preparatory Prayer

**First Prelude**. The first Prelude is the narrative and it will be
here how Christ our Lord went down with His eleven Disciples from Mount
Sion, where He made the Supper, to the Valley of Josaphat. Leaving the
eight in a part of the Valley and the other three in a part of the
Garden, and putting Himself in prayer, He sweats sweat as drops of
blood, <span id="fr_19"></span>[20](seil83.htm#fn_19.md) and after He
prayed three times to the Father and wakened His three Disciples, and
after the enemies at His voice fell down, Judas giving Him the kiss of
peace, and St. Peter cutting off the ear of Malchus, and Christ putting
it in its place; being taken as a malefactor, they lead Him down the
valley, and then up the side, to the house of Annas.

**Second Prelude**. The second is to see the place. It will be here to
consider the road from Mount Sion to the Valley of Josaphat, and
likewise the Garden, whether wide, whether large, whether of one kind,
whether of another.

**Third Prelude**. The third is to ask for what I want. It belongs to
the Passion to ask for grief with Christ in grief, anguish with Christ
in anguish, tears and interior pain at such great pain which Christ
suffered for me.

**First Note**. In this second Contemplation, after the Preparatory
Prayer is made, with the three Preludes already mentioned, the same form
of proceeding will be kept through the Points and Colloquy as was kept
in the first Contemplation, on the Supper.

And at the hour of Mass and Vespers two repetitions will be made on the
first and second Contemplation, and then, before supper, the senses will
be applied on the two above-said Contemplations, always prefixing the
Preparatory Prayer and the three Preludes, according to the subject
matter, in the same form as was said and explained in the SECOND WEEK.

**Second Note**. According as age, disposition and physical condition
help the person who is exercising himself, he will make each day the
five Exercises or fewer.

**Third Note**. In this THIRD WEEK the second and sixth Additions will
in part be changed.

The second will be, immediately on awaking, to set before me where I am
going and to what, and summing up a little the contemplation which I
want to make, according as the Mystery shall be, to force myself, while
I am getting up and dressing, to be sad and grieve over such great grief
and such great suffering of Christ our Lord.

The sixth will be changed, so as not to try to bring joyful thoughts,
although good and holy, as, for instance, are those on the Resurrection
and on heavenly glory, but rather to draw myself to grief and to pain
and anguish, bringing to mind frequently the labors, fatigues and pains
of Christ our Lord, which He suffered from the moment when He was born
up to the Mystery of the Passion in which I find myself at present.

**Fourth Note**. The Particular Examen on the Exercises and present
Additions, will be made as it was made in the past Week.

**Second Day**. The second day at midnight, the Contemplation will be
from the Garden to the house of Annas inclusive (P. 154), and in the
morning from the house of Annas to the house of Caiphas inclusive (P.
155), and then the two repetitions and the application of the senses, as
has been already said.

**Third Day**. The third day, at midnight, from the house of Caiphas to
Pilate, inclusive (p. 155); and in the morning, from Pilate to Herod
inclusive (p. 156); and then the repetitions and senses, in the same
form as has been already said.

**Fourth Day**. The fourth day, at midnight, from Herod to Pilate (p.
157), doing and contemplating up to half through the Mysteries of the
same house of Pilate, and then, in the Exercise of the morning, the
other Mysteries which remained of the same house; and the repetitions
and the senses, as has been said.

**Fifth Day**. The fifth day, at midnight, from the house of Pilate up
to the Crucifixion (p. 158), and in the morning from His being raised on
the Cross until He expired (p. 158), then the two repetitions, and the
senses.

**Sixth Day**. The sixth day, at midnight, from the Descent from the
Cross to the Tomb, exclusive (p. 159) and in the morning from the Tomb,
inclusive, to the house where Our Lady was, after her Son was buried.

**Seventh Day**. The seventh day, a Contemplation on the whole Passion
together, in the Exercise of midnight and of the morning, and in place
of the two repetitions and of the senses one will consider all that day,
as frequently as he can, how the most holy Body of Christ our Lord
remained separated and apart from the Soul: and where and how It
remained buried. Likewise, one will consider the loneliness of Our Lady,
whose grief and fatigue were so great: then, on the other side, the
loneliness of the Disciples.

**Note**. It is to be noted that whoever wants to dwell more on the
Passion, has to take in each Contemplation fewer Mysteries; that is to
say, in the first Contemplation, the Supper only; in the second, the
Washing of the Feet; in the third, the giving of the Blessed Sacrament
to them; in the fourth, the discourse which Christ made to them; and so
through the other Contemplations and Mysteries.

Likewise, after having finished the Passion, let him take for an entire
day the half of the whole Passion, and the second day the other half,
and the third day the whole Passion.

On the contrary, whoever would want to shorten more in the Passion, let
him take at midnight the Supper, in the morning the Garden, at the hour
of Mass the house of Annas, at the hour of Vespers the house of Caiphas,
in place of the hour before supper the house of Pilate; so that, not
making repetitions, nor the Application of the Senses, he make each day
five distinct Exercises, and in each Exercise take a distinct Mystery of
Christ our Lord. And after thus finishing the whole Passion, he can,
another day, do all the Passion together in one Exercise, or in
different ones, as it will seem to him that he will be better able to
help himself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Eating](seil33.md)
