[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gbos36)  [Next](gbos38) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Gardnerian Book of Shadows*, by Gerald Gardner, at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Consecrating Tools

\(1957\)

(Note: if possible lay any new weapon touching an already consecrated
one, Sword to sword, Athame to Athame, etc.)

\[1\] Prepare Circle and purify. All tools must be consecrated by a man
and a woman, both as naked as drawn swords; they must be purified,
clean, and properly prepared.

\[2\] Place tool on pentacle on altar. Magus sprinkles it with salt and
water. Witch passes it through smoke of incense, replaces it on
pentacle. Touching with already consecrated weapon, they say the First
Conjuration.

\[2a\] For sword or athame, say "I conjure thee, O Sword (or Athame) of
Steel, that thou servest me for a strength and a defence in all magical
operations, against all mine enemies, visible and invisible, in the
names of Aradia and Cernunnos. I conjure thee anew by the Holy Names
Aradia and Cernunnos, that thou servest me for a protection in all
adversities, so aid me."

\[2b\] For any other tool, say, "Aradia and Cernunnos, deign to bless
and to consecrate this \[tool\], that it may obtain necessary virtue
through thee for all acts of love and Beauty."

\[3\] Again they sprinkle and cense, and say the Second Conjuration:

\[3a\] For sword or athame, say, "I conjure thee, O Sword \[Athame\] of
Steel, by the Great Gods and the Gentle Goddesses, by the virtue of the
Heavens, of the Stars, of the Spirits who preside over them, that thou
mayest receive such virtues that I may obtain the end that I desire in
all things wherein I shall use thee, by the power of Aradia and
Cernunnos."

\[3b\] For any other tool, say, "Aradia and Cernunnos, bless this
instrument prepared in thine honour." (For the scourge or cords, add,
"That it may only serve for a good use and end, and to thy Glory.")

\[4\] All instruments when consecrated should be presented to their User
by giving the \[point-down triangle\] sign salute (if they are working
in the 1st degree, or the sign of the higher degree if they are working
that.)

\[5\] Then the one who is not the owner should give the Fivefold Kiss to
the owner. For the final kiss, the tool should be placed between the
breasts, and the two workers should embrace for as long as they feel
like, it being held in place by their bodies. The new owner should use
it immediately, i.e., cast (trace) Circle with Sword or Athame, wave
wand to 4 quarters, cut something with white-handled knife, etc. Cords
and scourge should be used at once.

The tool should be kept in as close connection as possible to the naked
body for at least a month, i.e., kept under pillow, etc. When not in
use, all tools and weapons should be put away in a secret place; and it
is good that this should be near your sleeping place, and that you
handle them each night before retiring. Do not allow anyone to touch or
handle any of your tools until they are thoroughly impregnated with your
aura; say, six months or as near as possible. But a couple working
together may own the same tools, which will be impregnated with the aura
of both.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Old Laws](gbos38)
