[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gbos28)  [Next](gbos30) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Gardnerian Book of Shadows*, by Gerald Gardner, at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Summer Solstice

Form circle. Invoke, Purify. Cauldron is placed before altar filled with
water, wreathed with summer flowers. The people, men and women
alternately, stand round circle. High Priestess stands in north, before
Cauldron, holding raised wand, which should be Phallic or tipped with a
pinecone (anciently the thyrsus) or a riding pole or a broomstick,
invokes the sun.

"Great One of Heaven, Power of the Sun, we invoke thee in thine ancient
names, Michael, Balin, Arthur, Lugh, Herne. Come again, as of old, into
this thy land. Lift up thy shining spear of light to protect us. Put to
flight the powers of darkness, give us fair woodlands and green fields,
blossoming orchards and r ipening corn. Bring us to stand upon thy hill
of vision, and show us the path to the lovely realms of the gods."

High Priestess draws invoking pentacle on Magus with wand.

Magus comes forward sunwise and takes wand with kiss, plunges wand into
Cauldron and holds it upright, saying, "The spear to the Cauldron, the
lance to the Grail, spirit to flesh, man to woman, sun to earth." He
salutes High Priestess over Cauldron, then rejoins people, still bearing
wand.

High Priestess takes aspergillum, stands by Cauldron, says, "Dance ye
about the Cauldron of Cerridwen the Goddess, and be ye blessed with the
touch of this consecrated water, even as the sun, the lord of light,
arriveth in his strength in the sign of the waters of life."

The people dance sunwise about the altar and Cauldron, led by Magus
bearing wand. High Priestess sprinkles them lightly as they pass her.

Ritual of cakes and wine.

Any other dances, rites, or games as the Priestess and people wish.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Sabbat Rituals: Autumn Equinox](gbos30)
