[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gbos03)  [Next](gbos05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Gardnerian Book of Shadows*, by Gerald Gardner, at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Initiation: Second Degree

Magus binds Witch as before, but does not blindfold her, and
circumambulates with her, proclaims to the four quarters, "Hear, ye
Mighty Ones, (name), a duly consecrated Priestess and Witch, is now
properly prepared to be made a High Priestess and Witch Queen." Magus
now leads her thrice around the circle with the half-running,
half-dancing step, halts south of the altar, has the Witch kneel, and
ties her down to the altar as before.

Magus: "To attain this sublime degree, it is necessary to suffer and be
purified. Art ready to suffer to Learn?"

Priestess Witch: "I am."

Magus: "I prepare thee to take the great oath."

He strikes three knells on the bell, and again gives the series of
three, seven, nine, and 21 strokes with the scourge as before.

Magus: "I now give thee a new name: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_. \[kiss\]

Magus: "Repeat thy new name after me, I, (name), swear upon my mother's
womb and by mine Honor among men and among my brothers and sisters of
the Art, that I will never reveal to any at all any of the secrets of
the Art, except it be to a worthy person, properly prepared, in the
center of a Magic Circle, such as I am now in. This I swear by my hopes
of Salvation, my past lives, and my hopes of future ones to come, and I
devote myself to utter destruction if I break this my solemn oath."

Magus kneels, placing left hand under her knees and right hand on her
head, thus forming magic link.

Magus: "I hereby will all my power into you." Wills.

Magus now unties her feet, unties the Cable Tow from the altar, and
helps the Witch to her feet.

Magus: "I hereby sign and consecrate you with the great Magic Sign.
Remember how it is formed and you will always recognize it.

"I consecrate thee with oil." (He anoints her with oil on her womb,
right breast, left hip, right hip, left breast, and womb again, thus
tracing a point-down pentacle.)

"I consecrate thee with wine." (He anoints her with wine in the same
pattern.)

"I consecrate thee with my lips" (he kisses her in the same pattern),
"High Priestess and Witch Queen."

Magus now unbinds Witch's hands and removes the cord, saying, "Newly
made High Priestess and Witch Queen" \[kiss\] "you will now use the
working tools in turn.

First, the Magic Sword; with it you will scribe the Magic Circle
\[kiss\]

"Secondly, the Athame" (Form Circle) \[kiss\]

"Thirdly, the White Handled Knife" (use) \[kiss\]

"Fourthly, the Wand" (Wave to 4 Quarters) \[kiss\]

"Fifthly, the Pentacle" (Show to 4 Quarters) \[kiss\]

"Sixthly, the Censer of Incense" (Circle, cense) \[kiss\]

"Seventhly, the cords; bind me as I bound you." Witch binds Magus and
ties him to Altar.

Magus: "Learn, in Witchcraft, thou must ever return triple. As I
scourged thee, so thou must scourge me, but triple. So where you
received 3, return 9; where you received 7, return 21; where you
received 9, return 27; where you received 21, return 63." Witch scourges
Magus as instructed, 120 strokes total.

Magus: "Thou hast obeyed the Law. But mark well, when thou receivest
good, so equally art bound to return good threefold."

Witch now unbinds Magus and helps him to his feet. Magus, taking the new
Initiate by the hand and holding the Athame in the other, passes once
round the Circle, proclaiming at the Four Quarters, "Hear, Ye Mighty
Ones, (name) hath been duly consecrated High Priestess and Witch Queen."
(Note, if ceremony ends here, close circle with "Hail and farewell." If
not go to next degree.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Initiation: Third Degree](gbos05)
