[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gbos34)  [Next](gbos36) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Gardnerian Book of Shadows*, by Gerald Gardner, at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# The Third-Degree Initiation

\(1957\)

Magus gives Fivefold Kiss.

Magus: "Ere we proceed with this sublime degree, I must beg purification
at thy hands."

High Priestess binds Magus and ties him down to the altar. She
circumambulates three times, and scourges Magus with three, seven, nine,
and 21 strokes. She then unbinds him and helps him to his feet.

Magus now binds the High Priestess and ties her down to the altar. He
circumambulates, proclaiming to the four quarters, "Hear, ye mighty
Ones, the twice consecrate and Holy (name), High Priestess and Witch
Queen, is properly prepared and will now proceed to erect the Sacred
Altar."

Magus scourges High Priestess with three, seven, nine, and 21 strokes.

Magus kisses her feet. "Ere I dare proceed with this sublime degree, I
must again beg purification at thy hands."

She binds and scourges him.

Note: if High Priestess has not performed this rite before, he says,
"Here I reveal to you a great mystery." \[Kneel and place couch in
position so as to face north.\]

Assist me to build As the Mighty One willed, An Altar of praise, From
beginning of days, Thus doth it lie, Twixt the points of the sky, For
thus it was placed When the Goddess embraced The Horned One, Her Lord,
Who taught her the word,

\[Priestess lies down in such a way that her vagina is approximately at
the center of the circle\]

Which quickened the womb, And conquered the Tomb. Be thus as of yore,
The Shrine we adore, \[kiss\] The feast without fail, The life-giving
Grail, \[kiss\] Before it uprear The Miraculous Spear, And invoke in
this sign The Goddess divine. \[kiss\]

Invoke: "Thou who at moon of night doth reign, Queen of the starry realm
above, 'Not unto Thee may we attain Unless Thine Image be of Love.'
\[kiss\]

By moon-rays silver shaft of power, By green leaf breaking from the bud,
By seed that springeth into flower, By life that courseth in the blood.
\[kiss\]

By rushing wind and leaping flame, By flowing water and green earth,
Pour us the wine of our desire From out Thy Cauldron of Rebirth.
\[kiss\]

Here may we see in vision clear The Secret Strange unveiled at length,
The wondrous Twin-Pillars rear Erect in Beauty and in Strength. \[kiss
breasts\]

Altar of Mysteries manifold, The Sacred Circle's central point, Thus do
I sign thee as of old, With kisses of my lips anoint.

(Eightfold Kiss: 3 points, Lips, 2 Breasts and back to lips, & 5
points <span id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2), with oil, wine, & kisses)

Open for me the Secret Way, The pathway of intelligence, Between the
Gates of Night and Day, Beyond the bounds of time and sense.

Behold the Mystery aright, The Five True Points of Fellowship, Here
where the Lance and Grail unite, And feet and knees and breast and
lips."

Magus and High Priestess: "Encourage our hearts, Let thy Light
crystallize itself in our blood, fulfilling us of Resurrection, for
there is no part of us that is not of the Gods."

(Exchange Names.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2"></span>[3](gbos35.htm#fr_2) These are shown by a drawing
to be: genitals, left foot, right knee, left knee, right foot, and back
to genitals.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Witches' Chant or Rune](gbos36)
