[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gbos40) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Gardnerian Book of Shadows*, by Gerald Gardner, at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Forming the Circle.

\(1961\)

\[1\] Must have a man and a woman, properly prepared, i.e., naked.

\[2\] Mark a circle nine feet across on the floor with chalk, etc. The
best way is to get a string. Tie 2 loops four foot, six inches apart.
Put one loop over a nail or something in the center. Put chalk in the
other and run it round. If you can't make marks on the floor, put
furniture, etc., round to form it. Have a table, etc., as an Altar, with
all tools, etc., on it. Have a bowl of water, and some salt.

\[3\] Place Athame on the bowl of water. Say, "I exorcise thee, O
creature of Water, that thou cast out from Thee all the impurities and
uncleannesses of the Spirits of the World of Phantasm in the name of
Aradia and Cernunnos. But ever mind that Water purifies the body, but
the scourge purifies the soul."

\[4\] Then place Athame on the salt. Say, "Blessings be upon this
creature of Salt. Let all malignity and hindrance be cast forth
hencefrom, and let all good enter herein. Wherefore I bless thee that
thou mayest aid me, in the name of Aradia and Cernunnos.

\[5\] Then trace Circle on the lines you have marked out, starting at
the East and returning to the East. (Always go round the circle with
your Right hand to the Altar. Never go Widdershins.) Then put the Salt
into the water. and go round the circle again, sprinkling it to purify
it. Then go round again censing it. (Everyone in the circle must be
sprinkled and censed.)

\[6\] Then go to the East, Sword or Athame in hand. Draw an invoking
pentacle in the Air, starting at the top and going to the lefthand
corner, saying, "I summon, and call thee up, O Ye Mighty ones of the
East, to guard the Circle and witness our rites." Then holding the point
of sword or Athame upwards, do the same to the south, west, and north,
and return to the center, to the south of the Altar.

\[7\] Then each girl should bind her man, hands behind back and cable
Tow to neck. He should kneel at altar, and be scourged. When all men are
thus "purified," they purify the girls in turn. No one may be in the
circle without being thus purified.

\[8\] Then do whatever work wanted.

\[9\] When closing the Circle, the High Priestess, or whoever she tells
to do it, saying, "Hail, ye mighty ones of the East. I thank you for
attending, and ere ye depart for your lovely realms, We say, Hail and
Farewell."
