[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](fim00)  [Next](fim02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_i">p. i</span>

# INTRODUCTION.

<span id="img_tinit"></span>

|                     |
|---------------------|
| ![T](img/tinit.jpg) |

HE Isle of Man has been unfortunate in not having had competent
collectors of its Legendary Lore. But few have taken the slightest
interest in it, and those who have did not understand the language in
which they could have learned it at first hand. The earliest of these
collectors, and the one to whom we owe most of the tales which are given
in the following pages, was George Waldron, an Englishman, who was in
the Isle of Man, where he seems to have been acting as Commissioner from
the British Government, to watch and report on the import and export
trade of the country, between 1720 and 1730. He seems to have had but
little knowledge of the Manx people and their ways, and the marvellous
tales which he tells are given in his own language, find, probably, with
many additions suggested by his fancy. After an interval of a century
came Train, who had also the disadvantage of being a stranger, and who
was, therefore, obliged to gather the greater number of the few
additional tales he gives at second hand. The next collector of Manx
Folk-Lore who began his work about 1860, was William Harrison, a
Lancashire man, who lived for some time on the Island, being a member of
the House of Keys, and devoted considerable attention to Manx
antiquities. He has done good service in the cause of Folk-Lore by
collecting the ballads, proverbs, &c., which are printed in volumes XVI.
and XXI. of the Manx Society's publications, and in editing Waldron s
History. And, lastly, Jenkinson inserted some scraps of Folk-Lore in his
"Guide to the Isle of Man," published in 1874. Campbell, the editor of
the "Popular Tales of the West Highlands," who visited the Island in
1860, was a singularly competent observer, and might have done much for
Manx Folk-Lore, even at such a late period, and in spite of his also
being a stranger, if he had thought it worth his while. His visit was,
however, only a very brief one, and, being discouraged at his Gaelic not
being understood, and at the difficulty of extracting any information
from the Manx peasantry, did not persevere. He describes his
difficulties in getting into the confidence of the Manx peasants as
follows:--"I found them willing to talk, eager to question, kindly,
homely folk, with whom it was easy to begin an acquaintance. I heard
everywhere that it used to be common to hear old men telling stories
about the fire in Manx; but any attempt to extract a story, or search
out a queer old custom, or a half-forgotten belief seemed to act as a
pinch of snuff does on a snail. The Manxman would not

<span id="page_ii">p. ii</span>

trust the foreigner with secrets; his eyes twinkled suspiciously, and
his hand seemed unconsciously to grasp his mouth, as if to keep all
fast. "It is remarkable that no native Manxmen have, till recently,
troubled themselves about collecting what, we suppose, they considered
idle, if not mischievous, tales. <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) If
they had done so, and had recorded them in the original Manx, they would
have conferred a boon upon those who are interested in such researches.
Now it is, unfortunately, too late. The Manx language is moribund, and
Manx superstitions, except in the more remote districts, are in a
similar condition. Since even so recent a date as 1860, the change in
the condition of the natives is simply marvellous, The constant and
rapid intercourse with England, Scotland, and Ireland, the large
emigration of the Manx, and immigration of strangers, the shoals of
visitors who come over in the summer, and the consequent increase of
wealth and prosperity, have produced their natural results, There are,
however, remote parts of the Island, away from the towns and the main
highways, whole beliefs in Fairies, Goblins, Demons, and Ghosts still
remain; where the "Evil Eye" is still a power; where there is still a
vague distrust of solitary old crones; and where the "Charmer" has a
larger practice than the ordinary medical practitioner. But these things
are not spoken of either to the stranger or to the educated Manxman,
especially if a clergyman, and, even among themselves, they are
mentioned with some sense of shame, and with a wish to keep them as
secret as possible, so that the most diligent and craftily-put enquiries
have extracted but little that has not been hitherto known. <span
id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1) On the whole, the present state of the Isle
of Man is so antagonistic to such superstitions that, to place the
reader in a position which will enable him to understand the sort of
people and the state of society in which they originated, it is
necessary to draw a veil over the present, and to uncover the past as
far as possible. This we are able to do only to a very limited extent,
as the old historians, or rather annalists, were not at all concerned
with the people whose history they were supposed to write, but merely
with the movements of their rulers, dynastic and episcopal changes,
battles and ecclesiastical squabbles. We append such meagre accounts as
exist. The first writer who mentions the people in anyway was Merick,
who was Governor and Bishop in 1577, and who confines himself to the
astounding statement that the women when they went abroad, girded
themselves with the winding sheet that they proposed to be buried in,
"to show themselves mindful of their mortality. "Speed, writing in 1627,
copies this, and adds on his own account the fiction that "such of them
(the inhabitants) as are at any time condemned to dye: are sowed within
a sack, and flung from a rocke into the sea." Blundell, writing 30 years
later, corrects the error about the winding sheets, which, he shows,
were merely blankets or plaids, and mentions their houses, &c., as
follows:--"These men's habitations are mere hovels, compacted of stones
and clay for the walls, thatched with broom, most commonly containing
one room only. Very few have two rooms, have no upper rooms--such as in
their town they call lofts--nor any ceiling but the thatch itself, with
the rafters,

<span id="page_iii">p. iii</span>

yet in this smoking hut . . . doth the man, his wife, and children
cohabit and in many places with ye geese and ducks under ye bed, the
cocks and hens over his head, the cow and calf at the bed's foot . . .
their constant diet is only salt butter, herrings, and oat cakes, here
made almost as thin as a paper leaf . . . their drink is either simple
water, or water mixt with milk, or at best buttermilk." Beer, he says,
is only drunk when they meet at market. <span
id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2) Chaloner, who was Governor of the Island at
this time, says that the Manx are "very civil . . . laborious, contented
with simple diet and lodgings; their drink, water; their meat, fish;
their bedding, hay or straw, generally; much addicted to the musick of
the violyne . . . bearing a great esteem and reverence for the publique
service of God." <span id="fr_3"></span>[2](#fn_3) Bishop Gibson's
account, in the edition of Camden's *Britannia* published in 1695, adds
nothing new. Waldron (1720-30) says that the houses of the peasantry
"are no more than cabins built of sods, and covered with the same,
except a few belonging to the better sort of farmers, which are thatched
with straw . . . the greater part of them (the peasants) of both sexes
go barefoot, except on Sunday or when they are at work in the field, and
have then only small pieces of cow's or horse's hide at the bottom of
their feet, tyed on with packthread, which they call carranes. Their
food is commonly herrings and potatoes, or bread made of
potatoes." <span id="fr_4"></span>[3](#fn_4)

Thomas Quayle, a Manxman, who wrote in 1812 about the agriculture of the
Island, also mentions the cottages of the peasantry as follows: ''The
walls are about seven feet high, constructed of sods of earth; at each
side the door appears a square hole containing a leaded window. Chimney
there is none, but a perforation of the roof thatch elevated at one end,
emits a great part of the smoke from the fire underneath. The timber
forming the roof is slender, coarse, and crooked. It is thatched with
straw, crossed chequerwise, at intervals of twelve or eighteen inches,
by ropes of the same material, secured either by being tied to the wall
by means of coarse slates fixed and projecting, or by stones hanging
from the ends of the ropes. From that end of the roof whence the smoke
issues to the other end, thereof gently declines in height. If the means
of the inhabitant enable him to keep a cow, a continuation of the roof
covers another hovel of similar materials, accommodating this valuable
inmate. . . . The floor (of both portions of the hovel) is hardened
clay; the embers burn on a stone placed on a hearth, without range or
chimney; the turf-smoke, wandering at random, darkens every article of
furniture, till it finds exit at the aperture in the roof or elsewhere.
A partition separates the cottage into two rooms; over the chamber end
is sometimes a loft, to which the ascent is by a ladder from the keeping
room. The aspect of the inhabitants is in unison with their abode. The
mother and children are bare-legged and bare-footed; their dark-coloured
woollen garments squalid and unseemly. Yet, perhaps, this wretchedness
is but in externals. This homely abode is warm and evidently not
unhealthy . . . In the northern district, where quarries of stone are
less accessible and lime more distant, the cottages continue to be built
in the primitive manner. In the southern, where building materials are
comparatively more plentiful, stone and lime are used in the new
cottages

<span id="page_iv">p. iv</span>

more. The ancient mode of thatching and roping is still general" <span
id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5)

He is followed, in 1816, by Bullock, who declares that "what any English
peasant would consider a state of actual starvation is scarcely regarded
by Manxman as including any particular deprivation; from their birth
they are habituated to live very hardly. Herrings, potatoes, oatmeal,
and the same very moderate quantities, are the general fare equally of
the small native farmer and the labourer. The latter resides contentedly
in a cottage of mud, under a roof of straw, so low that a man of
middling stature can hardly stand erect in any part of it. If to the
common necessaries above stated the good people add a stock of turf for
the fire and a cow, fed in the lanes and hedges, they enjoy the utmost
abundance of which they have any idea. A chaff bed for the whole family,
a stool, and a wooden table constitute the furniture of their
mansion." <span id="fr_6"></span>[2](#fn_6) Finally, Campbell, in 1860,
tells us that, "Of the poorer classes living in the mountain farms, and
at the points and distant corners of the Island, these are still many
who can hardly speak anything but Manx. Their hair is dark; the sound of
the voices, even their houses, are Celtic. I know one turf dwelling
which might be a house in North Uist. There was the fire on the floor,
the children seated around it, the black haired Celtic mother on a low
stool in front, the hens quarrelling about a nest under the table, in
which several wanted to lay eggs at once." From other sources we gather
the following further facts about the Manx people of by-gone times:--A
fireplace or chimney in their houses was quite a modern luxury. the
*chiollagh*, or hearth, was made of a few stones laid on the floor, and
the smoke found its way out either through the door or a hole in the
roof. Frequently, from the scarcity of wood in the Island, they were too
poor to afford a door, and used a bundle of gorse in its place. For
burning they used turf, or even dried seaweed, front which latter they
also got kelp for washing. Of their costume we have been able to collect
the following particulars:--Train tells us, but without giving his
authority, that the ancient Manx wore their hair long, and bound behind
with a leather thong. The dress of the peasantry was made of *kialter*,
a woollen cloth, neither milled nor tucked. It consisted of trousers,
more recently of knee breeches, when blue stockings were worn, and a
short coat and waistcoat, The colour of these garments was usually
*keeir*, or dark brown, from the undyed fleece of the *loghtan*, or
native sheep; but sometimes it was *keeir-as-lheeah*, "brown and gray,"
or *keeir-as-gorrym*, "brown and blue," the colours being mixed in the
wool, *Gorrym*, "blue", was also a favourite colour. On their feet they
wore *oashyr-voynee*, a stocking without a foot, but having a string to
fasten it under the sole; or *oashyr-slobbagh*, a stocking having no
sole to the foot, but a lappet covering the top of the foot, with a loop
to the fore toe, and a heel strap. Over these they had the *carrane* or
*kerrane*, a cover for the sole and sides of the foot, made of raw hide,
salted and dried, and laced with thongs of the same at the top of the
foot. Train says that, in 1836, these were still worn by the peasantry
in the uplands, but that they were being rapidly displaced by a

<span id="page_v">p. v</span>

shoe with a large buckle, and with the buckles the knee breeches came in
vogue. Sometimes elderly people made inner soles to their *carranes* of
pitched sheep skin, but this was generally regarded as effeminate. On
their heads they had a *bayrn*, or cap, like the Scotch bonnet, but, at
the beginning of the present century, this was discarded in favour of
the tall beaver hat. The women wore a petticoat, of *oanrey*, of
*eglhinolley*, or linsey-woolsey, which was usually dyed dark-red with
*scriss-ny-greg*, a moss which grows upon the rocks by the sea, but it
was also blue, *keeir*, or *keeir* and white chequered. It was full and
loose, and fell to within six inches of the ground, Over this there was
a loose jacket with a broad collar, called the "bedgown", usually made
of linen, and dyed some bright colour, drawn in at the waist by a linen
apron. On the head a mob cap, called *quoif cooil corran*, or cap shaped
like the back of a sickle, dark blue or *keeir* stockings and
*carranes*, or, at a later date, buckled shoes, completed the attire. A
sun-bonnet was substituted for the mob cap in the summer, but frequently
no cap at all was worn in the house, and when they went out they wrapped
themselves in the plaid or shawl, which Bishop Merick called their
winding sheet. It seems probable that in early days, before the time of
English rule, the men wore the Scotch kilt, which at that time was worn
by both Scotch and Irish. It must be remembered that all these garments
we have mentioned were made either at home, or in the immediate vicinity
of it. The women spun both wool and linen, which was woven by the
weaver, or *fidder*, who was to be found all over the country. When the
cattle were killed at Martinmas, and salted for winter consumption,
their hides were kept and tanned at home; and the light beer, or
*jough*, which was the usual drink, was generally home-brewed. The
woollen and linen cloths were made into garments by tailors, who
travelled from farm house to farm house, and who were usually famous
gossips and story tellers. Stories, or *skeeal*, were told also by the
old people during the long winter nights, which stories they had heard
from their forefathers, and which they in their turn handed on to their
children. As an illustration of this method of oral tradition, it is
recorded that the poem of "Fin and Ossian" was written down a century
ago from the recitation of an old woman, who, when she was. asked how
and where she had learned it, replied "from her mother and grandmother
and many more." She told them also that she remembered the name of
*Farg-hail*, the man with the terrible eyes; and *Lhane-jiarg*, the man
with the bloody red hand. Can the existence of superstitions among a
people so excluded from the outer world be wondered at? It is difficult
in these days to estimate how complete this seclusion was, but a fair
idea of what it was, even at the beginning of the present century, may
be arrived at from considering the fact that the Battle of Waterloo was
not heard of in the Isle of Man till the beginning of September, six
weeks after it had taken place. Apart from their isolation, too, the
people, who are of mixed Celtic and Scandinavian race, were naturally
superstitious, so much so that Waldron stated "he verily believed that,
idolisers as they were of their clergy, they would be even refractory to
them were they to preach against the existence of fairies;" and at the
beginning of the present century, we have the evidence of Sir Walter
Scott, who was well informed

<span id="page_vi">p. vi</span>

about the Folk-Lore of the Island by his brother, who lived there, to
the effect that "Tales of Goblins, Ghosts, and Spectres; legends of
Saints and Devils, of Fairies and familiar Spirits, in no corner of the
British dominions are told and received with more absolute credulity
than in the Isle of Man.

We have divided our consideration of the Folk-Lore of the Isle of Man
into the following chapters:--

\(1\) Legendary Myths.

\(2\) Hagiological, and Mytho-Historical Legends.

\(3\) Fairies and Familiar Spirits.

\(4\) Hobgoblins, Monsters, Giants, Mermaids, and Apparitions.

\(5\) Magic, Witchcraft, Charms, &c.

\(6\) Customs and Superstitions connected with the Seasons.

\(7\) Superstitions connected with the Sun, Animals, Trees, Plants,
Sacred Edifices, &c.

\(8\) Customs and Superstitions, connected with Birth, Marriage, Death,
&c.

\(9\) Customs formerly enforced by Law.

\(10\) Proverbs and Sayings.

Folk-Lore may be defined as being "the comparison and identification of
the survivals of archaical beliefs, customs, and traditions, in modern
ages; and though many will doubtless think that the attempt to
perpetuate these figments of an ignorant and superstitious past is a
mistaken one; yet, on the other hand, there has been a disposition of
late years to recognise that they contain elements of instruction as
well as of amusement, for they are "often the only possible means of
penetrating to the historic past of nations," and they are "certainly
the only means of tracing out many of the landmarks in the mental
development of man." <span id="fr_7"></span>[1](#fn_7)

<span id="img_i00600"></span> ![](img/i00600.jpg)

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[ii:1](fim01.htm#fr_0) The Isle of Man Natural
History and Antiquarian Society has appointed a Committee for this
purpose.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[ii:2](fim01.htm#fr_1) The results. of these
enquiries, which have chiefly been made by Professor Rhys and the
writer, are given in the following pages, together with the Folk-Lore
taken from previously published accounts.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[iii:1](fim01.htm#fr_2) Manx Society, Vol. xxv.,
p. 57.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[iii:2](fim01.htm#fr_3) Manx Society, Vol. x, p.
11.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[iii:3](fim01.htm#fr_4) Manx Society, Vol. xi, p.
2.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[iv:1](fim01.htm#fr_5) Quayle; General View of
the Agriculture of the Isle of Man, pp. 22-3.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[iv:2](fim01.htm#fr_6) History of the Isle of
Man, pp. 350-1.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[vi:1](fim01.htm#fr_7) The Handbook of Folk-Lore.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Preface](fim02)
