[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](fim07)  [Next](fim09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

<span id="img_07600"></span> ![](img/07600.jpg)

# CHAPTER V.

### MAGIC, WITCHCRAFT, &C.

<span id="img_iinit"></span>

|                     |
|---------------------|
| ![I](img/iinit.jpg) |

t would seem that the inhabitants of Man and the other Western Isles of
Scotland had acquired a reputation for magical powers at an early
period. For the bard, who accompanied Hakon, king of Norway, in his
expedition to these parts in 1203, wrote as follows--Now our deep
inquiring sovereign encountered the horrid powers of enchantment and the
abominations of an impious race. The troubled flood tore many fair
gallies from their moorings, and swept them anchor less before the
waves. A magic raised watery tempest blew upon our warriors, ambitious
of conquest, and against the floating habitations of the brave." <span
id="fr_45"></span>[1](#fn_44) Two centuries later, we are told by
Ranulph Higden that "In the Ilonde of Mann is sortilege and witchcraft
used; for women there sell to shipmen wynde as it were closed under
three knottes of threde, so that the more wynde he would have the more
knottes he must undo." <span id="fr_46"></span>[2](#fn_45) According to
Sacheverell, Martholine, who was Governor of the Isle of Man in 1338.
wrote a treatise [against](errata.htm#15) the practice of witchcraft
then prevalent there.

A profound belief in the power of Magic was one of the charactistics of
Goidelic peoples, though indeed it was formerly all but universal. Their
paganism was a kind of fetichism which considered the various objects of
nature, especially the sun, as malignant beings, who had to be
propitiated with offerings to avert their wrath. In connection with this
worship, a class of persons arose called *Druadh*, who stood between the
people and their deities, and acquired great power over the former by
the influence they were supposed to be able to exert over the latter by
their

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

sacrifices and magic arts. St. Patrick, who is supposed to have driven
the *Druadh* from Ireland, prays in a very old hymn attributed to him,
to be protected

     "Against snares of demons  
     Against black laws of heathens,  
Against spells of women, smiths, and *Druads*."

These Goidelic *Druadh* <span id="fr_47"></span>[1](#fn_46) probably
belonged to the same system as the Gaulish Druids at a very remote
period; but, by Julius Cæsar's time, the latter had picked up a little
Greek philosophy, and were probably comparatively well educated and
superior men; while the *Druadh* in Britain, and more especially in
Ireland and Man, being isolated from Continental influences, had shrunk
into mere Magicians and Medicine-men. It was formerly supposed that they
sacrificed to *Baal* on the cromlechs within the stone circles, but more
recent research has shown that these mighty stone monuments are the
memorials of a pre-historic race, and that the Goidels, who, before the
introduction of Christianity, worshipped the heavenly bodies, hills,
fire, wells, &c., had no knowledge of the Phoenician *Baal*, or, indeed,
of a personal God of any kind. With the introduction of Christianity
these *Druadh* disappeared, but the beliefs they had inculcated survived
in other forms, as it was believed that all the powers of evil were
concentrated in the devil and his myrmidons, that he could delegate his
powers to human beings who sold their souls to him, and who, according
to the nature of their functions or their sex, were called Magicians,
Enchanters or Enchantresses, Sorcerers or Sorceresses, Wizards or
Witches. By their spells, or charms, they could bring all kinds of evil
on human beings, but by counter-charms they could also alleviate those
evils. The Magicians, Enchanters, and Enchantresses belonged to the
higher order of these beings. They had spirits or demons at their
command, and were proficient in the occult sciences, but would not
condescend to the petty malignity occasionally practised by the
Sorcerers and Sorceresses, the Wizards and the Witches. The only
Magician who is remembered by name in the Isle of Man is the famous
*Manannan* (see Chapter I.) There is also the Enchantress *Tehi*, and
the Sorceress, or rather Prophetess, called *Caillagh-ny-Ghueshag*, a
sort of Manx Mother Shipton, who appears to have been superior to most
of her kind. To the lower and much more common order of these beings
belong those who practised witchcraft, which may be defined to be a
supernatural power which persons were formerly supposed to

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

obtain by entering into compact with the devil. As soon as the bargain
was concluded, the devil was said to deliver to the Wizard or Witch an
imp or [familiar](errata.htm#16) spirit, to be ready at call to do
whatever it was directed. By the aid of this imp and the devil together,
the Witch--who was almost always an old woman, the Wizard being
comparatively uncommon--was enabled to transport herself through the air
on a broomstick, and transform herself into various shapes, particularly
those of cats and hares; to inflict diseases on whomsoever she chose,
and to punish her enemies in various ways. The belief in witchcraft is
very ancient, being common in Europe till the sixteenth century, and it
maintained its ground till the middle of the seventeenth century; indeed
it is not altogether extinct either in the Isle of Man, or elsewhere, at
the present day. A special attribute of Sorcerers and Witches was the
possession of the "Evil Eye." This was supposed to be an influence in
virtue of which its possessor could injure whomsoever he or she cast a
hostile or envious eye upon, and to be the cause of many things going
wrong. For instance, if anyone took suddenly ill, if a cow was diseased,
or any difficulty occurred in churning, if the hens did not lay well,
&c., the operation of the "Evil Eye" was at once suspected. Before
curing any of these complaints, it was first necessary to discover the
operator. One of the most approved methods of doing this, in the case of
a diseased animal, is to burn it; when, as Train remarks, "The first
person that passes that way after the fire is kindled, is recognised as
the witch or wizard." Fire, indeed, was considered generally efficacious
against Witches and their wiles, and was used at special seasons, as we
shall see later (Chapter VI.), when they were supposed to be more
powerful than usual. When the possessor of the "Evil Eye" was
discovered, the next step was to cure the disease, and this was
frequently effected by picking up the dust from beneath the feet or from
the threshold of the suspected Witch, and rubbing it on her victim.

But there were cases in which the popular and well-known methods failed,
when recourse was had to the practitioners called" Charmers," or
"Witch-doctors." These Charmers--*Fer-obbee*, "Men-charmers," and
*Ben-obbee*, "Women-charmers," as they might be either men or
women--used certain formulas and practised various ceremonies for the
purpose of curing diseases, or, occasionally, of causing them; and they
also made use of their powers to counteract the spells of Fairies as
well as those of the malevolent Sorcerers or Witches. For diseases, in
addition to using charms, they administered medicinal herbs and applied
fasting spittle, in the virtues of which there was a

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

very general belief; but to accomplish the more recondite branch of
their profession they used charms and incantations <span
id="fr_48"></span>[1](#fn_47) only. They were all more or less tainted
with the suspicion of dabbling a little in sorcery and witchcraft on
their own account, but, as their powers were on the whole used for good
purposes, they were tolerated.

One of the best known of these Witch-doctors was Teare, of Ballawhane,
who was described by Train as follows:--The Seer is a little man, far
advanced into the vale of life; in appearance he was healthy and active;
he wore a low-crown slouched hat, evidently too large for his head, with
a broad brim; his coat, of an old-fashioned make, with his vest and
breeches, were all of *loughtyn* wool, which had never undergone any
process of dyeing; his shoes, also, were of a colour not to be
distinguished from his stockings, which were likewise of *loughtyn*
wool." He was said to have been the most powerful of all these
practitioners, and when their prescriptions had failed in producing the
desired effect, he was applied to. The messenger that was despatched to
him on such occasions was neither to eat nor to drink by the way, nor
even to tell any person his mission. The recovery was supposed to be
perceptible from the time the case was stated to him.

These powers were supposed to be hereditary, and were handed down in the
same family for generations. There, is for instance, a daughter of
Teare's still practising the same art, and she is resorted to by the
fishermen for the sake of having their nets charmed, and so cause them
to be lucky in their fishing. <span id="fr_49"></span>[2](#fn_48) To
preserve these powers intact from generation to generation, it was
supposed to be necessary to hand them down from a man to a woman, but in
the next generation from a woman to a man, and so on. Having thus
referred to the methods of detecting Witches and of protecting and
curing those that were attacked by them, we will now proceed to show how
they were punished. The Law with regard to witchcraft and kindred
practices was very severe in every part of Europe, and, it is said, that
in England alone, no less than 30,000 Wizards and Witches have suffered
at the stake. Blackstone writes with regard to the law on this subject
in England as follows:--"Our law once included in the list of crime,
that of actual witchcraft or intercourse with evil spirits; and though
it has now no longer a place among them, its exclusion is not to be
understood as implying a denial of the possibility of such an offence.
To deny this, would be to contradict the revealed word of God in various
passages both

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

of the Old and New Testament; and the thing itself is a truth to which
every nation hath in its turn borne testimony; either by examples
seemingly well attested, or by prohibitory laws, which at least suppose
the possibility of a commerce with evil spirits \* \* \*

By the Statute 33, Henry VIII., all witchcraft and sorcery were declared
to be 'felony without benefit of clergy,' and by I. Jac. 1., 'all
persons invoking any evil spirits, or consulting, covenanting with,
entertaining, employing, feeding or rewarding any evil spirit; . . . for
killing, or hurting any person by such infernal arts; should be guilty
of felony and suffer death; and if any person should attempt, by
sorcery, to discover hidden treasure, or to restore stolen goods, or to
provoke unlawful love, or to hurt any man or beast, he, or she, should
suffer imprisonment and pillory for the first offence, and death for the
second.' These acts long continued in force, to the terror of all
antient females in the kingdom; and many poor wretches were sacrificed
thereby to the prejudice of their neighbours and their own illusions;
not a few having confessed the fact at the gallows.' In the Isle of Man,
too, legislation on this subject was not neglected, for we find, by the
50th Spiritual Law, that "all such as are suspected for sorcerie and
witchcraft are to be presented to the Chapter Quest, then the Ordinary
in such cases finding any suspicion is to impannel a jury of honest men
within the same parish and the party suspected in the meantime to be
committed to the Bishop's Prison, and all the offences and crimes the
jury doth find the Ordinary shall write, and if the jury can prove any
notorious fault or crime done by the same person, then the Ordinary to
deliver him out of the Bishop's Prison to the Lord's Jail and Court." It
is supposed that in old times the usual result of the legal procedure
against Witches was that they were subjected to two so-called forms of
ordeal, but which were really means of putting them to death, as, if
they survived the first, the second would almost certainly prove fatal,
for they were said to have been thrown into the middle of the *Curragh
Glass*, or "green bog" pool, in the valley below Greeba mountain. If
they sank, their bodies were taken out of the water, carried home,
waked, and received a Christian burial; but if; to save themselves from
drowning, they managed to paddle to either side, they were instantly
declared guilty of the crime of which they were charged, and were
consequently either burned alive as unconvicted witches. or rolled from
the top of *Slieau Whuallian* in spiked barrels, Thus literally was
followed the Scripture maxim, "Thou shalt not suffer a witch to live."

The following extracts from the Manx Episcopal and Civil Records show,
however, that our forefathers dealt with these

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

poor creatures in the seventeenth century, and later, in a milder
fashion than they did, according to tradition, at an earlier date:--

1638.--Whereas Jony Tear hath been presented by the Chapter Quest upon
information given them that she was seen together with an Irish woman in
a gill pulling strange herbs, and whereas the said Jony Tear hath
cleared herself, her slanderers had to ask her forgiveness before the
congregation.

The following entry, taken from the *Liber Scaccar*, or Exchequer Book,
appears in the Malew Register in 1659. It affords an instance of the
enforcement of Church discipline by the temporal ruler who took the
Bishop's place during the time of the Commonwealth:--

Bishop's Court, 30th September, 1659.--Whereas Mrs Jane Cesar hath been
accused upon suspicion of witchcraft, charminge or sorscerie, where upon
certaine examinacons have been taken. And the said case being putt to
the triall of a jurie, they the said jurors (after examinacon of the
business) have this day cleared and acquitted ye said Jane Cesar of the
accusacon aforesaid as by theire Answere may appeare. Nevertheles that
the said Jane Cesar may declare her inocencie of such practizes and that
shee doth renounce the same as diabolicall and wicked; she is hereby
ordered to acknowledge the same before the Congregacon off (sic.) Kk.
Malew Parish on the next Lord's day to the end that others may be
admonished to relinquish detest and abhor such delusions which are of
great inducement to greater temptacons and are too frequently practised
in this Island as is dayly observed. Of which if any one shalt be
hereafter accused and the same lawfully proved such persons are to be
severely fined and punished, or otherwise proceeded against accordinge
as the law doth provide in such cases.

(Signed) Jam. Chaloner.

To Sr. Tho. Parr minister of Kk Malew who is to read ye before his
Congregacon the next Sabbath in English and Manxe and to return this
Order with the acknowledgment made as aforesaid into the Comptrouleres
office afterwards. True Coppie agreeinge with ye originall.

October the 2th, 1659

(Signed) J. Woods.

It is certainly remarkable that this unfortunate woman, after being
acquitted by the jury of the offence alleged against her, should be
ordered "to acknowledge the same before the congregation," and at the
same time "to declare her innocencie."

The following, in 1690, is from the Archideaconal Register:--

We, whose names are hereunder written, being sworn in a jury of inquiry
to take evidence in some difference between Gilbert Moore and John Steon
about witchcraft, picking of herbs, and strikening them unknown, do give
in our verdict as followeth:--Ann Callister, alias Karran, and Grace
Cowley, being sworn and examined say that John Steon said unto Ann
Callister thou b------ and w------ that little fat that thou has gotten
upon thee I will take it oft thee in a short time, and since that time
she has lost very many of her goods, and furth: saith not, Ann Callister
further saith that John Steon's wife said unto her that she knew an
herb, that if a man drank of the drink of it be would forget himself,
but if one drank of it twice he would forget himself for ever--and
further saith not. John Corlet and William Tear swore that Daniel Quayle
told them that John Steon gave

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

him an herb to put to his eyes and he never saw afterward, and further
saith not. Gilbert Callister and Ann Callister declared that the said
Daniel Quayle's wife told them the same words, and further saith not.
Dollin Gawn sworn, examined, saith that himself and John Steon chid
(sic) and the said John Steon promised to give him loss, and shortly
after he received it, & furth: saith not, Dollin Gawn's wife sworn,
examined, saith that the same John Steon told her that he knew that none
of her children should inherit that little place they had, and since
that time one of her child<sup>n</sup> dyed and another is now a cripple
at her fire side, and furth: saith not. Adam Callister sworn, examined,
saith that he came with John Corlett and John Steon from church and John
Corlett told Steon he would present him to the great inquest, and the
said Steon answered that he could not tell whether he would be able to
do so, but that he might be sick and have need to be washed in tobacco
water and swines broth, and further saith not. Ann Cowle sworn,
examined, saith that John Steon said unto her he would deceive her and
blind her, and strike her unknown. Adam Callister sworn, examined, saith
that the said Steon told him that he would strike him unawares, and John
Corlett declared that that was the common report he had heard of John
Steon that he would strike people unknown and furth: saith not. Gilbert
Moore sworn, examined, saith that the said Steon came to his house and
said to his wife and children that he would strike them unawares so that
they should not know of it, and since that time he lost abundance (sic)
of his goods, and furth: saith not. Gilbert Moore likewise and Pat.
Cowley sworn, examined, say John Steon came to the plough to Gilbert
Moore for the lone (sic) of a Manks spade, and the said Moore denyed
him, whereupon Steon told bins he would do him a mischief and that
shortly and within a while after one of his oxen were struck lame so the
said Moore sent to Steon to come to see the Ox, and Steon coming spit
upon the Ox and handled him and he recovered, and further saith not.
Mrs. Nelson sworn, examined, saith that John Steon told her that he knew
she would be willing to deliver up her land unto Grinsey and Richard
Cannell, and the said Mrs. Nelson asked him how did he know, whereupon
the said Steon replyed that he knew she would be willing to give them
payment for taking it from her and they would not accept of it, and
further saith not. Pat. Cannell sworn and examined saith that he came
upon John Steon's daughter picking of herbs in the Court land where corn
was sowen on our Lady day in Lent a little after break of day.
Ellin<sup>r</sup> Cannell sworn, examined, saith as aboves<sup>d</sup>,
**J**aine Quayle examined saith that she saw an herb with John Steon's
daughter, and asked what that was for and she said to preserve her from
the flux and seeing something else with her she said it was to preserve
her from the feaver.--Having taken the above depositions we find said
Steon to be guilty, and leave him to the discretion of the Court for
fine and punishment. Jo. Quayle his m<sup>k</sup>. X, Gilb<sup>t</sup>.
Callist<sup>r</sup> his m<sup>k</sup>. X, Pat, Caine his m<sup>k</sup>.
X, and Wm. Quayle his m<sup>k</sup>. X.

At Kirk Michael, July 31, 1712, one Alice Knakill, *alias* Moor, of Kirk
Lonan, confessed to a charge of having taken up some earth from under a
neighbour's door, and burnt it to ashes, which she gave to her cattle,
"with an intention, as she owns, to make them give more milk. Also
another woman declares that the said Alice Knakill cut a piece out of
her petticoat and burnt it to powder, which she drank with a design, as
she confessed, to recover her health, and procure sleep. Both which
charms

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

she owns to have been taught her by an Irishwoman." She was sentenced to
three Sundays' penance in the neighbouring churches. In the following
year, Alice Cowley, of Ballaugh, a regular dealer in charms, and known
as such far and wide in the Island, was brought before the Consistory
Court. It was then deposed that this old crone, "addressed herself to a
youth, and told him, if he would give her a ninepenny piece, she would
give him something that would make a young woman fall in love with him,
which proves to be a powder in a paper, which he believes to be the
powder of some of the bright stones that are at Foxdale." Her dealings
with married women, under the pretence of removing barreness; with
farmers for procuring a crop of corn, or making the herd fruitful; with
young women for procuring lovers; and with parents for the recovery of a
sick child were also deposed to; the mischief in each case being implied
to be the witch's doing, and thought to be remedied by drawing blood
from her. All these charges were proved, and Alice was sentenced, by the
Bishop and Vicars-General, to "thirty days' imprisonment, and before
releasement to give sufficient security to stand two hours in a white
sheet, a white wand in her right hand, and these words, 'for charming
and sorcery,' in capital letters on her breast, in the four market towns
of this Island, at the public cross, in the height of the market; and
afterwards to do penance in Ballaugh Church."

In 1716, a woman from Jurby complained to Vicar-General Walker that she
and her husband had been "suspected to have been out early in the
morning last May-day, walking on the dew in their neighbours' fields,
with a design to prejudice them in the increase of their crop," and that
though this calumny had been disproved by evidence, it was still
repeated. It was, therefore, ordered by the Court, in order "to
discourage such vile and unchristian thoughts of one neighbour receiving
damage from another, by any trivial, foolish customs of that kind, which
betray great weakness of faith and trust in God," that a fine of £3, and
imprisonment for forty days, besides further punishment at the
Ordinary's discretion, should be imposed on anyone reviving the story.

Bishop Wilson evidently viewed the practice of charming with abhorrence,
as we find him writing about it, in 1741, as follows:--"There is a
cursed practice carried on secretly by Satan and his instruments, which
I beseech you, my brethren, take this proper occasion <span
id="fr_50"></span>[1](#fn_49) to speak upon: both to terrify those that
practice it, and to confirm people's

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

faith in God, against any hurt the devil or his agents can do them. Many
complaints have been brought into our courts against people using
foolish and wicked charms and arts, either to injure their neighbour in
his goods, or to transfer them to themselves, to the great dishonour of
God, who alone can increase the fruits of the earth to our comfort, or
withhold them for our sins; and, indeed, it is for want of a true faith
in God's power and goodness that makes men afraid of what such wretched
instruments of Satan can do . . ."

There are many other similar presentments to be found in the Records
during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, but we will content
ourselves with mentioning two cases which have come into the Courts in
the present century. In the *Manx Sun* newspaper of the 5th of January,
1838, it is reported that "a case of sorcery was recently brought into
and solemnly heard in one of the Courts of Law." About the same time the
then Deemster McHutchin was applied to for a warrant against a Witch on
the charge of depriving cows of their milk, and causing them to sicken.
He, however, wisely asked a veterinary surgeon to supply a remedy, and
thus put a stop to the prosecution.

The following account was published in the *Mona's Herald* newspaper of
the 10th of January, 1844, concerning the proceedings against a
suspected Witch:--A farmer in the parish of Marown, having lost in
succession, a heifer, a cow, and a horse, attributed the death of these
animals to the influence of witchcraft. Consequently he obtained a
trespass warrant from one of the Deemsters, under authority of which a
jury was sworn, and a number of persons summoned as witnesses and
examined. Such questions as the following were put: 'Did you ever witch
Quine's cattle?' 'Do you bear malice against Quine?' 'Did you hear
anybody talking about Quine before his cattle died, and seeming to
grudge him what he possessed?' Among those who were sworn was Quine's
sister-in-law, and on being asked if she ever came *in any shape or
form* to do Quine or his goods an injury, she confessed 'that she had
once passed through Quine's fields without leave.' The poor woman was
frightened into paying the costs in consequence of this. While the case
was going on someone let loose a wild rabbit in the room. On the
appearance of this unexpected visitor all became terrified, crying, 'The
Witch, the Witch!' This continued for several minutes, till one of the
party, more courageous than the rest, seized the supposed Witch, and,
while depriving the harm less creature of existence, triumphantly
exclaimed, 'You shall not trouble poor Quine again."'

The stories which follow relate to the various practices of MAGIC,
ENCHANTMENT, SORCERY, and WITCHCRAFT. A list of the CHARMS most in vogue
is also given.

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

#### THE MAGICIAN'S PALACE.

In visionary glory rear’d,  
The gorgeous castle disappear’d;  
And a bare heath's unfruitful plain  
Usurp’d the wizard's proud domain,  
                                     *Warton*.

In the days of enchantment a certain great magician had, by his art,
raised for himself the most magnificent palace in the Isle of Man that
eye ever beheld; but none who, either out of curiosity or a desire of
being entertained there, went to it but was immediately converted into
stone, or at least had the appearance of it, so implacable an enemy was
the wicked master of it to all his own species,. being served only by
infernal spirits. He became at length so much the terror of the whole
Island that no person would venture to live or pass within several
leagues of his habitation, so that all that side of the country was in a
manner desolate, to the great loss and detriment of the place in
general. This had continued for the space of three years, when an
accident, or rather the peculiar direction of divine providence, was
pleased in mercy to deliver them from the terror of so cruel a
neighbour.

A poor man, whom one may justly term a pilgrim, having nothing to
subsist on but what he procured by imploring the charity of those able
to afford him succour, happening to travel on that side of the Island,
not knowing anything of the fame of this enchanter, and perceiving no
house inhabited, nor any cottage even, where he might get a lodging, and
it growing dark, he was in terrible apprehensions of being under the
necessity of taking up his lodgings on those bleak mountains, yet
wandering on as long as light permitted, in hopes of better fortune, he,
at last, came within sight of this palace, which filled his heart with
much joy. Coming near it, he beheld large piazzas, which surrounded that
magnificent building, and believing these might serve him for a
resting-place, without being troublesome to any of the servants, whose
churlish disposition in other places did not always afford a ready
welcome to strangers, he chose rather to content himself with resting
his wearied limbs on the marble floor than entreat a reception into any
of the barns, which, perhaps, might be denied. In a word, he sat down on
a bench in one of these piazzas, and, finding himself hungry, he took
out of his pouch a piece of meat and bread, which he had begged at the
last town he had passed through. He had also a little salt, which, by
dipping his meat in the dark, he happened to spill some on the floor, on
which he presently heard the most terrible groans to issue, from the
earth beneath, vast winds seemed to be let loose from every quarter of
the element, all the face of heaven was deformed

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

with lightning, the most dreadful thunder rattled over his head, and in
less than a moment this fine palace, with all its proud and lofty
piazzas, porticos, and brazen doors, vanished into the air, and he found
himself in the midst of a wide, desert, [mountainous](errata.htm#17)
plain, without the least appearance of anything he had formerly seen.
Surprised as he was, he instantly betook himself to his prayers, nor
removed from his knees till day began to break, when, after thanking God
for bringing him safe through the dangers of the night past, he made
what speed he could to the next village, and relating the adventure just
as it was to the inhabitants, they could not at first give credit to
what he said, hut, going in great numbers towards the place where the
palace of the necromancer had stood, they were convinced, and all joined
in prayer and thanksgiving for so great a deliverance.

It was presently concluded, from what the pilgrim said, that the salt
spilt on the ground had occasioned this dissolution of the palace, and
for that reason salt has ever since been in such estimation among them
that no person will go out on any material affair without taking some in
their pockets, much less remove from one house to another, marry, put
out a child, or take one to nurse, without salt being mutually
interchanged; nay, though a poor creature be almost famished in the
streets, he will not accept any food you will give him unless you join
salt to the rest of your benevolence.--*Waldron*.

Salt has borne a conspicuous part in many superstitious ceremonies. The
high priest of the Jews was ordered to season all offerings with
salt. <span id="fr_51"></span>[1](#fn_50) The [Egyptians](errata.htm#18)
and Romans also used it in their sacrifices. In Ireland, before the seed
is put into the ground, salt is sent into the field for the purpose of
counteracting the power of the witches and fairies. So in the Isle of
Man, salt was placed in the churn lest the fairies should prevent the
production of butter. Salt was formerly placed on the breast of a corpse
in the Isle of Man, as elsewhere, as an emblem of the immortality of the
soul. The dread of spilling salt was a general superstition.

#### ORIGIN OF KING WILLIAM'S SANDS.

They tell you that the Island was once much larger than it is at
present; but that a magician, who had great power over it, and committed
many wonderful and horrible things, being opposed by one who was a
friend to the place, and at length, overcome by him, he, in revenge,
raised a furious wind, not only in the air, but also in the bosom of the
earth, which, rending it, tore off several pieces, which, floating in
the sea, in process of time were converted into stone, and became those
rocks which

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

are now so dangerous to shipping. The smaller fragments, they say, are
sands, which, waving up and down, are at sometimes to be seen, and at
others, shift themselves far off the coast. They maintain that it was on
one of these that the late King William had liked to have perished, and
strengthen this suggestion by the trial of the pilot, who must
infallibly have been hanged, if on strict examination of all the charts
there had been in any of them the least mention made of any such sands,
but, however, these floating ruins have ever since remained, and from
thence are called, King William's Sands.--*Waldron*.

#### THE DEVIL'S DEN.

"Deeper than plummet ever sounded."--S*hakespeare*.

About a league and a half from Barrule, there is a hole in the earth,
just at the foot of the mountain, which they call "The Devil's Den."
They tell you, that, in the days of enchantment, persons were there
confined by the magicians, and that it now contains a very great prince,
who never knew death, but has for the space of six hundred years been
bound by magic spells; but in what manner he lies, or in what form, none
had ever courage enough to explore. They add, that if you carry a horse,
a dog, or any other animal to the mouth of this hole, its hair will
stand on end, and its eyes stare, and a damp sweat cover its whole body.
Strange noises are also said to have been heard to issue from this
place, and I knew a man once, who positively averred that his
great-grandfather saw a huge dragon, with a tail and wings that darkened
all the element, and the eyes that seemed two globes of fire, descend
swiftly into it, and after that, heard most terrible shrieks and groans
from within.--*Waldron*.

#### THE SUBMERGED ISLAND.

There was supposed to be a submerged island near Port Soderick which
appeared every seven years. Train relates the story of one of these
appearances as follows:--Many a time and oft had Nora Cain heard her old
grandsire relate the tradition of the enchanted island at Port Soderick,
while sitting spinning by the turf fire on a winter's evening. It was in
the days of the Great Fin MacCooil, that mighty magician, who, for some
insult he had received from the people who lived on a beautiful island,
off Port Soderick, cast his spell over it, and submerged it to the
bottom of the ocean, transforming the inhabitants into blocks of
granite. It was permitted them, once in seven years, to come to the
surface for the short space of thirty minutes, during which time the
enchantment might be broken if any person had the boldness to place a
Bible on any

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

part of the enchanted land when at its original altitude above the
waters of the deep.

On one occasion, it was about the end of September, on a fine moonlight
night, Nora was sauntering along the little bay in sweet converse with
her lover, when she observed something in the distance which continued
to increase in size. It struck her to be none other than the enchanted
isle she so often had heard of. It continued gradually rising above the
surface of the water, when, suddenly disentangling herself from the arm
of her lover, she hastened home with all the speed she could, and rushed
into the cottage, crying out, and breathless with her haste, "The Bible,
the Bible, the Bible!" to the utter amazement of the inmates, who could
not at the moment imagine what had possessed her. After explaining what
she had seen, she seized hold of the coveted volume and hastened back to
the beach, but, alas! only just in time to see the last portion of the
enchanted isle subside once more to its destined fate of another seven
years' submersion.

From that night poor Nora gradually pined away, and was soon after
followed to her grave by her disconsolate lover. It is said from that
time no person has had the hardihood to make a similar attempt, lest, in
case of failure, the enchanter in revenge might cast his club over Mona
also.

#### TEHI-TEGI, THE ENCHANTRESS.

                "With lips of rosy hue,  
Dipp’d five times over in ambrosial dew,  
She led them to their destruction."--*Old Poet*.

A famous enchantress, adjourning in this Island, had by her diabolical
arts made herself appear so lovely in the eyes of men that she ensnared
the hearts of as many as beheld her. The passion they had for her so
took up all their hearts that they entirely neglected their usual
occupations. They neither ploughed nor sowed, neither built houses, nor
repaired them; their gardens were all overgrown with weeds, and their
once fertile fields were covered with stones; their cattle died for want
of pasture; their turf lay in the bowels of the earth undug for, and
everything had the appearance of an utter desolation, even propagation
ceased, for no man could have the least inclination for any woman but
this universal charmer, who smiled on them, permitted them to follow and
admire her, and gave everyone leave to hope himself would be at last the
happy He. When she had thus allured the male part of the Island, she
pretended one day to go a progress through the provinces, and being
attended by all her adorers on foot, while she rode on a milk-white
palfrey, in a kind of triumph at the head of them.

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

\[paragraph continues\] She led them into a deep river, which by her art
she made seem passable, and when they were all come a good way in it,
she caused a sudden wind to rise, which, driving the waters in such
abundance to one place, swallowed up the poor lovers, to the number of
six hundred, in their tumultuous waves. After which, the sorceress was
seen by some persons, who stood on the shore, to convert herself into a
bat, and fly through the air till she was out of sight, as did her
palfrey into a sea hog or porpoise, and instantly plunged itself to the
bottom of the stream.

To prevent the recurrence of a like disaster, it was ordained that the
women should go on foot and follow the men hence forth, which custom is
so religiously observed, that if by chance a woman is seen walking
before a man, whoever sees her cries out immediately, "Tehi! Tegi!"
which, it would appear, is the name of the enchantress who occasioned
this law.--*Waldron.*

#### CAILLAGH-NY-GHUESHAG.

*Caillagh* was the name given to an old woman, and, from the ugliness
associated with old women, it came to mean a hag or witch. The most
famous *Caillagh* was an old woman called *Caillagh-ny-Ghueshag*, "old
woman of the spells," or the Sorceress. She was an adept at
chiromancy--*Faaishlaght*--and could perform a charm or
incantation--*pisag*; but her posthumous reputation arose mainly from
her having foretold certain things, which, she said, were to happen
before the end of the world. Such of her predictions as have been
recorded certainly related to very trifling events. There was a small
treen chapel called *Cabbal-keeill-Vout*, between the Foxdale river and
Slieau-whallin, concerning which she is said to have predicted us
follows

*Tra Vees Cabbal-keeill-Vout ersooyl lesh-y-hooilley,  
Cha bee cleïn Quirk Slieau-whallin veg sodjey*.

*i.e.*, "When the Chapel Keeil-Vout shall be taken away by the flood the
Quirk family will be no longer in Slieau Whallin." It is said that about
70 years ago the last fragment of the chapel and the last of the Quirks
of Slieau Whallin disappeared simultaneously. The following sayings are
also attributed to her:--*Dy beagh chimlee caardagh ayns chooilley hie
roish jerrey yn theill*--"That there would be a smithy chimney in every
house before the end of the world;" and that *Dy nee ass claghyn glassey
yoghe sleih nyn arran*--"People would get their bread from grey stones."
Like many other prophecies, these decidedly require an interpreter!
Another saying that was attributed to her was that "the Manx and the
Scotch will come so near as to throw their beetles at each other."
Certainly, the Point of Ayre

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

is extending slowly towards Scotland, but thousands of years would have
to elapse, even if the same process continued steadily, before it could
get there.--*Harrison*.

#### THE GLENCRUTCHERY WELL.

A story is told of a girl who was going to the Glencrutchery well for
water, and met an old man, who had the reputation of being a
sorcerer, <span id="fr_52"></span>[1](#fn_51) on her way. He asked her
where she was going. "Going to your well for water," she said. "Is there
no water in your well?" said he. She replied that there was, but that
her mistress had sent her to get water from his well. He then gave her
some money, and told her to take the water out of their own well. The
girl took the money, which confirmed the charm, and went to the fair,
which was going on that day, after fetching the water home. When she
returned home in the evening her mistress asked her where she had got
the water, as she had been churning all day without getting any
butter.--*Oral*.

#### THE EFFIGY.

In a lonely part of the northern district of the Island stood the
cottage of an old woman, who had been long suspected of being a
practitioner of the "black art," to the detriment of many of her
neighbours. A person of great courage having had occasion to pass that
remote dwelling one night, at a late hour, and seeing a strong light
within, on peeping through a chink in the door, perceived distinctly the
old beldame busily turning an image before a large fire, and sticking
pins into it occasionally, on which she muttered a cabalistic rhyme
which he could not understand. Next morning, on hearing that the
minister had been suddenly seized by a chronic disease on the preceding
evening, which lasted till midnight, the man who had seen the crone at
work at the very time the minister was tortured by racking pains,
publicly charged her of being the sole cause of his indisposition, which
was seemingly confirmed by the Captain of the Parish finding in her
possession the image or supposed effigy of the minister, with an old
bladder containing rusty nails, pins, and skewers. After having been
tried and found guilty, she walked seemingly quite unconcerned to the
common place of execution, and just before she was bound to the stake,
confessed the crime for which she was about to suffer.--*Train*.

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

#### THE WITCH OF SLIEU WHALLIAN.

                                     They say,  
Lamentings heard i’ the air! strange screams of death.  
                                          --*Shakespeare*.

About two miles from Peel, opposite to the Tynwald Mount, there is a
hill called Slieu Whallian, said to be haunted by the spirit of a
murdered witch, but, however, it does not appear to mortal eyes, but
every night joins its lamentations to the howling winds. This woman was
put into a barrel with sharp iron spikes inserted round the interior,
pointing inwards, and thus, by the weight of herself and the apparatus,
allowed to roll from the top of the hill to the bottom.

Many other persons have suffered here in a similar manner, one of whom
was a man named Thomas Carran, who died protesting his innocence of the
crime of which he was accused. In proof of this, as he is said to have
predicted, a thorn-tree has since grown, and marks the fatal spot on the
summit of the hill, where the cask, in which he was enclosed, in
fulfilment of the sentence awarded against him, was pushed over the
brow, to roll, and bound, and dash with headlong speed to the plain
below.--*Train*.

#### THE BURNT BESOM.

The following story was told last year by a man who is now living:--One
morning as he was returning from courting--courting it should be
mentioned was, and still is in the country districts, carried on at
night--he saw a woman, who was a reputed Witch, at the four cross-roads,
near Regaby, sweeping a circle round her as large as that made by horses
when threshing. He kicked her, and took her besom (broom) from her, and
hid it till mid-day, when he and some boys collected some dry gorse,
fired it, and put the besom on top. Wonderful to relate, when burning it
made reports like guns going off, which could be heard at Andreas
Church. This besom had on it "17 sorts of knots." Soon after its
destruction the woman died.--*Rhys*.

#### BUTTER BEWITCHED.

One day a woman who was a reputed Witch, called at the door of a
neighbouring farm-house when churning was going on, and asked the
dairymaid for some buttermilk. Not having any, she refused and went on
churning; hut from that moment it was of no avail, as the butter refused
to come, and she got none at all, while the Witch, who kept only one
cow, took sixteen pounds of butter to sell, the produce of her dairy,
which was a common event with her when the farmers near her were
unsuccessful.--*Oral*.

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

The following extract from a poem by the Rev T. E. Brown, of Clifton,
entitled "The Manx Witch," gives an excellent idea of the usual Manx
notions about these creatures

#### THE MANX WITCH.

A wutch <span id="fr_53"></span>[1](#fn_52), of coorse she was a
wutch,  
And a black wutch, the wuss that's goin’--  
The white is--well, I’m hardly knowin’.  
Is the lek in <span id="fr_54"></span>[2](#fn_53): but these ould
things  
That's sellin’ charms to sailors--rings,  
Papers, ye know  
I spose the most of ye’s got the lek  
Somewhere hung about your neck.  
But there's odds of charms; for some is just  
A sort of a blessin’; but some is a cuss,  
Most hither--brewed in the very gall  
Of spite and hate, and’ll creep and crawl  
Over your body and over your sowl,  
Aye, man! aye! at laste so I’m tould;  
And through and through, and making you sick,  
And making you mad--aw, they know the trick!  
Cussin’ your fingers and cussin’ your toes,  
Cussin’ your mouth and cussin’ your nose,  
Every odd jint, and every limb,  
And all your inside--that's the thrim--  
Cussin’ your horse and cussin’ your cow,  
Cussin’ the boar and cussin’ the sow--  
Everything that’s got a tail.  
Aye, and your spade, and your cart and your flail,  
Plough and harras <span id="fr_55"></span>[3](#fn_54), stock and crop,  
Nets and lines--they'll navar stop.  
     .     .     .     You'll be passin’ by,  
And not a word, but the evil eye.--  
There ye are! Your stuck, they’ve done ye!  
They’ve got ye--you’re tuck! they’ve put it upon ye!  
     .     .     .     And harbs! they picks them  
The right time of the moon, and they’ll take and mix them.  
Divils! divils! that’s what they are!  
And should be tuk and burnt the way  
They used to be.

The following stories refer to the popular antidotes to the effects of
witchcraft, which, as stated above, are mainly the use of fire and dust,
the former being used partly as a preventive to witchcraft, and partly
as a means of detecting the Witch, while the latter is an antidote only.
The sacrifice of cattle by burning, as a means of preventing witchcraft,
has been common even in the present century, and is secretly practised
in the remote districts even now:--

The cattle of a farmer, in the Parish of German, having been, in about
1834, attacked by a kind of murrain, which he

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

attributed to witchcraft, he sought to stay the spreading of the disease
by offering tip a living calf as a burnt sacrifice. The ashes of this
unfortunate beast were collected and applied to the rest of the herd. A
small chapel was afterwards built near the spot where this disgusting
sacrifice took place, and was consequently called *Cabbal yn oural
losht*, "Chapel of the burnt offering.--*Oral*.

A similar case occurred near the Union Mills in 1843.

The *Manx Sun* newspaper describes the sacrifice of a calf in the Parish
of Maughold, in 1853, as follows:--The calf was dragged to an eminence
not far from the highway, a large quantity of peat and straw was
provided, and, a light having been applied, the calf and pyre were
consumed."

There was an *oural losht* in the Parish of Jurby in 1880, and even
within the last five years there have been several sacrifices, but it is
difficult to obtain any particulars. One of them was that of a young
horse which was supposed to have been bewitched to death, which was
burned in order to see the Witch come by, and she was, accordingly, seen
through the smoke.

Some thirty years ago, cattle which were afflicted with "black-leg" were
thrown into the sea at the *Lhen-vuirr*, in the hope that, as the tide
carried them out, so would the disease be prevented from seizing their
fellows.

It was not only on land that burning some animal or thing to detect or
exorcise witchcraft was resorted to, but at sea also, for when a boat
was unsuccessful during the fishing season. the cause was ascribed by
the sailors to witchcraft, and, in their opinion, it then became
necessary to exorcise the boat by burning the Witches out of it.
Townley, in his journal, relates one of these operations, which he
witnessed in Douglas harbour in 1789, as follows:--They set fire to
bunches of heather in the centre of the boat, and soon made wisps of
heather, and lighted them, going one at the head, another at the stern,
others along the sides, so that every part of the boat might be
touched." Again he says, "there is another burning of witches out of an
unsuccessful boat off Banks's Howe--the flames are very visible to the
top of the bay." Feltham, writing a few years latter, also, mentions
this practice.

We now come to some stories relating to the use of dust, the great
antidote to the effects of witchcraft. "If a person," says Train,
"wishes to purchase an animal, but will not give the price demanded, the
disposer lifts earth from the print made by the person's right foot on
the ground, where he stood to drive the bargain, and rubs the animal all
over with it, to prevent the effects of what is called by the Islanders,
'overlooking.'" The following stories will illustrate this:--

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

A farmer and his neighbour were in treaty for the purchase of a pony;
but, differing about the price, his neighbour, vexed at his
disappointment, put an evil eye upon the beast, who instantly, and
without visible cause, became so lame as to be wholly useless, and so
continued for twelve months; when, by extraordinary good luck, another
person called on him, who had on his part the power to discern these
unrighteous influences, and to do away with them by a counter-charm. No
sooner had this man cast his eye on the animal than he pronounced his
lameness to have originated with the malignant purchaser, and, after
performing certain ceremonies, he assured the farmer that the spell was
broken, and that within a few hours, the pony would be restored to
perfect soundness and strength, all which, in course, happened as
foretold.--*Waldron*.

A farmer in the parish of Braddan sold a calf to a Douglas butcher; but
his wife, nut being aware of this, had sold the same calf to another
person of the same trade, who, upon concluding the bargain, paid the
price agreed on, and then took away the calf and killed it. As soon as
the farmer discovered the mistake made by his wife, he called on the
butcher to whom he had sold the calf; and, after explaining the
circumstances, offered to refund the price which his wife had received
from the other butcher, which was more than the price which the first
butcher had agreed to pay. This he not only refused; but instituted an
action against the farmer for the unlawful disposal of his property.
During the continuance of this law suit, the mother of the disputed calf
ceased to give milk, and became hide-bound, as did all the rest of the
farmer's cows. This led to the belief that they were all bewitched, and
they were not cured till a servant maid was obtained, from the north of
the Island, who was skilful in applying the antidotes to
witchcraft.--*Train*.

Mr Karran, the late Captain of the Parish of Marown, had a fine colt, to
which a person in Baldwin took a particular fancy, and was very anxious
to purchase it, though Mr Karran had no intention of parting with the
animal. On the evening of the last refusal, the colt became suddenly
ill; and although every possible means were resorted to for its
recovery, it continued to grow worse. On the third day, a friend
accidentally called at Mr Karran's house, and on being told the
circumstance thus related of the colt, undertook the cure of it. He
immediately started off for Baldwin, in the hope of meeting the person
whose *evil-eye* had infected it; he did so; and when the person with
the evil eye had passed Mr Karran's friend, the latter gathered the dust
of the road out of his footsteps, and returned with it in his
pocket-handkerchief. On rubbing the colt all

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

over with the dust, it presently partook of food and rapidly recovered,
to the surprise of the proprietor and many of his neighbours.--*Train*.

In the following there is no purchase:----A hare, or rather a Witch in
the shape of a hare, was crossing a field and stood still to stare at a
team of horses employed in ploughing, when, to the horror of the
ploughman, they instantly dropped dead on the ground. Fortunately,
however, he retained his presence of mind, and, remembering that what
had [occurred](errata.htm#19) was doubtless the result of the "Evil
Eye," he collected some of the dust from where the hare had stood and
threw it over the horses, who were at once restored to life.--*Oral*.

The use of dust against the influence of the "Evil Eye" has not been
uncommon during the last fifty years. Quite recently a man on the south
side of the Island, finding his calf suddenly taken ill, and observing
an old woman crossing a field where it was, hurried after her, took up
the dust from the place where she had passed, and then rubbed the calf
with it till it recovered. It should be remembered that touching or
lifting the earth was in many countries considered a remedy for
diseases, especially for those of the eye. Earth taken from the spot
where a man was slain was prescribed in Scotland for a hurt to an ulcer.

Having given an account of the remedies against witchcraft made use of
by amateurs, we will now proceed to describe the skill of the regular
practitioners, or Charmers, in the same direction. The two following
stories relate to two of the best known of them, the first being about
the famous Teare, of Ballawhane:--

In the spring, when the doctor is called professionally to more places
than he can accomplish in the time required, many respectable farmers
will suspend for days the operation of sowing, although the land should
be fully prepared, and even in the most precarious weather, rather than
run the risk of committing the seed to the soil without his accustomed
benediction. Seer Teare had power over the birds of the air as well as
over the beasts of the field. In July, 1833, the great Fairy Doctor had
just entered the house of Mr Fargher, innkeeper, of Laxey, and seated
himself in an old arm-chair, when he was greeted by the landlord, "Well,
Ballawhane, I am glad to see you; my little field of wheat is nearer
ripe than any grain in the glen, and the sparrows feed on it in such
flocks, notwithstanding all I can do to prevent them, that they will
have all the grain carried away before the straw is fit for the sickle."
"I am quite aware of

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

that," replied Mr Teare, "and I am just come to try if I can put them
away for you." After returning from the cornfield, where he had
performed some ceremonious rites, he remarked to the innkeeper "these
sparrows know well to take advantage of corn that [has](errata.htm#20)
not been seen by me before it was sown, but I have sent them all away
now, and I think they will not again venture into your field this
season." This singular exorcism of the sparrows soon became known
throughout Laxey; the paper-makers and the miners in the
[neighbourhood](errata.htm#21) were the only persons who had any doubt
as to the doctor's power in such matters, and, for the purpose of
satisfying themselves, they narrowly watched the field during the
remaining part of the season. To their great surprise, however, though
the sparrows flocked round Mr Fargher's field in greater numbers than
before, casting many a wistful eye to the waving grain, yet not one of
them dared to enter the charmed precincts.--*Train*.

Another of these Charmers, who lived in Ballaugh, was specially noted
for his skill in bringing luck in fishing to those who applied to him.
One of these was told by the old fellow that he could not put the fish
in their nets; but he could remove anything that might cause him to be
unsuccessful. He then gave him a lot of herbs, which he was to pound and
boil, and mix with a pint of whisky. Of this compound, a glass was first
to be taken by the captain of the boat, and then by each man in it, and
the rest was to be sprinkled over the boat and nets. On one occasion he
was sent by his fellows, after a spell of ill-luck in the fishing, to
see the old charmer; but, being somewhat sceptical, he spent the
charmer's fee in drink, and compounded the nostrum himself; though quite
ignorant of the proper herbs, the result was a magnificent haul that
night; but he never dared tell his comrades of the trick he had played
on them.--*Rhys*.

But these powers may be taken away for having been made use of when
unnecessary, as witness the following story:--A man near Laxey had the
power of being able to stop any effusion of blood by a charm he
possessed. On one occasion he was taunted by an unbeliever with being
unable to stop the bleeding of a pig which he was about to kill. The
moment the creature's throat was cut, the incantation was pronounced;
but the power of the charmer was gone from henceforth.--*Oral*.

We now append a list of such of the charms as we have been able to
discover.

### CHARMS.

#### YN CHIED PHISHAG DY GHEDDYN FUILL.

*Farraneagh yn uill ghoo, myr doo naght jiarg; goym’s eh, as bee eh aym,
as cha derrym geill da ny smoo*.

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

#### THE FIRST CHARM TO GET BLOOD.

"The black blood running, as black as red; I will take it, and it shall
be mine, and I will take no further heed of it."

#### YN NAH PHISHAG.

*Phillip va Ree ny Shee, as Bahee yn yen echey; yinnagh ee Brearey gys
Jee, nagh beagh dy bragh lackal er aeg ny shenn. Goym’s spyrryd
firrinagh, as jiooldym voym yn doo spyrryd; as goym’s eh, as bee eh aym,
as cha beem dy bragh yn drogh spyrryd*.

#### THE SECOND CHARM.

"Philip was the king of peace, and Bahee his wife; she would vow to God,
that there never would be want to young or old. I will take the true
spirit, and cast from me the black spirit; and I will take it, and it
shall be mine, and I shall never be the evil spirit."

#### A CHARM TO STAUNCH THE HORSE'S BLOOD.

*Three Moirraghyn hie dyn Raue, ny Ke imee as ny Cughtee, Peddyr as
Paul, dooyrt Moirrey jeu, shass, dooyrt Moirrey jeu, shooyl, dooyrt
Moirrey elley, Dy gast yn uill shoh, myr chast yne uill haink as lottyn
Chreest: mish dy ghra eh, as mac Voirrey dy chooilleeney eh*.

Three Maries went to Rome, the Spirits of the Church stiles and the
Spirits of the houghs, <span id="fr_56"></span>[1](#fn_55) Peter and
Paul, a Mary of them said, stand; a Mary of them said, walk; the other
Mary said, may this blood stop <span id="fr_57"></span>[2](#fn_56) as
the blood stopped which came out of the wounds of Christ: me to say it
and the son of Mary to fulfil it."

#### A CHARM TO BANISH ALL EVIL SPIRITS.

The following is a printed form having blank spaces for the insertion of
names by the Charmer:--

#### PISHAG DY STHAPPAL ROIE FOALLEY.

*Three deiney chranee haink voish y Raue--Chreest, Peddyr, as Paul. Va
Creest y Chrosh, yn uill echey shilley, as Moirrey er ny glioonyn yn ec
liorish. Ghow for jeu yn er-obbee ayns e lau yesh, as hayrn Creest
crosh <span id="fr_58"></span>[2](#fn_56) harrish eh. Three mraane aegey
haink harrish yn ushtey, dooyrt unnane jeu, seose, dooyrt, nane elley,
fuirree--dooyrt yn trass-unnane sthappyms fuill dooinney ny ben. Mish dy
ghra eh, as Chreest dy yannoo eh, ayns ennym yn Ayr, as y Vac as y
spyrryd Noo*.

*N.B.--*On repeating "crosh," you are to draw a cross with the thumb of
your right hand over the bleeding part.

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

#### CHARM TO STOP BLOOD.

"Three godly men came from Rome--Christ, Peter, and Paul. Christ was on
the cross, his blood flowing, and Mary on her knees close by. One took
the enchanted one in his right hand, and Christ drew a cross † over him.
Three young women came over the water, one of them said, "up," another
one said, "stay," and the third one said, "I will stop the blood of man
or woman." "Me to say it, and Christ to do it, in the name of the
Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost."

#### PHISHAG SON Y ROIG.

*Ta mee dy rheynn eh ayns ennym yn Ayr as y Vac as yn spyrryd Noo, eddyr
eh ve roig shee, ny roig Ree, dy jean yn chrou rheynnit shoh skeayley'n
dourin shoh er geinnagh ny marrey*.

#### CHARM FOR THE KING'S EVIL.

"I am to divide it in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost; whether it be a sprite's evil, or a King's evil, may this
divided blemish banish this distemper to the sand of the sea."

#### TO CURE THE TOOTHACHE.

The following charm, written on a scrap of paper or parchment, and
stitched securely into the inner garments, is a certain means of
prevention as well as cure:--

                Saint Peter was ordained a saint  
                Standing on a marble stone,  
                Jesus came to him alone,  
And saith unto him, "Peter, what makes thee shake?"  
Peter replied, "My Lord and Master it is the toothache."  
Jesus said, "Rise up and be healed, and keep these words for my sake,  
And thou shalt never more be troubled with toothache."

#### A CHARM TO STOP BLEEDING.

Sanguis mane in te,  
Sicut Christus in se;  
Sanguis mane in tuâ venâ,  
Sicut Christus in suâ pœnâ;  
Sanguis mane fixus.  
Sicut erat Christus,  
Quando fuit crucifixus.

The consequence of interpreting this would be that its efficacy would be
lost for ever! The same charm was in use in the West of England, and is
to be found in Pepys's Memoirs.

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

#### CHARM TO REMOVE NUMBNESS OR "SLEEP" IN THE FEET.

(This is called in Manx, Cadley-Jiargan.)

       "*Ping, ping, prash,  
Cur yn cadley-jiargan ass my chass*."

A translation of this would spoil the effect.

Another charm to stop blood is as follows:--*O Hiarn eaisht rish my
phadjer! Ayns dty ynrickys cur geill da, my aghyn! As ayns dty ynrickys
jean hoilshaghey mieys; son cha vel dooiney bio oddys ayns dty hilley's
ve ynrick as er ny heyrey gys yn jerrey* <span
id="fr_59"></span>[1](#fn_57). *Ta mee credjal dy ren Adaue as Eve chur
er, hoshiaght yn cheid peccah. Ayns ennym Adaue ta mish eisht cur fo
harey dagh giarey as bine jeh fuill yn*, {*dooiney*, *ben*} *shoh dy
scuirr Amen. Amen*.

"O Lord hear my prayer! In Thy faithfulness give heed to my petitions!
And in thy faithfulness manifest goodness; for no man living in Thy
sight can be perfect and justified to the end. I believe Adam and Eve
did begin the first sin. In Adam's name I then do charge each gash and
drop of this \[man's, woman's\] blood to stop. Amen. Amen."

#### A CHARM AGAINST THE FAIRIES.

*Shee Yee as shee ghooinney,  
Shee Yee er Columb-Killey* <span id="fr_60"></span>[1](#fn_57)  
*Er dagh uinnag, er dagh ghorrys,  
Er dagh howl joaill stiagh yn Re-hollys.  
Er kiare cornelllyn y thie  
Er y ooayl ta mee my lhie  
As shee Yee orrym-pene*.

"Peace of God and peace of man,  
Peace of God on Columb-Killey,  
On each window and each door,  
On every hole admitting moonlight,  
On the four corners of the house,  
On the place of my rest,  
And peace of God on myself."

NOTE.--It will be observed that in this charm the name of the famous St.
Columba, Columcille or Columb-Killey, is mentioned. There are two
*Keeills* dedicated to him in the Island.

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

One of the most efficacious charms to prevent milk being bewitched, was
to place a branch of the *cuirn*, or mountain-ash, in the cow-house on
May-eve. Written charms were believed to prevent people from taking
diseases if they were carried about sewn in the clothes. Great virtue
was supposed to attach to red flannel for curing coughs. The virtue lay
in the colour, not in the flannel.

The following charms are for curing warts:--Take a half-penny and smear
it over with fat. bacon; then rub the wart with the halfpenny; after
doing this, bury both the bacon and the halfpenny, and by the time the
bacon has decayed the wart will have passed away.

Procure a piece of woollen thread and tie as many knots upon it as there
are warts. Throw it away, or bury it in some place that the patient is
ignorant of; and as the thread rots, the warts will die away. It is
essential that no tie of blood exist between the operator and the
patient.

*Steal* (the stealing is necessary) a piece of raw beef, and rubbing it
nine times backwards over the warts, secretly bury it in a dry sandy
place, when, as the beef decays, the warts will disappear; but perfect
secrecy must be preserved, not even the patient's wife is to receive a
hint of it, if a successful result is desired.

The following case of a successful "charming" operation was reported in
the *Mona's Herald* newspaper, in 1853:--A man named John Kaighan,
employed at the landing pier works, was hammering an iron rod, when he
missed his stroke, and the iron rod pierced one of the arteries in his
left arm. The blood flowed freely from the wound, and he was taken to
the hospital; but all efforts to stop the flow of blood were fruitless,
and it was feared the man would bleed to death. In this state of
affairs, his relatives had recourse to a certain person who bears the
reputation of being a blood charmer; and when this person had repeated
his incantation over the wound, strange to say the flow of blood shortly
afterwards ceased.

The following extraordinary charm emanated from a woman who was much
better educated than such practitioners usually are. She lived at
Ballasalla, fifty years ago, and produced a number of religions
pamphlets, which for the most part consisted of wild prognostications,
and of invocations to the Deity. Her mind seems to have been affected,
and she was at times subject to hallucinations. She was called the
Prophetess of Ballasalla, and was much respected and feared by her
neighbours:

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

"WHERE is the JEHOVAH ELSHADDAI, the LORD GOD of ELIJAH?" See 2d. Kings,
2d. Chapter, 14th Verse.

"Behold, I give you power to tread on serpents and scorpions," and over
all the power of the enemy: and nothing shall by any means hurt
you."--See Saint Luke, 10th Chapter, 19th Verse.

"And, Lo, I am with you alway, even to the end of the world. Amen." See
Saint Matthew, 28th Chapter, 10th Verse.

In the Name of the FATHER, and of the SON, and of the HOLY GHOST, In the
Name of GOD the FATHER, and of GOD the SON, and of GOD the HOLY GHOST,
the most HIGH GOD HELION ELSHADDAI, Whose Name alone is JEHOVAH, and
through the GRACE, and by the POWER of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, I, a
Baptised Papist, and a poor unworthy Servant of the LORD JESUS CHRIST,
do now command all devils, and all damned spirits, and all evil, wicked
and bad spirits, and all Fairies, and all Wizards, and all Witches, and
every evil eye, and each, all and every evil bad devilish satanick power
and powers of evil whatsoever, Not to hurt, Not to harm. Not to injure,
Nor do any devilish evil bad wicked mischief in anywise whatsoever unto
thee \[Margaret C------ alias C------, Nor unto thy Husband, Nor unto
any one of all your Children,\] Nor unto any thing that ever did, or
that now doth, or that hereafter shall and may both Justly and Lawfully
belong in any-wise whatsoever unto thee \[Margaret, or unto Thy Husband,
or unto your Children, (And now especially) as unto Thy Child Elizabeth
Anna C------\] so long as the *Almighty Lord Jesus Christ, the Holy Son
of God with Power*, Liveth and Reigneth *God over all*, *God* blessed
for evermore. Amen. even so *Lord Jesus*, Amen; if it be Thy *Holy Godly
Blessed Will*; for the alone sake of Thy most Holy Atoneing, Redeeming
Propitious Blood, and justifying Righteousness, and Holy Sanctifying
saving Grace of *God* the *Holy Ghost*, the Blessed gift of *God* the
*Father Jehovah*, To them that believe through saving Grace.--Wherefore,
none of all the powers of evil, shall not again be able to hurt thee
\[Margaret,\] in anywise whatsoever, so long as thou believeth in the
*Lord Jesus Christ*, to be the *Son* of *God*, with Power. Amen. *Lord
Jesus*, Amen. For thy great Almighty Name's sake.

May *Jesus* Help thee \[Margaret, and Help all of Them.\] May *Jesus*
Save thee, \[and Save all of Them;\] and, O, May *Christ the Lord
Jesus*, both Bless, Prosper, and Keen thee, both now and forever more,
even forever. Amen. *Lord Jesus Christ*, our *God* and only *Saviour*.
Let it be so, according to Thy Promise, and our Faith in Thee; and give
us Faith alone in Thee. Amen, Almighty *Lord Jesus Christ*.

<span id="img_10100"></span> ![](img/10100.jpg)

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_44"></span>[76:1](fim08.htm#fr_45) Poem of Snorro Sturlson
(Johnstone's Translation.)

<span id="fn_45"></span>[76:2](fim08.htm#fr_46) Polychronicon, A. D.
5487. Rolls Series.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[77:1](fim08.htm#fr_47) The genitive of this
word, *droata*, has been deciphered by Professor Rhys in the Ogam
character on a stone at Ballaqueeney, near Port St. Mary.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[79:1](fim08.htm#fr_48) Specimens of these are
given at the end of this chapter.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[79:2](fim08.htm#fr_49) Even now it is no
uncommon thing for any one who has a cut, or a burn, to seek the nearest
Charmer and have a charm 'put on it.'

<span id="fn_49"></span>[83:1](fim08.htm#fr_50) During the
perambulations of the parishes on Ascension Day.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[86:1](fim08.htm#fr_51) Leviticus ii., 53.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[90:1](fim08.htm#fr_52) There seems to be
practically no distinction between Sorcery, when deprived of the
prophetic element, and Witchcraft.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[92:1](fim08.htm#fr_53) Witch.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[92:2](fim08.htm#fr_54) If the like exist.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[92:3](fim08.htm#fr_55) Harrows.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[97:1](fim08.htm#fr_56) Or, cliffs by the sea.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[97:2](fim08.htm#fr_58) Or, heal.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[99:1](fim08.htm#fr_60) These words are almost
identical with those of the first two verses of the 143rd Psalm.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. Customs and Superstitions Connected With the
Seasons](fim09)
