[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](fim10)  [Next](fim12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

<span id="img_15600"></span> ![](img/15600.jpg)

# CHAPTER VIII.

### CUSTOMS AND SUPERSTITIONS CONNECTED WITH BIRTH, MARRIAGE, AND DEATH.

<span id="img_iinit"></span>

|                     |
|---------------------|
| ![I](img/iinit.jpg) |

N the Isle of Man, as elsewhere, a number of curious customs and
superstitions have naturally grouped themselves about the important
events of Birth, Marriage, and Death.

#### BIRTH

From the birth of a child, till after it was baptised, it was customary
to keep in the room where the woman was confined, a deck, or wooden
hoop, about three or four inches deep, and about twenty inches in
diameter, covered with a sheep's skin, and resembling the head of a
drum, which was heaped with oaten cakes and cheese, of which all
visitors may freely partake, and small pieces of cheese and bread,
called *blithe meat*, were scattered in and about the house for the
Fairies. The woman who carried the infant to church for baptism, was
also supplied with bread and cheese, to give to the first person she met
on the way, in order to preserve her charge from evil influences. After
returning from church, the remaining part of the day, and often a great
part of the night, was spent in eating and drinking, to which "the whole
country round" was invited, and they, in return, gave presents to the
child. If, after child-birth, a woman did not recover her usual strength
as soon as expected, she was then declared to be the victim of an "Evil
Eye." (See [p. 78](fim08.htm#page_78).) Some neighbour is soon suspected
of having given the envenomed glance; and to counteract its malignancy,
a square piece was secretly cut out of some part of her garment, and
burnt immediately under the nose of the afflicted woman. This was
considered an infallible cure.--*Train*.

The baby, also,. was supposed to be especially liable to be affected by
the "Evil Eye" before baptism, and it. was considered

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

that the best way to prevent this was to keep it constantly within the
same room in which it was born. Children were also supposed to be much
more liable to abduction by Fairies before the same ceremony. (See [p.
34](fim06.htm#page_34).) From the time that a woman was delivered of a
child, till thanksgiving for her safe recovery was offered up by some
divine, or until the consecrated candle <span
id="fr_130"></span>[1](#fn_126)--which was kept in her room at this
time--was burnt, it was deemed requisite, as a protection for herself
against the power of evil spirits, that she should keep her husband's
trousers beside her in the bed, to prevent her infant being carried off
by the Fairies, before being secured from their grasp by baptism. A
person was invariably appointed for its special protection, and when she
had occasion to leave the child in the cradle she would place the tongs,
which must be made of iron, across it till her return.

Another specific to ward off evil from babies was to put salt in their
mouths as soon as possible after their birth. In connection with this it
may be noted. that, as it was once the custom to expose infants in order
that they might die, this practice may have been resorted to as a means
of prevention. For, if the child had once partaken of any food, it could
not be exposed. It was deemed most unlucky to cut their hair or nails
before they were a year old, and, if it was done, the fragments were
carefully burned. A posthumous child was supposed to have the gift of
second-sight (see [p. 162](#page_162)); and the seventh son of a seventh
son, and a child born on Hallowe’en had powers of intercourse with the
unseen world.

A child born with a caul--a thin membrane covering the head--would
probably be notorious in some way. This caul was supposed to be a
preventive against shipwreck and drowning, and was accordingly purchased
by sailors. This idea of the value of a caul was wide-spread, as would
appear from numerous advertisements in the newspapers. One of these,
which appeared in the London *Times* in 1835, was as follows:--"A
Child's Caul to be disposed of, a well-known preservative against
drowning, &c., price 10 guineas." And a caul has been advertised for
sale in a Liverpool paper in this year (1891).

#### MARRIAGE.

Waldron describes a Manx Wedding in his time, 1726, as follows:--"The
match is no sooner concluded than besides the banes (sic) of matrimony
being publicly asked in the Church three Sundays, notice is given to all
friends and relations, tho'

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

they live ever so far distant. Not one of these, unless detained by
sickness, fail coming, and bring something towards the feast; the
nearest of kin, if they are able, commonly contribute most, so that they
have vast quantities of fowls of all sorts. \* \* \*

They have Bride-men, and Bride-maids, who lead the young couple, as in
England, only with this difference, that the former have ozier-wands in
their hands, as an emblem of superiority, they are preceded by musick,
who play all the while before them the tune *The Black and the
Grey*, <span id="fr_131"></span>[1](#fn_127) and no other ever is used
at weddings. When they arrive at the Churchyard, they walk three times
round the Church, before they enter it. The ceremony being performed,
the return home and sit down to the feast; after which they dance in the
Manx fashion, and, between that and drinking, pass the remainder of the
day." This Marriage-Feast was a lavish if not a sumptuous repast, and is
described by the same writer as follows:--"Broth is served up in wooden
piggins, every man having his portion allowed him. This they sup with
shells called *sligs*, very much like our mussel shells, but larger. I
have seen a dozen capons in one platter, and six or eight fat geese in
another; hogs and sheep roasted whole, and oxen divided but into
quarters." These customs have now fallen into disuse. But the blowing of
horns, the day before and the morning of the wedding, is still
continued. It was formerly usual for the lover to employ a go-between
called a *dooinney-moyllee*, "a praising man," to court and win over his
mistress to accept his addresses. It was also part of his duty to get
the parents to consent to the match, and to arrange the marriage portion
with them.

Train, writing about marriages fifty years ago, says that "when two
persons agreed to become united in matrimony, and this had been
proclaimed in the parish church on three several Sundays, all the
relations and friends of the young people were invited to the bridal,
and generally attended, bringing with them presents for the 'persons
about to begin the world.' Their weddings, as in Galloway, were
generally celebrated on a Tuesday or a Thursday. The bridegroom and his
party proceeded to the bride's house, and thence with her party to
church--the men walking first in a body and the women after them. On the
bridegroom leaving his house, it was customary to throw an old shoe
after him, and in like manner an old shoe after the bride on leaving her
house to proceed to church, in order to ensure good luck to each
respectively; and if, by stratagem, either of the bride's shoes could be
taken off by any spectator on her way from church,

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

it had to be ransomed by the bridegroom. On returning from church, the
bride and bridegroom walk in front, and every man, with his sweetheart,
in procession, often to the number of fifty. The expenses of the wedding
dinner and drink are sometimes paid by the men individually. It was
formerly the custom after the marriage had been performed for some of
the most active of the young people to start off at full speed for the
bridegroom's house, and for the first who reached it to receive a flask
of brandy. He then returned in all haste to the wedding party, all of
whom halted and formed a circle. He handed spirits first to the
bridegroom, next to the bride, and then to the rest of the company in
succession, each drinking to the health of the new-married couple. After
this, the party moved onwards to the bridegroom's house, on their
arrival at the door of which the bridecake was broken over the bride's
head, and then thrown away to be scrambled for by the crowd usually
attendant on such occasions. The girls present were especially anxious
to secure a piece to place under their pillows, that they might dream of
their future husbands, as this ceremony is supposed to strengthen the
dreaming charm." The writer has heard this ceremony somewhat differently
related by men still living, who have taken part in it. They say that
there was a race among the young men from the church to the house, and
that the first to arrive got the cake, and broke a portion of it over
the bride's head when she reached the threshold.

In his notes on Customs and Superstitions in Vol. XXI. of the Manx
Society, William Harrison adds the following particulars to Waldron's
account of Weddings, which, he says, obtained about 20 years before the
time he wrote (*i.e.*, about 20 years after Train's account):--"After
the ceremony, on coming out of the church, money is thrown amongst the
idlers, who generally congregate about, for which they scramble. This is
also done in passing any public place on the way home. On returning
home, some of the most active of the young people start off at full
speed for the bride's house, and he who arrives there first is
considered best man, and is entitled to some peculiar privilege in
consequence. Occasionally, when the wedding party is attended by their
friends on horseback, some severe riding takes place, and it is well if
all ends without an accident. After the feast the remainder of the day
is spent with the utmost hilarity in dancing and other amusements."

#### DEATH.

Many were the omens which preceded the solemn event of death. If the
dogs howled more loudly than usual, if the

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

death-watch <span id="fr_132"></span>[1](#fn_128) was distinct in the
sick person's room, if his or her wraith was seen by anyone, and if the
strains of the funeral psalm were heard, then death was near. When death
ensued the corpse was laid on what was called a "straightening board," a
trencher with salt <span id="fr_133"></span>[2](#fn_129) in it and a
lighted candle were placed on the breast, and the bed, on which the
straightening board lay, was generally strewed with strong scented
flowers. It was then waked, as we shall see, and carried to the grave,
wrapped in a winding sheet and on an open bier (*carbad*, in Manx). With
regard to this winding sheet, Merick, who was Bishop of Man from 1577 to
1600, and who supplied Camden with a brief account of the Isle for his
*Britannia*, made the extraordinary statement that the women of the
Island wore them during their lives to remind them of their mortality.
This was contradicted by later historians, who pointed out that these
so-called shrouds were merely the blankets, plaids, or shawls which the
women habitually wore. Waldron wrote about death and funerals in Man 160
years ago as follows:--

"When a person dies, several of his acquaintances come and sit up with
him, which they call the Wake <span id="fr_134"></span>[3](#fn_130)
(*Farrar*, in Manx). The Clerk of the Parish is obliged to sing a Psalm,
in which all the company join; and after that they begin some pastime to
divert themselves, and having strong beer and tobacco allowed them in
great plenty. . As to their Funerals, they give no invitation, but
everybody, that had any acquaintance with the deceased, comes either on
foot or horseback. I have seen sometimes at a Manks burial upwards of a
hundred horsemen, and twice the number on foot: all these are
entertained at long tables, spread with all sorts of cold provision, and
rum and brandy flies about at a lavish rate. The procession of carrying
the corpse to the grave is in this manner: When they come within a
quarter of a mile from Church, they are met by the Parson, who walks
before them singing a psalm, all the company joining with him. In every
Church-yard there is a cross round which they go three times before they
enter the Church. But these are the funerals of the

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

better sort, for the poor are carried only on a bier, <span
id="fr_135"></span>[1](#fn_131) with an old blanket round them fastened
with a skewer."

There were formerly crosses on the roads leading to the Parish Churches.
When funerals passed, "the corpse," says Train, "was usually set down at
these stones, that all the people attending might have an opportunity of
praying for the soul of the deceased." He also tells us that "one of
this description was lately to be seen at Port-y-Vullin, on the wayside
leading from Ramsey to St. Maughold, and another near Port Erin." It
would seem that before 1594, when it was forbidden by Statute, it was
customary to carry bells and banners before the dead. Colonel Townley,
who visited the Island towards the end of the eighteenth century,
describes a funeral entertainment as follows: "The concourse of people,
upon the occasion, was wonderful, and the quantity of provisions
prepared . . . . was as wonderful; but not more so than the speedy mode
of dispatching them; for the people of this Island (I mean the country
farmers and their good wives, together with many handicraft-people)
esteem a funeral attendance as one of their very first entertainments."

Lord Teignmouth, when in the Isle of Man in 1835, was informed that
persons walking in the neighbourhood of a churchyard sometimes found
themselves entangled in a crowd, which suddenly vanished--a sign that
foreboded a funeral. It was supposed that when the funeral hymn was sung
in a low key that it was a sign of another death.

It is a practice at the present day for the relatives of the deceased to
attend the parish church the next Sunday but one after the funeral and
to sit down throughout the service.

#### SECOND-SIGHT.

Closely connected with death is the curious superstition about
*Second-sight*, because it is with reference to death that its visions
almost always occur. It may be defined as the faculty of seeing future
events by means of a spectral exhibition of the persons to whom such
events relate, accompanied with signs denoting their fate. This
superstition is more prevalent among Gaelic peoples than others. Dr.
Johnson, when on his tour in Scotland and the Western Isles, remarks
upon it as follows:--"Second sight is an impression made either by the
mind upon the eye, or by the eye upon the mind, by which things distant
or future are perceived and seen as if they were present. . . . Things
distant are seen at the instant when they happen. This receptive
faculty, for power it cannot be called, is neither voluntary nor

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

constant. The appearances have no dependence upon choice; they cannot be
summoned, detained, or recalled--the impression is sudden, and the
effect often painful." People who have a hairy cross on their breasts,
or whose eyebrows meet, often have the faculty of *Second-sight*, and
so, as we have already seen, had those of posthumous birth. Such people
if they go into a churchyard on the Eves of the New Year, of St. Mark's
Day and of Midsummer Day can tell who will be buried in it during the
ensuing year. A child whose eye touches water in baptism has no chance
of becoming second-sighted.

The belief in the faculty of *Second-sight* was formerly very prevalent
in the Island. According to Higden, it was the reputed prerogative of
Manxmen, for he says, "There, ofte by daye time, men of that Islande
seen men that bey dede to fore honde, byheeded or hole, and what dethe
they dyde. Alyens setten there feet upon feet of the men of that londe
for to see such syghts as the men of that londe doon." <span
id="fr_136"></span>[1](#fn_132) Sacheverell, who was Governor of the
Isle of Man from 1692-1696, says that this power was sometimes derived
by inheritance, and transmitted from father to son, and he remarks that
there were people who would attest to having seen apparitions of funeral
solemnities on the large barrow called "Fairy Hill" in Rushen. He does
not altogether believe in this, however, "but as to the light being
generally seen at people's deaths, I have some assurances so probable,
that I know not how to disbelieve them; particularly an ancient man, who
has been long clerk of a parish, has affirmed to me that he almost
constantly sees them upon the death of any of his own parish; and one
Captain Leathes, who was chief magistrate of Belfast, and reputed a man
of great integrity, assured me that he was once shipwrecked on the
Island, and lost the greater part of his crew; that when he came on
shore the people told him he had lost thirteen of his men, for they saw
so many lights going toward the church, which was the just number lost.
Whether these fancies proceed from ignorance, superstition, or prejudice
of education, or from any traditional or veritable magic, which is the
opinion of the Scotch divines concerning second sight; or whether nature
has adapted the organs of some persons for discerning of spirits, is not
for me to determine." This belief is not yet extinct, for
"corpse-lights" seen about the bed of the patient are still supposed to
be the certain forerunners of death. <span
id="fr_137"></span>[2](#fn_133)

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

Bishop Wilson gives, in his Pocket-Book, the following instance of a
supernatural warning:--"Mar., 1721. Two boats of Ballaugh, being at sea,
but not any distance without hearing each other, y<sup>e</sup> men in
each boat heard a voice very distinctly repeating these words--"Churr
hoods," a term used by fishermen to raise the anchor. They immediately
did so, and well it was for them, for a violent storm arose in
half-an-hour's time, so y<sup>t</sup> as it was they had enough to save
their boat and their lives. This is well attested. N.B.--Mr Corlett
assured me y<sup>t</sup> the very same thing happened once to the boat
he was in, only with the addition y<sup>t</sup> y<sup>e</sup> master of
y<sup>e</sup> boat saw y<sup>e</sup> appearance of a man." <span
id="fr_138"></span>[1](#fn_134)

It was formerly supposed, as already stated, that families had
*Second-sight* by succession, and it was also supposed that the only way
to be freed from it was by a man who had it marrying a woman affected in
the same way. Waldron, who gives several instances of the possession of
this faculty, was evidently much impressed by them, as he declared
himself "positively convinced by many proofs." He stated that the Manx
consider that the warnings caused by these mock funerals were the work
of friendly demons, who even condescended to warn a host of the arrival
of an unexpected guest, and servants of the return of a master who had
not been expected. "As difficult as I found it," he says, "to give any
faith to this, I have frequently been very much surprised, when, on
visiting a friend, I have found the table ready spread and everything in
order to receive me, and been told by the person to whom I went, that he
had knowledge of my coming, or some other guest, by those good natured
intelligencers. Nay, when obliged to be absent some time from home, my
own servants have assured me they were informed by these means of my
return, and expected me the very hour I came, though, perhaps, it was
some days before I hoped it myself at my going abroad."

He then gives the following account of

#### MOCK FUNERALS.

"The natives of this Island tell you that before any person dies, the
procession of the funeral is acted by a sort of beings which, for that
end, render themselves visible. I know several that, as they have been
passing the road, one of these funerals has come behind them, and even
laid the bier on their shoulders, as though to assist the bearers. One
person, who assured me he had been served so, told me that the flesh of
his shoulder had been very much bruised, and was black for many weeks

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

after. There are few or none of them who pretend not to have seen or
heard these imaginary obsequies (for I must not omit to say that they
sing psalms in the same manner as those do who accompany the corpse of a
dead friend), which so little differ from real ones that they are not to
be known till both coffin and mourners are seen to vanish at the church
doors."

<span id="img_16400"></span> ![](img/16400.jpg)

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_126"></span>[157:1](fim11.htm#fr_130) The churching of a
woman, in the Manx language, is called *lostey-chainley*, from the
practice of burning a candle, in former times, during his service.

<span id="fn_127"></span>[158:1](fim11.htm#fr_131) This was a popular
tune in the time of Charles II., and it continued in vogue till the end
of the last century.

<span id="fn_128"></span>[160:1](fim11.htm#fr_132) This sound was really
produced by a small wood-moth.

<span id="fn_129"></span>[160:2](fim11.htm#fr_133) Sometimes earth as
well as salt was laid on the corpse, the former being an emblem of the
corruptibility of the body, the other of the incorruptibility of the
soul.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[160:3](fim11.htm#fr_134) Watching with the
dead was an ancient custom of the Church. Pennant, in his Tour of
Scotland, speaks of it as follows: "The evening after the death of any
person, the relations or friends of the deceased meet at the house,
attended by bag-pipe or fiddle; the nearest of kin, be it wife, son, or
daughter, opens a melancholy ball, dancing and greeting (*i.e.*, crying)
at the same time."

<span id="fn_131"></span>[161:1](fim11.htm#fr_135) Burial in coffins, as
a universal custom, did not begin in England before the end of the
seventeenth century.

<span id="fn_132"></span>[162:1](fim11.htm#fr_136) Polychronicon, A. D.
1482, Rolls series.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[162:2](fim11.htm#fr_137) Its frequency in
earlier times may be reasonably attributed to the greater prevalency of
marshy ground over which such phenomena as the *ignis fatuus*, or
Will-o’-the-wisp, would often be seen.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[163:1](fim11.htm#fr_138) Manx Note Boot:, Vol.
II., p. 87.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX. Customs Formerly Enforced by Law](fim12)
