<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbf03)  [Next](sbf05) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Specimens of Bushman Folklore*, by W.H.I. Bleek and L.C. Lloyd,
\[1911\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# !GAUNU-TSAXAU (THE SON OF THE MANTIS), THE BABOONS, AND THE MANTIS.

!gaunu-tsaxau <span class="small">\[1\]</span> formerly went to fetch
for his father sticks, that his father might take aim at the people who
sit upon (their) heels. Fetching, he went up to them (the baboons) as
they were going along feeding. Therefore, a baboon who feeding went past
him,-he who was an older baboon,-he was the one to whom *!gaunu-tsaxau*
came. Then he questioned *!gaunu-tsaxau*. And *!gaunu-tsaxau* told him
about it, that he must fetch for his father sticks, that his father
might take aim at the people who sit upon (their) heels. Therefore, he
(the baboon) exclaimed <span class="small">\[2\]</span> "Hie! Come to
listen to this child." And the other one said:

"First going  
I listen,  
To the child yonder.  
First going  
I listen,  
To the child yonder."

\[1 *!gaunu-tsaxau* was a son of the Mantis.

2\. I must (the narrator here explained) speak in my language, because I
feel that the speech of the baboons is not easy."\]

And he reached them. He said: "What does this child say?" And the child
said: "I must fetch for my father sticks (bushes?), that my father may
take aim at the people who sit upon (their) heels." Then the baboon
said: "Tell the old man yonder that he must come to hear this child."
Then the baboon called out: "Hie! Come to hear this child." Then the
other one said:

First going  
I listen,  
To the child yonder."

And he came up (to them); he exclaimed: "What does this child say?" And
the other one answered: "This child, he wishes, he says, to fetch sticks
for his father, that his father may take aim at the people who sit upon
(their) heels." And this baboon said: "Tell the old man yonder that he
must come to hear this child." Then this (other) baboon called out: "O
person passing across in front! come to listen to this child."
Therefore, the other one said:

First going  
I listen,  
To the child yonder."

And he came up (to them). He said: "What does this child say?" And the
other one answered: "This child wants, he says, to fetch sticks <span
class="small">\[1\]</span> for his father, that his father may take aim
at the people who sit upon (their) heels." Therefore, this baboon

<span class="small">\[1. In a paper entitled "A Glimpse into the
Mythology of the Maluti Bushmen," which appeared in the *Cape Monthly
Magazine* for July, 1874, written by Mr. J. M. Orpen. (at that time
Chief Magistrate, St. John's Territory), we find, on p. 8, that the
Mantis sent one of his sons to cut sticks to make bows, and that he was
caught and killed by the baboons.\]</span>

exclaimed It is ourselves! Thou shalt tell the old man yonder that he
shall come to listen to this child." Therefore, this other baboon called
out: "Ho! come to listen to this child." Then the other one said:

First going  
I listen,  
To the child yonder."

He came up to the other people on account of it. He said: "What does
this child say?" And the other one answered: "This child, he wants, he
says, to fetch<span class="small">\[1\]</span> sticks for his father,
that his father may take aim at the people who sit upon (their) heels."
Therefore, this baboon exclaimed (with a sneering kind of laugh): "O ho!
It is ourselves! Thou shalt quietly go to tell the old man yonder, that
he may come to listen to this child." And the other one called out: "O
person passing across in front! come to listen to this child." And the
other said:

First going  
I listen,  
To the child yonder."

And he went up to the other people; he said: "What does this child say?"
And the other one answered: "This child, he wants, he says, to fetch
sticks for his father, that his father may take aim at the people who
sit upon their heels."

Then that baboon,--he felt that he was an old

<span class="small">\[1. Note by the narrator. He had sent his son, that
his son should go to construct things for him. I think that they were
sticks (bushes?). He wished his son to go (and) make them for him, that
he might come (and) work them, in order that he might make war upon the
baboons.\]</span>

baboon--therefore, he said, when the other one had said, "This child
wanted, he said, to fetch sticks for his father," therefore the other
one (the old baboon) exclaimed: "What? it is we ourselves; ourselves it
is! Ye shall strike the child with your fists."

Therefore, they were striking *!gaunu-tsaxau* with their fists on
account of it; they hit with their fists, breaking (his) head. And
another struck with his fist, knocking out *!gaunu-tsaxau*'s eye, the
and the child's eye in this manner sprang (or rolled) away. Then this
baboon exclaimed: "My ball! my ball! "Therefore, they began to play a
game at ball,<span class="small">\[2\]</span> while the child died; the
child lay still. They said (sang):

And I want it,  
Whose ball is it?  
And I want it,  
Whose ball is it?  
And I want it."

The other people said:

My companion's ball it is,  
And I want it,  
My companion's ball it is,  
And I want it,"

while they were playing at ball there with the child's eye.

The Mantis was waiting for the child. Therefore, the Mantis lay down at
noon. Therefore, the Mantis

\[1 (They) were playing at ball.

My ball,  
My ball it is,  
And I want it.  
My companion's ball it is,  
And I want it,  
My companion's ball,  
And I want it."

\]

was dreaming about the child, that the baboons were those who had killed
the child; that they had made a ball of the child's eye; that he went to
the baboons, while the baboons played at ball there with the child's
eye.

Therefore, he arose; he took up the quiver, he slung on the quiver; be
said, "Rattling along,<span class="small">\[1\]</span> rattling along,"
while he felt that he used formerly to do so, he used to say, Rattling
along." Then, when he came into sight. he perceived the baboons' dust,
while the baboons were playing at ball there with the child's eye. Then
the Mantis cried on account of it, because the baboons appeared really
to have killed the child. Therefore, they were playing at ball there
with the child's eye. Therefore, when he came into sight, he perceived
the baboons' dust, while the baboons were playing at ball there with the
child's eye. Therefore he cried about it. And he quickly shut his mouth;
he thoroughly dried the tears from his eyes, while he desired that the
baboons should not perceive tears in his eyes; that he appeared to have
come crying, hence tears were in his eyes; so that he might go to play
at ball with the baboons, while his eyes had no tears in them.

Then he, running, came up to the baboons, while the baboons stared at
him, because they were startled at him.<span class="small">\[2\]</span>
Then, while the baboons were still staring at him, he came running to a
place where he

\[1 The arrows they were, the arrows which were in the quiver; they made
a rattling noise, because they stirred inside (it). Therefore, he said,
"Rattling along, rattling along."

2\. They were not in the habit of seeing him; therefore they stared at
him.\]

laid down the quiver; he took off (his) kaross (i.e. skin cloak), he put
down the kaross, he, grasping, drew out the feather brush which he had
put into the bag, he shook out the brush, he played with (?) the ball.
He called out to the baboons, why was it that the baboons were staring
at him, while the baboons did not play with (?) the ball, that the
baboons might throw it to him.

Then the baboons looked at one another, because they suspected why he
spoke thus. Then he caught hold of the ball, when the ball had merely
flown to another baboon, when this (the first) baboon had thrown the
ball to the other. Then the child's eye, because the child's eye felt
that it was startled (?), on account of his father's scent, it went
playing about; the baboons trying to get it, missed it. Then one baboon,
he was the one who caught hold of it, he threw it towards another. Then
the Mantis merely sprang out from this place, the Mantis caught hold of
the child's eye, the Mantis, snatching, took the child's eye. Then the
Mantis whirled around the child's eye; he anointed the child's eye with
(the perspiration of) his armpits. Then he threw the child's eye towards
the baboons, the child's eye ascended, the child's eye went about in the
sky; the baboons beheld it above, as it played about above in the sky.
And the child's eye went to stand yonder opposite to the quiver; it
appeared as if it sprang over the quiver, while it stood inside the
quiver's bag.<span class="small">\[1\]</span>

<span class="small">\[1. He tied, placing a little bag at the side of
the quiver; therefore it is the quiver's bag; while it feels that it is
a little bag which is tied at the side of the quiver; he had laid the
bow upon it; it was the one that he tied, placing it by the side of the
quiver. That bag, it was the one that the child's eye was in. That bag,
it was the one that he laid the bow upon.\]</span>

Then the baboons went to seek for it. The Mantis also sought for it,
while the baboons sought for it. Then all the baboons were altogether
seeking for the child's eye. They said: "Give my companion the
ball."<span class="small">\[1\]</span> The baboon whose ball it was, he
said: "Give me the ball."<span class="small">\[2\]</span> The Mantis
said: "Behold ye! I have not got the ball." The baboons said: "Give my
companion the ball." The baboon whose ball it was, he said: "Give me the
ball." Then the baboons<span class="small">\[3\]</span> said that the
Mantis must shake the bag, for the ball seemed to be inside the bag. And
the Mantis exclaimed: "Behold ye! Behold ye! the ball is not inside the
bag. Behold ye!" while he grasped the child's eye, he shook, turning the
bag inside out. He said: "Behold ye! Behold ye! the ball cannot be
inside the bag."

Then this baboon exclaimed: "Hit the old man with (your) fists." Then
the other one exclaimed: "Give my companion the ball! "while he struck
the head of the Mantis. Then the Mantis exclaimed: "I have not got the
ball," while he struck the baboon's head. Therefore, they were all
striking the Mantis with their fists; the Mantis was striking them with
his fist. Then the Mantis got the worst of it; the Mantis exclaimed:
"Ow! Hartebeest's Children!<span class="small">\[4\]</span> ye must go!

!kau

\[1. "Give my companion the ball."

2\. "Give me the ball."

3\. It is uncertain whether this should be singular or plural here.

4\. "Hartebeest's Children," here, may refer to a bag made from the skin
of young hartebeests, which the Mantis had with him.\]

!Yerriggu!<span class="small">\[1\]</span> ye must go!" while the
baboons watched him ascend; as he flew up, as he flew to the water. Then
he popped into the water on account of it; while he exclaimed: "*I \|ke,
tten !khwaiten!khwaiten, !kui ha i \|ka!*"<span
class="small">\[2\]</span> "Then he walked out of the water; he sat
down; he felt inside (his) bag; he took out the child's eye; he walked
on as he held it; he walked, coming up to the grass at the top of the
water's bank<span class="small">\[3\]</span>; he sat down. He exclaimed:
"*Oh wwi ho!*"<span class="small">\[4\]</span> as he put the child's eye
into the water.

"Thou must grow out, that thou mayest become like that which thou hast
been."<span class="small">\[5\]</span> "Then he walked on; he went to
take up (his) kaross, he threw it over his shoulder; be took up the
quiver, he slung on the quiver; and, in this manner, he returning went,
while he returning arrived at home.

Then the young Ichneumon exclaimed: "Who can have done thus to my
grandfather, the Mantis, that the Mantis is covered with wounds? "Then
the Mantis replied: "The baboons were those who killed grandson,
*!gaunu-tsaxau*; I went <span class="small">\[the Mantis speaks very
sadly and slowly here\]</span>, as they were

\[1. The meaning of *!kau !Yerri-ggu* is at present unknown to the
translator, but the Mantis is still addressing some of his possessions,
and ordering them to leave the scene of his defeat.

2\. Of these words of the Mantis (which frequently appear in stories
concerning him) the narrators were not able to furnish a sufficiently
clear explanation, so the original text is given.

3\. It is grass; the grass which stands upon the top of the water's
bank; it is that which the Bushmen call *\|kannung-a-sse*.

4\. At the same time, putting the first finger of his right hand into
his mouth, against his left cheek, and drawing it forcibly out; the eye
being meanwhile in the palm of his right hand, shut down by his other
fingers.

5 He desired that the child should live; that it should living return.\]

playing at ball there with grandson's eye; I went to play at ball with
them. Then grandson's eye vanished. Therefore, the baboons said (that) I
was the one who had it; the baboons were fighting me; therefore, I was
fighting them; and I thus did, I flying came."

Then *\|kuammang-a* said: "I desire thee to say to grandfather, Why is
it that grandfather continues to go among strangers <span
class="small">\[literally, people who are different\]</span>?" Then the
Mantis answered: "Thou dost appear to think that yearning was not that
on account of which I went among the baboons; "while he did not tell
*\|kuammang-a* and the others that he came (and) put the child's eye
into the water.

Then he remained there (i.e. at home), while he did not go to the water.
Then he went there, while he went to look at the place where he had put
in the child's eye. And he approached gently, while he wished that he
might not make a rustling noise. Therefore, he gently came. And the
child heard him, because he had not come gently when afar off; and the
child jumped up, it splashed into the water. Then the Mantis was
laughing about it, while his heart yearned (for the child). And he
returned; altogether returned.

Then the child grew; it became like that which it had (formerly) been.
Then the Mantis came; while he came to look; and be in this manner
walking came. While he came walking and looking, he espied the child, as
the child was sitting in the sun. Then the child heard him, as be came
rustling (along); the child sprang up, the child entered the water. And
he looking stood, he went back. he went; he went to make for the child a
front kaross (or apron), that and a *\|\|koroko*.<span
class="small">\[1\]</span> He put the things aside; then he put the
front kaross (into a bag), that and the *\|\|koroko*; he in this manner
went; he in this manner came he approached gently. And, as he approached
gently, he espied the child lying in the sun, as the child lay yonder,
in the sun, opposite the water. Therefore, he gently came up to the
child. And the child heard him, as his father gently came. And the
Mantis, when the child intended to get up, the Mantis sprang forward, he
caught hold of the child. And he anointed the child with his scent; he
anointed the child; be said: "Why art thou afraid of me? I am thy
father; I who am the Mantis, I am here; thou art my son, thou art
!gaunu-tsaxau; I am the Mantis, I whose son thou art; the father is
myself." And the child sat down, on account of it; and he took out the
front kaross, he took out the *\|\|koroko*. He put the front kaross on
to the child; he put the *\|\|koroko* on to the child; he put the front
kaross on to the child. Then he took the child with him; they, in this
manner, returning went; they returning arrived at home.

Then the young Ichneumon exclaimed: "What person can it be who comes
with the Mantis?" And *\|kuammang-a* replied: "Hast thou not just(?)
heard that grandfather said he had gone to the baboons, while they were
playing at ball there with the child's eye? while grandfather must have
been playing before us; his son comes yonder with him! "And they
returned, reaching the house. Then the young Ichneumon spoke; he said:
"Why did my grandfather, the Mantis, first say that the

<span class="small">\[1. Another article for the child to wear.\]</span>

baboons were those who killed the child, while the child is here Then
the Mantis said: Hast thou not seen (that) he is not strong? while he
feels that I came to put his eye into the water; while I wished that I
might see whether the thing would not accomplish itself for me;
therefore, I came to put his eye into the water. He came out of the
water; therefore, thou seest (that) he is not strong. Therefore, I
wished that I might wait, taking care of him; that I may see whether he
will not become strong."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Story Of The Leopard Tortoise.](sbf05)

</div>
