<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbf07)  [Next](sbf09) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Specimens of Bushman Folklore*, by W.H.I. Bleek and L.C. Lloyd,
\[1911\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE MOON IS NOT TO BE LOOKED AT WHEN GAME HAS BEEN SHOT.

We may not look at the Moon, when we have shot game; for, we look,
lowering our head, while we do not look up, towards the sky; while we
are afraid of the Moon's shining. It is that which we fear. For, our
mothers used to tell us about it, that the Moon is not a good person, if
we look at him.

For, if we look at him, when we have shot game, the beasts of prey will
eat the game, when the game lies dying, if we look at the Moon. When the
game does not die, the Moon's water is that which causes the game to
live. For, our mothers used to tell us about it, that, the Moon's water
yonder, (that) we see, which is on a bush, it resembles liquid honey. It
is that which falls upon the game; the game arises, when it has fallen
upon the game. It makes cool the poison with which we shot the game; and
the game arises, it goes on, while it does not show signs of poison<span
class="small">\[1\]</span>; even if it had appeared as if it would die.
The Moon's water is that which cures it. And it lives, on account of it.

Therefore, our mothers did not wish us to be looking about, we should
not look at the things which are in the sky; while our mothers used to
tell us about it, that the Moon, if we had looked at him, the game which
we had shot, would also go along like the Moon, Our mothers said to us
about it, did we

<span class="small">\[1. Literally, "make," or "become poison."\]</span>

not see the Moon's manner of going? he was not in the habit of going to
a place near at hand, for, the day was used to break, while he was still
going along. The game would also do the same, if we had looked at the
Moon. The day would break, while the game was still going along; while
it resembled the Moon, at which we had looked. Therefore, we feared to
look at the Moon; while we felt that our mothers used to tell us about
it, that the game would desire to take us away to a place where no water
was. We could (?) go to die of thirst, while it, leading us astray, took
us away to a place where no water was.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Girl Of The Early Race, Who Made Stars.](sbf09)

</div>
