<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbf05)  [Next](sbf07) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Specimens of Bushman Folklore*, by W.H.I. Bleek and L.C. Lloyd,
\[1911\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# II. Sun and Moon.

## THE CHILDREN ARE SENT TO THROW THE SLEEPING SUN INTO THE SKY.

The children were those who approached geutly to lift up the Sun-armpit,
while the Sun-armpit lay sleeping.

The children felt that their mother was the one who spoke; therefore,
the children went to the Sun; while the Sun shone, at the place where
the Sun lay, sleeping lay.

Another old woman was the one who talked to the other about it;
therefore, the other one spoke to the other one's children.<span
class="small">\[1\]</span> The other old woman said to the other, that,
the other one's children should approach gently to lift up the
Sun-armpit, that they should throw up the Sun-armpit, that the Bushman
rice might become dry for them, that the Sun might make bright the whole
place; while the Sun felt that the Sun went (along), it went over the
whole sky, it made all places bright; therefore, it made all the ground
bright; while it felt that the children were those who had coaxed (?)
him; because an old woman was the one who spoke to the other about it,
therefore, the other one said: "O children! ye must wait for the Sun,
that the Sun may lie down to sleep, for, we are cold. Ye shall gently
approach to lift

<span class="small">\[1. Another old woman was the one who said to the
other, that the other should tell the other one's children; for, she
(herself) had no young male children; for, the other was the one who had
young male children who were clever, those who would understand nicely,
when they went to that old man.\]</span>

him up, while he lies asleep; ye shall take hold of him, all together,
all together ye lift him up, that ye may throw him up into the sky."
They, in this manner, spoke; the old woman, in this manner, she spoke to
the other; therefore, the other in this manner spoke to her, she also,
in this manner, spoke to her children. The other said to her: "This (is
the) story which I tell thee, ye must wait for the Sun."

The children came, the children went away; the old woman said: "Ye must
go to sit down, when ye have looked at him, (to see) whether he lies
looking; ye must go to sit down, while ye wait for him." Therefore, the
children went to sit down, while the children waited for him; he lay
down, he lifted up his elbow, his armpit shone upon the ground, as he
lay. Therefore, the children threw him up into the sky, -while they felt
that the old woman had spoken to them. The old woman said to the
children: "O children going yonder! ye must speak to him, when ye throw
him -up." The old woman said to the children: "O children going yonder!
ye must tell him, that, he must altogether become the Sun, that he may
go forward, while he feels that he is altogether the Sun, which is hot;
therefore, the Bushman rice becomes dry, while he is hot, passing along
in the sky; he is hot, while he stands above in the sky."

The old woman was the one who told the children about it, while she felt
that her head was white; the children were listening to her, they were
listening to their mamma, their mother; their mother told them about it,
that which the old woman in this manner said. Therefore, they thought in
this manner. Therefore, they went to sit down. An older child spoke to
another, therefore, they went to sit down, while they waited for him
(the Sun), they went to sit down.

They arose, going on, they stealthily approached him, they stood still,
they looked at him, they went forward; they stealthily reached him, they
took hold of him) they all took hold of him together, lifted him up,
they raised him, while he felt hot. Then, they threw him up, while he
felt hot; they spoke to him while he felt hot: "O Sun! thou must
altogether stand fast, thou must go along, thou must stand fast) while
thou art hot."

The old woman said (that) they seemed to have thrown him up, he seemed
to be standing fast above. They thus spoke, they in this manner spoke.
Her (apparently the mother's) husband said: "The Suns' armpit is
standing fast above yonder, he whom the children have thrown up; he lay,
he intended to sleep; therefore, the children have thrown him up."

The children returned. Then, the children came (and) said: "(Our)
companion who is here, he took hold of him, I also was taking hold of
him; my younger brother was taking hold of him, my other younger brother
was also taking bold of him; (our) companion who is here, his other
younger brother was also taking hold of him. I said: 'Ye must grasp him
firmly.' I, in this manner, spoke; I said: 'Throw ye him up!' Then, the
children threw him up. I said to the children: 'Grasp ye the old man
firmly!' I said to the children: 'Throw ye up the old man!' Then, the
children threw up the old man; that old man, the Sun; while they felt
that the old woman was the one who spoke."

An older child spoke, while he felt that he was a youth; the other also
was a youth, they were young men (?), they went to throw up the
Sun-armpit. They came to speak, the youth spoke, the youth talked to his
grandmother: "O my grandmother! we threw him up, we told him, that, he
should altogether become the Sun, which is hot; for, we are cold. We
said: 'O my grandfather, Sun-armpit! Remain (at that) place; become thou
the Sun which is hot; that the Bushman rice may dry for us; that thou
mayst make the whole earth light; that the whole earth may become warm
in the summer; that thou mayst altogether make heat. Therefore, thou
must altogether shine, taking away the darkness; thou must come, the
darkness go away.'"

The Sun comes, the darkness goes away, the Sun comes, the Sun sets, the
darkness comes, the moon comes at night. The day breaks, the Sun comes
out, the darkness goes away, the Sun comes. The moon comes out, the moon
brightens the darkness, the darkness departs; the moon comes out, the
moon shines, taking away the darkness; it goes along, it has made bright
the darkness, it sets. The Sun comes out, the Sun follows (drives away?)
the darkness, the Sun takes away the moon, the moon stands, the Sun
pierces it, with the Sun's knife, as it stands; therefore, it decays
away on account of it. Therefore, it says: "O Sun! leave for the
children the backbone!" Therefore, the Sun leaves the backbone for the
children; the Sun does so. Therefore, the Sun says that the Sun will
leave the backbone for the children, while the Sun assents to him; the
Sun leaves the backbone for the children; therefore, the moon painfully
goes away, he painfully returns home, while he painfully goes along;
therefore, the Sun desists, while he feels that the Sun has left for the
children the backbone, while the Sun assents to him; therefore, the Sun
leaves the backbone; while the Sun feels that the Sun assents to him;
therefore, the Sun desists on account of it; he (the moon) painfully
goes away, he painfully returns home; he again, he goes to become
another moon, which is whole; he again, be lives; he again, be lives,
while he feels that he had seemed to die. Therefore, he becomes a new
moon; while he feels that he has again put on a stomach; he becomes
large; while he feels that he is a moon which is whole; therefore, he is
large; he comes, while he is alive. He goes along at night, he feels
that he is the moon which goes by night, while he feels that he is a
shoe<span class="small">\[1\]</span>; therefore, he walks in the night.

The Sun is here, all the earth is bright; the Sun is here, the people
walk while the place is light, the earth is light; the people perceive
the bushes, they see the other people; they see the meat, which they are
eating; they also see the springbok, they also head the springbok, in
summer; they also head the ostrich, while they feel that the Sun shines;
they also head the ostrich in summer; they are shooting the springbok in
summer, while they feel that the Sun shines, they see the springbok;
they also steal up to the gemsbok; they also steal up to the kudu, while
they feel that the whole place is bright; they also visit each other,
while they feel that the Sun shines, the earth also is bright, the Sun
shines upon the path. They also travel in summer; they

<span class="small">\[1. The Mantis formerly, when inconvenienced by
darkness, took off one of his shoes and threw it into the sky, ordering
it to become the Moon.\]</span>

are shooting in summer; they hunt in summer; they espy the springbok in
summer; they go round to head the springbok; they lie down; they feel
that they lie in a little house of bushes; they scratch up the earth in
the little house of bushes, they lie down, while the springbok come.

 

FURTHER REMARKS.

The second version of the preceeding myth, which is unfortunately too
long to be conveniently included in the present volume, contains a few
interesting notes, furnished by the narrator, *\|\|kabbo* ("Dream"),
which are given below. *\|\|kabbo* further explained that the Sun was a
man; but, *not* one of the early race of people who preceded the Flat
Bushmen in their country. He only gave forth brightness for a space
around his own dwelling. Before the children threw him up, he had not
been in the sky, but, had lived at his own house, on earth. As his
shining had been confined to a certain space at, and round his own
dwelling, the rest of the country seemed as if the sky were very cloudy;
as it looks now, when the Sun is behind thick clouds. The sky was black
(dark?). Thee shining came from one of the Sun's armpits, as he lay with
one arm lifted up. When he put down his arm, darkness fell everywhere;
when he lifted it up again, it was as if day came. In the day, the Sun's
light used to be white; but, at night, it was red, like a fire. When the
Sun was thrown up into the sky it became round, and never was a man
afterwards.

TRANSLATION OF NOTES.

The First Bushmen<span class="small">\[1\]</span> were those who first
inhabited the earth. Therefore, their children were those who worked
with the Sun. Therefore, the people who <span
class="small">\[later\]</span> inhabited their country, are those who
say that the children worked, making the Sun to ascend, while they felt
that their mothers had agreed together that they should throw up, for
them, the Sun; that the Sun might warm the earth for them; that
they-might feel the Sun's warmth, that they might be able to sit in the
Sun.

<span class="small">\[1. The men of the early race.\]</span>

When the first Bushmen had passed away, the Flat Bushmen inhabited their
ground. Therefore, the Flat Bushmen taught their children about the
stories of the First Bushmen.

The Sun had been a man, he talked; they all talked, also the other one,
the Moon. Therefore, they used to live upon the earth; while they felt
that they spoke. They do not talk, now that they live in the sky.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Origin Of Death; Preceded By A Prayer Addressed To The Young
Moon.](sbf07)

</div>
