<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbf11)  [Next](sbf13) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Specimens of Bushman Folklore*, by W.H.I. Bleek and L.C. Lloyd,
\[1911\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# !KO-G!NUING-TARA, WIFE OF THE DAWN'S-HEART STAR, JUPITER.

They sought for *!haken*,<span class="small">\[1\]</span> they were
digging out *!haken*. They went about, sifting *!haken*, while they were
digging out *!haken*. And, when the larvæ of the, *!haken* were
intending to go in (to the earth which was underneath the little
hillock), they collected together, they sifted the larvæ of the *!haken*
on the hunting ground.

And the hyena<span class="small">\[2\]</span> took the blackened
perspiration of her armpits, she put it into the *!haken*. And they<span
class="small">\[3\]</span> gave to *!ko-g!nuing-tara* of the *!hagen*.
And *!ko-g!nuing-tara* exclaimed, she said to her younger sister: "Thou
shalt leave this *!haken* alone; I will be the one who eats it. For,
thou art the one who shalt take care of the child.<span
class="small">\[4\]</span> For, this *!haken*, its smell is not nice."

Therefore, as *!ko-g!nuing-tara* sat, eating the *!haken*,

\[1. *!haken* resembles "rice" (i.e. "Bushman rice"); its larvæ are like
(those of) "Bushman rice". *!haken* is a thing to eat; there is nothing
as nice as it is, when it is fresh.

2\. A female hyena.

3\. The hyenas (it) was, with the jackals, the blue cranes (and) the
black crows.

4\. It was *!ko-g!nuing-tara*'s child. The Dawn's-Heart was the one who
buried the child away from his wife, under the *!huing* (a plant with a
handsome green top, and little bulbous roots at the end of fibres in the
ground. The roots are eaten by the Bushmen raw, and also roasted and
made into meal, which is said to be excellent, *\|hang\#kass'o* thinks
that the flower is red; but has not seen the plant since he was a
child).\]

the ornaments<span class="small">\[1\]</span> (i.e., earrings,
bracelets, leglets, anklets) of themselves ) came off.<span
class="small">\[2\]</span> The kaross (skin cloak) also unloosened
(itself), the kaross also sat down. The skin petticoat also unloosened
(itself), the skin petticoat sat down. The shoes ilso unloosened
(themselves). Therefore, she sprang up,<span class="small">\[3\]</span>
she in this manner trotted away. Her younger sister, shrieking, followed
her.<span class="small">\[4\]</span> She went; she went into the reeds.
She went to sit in the reeds.

Her younger sister exclaimed: "O *!ko-g!nuing-tara*! wilt thou not first
allow the child to suck?" And she (the elder sister) said: "Thou shalt
bring it, that it may suck; I would altogether talk to thee, while my
thinking-strings still stand." Therefore, she spoke., she said to her
younger sister: "Thou must be quickly bringing the child, while I am
still conscious; and thou shalt bring the child to-morrow morning."

Her younger sister returned home, also the hyena, when the hyena bad put
on the ornaments; they returned home, while the Dawn's-Heart and the
rest<span class="small">\[5\]</span> were (still) out hunting. The
Dawn's-Heart returned home, as the child cried there, while his younger
sister-in-law was the one who had the child.

He came, he exclaimed: "Why is it, that *!ko-g!nuing-tara* is not
attending to the child, while the child cries there?" The hyena did not
speak.

\[1. Bracelet, anklet, leglet.

2\. (They) came off, they sat down upon the ground.

3\. She felt that she became a beast of prey.

4\. Because she wanted to run to catch hold of her elder sister.

5\. I think that he was with other people. I think that they seem to
have been the jackals' husbands, and the quaggas, and the wildebeests
with the ostriches.\]

\|Xe-dde-Yoe<span class="small">\[1\]</span> was soothing the child. She
waited; her elder sister's husband went to hunt; and she took the child
upon her back. She went to her elder sister; she walked, arriving at the
reeds. She exclaimed: "O *!ko-g!nuing-tara*! let the child suck." And
her elder sister sprang out of the reeds; her elder sister, in this
manner, came running; her elder sister caught hold of her, she turning
(her body on one side) gave her ) elder sister the child. She said: "I
am here" And her elder sister allowed the child to suck. She said: "Thou
must quickly bring the child (again), while I am still conscious; for, I
feel as if my thinking-strings would fall down." And her younger sister
took the child upon her back, she returned home; while her elder sister
went into the reeds.

And, near sunset, she went to her elder sister; while she felt that her
elder sister was the one who had thus spoken to her about it; her elder
sister said: "Thou must quickly bring the child, for, I feel. as if I
should forget you, while I feel that I do not know." And, her younger
sister took the child near sunset, she went to her elder sister, she
stood. She exclaimed: "O *!ko-g!nuing-tara*! let the child suck." Her
elder sister sprang out of the reeds; she ran up to her younger sister.
And she caught hold of her younger sister. Her younger sister said: "I
am here! I am here!" She allowed the child to suck. She said: "Thou must
quickly come (again); for, I feel as if I should forget you, (as if) I
should not any longer think of you." Her

<span class="small">\[1. The name of the younger sister of
*!ko-g!nuing-tara* was *\|Xe-dde-Yoe*. She was a (one of the early
race).\]</span>

younger sister returned home, while she went into the reeds.

Her younger sister, on the morrow, she went to her elder sister; she
walked, coming, coming, coming, coming, she stood. And she exclaimed: "O
*!ko-g!nuing-tara*!" let the child suck." And her elder sister sprang
out of the reeds, she ran up to her younger sister, she caught hold of
her younger sister. Her younger sister, springing aside, gave her the
child. Her younger sister said: "I am here!" Therefore, she (the elder
sister) spoke, she said to her younger sister: "Thou must not continue
to come to me; for, I do not any longer feel that I know." And her
younger sister returned home.

And they went to make a *!ku*<span class="small">\[1\]</span> there (at
the house). They played. The men played with them, while the women were
those who clapped their hands, while the men were those who nodded their
heads, while the women were those who clapped their hands for them.
Then, the Dawn's-Heart, nodding his head, went up to his younger
sister-in-law, he laid his hand on his younger sister-in-law (on her
shoulder). Then his younger sister-in-law swerved aside. She exclaimed:
"Leave me alone! your wives, the old she-hyenas,<span
class="small">\[2\]</span> may clap their hands for you."

Then the Dawn's-Heart ran to the hyena; he took

\[1. This is a dance or game of the Bushmen, which *\|hang\#kass'o* has
not himself seen, but has heard of from *Tuani-ang* and *\#kammi*, two
of *Tsatsi*'s wives. They used to say that their fathers made a *!ku*
(and) played. Their mothers were those who clapped their hands, clapped
their hands for the men; the men nodded their heads.

2\. She said *!gwai \|e-tara*, a from anger; anger was that on account
of which she said *!gwai \|e-tara*.\]

aim (with his assegai),<span class="small">\[1\]</span> he pierced the
place where the hyena had been sitting,<span class="small">\[2\]</span>
while the hyena sprang out, she trod, burning herself in the fire, while
she sprang away; while the ornaments remained at the place where she had
been sitting, and where she had been wearing them. She sprang away,
while they remained.

And the Dawn's-Heart scolded his younger sister-in-law, why was it that
his younger sister-in-law had not quickly told him about it; she had
concealed from him about the hyena; as if this was not why he had seen
that the woman had been sitting with her back towards him, she had not
been sitting with her face towards him. She had been sitting with her
back towards him; the (*i.e*. his) wife had been sitting with her face
towards him. A different person, she must be the one who was here, she
had sat with her back towards him.<span class="small">\[3\]</span> And
he said that his younger sister-in-law should quickly explain to him
about the place where the (his) wife seemed to be. His younger
sister-in-law said: "Thou shalt wait, that the place may become
light<span class="small">\[4\]</span>; for, thou dost seem to think that
(thy) wife is still like that which she used to be. We will go to (thy)
wife, when the sun has come out."

\[1. (He) brought himself to a stand (in order to take aim).

2\. She sat in the house, being afraid. Therefore, she took off the
bracelets from her wrists, while she desired that she might sit quietly;
while she felt that she left the things. She suspected that the people
were making a *!ku* (on her account), therefore she did not go to the
*!ku*, while she felt that she had been wearing *!ko-g!nuing-tara*
things.

3\. Because he had married the hyena, because he thought that it was
*!ko-g!nuing-tara*.

4\. Because it was night.\]

Therefore, on the morrow, he said that his younger sister-in-law must
quickly allow them to go. Then his younger sister-in-law said: "We ought
to drive, taking goats, that we may take goats to (thy) wife."
Therefore, they drove, taking goats. They drove along goats, drove along
goats; they took the goats to the reeds. And they drove the goats to a
stand.<span class="small">\[1\]</span>

\|Xe-dde-Yoe<span class="small">\[1\]</span> directed her elder sister's
husband, she said that her elder sister's husband should stand behind
her back, the other people must stand behind her elder sister's
husband's back, while she must be the one to stand beside the goats.
Then she exclaimed: *!ko-g!nuing-tara*! let the child suck."

Then her elder sister sprang out of the reeds; she, in this manner, she
running came. She, when she had run to her younger sister, she perceived
the goats, she turned aside to the goats. She caught hold of a goat. The
Dawn's-Heart caught hold of (his) wife, while the wife caught hold of
the goat; while his younger sister-in-law, *\|Xe-dde-Yoe*, also took
hold of the wife. All the people altogether caught hold of her. Other
people were catching hold of the goats; they out the goats open, they
took out the contents of the stomach, they anointed *!ko-g!nuing-tara*
with the contents of the stomachs. They, taking hold, rubbed off the
hair<span class="small">\[3\]</span> (from her skin). Therefore, when
she sat down, she said: "Ye must, pulling, leave the hair on the tips of
my ears; for, in that

\[1. They left off (driving), in order that the goats might stand still.

2\. *\|Xe* is a young girl. What the whole of *\|Xe-dde-Yoe*'s name
means, the narrator does not know.

3\. The hair, with which she had become a lynx.\]

manner I shall come to hear; for, I do not feel as if I should hear."
Therefore, the man (her husband), pulling off, left the hair on the tips
of her ears, that hair which is thus<span class="small">\[2\]</span> on
the tips of the ears, standing on the top of them.

Therefore, the Dawn's-Heart used, when he was returning home,<span
class="small">\[3\]</span> to put an arrow on the bow, he walked,
sticking the end of his assegai into the ground, as he returning came.
His eyes were large, as he came walking along; they resembled fires. The
people were afraid of him as he came, on account of his eyes; while they
felt that his eyes resembled fires, as he came walking along. The
jackals were afraid of him, as he returning came.

In order to throw more light on that portion of the story of
*!ko-gnuing-tara* which is contained in the version here given, the
following extract is supplied from page 11 of Dr. Bleek's "Second Report
concerning Bushman Researches", printed at Cape Town, in 1875:--

"The "Dawn's-Heart" (the star Jupiter) has a daughter, who is identified
with some neighboring star preceding Jupiter (at the time when we asked,
it was Regulus or *Alpha* Leonis). Her name is the "Dawn's-Heart-child,"
and her relation to her father is somewhat mysterious. He calls her "my
heart," he swallows her, then walks alone as the only Dawn's-Heart Star,
and, when she is grown up, he spits her out again. She then herself
becomes another (female) Dawn's-Heart, and spits out another
Dawn's-Heart-child, which follows the male and female Dawn's-Heart. The
mother of the latter, the first-mentioned Dawn's-Heart's wife, was the
Lynx, who was then a beautiful woman, with a younger sister who carried
her digging-stick after her. The Dawn's-Heart hid his child under the
leaves of an edible root (*!kuissi*), where he thought that his wife
would come and find it. Other animals and birds arrived first, and each
proposed herself to the Dawn's-Heart-child as its mother; but they

\[1. She said that she should not hear, if all the hair were off her
ears. Therefore, her husband should leave the other hair on her ears.

2\. Holding up two fingers.

3\. He always (henceforth) did thus, because the hyenas had made his
heart angry, they had poisoned (his) wife.\]

were mocked at by the child, until at last it recognized its own mother.
Among the insulted animals were the Jackal and the Hyena, who, to
revenge themselves, bewitched the mother (Lynx) with some poisoned
"Bushman rice" (so-called "ants' eggs"), by which means she was
transformed into a lioness. la the dark, the Hyena tried to take her
(the Lynx's) place in the hut, on the return of the Dawn's-Heart; but
the imposture was made known to him by his sister-in-law. The
Dawn's-Heart tried to stab the Hyena with his assegai, but missed her.
She fled, putting her foot into the fire, and burning it severely. The
bewitched wife was enticed out of the reeds by her younger sister, and
then caught by her brothers, who pulled off the lion skin, so that she
became a fair woman again. But, in consequence of having been bewitched
by "Bushman rice," she could no longer eat that, and was changed into a
lynx who ate meat.--This myth, which contains many minor, and some
beautiful incidents, is partly given in the form of a narrative, and
partly in discourses addressed by the Dawn's-Heart to his daughter, as
well as in speeches made by the Hyena and her parents, after her flight
home."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Son of the Wind.](sbf13)

</div>
