<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbf44)  [Next](sbf46) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Specimens of Bushman Folklore*, by W.H.I. Bleek and L.C. Lloyd,
\[1911\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE BABOONS AND \|\|XABBITEN\|\|XABBITEN.

The baboons espied *\|\|Xabbiten\|\|Xabbiten*. as he was coming away
from the white men whom he had been to visit. He was carrying flonr,
which the white men gave him. And the baboons said: "Uncle
*\|\|Xabbiten\|\|Xabbiten* seems to be returning yonder; let us cross
his path (?), that we may knock him down."

The baboons did so; *\|\|Xabbiten\|\|Xabbiten* thought he would speak to
them, he asked them what they were saying. And
*\|\|Xabbiten\|\|Xabbiten* remarked upon their foreheads' steepness
(?).<span class="small">\[1\]</span> And the baboons angrily came down
to *\|\|Xabbiten\|\|Xabbiten*; they

<span class="small">\[1. "Ye speak to me! ye are ugly! your foreheads
resemble overhanging cliffs!" The baboons became angry with him, because
he derided them; he said that their foreheads resembled overhanging
cliffs. And they broke off sticks, on account of it they went towards
*\|\|Xabbiten\|\|Xabbiten.*\]</span>

broke off sticks, with which they intended to come to beat
*\|\|Xabbiten\|\|Xabbiten*.

The baboons' children also came; going along, they called out to their
parents.about it: "O fathers! ye must give us
*\|\|Xabbiten\|\|Xabbiten*'s head that we may play with it."

\|\|Xabbiten\|\|Xabbiten did as follows, when he heard that the baboons'
children were speaking in this manner, he thought to himself, 'What
shall I do? for the baboons are not a little numerous.' He thought, 'I
will climb a krieboom, that I may sit above in the krieboom; the baboons
will have (?) to drag me down from the krieboom.'

And the baboons went up to him, as he sat above in the krieboom; the
baboons' children spoke to each other about it, they said: "First look
ye at *\|\|Xabbiten\|\|Xabbiten*'s big head; we should be a Iong while
playing there, with *\|\|Xabbiten\|\|Xabbiten*'s head; for ye are those
who see that its bigness is like this; it seems as if it would not
quickly break."A baboon, who was grown up,<span
class="small">\[1\]</span> spoke to the baboons' children; he questioned
the baboons' children: Did not the baboons' children see that
*\|\|Xabbiten\|\|Xabbiten* was grown up-that they who were children
should think that they could possess the pieces of
*\|\|Xabbiten\|\|Xabbiten*. They spoke as if he were their little
cousin; that they should possess his pieces. Did they not see that those
who are grown up would be the ones to get the pieces of
*\|\|Xabbiten\|\|Xabbiten* those who are grown up?

And *\|\|Xabbiten\|\|Xabbiten* thought to himself: 'What shall I do, (in
order) that the baboons may

<span class="small">\[1. The name of the head baboon, the big, old one,
which goes after the rest, is *!uhai\|ho\|kwa*, or
"Schildwacht"\]</span>

leave me? for, they speak angrily about me. it sounds as if they would
really attack me.' And 11 e *\|\|Xabbiten\|\|Xabbiten* thought to
himself: 'Wait, I will first tell about the baboons to the white men.
For baboons are not a little afraid of a gun; I shall see whether they
will not be afraid, if they hear that I am talking about them to the
white men.'

And *\|\|Xabbiten\|\|Xabbiten* called out,--while he deceived them,--he
said: "O white men! the baboons are here, they are with me, ye must
drive them away"(?). And the baboons did thus, when they heard that
*\|\|Xabbiten\|\|Xabbiten* spoke about them, that the white men should
drive them away (?), the baboons looked about, on account of it. And the
baboons ran, leaving *\|\|Xabbiten\|\|Xabbiten*; and he escaped, at the
time when the baboons went away in fear, he quickly descended from the
krieboom. He ran away, as he escaped from the baboons; while they ran to
the cliffs he ran away.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: A Lion's Story.](sbf46)

</div>
