<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbf73)  [Next](sbf75) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Specimens of Bushman Folklore*, by W.H.I. Bleek and L.C. Lloyd,
\[1911\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE JACKAL'S HEART NOT TO BE EATEN.

They (the Bushmen) feel that a little child is wont to be timid;
therefore, the little child does not eat jackals' hearts; because the
jackal is not a little afraid; for the jackal runs away.

The leopard is the one whose heart the little child eats; it which is
not afraid; for, a little child becomes a coward from the jackal's
heart, it fears immoderately (?).

Therefore, we do not give to a little child the jackal's heart; because
we feel that the jackal is used to run away, when it has not (even) seen
us; when it has only heard our foot rustle, it runs away, while it does
not look towards (us).

Note added by the Narrator.

He (my grandfather, *Tssatssi*) had bought dogs from *\|gappem-ttu*, and
*\|gappem-ttu* gave him a dog. And he took hold of the dog, he tied the
dog up; and he took the dog away; holding the thong with which he had
tied up the dog. He at first kept the dog tied up; and, when the dog had
slipped his thong(?), he put it upon the scent(?), and the dog killed
jackals.

He (my grandfather) skinned the jackals; and my grandmothers dressed the
jackals' skins; they dressed them, they sewed them.

He again(?) killed(?) a jackal and an *Olocyon Lalandii*, he brought
them (home), he skinned them.

And he made a kaross for *\|gappem-ttu*, a jackals' kaross, while he put
on the *Otocyon* kaross, the *Otocyon* skin.

And he took the kaross to *\|gappem-ttu*, the jackals' kaross, while he
felt that *\|gappem-ttu* was the one who had given him the dog.
Therefore, he made a kaross for i*\|gappem-ttu*; while be made for
*\|gappem-ttu* an equivalent(?) for the dog; therefore, he gave the
kaross to *\|gappem-ttu*, and *\|gappem-ttu* also gave him a pot, while
he rewarded (?) my grandfather for the jackals' kaross. And my
grandfather returned home.

Then my grandfather used to act in this manner, when he was boiling a
jackal, he said: "Thou dost seem to think that we eat jackals' hearts?
for, we become cowards (if we do so)." Therefore, we did not eat the
jackals' hearts.

For, my grandfather used not to eat the jackal; he only boiled the
jackal for his sons.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: \|\|Hara And Tto.](sbf75)

</div>
