<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbf79)  [Next](sbf81) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Specimens of Bushman Folklore*, by W.H.I. Bleek and L.C. Lloyd,
\[1911\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE RELATIONS OF WIND, MOON, AND CLOUD TO HUMAN BEINGS AFTER DEATH.

The wind does thus when we die, our (own) wind blows; for we, who are
human beings, we possess wind; we make clouds, when we die. Therefore,
the wind does thus when we die, the wind makes dust, because it intends
to blow, taking away our footprints, with which we had walked about
while we still had nothing the matter with us; and our footprints, which
the wind intends to blow away, would (otherwise still) lie plainly
visible. For, the thing would seem as if we still lived. Therefore, the
wind intends to blow, taking away our footprints.

And, our gall,<span class="small">\[1\]</span> when we die, sits in the
sky; it sits green in the sky, when we are dead.

Therefore, mother was wont to do thus when the moon lying down came,
(when) the moon stood hollow. Mother spoke, she said: "The moon is
carrying people who are dead. For, ye are those who see that it lies in
this manner; and it lies hollow, because it is killing itself (by)
carrying people who are dead. This is why it lies hollow. It is not a
*\|\|k'auru*; for, it is a moon of badness(?).<span
class="small">\[2\]</span> Ye may (expect to) hear something, when the
moon lies in this manner. A person is the one who has died, he whom the
moon carries, Therefore, ye may (expect to) hear what has happened, when
the moon is like this."

The hair of our head will resemble clouds, when we die, when we in this
manner make clouds. These things are those which resemble clouds; and we
think that (they) are clouds. We, who do

\[1. Mother, she used to tell me, that it (thus) happens to us if we sit
in the shade when the place is not particularly warm, when it is (only)
moderately warm, (and) we feel that the summer seems as if it would be
hot. We think: 'Allow me to sit for a little in the shade under the
bush; for the sun's eye is not a little hot; I will sit a little while
in the shade;' (then) we make clouds; our liver goes out from the place
where we are sitting in. the shade, if the place is not hot. Therefore,
we make clouds on account of it. For, when it is really summer, then we
(may) sit in the shade.

2\. Possibly, "of threatening."\]

not know, we are those who think in this manner, that (they) are clouds.
We, who know, when we see that they are like this, we know that (they)
are a person's clouds; (that they) are the hair of his head. We, who
know, we are those who think thus, while we feel that we seeing
recognize the clouds, how the clouds do in this mauner form themselves.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1. The Doings Of \|Xue Are Many.](sbf81)

</div>
