[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sby01)  [Next](sby03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564596958/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Sacred Books and Traditions of the Yezidiz*, by Isya Joseph, \[1919\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span> <span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

# DEVIL WORSHIP

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

# INTRODUCTION

### THE ORIGIN OF THE MANUSCRIPT

The Arabic manuscript here translated was presented to me before I left
Mosul by my friend Dâud aṣ-Ṣâîġ as a memento of our friendship. Ḫawâja
aṣ-Ṣâîġ was a man of culture, in sympathy with western thought, and an
intimate acquaintance of M. N. Siouffi, the vice-consul of the French
Republic in Mosul. From the first page of the manuscript it appears that
through some Yezidis he had access to their literature. I know he was in
close touch with many of them, especially with the family of Mulla
Ḥaidar, which is the only Yezidi family that can read and guard the
sacred tradition of the sect.

The manuscript comprises a brief Introduction, the Sacred Books, and an
Appendix. In the first, the compiler indicates the source of his
information and gives a sketch of the life of Šeiḫ ‘Adî, the chief saint
of the Yezidis.

The Sacred Books comprise *Kitâb al-Jilwah* (Book of Revelation), and
*Maṣḥaf Rêš* (Black Book)--so named because in it mention made of the
descent of

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

the Lord upon the Black Mountain ([p. 32](sby06.htm#page_32)). *Al
Jilwah* <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) is ascribed to Šeiḫ ‘Adî
himself, and would accordingly date from the twelfth century A. D. It is
divided into a brief introduction and five short chapters. In each, ‘Adî
is represented as the speaker. In the Preface the Šeiḫ says that he
existed with Melek Ṭâ’ûs before the creation of the world, and that he
was sent by his god Ṭâ’ûs to instruct the Yezidi sect in truth. In the
first chapter he asserts his omnipresence and omnipotence; in the second
he claims to have power to reward those who obey him and to punish those
who disobey him; in the third he declares that he possesses the
treasures of the earth; in the fourth he warns his followers of the
doctrines of those that are without; and in the fifth he bids them keep
his commandments and obey his servants, who will communicate to them his
teachings. The *Black Book*, <span id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1) which
perhaps dates from the thirteenth century, is larger than the Book of
Revelation, but is not divided into chapters. It begins with the
narrative of creation: God finishes his work in seven days--Sunday to
Saturday. In each day he creates an angel or king (*melek*). Melek
Ṭâ’ûs, who is created on Sunday, is made chief of all. After that
Fahr-ad Din creates the planets, man, and animals. Then follows a story
about Adam and Eve, their temptation and quarrel; the coming of the
chief angels to the world to establish the Yezidi kingdom; the flood;
the miraculous birth of Yezîd bn Mu‘awiya; and certain ordinances in
regard to food, the New Year, and marriages.

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

The Appendix contains the following:

1\. A collection of materials concerning the Yezidi belief and practice.

2\. A poem in praise of Šeiḫ ‘Adî.

3\. The principal prayer of the Yezidis, in the Kurdish language.

4\. A description of the Yezidi sacerdotal system.

5\. A petition to the Ottoman government to exempt the sect from
military service, presented in the year 1872 A. D.

 

An analysis of the texts shows that the material is taken from different
sources: part of it is clearly derived from the religious books of the
sect; another part from a description of the beliefs and customs of the
sect given by a member of it to an outsider; a third, partly from
observations by an outsider, partly from stories about Yezidis current
among their Christian neighbors. Unfortunately the compiler does not
specify whence each particular part of his information is obtained. On
closer examination it is evident that part, at least, of the Arabic in
hand is a translation from Syriac.

The Yezidis, frequently called "Devil-Worshippers," are a small and
obscure religious sect, numbering about 20,000. <span
id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2) They are scattered over a belt of territory
three hundred miles wide, extending in length from the neighborhood of
Aleppo in northern Syria to the Caucasus in southern Russia. The mass of

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

them, however, are to be found in the mountains of northern and central
Kurdistan and among the Sinjar Hills of Northern Mesopotamia.

By reason of their mysterious religion, the Devil Worshipers have been
an object of interest and investigation for several generations. Our
chief first-hand sources of information in regard to the manners,
customs, and practices of these people are: Sir Henry Layard, *Nineveh
and its Remains* (1849), *Nineveh and Babylon* (1853); G. p. Badger,
*The Nestorians and their Rituals* (1852); my honored teacher, Rev. A.
N. Andrus, veteran missionary of the A. B. C. F. M., resident in Mardin,
Mesopotamia, "The Yezidis," in the *Encyclopedia of Missions*; p.
Anastase, "The Yezidis," in the Arabic periodical, *Al-Mašrik*, Vol. II
, (1899); Professor A. V. Williams Jackson, of Columbia University,
*Persia Past and Present* (1906); "The Yezidis," in the *International
Encyclopedia*, *s. v.*; also in *JAOS*, XXV, 178; M. N. Siouffi, in the
*Journal Asiatique*, 1882 (vii<sup>e</sup> série, T. 20), p. 252, and
1885 (viii<sup>e</sup> série, T. 5), p. 78. Siouffi was the first to
discover and establish the historical character of Šeiḫ ‘Adî, about whom
the scholars had been puzzled. He published an extract relating to ‘Adî
from Ibn Ḫallikân's *Wafaiyât ‘al-Ayân* (bibliographical work). Of the
second-hand sources of information may be mentioned *Les Yezidis*, by J.
Menant (Paris, 1892), and the article by Victor Dingelstedt, "The
Yezidis," in the *Scottish Geographical Magazine*, Vol. XIV, pp. 259
ff. <span id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3)

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

In addition to these descriptions, several manuscripts have come to
light of recent years which give a great deal of information about the
beliefs and customs of the Yezidis

Two of these manuscripts are in the Bibliothèque Nationale, in Paris
(*Fond Syriaque*, Nos. 306 and 325). A translation of the Arabic
(Carshuni) texts in these manuscripts relative to the Yezidis was
published by Professor E. H. Browne in an appendix to O. H. Parry, *Six
Months in a Syrian Monastery*, 1895. Professor Browne at that time
proposed to edit the Arabic text (see J.-B. Chabot, *Journal Asiatique*,
1896, ix<sup>e</sup> série, T. 7, p. 100); but so far as I can ascertain
this intention has not been carried out.

The manuscript translated by Browne, which according to Parry (*loc.
cit.*, p. 357) was written by a native of Mosul, seems to be closely
related to that translated below. There are, however, some differences
in contents and arrangement: my copy is divided into the Book of
Revelation, the Black Book, and an Appendix; while Browne's embraces the
Book of Revelation which corresponds to that in my manuscript), and two
other "Accounts," the greater part of which is contained in the Black
Book of my text, and the rest in the Appendix. Further, in my manuscript
*Al-Jilwah* immediately follows the Introduction; while in Browne's the
discussion of the sacerdotal system, the petition to the Ottoman
government, and some other matters are inserted between the Introduction
and *Al-Jilwah*. In Browne's, moreover, the

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Poem in Praise of
Šeiḫ ‘Adî, and the Principal Prayer (in Kurdish) are absent, while the
petition to the Turkish government is briefer, and lacks articles iv and
xiv. The text of this petition, in its original form. was published by
Lidzbarski in *ZDMG*, LI, 592 ff., after a manuscript in Berlin which
was procured from Šammas Eremia Šamir.

Two Syriac texts have also been printed. The first, edited and
translated by J.-B. Chabot in the *Journal Asiatique*, 1896
(ix<sup>e</sup> série, T. 7), p. 100 ff., from the Paris manuscripts
referred to above, corresponds, with slight variations, to the second
"Account,"' of Browne (Parry, *loc. cit.*, pp. 380-87).

The second was published with an Italian translation, by Samuel Giamil,
under the title, *Monte Singar; Storia di un Popolo Ignoto* (Rome,
1900), from a manuscript copied for him in 1899 from an original in the
monastery of Rabban Hormizd. The author of this work, a Syrian priest,
Isaac, lived for a long time among the Yezidis, and not only had unusual
opportunities of observation, but, as is evident from several anecdotes,
possessed their confidence and esteem in a singular degree. His work is
in catechetical form: a youthful Yezidi inquirer questions a teacher
about the beliefs, traditions, and customs of his people, and the
answers contain the fullest exposition of these matters we at present
possess. Occasionally the author falls out of his role, and lets it
appear that the questioner is no other than Priest Isaac himself.

The work is divided into ten sections, which treat

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

respectively of the works of God and his abode (p. 3) the creation of
Adam and Eve (p. 8); the wonderful deeds of the god Yezîd (p. 16); the
Yezidi saints (p. 27); the New-Year (p. 32); marriage customs (p. 46);
death and burial (p. 53); the pilgrimage to Šeiḫ ‘Adî's shrine (p. 67);
the festivals and assemblies at Šeiḫ ‘Adî (p. 80); and the Yezidi kings
(p. 87).

Apart from the *Kitâb al-Jilwah*, Priest Isaac's work is clearly the
source from which is derived most of the material in the Syriac and
Arabic manuscripts that have hitherto come to light.

Beside the Arabic manuscript from Dâud aṣ-Ṣaîġ which is translated
below, I have in my possession two others, which were sent me by the
Rev. A. N. Andrus. The first of these written by Šammas Eremia Šamir
(designated in the notes hereafter as SS), seems to be a duplicate of
that from which Browne's translation was made. They agree in contents
and arrangement, and in certain readings in which they differ from the
other texts. At the close of SS the writer says that he compiled it
(chiefly from *Al-Jilwah*) for the benefit of some of his friends who
wished to acquaint themselves with the Yezidi religion.

The origin of the Yezidi sect has been the subject of much discussion,
but no satisfactory solution of the problem has as yet been reached.
There are those who assert that the Yezidis are the remains of the
ancient Manichaeans; <span id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4) others entertain
the view that the Yezidis were originally Christians, whom progressive
ignorance has brought into their present

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

condition <span id="fr_5"></span>[6](#fn_5)--some even going so far as
to connect the name "Yezidi" with "Jesus"! <span
id="fr_6"></span>[7](#fn_6) Some think that the Yezidi sect takes its
name from the Persian word *yazd*, 'god, or good spirit,' over against
Ahriman, the evil principle; <span id="fr_7"></span>[8](#fn_7) while
others associate it with *Yazd* or *Yezid*, a town in central Persia,
the inhabitants of which are chiefly Parsees. <span
id="fr_8"></span>[9](#fn_8) Some finally maintain that the sect was
founded by Šeiḫ ‘Adî. <span id="fr_9"></span>[10](#fn_9)

The Yezidis themselves had a curious legend connecting the name with the
Caliph Yezîd bn Mu‘âwiya <span id="fr_10"></span>[11](#fn_10) (see [p.
37](sby11.htm#page_37)).

In a dissertation presented for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy in
Harvard University I called attention to a statement of aš-Šahrastânî
the importance of which seems hitherto not to have been appreciated, but
which appears to me to give the most probable explanation of the name
and of the original affinities of the sect. The passage is as follows
(*Kitâb al Milal wan-Nihal*, ed. Cureton, I, 101):

 

The Yezidis are the followers of Yezîd bn Unaisa, who kept friendship
with the first Muhakkama, before the Azariḳa; he separated himself from
those who followed after them with the exception of the Abadiyah <span
id="fr_11"></span>[12](#fn_11) for with these he kept friendly. He
believed that God would send an apostle from among the Persians, and
would reveal to him a book that is already written in heaven, and would
reveal the whole (book) to him at one time, <span
id="fr_12"></span>[13](#fn_12) and as a result he would leave the
religion of Mohammed, the Chosen One--

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

may God bless and save him!--and follow the religion of the Sabians
mentioned in the Koran. <span id="fr_13"></span>[14](#fn_13) (These are
not the Sabians who are found in Ḥarân and Wasit. <span
id="fr_14"></span>[15](#fn_14)) But Yezîd associated himself with the
people of the Book who recognized the Chosen One as a prophet, even
though they did not accept his (Mohammed's) religion. And he said that
the followers of the ordinances are among those who agree with him; but
that others are hiding the truth and give companions to God, and that
every sin, small or great, is idolatry. <span
id="fr_15"></span>[16](#fn_15)

The statement of Aš-Šahrastânî is so clear that it can bear no other
interpretation than that the Yezidis were the followers of Yezîd bn
Unaisa. He calls them his *’aṣḥâb*, that is, his followers, a term by
which he designates the relation between a sect and its founder. <span
id="fr_16"></span>[17](#fn_16) The statement comes from the pen of one
who is considered of the highest authority among the Arab scholars on
questions relating to philosophical and religious sects. <span
id="fr_17"></span>[18](#fn_17) This precise definition of the position
of Yezîd bn Unaisa in the sectarian conflicts of the first century of
Islam seems to show that he had exact information about him.

The prediction about the Persian prophet is quoted, almost in the same
words, by another great Mohammedan authority on religious sects, Ibn
Ḥazm, who lived a century before Aš-Šahrastânî. (The Egyptian edition of
Ibn Ḥazm, Vol. IV, p. 188, reads Zaid bn Abi *Ubaisa*; but that Unaisa
should be restored is evident from the fact that Ibn Ḥazm is at pains to
distinguish the author of this unorthodox prediction from

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

the well-known traditionist of the name--e. g., Tabari, I, 135. <span
id="fr_18"></span>[19](#fn_18)

The prophecy was perhaps preserved among the leaders of the Abaḍiya,
with which sect Yezîd bn Unaisa is associated Aš-Šahrastânî's statement,
the significant part of which we have found also in Ibn Ḥazm was
doubtless derived from an older written source.

Who is intended by the coming Persian prophet--if, indeed, any
particular individual is meant--it is not possible to determine.
Kremer <span id="fr_19"></span>[20](#fn_19) cannot be right in
identifying him with Šeiḫ ‘Adî, for the supposed prediction was in
circulating a century or more before his time. He is said to have been,
not a Persian, but a Syrian from Baalbek or elsewhere in the West; and
both in Arabic authors <span id="fr_20"></span>[21](#fn_20) and in his
own writings <span id="fr_21"></span>[22](#fn_21) he appears as a
Moslem, a Sufi saint in good standing. The Yezidis to this day await the
appearance of the Persian prophet. <span id="fr_22"></span>[23](#fn_22)

On the basis of these scanty bits of fact, it appears that: The Yezidis
were originally a Ḫarijite <span id="fr_23"></span>[24](#fn_23) subsect,
akin to the Abadiya, bearing the name of their founder, Yezîd bn Unaisa.
Certain distinctive Ḫarijite peculiarities seem indeed to have outlived
among them the common faith of Islam; such as the tolerant judgment of
Jews and Christians; the condemnation of every sin as implicit idolatry.
In their new seats in Kurdistan, whither they migrated about the end of
the fourteenth century <span id="fr_24"></span>[25](#fn_24) they were
drawn into the movement of which Šeiḫ ‘Adî was in his life time the

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

leader and after his death the saint, and ended by making of him the
incarnation of God in the present age. <span
id="fr_25"></span>[26](#fn_25) With this they joined elements drawn from
Christianity, <span id="fr_26"></span>[27](#fn_26) with here and there a
trace of Judaism, and with large survivals of the persistent old Semitic
heathenism, many of which they share with their neighbors of all creeds.

Difficult problems, <span id="fr_27"></span>[28](#fn_27) however, remain
unsolved, especially the origin and nature of the worship of Melek
Ṭâ'ûs. <span id="fr_28"></span>[29](#fn_28) The certain thing is that
the actual religion of the Yezidis is a syncretism, to which Moslem,
Christian (heretical, rather than orthodox), pagan, and perhaps also
Persian religions have contributed. <span id="fr_29"></span>[30](#fn_29)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[12:1](sby02.htm#fr_0) <span id="page_22">p.
22</span> Al-Jilwah is said to have been written in 158 A. H., by Šeiḫ
Faḫr-ad-Dîn, the secretary of Šeiḫ ‘Adî, at the dictation of the latter.
The original copy, wrapped in linen and silk wrappings, is kept in the
house of Mulla Ḥaidar, of Baadrie. Twice a year the book is taken to
Šeiḫ ‘Adî's shrine. (Letter from Šammas Jeremia Šamir to Mr. A. N.
Andrus, of Mardin, dated October 28, 1892.)

<span id="fn_1"></span>[12:2](sby02.htm#fr_1) The Black Book is said to
have been written by a certain Ḥasan al-Baṣrî, in 743 A. H. The original
copy is kept in the house of Kehyah (chief) ‘Ali, of Kasr ‘Az-ad-Dîn,
one hour west of Semale, a village east of Tigris. The book rests upon a
throne, having over it a thin covering of red broadcloth, of linen, and
other wrappings. Then is disclosed the binding, which is of wood.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[13:3](sby02.htm#fr_2) The exact number of the
Yezidis is unknown. See also Société de Géographie de l’Est, *Bulletin*,
1903, p. 284; Al Mašriḳ, II, 834.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[14:4](sby02.htm#fr_3) For a fuller account of
the literature on the Yezidis, consult J. Menant, *Les Yézidis*, and
Paul Perdrizet, Société de Géographie de l’Est, *Bulletin*, 1903 pp. 281
ff.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[17:5](sby02.htm#fr_4) Société de Géographie de
l’Est, *Bulletin*, 1903, p. 297.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[18:6](sby02.htm#fr_5) Fraser, *Mesopotamia and
Persia*, pp. 285, 287; Rich, *Residence in Kurdistan*, II, 69; *Al
Mašriḳ*, II, .396; Badger, *The Nestorians and their Rituals*, I: 111;
Assemani, *Bibliotheca Orientalis*, III, 439.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[18:7](sby02.htm#fr_6) <span id="page_23">p.
23</span> Michel Febvre, *Theatre de la Turquie*, p. 364; Société de
Géographie de l’Est, *Bulletin*, 1903, pp. 299, 301; cf. also J. Menant,
*Les Yézidis*, pp. 52, 86, 132.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[18:8](sby02.htm#fr_7) Oppenheim, *Vom Mittelmeer
sum persischen Golf*, 1900, II, 148; Victor Dingelstedt, *Scottish
Geographical Magazine*, XIV, 295; Southgate, *A Tour through Armenia*,
II, 317; A. V. Williams Jackson, "Yezidis," in the *New International
Encyclopedia*, XVII, 939; Perdrizet, loc. cit., p. 299.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[18:9](sby02.htm#fr_8) A. V. Williams Jackson,
*Persia Past and Present*, p. 10, *New International Encyclopedia*,
"Yezidis;" Perdrizet, loc. cit.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[18:10](sby02.htm#fr_9) Dingelstedt, loc. cit.;
*Revue de l’Orient Chrétien*, I, "Kurdistan."

<span id="fn_10"></span>[18:11](sby02.htm#fr_10) Société de Géographie
de l’Est, loc. cit.; *Encyclopedia of Missions*, "Yezidis"; A. V.
Williams Jackson, loc. cit.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[18:12](sby02.htm#fr_11) On these sects consult
Aš-Šahrastânî, I, 86, 89, 100.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[18:13](sby02.htm#fr_12) Not like Mohammed, to
whom, according to Moslem belief, the Koran was revealed at intervals.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[19:14](sby02.htm#fr_13) On the Ṣabians of the
Koran, see Baiḍâwi and Zamaḫšari on *Suras* 2, 59; 5, 73; 22, 17.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[19:15](sby02.htm#fr_14) On the Ṣabians of
Ḥarrân, see Fihrist, p. 190; on the Ṣabians in general consult
Aš-Šahrastânî, II, 203; on the location of Ḥarrân and Wasit, see Yaḳût,
II, 331, and IV, 881.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[19:16](sby02.htm#fr_15) To get more particular
information in regard to Yezîd bn Unaisa, I wrote to Mosul, Bagdad, and
Cairo, the three centers of Mohammedan learning, and strange to say,
none could throw any light on the subject.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[19:17](sby02.htm#fr_16) Al-Hara<u>t</u>iyah he
describes as Aṣhâb Al-Ḥareṭ (I, 101), al-Ḥafaziyah, Aṣḥâb Ḥafez
(*ibid*.), etc.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[19:18](sby02.htm#fr_17) <span id="page_24">p.
24</span> Ibn Ḫallikân says: " Aš-Šahrastânî, a dogmatic theologian of
the Ašarite sect, was distinguished as an Imâm and a doctor of the law.
He displayed the highest abilities as a jurisconsult. The *Kitâb
al-Milal wan-Nihal* (this is the book in which Al-Šahrastânî traces the
Yezidi sect to Yezîd bn Unaisa) is one of his works on scholastic
theology. He remained without an equal in that branch of science."

<span id="fn_18"></span>[20:19](sby02.htm#fr_18) It is to be noticed
also that the name "Unaisa" is very common among the Arabs; cf. Ibn
Sa‘ad (ed. Sachau), III, 154, 260, 264, 265, 281, 283, 287, 289; Musnad,
VI, 434; Mishkat, 22, 724.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[20:20](sby02.htm#fr_19) *Geschichte der
herrichenden Ideen des Islams*, p. 195.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[20:21](sby02.htm#fr_20) Ibn Ḫallikân (Egyptian
edit., A. H. 1310), I, 316; Mohammed al-‘Omari, at-Mauṣili, "Šeiḫ ‘Adî,"
quoted by M. N. Siouffi, *Journal asiatique*, 1885; Yakut, IV, 374.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[20:22](sby02.htm#fr_21) ‘Itiḳad Ahl as-Sunna,
"Belief of the Sunnites," the Waṣaya, "Counsels to the Califs"; cf. C.
Huart, *History of Arabic Literature*, p. 273.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[20:23](sby02.htm#fr_22) See [p.
61](sby12.htm#page_61) of this book.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[20:24](sby02.htm#fr_23) Aš-Šahrastânî regards
them a Ḫarijite sub-sect.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[20:25](sby02.htm#fr_24) Layard, *Nineveh and
its Remains*, II, 254.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[21:26](sby02.htm#fr_25) Mohammed al-‘Omari
al-Mausili and Yâsîn al-Ḥâtib al-‘Omari al-Mauṣili, "Šeiḫ ‘Adî," quoted
by M. N. Siouffi, *Journal asiatique*, Série viii, V (1885), 80.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[21:27](sby02.htm#fr_26) George Wards, Bishop of
Arbila, *Poems*, edited by Heinrich Hilgenfeld, Leipzig, 1904.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[21:28](sby02.htm#fr_27) Such as their
ceremonies at Šeiḫ ‘Adî (Badger, The Nestorians, I, 117), which have
obtained for them the name Cheraġ Sonderan, "The Extinguishers of
Light." Bar Hebraeus (*Chronicon; Eccles.*, ed. Abeloos-Lamy, I, 219)
Speaks of similar practices <span id="page_25">p. 25</span> among what
he calls "Borborians," a branch of the Manichaeans, and calls them "The
Extinguishers of Light." This name is applied to other eastern sects
also; see *Abhandlungen für die Kunde des Morgenlandes*, V, 124.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[21:29](sby02.htm#fr_28) Professor Jackson, of
Columbia University, Seems to trace it to the "old devil-worship in
Mazanderan" (*JAOS*, XXV, 178). But it is not certain that the Yezidis
believe in Melek Ṭâ’ûs as an evil spirit. In the history of religion the
god of one people is the devil of another. Asura is a deity in the Rig
Veda and an evil spirit only in later Brahman theology. In Islam the
gods of heathenism are degraded into jinns, just as the gods of North
Semitic heathenism are called še‘îrîm (hairy demons) in Lev. 17:7; or as
the gods of Greece and Rome became devils to early Christians. See W. R.
Smith, *Religion of the Semites*, p. 120; Fihrist, pp. 322, 326.

Professor M. Lidzbarski (*ZDMG*, LI, 592), on the other hand, argues
that Ṭâ’ûs is the god Tammuz. His contention is based on the assumption
that the word Ṭâ’ûs must embody the ancient god; that in Fihrist, 322,
the god Tâuz has a feast on the 15th of Tammuz (July); that in Kurdish,
the language of the Yezidis, *m* is frequently changed to *w*. This
theory also is untenable, for one might guess at any ancient god. The
exact form of the name "Tauz" is uncertain (see Chwolsohn, *Die
Ssabier*, II, 202; the statement that in Kurdish *m* is frequently
changed to w is not true, if one would set it up as a grammatical rule
to explain such phenomena; the Kurdish-speaking people never pronounce
Tammuz, "Tauz;" and, finally, in the Yezidi conception of Melek Ṭâ’ûs
there are no traces of the notion held respecting Tammuz.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[21:30](sby02.htm#fr_29) <span id="page_26">p.
26</span> Such a state of affairs finds a historical parallel in other
religions. Take, for example, Christianity. In it we find that the
distinctive characteristics of the founder have been wrapped up in many
foreign elements brought in by those who came from other religions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Notes on the Introduction](sby03)
