[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sby18)  [Next](sby20) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564596958/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Sacred Books and Traditions of the Yezidiz*, by Isya Joseph, \[1919\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### II

### THE CHRISTIAN TRADITION

But the myth of the Yezidis is not the only account that attempts to
trace their religious origin; the eastern Christians have a tradition
that gives a different interpretation. It is to the effect that the
people in question were originally Christians, but that ignorance
brought them into their present condition. The tradition

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

runs that the shrine of Šeiḫ ’Adî was formerly a Nestorian monastery
which was noted for the devotion of its monks, but that these were
tempted by the devil and left their convent. The Church of the Monastery
was dedicated to St. Thaddeus or Addai, <span
id="fr_82"></span>[12](#fn_81) one of the seventy-two disciples who,
after the ascension of our Lord, was sent to King Abgar of Edessa. It is
said that the temple of ’Adî has a conventicle resembling that at
Jerusalem. <span id="fr_83"></span>[13](#fn_82) The story of how the
cloister was deserted is as follows:

On a great feast day, while the hermits bearing the cross went in
procession around the church, they saw, hanging on a tree, a piece of
paper with this inscription: "O ye devout monks! Let it be known to you
that God has forgiven all your sins, great and small; cease to undergo
religious exercises; leave your hermitage; disperse, marry and rear
children. Peace be unto you!" On the second day they observed the same
thing, and were: led to dispute among themselves whether this were a
device of God or of a devil. When on the third day the same incident was
repeated, they agreed to leave the abbey and follow what seemed to them
a divine order. Šeiḫ ’Adî, the legend goes on, had foretold to the
Yezidis of that district that the monks of this monastery would desert
their place, would become Yezidis, would marry and beget children; that
he would die during that time; and that he wishes his followers to pull
down the attar of the church in that priory and bury him there. Shortly
after the fulfilment of his prophecy, the Šeiḫ

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

died, and was entombed in the place of the altar. And since that time,
it is asserted, the spot has become the sanctuary of the
devil-worshippers. In support of this statement, it is argued, that
there was a Syriac inscription in the temple mentioning the name of the
founder of the monastery and the patriarch in whose time it was built;
that some of the Yezids themselves bear testimony to this fact, and say
they have removed the writing from its former place and have hidden it
at the entrance to ’Adî's temple, a spot the whereabouts of which only a
few of them know. The reason why this record is hidden, it is explained,
is the fear that the Nestorians may see it and reclaim the church. <span
id="fr_84"></span>[14](#fn_83)

Such is the eastern Christian's tradition relative to the origin of the
Yezidis. It is of course, merely a legend; but its character is such as
to require careful examination and' critical study. It may embody a
measure of truth that will indirectly throw some light on the subject in
hand.

One noticeable thing regarding this current view is. that it is not a
recent invention; else it might be said to be the creation of ignorance
at a time far removed from the event which it records. Assemani, himself
an oriental of distinguished scholarship, in that part of his book
wherein he treats of the religion of Mesopotamia, according to the
natives of the country, says that the Yezidis were at one time
Christians, who, however, in the course of time, had forgotten the
fundamental principles of their faith. <span
id="fr_85"></span>[15](#fn_84) This statement

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

is incorporated in the writings of all western orientals that have
travelled in the East. <span id="fr_86"></span>[16](#fn_85)

Another thing worthy pf notice is that the Christians should have such a
sacred regard for his tradition as to hand it down to posterity at the
risk of their own reputation. Certainly the Christians are not
cherishing this theory with any expectation of receiving honor by
assuming relation with the Yezidis. The devil-worshippers are utterly
despised by all their neighbors. Nor do they do it out of love, that
they may arouse the sympathy of the dominating race for this degraded
people. Oriental Christians themselves despise the Yezidi sect. They
would not, and could not, help them. There must then be some truth in a
legend that leads the church to regard a despised people as having been
at one time co-religionists.

Were the antiquity of the tradition, and the unfavorable result which
its entertainment causes, the only two reasons for its consideration, we
might just as well dismiss it. But there are other things which go to
point out some historic facts underlying the current theory. One such
fact is that the family name of the Yezidis around Mosul is Daseni, plur
Dawasen. The Christians and the Mohammedans know them by this name, and
they themselves also use it, and say it is the ancient name of their
race, existing from time immemorial. <span
id="fr_87"></span>[17](#fn_86) Now Daseni, or Dasaniyat, was the name of
a Nestorian Diocese, the disappearance of which is simultaneous with the
appearance of the Yezidis in these places. <span
id="fr_88"></span>[18](#fn_87)

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

It is stated, moreover, that all the people of Sinjar were formerly
Christians, belonging to the ancient Syriac Church and having a very
prominent diocese, which was called the diocese of Šaki, *i.e.*, Sinjar;
and that the diocese continued to exist till the middle of the
eighteenth century: What goes to verify this tradition is that, at
present, there is a library at Jabal Sinjar, under the control of the
Yezidis, that consists of ancient Syriac books. They are kept in a small
room guarded by a Yezidi. On Sunday and Friday of every week they burn
incense and light lamps in honor of the manuscripts; and once a month
they take them out in the sun to dust and to preserve them from
destruction by dampness. After the door is locked, the key is kept by
the Šeiḫ, besides whom and his son no one else is allowed to touch the
books. What is more interesting, the people of Sinjar say they have
inherited the library from their forefathers, who were Christians. <span
id="fr_89"></span>[19](#fn_88) It is pointed out, furthermore, that the
names of the principal towns of the Yezidis are Syriac. Ba‘šika comes
from "the house of the falsely accused, or oppressed"; Ba‘adrie from
"the place of help or refuge"; Baḥzanie from "the house of visions or
inspiration"; Talḥas from "the hill of suffering," where many Christians
were martyred by Persians. These are a few of many Yezidi villages
having Syriac names.

The Yezidis have religious practices which are to be found only in the
Christian Church. I mean the rites of baptism and the Eucharist. It is
true that

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

the use of water as a rite is practised by other non-Christian sects,
such as the Mandeans; but it is argued that this ordinance as observed
by the Yezidis is so similar to that of the Christians that its origin
is to be traced back to Christianity, rather than to any other system.
Like their neighbors, the Dawaseni must if possible baptize their
children at the earliest age. In performing the rite, the Šeiḫ, like the
Christian priest, puts his hand upon the child's head. In regard to the
sacrament of the Lord's supper, it is strictly Christian in character.
The Yezidis call the cup the cup of Isa (Jesus); and when a couple
marry, they go to a Christian town to partake of Al-Ḳiddas (the
Eucharist) from the hand of a priest, a custom which prevails among
eastern Christians. What requires special note is that this practice is
observed where the Yezidi influence is not very strong, a fact which
seems to indicate that the Apostate Nasara, who lived remote from
strongly Yezidising influences, were able to retain some of their
originally much favored practices, and vice versa. <span
id="fr_90"></span>[20](#fn_89)

Finally, the Dawaseni entertain great reverence for Christianity and the
Christian saints. They respect the churches and tombs of the Christians,
and kiss the doors and walls when they enter them; but they never visit
a Mohammedan mosque. In the Black Book a statement is made that on her
way to the house of her bridegroom, a bride should visit the temple of
every idol she passes by, even if it be a Christian Church. <span
id="fr_91"></span>[21](#fn_90) They have also professed reverence for

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> ‘Isa (Jesus). They
affect more attachment to An Naṣara than to Mohammedans. Such a
religious affinity cannot be fully accounted for on any other ground
than that of their sincere respect for [Christianity](errata.htm#9), a
feeling which clearly indicates that these people must at one time have
had a very close connection with Christianity. This intimate relation
cannot be explained by their ignorance, or by kindred experiences, as
some scholars seem to think. <span id="fr_92"></span>[22](#fn_91) It is
true the Christians have been co-sufferers with them; both have lived
for generations under the same yoke of bondage and oppression and under
similar circumstances. But this alone could not create sympathy between
them. Such an assumption cannot be verified by the facts collected
through our observation of the Yezidis' character as a religious body.
They are sincere in their beliefs, and never compromise in religious
matters. History has shown again and again that they have suffered
martyrdom for their faith, in which they have been as sincere and
unshaken as have been the heroes of any religion. No matter how
uneducated they may be, they are not hypocrites in their faith. The
theory is also refuted by our understanding of the nature of the
affinity in question between the Yezidis and the Christians. It is not a
matter of sympathy but of religion. They believe in some forms of
Christianity; and when they visit a church, they want to exercise their
faith and not to express their-sympathy. What is more, the eastern
Christians have no sympathy for the devil worshippers, at least,

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

not more than they have for any other religious body. Such an affinity
is wanting between the Jews and the Christians or the Yezidis, yet they
all live under the same conditions.

I am not here advocating the theory, or implying, that the Yezidi sect
is a corrupt form of Christianity, but am simply aiming to show that if
the similarity of a certain religion with another in some phases be
taken as a ground for the explanation of its origin, the Christian
tradition can be regarded as a more probable theory to account for the
rise of Yezidism than any other view: And, hence, to point out, what
seems to me to be the best position, that the explanation must be found
ultimately in some historical document which will give us a reasonable
clew in the tracing of the sect in question to its founder.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_81"></span>[97:12](sby19.htm#fr_82) Fraser: Ibid, p. 147.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[97:13](sby19.htm#fr_83) Rich: *Residence in
Kurdistan*, vol. II, p. 69.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[98:14](sby19.htm#fr_84) *Al-Mašrik*, vol. II,
p. 396.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[98:15](sby19.htm#fr_85) Ibid, vol. III, p. 493.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[99:16](sby19.htm#fr_86) Fraser: Ibid; Rich,
ibid.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[99:17](sby19.htm#fr_87) Badger: *Nestorians and
Their Rituals*, vol. I, p. 111; Fraser, ibid, p. 285.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[99:18](sby19.htm#fr_88) *Al-Maš*rik, ibid, p.
36.

‘Abdišû was at one time bishop of Sinjar; cf. Fardaisa de ‘Eden, ed. by
B. Cardaḥi, Beirut, 1889, p. 5.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[100:19](sby19.htm#fr_89) Ibid, pp. 56, 110,
832.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[101:20](sby19.htm#fr_90) <span id="page_139">p.
139</span> Ibid. This rite is practiced by the Yezidis of Ḫalitiyeh, a
dependency of Darbeker, where the Yezidis are few in number.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[101:21](sby19.htm#fr_91) Southgate: *A Tour
Through Armenia*, etc., Vol. II, p. 179.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[102:22](sby19.htm#fr_92) See [p.
42](sby11.htm#page_42) of this book. Badger, ibid, p. 128.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III. The Speculative Theories of Western Orientalists](sby20)
