[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sby24)  [Next](sby26.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564596958/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Sacred Books and Traditions of the Yezidiz*, by Isya Joseph, \[1919\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2\. Šeiḫ ‘Adî

Next to the devil in rank comes Šeiḫ ‘Adî. But he is not the historical
person whose biography is given by the Mohammedan authors. He is
identified with deity and looked upon as a second person in a divine
trinity. He is sent by Melek Ṭâ’ûs to teach and to warn his chosen
people lest they go astray. He is conceived to be everywhere, to be
greater than Christ; and, like Melek-Ṣedek, has neither father nor
mother. He has not died and will never die. In verse ten of the poems in
his praise, he is distinctly said to be the only God. His name is
associated with all the myth that human imagination can possibly create
about a deity. To express the Yezidi dogma in terms of Christian
formula, Šeiḫ ‘Adî is the Holy Spirit, who dwells in their prophets, who
are called

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

kochaks. He also reveals to them truth and the mysteries of heaven.

The entertaining of such views has led some modern critics to think ‘Adî
the good and Melek Ṭâ’ûs the evil principle. In the poem (30-32) he is
represented as the good deity and the source of all good. Others
identify him with Adde or Adi, a disciple of Manes or Mani. Still others
regard his name as one of the names of the deity. In this case, his tomb
is a myth and the prefix "Šeiḫ" is added to deceive the Mohammedans, and
thus to prevent them from desecrating the sacred shrine, just as the
Christians call Mar Mattie, Sheikh Mattie, and the convent of Mar
Behrian, ḫuder Elias. <span id="fr_146"></span>[15](#fn_145.md) But the
most ingenious theory is that advanced by the Rev. G. p. Badger. He
queries whether "the Yezidi ‘Adî be not cognate with the Hebrew Ad, the
two first letters in the original of Adonai, the Lord, and its
compounds, Adonijah, Adonibezek. The writer is aware, however, that
"This derivative is open to objection on the ground that the Yezidis
write the word with ‘ain and not with alif." But he explains: "They
write so only in Arabic, of which they know but very little, and not in
their own language (Kurdish) in which they do not write it at all.
Moreover, they may have assimilated the mode of expressing the title of
their deity in bygone days to that of ‘Adî, one of the descendants of
the Merawian Califs, with whom, from fear of being persecuted by the
Mohammedans, they sometimes identified him." Having thus expounded his
own

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

view, this English scholar proceeds to repudiate the suggestion that
Šeiḫ ‘Adî "is the same Adi," one of the disciples of Mani, Since there
is no proof, according to him, that Mani himself was deified by his
followers.

So far as the application of the method of comparative philology is
concerned, Badger's theory is more reasonable and tenable than that of
Lidzbarski, who, by the same method, attempts to identify Melek Ṭâ’ûs
with Tammuz. Nevertheless, the inference of the former is beyond any
possible justification. For such a starting-point is misleading when it
is not supported by historical proof. A failure to support it thus
cannot be regarded as other than deficiency in treatment Now, while one
may be misguided by the Yezidi myth surrounding the personality of Šeiḫ
‘Adî, the critical mind can find much in it to aid him in his efforts to
discover the true identity of the man. In verse fifty of his poem, for
our critic draws his conclusions in the light of this poem, the Šeiḫ
receives his authority from God who is his lord; in verse fifty-seven he
is a man, ‘Adî of Damascus, son of Musafir; in verse eighty he declares
that the high place which he had attained is attainable by all who, like
him, shall find the truth. To justify my criticism, I need only ask the
reader to recall the description by the Mohammedan biographers of the
person in question.

The Yezidis offer their worship to Šeiḫ ‘Adî, usually when they assemble
at his shrine. This is his tomb within a temple. The latter lies in a
narrow

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

valley which has only one outlet, as the rock rises on all sides except
where a small stream forces its way into a large valley beyond. The tomb
stands in a courtyard, and is surrounded by a few buildings in which the
guardians and the servants of the sanctuary live. In the vicinity are
scattered a number of shacks, each named after a šeiḫ, and supposed to
be his tomb. Toward sunset these sacred places are illuminated by
burning sesame oil lamps, putting one at the entrance to each tomb in
token of their respect, the light lasts but a short time. There are also
a few edifices, each belonging to a Yezidi district, in which the
pilgrims reside during the time of the feast; so that each portion of
the valley is known by the name of the country of those who resort
thither. On the lintel of the doorway of the temple, various symbols are
engraved,---a lion, a snake, a hatchet, a man and a comb. <span
id="fr_147"></span>[16](#fn_146.md) Their mystical meaning is unknown. They
are regarded as mere ornaments placed there at the request of those who
furnished money for building the temple. The interior of the temple is
made up of an oblong apartment which is divided into three compartments,
and a large hall in the centre which is divided by a row of columns; and
arches support the roof. To the right of the entrance are a platform,
and a spring of water coming from the rock. The latter is regarded with
great veneration, and is believed to be derived from the holy well of
Zamzam at Mecca. It is used for the baptism of children and for other
sacred purposes. Close by there are two

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

small apartments in which are tombs of the saints and of some inferior
personage. In the principal halls a few lamps are usually burning, and
at sunset lights are scattered over the walls.

The tomb of Šeiḫ ‘Adî lies in the inner room, which is dimly lighted.
The tomb has a large square cover, upon which is written Ayat al-Kursi,
that is, the verse of the throne, which is the 256th verse of
surat-al-Baḳarah, or Chapter II of the Koran.

"God. There is no God but He, the Living, the Abiding. Neither slumber
nor sleep seizeth Him. To Him belongeth whatsoever is in heaven and
whatsoever is on earth. Who is he that can intercede with Him but by His
own permission? He knoweth what has been before them and what shall be
after them; yet naught of His knowledge do they comprehend, save what he
willeth to reveal. His throne reacheth over the heavens and the earth,
and the upholding of both burdeneth Him not. He is the High, the Great."

It is related (in the Mishkat, Book IV, 1. 19, Part III) that ‘Ali heard
Mohammed say in the pulpit, "That person who repeats the Ayat al-Kursi
after every prayer shall in no wise be prevented from entering into
Paradise, except by life; and whoever says it when he goes to his
bedchamber will be kept by God in safety together with his house and the
house of his [neighbor](errata.htm#18.md)." Šeiḫ ‘Adî might have been in
the habit of repeating this verse; and this, perhaps, led to its
inscription on the tomb.

In the center of the inner, room, close by the tomb,

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

there is a square plaster case, in which are small balls of clay taken
from the tomb. These are sold or distributed to the pilgrims, and
regarded as sacred relics, useful against disease and evil spirits. It
is said that there are three hundred and sixty lamps in the shrine of
‘Adi, which are lit every night. The whole valley in which the shrine
lies is held sacred. No impure thing is permitted within its holy
bounds. No other than the high priest and the chiefs of the sect are
buried near the tomb. Many pilgrims take off their shoes on approaching
it, . and go barefooted as long as they remain in its vicinity.

Such is the sanctuary of ‘Adî, where they offer him their homage. Their
worship may be divided into two kinds, direct and indirect. The former
consists of traditional hymns sung by the ḳawwals, the sacred musicians
of the sect. They are chanted to the sound of flutes and tambourines.
The tunes are monotonous and generally loud and harsh. The latter kind
consists in celebrating their religious rites with great rejoicing on
the feast day of their great saint. And their Ḳubla, the place to which
they look while performing their holy ceremonies, is that part of the
heaven in which the sun rises.

The great feast of Šeiḫ ‘Adî is held yearly on April fifteenth to
twentieth, Roman calendar, when the Yezidis from all their districts
come to attend the festival celebration. Before entering the valley, men
and women perform their ablutions, for no one can enter the sacred
valley without having first purified

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

his body and his clothes. The people of the villages are gathered and
start together, forming a long procession, preceded by musicians, who
play the tambourine and the pipe. They load the donkeys with necessary
carpets and domestic utensils. While marching they discharge their guns
into the air and sing their war cry. As soon as they see the tower of
the tomb, they all together discharge their arms.

The šeiḫs and the principal members of the priesthood are dressed in
pure white linen, and all are venerable men with long beards. Only the
chief and the ḳawwals and two of the order of the priesthood enter the
inner court of the temple, and they always go in barefooted. They start
an hour after sunset. <span id="fr_148"></span>[17](#fn_147.md) The
ceremony begins with the exhibition of the holy symbol of Melek Ṭâ’ûs to
the priests. No stranger is allowed to witness this ceremony or to know
the nature of it. This being done, they begin the rite. The ḳawwals
stand against the wall on one side of the court and commences a chant.
Some play on the flute, others on the tambourine; and they follow the
measure with their voices. The šeiḫs and the chiefs form a procession,
walking two by two; the chief priest walks ahead. A faḳir holds in one
hand a lighted torch, and in another a large vessel of oil, from which
he pours into the lamp from time to time. All are in white apparel
except the fakirs, who are dressed in black. As they walk in a circle,
they sing in honor of Šeiḫ ‘Adî. Afterward, they sing in honor of 'Isa
(Jesus). As they proceed the excitement

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

increases, the chants quicken, the tambourines are beaten more
frequently, the faḳirs move faster, the women make tahlil with a great
shouting, and the ceremony comes to an end with great noise and
excitement. When the chanting is ended, those who were marching in
procession kiss, as they pass by, the right side of the temple entrance,
where the serpent is figured on the wall. Then the emir stands at this
entrance to receive the homage of the šeiḫs and elders who kiss his
hand. Afterward all that are present give one another the kiss of
peace. <span id="fr_149"></span>[18](#fn_148.md) After the ceremony the
young men and women dance in the outer court until early in the morning.

In the morning the šeiḫs and the ḳawwals offer a short prayer in the
temple without any ceremony and some kiss the holy places in the
vicinity. When they end, they take the green <span
id="fr_150"></span>[19](#fn_149.md) cover of the tomb of Šeiḫ ‘Adî and
march with it around the outer court with music. The people rush to them
and reverently kiss the corner of the cloth, offering money.

After taking the cover back to its place, the chiefs and priests sit
around the inner court. Kochaks at this time bring food and call the
people to eat of the hospitality of Šeiḫ ‘Adî. <span
id="fr_151"></span>[20](#fn_150.md) After they have finished their meal, a
collection is taken for the support of the temple and tomb of their
saint. All people that come to the annual festival bring dishes as
offerings to their living šeiḫ. After he has indicated his acceptance of
them by tasting, these are given to the servants of

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

the sanctuary. When the feast comes to an end, the people return to
their several abodes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_145"></span>[159:15](sby25.htm#fr_146.md) Badger: Ibid, p.
247. (137) Ibid, p. 112.

Mr. Badger seems to contend that the Kurdish-speaking people do not
pronounce the letter ‘ain. This is not true, the Kurds pronounce this
letter as well as other gutterals. They sometimes even change the Arabic
Alif to ain. This is to be said, however, that in some localities the
‘ain is pronounced alif, just as the kaf is changed to alif, but this is
not confined to the Kurds, such changes are made by the Arabic- and the
Syriac-speaking people also.

<span id="fn_146"></span>[161:16](sby25.htm#fr_147.md) The figures of the
bull and of the serpent, or of the bull and of the lion were placed at
the right and left of the palaces of the Assyrian kings to protect their
path. Layard, Nineveh and Babylon, p. 162; Nineveh, Vol. II, p. 315; B.
F. Harper, Assyrian and Babylonian Literature, pp. 139, 148, 153. The
lion was both an ornament and support in the throne of Solomon, Layard,
Nineveh, Vol. II, p. 301. The hatchet was among the weapons of those who
fought in chariots, and carried in the quiver, with the arrows and short
angular bow, Nineveh, Vol. II, p. 343.

<span id="fn_147"></span>[164:17](sby25.htm#fr_148.md) The Mandeans, the
star-worshippers, also begin their rasta ceremony after the sunset, and
continue it through the night.--*London Standard*, October 19, 1994,
Al-Mutaḳtataf, 23, 88.

<span id="fn_148"></span>[165:18](sby25.htm#fr_149.md) The kiss of the
peace is a regular part of the church service in the East.

<span id="fn_149"></span>[165:19](sby25.htm#fr_150.md) In Mohammedanism,
green is the color of šeiḫs.

<span id="fn_150"></span>[165:20](sby25.htm#fr_151.md) This is a communal
meal.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3. Yezid](sby26.md)
