[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sby32)  [Next](sby34.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564596958/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Sacred Books and Traditions of the Yezidiz*, by Isya Joseph, \[1919\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

### III

### THE SACERDOTAL ORDERS

The hierarchical orders of the Yezidi sect are four. The head šeiḫ is
the patriarch of the sect. He directs all, the religious affairs of the
community and leads them in their rites. He is also the principal
interpreter of their religion, the chief spiritual judge, a sacred
person, whose hearth is regarded as a sanctuary, only second in
importance to Šeiḫ ‘Adî's temple, and whose will. must be obeyed. His
powerful weapon is excommunication. He presides over a tribunal composed
of ecclesiastical superiors, which has jurisdiction in religious
offences, in questions relating to marriage, and in disputes between the
clergy. His charge is hereditary, in direct succession; but if his
eldest son be considered unworthy, he may appoint another to succeed
him. He is said to be descended from Šeiḫ ‘Adî, and is believed to be
endowed with supernatural power for healing diseases, and for blessing
cattle and crops. Twice a year he visits the neighboring villages to
collect contributions, and sends his ḳawwals to far distant districts
for the same purpose. Occasionally he takes part in celebrating the
marriage of persons of distinction in his community. He is also at times
solicited to preside over funeral rites, which are generally conducted
by the ḳawwals and šeiḫs. The chief šeiḫ wears a black turban and white
garments.

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

Besides the head šeiḫ, the Yezidis have many other šeiḫs. Each has a
parish to look after. Twice a year he visits his parishioners to receive
their free-will offerings. If a member of a congregation does not
satisfy his šeiḫs, he is anathematized by his spiritual leader, and no
one will speak to him or eat with him. Every one of these šeiḫs is
supposed to possess a special power, such as the power to drive
scorpions away by praying over water and sprinkling it in the corners of
the house. They have one called Šeiḫ Deklie, that is, šeiḫ of the Cocks.
His office is to go from village to village to collect chickens. Several
of these šeiḫs always reside at Šeiḫ ‘Adî's.

The next in dignity are pirs, from the Persian meaning an old man. They
wear red turbans and black garments. Then come the ḳawwals, from the
Arabic, meaning one who speaks fluently, an orator. And lastly, the
fakirs, from the Arabic poor. These are the lowest order in the Yezidi
priesthood. (For the different offices of the last three orders, (see
[p. 69](sby12.htm#page_69)..md)

The clergy of all ranks enjoy particular respect. Their persons and
homes are held inviolate. They take precedence at public gatherings. And
the šeiḫs and pirs possess the much dreaded power of excommunication.

Besides the above, the Yezidis have a temporal chief, who is called
amir. His dignity is also hereditary and confined to one family. He is
believed to be a descendant of Yezid. He exercises a secondary

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

authority over the Yezidis. He is a mediator between his sect and the
Turkish government. He has the power to cut off any refractory member
from the community. He has charge of fifty ḳawwals who try to collect
for him at their annual visits to each Yezidi district a certain amount
of money. The money received by them is divided into two equal parts,
one of which goes to the support of the tomb of Šeiḫ ‘Adî, and the
second part is divided, one-half being for the amir, the other half
being shared equally by the ḳawwals.

The name of the present amir is ‘Ali, and he resides in Ba‘adrie.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Notes on Chapter IV](sby34.md)
