[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sby34)  [Next](sby36.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564596958/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Sacred Books and Traditions of the Yezidiz*, by Isya Joseph, \[1919\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

# CHAPTER V

# THEIR CUSTOMS

### I

### MARRIAGE

The Yezidis are endogamic. They forbid union between the secular and the
religious classes, as also within certain degrees of relationship. A
šeiḫ's son marries only a Šeiḫ's daughter; so pirs' sons, pirs'
daughters. A layman cannot marry a šeiḫ's or a pir's daughter, but he
may take for a wife a ḳawwal's or a kochak's daughter; and ḳawwals' or
kochaks' sons may marry laymen's daughters. But if a layman marries a
šeiḫ's or a pir's daughter, he must be killed. Marriage is for life, but
it is frequently dissolved, divorce being as easy to obtain among them
as among Moslems. When a man wants to get rid of his wife, he simply
lets her go. Polygamy is allowed, but usually confined to rich men, who
generally have two wives. The number of wives is limited to six, except
for the amir. A man must have money or cattle in order to be able to get
married. The price is called ḳalam. A respectable girl will not sell
herself at a low price. Parents get rich if they have several pretty
girls; they are the father's property. The ḳalam,

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

dowry, is usually thirty sheep or goats, or the price of them. The man
must give presents to the relatives of his bride, parents, brothers,
etc. If a couple love each other and cannot marry because the man has no
money to pay his sweetheart's father, then they elope. They usually make
arrangements before elopement as to where they will stay for a few weeks
to escape detection. Some strong men accompany them when they elope. The
father of the girl with his relatives follow. If they catch the
fugitives, bloodshed may ensue. But if they succeed in escaping, they
return after some time and are then forgiven. According to a Kurdish
proverb everything is pardoned the brave.

The couple choose one another, The girl informs her mother that she
loves so and so. The latter informs her husband. The father acquaints
the father of the young man with the fact. When they agree, and the
daughter is given to the young man, his kindred come to the house of the
bride's father on an appointed day, and give the girl a ring; then they
dance, rejoice all night, play, wrestle, and eat black raisins. After
that the young couple are allowed to arrange nuptial meetings in the
company of a matron, who is presented with a gift.

When the time of marriage comes, the family of the bridegroom invites
the relatives. Each takes with him a silk handkerchief as a present for
the bride. For three days they drink "ărak," sing and dance to the sound
of flutes and drums at the house of the young man. After that, the
women, two by two, ride on

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

horseback together, and likewise the men. The men take with them their
children, who ride behind them. In this manner they go to the bride's
house, discharging their guns as they proceed. When they reach the house
they all discharge their guns together. Hearing the sound, the father
comes out and according to the custom, asks the visitors what they want.
They respond "Your daughter," all answering at once. Then he goes in and
tells his wife. After putting upon their daughter a scarlet ḫailiyah
(veil), which covers her from head to foot, they bring her out. Everyone
of the children takes a spoon from the bride's house and sticks it in
his turban. After being brought to the house of the bridegroom, the
bride is kept behind a curtain in the corner of a darkened room for
three days, and the young man is not allowed to see her during this
period.

On the third day, the bridegroom is sought early in the morning, and led
in triumph by his friends from house to house, receiving at each a small
present. He is then placed within a circle of dancers, and the guests
and bystanders wetting small coins stick them to his forehead. The money
is collected as it falls in an open handkerchief held by his companions.
After this ceremony a number of the young men, who have attached
themselves to the bridegroom, lock the most wealthy of their companions
in a dark room until they are willing to pay a ransom for their release.
The money thus taken is added to the dowry of the newly married couple.

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

On the evening of the third day the šeiḫ takes the bridegroom to the
bride. Putting the hand of one in that of the other, and covering the
couple with a ḫailiyah, he asks the bride, "Who are you?" "I am the
daughter of so and so," responds she. Then he asks the bridegroom the
same question. After receiving an answer, the šeiḫ asks, "Will you take
this young woman as a wife," and "Do you want this young man as a
husband?" After hearing each say "Yes:" the šeiḫ marks their shoulders
and foreheads with red ink, and hands them a stick. As each holds one
end of it, he asks them to break it in the middle, leaving one-half in
the hand of each. Then the šeiḫ says, "So you remain one until death
breaks you asunder."

When this is done, he takes the couple to a too and locks them in,
waiting at the door. After a while the bridegroom knocks at the door
three times. Understanding the signal, the priest discharges his gun,
and all the bystanders outside follow his example. After shouting and
dancing for some time. the šeiḫ sends them home. When they first meet,
the newly wedded husband strikes his young wife with a small stone as a
token of his superiority over her. For seven days, they stay at home and
do no work. Now, if the husband dies first, the wife goes to her
father's house.

With the Yezidis, the family bonds are stronger than those of the tribe.
The family proper consists of parents and their children; married, and
unmarried, living in the same house. Respect for parents and

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

elder persons is considered a virtue, as it is among all the eastern
people. The head of the family is the sole proprietor of the possessions
of the family, and holds full control over his wife and children, who
are bound to obey him. Only personal objects and dress are the property
of the wife. He can punish his wife and the children. If a son leaves
his father's house, be is beyond the father's authority, but not beyond
his moral influence. A father is to maintain his family, defend it, and
answer charges brought against its members. Next to the father in
authority stands the eldest son.

Women are inferior to men; married women must obey their husbands. They
work like men; they till the ground, take care of cattle, fight the
enemy and are courageous and very independent. This enables the young
women to choose their sweethearts and run away with them. They converse
with men freely. A woman does not conceal her face unless she is stared
at, when she draws a corner of her mantle over her face.

Married women are dressed entirely in white, and their shirt is of the
same cut as the man's, with a white kerchief under their chin, and
another over their heads, held by the ‘agal or woollen cord of the
Bedouins. The girls wear white skirts and drawers, and over them colored
zabouns, long dresses open in front and confined at the waist by a
girdle ornamented with pieces of silver. They bind fancy kerchiefs

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

around their heads and adorn themselves with coins as well as with glass
and amber beads.

The men wear shirts closed up to the neck, and their religious law
forbids them to wear the common eastern shirts open in front. Their
shirt is the distinctive mark by which the Yezidi sect is recognized at
once. They are clothed besides with loose trousers and cloaks, both of
white, and with a black turban. from beneath which their hair falls in
ringlets. They usually carry long rifles in their hands, pistols in
their girdles, and a sword at their side.

In their physical characteristics they are like the Kurds, wild, rough,
uncultured. They are muscular, active, and capable of bearing great
hardship. In general, they are a fine, manly race: tall or of medium
stature, with large chest; strong deep voice, audible afar; clear, keen
eye; frank and confident, or fierce and angry; nose of moderate length,
and fairly small head. Their legs are rather short, but the soles of
their feet are large. Their complexion is usually dark and their eyes
are black. But there are different types. The predominant type is tall,
with black hair, fine regular nose, and bluish brown eyes. The rest are
of shorter stature, with longer features; light, bright eyes; and large,
irregular nose. The Yezidis sometime shave the hair off their head,
leaving only a long, thin forelock.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II. Funerals](sby36.md)
