[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sby30)  [Next](sby32) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564596958/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Sacred Books and Traditions of the Yezidiz*, by Isya Joseph, \[1919\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

# CHAPTER IV

# SACRAMENTS, RELIGIOUS OBSERVANCES AND SACERDOTAL SYSTEM

### I

### SACRAMENTS

Circumcision, the Eucharist and baptism are the three religious rites
administered by the followers of Yezid. The first rite is optional. But
with baptism the case is different; it is a matter of obligation. When a
child is born near enough to the tomb of Šeiḫ ‘Adî to be taken there
without great inconvenience or danger, it should be baptized as early as
possible after birth. The ḳawwals in their periodical visitations carry
a bottle or skin filled with holy water to baptize those children who
cannot be brought to the shrine. The mode of baptism is as follows: A
šeiḫ carries the baby into the water, takes off his clothes, and
immerses him three times. After the second time, putting his hand on the
child's head, he mutters, "Hol hola soultanie Azid, tou bouia berḫe
Aizd, saraka rea Azid." ("Hol hola! <span
id="fr_160"></span>[1](#fn_159) Yezid is a sultan. Thou hast become a
lamb of Yezid; thou mayest be a martyr for the religion of Yezid.") The
parents are not admitted to the domed shack of the spring; they remain
outside.

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The šeiḫ is paid
for his services by the father of the child. If the baby be a male, the
gift must be more valuable than if it be a female.

Within twenty days from the time of baptism, a male child is
circumcised. To perform the rite, two šeiḫs are employed. One holds the
child in his lap, the other performs the operation. Before starting, he
asks the child to say: "As berḫe Azide Sarum." ("I am the lamb of
illuminating Yezid.") If he be too small to repeat, the šeiḫ who holds
him repeats the sentence for him. All this is done in the presence of
the parents, the relatives and the friends, amid rejoicing with the
sound of the flute and the tambourine. When the ceremony is ended, the
father of the child entertains all those present for seven successive
days, during which period they dance, sing and eat the food sent to them
by the friends and neighbors of the circumcised child. When this comes
to an end, the two šeiḫs are presented with gifts. Then every one
returns home. The reason why they observe the two rites, they say, is
that if one does not work the other may, and neither is harmful.

As to the Eucharist, <span id="fr_161"></span>[2](#fn_160) its
observance is local. It is usually administered by the Yezidis of a
place called Ḫalitiyeh, a dependency of Diarbeker. It is observed in the
following manner: They sit around a table. The chief among them holding
a cup of wine, asks in Kurdish, "Ave Chia." ("What is this?") Then he
himself answers, "Ave Kasie ‘Isaya." ("This is the cup of Jesus.") He
continues, "Ave 'Isa naf

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

rounishtiya." ("Jesus is sitting and present in it.") Having first
partaken himself, he passes the cup around. The last person drinks all
that is left in the cup.

There is another sacrament among the Yezidis. I refer to the rite of
repentance. When persons quarrel, the guilty one, covering his face with
his hands, betakes himself to the most venerable šeiḫ to confess his
sin. The latter, giving the penitent instructions, enjoins him to kiss
the hands of his enemy and those of the members of the priesthood. This
having been done, if still no reconciliation be effected, the offending
person, whoever he may be, must undergo again the same exercises. When
peace is established, the penitent one slaughters a sheep and offers
wine to the reconciled one and the clerical body. This rite of
repentance, however, is not obligatory. <span
id="fr_162"></span>[3](#fn_161)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_159"></span>[178:1](sby31.htm#fr_160) <span
id="page_185">p. 185</span> Hol Hola is an interjection, or exclamation,
expressing sudden emotion, excitement, or feeling. as "Oh!" "Alas!"
"Hurrah!" "Hark!" in English.

<span id="fn_160"></span>[179:2](sby31.htm#fr_161) P. Anastase:
*Al-Mašrik*, vol. II, p. 309.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[180:3](sby31.htm#fr_162) Ibid, p. 311.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II. Some Other Religious Practices](sby32)
