[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sby43)  [Next](sby45.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564596958/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Sacred Books and Traditions of the Yezidiz*, by Isya Joseph, \[1919\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

# CHAPTER VII

# PERSECUTION

The history of the Yezidis, like that of the Jews, their has been one of
persecution. The causes of their misfortune have been (1) the fact that
they are not regarded as the people of the Book; and with such the
Mohammedans have no treaty, no binding oath, as they do with the other
non-Mohammedan bodies. For this reason they have to make choice between
conversion and the sword, and it is unlawful even to take taxes from
them. Consequently they must accept the faith or be killed. (2) Their
ceremonies have given rise among their neighbors to fables confounding
their practices with those of the Nuṣairi of Syria and ascribing to them
certain midnight orgies, which obtained for them the name of cheraġ
sanderañ <span id="fr_167"></span>[1](#fn_166.md), i.e., the extinguisher;
of light. (3) Their determined refusal to enter the military service.
The Yezidis with the Christians have been exempt from the military
service on the general law sanctioned by the Koran; namely, that none
but true believers can serve in the armies of the state. But from time
to time the Turkish government has endeavored to raise recruits for the
regular troops among the Yezidis on the ground that, being of no
recognized infidel sect

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

they must be included like the Druses of Mount Lebanon among
Mohammedans. But they have resisted the orders, alleging that their
religious law absolutely forbids them to take the oath to which the
Turkish soldiers are weekly subjected, to wear the blue color and
certain portions of the uniform, and to eat several articles of food
that are offered to the troops. Hence they have suffered severely at the
hands of the local authorities.

One of the most cruel persecutions which the Yezidis have suffered was
that brought upon them in the Šeiḫan district by the famous Beg
Rawmanduz in 1832, who had united most of the Kurdish tribes of the
surrounding mountains under his command. His cry was to crush the
hateful sect of the devil-worshipers. The forces of ‘Alì Beg, the then
amir of the Yezidis, were much inferior in number to those of the
Khurdish Beg. The latter (Ali Beg) was defeated, therefore, and fell
into the hands of his enemy, who put him to death. The people of Šeiḫan
fled to Mosul. It was in the spring and the river had overflowed and
carried the bridge away. A few succeeded in crossing, but the greater
multitude of men, women and children were left on the opposite side and
crowded on tal ‘Armus. The hostile Beg followed and butchered them
indiscriminately, showing no mercy, while the people of Mosul were
witnessing the horrible massacre from the other side of the stream and
hearing the cry of the unfortunate for their help, unwilling to render
any assistance. For the Christians

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

were helpless and Mohammedans rejoiced to see the devil-worshippers
exterminated. From this crud action of the Beg of Rawanduz, the mounds
of Nineveh gained the name "Kuyunjik," *i.e.*, "the slaughter of the
sheep."

Soon after this Suleiman Paša of Bagdad sent a large army to Sinjar
under the command of Lutfee Effendi, who set fire to the Jabal Sinjar
and caused all the inhabitants to flee. Then Ḥafiz Paša of Diarbeker
attempted the subjugation of the Yezidis of Sinjar, on the ground that
they were plunderers. After meeting some resistance, he accomplished his
purpose in 1837, and appointed a Moslem to watch over them. At another
time Mohammed Rašid Pasha of Mosul attacked Sinjar. On both occasions
there was a massacre. The Yezidis took refuge in caves, where they were
either suffocated by smoke or killed by the discharge of cannon. And
thus the population was reduced by three-fourths. These and other
similar injustices at the hands of the Pašas of Bagdad and Mosul and the
Kurdish chiefs led the Yezidis from time to time to send a deputation to
lay their grievances before the agents of the European powers, and they
have even sent commissioners to the Sultan. They finally succeeded in
enlisting the interest of Lord Stratford in 1847 to obtain at
Constantinople a proper recognition of their religion and exemption from
military service.

But the severest of all persecutions, to which I was on eye-witness, was
perhaps the one which the Yezidis

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

of both Šeiḫan and Sinjar suffered in 1892 at the hands of Fariḳ ‘Omar
Paša, lieutenant-General of the Turkish Army. This Fariḳ was sent in the
summer of 1892 as a special commissioner by the Sultan to accomplish
certain definite things in the states of Mosul and Bagdad: to collect
twenty years' unpaid taxes; to induce the Bedouins to exchange their
nomadic life for village life; to convert the Yezidis of Šeiḫan and
Jabal Sinjar from their idolatry to the true faith. He was a harsh man
in his manners and methods. He first invited some of their chiefs to
Mosul. They came and listened to what the new Paša had to say. They met
him when Mijlis al-Edarah, council of the state, composed of ‘Olama and
a few Christians, was in session. In the presence of these noblemen he
began to tell them that if they would give up their devil-worship, they
would be rewarded with high place and rank, and would please the great
Allah. But they answered not. When the Farik saw that his words failed
to persuade them, he began to apply the weapon of cruelty. He cast them
into prison; some died; others fled; and a few, through the fear of
torture and painful death, pronounced al-šehâdah <span
id="fr_168"></span>[2](#fn_167.md) with their lips but not from their
hearts. Then he sent an army to their villages, and commanded them to
choose between Islam and the sword. ‘Omar Beg, his son, who was
commanding the soldiers, directed them to slaughter the men, and take
captives the pretty women and girls and marry them. He slew about five
hundred men. Many became

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Moslems from fear,
among these Merza Beg, their civil chief.

Then he placed mullas among them to teach the children the Muslim faith,
and ordered the newly converted Yezidis to pray five times every day and
to perform all the religious rites. To make them continue to be
Mohammedans, he tore down their shrines, especially those at Baḥzanie
and Baašiḳa. Such events encouraged the Kurds to come down and add
greater cruelty to what was already done.

But amir ‘Ali Beg, their chief in civil and religious affairs, after
long imprisonment and torture, did not change his religious belief. That
he might not be an example of firmness to the Yezidis, the Fariḳ
banished him with soldiers to Katamuni, a place near Constantinople.

As a consequence of these persecutions, the number of the Yezidis has
been considerably decreased. In the fifteenth century there were
250,000. At the beginning of the nineteenth century there were 200,000.
Thy are still declining and remaining under the clouds of misconception,
and are consequently objects of aversion and hatred. But they console
themselves with the idea that they suffer in the cause of their
religious convictions.

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

### NOTES ON CHAPTER VII

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_166"></span>[205:1](sby44.htm#fr_167.md) Cherog sonderan is
Turkish; sonderan is the participle of the infinitive of to put out, and
cherag, literally lamp, is the object of sonderan. In Turkish the object
precedes the verb; cf. Yani sarfi Otamani "the New Turkish Grammar" (in
the Turkish language, ed. Ahmad Jaudat & Co., Constantinople, 1318 A.
H.), p. 77.

<span id="fn_167"></span>[208:2](sby44.htm#fr_168.md) Kalimatu, š-Šehâdah
is as follows: "I testify that there is no deity but God and that
Mohammed is apostle of God."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Bibliography](sby45.md)
