[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2090015)  [Next](2090017) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p1"></span> <span id="page_71">p. 71</span> <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-Page_71"></span><span class="c16"><span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p1.1"></span>Book IV.</span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p2"></span>1. <span class="c12"><span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p2.1"></span>The</span> earlier books of this treatise,
written some time ago, contain, I think, an invincible proof that we
hold and profess the faith in Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, which is
taught by the Evangelists and Apostles, and that no commerce is possible
between us and the heretics, inasmuch as they deny unconditionally,
irrationally, and recklessly, the Divinity of our Lord Jesus Christ. Yet
certain points remained which I have felt myself bound to include in
this and the following books, in order to make our assurance of the
faith even more certain by exposure of every one of their falsehoods and
blasphemies. Accordingly, we will enquire first what are the dangers of
their teaching, the risks involved by such irreverence; next, what
principles they hold, and what arguments they advance against the
apostolic faith to which we adhere, and by what sleight of language they
impose upon the candour of their hearers; and lastly, by what method of
comment they disarm the words of Scripture of their force and meaning.

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p3"></span>2. We are well aware that neither the
speech of men nor the analogy of human nature can give us a full insight
into the things of God. The ineffable cannot submit to the bounds and
limits of definition; that which is spiritual is distinct from every
class or instance of bodily things. Yet, since our subject is that of
heavenly natures, we must employ ordinary natures and ordinary speech as
our means of expressing what our mind apprehends; a means no doubt
unworthy of the majesty of God, but forced upon us by feebleness of our
intellect, which can use only our own circumstances and our own words to
convey to others our perceptions and our conclusions. This truth has
been enforced already in the first book <span
id="fr_655"></span>[656](#fn_655) , but is now repeated in order that,
in any analogies from human affairs which we adduce, we may not be
supposed to think of God as resembling embodied natures, or to compare
spiritual Beings with our passible selves, but rather be regarded as
advancing the outward appearance of visible things as a clue to the
inward meaning of things invisible.

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p5"></span>3. For the heretics say that Christ is
not from God, that is, that the Son is not born from the Father, and is
God not by nature but by appointment; in other words, that He has
received an adoption which consists in the giving of a name, being God’s
Son in the sense in which many are sons of God; again, that Christ’s
majesty is an evidence of God’s widespread bounty, He being God in the
sense in which there are gods many; although they admit that in His
adoption and naming as God a more liberal affection than in other cases
was shewn, His adoption being the first in order of time, and He greater
than other adopted sons, and first in rank among the creatures because
of the greater splendour which accompanied His creation. Some add, by
way of confessing the omnipotence of God, that He was created into God’s
likeness, and that it was out of nothing that He, like other creatures,
was raised up to be the Image of the eternal Creator, bidden at a word
to spring from non-existence into being by the power of God, Who can
frame out of nothing the likeness of Himself.

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p6"></span>4. Moreover, they use their knowledge of
the historical fact that bishops of a former time have taught that
Father and Son are of one substance, to subvert the truth by the
ingenious plea that this is a heretical notion. They say that this term
‘of one substance,’ in the Greek *<span class="c37"><span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p6.1"></span>homoousion</span>*, is used to mean and
express that the Father is the same as the Son; that is, that He
extended Himself out of infinity into the Virgin, and took a body from
her, and gave to Himself, in the body which He had taken, the name of
Son. This is their first lie concerning the *<span class="c37"><span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p6.2"></span>homoousion</span>*. Their next lie is that
this word *<span class="c37"><span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p6.3"></span>homoousion</span>* implies that Father and
Son participate in something antecedent to Either and distinct from
Both, and that a certain imaginary substance, or *<span
class="c37"><span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p6.4"></span>ousia</span>*, anterior to
all matter whatsoever, has existed heretofore and been divided and
wholly distributed between the Two; which proves, they say, that Each of
the Two is of a nature pro-existent to Himself, and Each identical in
matter with the Other. And so they profess to condemn the confession of
the *<span class="c37"><span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p6.5"></span>homoousion</span>* on the ground that that
term does not discriminate between Father and Son, and makes the Father
subsequent in time to that matter which He has in common with the Son.
And they have devised this third <span id="page_72">p. 72</span> <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-Page_72"></span>objection to the word *<span
class="c37"><span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p6.6"></span>homoousion</span>*, that
its meaning, as they explain it, is that the Son derives His origin from
a partition of the Father’s substance, as though one object had been cut
in two and He were the severed portion. The meaning of ‘one substance,’
they say, is that the part cut off from the whole continues to share the
nature of that from which it has been severed; but God, being
impassible, cannot be divided, for, if He must submit to be lessened by
division, He is subject to change, and will be rendered imperfect if His
perfect substance leave Him to reside in the severed portion.

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p7"></span>5. They think also that they have a
compendious refutation of Prophets, Evangelists and Apostles alike, in
their assertion that the Son was born within time. They pronounce us
illogical for saying that the Son has existed from everlasting; and,
since they reject the possibility of His eternity, they are forced to
believe that He was born at a point in time. For if He has not always
existed, there was a time when He was not; and if there be a time when
He was not, time was anterior to Him. He who has not existed
everlastingly began to exist within time, while He Who is free from the
limits of time is necessarily eternal. The reason they give for their
rejection of the eternity of the Son is that His everlasting existence
contradicts the faith in His birth; as though by confessing that He has
existed eternally, we made His birth impossible.

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p8"></span>6. What foolish and godless fears! What
impious anxiety on God’s behalf! The meaning which they profess to
detect in the word *<span class="c37"><span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p8.1"></span>homoousion</span>*, and in the assertion of
the eternity of the Son, is detested, rejected, denounced by the Church.
She confesses one God from Whom are all things; she confesses one Jesus
Christ our Lord, through whom are all things; One from Whom, One through
Whom; One the Source of all, One the Agent through Whom all were
created. In the One from Whom are all things she recognises the Majesty
which has no beginning, and in the One through Whom are all things she
recognises a might coequal with His Source; for Both are jointly supreme
in the work of creation and in rule over created things. In the Spirit
she recognises God as Spirit, impassible and indivisible, for she has
learnt from the Lord that Spirit has neither flesh nor bones <span
id="fr_656"></span>[657](#fn_656) ; a warning to save her from supposing
that God, being Spirit, could be burdened with bodily suffering and
loss. She recognises one God, unborn from everlasting; she recognises
also one Only-begotten Son of God. She confesses the Father eternal and
without beginning; she confesses also that the Son’s beginning is from
eternity. Not that He has no beginning, but that He is Son of the Father
Who has none; not that He is self-originated, but that He is from Him
Who is unbegotten from everlasting; born from eternity, receiving, that
is, His birth from the eternity of the Father. Thus our faith is free
from the guesswork of heretical perversity; it is expressed in fixed and
published terms, though as yet no reasoned defence of our confession has
been put forth. Still, lest any suspicion should linger around the sense
in which the Fathers have used the word *<span class="c37"><span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p9.2"></span>homoousion</span>* and round our confession
of the eternity of the Son, I have set down the proofs whereby we may be
assured that the Son abides ever in that substance wherein He was
begotten from the Father, and that the birth of His Son has not
diminished ought of that Substance wherein the Father was abiding; that
holy men, inspired by the teaching of God, when they said that the Son
is *<span class="c37"><span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p9.3"></span>homoousios</span>* with the Father pointed
to no such flaws or defects as I have mentioned <span
id="fr_657"></span>[658](#fn_657) . My purpose has been to counteract
the impression that this *<span class="c37"><span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p10.1"></span>ousia</span>*, this assertion that He is
*<span class="c37"><span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p10.2"></span>homoousios</span>*
with the Father, is a negation of the nativity of the Only-begotten Son.

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p11"></span>7. To assure ourselves of the
needfulness of these two phrases, adopted and employed as the best of
safeguards against the heretical rabble of that day, I think it best to
reply to the obstinate misbelief of our present heretics, and refute
their vain and pestilent teaching by the witness of the evangelists and
apostles. They flatter themselves that they can furnish a proof for each
of their propositions; they have, in fact, appended to each some
passages or other from holy Writ; passages so grossly misinterpreted as
to ensnare none but the illiterate by the semblance of truth with which
perverted ingenuity has masked their explanation.

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p12"></span>8. For they attempt, by praising the
Godhead of the Father only, to deprive the Son of His Divinity, pleading
that it is written, *Hear, O Israel, the Lord thy God is One* <span
id="fr_658"></span>[659](#fn_658) , and that the Lord repeats this in
His answer to the doctor of the Law who asked Him what was the greatest
commandment in the Law;—*Hear, O Israel, the Lord thy God is One* <span
id="fr_659"></span>[660](#fn_659) . Again, they say that Paul proclaims,
*For there is One God, and One Mediator between God and men* <span
id="fr_660"></span>[661](#fn_660) . And furthermore, they insist that
God alone is wise, in order to leave no wisdom for the Son, relying upon
the words of the <span id="page_73">p. 73</span> <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-Page_73"></span>Apostle, *Now to Him that is able to
stablish you according to my gospel and the preaching of Jesus Christ,
according to the revelation of the mystery which hath been kept in
silence through age-long times, but now is manifested through the
scriptures of the prophets according to the commandment of the eternal
God Who is made known unto all nations unto obedience of faith; to the
only wise God, through Jesus Christ, to Whom be glory for ever and
ever* <span id="fr_661"></span>[662](#fn_661) . They argue also that He
alone is true <span id="fr_662"></span>[663](#fn_662) , for Isaiah says,
*They shall bless Thee, the true God* <span
id="fr_663"></span>[664](#fn_663) , and the Lord Himself has borne
witness in the Gospel, saying, *And this is life eternal that they
should know Thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ Whom Thou hast
sent* <span id="fr_664"></span>[665](#fn_664) . Again they reason that
He alone is good, to leave no goodness for the Son, because it has been
said through Him, *There is none good save One, even God* <span
id="fr_665"></span>[666](#fn_665) ; and that He alone has power, because
Paul has said, *Which in His own times He shall shew to us, Who is the
blessed and only Potentate, the King of kings and Lord of lords* <span
id="fr_666"></span>[667](#fn_666) . And further, they profess themselves
certain that in the Father there is no change nor turning, because He
has said through the prophet, *I am the Lord your God, and I am not
changed* <span id="fr_667"></span>[668](#fn_667) , and the apostle
James, *With Whom there is no change* <span
id="fr_668"></span>[669](#fn_668) ; certain also that He is the
righteous Judge, for it is written, *God is the righteous Judge, strong
and patient* <span id="fr_669"></span>[670](#fn_669) ; that He cares for
all, because the Lord has said, speaking of the birds, *And your
heavenly. Father feedeth them* <span id="fr_670"></span>[671](#fn_670) ,
and, *Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing? And not one of them
falleth upon the ground without the will of your Father; but the very
hairs of your head are numbered* <span id="fr_671"></span>[672](#fn_671)
. They say that the Father has prescience of all things, as the blessed
Susanna says, *O eternal God, that knowest secrets, and knowest all
things before they be* <span id="fr_672"></span>[673](#fn_672) ; that He
is incomprehensible, as it is written, *The heaven is My throne, and the
earth is the footstool of My feet. What house will ye build Me, or what
is the place of My rest? For these things hath My hand made, and all
these things are mine* <span id="fr_673"></span>[674](#fn_673) ; that He
contains all things, as Paul bears witness, *For in Him we live and move
and have our being* <span id="fr_674"></span>[675](#fn_674) , and the
psalmist, *Whither shall I go from Thy Spirit, and whither shall I fly
from Thy face? If I climb up into heaven, Thou art there; if I go down
to hell, Thou art present. If I take my wings before the light and dwell
in the uttermost parts of the sea, even thither Thy hand shall lead me
and Thy right hand shall hold me* <span
id="fr_675"></span>[676](#fn_675) ; that He is without body, for it is
written, *For God is Spirit, and they that worship Him must worship in
spirit and in truth* <span id="fr_676"></span>[677](#fn_676) ; that He
is immortal and invisible, as Paul says, *Who only hath immortality, and
dwelleth in light unapproachable, whom no man hath seen nor can
see* <span id="fr_677"></span>[678](#fn_677) , and the Evangelist, *No
one hath seen God at any time, except the Only-begotten Son, which is in
the bosom of the Father* <span id="fr_678"></span>[679](#fn_678) ; that
He alone abides eternally unborn, for it is written, *I Am That I Am*,
and *Thus shalt thou say to the children of Israel, I Am hath sent me
unto you* <span id="fr_679"></span>[680](#fn_679) , and through
Jeremiah, *O Lord, Who art Lord* <span id="fr_680"></span>[681](#fn_680)
.

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p36"></span>9. Who can fail to observe that these
statements are full of fraud and fallacy? Cleverly as issues have been
confused and texts combined, malice and folly is the character indelibly
imprinted upon this laborious effort of cunning and clumsiness. For
instance, among their points of faith they have included this, that they
confess the Father only to be unborn; as though any one on our side
could suppose that He, Who begot Him through Whom are all things,
derived His being from any external source. The very fact that He bears
the name of *Father* reveals Him as the cause of His Son’s existence.
That name of *Father* gives no hint that He who bears it is Himself
descended from another, while it tells us plainly from Whom it is that
the Son is begotten. Let us therefore leave to the Father His own
special and incommunicable property, confessing that in Him reside the
eternal powers of an omnipotence without beginning. None, I am sure, can
doubt that the reason why, in their confession of God the Father,
certain attributes are dwelt upon as peculiarly and inalienably His own,
is that He may be left in isolated possession of them. For when they say
that He alone is true, alone is righteous, alone is wise, alone is
invisible, alone is good, alone is mighty, alone is immortal, they are
raising up this word *alone* as a barrier to cut off the Son from His
share in these attributes. He Who is alone, they say, has no partner in
His properties. But if we suppose that these attributes reside in the
Father only, and not in the Son also, then we must believe that God the
Son has neither truth nor wisdom; that He is a bodily being compact of
visible and material elements, ill-disposed and feeble and void of
immortality; for we exclude Him from all these attributes of which we
make the Father the solitary Possessor.

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p37"></span><span id="page_74">p. 74</span> <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-Page_74"></span>10. We, however, who propose to discourse
of that most perfect majesty and fullest Divinity which appertains to
the Only-begotten Son of God, have no fear lest our readers should
imagine that amplitude of phrase in speaking of the Son is a detraction
from the glory of God the Father, as though every praise assigned to the
Son had first been withdrawn from Him. For, on the contrary, the majesty
of the Son is glory to the Father; the Source must be glorious from
which He Who is worthy of such glory comes. The Son has nothing but by
virtue of His birth; the Father shares all veneration received by that
birthright. Thus the suggestion that we diminish the Father’s honour is
put to silence, for all the glory which, as we shall teach, is inherent
in the Son will be reflected back, to the increased glory of Him who has
begotten a Son so great.

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p38"></span>11. Now that we have exposed their plan
of belittling the Son under cover of magnifying the Father, the next
step is to listen to the exact terms in which they express their own
belief concerning the Son. For, since we have to answer in succession
each of their allegations and to display on the evidence of Holy
Scripture the impiety of their doctrines, we must append, to what they
say of the Father, the decisions which they have put on record
concerning the Son, that by a comparison of their confession of the
Father with their confession of the Son we may follow a uniform order in
our solution of the questions as they arise. They state as their verdict
that the Son is not derived from any pre-existent matter, for through
Him all things were created, nor yet begotten from God, for nothing can
be withdrawn from God; but that He was made out of what was nonexistent,
that is, that He is a perfect creature of God, though different from His
other creatures. They argue that He is a creature, because it is
written, *The Lord hath created Me for a beginning of His ways* <span
id="fr_681"></span>[682](#fn_681) ; that He is the perfect handiwork of
God, though different from His other works, they prove, as to the first
point, by what Paul writes to the Hebrews, *Being made so much better
than the angels, as He possesseth a more excellent name than they* <span
id="fr_682"></span>[683](#fn_682) , and again, *Wherefore, holy
brethren, partakers of the heavenly calling, consider the Apostle and
High Priest of our confession, Jesus Christ, who is faithful to Him that
made Him* <span id="fr_683"></span>[684](#fn_683) . For their
depreciation of the might and majesty and Godhead of the Son they rely
chiefly on His own words, *The Father is greater than I* <span
id="fr_684"></span>[685](#fn_684) . But they admit that He is not one of
the common herd of creatures on the evidence of *All things were made
through Him* <span id="fr_685"></span>[686](#fn_685) . And so they sum
up the whole of their blasphemous teaching in these words which follow:—

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p44"></span>12. “We confess One God, alone unmade,
alone eternal, alone unoriginate, alone true, alone possessing
immortality, alone good, alone mighty, Creator, Ordainer and Disposer of
all things, unchangeable and unalterable, righteous and good, of the Law
and the Prophets and the New Testament. We believe that this God gave
birth to the Only-begotten Son before all worlds, through Whom He made
the world and all things; that He gave birth to Him not in semblance,
but in truth, following His own Will, so that He is unchangeable and
unalterable, God’s perfect creature but not as one of His other
creatures, His handiwork, but not as His other works; not, as Valentinus
maintained, that the Son is a development of the Father; nor, as
Manichæus has declared of the Son, a consubstantial part of the Father;
nor, as Sabellius, who makes two out of one, Son and Father at once;
nor, as Hieracas, a light from a light, or a lamp with two flames; nor
as if He was previously in being and afterwards born or created afresh
to be a Son, a notion often condemned by thyself, blessed Pope <span
id="fr_686"></span>[687](#fn_686) , publicly in the Church and in the
assembly of the brethren. But, as we have affirmed, we believe that He
was created by the will of God before times and worlds, and has His life
and existence from the Father, Who gave Him to share His own glorious
perfections. For, when the Father gave to Him the inheritance of all
things, He did not thereby deprive Himself of attributes which are His
without origination, He being the source of all things.

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p46"></span>13. “So there are three Persons,
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. God, for His part, is the cause of all
things, utterly unoriginate and separate from all; while the Son, put
forth by the Father outside time, and created and established before the
worlds, did not exist before He was born, but, being born outside time
before the worlds, came into being as the Only Son of the Only Father.
For He is neither eternal, nor co-eternal, nor co-uncreate with the
Father, nor has He an existence collateral with the Father, as some say,
who <span id="fr_687"></span>[688](#fn_687) postulate two unborn
principles. But God is before all things, as being indivisible and the
beginning of all. Wherefore He is before the Son also, as indeed we have
learnt from thee in thy public preaching. Inasmuch then as He hath His
being from God, and His glorious perfections, and His life, <span
id="page_75">p. 75</span> <span id="ii.v.ii.iv-Page_75"></span>and is
entrusted with all things, for this reason God is His source, and hath
rule over Him, as being His God, since He is before Him. As to such
phrases as *from Him*, and *from the womb*, and *I went out from the
Father and am come*, if they be understood to denote that the Father
extends a part and, as it were, a development of that one substance,
then the Father will be of a compound nature and divisible and
changeable and corporeal, according to them; and thus, as far as their
words go, the incorporeal God will be subjected to the properties of
matter <span id="fr_688"></span>[689](#fn_688) .”

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p49"></span>14. Such is their error, such their
pestilent teaching; to support it they borrow the words of Scripture,
perverting its meaning and using the ignorance of men as their
opportunity of gaining credence for their lies. Yet it is certainly by
these same words of God that we must come to understand the things of
God. For human feebleness cannot by any strength of its own attain to
the knowledge of heavenly things; the faculties which deal with bodily
matters can form no notion of the unseen world. Neither our created
bodily substance, nor the reason given by God for the purposes of
ordinary life, is capable of ascertaining and pronouncing upon the
nature and work of God. Our wits cannot rise to the level of heavenly
knowledge, our powers of perception lack the strength to apprehend that
limitless might. We must believe God’s word concerning Himself, and
humbly accept such insight as He vouchsafes to give. We must make our
choice between rejecting His witness, as the heathen do, or else
believing in Him as He is, and this in the only possible way, by
thinking of Him in the aspect in which He presents Himself to us.
Therefore let private judgment cease; let human reason refrain from
passing barriers divinely set. In this spirit we eschew all blasphemous
and reckless assertion concerning God, and cleave to the very letter of
revelation. Each point in our enquiry shall be considered in the light
of His instruction, Who is our theme; there shall be no stringing
together of isolated phrases whose context is suppressed, to trick and
misinform the unpractised listener. The meaning of words shall be
ascertained by considering the circumstances under which they were
spoken; words must be explained by circumstances not circumstances
forced into conformity with words. We, at any rate, will treat our
subject completely; we will state both the circumstances under which
words were spoken, and the true purport of the words. Each point shall
be considered in orderly sequence.

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p50"></span>15. Their starting-point is this; We
confess, they say, One only God, because Moses says, *Hear, O Israel,
the Lord thy God is One* <span id="fr_689"></span>[690](#fn_689) . But
is this a truth which anyone has ever dared to doubt? Or was any
believer ever known to confess otherwise than that there is One God from
Whom are all things, One Majesty which has no birth, and that He is that
unoriginated Power? Yet this fact of the Unity of God offers no chance
for denying the Divinity of His Son. For Moses, or rather God through
Moses, laid it down as His first commandment to that people, devoted
both in Egypt and in the Desert to idols and the worship of imaginary
gods, that they must believe in One God. There was truth and reason in
the commandment, for God, from Whom are all things, is One. But let us
see whether this Moses have not confessed that He, through Whom are all
things, is also God. God is not robbed, He is still God, if His Son
share the Godhead. For the case is that of God from God, of One from
One, of God Who is One because God is from Him. And conversely the Son
is not less God because God the Father is One, for He is the
Only-begotten Son of God; not eternally unborn, so as to deprive the
Father of His Oneness, nor yet different from God, for He is born from
Him. We must not doubt that He is God by virtue of that birth from God
which proves to us who believe that God is One; yet let us see whether
Moses, who announced to Israel, *The Lord thy God is One*, has also
proclaimed the Godhead of the Son. To make good our confession of the
Divinity of our Lord Jesus Christ we must employ the evidence of that
same witness on whom the heretics rely for the confession of One Only
God, which they imagine to involve the denial of the Godhead of the Son.

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p52"></span>16. Since, therefore, the words of the
Apostle, *One God the Father, from Whom are all things, and one Jesus
Christ, our Lord, through Whom are all things* <span
id="fr_690"></span>[691](#fn_690) , form an accurate and complete
confession concerning God, let us see what Moses has to say of the
beginning of the world. His words are, *And God said, Let there be a
firmament in the midst of the water, and let it divide the water from
the water. And it was so, and God made the firmament and God divided the
water through the midst* <span id="fr_691"></span>[692](#fn_691) . Here,
then, you have the God from Whom, and the God through Whom. If you deny
it, you must tell us through whom it was that God’s work in creation was
done, or else <span id="page_76">p. 76</span> <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-Page_76"></span>point for your explanation to an
obedience in things yet uncreated, which, when God said *Let there be a
firmament*, impelled the firmament to establish itself. Such suggestions
are inconsistent with the clear sense of Scripture. For all things, as
the Prophet says <span id="fr_692"></span>[693](#fn_692) , were made out
of nothing; it was no transformation of existing things, but the
creation into a perfect form of the non-existent. Through whom? Hear the
Evangelist: *All things were made through Him*. If you ask Who this is,
the same Evangelist will tell you: *In the beginning was the Word, and
the Word was with God, and the Word was God. He was in the beginning
with God. All things were made through Him* <span
id="fr_693"></span>[694](#fn_693) . If you are minded to combat the view
that it was the Father Who said, *Let there be a firmament*, the prophet
will answer you: *He spake, and they were made; He commanded, and they
were created* <span id="fr_694"></span>[695](#fn_694) . The recorded
words, *Let there be a firmament*, reveal to us that the Father spoke.
But in the words which follow, *And it was so*, in the statement that
God did this thing, we must recognise the Person of the Agent. *He
spake, and they were made*; the Scripture does not say that He willed
it, and did it. *He commanded, and they were created;* you observe that
it does not say they came into existence, because it was His pleasure.
In that case there would be no office for a Mediator between God and the
world which was awaiting its creation. God, from Whom are all things,
gives the order for creation which God, through Whom are all things,
executes. Under one and the same Name we confess Him Who gave and Him
Who fulfilled the command. If you dare to deny that *God made* is spoken
of the Son, how do you explain *All things were made through Him?* Or
the Apostle’s words, *One Jesus Christ, our Lord, through Whom are all
things?* Or, *He spake, and they were made?* If these inspired words
succeed in convincing your stubborn mind, you will cease to regard that
text, *Hear, O Israel, the Lord thy God is One*, as a refusal of
Divinity to the Son of God, since at the very foundation of the world He
Who spoke it proclaimed that His Son also is God. But let us see what
increase of profit we may draw from this distinction of God Who commands
and God Who executes. For though it is repugnant even to our natural
reason to suppose that in the words, *He commanded, and they were made*,
one single and isolated Person is intended, yet, for the avoidance of
all doubts, we must expound the events which followed upon the creation
of the world.

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p58"></span>17. When the world was complete and its
inhabitant was to be created, the words spoken concerning him were, *Let
Us make man after Our image and likeness* <span
id="fr_695"></span>[696](#fn_695) . I ask you, Do you suppose that God
spoke those words to Himself? Is it not obvious that He was addressing
not Himself, but Another? If you reply that He was alone, then out of
His own mouth He confutes you, for He says, *Let Us make man after Our
image and likeness.* God has spoken to us through the Lawgiver in the
way which is intelligible to us; that is, He makes us acquainted with
His action by means of language, the faculty with which He has been
pleased to endow us. There is, indeed, an indication of the Son of
God <span id="fr_696"></span>[697](#fn_696) , through Whom all things
were made, in the words, *And God said, Let there be a firmament*, and
in, *And God made the firmament*, which follows: but lest we should
think these words of God were wasted and meaningless, supposing that He
issued to Himself the command of creation, and Himself obeyed it,—for
what notion could be further from the thought of a solitary God than
that of giving a verbal order to Himself, when nothing was necessary
except an exertion of His will?—He determined to give us a more perfect
assurance that these words refer to Another beside Himself. When He
said, *Let Us make man after Our image and likeness*, His indication of
a Partner demolishes the theory of His isolation. For an isolated being
cannot be partner to himself; and again, the words, *Let Us make*, are
inconsistent with solitude, while *Our* cannot be used except to a
companion. Both words, *Us* and *Our* are inconsistent with the notion
of a solitary God speaking to Himself, and equally inconsistent with
that of the address being made to a stranger who has nothing in common
with the Speaker. If you interpret the passage to mean that He is
isolated, I ask you whether you suppose that He was speaking with
Himself? If you do not understand that He was speaking with Himself, how
can you assume that He was isolated? If He were isolated, we should find
Him described as isolated; if He had a companion, then as not isolated.
*I* and *Mine* would describe the former state; the latter is indicated
by *Us* and *Our*.

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p61"></span>18. Thus, when we read, *Let Us make
man after Our image and likeness*, these two words *Us* and *Our* reveal
that there is neither one isolated God, nor yet one God in two
dissimilar Persons; and our confession must be framed in harmony with
the second as well as with the first truth. For the words *our
image*—not *our images*—prove that there is <span id="page_77">p.
77</span> <span id="ii.v.ii.iv-Page_77"></span>one nature possessed by
Both. But an argument from words is an insufficient proof, unless its
result be confirmed by the evidence of facts; and accordingly it is
written, *And God made man; after the image of God made He him* <span
id="fr_697"></span>[698](#fn_697) . If the words He spoke, I ask, were
the soliloquy of an isolated God, what meaning shall we assign to this
last statement? For in it I see a triple allusion, to the Maker, to the
being made, and to the image. The being made is man; God made him, and
made him in the image of God. If Genesis were speaking of an isolated
God, it would certainly have been *And made him after His own image*.
But since the book was foreshowing the Mystery of the Gospel, it spoke
not of two Gods, but of God and God, for it speaks of man made through
God in the image of God. Thus we find that God wrought man after an
image and likeness common to Himself and to God; that the mention of an
Agent forbids us to assume that He was isolated; and that the work, done
after an image and likeness which was that of Both, proves that there is
no difference in kind between the Godhead of the One and of the Other.

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p63"></span>19. It may seem waste of time to bring
forward further arguments, for truths concerning God gain no strength by
repetition; a single statement suffices to establish them. Yet it is
well for us to know all that has been revealed upon the subject, for
though we are not responsible for the words of Scripture, yet we shall
have to render an account for the sense we have assigned to them. One of
the many commandments which God gave to Noah is, *Whoso sheddeth man’s
blood, for his blood shall his life be shed, for after the image of God
made I man* <span id="fr_698"></span>[699](#fn_698) . Here again is the
distinction between likeness, creature, and Creator. God bears witness
that He made man after the image of God. When He was about to make man,
because He was speaking of Himself, yet not to Himself, God said, *After
our image;* and again, after man was made, *God made man after the image
of God*. It would have been no inaccuracy of language, had He said,
addressing Himself, *I have made man after My image*, for He had shewn
that the Persons are one in nature by, *Let us make man after Our
image* <span id="fr_699"></span>[700](#fn_699) . But for the more
perfect removal of all doubt as to whether God be, or be not, a solitary
Being, when He made man He made him, we are told, *After the image of
God*.

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p66"></span>20. If you still wish to assert that
God the Father in solitude said these words to Himself, I can go with
you as far as to admit the possibility that He might in solitude have
spoken to Himself as if He were conversing with a companion, and that it
is credible that He wished the words *I have made man after the image of
God* to be equivalent to *I have made man after My own image*. But your
own confession of faith will refute you. For you have confessed that all
things are from the Father, but all through the Son; and the words, *Let
Us make man*, shew that the Source from Whom are all things is He Who
spoke thus, while *God made him after the image of God* clearly points
to Him through Whom the work was done.

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p67"></span>21. And furthermore, to make all
self-deception unlawful, that Wisdom, which you have yourself confessed
to be Christ, shall confront you with the words, *When He was
establishing the fountains under the heaven, when He was making strong
the foundations of the earth, I was with Him, setting them in order. It
was I, over Whom He rejoiced. Moreover, I was daily rejoicing in His
sight, all the while that He was rejoicing in the world that He had
made, and in the sons of men* <span id="fr_700"></span>[701](#fn_700) .
Every difficulty is removed; error itself must recognise the truth.
There is with God Wisdom, begotten before the worlds; and not only
present with Him, but setting in order, for She was *with Him, setting
them in order*. Mark this work of setting in order, or arranging. The
Father, by His commands, is the Cause; the Son, by His execution of the
things commanded, sets in order. The distinction between the Persons is
marked by the work assigned to Each. When it says *Let us make*,
creation is identified with the word of command; but when it is written,
*I was with Him, setting them in order*, God reveals that He did not do
the work in isolation. For He was rejoicing before Him, Who, He tells
us, rejoiced in return; *Moreover, I was daily rejoicing in His sight,
all the while that He was rejoicing in the world that He had made, and
in the sons of men*. Wisdom has taught us the reason of Her joy. She
rejoiced because of the joy of the Father, Who rejoices over the
completion of the world and over the sons of men. For it is written,
*And God saw that they were good*. She rejoices that God is well pleased
with His work, which has been made through Her, at His command. She
avows that Her joy results from the Father’s gladness over the finished
world and over the sons of men; over the sons of men, because in the one
man Adam the whole human race had begun its course. Thus in the creation
of the world there is no mere soliloquy of an isolated Father; His
Wisdom is His partner <span id="page_78">p. 78</span> <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-Page_78"></span>in the work, and rejoices with Him when
their conjoint labour ends.

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p69"></span>22. I am aware that the full
explanation of these words involves the discussion of many and weighty
problems. I do not shirk them, but postpone them for the present,
reserving their consideration for later stages of the enquiry. For the
present I devote myself to that article of the blasphemers’ faith, or
rather faithlessness, which asserts that Moses proclaims the solitude of
God. We do not forget that the assertion is true in the sense that there
is One God, from Whom are all things; but neither do we forget that this
truth is no excuse for denying the Godhead of the Son, since Moses
throughout the course of his writings clearly indicates the existence of
God and God. We must examine how the history of God’s choice, and of the
giving of the Law, proclaims God co-ordinate with God.

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p70"></span>23. After God had often spoken with
Abraham, Sarah was moved to wrath against Hagar, being jealous that she,
the mistress, was barren, while her handmaid had conceived a son. Then,
when Hagar had departed from her sight, the Spirit speaks thus
concerning her, *And the angel of the Lord said unto Hagar, Return to
thy mistress, and submit thyself under her hands. And the angel of the
Lord said unto her, I will multiply thy seed exceedingly, and it shall
not be numbered for multitude, and again, And she called the Name of the
Lord that spake with her, Thou art God, Who hast seen me* <span
id="fr_701"></span>[702](#fn_701) . It is the Angel of God Who
speaks <span id="fr_702"></span>[703](#fn_702) , and speaks of things
far beyond the powers which a messenger, for that is the meaning of the
word, could have. He says, *I will multiply thy seed exceedingly, and it
shall not be numbered for multitude*. The power of multiplying nations
lies outside the ministry of an angel. Yet what says the Scripture of
Him Who is called the Angel of God, yet speaks words which belong to God
alone? *And she called the Name of the Lord that spake with her, Thou
art God, Who hast seen me*. First He is the Angel of God; then He is the
Lord, for *She called the Name of the Lord;* then, thirdly, He is God,
for *Thou art God, Who hast seen me*. He Who is called the Angel of God
is also Lord and God. The Son of God is also, according to the prophet,
the *Angel of great counsel* <span id="fr_703"></span>[704](#fn_703) .
To discriminate clearly between the Persons, He is called the Angel of
God; He Who is God from God is also the Angel of God, but, that He may
have the honour which is His due, He is entitled also Lord and God.

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p74"></span>24. In this passage the one Deity is
first the Angel of God, and then, successively, Lord and God. But to
Abraham He is God only. For when the distinction of Persons had first
been made, as a safeguard against the delusion that God is a solitary
Being, then His true and unqualified name could safely be uttered. And
so it is written. *And God said to Abraham, Behold Sarah thy wife shall
bear thee a son, and thou shalt call his name Isaac; and I will
establish My covenant with him for an everlasting covenant, and with his
seed after him. And as far Ishmael, behold. I have heard thee and have
blessed him, and will multiply him exceedingly; twelve nations shall he
beget, and I will make him a great nation* <span
id="fr_704"></span>[705](#fn_704) . Is it possible to doubt that He Who
was previously called the Angel of God is here, in the sequel, spoken of
as God? In both instances He is speaking of Ishmael; in both it is the
same Person Who shall multiply him. To save us from supposing that this
was a different Speaker from Him who had addressed Hagar, the Divine
words expressly attest the identity, saying, *And I have blessed him,
and will multiply him*. The blessing is repeated from a former occasion,
for Hagar had already been addressed; the multiplication is promised for
a future day, for this is God’s first word to Abraham concerning
Ishmael. Now it is God Who speaks to Abraham; to Hagar the Angel of God
had spoken. Thus God and the Angel of God are One; He Who is the Angel
of God is also God the Son of God. He is called the Angel because He is
the *Angel of great counsel;* but afterwards He is spoken of as God,
lest we should suppose that He Who is God is only an angel. Let us now
repeat the facts in order. The Angel of the Lord spoke to Hagar; He
spoke also to Abraham as God. One Speaker addressed both. The blessing
was given to Ishmael, and the promise that he should grow into a great
people.

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p76"></span>25. In another instance the Scripture
reveals through Abraham that it was God Who spoke. He receives the
further promise of a son, Isaac. Afterwards there appear to him three
men. Abraham, though he sees three, worships One, and acknowledges Him
as Lord. Three were standing before him, Scripture says, but he knew
well Which it was that he must worship and confess. There was nothing in
outward appearance to distinguish them, but by the eye of faith, the
vision of the soul, he knew his Lord. Then the Scripture goes on, *And
He said unto him, I will* <span id="page_79">p. 79</span> <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-Page_79"></span>*certainly return unto thee at this time
hereafter, and Sarah thy wife shall have a son* <span
id="fr_705"></span>[706](#fn_705) ; and afterwards the Lord said to Him,
*I will not conceal from Abraham My servant the things that I will
do* <span id="fr_706"></span>[707](#fn_706) ; and again, *Moreover the
Lord said, The cry of Sodom and Gomorrah is filled up, and their sins
are exceeding great* <span id="fr_707"></span>[708](#fn_707) . Then
after long discourse, which for the sake of brevity shall be omitted,
Abraham, distressed at the destruction which awaited the innocent as
well as the guilty, said, *In no wise wilt Thou, Who judgest the earth,
execute this judgment. And the Lord said, If I find in Sodom fifty
righteous within the city, then I will spare all the place for their
sakes* <span id="fr_708"></span>[709](#fn_708) . Afterwards, when the
warning to Lot, Abraham’s brother, was ended, the Scripture says, *And
the Lord rained upon Sodom and upon Gomorrah brimstone and fire from the
Lord out of heaven* <span id="fr_709"></span>[710](#fn_709) ; and, after
a while, *And the Lord visited Sarah as He had said, and did unto Sarah
as He had spoken, and Sarah conceived and bare Abraham a son in his old
age, at the set time of which God had spoken to him* <span
id="fr_710"></span>[711](#fn_710) . And afterwards, when the handmaid
with her son had been driven from Abraham’s house, and was dreading lest
her child should die in the wilderness for want of water, the same
Scripture says *And the Lord God heard the voice of the lad, where he
was, and the Angel of God called to Hagar out of heaven, and said unto
her, What is it, Hagar? Fear not, for God hath heard the voice of the
lad from the place where he is. Arise, and take the lad and hold his
hand, for I will make him a great nation* <span
id="fr_711"></span>[712](#fn_711) .

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p84"></span>26. What blind faithlessness it is,
what dulness of an unbelieving heart, what headstrong impiety, to abide
in ignorance of all this, or else to know and yet neglect it! Assuredly
it is written for the very purpose that error or oblivion may not hinder
the recognition of the truth. If, as we shall prove, it is impossible to
escape knowledge of the facts, then it must be nothing less than
blasphemy to deny them. This record begins with the speech of the Angel
to Hagar, His promise to multiply Ishmael into a great nation and to
give him a countless offspring. She listens, and by her confession
reveals that He is Lord and God. The story begins with His appearance as
the Angel of God; at its termination He stands confessed as God Himself.
Thus He Who, while He executes the ministry of declaring the great
counsel is God’s Angel, is Himself in name and nature God. The name
corresponds to the nature; the nature is not falsified to make it
conform to the name. Again, God speaks to Abraham of this same matter;
he is told that Ishmael has already received a blessing, and shall be
increased into a nation; I have blessed him, God says. This is no change
from the Person indicated before; He shews that it was He Who had
already given the blessing. The Scripture has obviously been consistent
throughout in its progress from mystery to clear revelation; it began
with the Angel of God, and proceeds to reveal that it was God Himself
Who had spoken in this same matter.

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p85"></span>27. The course of the Divine narrative
is accompanied by a progressive development of doctrine. In the passage
which we have discussed God speaks to Abraham, and promises that Sarah
shall bear a son. Afterwards three men stand by him; he worships One and
acknowledges Him as Lord. After this worship and acknowledgment by
Abraham, the One promises that He will return hereafter at the same
season, and that then Sarah shall have her son. This One again is seen
by Abraham in the guise of a man, and salutes him with the same promise.
The change is one of name only; Abraham’s acknowledgment in each case is
the same. It was a Man whom he saw, yet Abraham worshipped Him as Lord;
he beheld, no doubt, in a mystery the coming Incarnation. Faith so
strong has not missed its recognition; the Lord says in the Gospel,
*Your father Abraham rejoiced to see My day; and he saw it, and was
glad* <span id="fr_712"></span>[713](#fn_712) . To continue the history;
the Man Whom he saw promised that He would return at the same season.
Mark the fulfilment of the promise, remembering meanwhile that it was a
Man Who made it. What says the Scripture? *And the Lord visited Sarah*.
So this Man is the Lord, fulfilling His own promise. What follows next?
*And God did unto Sarah as He had said*. The narrative calls His words
those of a Man, relates that Sarah was visited by the Lord, proclaims
that the result was the work of God. You are sure that it was a Man who
spoke, for Abraham not only heard, but saw Him. Can you be less certain
that He was God, when the same Scripture, which had called Him Man,
confesses Him God? For its words are, *And Sarah conceived, and bare
Abraham a son in his old age, and at the set time of which God had
spoken to him*. But it was the Man who had promised that He would come.
Believe that He was nothing more than man; unless, in fact, He Who came
was God and Lord. Connect the incidents. It was, confessedly, the Man
who promised that He would come that Sarah might con<span
id="page_80">p. 80</span> <span id="ii.v.ii.iv-Page_80"></span>ceive and
bear a son. And now accept instruction, and confess the faith; it was
the Lord God Who came that she might conceive and bear. The Man made the
promise in the power of God; by the same power God fulfilled the
promise. Thus God reveals Himself both in word and deed. Next, two of
the three men whom Abraham saw depart; He Who remains behind is Lord and
God. And not only Lord and God, but also Judge, for Abraham stood before
the Lord and said, In no wise shalt Thou do this things, to slay the
righteous with the wicked, for then the righteous shall be as the
wicked. In no wise wilt Thou Who judgest the whole earth, execute this
judgment <span id="fr_713"></span>[714](#fn_713) . Thus by all his words
Abraham instructs us in that faith, for which he was justified; he
recognises the Lord from among the three, he worships Him only, and
confesses that He is Lord and Judge.

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p88"></span>28. Lest you fall into the error of
supposing that this acknowledgment of the One was a payment of honor to
all the three whom Abraham saw in company, mark the words of Lot when he
saw the two who had departed; *And when Lot saw them, he rose up to meet
them, and he bowed himself with his face toward the ground; and he said,
Behold, my lords, turn in to your servant’s house* <span
id="fr_714"></span>[715](#fn_714) . Here the plural *lords* shews that
this was nothing more than a vision of angels; in the other case the
faithful patriarch pays the honour due to One only. Thus the sacred
narrative makes it clear that two of the three were mere angels; it had
previously proclaimed the One as Lord and God by the words, *And the
Lord said unto Abraham, Wherefore did Sarah laugh, saying, Shall I then
bear a child? But I am grown old. Is anything from God impossible? At
this season I will return to thee hereafter, and Sarah shall have a
son* <span id="fr_715"></span>[716](#fn_715) . The Scripture is accurate
and consistent; we detect no such confusion as the plural used of the
One God and Lord, no Divine honours paid to the two angels. Lot, no
doubt, calls them *lords*, while the Scripture calls them angels. The
one is human reverence, the other literal truth.

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p91"></span>29. And now there falls on Sodom and
Gomorrah the vengeance of a righteous judgment. What can we learn from
it for the purposes of our enquiry? *The Lord rained brimstone and fire
from the Lord*. It is *The Lord from the Lord*; Scripture makes no
distinction, by difference of name, between Their natures, but
discriminates between Themselves. For we read in the Gospel, *The Father
judgeth no man, but hath given all judgment to the Son* <span
id="fr_716"></span>[717](#fn_716) . Thus what the Lord gave, the Lord
had received from the Lord.

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p93"></span>30. You have now had evidence of God
the Judge as Lord and Lord; learn next that there is the same joint
ownership of name in the case of God and God. Jacob, when he fled
through fear of his brother, saw in his dream a ladder resting upon the
earth and reaching to heaven, and the angels of God ascending and
descending upon it, and the Lord resting above it, Who gave him all the
blessings which He had bestowed upon Abraham and Isaac. At a later time
God spoke to him thus: *And God said unto Jacob, Arise, go up to the
place Bethel, and dwell there, and make there an altar unto God, that
appeared unto thee when thou fleddest from the face of thy
brother* <span id="fr_717"></span>[718](#fn_717) . God demands honour
for God, and makes it clear that demand is on behalf of Another than
Himself. *He who appeared to thee when thou fleddest* are His words: He
guards carefully against any confusion of the Persons. It is God Who
speaks, and God of Whom He speaks. Their majesty is asserted by the
combination of Both under Their true Name of God, while the words
plainly declare Their several existence.

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p95"></span>31. Here again there occur to me
considerations which must be taken into account in a complete treatment
of the subject. But the order of defence must adapt itself to the order
of attack, and I reserve these outstanding questions for discussion in
the next book. For the present, in regard to God Who demanded honour for
God, it will suffice for me to point out that He Who was the Angel of
God, when He spoke with Hagar, was God and Lord when He spoke of the
same matter with Abraham; that the Man Who spoke with Abraham was also
God and Lord, while the two angels, who were seen with the Lord and whom
He sent to Lot, are described by the prophet as angels, and nothing
more. Nor was it to Abraham only that God appeared in human guise; He
appeared as Man to Jacob also. And not only did He appear, but, so we
are told, He wrestled; and not only did He wrestle, but He was
vanquished by His adversary. Neither the time at my disposal, nor the
subject, will allow me to discuss the typical meaning of this wrestling.
It was certainly God Who wrestled, for Jacob prevailed against God, and
Israel saw God.

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p96"></span>32. And now let us enquire whether
elsewhere than in the case of Hagar the Angel of God has been discovered
to be God Himself. He has been so discovered, and found to be not only
God, but the God of Abraham <span id="page_81">p. 81</span> <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-Page_81"></span>and of Isaac and of Jacob. For the Angel
of the Lord appeared to Moses from the bush; and Whose voice, think you,
are we to suppose was heard? The voice of Him Who was seen, or of
Another? There is no room for deception; the words of Scripture are
clear: *And the Angel of the Lord appeared unto him in a flame of fire
from a bush*, and again, *The Lord called unto him from the bush, Moses,
Moses, and he answered, What is it? And the Lord said, Draw not nigh
hither, put off thy shoes from off thy feet, for the place whereon thou
standest is holy ground. And He said unto him, I am the God of Abraham,
and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob* <span
id="fr_718"></span>[719](#fn_718) . He who appeared in the bush speaks
from the bush; the place of the vision and of the voice is one; He Who
speaks is none other than He Who was seen. He Who is the Angel of God
when the eye beholds Him is the Lord when the ear hears Him, and the
Lord Whose voice is heard is recognised as the God of Abraham, and of
Isaac, and of Jacob. When He is styled the Angel of God, the fact is
revealed that He is no self-contained and solitary Being: for He is the
Angel of God. When He is designated Lord and God, He receives the full
title which is due to His nature and His name. You have, then, in the
Angel Who appeared from the bush, Him Who is Lord and God.

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p98"></span>33. Continue your study of the witness
borne by Moses; mark how diligently he seizes every opportunity of
proclaiming the Lord and God. You take note of the passage, *Hear, O
Israel, the Lord thy God is One* <span id="fr_719"></span>[720](#fn_719)
. Note also the words of that Divine song of his; *See, See, that I am
the Lord, and there is no God beside* Me <span
id="fr_720"></span>[721](#fn_720) . While God has been the Speaker
throughout the poem, he ends with, *Rejoice, ye heavens, together with
Him and let all the sons of God praise Him. Rejoice, O ye nations, with
His people, and let all the Angels of God do Him honour* <span
id="fr_721"></span>[722](#fn_721) . God is to be glorified by the Angels
of God, and He says, *For I am the Lord, and there is no God beside Me*.
For He is God the Only-begotten, and the title ‘Only-begotten’ excludes
all partnership in that character, just as the title ‘Unoriginate’
denies that there is, in that regard, any who shares the character of
the Unoriginate Father. The Son is One from One. There is none
unoriginate except God the Unoriginate, and so likewise there is none
only-begotten except God the Only-begotten. They stand Each single and
alone, being respectively the One Unoriginate and the One Only-begotten.
And so They Two are One God, for between the One, and the One Who is His
offspring there lies no gulf of difference of nature in the eternal
Godhead. Therefore He must be worshipped by the sons of God and
glorified by the angels of God. Honour and reverence is demanded for God
from the sons and from the angels of God. Notice Who it is that shall
receive this honour, and by whom it is to be paid. It is God, and they
are the sons and angels of God. And lest you should imagine that honour
is not demanded for God Who shares our nature <span
id="fr_722"></span>[723](#fn_722) , but that Moses is thinking here of
reverence due to God the Father,—though, indeed, it is in the Son that
the Father must be honoured—examine the words of the blessing bestowed
by God upon Joseph, at the end of the same book. They are, *And let the
things that are well-pleasing to Him that appeared in the bush come upon
the head and crown of Joseph* <span id="fr_723"></span>[724](#fn_723) .
Thus God is to be worshipped by the sons of God; but God Who is Himself
the Son of God. And God is to be reverenced by the angels of God; but
God Who is Himself the Angel of God. For God appeared from the bush as
the Angel of God, and the prayer for Joseph is that he may receive such
blessings as He shall please. He is none the less God because He is the
Angel of God; and none the less the Angel of God because He is God. A
clear indication is given of the Divine Persons; the line is definitely
drawn between the Unbegotten and the Begotten. A revelation of the
mysteries of heaven is granted, and we are taught not to dream of God as
dwelling in solitude, when angels and sons of God shall worship Him, Who
is God’s Angel and His Son.

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p104"></span>34. Let this be taken as our answer
from the books of Moses, or rather as the answer of Moses himself. The
heretics imagine that they can use his assertion of the Unity of God in
disproof of the Divinity of God the Son; a blasphemy in defiance of the
clear warning of their own witness, for whenever he confesses that God
is One he never fails to teach the Son’s Divinity. Our next step must be
to adduce the manifold utterance of the prophets concerning the same
Son.

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p105"></span>35. You know the words, *Hear, O
Israel, the Lord thy God is One;* would that you knew them aright! As
you interpret them, I seek in vain for their sense. It is said in the
Psalms, *God, Thy God, hath anointed Thee* <span
id="fr_724"></span>[725](#fn_724) . Impress upon the reader’s mind the
distinction between <span id="page_82">p. 82</span> <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-Page_82"></span>the Anointer and the Anointed;
discriminate between the *Thee* and the *Thy:* make it clear to Whom and
of Whom the words are spoken. For this definite confession is the
conclusion of the preceding passage, which runs thus; *Thy throne, O
God, is for ever and ever; the sceptre of Thy kingdom is a right
sceptre. Thou hast loved righteousness and hated iniquity.* And then he
continues, *Therefore God, Thy God, hath anointed Thee*. Thus the God of
the eternal kingdom, in reward for His love of righteousness and hatred
of iniquity, is anointed by His God. Surely some broad difference is
drawn, some gap too wide for our mental span, between these names? No;
the distinction of Persons is indicated by *Thee* and *Thy*, but nothing
suggests a difference of nature. *Thy* points to the Author, *Thee* to
Him Who is the Author’s offspring. For He is God from God, as these same
words of the prophet declare, *God, Thy God, hath anointed Thee*. And
His own words bear witness that there is no God anterior to God the
Un-originate; *Be ye My witnesses, and I am witness, saith the Lord God,
and My Servant Whom I have chosen, that ye may know and believe and
understand that I am, and before Me there is no other God, nor shall be
after Me* <span id="fr_725"></span>[726](#fn_725) . Thus the majesty of
Him that has no beginning is declared, and the glory of Him that is from
the Unoriginate is safeguarded; for *God, Thy God, hath anointed Thee*.
That word *Thy* declares His birth, yet does not contradict His
nature <span id="fr_726"></span>[727](#fn_726) ; *Thy God* means that
the Son was born from Him to share the Godhead. But the fact that the
Father is God is no obstacle to the Son’s being God also, for *God, Thy
God, hath anointed Thee*. Mention is made both of Father and of Son; the
one title of God conveys the assurance that in character and majesty
They are One.

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p109"></span>36. But lest these words, *For I am,
and before Me there is no other God, nor shall be after Me*, be made a
handle for blasphemous presumption, as proving that the Son is not God,
since after the God, Whom no God precedes, there follows no other God,
the purpose of the passage must be considered. God is His own best
interpreter, but His chosen Servant joins with Him to assure us that
there is no God before Him, nor shall be after Him. His own witness
concerning Himself is, indeed, sufficient, but He has added the witness
of the Servant Whom He has chosen. Thus we have the united testimony of
the Two, that there is no God before Him; we accept the truth, because
all things are from Him. We have Their witness also that there shall be
no God after Him; but They do not deny that God has been born from Him
in the past. Already there was the Servant speaking thus, and bearing
witness to the Father; the Servant born in that tribe from which God’s
elect was to spring. He sets forth also the same truth in the Gospels:
*Behold, My Servant Whom I have chosen, My Beloved in Whom My soul is
well pleased* <span id="fr_727"></span>[728](#fn_727) . This is the
sense, then, in which God says, *There is no other God before Me, nor
shall be after Me*. He reveals the infinity of His eternal and
unchanging majesty by this assertion that there is no God before or
after Himself. But He gives His Servant a share both in the bearing of
witness and in the possession of the Name of God.

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p111"></span>37. The fact is obvious from His own
words. For He says to Hosea the prophet, *I will no more have mercy upon
the house of Israel, but will altogether be their enemy. But I will have
mercy upon the children of Judah, and will save them in the Lord their
God* <span id="fr_728"></span>[729](#fn_728) . Here God the Father gives
the name of God, without any ambiguity, to the Son, in Whom also He
chose us before countless ages. *Their God*, He says, for while the
Father, being Unoriginate, is independent of all, He has given us for an
inheritance to His Son. In like manner we read, *Ask of Me, and I will
give Thee the Gentiles for Thine inheritance* <span
id="fr_729"></span>[730](#fn_729) . None can be God to Him from Whom are
all things <span id="fr_730"></span>[731](#fn_730) , for He is eternal
and has no beginning; but the Son has God, from Whom He was born, for
His Father. Yet to us the Father is God and the Son is God; the Father
reveals to us that the Son is our God, and the Son teaches that the
Father is God over us. The point for us to remember is that in this
passage the Father gives to the Son the name of God, the title of His
own unoriginate majesty. But I have commented sufficiently on these
words of Hosea.

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p115"></span>38. Again, how clear is the
declaration made by God the Father through Isaiah concerning our Lord!
He says, *For thus saith the Lord, the holy God of Israel, Who made the
things to come, Ask me concerning your sons and your daughters, and
concerning the works of My hands command ye Me. I have made the earth
and man upon it, I have commanded all the stars, I have raised up a King
with righteousness, and all His ways are straight. He shall build My
city, and shall turn back the captivity of My people, not for price nor
reward, saith the Lord of Sabaoth. Egypt shall labour,* <span
id="page_83">p. 83</span> <span id="ii.v.ii.iv-Page_83"></span>*and the
merchandise of the Ethiopians and Sabeans. Men of stature shall come
over unto Thee and shall be Thy servants, and shall follow after Thee,
bound in chains, and shall worship Thee and make supplication unto Thee,
for God is in Thee and there is no God beside Thee. For Thou art God,
and we knew it not, O God of Israel, the Saviour. All that resist Him
shall be ashamed and confounded, and shall walk in confusion* <span
id="fr_731"></span>[732](#fn_731) . Is any opening left for gainsaying,
or excuse for ignorance? If blasphemy continue, is it not in brazen
defiance that it survives? God from Whom are all things, Who made all by
His command, asserts that He is the Author of the universe, for, unless
He had spoken, nothing had been created. He asserts that He has raised
up a righteous King, who builds for Himself, that is, for God, a city,
and turns back the captivity of His people, for no gift nor reward, for
freely are we all saved. Next, He tells how after the labours of Egypt,
and after the traffic of Ethiopians and Sabeans, men of stature shall
come over to Him. How shall we understand these labours in Egypt, this
traffic of Ethiopians and Sabeans? Let us call to mind how the Magi of
the East worshipped and paid tribute to the Lord; let us estimate the
weariness of that long pilgrimage to Bethlehem of Judah. In the toilsome
journey of the Magian princes we see the labours of Egypt to which the
prophet alludes. For when the Magi executed, in their spurious, material
way, the duty ordained for them by the power of God, the whole heathen
world was offering in their person the deepest reverence of which its
worship was capable. And these same Magi presented gifts of gold and
frankincense and myrrh from <span id="fr_732"></span>[733](#fn_732) the
merchandise of the Ethiopians and Sabeans; a thing foretold by another
prophet, who has said, *The Ethiopians shall fall down before His face,
and His enemies shall lick the dust. The Kings of Tharsis shall offer
presents, the Kings of the Arabians and Sabeans shall bring gifts, and
there shall be given to Him of the gold of Arabia* <span
id="fr_733"></span>[734](#fn_733) . The Magi and their offerings stand
for the labour of Egypt and for the merchandise of Ethiopians and
Sabeans; the adoring Magi represent the heathen world, and offer the
choicest gifts of the Gentiles to the Lord Whom they adore.

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p119"></span>39. As for the men of stature who
shall come over to Him and follow Him in chains, there is no doubt who
they are. Turn to the Gospels; Peter, when he is to follow his Lord, is
girded up. Read the Apostles: Paul, the servant of Christ, boasts of his
bonds. Let us see whether this ‘prisoner of Jesus Christ’ conforms in
his teaching to the prophecies uttered by God concerning God His Son.
God had said, *They shall make supplication, for God is in Thee*. Now
mark and digest these words of the Apostle:—*God was in Christ,
reconciling the world to Himself* <span
id="fr_734"></span>[735](#fn_734) . And then the prophecy continues,
*And there is no God beside Thee*. The Apostle promptly matches this
with *For there is one Jesus Christ our Lord, through Whom are all
things* <span id="fr_735"></span>[736](#fn_735) . Obviously there can be
none other but He, for He is One. The third prophetic statement is,
*Thou art God and we knew it not*. But Paul, once the persecutor of the
Church, says, *Whose are the fathers, from Whom is Christ, Who is God
over all* <span id="fr_736"></span>[737](#fn_736) . Such is to be the
message of these men in chains; men of stature, indeed, they will be,
and shall sit on twelve thrones to judge the tribes of Israel, and shall
follow their Lord, witnesses to Him in teaching and in martyrdom.

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p123"></span>40. Thus God is in God, and it is God
in Whom God dwells. But how is *There is no God beside Thee* true, if
God be within Him? Heretic! In support of your confession of a solitary
Father you employ the words, *There is no God beside Me;* what sense can
you assign to the solemn declaration of God the Father, *There is no God
beside Thee*, if your explanation of *There is no God beside Me* be a
denial of the Godhead of the Son? To whom, in that case, can God have
said, *There is no God beside Thee?* You cannot suggest that this
solitary Being said it to Himself. It was to the King Whom He summoned
that the Lord said, by the mouth of the men of stature who worshipped
and made supplication, *For God is in Thee.* The facts are inconsistent
with solitude. *In Thee* implies that there was One present within
range, if I may say so, of the Speaker’s voice. The complete sentence,
*God is in Thee*, reveals not only God present, but also God abiding in
Him Who is present. The words distinguish the Indweller from Him in Whom
He dwells, but it is a distinction of Person only, not of character. God
is in Him, and He, in Whom God is, is God. The residence of God cannot
be within a nature strange and alien to His own. He abides in One Who is
His own, born from Himself. God is in God, because God is from God. *For
Thou art God, and we knew it not, O God of Israel, the Saviour.*

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p124"></span>41. My next book is devoted to the
refutation of your denial that God is in God; for the <span
id="page_84">p. 84</span> <span id="ii.v.ii.iv-Page_84"></span>prophet
continues, *All that resist Him shall be ashamed and confounded and
shall walk in confusion.* This is God’s sentence, passed upon your
unbelief. You set yourself in opposition to Christ, and it is on His
account that the Father’s voice is raised in solemn reproof; for He,
Whose Godhead you deny, is God. And you deny it under cloak of reverence
for God, because He says, *There is no other God beside Me*. Submit to
shame and confusion; the Unoriginate God has no need of the dignity you
offer; He has never asked for this majesty of isolation which you
attribute to Him. He repudiates your officious interpretation which
would twist His words, *There is no other God beside Me,* into a denial
of the Godhead of the Son Whom He begot from Himself. To frustrate your
purpose of demolishing the Divinity of the Son by assigning the Godhead
in some special sense to Himself, He rounds off the glories of the
Only-begotten by the attribution of absolute Divinity:—*And there is no
God beside Thee*. Why make distinctions between exact equivalents? Why
separate what is perfectly matched? It is the peculiar characteristic of
the Son of God that there is no God beside Him; the peculiar
characteristic of God the Father that there is no God apart from Him.
Use His words concerning Himself; confess Him in His own terms, and
entreat Him as King; *For God is in Thee, and there is no God beside
Thee. For Thou art God, and we knew it not, O God of Israel, the
Saviour*. A confession couched in words so reverent is free from the
taint of presumption: its terms can excite no repugnance. Above all, we
must remember that to refuse it means shame and ignominy. Brood in
thought over these words of God; employ them in your confession of Him,
and so escape the threatened shame. For if you deny the Divinity of the
Son of God, you will not be augmenting the glory of God by adoring Him
in lonely majesty; you will be slighting the Father by refusing to
reverence the Son. In faith and veneration confess of the Unoriginate
God that there is no God beside Him; claim for God the Only-begotten
that apart from Him there is no God.

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p125"></span>42. As you have listened already to
Moses and Isaiah, so listen now to Jeremiah inculcating the same truth
as they:—*This is our God, and there shall be none other likened unto
Him, Who hath found out all the way of knowledge, and hath given it unto
Jacob His servant and to Israel His beloved. Afterward did He shew
Himself upon earth and dwelt among men* <span
id="fr_737"></span>[738](#fn_737) . For previously he had said, *And He
is Man, and Who shall know Him* <span id="fr_738"></span>[739](#fn_738)
? Thus you have God seen on earth and dwelling among men. Now I ask you
what sense you would assign to *No one hath seen God at any time, save
the Only-begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the Father* <span
id="fr_739"></span>[740](#fn_739) , when Jeremiah proclaims God seen on
earth and dwelling among men? The Father confessedly cannot be seen
except by the Son; Who then is This who was seen and dwelt among men? He
must be our God, for He is God visible in human form, Whom men can
handle. And take to heart the prophet’s words, *There shall be none
other likened to Him*. If you ask how this can be, listen to the
remainder of the sentence, lest you be tempted to deny to the Father His
share of the confession. *Hear, O Israel, the Lord thy God is One*. The
whole passage is, *There shall be none likened unto Him, Who hath found
out all the way of knowledge, and hath given it unto Jacob His servant
and to Israel His beloved. Afterward did He shew Himself upon earth and
dwelt among men*. For there is one Mediator between God and Men, Who is
both God and Man; Mediator both in giving of the Law and in taking of
our body. Therefore none other can be likened unto Him, for He is One,
born from God into God, and He it was through Whom all things were
created in heaven and earth, through Whom times and worlds were made.
Everything, in fine, that exists owes its existence to His action. He it
is that instructs Abraham, that speaks with Moses, that testifies to
Israel, that abides in the prophets, that was born through the Virgin
from the Holy Ghost, that nails to the cross of His passion the powers
that are our foes, that slays death in hell, that strengthens the
assurance of our hope by His Resurrection, that destroys the corruption
of human flesh by the glory of His Body. Therefore none shall be likened
unto Him. For these are the peculiar powers of God the Only-begotten; He
alone was born from God, the blissful Possessor of such great
prerogatives. No second god can be likened unto Him, for He is God from
God, not born from any alien being. There is nothing new or strange or
modern created in Him. When Israel hears that its God is one, and that
no second god is likened, that men may deem him God, to God Who is God’s
Son, the revelation means that God the Father and God the Son are One
altogether, not by confusion of Person but by unity of substance. For
the prophet forbids us, because God the Son is God, to liken Him to some
second deity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_655"></span>[71:656](2090016.htm#fr_655) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p4"></span> § 19.

<span id="fn_656"></span>[72:657](2090016.htm#fr_656) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p9"></span> St. [Luke xxiv.
39](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#039)<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_657"></span>[72:658](2090016.htm#fr_657) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p9.4"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p10"></span> In § 4.

<span id="fn_658"></span>[72:659](2090016.htm#fr_658) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p13"></span> [Deut. vi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#004)<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_659"></span>[72:660](2090016.htm#fr_659) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p14"></span> St. [Mark xii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#029)<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_660"></span>[72:661](2090016.htm#fr_660) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p15"></span> [1 Tim. ii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#005)<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_661"></span>[73:662](2090016.htm#fr_661) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p16"></span> [Rom. xvi.
25-27](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#025)<span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_662"></span>[73:663](2090016.htm#fr_662) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p17"></span> Omitting *solus innascibilis et*,
which are out of place here.

<span id="fn_663"></span>[73:664](2090016.htm#fr_663) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p18"></span> [Is. lxv.
16](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#016)<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_664"></span>[73:665](2090016.htm#fr_664) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p19"></span> St. [John xvii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#003)<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_665"></span>[73:666](2090016.htm#fr_665) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p20"></span> St. [Mark x.
18](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#018)<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_666"></span>[73:667](2090016.htm#fr_666) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p21"></span> [1 Tim. vi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#015)<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_667"></span>[73:668](2090016.htm#fr_667) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p22"></span> [Mal. iii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#006)<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_668"></span>[73:669](2090016.htm#fr_668) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p23"></span> [James
1.17](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#017)<span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_669"></span>[73:670](2090016.htm#fr_669) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p24"></span> [Ps. vii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#012)<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_670"></span>[73:671](2090016.htm#fr_670) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p25"></span> St. [Matt. vi.
26](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#026)<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_671"></span>[73:672](2090016.htm#fr_671) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p26"></span> [Matt.
10:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#029),
[30](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#030)<span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_672"></span>[73:673](2090016.htm#fr_672) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p27"></span> <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p27.1"></span>Susanna (Daniel xiii.) 42.

<span id="fn_673"></span>[73:674](2090016.htm#fr_673) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p28"></span> [Isa.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000), [Isa.
66:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#001), [Isa.
2:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#000)<span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_674"></span>[73:675](2090016.htm#fr_674) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p29"></span> [Acts xvii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#028)<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_675"></span>[73:676](2090016.htm#fr_675) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p30"></span> [Psa.
138.7-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#007)<span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_676"></span>[73:677](2090016.htm#fr_676) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p30.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p31"></span> St. [John iv.
24](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#024)<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_677"></span>[73:678](2090016.htm#fr_677) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p31.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p32"></span> [1 Tim. vi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#016)<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_678"></span>[73:679](2090016.htm#fr_678) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p32.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p33"></span> St. [John i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018)<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_679"></span>[73:680](2090016.htm#fr_679) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p33.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p34"></span> [Exod. iii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#014)<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_680"></span>[73:681](2090016.htm#fr_680) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p34.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p35"></span> [Jer.
1.6](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#006)<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p35.1"></span>
(LXX).

<span id="fn_681"></span>[74:682](2090016.htm#fr_681) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p38.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p39"></span> [Prov. viii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#022)<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_682"></span>[74:683](2090016.htm#fr_682) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p39.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p40"></span> [Heb. i.
4](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#004)<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_683"></span>[74:684](2090016.htm#fr_683) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p40.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p41"></span> [Heb.
3.1](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#001)<span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_684"></span>[74:685](2090016.htm#fr_684) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p41.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p42"></span> St. [John xiv.
28](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#028)<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_685"></span>[74:686](2090016.htm#fr_685) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p42.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p43"></span> St. [John i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003)<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_686"></span>[74:687](2090016.htm#fr_686) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p44.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p45"></span> Of Alexandria.

<span id="fn_687"></span>[74:688](2090016.htm#fr_687) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p46.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p47"></span> Omitting *aut aliqui*.

<span id="fn_688"></span>[75:689](2090016.htm#fr_688) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p47.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p48"></span> This Epistle of Arius to Alexander is
translated substantially as in Newman’s *Arians of the Fourth Century*,
ch. II., § 5, though there are differences of some importance between
Hilary’s Latin version and the Greek in Athanasius *de Synodis*, § 16,
from which Newman’s version is made.

<span id="fn_689"></span>[75:690](2090016.htm#fr_689) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p50.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p51"></span> [Deut. vi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#004)<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_690"></span>[75:691](2090016.htm#fr_690) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p52.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p53"></span> [1 Cor. viii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#006)<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_691"></span>[75:692](2090016.htm#fr_691) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p53.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p54"></span> [Gen.
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#007)<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p54.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_692"></span>[76:693](2090016.htm#fr_692) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p54.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p55"></span> [2 Macc. vii.
28](../../../bib/apo/ma2007.htm#028)<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_693"></span>[76:694](2090016.htm#fr_693) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p55.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p56"></span> St. [John i.
1-3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_694"></span>[76:695](2090016.htm#fr_694) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p56.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p57"></span> [Ps. clxviii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#005)<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_695"></span>[76:696](2090016.htm#fr_695) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p58.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p59"></span> [Gen. i.
26](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#026)<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p59.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_696"></span>[76:697](2090016.htm#fr_696) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p59.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p60"></span> Reading *Filii*.

<span id="fn_697"></span>[77:698](2090016.htm#fr_697) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p61.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p62"></span> [Gen. i.
27](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#027)<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p62.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_698"></span>[77:699](2090016.htm#fr_698) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p63.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p64"></span> [Gen.
9.6](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#006)<span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p64.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_699"></span>[77:700](2090016.htm#fr_699) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p64.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p65"></span> I.e. by the word *Our*.

<span id="fn_700"></span>[77:701](2090016.htm#fr_700) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p67.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p68"></span> [Prov. viii.
28-31](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#028)<span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p68.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_701"></span>[78:702](2090016.htm#fr_701) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p70.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p71"></span> [Gen.
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#010),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#013)<span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p71.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_702"></span>[78:703](2090016.htm#fr_702) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p71.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p72"></span> The parenthesis which follows: “Now
*angel of God* has two senses, that of Him Who is, and that of Him Whose
He is” interrupts the sense and seems quite out of place. The same
distinction in the case of the word Spirit, in Book II. § 32 may be
compared.

<span id="fn_703"></span>[78:704](2090016.htm#fr_703) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p72.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p73"></span> [Isaiah ix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006)<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p73.1"></span>
(LXX).

<span id="fn_704"></span>[78:705](2090016.htm#fr_704) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p74.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p75"></span> [Gen.
17:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#019),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#020)<span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p75.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_705"></span>[79:706](2090016.htm#fr_705) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p76.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p77"></span> [Gen. xviii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#010)<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p77.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_706"></span>[79:707](2090016.htm#fr_706) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p77.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p78"></span> [Gen.
18.17](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#017)<span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p78.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_707"></span>[79:708](2090016.htm#fr_707) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p78.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p79"></span> [Gen.
18.20](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#020)<span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p79.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_708"></span>[79:709](2090016.htm#fr_708) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p79.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p80"></span> [Gen.
18:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#025),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#026)<span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p80.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_709"></span>[79:710](2090016.htm#fr_709) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p80.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p81"></span> [Gen.
19.24](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#024)<span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p81.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_710"></span>[79:711](2090016.htm#fr_710) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p81.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p82"></span> [Gen.
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#002)<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p82.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_711"></span>[79:712](2090016.htm#fr_711) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p82.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p83"></span> [Gen.
21:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#018)<span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p83.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_712"></span>[79:713](2090016.htm#fr_712) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p85.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p86"></span> St. [John viii.
56](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#056)<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p86.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_713"></span>[80:714](2090016.htm#fr_713) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p86.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p87"></span> [Gen. xviii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#025)<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p87.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_714"></span>[80:715](2090016.htm#fr_714) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p88.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p89"></span> [Gen.
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#002)<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p89.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_715"></span>[80:716](2090016.htm#fr_715) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p89.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p90"></span> [Gen.
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#014)<span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p90.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_716"></span>[80:717](2090016.htm#fr_716) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p91.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p92"></span> St. [John v.
22](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#022)<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p92.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_717"></span>[80:718](2090016.htm#fr_717) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p93.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p94"></span> [Gen. xxxv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#001)<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p94.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_718"></span>[81:719](2090016.htm#fr_718) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p96.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p97"></span> [Exod.
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#002),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#004)<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p97.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_719"></span>[81:720](2090016.htm#fr_719) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p98.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p99"></span> [Deut. vi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#004)<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p99.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_720"></span>[81:721](2090016.htm#fr_720) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p99.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p100"></span> [Deut.
32.39](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#039)<span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p100.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_721"></span>[81:722](2090016.htm#fr_721) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p100.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p101"></span> [Deut.
32.43](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#043)<span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p101.1"></span> (LXX.)

<span id="fn_722"></span>[81:723](2090016.htm#fr_722) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p101.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p102"></span> *Dei naturalis*: cf. Book ix. § 39.

<span id="fn_723"></span>[81:724](2090016.htm#fr_723) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p102.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p103"></span> [Deut. xxxiii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#016)<span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p103.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_724"></span>[81:725](2090016.htm#fr_724) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p105.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p106"></span> [Psa.
44.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#008)<span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p106.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_725"></span>[82:726](2090016.htm#fr_725) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p106.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p107"></span> [Is. xliii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#010)<span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p107.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_726"></span>[82:727](2090016.htm#fr_726) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p107.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p108"></span> His human nature also; cf. next §,
and Book xi. § 18.

<span id="fn_727"></span>[82:728](2090016.htm#fr_727) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p109.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p110"></span> St. [Matt. xii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#018)<span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p110.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_728"></span>[82:729](2090016.htm#fr_728) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p111.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p112"></span> [Hos.
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#007)<span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p112.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_729"></span>[82:730](2090016.htm#fr_729) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p112.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p113"></span> [Ps. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#008)<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p113.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_730"></span>[82:731](2090016.htm#fr_730) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p113.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p114"></span> I.e. We cannot say *Thy God* of the
Father.

<span id="fn_731"></span>[83:732](2090016.htm#fr_731) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p115.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p116"></span> [Is. xlv.
11-16](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#011)<span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p116.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_732"></span>[83:733](2090016.htm#fr_732) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p116.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p117"></span> Reading *ex* for *et*.

<span id="fn_733"></span>[83:734](2090016.htm#fr_733) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p117.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p118"></span> [Ps.
72:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#010)<span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p118.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_734"></span>[83:735](2090016.htm#fr_734) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p119.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p120"></span> [2 Cor. v.
19](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#019)<span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p120.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_735"></span>[83:736](2090016.htm#fr_735) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p120.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p121"></span> [1 Cor. viii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#006)<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p121.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_736"></span>[83:737](2090016.htm#fr_736) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p121.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p122"></span> [Rom. ix.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#005)<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p122.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_737"></span>[84:738](2090016.htm#fr_737) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p125.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p126"></span> [Baruch iii.
35-37](../../../bib/apo/bar003.htm#035)<span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p126.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_738"></span>[84:739](2090016.htm#fr_738) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p126.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p127"></span> [Jer. xvii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#009)<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p127.1"></span>
(LXX.).

<span id="fn_739"></span>[84:740](2090016.htm#fr_739) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p127.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p128"></span> St. [John i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018)<span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p128.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book V](2090017)
