[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2090096)  [Next](2090098) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xv"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p1"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XV</span>.—*Concerning the
energies in our Lord Jesus Christ.*

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p2"></span>We hold, further, that there are two
energies <span id="fr_2128"></span>[2129](#fn_2128) in our Lord Jesus
Christ. For He possesses on the one hand, as God and being of like
essence with the Father, the divine energy, and, likewise, since He
became man and of like essence to us, the energy proper to human
nature <span id="fr_2129"></span>[2130](#fn_2129) .

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p5"></span>But observe that energy and capacity
for energy, and the product of energy, and the agent of energy, are all
different. Energy is the efficient (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p5.1"></span>δραστική</span>) and essential activity
of nature: the capacity for energy is the nature from which proceeds
energy: the product of energy is that which is effected by energy: and
the agent of energy is the person or subsistence which uses the energy.
Further, sometimes energy is used in the sense of the product of energy,
and the product of energy in that of energy, just as the terms creation
and creature are sometimes transposed. For we say “all creation,”
meaning creatures.

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p6"></span><span id="page_61b">p. 61b</span>
<span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-Page_61b"></span>Note also that energy is an
activity and is energised rather than energises; as Gregory the
Theologian says in his thesis concerning the Holy Spirit <span
id="fr_2130"></span>[2131](#fn_2130) : “If energy exists, it must
manifestly be energised and will not energise: and as soon as it has
been energised, it will cease.”

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p8"></span>Life itself, it should be observed,
is energy, yea, the primal energy of the living creature and so is the
whole economy of the living creature, its functions of nutrition and
growth, that is, the vegetative side of its nature, and the movement
stirred by impulse, that is, the sentient side, and its activity of
intellect and free-will. Energy, moreover, is the perfect realisation of
power. If, then, we contemplate all these in Christ, surely we must also
hold that He possesses human energy.

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p9"></span>The first thought <span
id="fr_2131"></span>[2132](#fn_2131) that arises in us is called energy:
and it is simple energy not involving any relationship, the mind sending
forth the thoughts peculiar to it in an independent and invisible way,
for if it did not do so it could not justly be called mind. Again, the
revelation and unfolding of thought by means of articulate speech is
said to be energy. But this is no longer simple energy that involves no
relationship, but it is considered in relation as being composed of
thought and speech. Further, the very relation which he who does
anything bears to that which is brought about is energy; and the very
thing that is effected is called energy <span
id="fr_2132"></span>[2133](#fn_2132) . The first belongs to the soul
alone, the second to the soul making use of the body, the third to the
body animated by mind, and the last is the effect <span
id="fr_2133"></span>[2134](#fn_2133) . For the mind sees beforehand what
is to be and then performs it thus by means of the body. And so the
hegemony belongs to the soul, for it uses the body as an instrument,
leading and restraining it. But the energy of the body is quite
different, for the body is led and moved by the soul. And with regard to
the effect, the touching and handling and, so to speak, the embrace of
what is effected, belong to the body, while the figuration and formation
belong to the soul. And so in connection with our Lord Jesus Christ, the
power of miracles is the energy of His divinity, while the work of His
hands and the willing and the saying, *I will, be thou clean* <span
id="fr_2134"></span>[2135](#fn_2134) , are the energy of His humanity.
And as to the effect, the breaking of the loaves <span
id="fr_2135"></span>[2136](#fn_2135) , and the fact that the leper heard
the “I will,” belong to His humanity, while the multiplication of the
loaves and the purification of the leper belong to His divinity. For
through both, that is through the energy of the body and the energy of
the soul, He displayed one and the same, cognate and equal divine
energy. For just as we saw that His natures were united and permeate one
another, and yet do not deny that they are different but even enumerate
them, although we know they are inseparable, so also in connection with
the wills and the energies we know their union, and we recognise their
difference and enumerate them without introducing separation. For just
as the flesh was deified without undergoing change in its own nature, in
the same way also will and energy are deified without transgressing
their own proper limits. For whether He is the one or the other, He is
one and the same, and whether He wills and energises in one way or the
other, that is as God or as man, He is one and the same.

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p15"></span>We must, then, maintain that Christ
has two energies in virtue of His double nature. For things that have
diverse natures, have also different energies, and things that have
diverse energies, have also different natures. And so conversely, things
that have the same nature have also the same energy, and things that
have one and the same energy have also one and the same essence <span
id="fr_2136"></span>[2137](#fn_2136) , which is the view of the Fathers,
who declare the divine meaning <span
id="fr_2137"></span>[2138](#fn_2137) . One of these alternatives, then,
must be true: either, if we hold that Christ has one energy, we must
also hold that He has but one essence, or, if we are solicitous about
truth, and confess that He has according to the doctrine of the Gospels
and the Fathers two essences, we must also confess that He has two
energies corresponding to and accompanying them. For as He is of like
essence with God and the Father in divinity, He will be His equal also
in energy. And as He likewise is of like essence with us in humanity He
will be our equal also in energy. For the blessed Gregory, bishop of
Nyssa, says <span id="fr_2138"></span>[2139](#fn_2138) , “Things that
have one and the same energy, have also absolutely the same power.” For
all energy is the effect of power. But it cannot be that uncreated and
created nature have one and the same nature or power or energy. But if
we should hold that Christ has but one energy, we should attribute to
the divinity of the Word the passions of the intelligent spirit, viz.
tear and grief and anguish.

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p19"></span>If they should say <span
id="fr_2139"></span>[2140](#fn_2139) , indeed, that the holy <span
id="page_62b">p. 62b</span> <span
id="iii.iv.iii.xv-Page_62b"></span>Fathers said in their disputation
concerning the Holy Trinity, “Things that have one and the same essence
have also one and the same energy, and things which have different
essences have also different energies,” and that it is not right to
transfer to the dispensation what has reference to matters of theology,
we shall answer that if it has been said by the Fathers solely with
reference to theology, and if the Son has not even after the incarnation
the same energy as the Father, <span
id="fr_2140"></span>[2141](#fn_2140) assuredly He cannot have the same
essence. But to whom shall we attribute this, *My Father worketh
hitherto and I work* <span id="fr_2141"></span>[2142](#fn_2141) : and
this, *What things soever He seeth the Father doing, these also doeth
the Son likewise* <span id="fr_2142"></span>[2143](#fn_2142) : and this,
*If ye believe not Me, believe My works* <span
id="fr_2143"></span>[2144](#fn_2143) : and this, *The work which I do
bear witness concerning Me* <span id="fr_2144"></span>[2145](#fn_2144) :
and this, *As the Father raised up the dead and quickeneth them, even so
the Son quickeneth whom He will* <span
id="fr_2145"></span>[2146](#fn_2145) . For all these shew not only that
He is of like essence to the Father even after the incarnation, but that
He has also the same energy.

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p27"></span>And again: if the providence that
embraces all creation is not only of the Father and the Holy Spirit, but
also of the Son even after the incarnation, assuredly since that is
energy, He must have even after the incarnation the same energy as the
Father.

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p28"></span>But if we have learnt from the
miracles that Christ has the same essence as the Father, and since the
miracles happen to be the energy of God, assuredly He must have even
after the incarnation the same energy as the Father.

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p29"></span>But, if there is one energy
belonging to both His divinity and His humanity, it will be compound,
and will be either a different energy from that of the Father, or the
Father, too, will have a compound energy. But if the Father has a
compound energy, manifestly He must also have a compound nature.

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p30"></span>But if they should say that together
with energy is also introduced personality <span
id="fr_2146"></span>[2147](#fn_2146) , we shall reply that if
personality is introduced along with energy, then the true converse must
hold good that energy is also introduced along with personality; and
there will be also three energies of the Holy Trinity just as there are
three persons or subsistences, or there will be one person and one
subsistence just as there is only one energy. Indeed, the holy Fathers
have maintained with one voice that things that have the same essence
have also the same energy.

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p32"></span>But further, if personality is
introduced along with energy, those who divine that neither one nor two
energies of Christ are to be spoken of, do not maintain that either one
or two persons of Christ are to be spoken of.

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p33"></span>Take the case of the flaming sword;
just as in it the natures of the fire and the steel are preserved
distinct <span id="fr_2147"></span>[2148](#fn_2147) , so also are their
two energies and their effects. For the energy of the steel is its
cutting power, and that of the fire is its burning power, and the cut is
the effect of the energy of the steel, and the burn is the effect of the
energy of the fire: and these are kept quite distinct in the burnt cut,
and in the cut burn, although neither does the burning take place apart
from the cut after the union of the two, nor the cut apart from the
burning: and we do not maintain on account of the twofold natural energy
that there are two flaming swords, nor do we confuse the essential
difference of the energies on account of the unity of the flaming sword.
In like manner also, in the case of Christ, His divinity possesses an
energy that is divine and omnipotent while His humanity has an energy
such as is our own. And the effect of His human energy was His taking
the child by the hand and drawing her to Himself, while that of His
divine energy was the restoring of her to life <span
id="fr_2148"></span>[2149](#fn_2148) . For the one is quite distinct
from the other, although they are inseparable from one another in
theandric energy. But if, because Christ has one subsistence, He must
also have one energy, then, because He has one subsistence, He must also
have one essence.

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p36"></span>And again: if we should hold that
Christ has but one energy, this must be either divine or human, or
neither. But if we hold that it is divine <span
id="fr_2149"></span>[2150](#fn_2149) we must maintain that He is God
alone, stripped of our humanity. And if we hold that it is human, we
shall be guilty of the impiety of saying that He is mere man. And if we
hold that it is neither divine nor human, we must also hold that He is
neither God nor man, of like essence neither to the Father nor to us.
For it is as a result of the union that the identity in hypostasis
arises, but yet the difference between the natures is not done away
with. But since the difference between the natures is preserved,
manifestly also the energies of the natures will be preserved. For no
nature exists that is lacking in energy.

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p38"></span>If Christ our Master <span
id="fr_2150"></span>[2151](#fn_2150) has one energy, it must be either
created or uncreated; for <span id="page_63b">p. 63b</span> <span
id="iii.iv.iii.xv-Page_63b"></span>between these there is no energy,
just as there is no nature. If, then, it is created, it will point to
created nature alone, but if it is uncreated, it will betoken uncreated
essence alone. For that which is natural must completely correspond with
its nature: for there cannot exist a nature that is defective. But the
energy <span id="fr_2151"></span>[2152](#fn_2151) that harmonises with
nature does not belong to that which is external: and this is manifest
because, apart from the energy that harmonises with nature, no nature
can either exist or be known. For through that in which each thing
manifests its energy, the absence of change confirms its own proper
nature.

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p41"></span>If Christ has one energy, it must be
one and the same energy that performs both divine and human actions. But
there is no existing thing which abiding in its natural state can act in
opposite ways: for fire does not freeze and boil, nor does water dry up
and make wet. How then could He Who is by nature God, and Who became by
nature man, have both performed miracles, and endured passions with one
and the same energy?

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p42"></span>If, then, Christ assumed the human
mind, that is to say, the intelligent and reasonable soul, undoubtedly
He has thought, and will think for ever. But thought is the energy of
the mind: and so Christ, as man, is endowed with energy, and will be so
for ever.

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p43"></span>Indeed, the most wise and great and
holy John Chrysostom says in his interpretation of the Acts, in the
second discourse <span id="fr_2152"></span>[2153](#fn_2152) , “One would
not err if he should call even His passion action: for in that He
suffered all things, He accomplished that great and marvellous work, the
overthrow of death, and all His other works.”

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p45"></span>If all energy is defined as
essential movement of some nature, as those who are versed in these
matters say, where does one perceive any nature that has no movement,
and is completely devoid of energy, or where does one find energy that
is not movement of natural power? But, as the blessed Cyril says <span
id="fr_2153"></span>[2154](#fn_2153) , no one in his senses could admit
that there was but one natural energy of God and His creation <span
id="fr_2154"></span>[2155](#fn_2154) . It is not His human nature that
raises up Lazarus from the dead, nor is it His divine power that sheds
tears: for the shedding of tears is peculiar to human nature while the
life is peculiar to the enhypostatic life. But yet they are common the
one to the other, because of the identity in subsistence. For Christ is
one, and one also is His person or subsistence, but yet He has two
natures, one belonging to His humanity, and another belonging to His
divinity. And the glory, indeed, which proceeded naturally from His
divinity became common to both through the identity in subsistence, and
again on account of His flesh that which was lowly became common to
both. For He Who is the one or the other, that is God or man, is one and
the same, and both what is divine and what is human belong to Himself.
For while His divinity performed the miracles, they were not done apart
from the flesh, and while His flesh performed its lowly offices, they
were not done apart from the divinity. For His divinity was joined to
the suffering flesh, yet remaining without passion, and endured the
saving passions, and the holy mind was joined to the energising divinity
of the Word, perceiving and knowing what was being accomplished.

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p48"></span>And thus His divinity communicates
its own glories to the body while it remains itself without part in the
sufferings of the flesh. For His flesh did not suffer through His
divinity in the same way that His divinity energised through the flesh.
For the flesh acted as the instrument of His divinity. Although,
therefore, from the first conception there was no division at all
between the two forms <span id="fr_2155"></span>[2156](#fn_2155) , but
the actions of either form through all the time became those of one
person, nevertheless we do not in any way confuse those things that took
place without separation, but recognise from the quality of its works
what sort of form anything has.

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p50"></span>Christ, then, energises according to
both His natures <span id="fr_2156"></span>[2157](#fn_2156) and either
nature energises in Him in communion with the other, the Word performing
through the authority and power of its divinity all the actions proper
to the Word, i.e. all acts of supremacy and sovereignty, and the body
performing all the actions proper to the body, in obedience to the will
of the Word that is united to it, and of whom it has become a distinct
part. For He was not moved of Himself to the natural passions <span
id="fr_2157"></span>[2158](#fn_2157) , nor again did He in that way
recoil from the things of pain, and pray for release from them, or
suffer what befel from without, but He was moved in conformity with His
nature, the Word willing and allowing Him œconomically <span
id="fr_2158"></span>[2159](#fn_2158) to suffer that, and to do the <span
id="page_64b">p. 64b</span> <span
id="iii.iv.iii.xv-Page_64b"></span>things proper to Him, that the truth
might be confirmed by the works of nature.

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p54"></span>Moreover, just as <span
id="fr_2159"></span>[2160](#fn_2159) He received in His birth of a
virgin superessential essence, so also He revealed His human energy in a
superhuman way, walking with earthly feet on unstable water, not by
turning the water into earth, but by causing it in the superabundant
power of His divinity not to flow away nor yield beneath the weight of
material feet. For not in a merely human way did He do human things: for
He was not only man, but also God, and so even His sufferings brought
life and salvation: nor yet did He energise as God, strictly after the
manner of God, for He was not only God, but also man, and so it was by
touch and word and such like that He worked miracles.

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p56"></span>But if any one <span
id="fr_2160"></span>[2161](#fn_2160) should say, “We do not say that
Christ has but one nature, in order to do away with His human energy,
but we do so because <span id="fr_2161"></span>[2162](#fn_2161) human
energy, in opposition to divine energy, is called passion (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p58.1"></span>πάτθος</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p58.2"></span>)</span>,” we shall
answer that, according to this reasoning, those also who hold that He
has but one nature do not maintain this with a view to doing away with
His human nature, but because human nature in opposition to divine
nature is spoken of as passible (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p58.3"></span>παθητική</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p58.4"></span> )</span>. But God forbid that we should
call the human activity passion, when we are distinguishing it from
divine energy. For, to speak generally, of nothing is the existence
recognised or defined by comparison or collation. If it were so, indeed,
existing things would turn out to be mutually the one the cause of the
other. For if the human activity is passion because the divine activity
is energy, assuredly also the human nature must be wicked because the
divine nature is good, and, by conversion and opposition, if the divine
activity is called energy because the human activity is called passion,
then also the divine nature must be good because the human nature is
bad. And so all created things must be bad, and he must have spoken
falsely who said, *And God saw every thing that He had made, and,
behold, it was very good* <span id="fr_2162"></span>[2163](#fn_2162) .

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p60"></span>We, therefore, maintain <span
id="fr_2163"></span>[2164](#fn_2163) that the holy Fathers gave various
names to the human activity according to the underlying notion. For they
called it power, and energy, and difference, and activity, and property,
and quality, and passion, not in distinction from the divine activity,
but power, because it is a conservative and invariable force; and
energy, because it is a distinguishing mark, and reveals the absolute
similarity between all things of the same class; and difference, because
it distinguishes; and activity, because it makes manifest; and property,
because it is constituent and belongs to that alone, and not to any
other; and quality, because it gives form; and passion, because it is
moved. For all things that are of God and after God suffer in respect of
being moved, forasmuch as they have not in themselves motion or power.
Therefore, as has been said, it is not in order to distinguish the one
from the other that it has been named, but it is in accordance with the
plan implanted in it in a creative manner by the Cause that framed the
universe. Wherefore, also, when they spoke of it along with the divine
nature they called it energy. For he who said, “For either form
energises close communion with the other <span
id="fr_2164"></span>[2165](#fn_2164) ,” did something quite different
from him who said, *And when He had fasted forty days, He was afterwards
an hungered* <span id="fr_2165"></span>[2166](#fn_2165) : (for He
allowed His nature to energise when it so willed, in the way proper to
itself <span id="fr_2166"></span>[2167](#fn_2166) ,) or from those who
hold there is a different energy in Him or that He has a twofold energy,
or now one energy and now another <span
id="fr_2167"></span>[2168](#fn_2167) . For these statements with the
change in terms <span id="fr_2168"></span>[2169](#fn_2168) signify the
two energies. Indeed, often the number is indicated both by change of
terms and by speaking of them as divine and human <span
id="fr_2169"></span>[2170](#fn_2169) . For the difference is difference
in differing things, but how do things that do not exist differ?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2128"></span>[60b:2129](2090097.htm#fr_2128) <span
id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p3"></span> Cf. *Anast., De operationibus*, I.;
*Joan. Scyth, Con. Sever*. VIII., &c.

<span id="fn_2129"></span>[60b:2130](2090097.htm#fr_2129) <span
id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p4"></span> *Supr*. bk. ii.: *Max., Dial. cum
Pyrrh*.

<span id="fn_2130"></span>[61b:2131](2090097.htm#fr_2130) <span
id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p7"></span> *Orat*. 37, near the beginning.

<span id="fn_2131"></span>[61b:2132](2090097.htm#fr_2131) <span
id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p10"></span> *Anast. Antioch., De
operationibus*.

<span id="fn_2132"></span>[61b:2133](2090097.htm#fr_2132) <span
id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p11.1"></span>καὶ αὐτὸ τὸ ἀποτελούμενον</span>; cf.
*Max., ad Marin*. II.

<span id="fn_2133"></span>[61b:2134](2090097.htm#fr_2133) <span
id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p12"></span> *Max*. tom. ii., *Dogmat. ad
Marin*., p. 124.

<span id="fn_2134"></span>[61b:2135](2090097.htm#fr_2134) <span
id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p13"></span> St. [Matt. viii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#003)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2135"></span>[61b:2136](2090097.htm#fr_2135) <span
id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p14"></span> St. [John vi.
11](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#011)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2136"></span>[61b:2137](2090097.htm#fr_2136) <span
id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p16"></span> See *Act*. 10 *sextæ synodi*.

<span id="fn_2137"></span>[61b:2138](2090097.htm#fr_2137) <span
id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p17"></span> Text, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p17.1"></span>θεηγόρους</span>. Variant, <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p17.2"></span>θεοφόρους</span>.

<span id="fn_2138"></span>[61b:2139](2090097.htm#fr_2138) <span
id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p17.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p18"></span> *Orat. de natura et hyp*. Also in
Basil. 43.

<span id="fn_2139"></span>[61b:2140](2090097.htm#fr_2139) <span
id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p20"></span> *Max.,* *Dial. cum Pyrrh*.

<span id="fn_2140"></span>[62b:2141](2090097.htm#fr_2140) <span
id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p21"></span> *Max.,* *Dial. cum Pyrrh*.

<span id="fn_2141"></span>[62b:2142](2090097.htm#fr_2141) <span
id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p22"></span> St. [John v.
17](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#017)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2142"></span>[62b:2143](2090097.htm#fr_2142) <span
id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p23"></span> [John
5.19](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#019)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2143"></span>[62b:2144](2090097.htm#fr_2143) <span
id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p24"></span> [John
10.38](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#038)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2144"></span>[62b:2145](2090097.htm#fr_2144) <span
id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p24.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p25"></span> [John
5.36](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#036)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2145"></span>[62b:2146](2090097.htm#fr_2145) <span
id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p26"></span> [John
5.21](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#021)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2146"></span>[62b:2147](2090097.htm#fr_2146) <span
id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p31"></span> *Max., ibid*.

<span id="fn_2147"></span>[62b:2148](2090097.htm#fr_2147) <span
id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p34"></span> *Maxim., lib. De duab. vol. et
Dial. cum Pyrrh*.

<span id="fn_2148"></span>[62b:2149](2090097.htm#fr_2148) <span
id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p35"></span> St. [Luke viii.
54](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#054)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p35.1"></span>; *Max., Dial. cum Pyrrh*.

<span id="fn_2149"></span>[62b:2150](2090097.htm#fr_2149) <span
id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p37"></span> *Max., ibid*.

<span id="fn_2150"></span>[62b:2151](2090097.htm#fr_2150) <span
id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p39"></span> *Max., ibid*.

<span id="fn_2151"></span>[63b:2152](2090097.htm#fr_2151) <span
id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p40"></span> Text, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p40.1"></span>ἡ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p40.2"></span>δὲ κατὰ φύσιν ἐνέργεια</span>. Variant,
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p40.3"></span>εἰ δέ</span>.

<span id="fn_2152"></span>[63b:2153](2090097.htm#fr_2152) <span
id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p43.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p44"></span> *Hom.* 1.

<span id="fn_2153"></span>[63b:2154](2090097.htm#fr_2153) <span
id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p45.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p46"></span> *Thes*., xxxii., ch. 2; *Act*. 10,
*sextæ Synodi*.

<span id="fn_2154"></span>[63b:2155](2090097.htm#fr_2154) <span
id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p47"></span> The Monotheletes made much of the
case of the raising of the daughter of Jairus. See *Cyril, In Joan*., p.
351; *Max.,* *Dial. cum Pyrrh., Epist. ad Nicand., Epist. ad Mon.
Sicil*.; Scholiast in *Collect. cont. Severum*, ch. 20.

<span id="fn_2155"></span>[63b:2156](2090097.htm#fr_2155) <span
id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p48.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p49"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p49.1"></span>οἰκονομῶ</span>, *in incarnate form*.

<span id="fn_2156"></span>[63b:2157](2090097.htm#fr_2156) <span
id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p50.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p51"></span> *Leo, Epist. cit*.

<span id="fn_2157"></span>[63b:2158](2090097.htm#fr_2157) <span
id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p51.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p52"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p52.1"></span>οὐ γὰρ ἀφ᾽ ἑαυτοῦ πρὸς τὰ φυσικὰ πάθη
τὴν ὁρμὴν ἐποιεῖτο, οὐδ᾽ αὐτὴν ἐκ τῶν λυπη</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p52.2"></span>?</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p52.3"></span>ῶν ἁφορμὴν καὶ
παραίτησιν</span>.

<span id="fn_2158"></span>[63b:2159](2090097.htm#fr_2158) <span
id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p52.4"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p53"></span> The term is <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p53.1"></span>μορφή</span>, as in
[Phil. 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p53.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_2159"></span>[64b:2160](2090097.htm#fr_2159) <span
id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p54.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p55"></span> *Dion*., ch. 2, *De div. nom. et
Epist*. 4.

<span id="fn_2160"></span>[64b:2161](2090097.htm#fr_2160) <span
id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p56.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p57"></span> *Max.,* *Dial. cum Pyrrh*.

<span id="fn_2161"></span>[64b:2162](2090097.htm#fr_2161) <span
id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p57.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p58"></span> See the reply of Maximus in the
*Dialogue cum Pyrrh*.

<span id="fn_2162"></span>[64b:2163](2090097.htm#fr_2162) <span
id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p58.5"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p59"></span> [Gen. i.
31](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#031)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p59.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2163"></span>[64b:2164](2090097.htm#fr_2163) <span
id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p60.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p61"></span> *Max.,* *Opusc. Polem*., pp. 31,
32.

<span id="fn_2164"></span>[64b:2165](2090097.htm#fr_2164) <span
id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p61.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p62"></span> *Leo, Epist*. 10.

<span id="fn_2165"></span>[64b:2166](2090097.htm#fr_2165) <span
id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p62.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p63"></span> St. [Matt. iv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#002)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p63.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2166"></span>[64b:2167](2090097.htm#fr_2166) <span
id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p63.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p64"></span> *Nyss., adv. Apoll*.

<span id="fn_2167"></span>[64b:2168](2090097.htm#fr_2167) <span
id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p64.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p65"></span> *Chrysost., Hom. in S. Thom.*

<span id="fn_2168"></span>[64b:2169](2090097.htm#fr_2168) <span
id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p65.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p66"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p66.1"></span>δι᾽ ἀντωνυμίας</span>.

<span id="fn_2169"></span>[64b:2170](2090097.htm#fr_2169) <span
id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p66.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xv-p67"></span> *Cyril, in Joan*., bk. viii.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: In reply to those who say “If man has two natures and two
energies, Christ must be held to have three natures and as many
energies.”](2090098)
