[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2090138)  [Next](2090140) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p1"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXVII</span>.—*Concerning the
Resurrection.*

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p2"></span>We believe also in the resurrection
of the dead. For there will be in truth, there will be, a resurrection
of the dead, and by resurrection we mean resurrection of bodies <span
id="fr_2726"></span>[2727](#fn_2726) . For resurrection is the second
state of that which has fallen. For the souls are immortal, and hence
how can they rise again? For if they define death as the separation of
soul and body, resurrection surely is the re-union of soul and body, and
the second state of the living creature that has suffered dissolution
and downfall <span id="fr_2727"></span>[2728](#fn_2727) . It is, then,
this very body, which is corruptible and liable to dissolution, that
will rise again incorruptible. For He, who made it in the beginning of
the sand of the earth, does not lack the power to raise it up again
after it has been dissolved again and returned to the earth from which
it was taken, in accordance with the reversal of the Creator’s judgment.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p5"></span>For if there is no resurrection,
let us eat and drink <span id="fr_2728"></span>[2729](#fn_2728) : let us
pursue a life of pleasure and enjoyment. If there is no resurrection,
wherein do we differ from the irrational brutes? If there is no
resurrection, let us hold the wild beasts of the field happy who have a
life free from sorrow. If there is no resurrection, neither is there any
God nor Providence, but all things are driven and borne along of
themselves. For observe how we see most righteous men suffering hunger
and injustice and receiving no help in the present life, while sinners
and unrighteous men abound in riches and every delight. And who in his
senses would take this for the work of a righteous judgment or a wise
providence? There must be, therefore, there must be, a resurrection. For
God is just and is the rewarder of those who submit patiently to Him.
Wherefore if it is the soul alone that engages in the contests of
virtue, it is also the soul alone that will receive the crown. And if it
were the soul alone that revels in pleasures, it would also be the soul
alone that would be justly punished. But since the soul does not pursue
either virtue or vice separate from the body, both together will obtain
that which is their just due.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p7"></span>Nay, the divine Scripture bears
witness that there will be a resurrection of the body. God in truth says
to Moses after the flood, *Even as the green herb have I given you all
things. But flesh with the life thereof, which is the blood thereof,
shall ye not eat. And surely your blood of your lives will I require; at
the hand of every beast will I require it, and at the hand of every
man’s brother will I require the life of man. Whoso sheddeth man’s
blood, for his blood his own shall be shed, for in the image of God made
I man* <span id="fr_2729"></span>[2730](#fn_2729) . How will He require
the blood of man at the hand of every beast, unless because the bodies
of dead men will rise again? For not for man will the beasts die.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p9"></span>And again to Moses, *I am the God
of Abra*<span id="page_100b">p. 100b</span> <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-Page_100b"></span>*ham, the God of Isaac and the God
of Jacob: God is not the God of the dead* (that is, those who are dead
and will be no more), *but of the living* <span
id="fr_2730"></span>[2731](#fn_2730) , whose souls indeed live in His
hand <span id="fr_2731"></span>[2732](#fn_2731) , but whose bodies will
again come to life through the resurrection. And David, sire of the
Divine, says to God, *Thou takest away their breath, they die and return
to their dust* <span id="fr_2732"></span>[2733](#fn_2732) . See how he
speaks about bodies. Then he subjoins this, *Thou sendest forth Thy
Spirit, they are created: and Thou renewest the face of the earth* <span
id="fr_2733"></span>[2734](#fn_2733) .

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p14"></span>Further Isaiah says: *The dead
shall rise again, and they that are in the graves shall awake* <span
id="fr_2734"></span>[2735](#fn_2734) . And it is clear that the souls do
not lie in the graves, but the bodies.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p16"></span>And again, the blessed Ezekiel
says: *And it was as I prophesied, and behold a shaking and the bones
came together, bone to his bone, each to its own joint: and when I
beheld, lo, the sinews came up upon them and the flesh grew and rose up
on them and the skin covered them above* <span
id="fr_2735"></span>[2736](#fn_2735) . And later he teaches how the
spirits came back when they were bidden.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p18"></span>And divine Daniel also says: *And
at that time shall Michael stand up, the great prince which standeth for
the children of thy people: and there shall be a time of trouble, such
trouble as never was since there was a nation on the earth even to that
same time. And at that time thy people shall be delivered, every one
that shall be found written in the book. And many of them that sleep in
the dust of the earth shall awake: some to everlasting life and some to
shame and everlasting contempt. And they that be wise shall shine as the
brightness of the firmament, and out of the multitude of the just shall
shine like stars into the ages and beyond* <span
id="fr_2736"></span>[2737](#fn_2736) . The words, *many of them that
sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake*, clearly shew that there
will be a resurrection of bodies. For no one surely would say that the
souls sleep in the dust of the earth.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p20"></span>Moreover, even the Lord in the
holy Gospels clearly allows that there is a resurrection of the bodies.
*For they that are in the graves, He says, shall hear His voice and
shall come forth: they that have done good unto the resurrection of
life, and they that have done evil unto the resurrection of
damnation* <span id="fr_2737"></span>[2738](#fn_2737) . Now no one in
his senses would ever say that the souls are in the graves.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p22"></span>But it was not only by word, but
also by deed, that the Lord revealed the resurrection of the bodies.
First He raised up Lazarus, even after he had been dead four days, and
was stinking <span id="fr_2738"></span>[2739](#fn_2738) . For He did not
raise the soul without the body, but the body along with the soul: and
not another body but the very one that was corrupt. For how could the
resurrection of the dead man have been known or believed if it had not
been established by his characteristic properties? But it was in fact to
make the divinity of His own nature manifest and to confirm the belief
in His own and our resurrection, that He raised up Lazarus who was
destined once more to die. And the Lord became Himself the first-fruits
of the perfect resurrection that is no longer subject to death.
Wherefore also the divine Apostle Paul said: *If the dead rise not, then
is not Christ raised. And if Christ be not raised, our faith is vain: we
are yet in our sins* <span id="fr_2739"></span>[2740](#fn_2739) . And,
*Now is Christ risen from the dead and become the first-fruits of them
that slept* <span id="fr_2740"></span>[2741](#fn_2740) , *and the
first-born from the dead* <span id="fr_2741"></span>[2742](#fn_2741) ;
and again, *For if we believe that Jesus died and rose again, even so
them also which sleep in Jesus will God bring with Him* <span
id="fr_2742"></span>[2743](#fn_2742) . *Even so*, he said, *as Christ
rose again.* Moreover, that the resurrection of the Lord was the union
of uncorrupted body and soul (for it was these that had been divided) is
manifest: for He said, *Destroy this temple, and in three days I will
raise it up* <span id="fr_2743"></span>[2744](#fn_2743) . And the holy
Gospel is a trustworthy witness that He spoke of His own body. *Handle
Me and see*, the Lord said to His own disciples when they were thinking
that they saw a spirit, *that it is I Myself, and that I am not
changed* <span id="fr_2744"></span>[2745](#fn_2744) *: for a spirit hath
not flesh or bones, as ye see Me have* <span
id="fr_2745"></span>[2746](#fn_2745) . And when He had said this He
shewed them His hands and His side, and stretched them forward for
Thomas to touch <span id="fr_2746"></span>[2747](#fn_2746) . Is not this
sufficient to establish belief in the resurrection of bodies?

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p32"></span>Again the divine apostle says,
*For this corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put
on immortality* <span id="fr_2747"></span>[2748](#fn_2747) . And again:
*It is sown in corruption, it is raised in incorruption: it is sown in
weakness, it is raised in power: it is sown in dishonour, it is raised
in glory: it is sown a natural body* (that is to say, crass and mortal),
*it is raised a spiritual body* <span
id="fr_2748"></span>[2749](#fn_2748) , such as was our Lord’s body after
the resurrection which passed through closed doors, was unwearying, had
no need of food, or sleep, or drink. *For they will be*, saith the Lord,
*as the angels of God* <span id="fr_2749"></span>[2750](#fn_2749) :
there will no longer be marriage nor procreation of children. The divine
apostle, in truth, says, *For our conversation is in heaven, from
whence* <span id="page_101b">p. 101b</span> <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-Page_101b"></span>*also we look for the Saviour, the
Lord Jesus, Who shall change our vile body that it may be fashioned like
unto His glorious body* <span id="fr_2750"></span>[2751](#fn_2750) : not
meaning change into another form (God forbid!), but rather the change
from corruption into incorruption <span
id="fr_2751"></span>[2752](#fn_2751) .

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p38"></span>But some one will say, *How are
the dead raised up?* Oh, what disbelief! Oh, what folly! Will He, Who at
His solitary will changed earth into body, Who commanded the little drop
of seed to grow in the mother’s womb and become in the end this varied
and manifold organ of the body, not the rather raise up again at His
solitary will that which was and is dissolved? *And with what body do
they come* <span id="fr_2752"></span>[2753](#fn_2752) *? Thou fool*, if
thy hardness will not permit you to believe the words of God, at least
believe His works <span id="fr_2753"></span>[2754](#fn_2753) . *For that
which thou sowest is not quickened except it die* <span
id="fr_2754"></span>[2755](#fn_2754) *. And that which thou sowest, thou
sowest not that body that shall be, but bare grain, it may chance of
wheat or of some other grain. But God giveth it a body as it hath
pleased Him, and to every seed his own body* <span
id="fr_2755"></span>[2756](#fn_2755) . Behold, therefore, how the seed
is buried in the furrows as in tombs. Who is it that giveth them roots
and stalk and leaves and ears and the most delicate beards? Is it not
the Maker of the universe? Is it not at the bidding of Him Who hath
contrived all things? Believe, therefore, in this wise, even that the
resurrection of the dead will come to pass at the divine will and sign.
For He has power that is able to keep pace with His will.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p43"></span>We shall therefore rise again, our
souls being once more united with our bodies, now made incorruptible and
having put off corruption, and we shall stand beside the awful
judgment-seat of Christ: and the devil and his demons and the man that
is his, that is the Antichrist and the impious and the sinful, will be
given over to everlasting fire: not material fire <span
id="fr_2756"></span>[2757](#fn_2756) like our fire, but such fire as God
would know. But those who have done good will shine forth as the sun
with the angels into life eternal, with our Lord Jesus Christ, ever
seeing Him and being in His sight and deriving unceasing joy from Him,
praising Him with the Father and the Holy Spirit throughout the
limitless ages of ages <span id="fr_2757"></span>[2758](#fn_2757) .
Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2726"></span>[99b:2727](2090139.htm#fr_2726) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p3"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
35-44](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#035)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2727"></span>[99b:2728](2090139.htm#fr_2727) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p4"></span> *Epist. in Ancor. n.* 89;
*Method., Contr. Orig*.

<span id="fn_2728"></span>[99b:2729](2090139.htm#fr_2728) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p6"></span> [Isa.
22:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#013), [1 Cor.
15:32](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#032)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2729"></span>[99b:2730](2090139.htm#fr_2729) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p8"></span> [Gen.
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#006)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2730"></span>[100b:2731](2090139.htm#fr_2730) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p10"></span> [Exod.
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#006), [Matt.
22:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#032)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2731"></span>[100b:2732](2090139.htm#fr_2731) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p11"></span> [Wisd. iii.
1](../../../bib/apo/wis003.htm#001)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2732"></span>[100b:2733](2090139.htm#fr_2732) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p12"></span> [Ps. civ.
29](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#029)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2733"></span>[100b:2734](2090139.htm#fr_2733) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p13"></span> [Psa.
104.30](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#030)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2734"></span>[100b:2735](2090139.htm#fr_2734) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p15"></span> [Is. xxvi.
18](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#018)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2735"></span>[100b:2736](2090139.htm#fr_2735) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p17"></span> [Ez. xxxvii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#007)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2736"></span>[100b:2737](2090139.htm#fr_2736) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p19"></span> [Dan.
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#003)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2737"></span>[100b:2738](2090139.htm#fr_2737) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p21"></span> St. [John
5:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#028),
[29](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#029)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2738"></span>[100b:2739](2090139.htm#fr_2738) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p23"></span> St. [John xi.
39-44](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#039)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2739"></span>[100b:2740](2090139.htm#fr_2739) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p24"></span> [1 Cor.
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#017)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2740"></span>[100b:2741](2090139.htm#fr_2740) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p25"></span> [1 Cor.
15.20](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#020)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2741"></span>[100b:2742](2090139.htm#fr_2741) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p26"></span> [Col. i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#018)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2742"></span>[100b:2743](2090139.htm#fr_2742) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p27"></span> [1 Thess. iv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#014)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2743"></span>[100b:2744](2090139.htm#fr_2743) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p28"></span> St. [John ii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#019)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2744"></span>[100b:2745](2090139.htm#fr_2744) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p29"></span> St. [Luke xxiv.
37](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#037)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2745"></span>[100b:2746](2090139.htm#fr_2745) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p30"></span> [Luke
24.39](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#039)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2746"></span>[100b:2747](2090139.htm#fr_2746) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p31"></span> St. [John xx.
27](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#027)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2747"></span>[100b:2748](2090139.htm#fr_2747) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p33"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
35](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#035)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2748"></span>[100b:2749](2090139.htm#fr_2748) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p33.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p34"></span> [1 Cor.
15:42](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#042),
[44](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#044)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2749"></span>[100b:2750](2090139.htm#fr_2749) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p34.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p35"></span> St. [Mark xii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#025)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2750"></span>[101b:2751](2090139.htm#fr_2750) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p35.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p36"></span> [Phil.
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#021)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2751"></span>[101b:2752](2090139.htm#fr_2751) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p36.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p37"></span> *Nyss., loc. citat.; Epiph.,
Hæres.* vi. 4.

<span id="fn_2752"></span>[101b:2753](2090139.htm#fr_2752) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p39"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
35](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#035)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2753"></span>[101b:2754](2090139.htm#fr_2753) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p39.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p40"></span> *Epiph., Ancor., n.* 93.

<span id="fn_2754"></span>[101b:2755](2090139.htm#fr_2754) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p41"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
35](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#035)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2755"></span>[101b:2756](2090139.htm#fr_2755) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p41.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p42"></span> [1 Cor.
15.36-38](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#036)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2756"></span>[101b:2757](2090139.htm#fr_2756) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p43.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p44"></span> See Migne’s Preface to John’s
*Dial., Contr. Manichæos*.

<span id="fn_2757"></span>[101b:2758](2090139.htm#fr_2757) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p44.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p45"></span> In R. 2924 is read: <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p45.1"></span>ἐν τῷ Κυρί& 251·
ἡμῶν, ᾧ πρέπει πάσα δόξα, τιμὴ, καὶ προσκύνησις, νῦν καὶ ἀεὶ, καὶ εἰς
τοὺς αἰ& 242·νας τῶν αἰ& 240·νων. ᾽Αμήν.</span> In 2928: <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iv.iv.xxvii-p45.2"></span>ὅτι αὐτῷ πρέπει
δόξα, τιμὴ καὶ προσκύνησις, νῦν καὶ ἀεὶ</span>, &c.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Indexes](2090140)
