[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2090072)  [Next](2090074) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.ii.xxii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p1"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXII</span>.—*Concerning Passion
and Energy.*

<span id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p2"></span>Passion is a word with various
meanings. It is used in regard to the body, and refers to diseases and
wounds, and again, it is used in reference to the soul, and means desire
and anger. But to speak broadly and generally, passion is an animal
affection which is succeeded by pleasure and pain. For pain succeeds
passion, but is not the same thing as passion. For passion is an
affection of things without sense, but not so pain. Pain then is not
passion, but the sensation of passion: and it must be considerable, that
is to say, <span id="page_36b">p. 36b</span> <span
id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-Page_36b"></span>it must be great enough to come
within the scope of sense.

<span id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p3"></span>Again, the definition of passions of
the soul is this: Passion is a sensible activity of the appetitive
faculty, depending on the presentation to the mind of something good or
bad. Or in other words, passion is an irrational activity of the soul,
resulting from the notion of something good or bad. For the notion of
something good results in desire, and the notion of something bad
results in anger. But passion considered as a class, that is, passion in
general, is defined as a movement in one thing caused by another.
Energy, on the other hand, is a drastic movement, and by “drastic” is
meant that which is moved of itself. Thus, anger is the energy
manifested by the part of the soul where anger resides, whereas passion
involves the two divisions of the soul, and in addition the whole body
when it is forcibly impelled to action by anger. For there has been
caused movement in one thing caused by another, and this is called
passion.

<span id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p4"></span>But in another sense energy is
spoken of as passion. For energy is a movement in harmony with nature,
whereas passion is a movement at variance with nature. According, then,
to this view, energy may be spoken of as passion when it does not act in
accord with nature, whether its movement is due to itself or to some
other thing. Thus, in connection with the heart, its natural pulsation
is energy, whereas its palpitation, which is an excessive and unnatural
movement, is passion and not energy.

<span id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p5"></span>But it is not every activity of the
passionate part of the soul that is called passion, but only the more
violent ones, and such as are capable of causing sensation: for the
minor and unperceived movements are certainly not passions. For to
constitute passion there is necessary a considerable degree of force,
and thus it is on this account that we add to the definition of passion
that it is a sensible activity. For the lesser activities escape the
notice of the senses, and do not cause passion.

<span id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p6"></span>Observe also that our soul possesses
twofold faculties, those of knowledge, and those of life. The faculties
of knowledge are mind, thought, notion, presentation, sensation: and the
vital or appetitive faculties are will and choice. Now, to make what has
been said clearer, let us consider these things more closely, and first
let us take the faculties of knowledge.

<span id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p7"></span>Presentation and sensation then have
already been sufficiently discussed above. It is sensation that causes a
passion, which is called presentation, to arise in the soul, and from
presentation comes notion. Thereafter thought, weighing the truth or
falseness of the notion, determines what is true: and this explains the
Greek word for thought, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p7.1"></span>διάνοια</span>, which is derived from
<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p7.2"></span>διανοεῖν</span>, meaning to think and
discriminate. That, however, which is judged <span
id="fr_1845"></span>[1846](#fn_1845) and determined to be true, is
spoken of as mind.

<span id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p9"></span>Or to put it otherwise: The primary
activity of the mind, observe, is intelligence, but intelligence applied
to any object is called a thought, and when this persists and makes on
the mind an impression of the object of thought, it is named reflection,
and when reflection dwells on the same object and puts itself to the
test, and closely examines the relation of the thought to the soul, it
gets the name prudence. Further, prudence, when it extends its area
forms the power of reasoning, and is called conception, and this is
defined as the fullest activity of the soul, arising in that part where
reason resides, and being devoid of outward expression: and from it
proceeds the uttered word spoken by the tongue. And now that we have
discussed the faculties of knowledge, let us turn to the vital or
appetitive faculties.

<span id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p10"></span>It should be understood that there
is implanted in the soul by nature a faculty of desiring that which is
in harmony with its nature, and of maintaining in close union all that
belongs essentially to its nature: and this power is called will or
<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p10.1"></span>θέλησις</span>. For the essence both of
existence and of living yearns after activity both as regards mind and
sense, and in this it merely longs to realise its own natural and
perfect being. And so this definition also is given of this natural
will: will is an appetite, both rational and vital, depending only on
what is natural. So that will <span id="fr_1846"></span>[1847](#fn_1846)
is nothing else than the natural and vital and rational appetite of all
things that go to constitute nature, that is, just the simple faculty.
For the appetite of creatures without reason, since it is irrational, is
not called will.

<span id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p12"></span>Again <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p12.1"></span>βούλησις</span> or wish is a sort of
natural will, that is to say, a natural and rational appetite for some
definite thing. For there is seated in the soul of man a faculty of
rational desire. When, then, this rational desire directs itself
naturally to some definite object it is called wish. For wish is
rational desire and longing for some definite thing.

<span id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p13"></span>Wish, however, is used both in
connection with what is within our power, and in connection with what is
outside our power, that is, both with regard to the possible and the
impossible. For we wish often to indulge lust or to be temperate, or to
sleep and the <span id="page_37b">p. 37b</span> <span
id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-Page_37b"></span>like, and these are within our power
to accomplish, and possible. But we wish also to be kings, and this is
not within our power, or we wish perchance never to die, and this is an
impossibility.

<span id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p14"></span>The wish <span
id="fr_1847"></span>[1848](#fn_1847) , then, has reference to the end
alone, and not to the means by which the end is attained. The end is the
object of our wish, for instance, to be a king or to enjoy good health:
but the means by which the end is attained, that is to say, the manner
in which we ought to enjoy good health, or reach the rank of king, are
the objects of deliberation <span id="fr_1848"></span>[1849](#fn_1848) .
Then after wish follow inquiry and speculation (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p16.1"></span>ζήτησις</span> and
<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p16.2"></span>σκέψις</span>), and after these, if the
object is anything within our power, comes counsel or deliberation
(<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p16.3"></span>βουλή</span>
or <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p16.4"></span>βούλευσις</span>): counsel is an
appetite for investigating lines of action lying within our own power.
For one deliberates, whether one ought to prosecute any matter or not,
and next, one decides which is the better, and this is called judgment
(<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p16.5"></span>κρίσις</span>). Thereafter, one becomes
disposed to and forms a liking for that in favour of which deliberation
gave judgment, and this is called inclination (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p16.6"></span>γνώμη</span>). For should one form a
judgment and not be disposed to or form a liking for the object of that
judgment, it is not called inclination. Then, again, after one has
become so disposed, choice or selection (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p16.7"></span>προαίρεσις</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p16.8"></span>ἐπιλογή</span>)
comes into play. For choice consists in the choosing and selecting of
one of two possibilities in preference to the other. Then one is
impelled to action, and this is called impulse (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p16.9"></span>ὁρμή</span>): and
thereafter it is brought into employment, and this is called use (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p16.10"></span>χρῆσις</span>).
The last stage after we have enjoyed the use is cessation from desire.

<span id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p17"></span>In the case, however, of creatures
without reason, as soon as appetite is roused for anything, straightway
arises impulse to action. For the appetite of creatures without reason
is irrational, and they are ruled by their natural appetite. Hence,
neither the names of will or wish are applicable to the appetite of
creatures without reason. For will is rational, free and natural desire,
and in the case of man, endowed with reason as he is, the natural
appetite is ruled rather than rules. For his actions are free, and
depend upon reason, since the faculties of knowledge and life are bound
up together in man. He is free in desire, free in wish, free in
examination and investigation, free in deliberation, free in judgment,
free in inclination, free in choice, free in impulse, and free in action
where that is in accordance with nature.

<span id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p18"></span>But in the case of God <span
id="fr_1849"></span>[1850](#fn_1849) , it is to be remembered, we speak
of wish, but it is not correct to speak of choice. For God does not
deliberate, since that is a mark of ignorance, and no one deliberates
about what he knows. But if counsel is a mark of ignorance, surely
choice <span id="fr_1850"></span>[1851](#fn_1850) must also be so. God,
then, since He has absolute knowledge of everything, does not
deliberate <span id="fr_1851"></span>[1852](#fn_1851) .

<span id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p22"></span>Nor in the case of the soul of the
Lord do we speak of counsel or choice, seeing that He had no part in
ignorance. For, although He was of a nature that is not cognisant of the
future, yet because of His oneness in subsistence with God the Word, He
had knowledge of all things, and that not by grace, but, as we have
said, because He was one in subsistence <span
id="fr_1852"></span>[1853](#fn_1852) . For He Himself was both God and
Man, and hence He did not possess the will that acts by opinion <span
id="fr_1853"></span>[1854](#fn_1853) or disposition. While He did
possess the natural and simple will which is to be observed equally in
all the personalities of men, His holy soul had not opinion <span
id="fr_1854"></span>[1855](#fn_1854) (or, disposition) that is to say,
no inclination opposed to His divine will, nor aught else contrary to
His divine will. For opinion (or, disposition) differs as persons
differ, except in the case of the holy and simple and uncompound and
indivisible Godhead <span id="fr_1855"></span>[1856](#fn_1855) . There,
indeed, since the subsistences are in nowise divided or separated,
neither is the object of will divided. And there, since there is but one
nature, there is also but one natural will. And again, since the
subsistences are unseparated, the three subsistences have also one
object of will, and one activity. In the case of men, however, seeing
that their nature is one, their natural will is also one, but since
their subsistences <span id="fr_1856"></span>[1857](#fn_1856) are
separated and divided from each other, alike in place and time, and
disposition to things, and in many other respects, for this reason their
acts of will and their opinions are different. But in the case of our
Lord Jesus Christ, since He possesses different natures, His natural
wills, that is, His volitional faculties belonging to Him as God and as
Man are also different. But since the subsistence is one, and He Who
exercises <span id="page_38b">p. 38b</span> <span
id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-Page_38b"></span>the will is one, the object of the
will, <span id="fr_1857"></span>[1858](#fn_1857) that is, the gnomic
will <span id="fr_1858"></span>[1859](#fn_1858) , is also one, His human
will evidently following His divine will, and willing that which the
divine will willed it to will.

<span id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p30"></span>Further note, that will (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p30.1"></span>θέλησις</span>) and
wish (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p30.2"></span>βούλησις</span>) are two different
things: also the object of will (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p30.3"></span>τὸ θελητόν</span>) and the capacity for
will (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p30.4"></span>θελητικόν</span>), and the subject that
exercises will (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p30.5"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p30.6"></span>θέλων</span>), are all different. For
will is just the simple faculty of willing, whereas wish is will
directed to some definite object. Again, the object of will is the
matter underlying the will, that is to say, the thing that we will: for
instance, when appetite is roused for food. The appetite pure and
simple, however, is a rational will. The capacity for will, moreover,
means that which possesses the volitional faculty, for example, man.
Further, the subject that exercises will is the actual person who makes
use of will.

<span id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p31"></span>The word <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p31.1"></span>τὸ θελήμα</span>, it is well to note,
sometimes denotes the will, that is, the volitional faculty, and in this
sense we speak of natural will: and sometimes it denotes the object of
will, and we speak of will (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p31.2"></span>θέλημα γνωμικόν</span>) depending on
inclination <span id="fr_1859"></span>[1860](#fn_1859) .

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1845"></span>[36b:1846](2090073.htm#fr_1845) <span
id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p7.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p8"></span> Cf. [1 Cor. i.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#010)<span
id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1846"></span>[36b:1847](2090073.htm#fr_1846) <span
id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p11"></span> *Max. ad Marin. et ad Incert.* p.
98.

<span id="fn_1847"></span>[37b:1848](2090073.htm#fr_1847) <span
id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p15"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p15.1"></span>τὸ βουλητόν</span>.

<span id="fn_1848"></span>[37b:1849](2090073.htm#fr_1848) <span
id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p16"></span> *Max. Dial. cum Pyrrh. et Epist.*
1 *ad Marin*.

<span id="fn_1849"></span>[37b:1850](2090073.htm#fr_1849) <span
id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p19"></span> Thomas Aquinas (1—2, *Quæst*. 4,
*a*. 1 and 2) lays down the position in accordance with John of
Damascus, that there is no “counsel” in God *quatenus est appetitus
inquisitivus*, but that there is *quantum ad certitudinem judicii*.
Basil (*Hexaëm. Hom.* 1), arguing against the ancient philosophers who
taught that the world was made <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p19.1"></span>ἀπροαιρέτως</span>, affirms “counsel”
in God in the latter sense.

<span id="fn_1850"></span>[37b:1851](2090073.htm#fr_1850) <span
id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p20"></span> *Max., Epist.* 1 *ad Marin*.

<span id="fn_1851"></span>[37b:1852](2090073.htm#fr_1851) <span
id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p21"></span> Text, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p21.1"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p21.2"></span>δὲ Θεὸς πάντα εἰδὼς ἁπλῶς, οὐ
βουλεύεται</span>. Various reading is, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p21.3"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p21.4"></span>δὲ Θεὸς πάντα αἰδὼς ἁπλῶς
βούλεται</span>.

<span id="fn_1852"></span>[37b:1853](2090073.htm#fr_1852) <span
id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p23"></span> *Max., Dial. cum Pyrrh*.

<span id="fn_1853"></span>[37b:1854](2090073.htm#fr_1853) <span
id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p24"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p24.1"></span>διὸ οὐδὲ γνωμικὸν εἶχε θέλημα</span>.

<span id="fn_1854"></span>[37b:1855](2090073.htm#fr_1854) <span
id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p25"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p25.1"></span>γνωμήν</span>.

<span id="fn_1855"></span>[37b:1856](2090073.htm#fr_1855) <span
id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p26"></span> *v. infr*., lib. iii. ch. 14.

<span id="fn_1856"></span>[37b:1857](2090073.htm#fr_1856) <span
id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p27"></span> Or, *personalities*.

<span id="fn_1857"></span>[38b:1858](2090073.htm#fr_1857) <span
id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p28"></span> Text, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p28.1"></span>θελητόν</span>, as given by Faber.
Variant, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p28.2"></span>θελητικόν</span>.

<span id="fn_1858"></span>[38b:1859](2090073.htm#fr_1858) <span
id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p28.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p29"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p29.1"></span>τὸ γνωμικὸν θέλημα</span>, *the will of
individual opinion,* or, *the dispositional will*.

<span id="fn_1859"></span>[38b:1860](2090073.htm#fr_1859) <span
id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p31.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii.xxii-p32"></span> Or, *acting by opinion*, or
*disposition*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Concerning Energy.](2090074)
