[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2090007)  [Next](2090009) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.i"></span> <span id="page_1">p. 1</span> <span
id="ii.iv.i-Page_1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.i-p1"></span><span class="c16"><span
id="ii.iv.i-p1.1"></span>Introduction to the Treatise De Synodis.</span>

<span id="ii.iv.i-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="ii.iv.i-p3"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="ii.iv.i-p3.1"></span>Hilary</span> had taken no part in the Synod
held at Ancyra in the spring of <span class="c12"><span
id="ii.iv.i-p3.2"></span>a.d.</span> 358, but he had been made
acquainted with its decisions and even with the anathemas which the
legates of that Synod concealed at Sirmium. He saw that these decisions
marked an approach. The horror which was felt at the Sirmian
*Blasphemia* by those Eusebians whose only objection to the Nicene faith
was that they did not understand it, augured well for the future. At the
same time the majority of the Eastern bishops were deliberately
heretical. It was natural that Hilary should be anxious about the
episcopate of the West.

<span id="ii.iv.i-p4"></span>He had been in exile about three years and
had corresponded with the Western bishops. From several quarters letters
had now ceased to arrive, and the fear came that the bishops did not
care to write to one whose convictions were different to their own.
Great was his joy when, at the end of the year 358, he received a letter
which not only explained that the innocent cause of their silence was
ignorance of his address, but also that they had persistently refused
communion with Saturninus and condemned the *Blasphemia*.

<span id="ii.iv.i-p5"></span>Early in 359 he dispatched to them the
*Liber de Synodis*. It is a double letter, addressed to Western bishops,
but containing passages intended for Orientals, into whose hands the
letter would doubtless come in time. Hilary had recognized that the
orthodox of the West had kept aloof from the orthodox of the East,
firstly from ignorance of events, secondly from misunderstanding of the
word <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.i-p5.1"></span>ὁμοούσιος</span>, and thirdly from the feelings
of distrust then prevalent. These facts determined the contents of his
letter.

<span id="ii.iv.i-p6"></span>He begins with an expression of the delight
he experienced on receiving the news that the Gallican bishops had
condemned the notorious Sirmian formula. He praises the constancy of
their faith.

<span id="ii.iv.i-p7"></span>He then mentions that he has received from
certain of their number a request that he would furnish them with an
account of the creeds which had been composed in the East. He modestly
accedes to this request beseeching his readers not to criticise his
letter until they have read the whole letter and mastered the complete
argument. His aim throughout is to frustrate the heretic and assist the
Catholic.

<span id="ii.iv.i-p8"></span>In the first or historical division of the
letter he promises a transcription, with explanations, of all the creeds
drawn up since the Council of <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.i-p8.1"></span>Νιχͅα</span>. He protests that he is not
responsible for any statement contained in these creeds, and leaves his
readers to judge of their orthodoxy.

<span id="ii.iv.i-p9"></span>The Greek confessions had already been
translated into Latin, but Hilary considered it necessary to give his
own independent translations, the previous versions having been
half-unintelligible on account of their slavish adherence to the
original.

<span id="ii.iv.i-p10"></span>The historical part of the book consists
of fifty-four chapters (c. 10–63). It begins with the second Sirmian
formula, and the opposing formula promulgated at Ancyra in <span
class="c12"><span id="ii.iv.i-p10.1"></span>a.d.</span> 358. The Sirmian
creed being given in c. 10, Hilary, before proceeding to give the twelve
anathemas directed against its teaching by the bishops who assembled at
Ancyra, explains <span id="page_2">p. 2</span> <span
id="ii.iv.i-Page_2"></span>the meaning of *essentia* and *substantia*.
Concerning the former he says, *Essentia est res quæ est, vel ex quibus
est, et quæ in eo quod maneat subsistit*. This *essentia* is therefore
identical with *substantia*, *quia res quæ est necesse est subsistat in
sese*. The Ancyran anathemas are then appended, with notes and a
summary.

<span id="ii.iv.i-p11"></span>In the second division (c. 29–33) of the
historical part, Hilary considers the Dedication creed drawn up at
Antioch in <span class="c12"><span id="ii.iv.i-p11.1"></span>a.d.</span>
341. He interprets it somewhat favourably. After stating that the creed
is perhaps not sufficiently explicit in declaring the exact likeness of
the Father and the Son, he excuses this inadequacy by pointing out that
the Synod was not held to contradict Anomœan teaching, but teaching of a
Sabellian tendency. The complete similarity of the Son’s essence to that
of the Father appears to him to be guarded by the phrase *Deum de Deo,
totum ex toto*.

<span id="ii.iv.i-p12"></span>The third division (c. 34–37) contains the
creed drawn up by the Synod, or Cabal Synod, which met at Philippopolis
in <span class="c12"><span id="ii.iv.i-p12.1"></span>a.d.</span> 343.
Hilary does not discuss the authority of the Synod; it was enough for
his purpose that it was composed of Orientals, and that its language
emphatically condemns genuine Arianism and asserts the Son is *God of
God*. The anathema which the creed pronounces on those who declare the
Son to have been begotten without the Father’s will, is interpreted by
Hilary as an assertion that the eternal Birth was not conditioned by
those passions which affect human generation.

<span id="ii.iv.i-p13"></span>The fourth division (c. 38–61) contains
the long formula drawn up at Sirmium in <span class="c12"><span
id="ii.iv.i-p13.1"></span>a.d.</span> 351 against Photinus. The
twenty-seven anathemas are then separately considered and commended. The
two remaining chapters of the historical part of the work include a
reflection on the many-sided character of these creeds both in their
positive and negative aspects. God is *infinitus et immensus*, and
therefore short statements concerning His nature may often prove
misleading. The bishops have used many definitions and phrases because
clearness will remove a danger. These frequent definitions would have
been quite unnecessary if it had not been for the prevalence of heresy.
Asia as a whole is ignorant of God, presenting a piteous contrast to the
fidelity of the Western bishops.

<span id="ii.iv.i-p14"></span>The theological part of the work opens in
c. 64 with Hilary’s exposition of his own belief. He denies that there
is in God only one personality, as he denies that there is any
difference of substance. The Father is greater in that He is Father, the
Son is not less because He is Son. He asks his readers to remember that
if his words fall short, his meaning is sound. This done, he passes to
discuss the meaning of the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.i-p14.1"></span>ὀμοούσιον</span>. Three wrong meanings may be
attributed to it. Firstly, it may be understood to deny the personal
distinctions in the Trinity. Secondly, it may be thought to imply that
the divine essence is capable of division. Thirdly, it may be
represented as implying that the Father and the Son both equally partake
of one prior substance. A short expression like <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iv.i-p14.2"></span>ὁμοούσιος</span> must
therefore receive an exact explanation. A risk is attached to its use,
but there is no risk if we understand it to mean that the Father is
unbegotten and the Son derives His being from the Father, and is like
Him in power, and honour, and nature. The Son is subordinate to the
Father as to the Author of His being, yet it was not by a robbery that
He made Himself equal with God. He is not from nothing. He is wholly
God. He is not the Author of the divine life, but the Image. He is no
creature, but is God. Not a second God, but one God with the Father
through similarity of essence. This is the ideal meaning of <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iv.i-p14.3"></span>ὁμοούσιος</span>, and in
this sense it is not an error to assert, but to deny, the
consubstantiality.

<span id="ii.iv.i-p15"></span>Hilary then makes a direct appeal to the
Western bishops. They might forget the contents of the word while
retaining the sound, but provided that the meaning was granted, what
objection could be made to the word? Was the word <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iv.i-p15.1"></span>ὁμοιούσιον</span> free
from all possible objections? Hilary (c. 72–75) shews that *really like*
means *really equal*. Scripture is appealed to as proving the assertion
that the Son is both like God and equal to God. This essential likeness
can alone justify the statement that the Father and the Son are one. It
<span id="page_3">p. 3</span> <span id="ii.iv.i-Page_3"></span>is
blasphemous to represent the similarity as a mere analogy. The
similitude is a similitude of proper nature and equality. The conclusion
of the argument is that the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.i-p15.2"></span>ὁμοιούσιος</span>, if understood, leads us to
the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.i-p15.3"></span>ὁμοούσιος</span> which helps to guard it, and
that it does not imply any separation between the Persons of the
Trinity.

<span id="ii.iv.i-p16"></span>The saint now turns to the Eastern
bishops, a small number of whom still remained faithful. He bestows upon
them titles of praise, and expresses his joy at the decisions they had
made, and at the Emperor’s repudiation of his former mistake. With
Pauline fervour Hilary exclaims that he would remain in exile all his
life, if only truth might be preached.

<span id="ii.iv.i-p17"></span>Then, in a chapter which displays alike
his knowledge of the Bible and his power of refined sarcasm, he unveils
his suspicions concerning Valens and Ursacius. He doubts whether they
could have been so inexperienced as to be ignorant of the meaning of the
word <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.i-p17.1"></span>ὁμοούσιον</span> when they signed the third
Sirmian Creed. Furthermore he is obliged to point out a defect in the
letter which the Oriental bishops wrote at the Synod of Ancyra. The word
<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.iv.i-p17.2"></span>ὁμοούσιον</span> is
there rejected. The three grounds for such rejection could only be that
the word was thought to imply a prior substance, or the teaching of Paul
of Samosata, or that the word was not in Scripture. The first two
grounds were only illusions, the third was equally fatal to the word
<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.iv.i-p17.3"></span>ὁμοιούσιον</span>.
Those who intelligibly maintained <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.i-p17.4"></span>ὁμοούσιον</span> or <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.i-p17.5"></span>ὁμοιούσιον</span> , meant the same thing and
condemned the same impiety (c. 82). Why should any one wish to decline
the word which the Council of Nicæa had used for an end which was
unquestionably good? The argument is enforced by the insertion of the
Nicene Creed in full. True, the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.i-p17.6"></span>ὁμοούσιον</span> is quite capable of
misconstruction. But the application of this test to the difficult
passages in the Bible would lead to the chaos of all belief. The
possible abuse of the word does not abolish its use. The authority of
the eighty bishops who condemned the Samosatene abuse of it does not
affect the authority of the three hundred and eighteen who ratified its
Nicene meaning. Hilary adds a statement of great importance. Before he
was acquainted with the term he had personally believed what it implied.
The term has merely invigorated his previous faith (c. 88, cf. c. 91).
In other words, Hilary tells his contemporaries and tells posterity that
the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.i-p17.7"></span>ὁμοούσιον</span>, is Scripture because it is
the sense of Scripture, and is truly conservative because it alone
adequately preserves the faith of the fathers. The argument is
interwoven with a spirited appeal to the Eastern bishops to return to
that faith as expressed at Nicæa.

<span id="ii.iv.i-p18"></span>The last chapter (c. 92) is addressed to
the Western bishops. It modestly defends the action of Hilary in
writing, and urges a corresponding energy on the part of his readers.
The whole concludes with a devout prayer.

<span id="ii.iv.i-p19"></span>The *Liber de Synodis*, like other works
in which Catholicism has endeavoured to be conciliatory, did not pass
unchallenged. It satisfied neither the genuine Arian nor the violently
orthodox. The notes or fragments which we call Hilary’s Apology throw
light upon the latter fact. Hilary has to explain that he had not meant
that the Eastern bishops had stated the true faith at Ancyra, and tells
his *Lord and brother Lucifer* that it was against his will that he had
mentioned the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.i-p19.1"></span>ὁμοιούσιον</span>. We must ourselves confess
that Hilary puts an interpretation on the meaning of the Eastern formulæ
which would have been impossible if he had written after the Synod of
Ariminum. Speaking when he did, his arguments were not only pardonable
but right.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: De Synodis or On the Councils.](2090009)
