[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2090004)  [Next](2090006) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iii.i"></span> <span id="page_i">p. i</span> <span
id="ii.iii.i-Page_i"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p1"></span><span class="c16"><span
id="ii.iii.i-p1.1"></span>Introduction.</span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="ii.iii.i-p3"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ii.iii.i-p3.1"></span>Chapter I.—The Life and Writings of St. Hilary
of Poitiers.</span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p4"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="ii.iii.i-p4.1"></span>St. Hilary</span> of Poitiers is one of the
greatest, yet least studied, of the Fathers of the Western Church. He
has suffered thus, partly from a certain obscurity in his style of
writing, partly from the difficulty of the thoughts which he attempted
to convey. But there are other reasons for the comparative neglect into
which he has fallen. He learnt his theology, as we shall see, from
Eastern authorities, and was not content to carry on and develop the
traditional teaching of the West; and the disciple of Origen, who found
his natural allies in the Cappadocian school of Basil and the
Gregories <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) , his juniors though they
were, was speaking to somewhat unsympathetic ears. Again, his Latin
tongue debarred him from influence in the East, and he suffered, like
all Westerns, from that deep suspicion of Sabellianism which was rooted
in the Eastern Churches. Nor are these the only reasons for the neglect
of Hilary. Of his two chief works, the Homilies <span
id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1) on the Psalms, important as they were in
popularising the allegorical method of interpretation, were soon outdone
in favour by other commentaries; while his great controversial work on
the Trinity suffered from its very perfection for the purpose with which
it was composed. It seems, at first sight, to be not a refutation of
Arianism, or of any particular phase of Arianism, but of one particular
document, the Epistle of Arius to Alexander, in which Arian doctrines
are expressed; and that a document which, in the constantly shifting
phases of the controversy, soon fell into an oblivion which the work of
Hilary has nearly shared. It is only incidentally constructive; its plan
follows, in the central portion, that of the production of Arius which
he was controverting, and this negative method must have lessened its
popularity for purposes of practical instruction, and in competition
with such a masterpiece as the *De Trinitate* of St. Augustine. And
furthermore, Hilary never does himself justice. He was a great original
thinker in the field of Christology, but he has never stated his views
systematically and completely. They have to be laboriously reconstructed
by the collection of passages scattered throughout his works; and though
he is a thinker so consistent that little or no conjecture is needed for
the piecing together of his system, yet we cannot be surprised full
justice has never been done to him. He has been regarded chiefly as one
of the sufferers from the violence of Constantius, as the composer of a
useful conspectus of arguments against Arianism, as an unsuccessful
negotiator for an understanding between the Eastern and Western
Churches; but his sufferings were as nothing compared to those of
Athanasius, while his influence in controversy seems to have been as
small as the results of his diplomacy. It is not his practical share, in
word or deed, in the conflicts of his day that is his chief title to
fame, but his independence and depth as a Christian thinker. He has,
indeed, exerted an important influence upon the growth of doctrine, but
it has <span id="page_ii">p. ii</span> <span
id="ii.iii.i-Page_ii"></span>been through the adoption of his views by
Augustine and Ambrose; and many who have profited by his thoughts have
never known who was their author.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p7"></span>Hilary of Poitiers, the most impersonal of
writers, is so silent about himself, he is so rarely mentioned by
contemporary writers—in all the voluminous works of Athanasius he is
never once named,—and the ancient historians of the Church knew so
little concerning him beyond what we, as well as they, can learn from
his writings, that nothing more than a very scanty narrative can be
constructed from these, as seen in the light of the general history of
the time and combined with the few notices of him found elsewhere. But
the account, though short, cannot be seriously defective. Apart from one
or two episodes, it is eminently the history of a mind, and of a
singularly consistent mind, whose antecedents we can, in the main,
recognise, and whose changes of thought are few, and can be followed.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p8"></span>He was born, probably about the year 300
<span class="c12"><span id="ii.iii.i-p8.1"></span>a.d. <span
id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2) </span>, and almost certainly, since he was
afterwards its bishop, in the town, or in the district dependent upon
the town, by the name of which he is usually styled. Other names, beside
Hilarius, he must have had, but we do not know them. The fact that he
has had to be distinguished by the name of his see, to avoid confusion
with his namesake of Arles, the contemporary of St. Augustine, shews how
soon and how thoroughly personal details concerning him were forgotten.
The rank of his parents must have been respectable at least, and perhaps
high; so much we may safely assume from the education they gave him.
Birth in the Gallic provinces during the fourth century brought with it
no sense of provincial inferiority. Society was thoroughly Roman, and
education and literature more vigorous, so far as we can judge, than in
any other part of the West. The citizen of Gaul and of Northern Italy
was, in fact, more in the centre of the world’s life than the inhabitant
of Rome. Gaul was in the West what Roman Asia was in the East, the
province of decisive importance, both for position and for wealth. And
in this prosperous and highly civilised community the opportunities for
the highest education were ample. We know, from Ausonius and otherwise,
how complete was the provision for teaching at Bordeaux and elsewhere in
Gaul. Greek was taught habitually as well as Latin. In fact, never since
the days of Hadrian had educated society throughout the Empire been so
nearly bilingual. It was not only that the Latin-speaking West had still
to turn for its culture and its philosophy to the literature of Greece.
Since the days of Diocletian the court, or at least the most important
court, had resided as a rule in Asia, and Greek had tended to become,
equally with Latin, the language of the courtier and the administrator.
The two were of almost equal importance; if an Oriental like Ammianus
Marcellinus could write, and write well, in Latin, we may be certain
that, in return, Greek was familiar to educated Westerns. To Hilary it
was certainly familiar from his youth; his earlier thoughts were moulded
by Neoplatonism, and his later decisively influenced by the writings of
Origen <span id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3) . His literary and technical
knowledge of Latin was also complete <span id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4) .
It would <span id="page_iii">p. iii</span> <span
id="ii.iii.i-Page_iii"></span>require wide special study and knowledge
to fix his relation in matters of composition and rhetoric to other
writers. But one assertion, that of Jerome <span
id="fr_5"></span>[6](#fn_5) , that Hilary was a deliberate imitator of
the style of Quintilian, cannot be taken seriously. Jerome is the most
reckless of writers; and it is at least possible to be somewhat familiar
with the writings of both and yet see no resemblance, except in a
certain sustained gravity, between them. Another description by Jerome
of Hilary as ‘mounted on Gallic buskin and adorned with flowers of
Greece’ is suitable enough, as to its first part, to Hilary’s dignified
rhetoric; the flowers of Greece, if they mean embellishments inserted
for their own sake, are not perceptible. In this same passage <span
id="fr_6"></span>[7](#fn_6) Jerome goes on to criticise Hilary’s
entanglement in long periods, which renders him unsuitable for unlearned
readers. But those laborious, yet perfectly constructed, sentences are
an essential part of his method. Without them he could not attain the
effect he desires; they are as deliberate and, in their way, as
successful as the eccentricities of Tacitus. But when Jerome elsewhere
calls Hilary ‘the Rhone of Latin eloquence <span
id="fr_7"></span>[8](#fn_7) ,’ he is speaking at random. It is only
rarely that he breaks through his habitual sobriety of utterance; and
his rare outbursts of devotion or denunciation are perhaps the more
effective because the reader is unprepared to expect them. Such language
as this of Jerome shews that Hilary’s literary accomplishments were
recognised, even though it fails to describe them well. But though he
had at his command, and avowedly employed, the resources of rhetoric in
order that his words might be as worthy as he could make them of the
greatness of his theme <span id="fr_8"></span>[9](#fn_8) , yet some
portions of the *De Trinitate*, and most of the Homilies on the Psalms
are written in a singularly equable and almost conversational style, the
unobtrusive excellence of which manifests the hand of a clear thinker
and a practiced writer. He is no pedant <span
id="fr_9"></span>[10](#fn_9) , no laborious imitator of antiquity,
distant or near; he abstains, perhaps more completely than any other
Christian writer of classical education, from the allusions to the poets
which were the usual ornament of prose. He is an eminently businesslike
writer; his pages, where they are unadorned, express his meaning with
perfect clearness; where they are decked out with antithesis or
apostrophe and other devices of rhetoric, they would no doubt, if our
training could put us in sympathy with him, produce the effect upon us
which he designed, and we must, in justice to him, remember as we read
that, in their own kind, they are excellent, and that, whether they aid
us or no in entering into his argument, they never obscure his thought.
Save in the few passages when corruption exists in the text, it is never
safe to assert that Hillary is unintelligible. The reader or translator
who cannot follow or render the argument must rather lay the blame upon
his own imperfect knowledge of the language and thought of the fourth
century. Where he is stating or proving truth, whether well-established
or newly ascertained, he is admirably precise; and even in his more
dubious speculations he never cloaks a weak argument in ambiguous
language. A loftier genius might have given us in language inadequate,
through no fault of his own, to the attempt some intimations of remoter
truths. We must be thankful to the sober Hilary that he, with his strong
sense of the limitations of our intellect, has provided a clear and
accurate statement of the case against Arianism, and has widened the
bounds of theological knowledge by reasonable deductions from the text
of Scripture, usually convincing and always suggestive.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p17"></span><span id="page_iv">p. iv</span> <span
id="ii.iii.i-Page_iv"></span>His training as a writer and thinker had
certainly been accomplished before his conversion. His literary work
done, like that of St. Cyprian, within a few years of middle life,
displays, with a somewhat increasing maturity of thought, a steady
uniformity of language and idiom, which can only have been acquired in
his earlier days. And this assured possession of literary form was
naturally accompanied by a philosophical training. Of one branch of a
philosophical education, that of logic, there is almost too much
evidence in his pages. He is free from the repulsive angularity which
sometimes disfigures the pages of Novatian, a writer who had no great
influence over him; but in the *De Trinitate* he too often refuses to
trust his reader’s intelligence, and insists upon being logical not only
in thought but in expression. But, sound premises being given, he may
always be expected to draw the right conclusion. He is singularly free
from confusion of thought, and never advances to results beyond what his
premises warrant. It is only when a false, though accepted, exegesis
misleads him, in certain collateral arguments which may be surrendered
without loss to his main theses, that he can be refuted; or again when,
in his ventures into new fields of thought, he is unfortunate in the
selection or combination of texts. But in these cases, as always, the
logical processes are not in fault; his deduction is clear and honest.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p18"></span>Philosophy in those days was regarded as
incomplete unless it included some knowledge of natural phenomena, to be
used for purposes of analogy. Origen and Athanasius display a
considerable interest in, and acquaintance with, physical and
physiological matters, and Hilary shares the taste. The conditions of
human or animal birth and life and death are often discussed <span
id="fr_10"></span>[11](#fn_10) ; he believes in universal remedies for
disease <span id="fr_11"></span>[12](#fn_11) , and knows of the
employment of anæsthetics in surgery <span
id="fr_12"></span>[13](#fn_12) . Sometimes he wanders further afield,
as, for instance, in his account of the natural history of the
fig-tree <span id="fr_13"></span>[14](#fn_13) and the worm <span
id="fr_14"></span>[15](#fn_14) , and in the curious little piece of
information concerning Troglodytes and topazes, borrowed, he says, from
secular writers, and still to be read in the elder Pliny <span
id="fr_15"></span>[16](#fn_15) . Even where he seems to be borrowing, on
rare occasions, from the commonplaces of Roman poetry, it is rather with
the interest of the naturalist than of the rhetorician, as when he
speaks in all seriousness of ‘Marsian enchantments and hissing vipers
lulled to sleep <span id="fr_16"></span>[17](#fn_16) ,’ or recalls
Lucan’s asps and basilisks of the African desert as a description of his
heretical opponents <span id="fr_17"></span>[18](#fn_17) . Perhaps his
lost work, twice mentioned by Jerome <span
id="fr_18"></span>[19](#fn_18) , against the physician Dioscorus was a
refutation of physical arguments against Christianity.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p28"></span>Hilary’s speculative thought, like that
of every serious adherent of the pagan creed, had certainly been
inspired by Neoplatonism. We cannot take the account of his spiritual
progress up to the full Catholic faith, which he gives in the beginning
of the *De Trinitate*, and of which we find a less finished sketch in
the Homily on [Psalm lxi.](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#000)<span
id="ii.iii.i-p28.1"></span> § 2, as literal history. It is too
symmetrical in its advance through steadily increasing light to the
perfect knowledge, too well prepared as a piece of literary
workmanship—it is indeed an admirable example of majestic prose, a
worthy preface to that great treatise—for us to accept it, as it stands,
as the record of actual experience. But we may safely see in it the
evidence that Hilary had been an earnest student of the best thought of
his day, and had found in Neoplatonism not only a speculative training
but also the desire, which was to find its satisfaction in the Faith,
for knowledge of God, and for union with Him. It was a debt which
Origen, his master, shared with him; and it must have been because, as a
Neoplatonist feeling after the truth, he found so much of common ground
in Origen, that he was able to accept so <span id="page_v">p. v</span>
<span id="ii.iii.i-Page_v"></span>fully the teaching of Alexandria. But
it would be impossible to separate between the lessons which Hilary had
learnt from the pagan form of this philosophy, and those which may have
been new to him when he studied it in its Christian presentment. Of the
influence of Christian Platonism upon him something will be said
shortly. At this point we need only mention as a noteworthy indication
of the fact that Hilary was not unmindful of the debt, that the only
philosophy which he specifically attacks is the godless system of
Epicurus, which denies creation, declares that the gods do not concern
themselves with men, and deifies water or earth or atoms <span
id="fr_19"></span>[20](#fn_19) .

<span id="ii.iii.i-p30"></span>It was, then, as a man of mature age, of
literary skill and philosophical training, that Hilary approached
Christianity. He had been drawn towards the Faith by desire for a truth
which he had not found in philosophy; and his conviction that this truth
was Christianity was established by independent study of Scripture, not
by intercourse with Christian teachers; so much we may safely conclude
from the early pages of the *De Trinitate*. It must remain doubtful
whether the works of Origen, who influenced his thought so profoundly,
had fallen into his hands before his conversion, or whether it was as a
Christian, seeking for further light upon the Faith, that he first
studied them. For it is certainly improbable that he would find among
the Christians of his own district many who could help him in
intellectual difficulties. The educated classes were still largely
pagan, and the Christian body, which was, we may say, unanimously and
undoubtingly Catholic, held, without much mental activity, a traditional
and inherited faith. Into this body Hilary entered by Baptism, at some
unknown date. His age at the time, his employment, whether or no he was
married <span id="fr_20"></span>[21](#fn_20) , whether or no he entered
the ministry of the Church of Poitiers, can never be known. It is only
certain that he was strengthening his faith by thought and study.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p32"></span>He had come to the Faith, St. Augustine
says <span id="fr_21"></span>[22](#fn_21) , laden, like Cyprian,
Lactantius and others, with the gold and silver and raiment of Egypt;
and he would naturally wish to find a Christian employment for the
philosophy which he brought with him. If his horizon had been limited to
his neighbours in Gaul, he would have found little encouragement and
less assistance. The oral teaching which prevailed in the West
furnished, no doubt, safe guidance in doctrine, but could not supply
reasons for the Faith. And reasons were the one great interest of
Hilary. The whole practical side of Christianity as a system of life is
ignored, or rather taken for granted and therefore not discussed, in his
writings, which are ample enough to be a mirror of his thought. For
instance, we cannot doubt that his belief concerning the Eucharist was
that of the whole Church. Yet in the great treatise on the Trinity, of
which no small part is given to the proof that Christ is God and Man,
and that through this union must come the union of man with God, the
Eucharist as a means to such union is only once introduced, and that in
a short passage, and for the purpose of argument <span
id="fr_22"></span>[23](#fn_22) . And altogether it would be as
impossible to reconstruct the Christian life and thought of the day from
his writings as from those of the half-pagan Arnobius. To such a mind as
this the teaching which ordinary Christians needed and welcomed could
bring no satisfaction, and no aid towards the interpretation of
Scripture. The Western Church was, indeed, in an almost illogical
position. Conviction was in advance of argument. The loyal practice of
the Faith had led men on, as it were by intuition, to apprehend and
firmly hold truths which the more thoughtful East was doubtfully and
painfully approaching. Here, again, Hilary would be out of sympathy with
his neighbours, and we cannot wonder that in such a doctrine <span
id="page_vi">p. vi</span> <span id="ii.iii.i-Page_vi"></span>as that of
the Holy Spirit he held the conservative Eastern view. Nor were the
Latin speaking Churches well equipped with theological literature. The
two <span id="fr_23"></span>[24](#fn_23) great theologians who had as
yet written in their tongue, Tertullian and Novatian, with the former of
whom Hilary was familiar, were discredited by their personal history.
St. Cyprian, the one doctor whom the West already boasted, could teach
disciplined enthusiasm and Christian morality, but his scattered
statements concerning points of doctrine convey nothing more than a
general impression of piety and soundness; and even his arrangement, in
the *Testimonia*, of Scriptural evidences was a poor weapon against the
logical attack of Arianism. But there is little reason to suppose that
there was any general sense of the need of a more systematic theology.
Africa was paralysed, and the attention of the Western provinces
probably engrossed, by the Donatist strife, into which questions of
doctrine did not enter. The adjustment of the relations between Church
and State, the instruction and government of the countless proselytes
who flocked to the Faith while toleration grew into imperial favour,
must have needed all the attention that the Church’s rulers could give.
And these busy years had followed upon a generation of merciless
persecution, during which change of practice or growth of thought had
been impossible; and the confessors, naturally a conservative force,
were one of the dominant powers in the church. We cannot be surprised
that the scattered notices in Hilary’s writings of points of discipline,
and his hortatory teaching, are in no respect different from what we
find a century earlier in St. Cyprian. And men who were content to leave
the superstructure as they found it were not likely to probe the
foundations. Their belief grew in definiteness as the years went on, and
faithful lives were rewarded, almost unconsciously, with a deeper
insight into truth. But meanwhile they took the Faith as they had
received it; one might say, as a matter of course. There was little
heresy within the Western Church. Arianism was never prevalent enough to
excite fear, even though repugnance were felt. The Churches were
satisfied with faith and life as they saw it within and around them.
Their religion was traditional, in no degenerate sense.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p36"></span>But such a religion could not satisfy
ardent and logical minds, like those of St. Hilary and his two great
successors, St. Ambrose and St. Augustine. To such men it was a
necessity of their faith that they should know, and know in its right
proportions, the truth so far as it had been revealed, and trace the
appointed limits which human knowledge might not overpass. For their own
assurance and for effective warfare against heresy a reasoned system of
theology was necessary. Hilary, the earliest, had the greatest
difficulty. To aid him in the interpretation of Scripture he had only
one writer in his own tongue, Tertullian, whose teaching, in the matters
which interested Hilary, though orthodox, was behind the times. His
strong insistence upon the subordination of the Son to the Father, due
to the same danger which still, in the fourth century, seemed in the
East the most formidable, was not in harmony with the prevalent thought
of the West. Thus Hilary, in his search for reasons for the Faith, was
practically isolated; there was little at home which could help him to
construct his system. To an intellect so self-reliant as his this may
have been no great trial. Scrupulous though he was in confining his
speculations within the bounds of inherited and acknowledged truth, yet
in matters still undecided he exercised a singularly free judgment, now
advancing beyond, now lingering behind, the usual belief of his
contemporaries. In following out his thoughts, loyally yet
independently, he was conscious that he was breaking what was new ground
to his older fellow-Christians, almost as much as to himself, the
convert <span id="page_vii">p. vii</span> <span
id="ii.iii.i-Page_vii"></span>from Paganism. And that he was aware of
the novelty is evident from the sparing use which he makes of that stock
argument of the old controversialists, the newness of heresy. He uses
it, e.g., in *Trin*. ii. 4, and uses it with effect; but it is far less
prominent in him than in others.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p37"></span>For such independence of thought he could
find precedent in Alexandrian theology, of which he was obviously a
careful student and, in his free use of his own judgment upon it, a true
disciple. When he was drawn into the Arian controversy and studied its
literature, his thoughts to some extent were modified; but he never
ceases to leave upon his reader the impression of an Oriental isolated
in the West. From the Christian Platonists of Alexandria <span
id="fr_24"></span>[25](#fn_24) come his most characteristic thoughts.
They have passed on, for instance, from Philo to him the sense of the
importance of the revelation contained in the divine name <span
class="c12"><span id="ii.iii.i-p38.1"></span>He that is</span>. His
peculiar doctrine of the impassibility of the incarnate Christ is
derived, more probably directly than indirectly, from Clement of
Alexandria. But it is to Origen that Hilary stands in the closest and
most constant relations, now as a pupil, now as a critic. In fact, as we
shall see, no small portion of the Homilies on the Psalms, towards the
end of the work, is devoted to the controverting of opinions expressed
by Origen; and by an omission which is itself a criticism he completely
ignores one of that writer’s most important contributions to Christian
thought, the mystical interpretation of the Song of Songs. It is true
that Jerome <span id="fr_25"></span>[26](#fn_25) knew of a commentary on
that Book which was doubtfully attributed to Hilary; but if Hilary had
once accepted such an exegesis he could not possibly have failed to use
it on some of the numerous occasions when it must have suggested itself
in the course of his writing, for it is not his habit to allow a thought
to drop out of his mind; his characteristic ideas recur again and again.
In some cases we can actually watch the growth of Hilary’s mind as it
emancipates itself from Origen’s influence; as, for instance, in his
psychology. He begins (*Comm. in Matt*. v. 8) by holding, with Origen
and Tertullian, that the soul is corporeal; in later life he states
expressly that this is not the case <span id="fr_26"></span>[27](#fn_26)
. Yet what Hilary accepted from Origen is far more important than what
he rejected. His strong sense of the dignity of man, of the freedom of
the will, his philosophical belief in the inseparable connection of name
and thing, the thought of the Incarnation as primarily an obscuring of
the Divine glory <span id="fr_27"></span>[28](#fn_27) , are some of the
lessons which Origen has taught him. But, above all, it is to him that
he owes his rudimentary doctrine concerning the Holy Spirit. Hilary says
nothing inconsistent with the truth as it was soon to be universally
recognised; but his caution in declining to accept, or at least to
state, the general belief of Western Christendom that the Holy Spirit,
since Christians are baptized in His Name as well as in that of Father
and Son, is God in the same sense as They, is evidence both of his
independence of the opinion around him and of his dependence on Origen.
Of similar dependence on any other writer or school there is no trace.
He knew Tertullian well, and there is some evidence that he knew
Hippolytus and Novatian, but his thought was not moulded by theirs; and
when, in the maturity of his powers, he became a fellow-combatant with
Athanasius and the precursors of the great Cappadocians, his borrowing
is not that of a disciple but of an equal.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p42"></span>There is one of St. Hilary’s writings,
evidently the earliest of those extant and probably the earliest of all,
which may be noticed here, as it gives no sign of being written by a
Bishop. It is the *Commentary on St. Matthew*. It is, in the strictest
sense, a commentary, and not, like the work upon the Psalms, a series of
exegetical discourses. It deals with the text of the Gospel, as it stood
in Hilary’s Latin version, without comment or criticism upon its
peculiarities, and draws out the meaning, chiefly allegorical, not of
the whole Gospel, <span id="page_viii">p. viii</span> <span
id="ii.iii.i-Page_viii"></span>but apparently of lections that were read
in public worship. A few pages at the beginning and end are
unfortunately lost, but they cannot have contained anything of such
importance as to alter the impression which we form of the book. In
diction and grammar it is exactly similar to Hilary’s later writings;
the fact that it is, perhaps, somewhat more stiff in style may be due to
self-consciousness of a writer venturing for the first time upon so
important a subject. The exegesis is often the same as that of Origen,
but a comparison of the several passages in which Jerome mentions this
commentary makes it certain that it is not dependent upon him in the
same way as are the Homilies on the Psalms and Hilary’s lost work upon
Job. Yet if he is not in this work the translator, or editor, of Origen,
he is manifestly his disciple. We cannot account for the resemblance
otherwise. Hilary is independently working out Origen’s thoughts on
Origen’s lines. Origen is not named, nor any other author, except that
he excuses himself from expounding the Lord’s Prayer on the ground that
Tertullian and Cyprian had written excellent treatises upon it <span
id="fr_28"></span>[29](#fn_28) . This is a rare exception to his habit
of not naming other writers. But, whoever the writers were from whom
Hilary drew his exegesis, his theology is his own. There is no
immaturity in the thought; every one of his characteristic ideas, as
will be seen in the next chapter, is already to be found here. But there
is one interesting landmark in the growth of the Latin theological
vocabulary, very archaic in itself and an evidence that Hilary had not
yet decided upon the terms that he would use. He twice <span
id="fr_29"></span>[30](#fn_29) speaks of Christ’s Divinity as ‘the
*theotes* which we call *deitas*.’ In his later writings he consistently
uses *divinitas*, except in the few instances where he is almost forced,
to avoid intolerable monotony, to vary it with *deitas*; and in his
commentary he would not have used either of these words, still less
would he have used both, unless he were feeling his way to a fixed
technical term. Another witness to the early date of the work is the
absence of any clear sign that Hilary knew of the existence of Arianism.
He knows, indeed, that there are heresies which impugn the Godhead of
Christ <span id="fr_30"></span>[31](#fn_30) , and in consequence states
that doctrine with great precision, and frequently as well as forcibly.
But it has been pointed out <span id="fr_31"></span>[32](#fn_31) that he
discusses many texts which served, in the Arian strife, for attack or
defence, without alluding to that burning question: and this would have
been impossible and, indeed, a dereliction of duty, in Hilary’s later
life. And there is one passage <span id="fr_32"></span>[33](#fn_32) in
which he speaks of God the Father as ‘He with (or ‘in’) Whom the Word
was *before He was born*.’ The Incarnation is spoken of in words which
would usually denote the eternal Generation: and if a candid reader
could not be misled, yet an opportunity is given to the malevolent which
Hilary or, indeed, any careful writer engaged in the Arian controversy
would have avoided. The Commentary, then, is an early work, yet in no
respect unworthy of its author. But though he had developed his
characteristic thoughts before he began to write it, they are certainly
less prominent here than in the treatises which followed. It is chiefly
remarkable for its display of allegorical ingenuity. Its pages are full
of fantastic interpretations of the kind which he had so great a share
in introducing into Western Europe <span id="fr_33"></span>[34](#fn_33)
. He started by it a movement which he would have been powerless to
stop; that he was not altogether satisfied with the principle of
allegory is shewn by the more modest use that he made of it when he
composed, with fuller experience, the Homilies on the Psalms. It is,
perhaps, only natural that there is little allegorism in the *De
Trinitate*. Such a hot-house growth could not thrive in the keen <span
id="page_ix">p. ix</span> <span id="ii.iii.i-Page_ix"></span>air of
controversy. As for the Commentary on St. Matthew, its chief influence
has been indirect, in that St. Ambrose made large use of it in his own
work upon the same Gospel. The consideration of Hilary’s use of
Scripture and of the place which it held in his system of theology is
reserved for the next chapter, where illustrations from this Commentary
are given.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p49"></span>About the year 350 Hilary was consecrated
Bishop of Poitiers. So we may infer from his own words <span
id="fr_34"></span>[35](#fn_34) that he had been a good while regenerate,
and for some little time a bishop, on the eve of his exile in 356 <span
class="c12"><span id="ii.iii.i-p50.1"></span>a.d.</span> Whether, like
Ambrose, he was raised directly from lay life to the Episcopate cannot
be known. It is at least possible that this was the case. His position
as a bishop was one of great importance, and, as it must have seemed,
free from special difficulties. There was a wide difference between the
Church organisation of the Latin-speaking provinces of the Empire (with
the exception of Central and Southern Italy and of Africa, in each of
which a multitude of insignificant sees were dependent upon the
autocracy of Rome and Carthage respectively) and that of the
Greek-speaking provinces of the East. In the former there was a mere
handful of dioceses, of huge geographical extent; in the latter every
town, at least in the more civilised parts, had its bishop. The Western
bishops were inevitably isolated from one another, and could exercise
none of that constant surveillance over each other’s orthodoxy which
was, for evil as well as for good, so marked a feature of the Church
life of the East. And the very greatness of their position gave them
stability. The equipoise of power was too perfect, the hands in which it
was vested too few, the men themselves, probably, too statesmanlike, for
the Western Church to be infected with that nervous agitation which
possessed the shifting multitudes of Eastern prelates, and made them
suspicious and loquacious and disastrously eager for compromise. It was,
in fact, the custom of the West to take the orthodoxy of its bishops for
granted, and an external impulse was necessary before they could be
overthrown. The two great sees with which Hilary was in immediate
relation were those of Arles and Milan, and both were in Arian hands.
But it needed the direct incitation of a hostile Emperor to set
Saturninus against Hilary; and it was in vain that Hilary, in the
floodtide of orthodox revival in the West, attacked Auxentius. The
orthodox Emperor upheld the Arian, who survived Hilary by eight years
and died in possession of his see. But this great and secure position of
the Western bishop had its drawbacks. Hilary was conscious of its
greatness <span id="fr_35"></span>[36](#fn_35) and strove to be worthy
of it; but it was a greatness of responsibility to which neither he, nor
any other man, could be equal. For in his eyes the bishop was still, as
he had been in the little Churches of the past, and still might be in
quiet places of the East or South, the sole priest, *sacerdos* <span
id="fr_36"></span>[37](#fn_36) , of his flock. In his exile he reminds
the Emperor that he is still distributing the communion through his
presbyters to the Church. This survival can have had none but evil
results. It put both bishop and clergy in a false position. The latter
were degraded by the denial to them of a definite status and rights of
their own. Authority without influence and information in lieu of
knowledge was all for which the former could hope. And this lack of any
organised means of influencing a wide-spread flock—such a diocese as
that of Poitiers must have been several times as large as a rural
diocese of England—prevented its bishop from creating any strong public
opinion within it, unless he were an evangelist with the gifts of a
Martin of Tours. It was impossible for him to excite in so unwieldy a
district any popular enthusiasm or devotion to himself. Unlike an
Athanasius, he could be deported into exile at the Emperor’s will with
as little commotion as the bishop of some petty half-Greek town in Asia
Minor.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p53"></span><span id="page_x">p. x</span> <span
id="ii.iii.i-Page_x"></span>During the first years of Hilary’s
episcopate there was civil turmoil in Gaul, but the Church was at peace.
While the Eastern ruler Constantius favoured the Arians, partly misled
by unprincipled advisers and partly guided by an unwise, though honest,
desire for compromise in the interests of peace, his brother Constans,
who reigned in the West, upheld the Catholic cause, to which the immense
majority of his clergy and people was attached. He was slain in January,
350, by the usurper Magnentius, who, with whatever motives, took the
same side. It was certainly that which would best conciliate his own
subjects; but he went further, and attempted to strengthen his
precarious throne against the impending attack of Constantius by
negotiations with the discontented Nicene Christians of the East. He
tried to win over Athanasius, who was, however, too wise to listen; and,
in any case, he gained nothing by tampering with the subjects of
Constantius. Constantius defeated Magnentius, pursued him, and finally
slew him on the 11th August, 353, and was then undisputed master not
only of the East but of the West, which he proceeded to bring into
ecclesiastical conformity, as far as he could, with his former
dominions.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p54"></span>The general history of Arianism and the
tendencies of Christian thought at this time have been so fully and
admirably delineated in the introduction to the translation of St.
Athanasius in this series <span id="fr_37"></span>[38](#fn_37) , that it
would be superfluous and presumptuous to go over the same ground. It
must suffice to say that Constantius was animated with a strong personal
hatred against Athanasius, and that the prelates at his court seem to
have found their chief employment in intrigues for the expulsion of
bishops, whose seats might be filled by friends of their own. Athanasius
was a formidable antagonist, from his strong position in Alexandria,
even to an Emperor; and Constantius was attempting to weaken him by
creating an impression that he was unworthy of the high esteem in which
he was held. Even in the East, as yet, the Nicene doctrine was not
avowedly rejected; still less could the doctrinal issue be raised in
Gaul, where the truths stated in the Nicene Creed were regarded as so
obvious that the Creed itself had excited little interest or attention.
Hilary at this time had never heard it <span
id="fr_38"></span>[39](#fn_38) , though nearly thirty years had passed
since the Council decreed it. But there were personal charges against
Athanasius, of which he has himself given us a full and interesting
account <span id="fr_39"></span>[40](#fn_39) , which had done him, and
were to do him, serious injury. They had been disproved publicly and
completely more than once, and with great solemnity and apparent
finality ten years before this, at Sardica in 343 <span
class="c12"><span id="ii.iii.i-p57.1"></span>a.d</span>. But in a
distant province, aided by the application of sufficient pressure, they
might serve their turn, and if the Emperor could obtain his enemy’s
condemnation, and that in a region whose theological sympathies were
notoriously on his side, a great step would be gained towards his
expulsion from Egypt. No time was lost. In October, 353, a Council was
called at Arles to consider the charges. It suited Constantius’ purpose
well that Saturninus of Arles, bishop of the most important see in Gaul,
and the natural president, was both a courtier and an Arian. He did his
work well. The assembled bishops believed, or were induced to profess
that they believed, that the charges against Athanasius were not made in
the interests of his theological opponents, and that the Emperor’s
account of them was true. The decision, condemning the accused, was
almost unanimous. Even the representative of Liberius of Rome consented,
to be disavowed on his return; and only one bishop, Paulinus of Treves,
suffered exile for resistance. He may have been the only advocate for
Athanasius, or Constantius may have thought that one example would
suffice to terrify the episcopate of Gaul into submission. It is
impossible to say whether Hilary was present at the Council or no. It is
not probable that he was absent: and his ignorance, even later, on
important points in the dispute shows that he may <span id="page_xi">p.
xi</span> <span id="ii.iii.i-Page_xi"></span>well have given an honest
verdict against Athanasius. The new ruler’s word had been given that he
was guilty; nothing can yet have been known against Constantius and much
must have been hoped from him. It was only natural that he should obtain
the desired decision. Two years followed, during which the Emperor was
too busy with warfare on the frontiers of Gaul to proceed further in the
matter of Athanasius. But in the Autumn of 355 he summoned a Council at
Milan, a city whose influence over Gaul was so great that it might
almost be called the ecclesiastical capital of that country. Here again
strong pressure was used, and the verdict given as Constantius desired.
Hilary was not present at this Council; he was by this time aware of the
motives of Constantius and the courtier bishops, and would certainly
have shared in the opposition offered, and probably in the exile
inflicted upon three of the leaders in it. These were Dionysius of
Milan, who disappears from history, his place being taken by Hilary’s
future enemy, Auxentius, and Eusebius of Vercelli and Lucifer of
Cagliari, both of whom were to make their mark in the future.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p58"></span>By this time Hilary had definitely taken
his side, and it will be well to consider his relation to the parties in
the controversy. And first as to Arianism. As we have seen, Arian
prelates were now in possession of the two great sees of Arles and Milan
in his own neighbourhood; and Arianisers of different shades, or at
least men tolerant of Arianism, held a clear majority of the Eastern
bishoprics, except in the wholly Catholic Egypt. But it is certain that,
in the West at any rate, the fundamental difference of the Arian from
the Catholic position was not generally recognised. Arian practice and
Arian practical teaching was indistinguishable from Catholic; and unless
ultimate principles were questioned, Catholic clergy might work, and the
multitudes of Catholic laity might live and die, without knowing that
their bishop’s creed was different from their own. The Abbé Duchesne has
made the very probable suggestion that the stately Ambrosian ritual of
Milan was really introduced from the East by Auxentius, the Arian
intruder from Cappadocia, of whom we have spoken <span
id="fr_40"></span>[41](#fn_40) . Arian Baptism and the Arian Eucharist
were exactly the same as the Catholic. They were not sceptical; they
accepted all current beliefs or superstitions, and had their own
confessors and workers of miracles <span id="fr_41"></span>[42](#fn_41)
. The Bible was common ground to both parties: each professed its
confidence that it had the support of Scripture. “No false system ever
struck more directly at the life of Christianity than Arianism. Yet
after all it held aloft the Lord’s example as the Son of Man, and never
wavered in its worship of Him as the Son of God <span
id="fr_42"></span>[43](#fn_42) .” And the leaders of this school were in
possession of many of the great places of the Church, and asserted that
they had the right to hold them; that if they had not the sole right, at
least they had as good a right as the Catholics, to be bishops, and yet
to teach the doctrine that Christ was a creature, not the Son. And what
made things worse was that they seemed to be at one with the Catholics,
and that it was possible, and indeed almost inevitable, that the
multitudes who did not look below the surface should be satisfied to
take them for what they seemed. Many of the Arians no doubt honestly
thought that their position was a tenable one, and held their offices
with a good conscience; but we cannot wonder that men like Athanasius
and Hilary, aware of the sophistical nature of many of the arguments
used, and knowing that some, at least, of the leaders were unscrupulous
adventurers, should have regarded all Arianism and all Arians as
deliberately dishonest. It seemed incredible that they could be
sincerely at home in the Church, and intolerable that they should have
the power of deceiving the people and persecuting true believers. It is
against Arianism in the church that Hilary’s efforts are directed, not
against Arianism as an external heresy. He ignores heresies outside the
Church as completely as does Cyprian; they <span id="page_xii">p.
xii</span> <span id="ii.iii.i-Page_xii"></span>are outside, and
therefore he has nothing to do with them. But Arianism, as represented
by an Auxentius or a Saturninus, is an *internum malum* <span
id="fr_43"></span>[44](#fn_43) ; and to the extirpation of this ‘inward
evil’ the remaining years of his life were to be devoted.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p63"></span>His own devotion, from the time of his
conversion to the Catholic Faith, which almost all around him held, was
not the less sincere because it did not find its natural expression in
the Nicene Creed. That document, which primarily concerned only bishops,
and them only when their orthodoxy was in question, was hardly known in
the West, where the bishops had as yet had little occasion for doubting
one another’s faith. Hilary had never heard it,—he can hardly have
avoided hearing of it,—till just before his exile. In his earlier
conflicts he rarely mentions it, and when he does it is in connection
with the local circumstances of the East. In later life he, with Western
Christendom at large, recognised its value as a rallying point for the
faithful; but even then there is no attachment to the Creed for its own
sake. It might almost seem that the Creed, by his defence of which
Athanasius has earned such glory, owed its original celebrity to him
rather than he to it. His unjust persecution and heroic endurance
excited interest in the symbol of which he was the champion. If it were
otherwise, there has been a strange conspiracy of silence among Western
theologians. In their great works on the Trinity, Hilary most rarely,
and Augustine never, allude to it; the Council of Aquileia, held in the
same interests and almost at the same time as that of Constantinople in
381, absolutely ignores it <span id="fr_44"></span>[45](#fn_44) . The
Creed, in the year 355, was little known in the West and unpopular in
the East. Even Athanasius kept it somewhat in the background, from
reasons of prudence, and Hilary’s sympathies, as we shall see, were with
the Eastern School which could accept the truth, though they disliked
this expression of it.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p65"></span>The time had now come for Hilary, holding
these views of Arianism and of the Faith, to take an active part in the
conflict. We have seen that he was not at Milan; he was therefore not
personally compromised, but the honour of the Church compelled him to
move. He exerted himself to induce the bishops of Gaul to withdraw from
communion with Saturninus, and with Ursacius and Valens, disciples of
Arius during his exile on the banks of the Danube thirty years before,
and now high in favour with Constantius, and his ministers, we might
almost say, for the ecclesiastical affairs of the Western provinces. We
do not know how many bishops were enlisted by Hilary against Saturninus.
It is probable that not many would follow him in so bold a venture; even
men of like mind with himself might well think it unwise. It was almost
a revolutionary act; an importation of the methods of Eastern
controversy into the peaceful West, for this was not the constitutional
action of a synod but the private venture of Hilary and his allies.
However righteous and necessary, in the interests of morality and
religion, their conduct may have seemed to them, to Constantius and his
advisers it must have appeared an act of defiance to the law, both of
Church and State. And Hilary would certainly not win favour with the
Emperor by his letter of protest, the *First Epistle to Constantius*,
written about the end of the year 355. He adopts the usual tone of the
time, that of exaggerated laudation and even servility towards the
Emperor. Such language was, of course, in great measure conventional; we
know from Cicero’s letters how little superlatives, whether of flattery
or abuse, need mean, and language had certainly not grown more sincere
under the Empire. The letter was, in fact, a singularly bold manifesto,
and one which Hilary himself must have foreseen was likely to bring upon
him the <span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span> <span
id="ii.iii.i-Page_xiii"></span>punishment which had befallen the
recusants at Arles and Milan. He begins (§ 1) in studiously general
terms, making no mention of the provinces in which the offenses were
being committed, with a complaint of the tyrannical interference of
civil officers in religious matters. If there is to be peace (§ 2),
there must be liberty; Catholics must not be forced to become Arians.
The voice of resistance was being raised; men were beginning to say that
it was better to die than to see the faith defiled at the bidding of an
individual. Equity required that God-fearing men should not suffer by
compulsory intercourse with the teachers of execrable blasphemy, but be
allowed bishops whom they could obey with a good conscience. Truth and
falsehood, light and darkness could not combine. He entreated the
Emperor to allow the people to choose for themselves to what teachers
they would listen, with whom they would join in the Eucharist and in
prayer for him. Next (§ 3) he denies that there is any purpose of
treason, or any discontent. The only disturbance is that caused by Arian
propagators of heresy, who are busily engaged in misleading the
ignorant. He now (§ 4) prays that the excellent bishops who have been
sent into exile may be restored; liberty and joy would be the result.
Then (§ 5) he attacks the modern and deadly Arian pestilence. Borrowing,
somewhat incautiously, the words of the Council of Sardica, now twelve
years old, he gives a list of Arian chiefs which ends with “those two
ignorant and unprincipled youths, Ursacius and Valens.” Communion with
such men as these, even communion in ignorance, is a participation in
their guilt, a fatal sin. He proceeds, in § 6, to combine denunciation
of the atrocities committed in Egypt with a splendid plea for liberty of
conscience; it is equally vain and wicked to attempt to drive men into
Arianism, and an enforced faith is, in any case, worthless. The Arians
(§ 7) were themselves legally convicted long ago and Athanasius
acquitted; it is a perversion of justice that the condemned should now
be intriguing against one so upright and so faithful to the truth. And
lastly (§ 8) he comes to the wrong just done at Milan, and tells the
well-known story of the violence practiced upon Eusebius of Vercelli and
others in the ‘Synagogue of malignants,’ as he calls it. Here also he
takes occasion to speak of Paulinus of Treves, exiled for his resistance
at Arles two years before, where he “had withstood the monstrous crimes
of those men.” The conclusion of the letter is unfortunately lost, and
there are one or more gaps in the body of it; these, we may judge, would
only have made it more unacceptable to Constantius.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p66"></span>It was, indeed, from the Emperor’s point
of view, a most provocatory Epistle. He and his advisers were convinced
that compromise was the way of peace. They had no quarrel with the
orthodoxy of the West, if only that orthodoxy would concede that
Arianisers were entitled to office in the Church, or would at least be
silent; and they were animated by a persistent hatred of Athanasius.
Moreover, the whole tendency of thought, since Constantine began to
favour the Church, had run towards glorification of the Emperor as the
vice-regent of God; and the orthodox had had their full share in
encouraging the idea. That a bishop, with no status to justify his
interference, should renounce communion with his own superior, the
Emperor’s friend, at Arles; should forbid the officers of state to
rneddle in the Church’s affairs, and demand an entirely new thing,
recognition by the state as lawful members of the Church while yet they
rejected the prelates whom the state recognised; should declare that
peace was impossible because the conflicting doctrines were as different
as light and darkness, and that the Emperor’s friends were execrable
heretics; should assert, while denying that he or his friends had any
treasonable purpose, that men were ready to die rather than submit;
should denounce two Councils, lawfully held, and demand reinstatement of
those who had opposed the decision of those Councils; should, above all,
take the part of Athanasius, now obviously doomed to another exile;—all
this must have savoured of rebellion. And rebellion was no imaginary
danger. <span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span> <span
id="ii.iii.i-Page_xiv"></span>We have seen that Magnentius had tried to
enlist Athanasius on his side against the Arian Emperor. Constantius was
but a new ruler over Gaul, and had no claim, through services rendered,
to its loyalty. He might reasonably construe Hilary’s words into a
threat that the orthodox of Gaul would, if their wishes were
disregarded, support an orthodox pretender. And there was a special
reason for suspicion. At this very time Constantius had just conferred
the government of the West upon his cousin Julian, who was installed as
Cæsar on the 6th November, 355. From the first, probably, Constantius
distrusted Julian, and Julian certainly distrusted Constantius. Thus it
might well seem that the materials were ready for an explosion; that a
disloyal Cæsar would find ready allies in discontented Catholics.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p67"></span>We cannot wonder that Hilary’s letter had
no effect upon the policy of Constantius. It is somewhat surprising that
several months elapsed before he was punished. In the spring of the year
356 Saturninus presided at a Council held at Béziers, at which Hilary
was, he tells us, compelled to attend. In what the compulsion consisted
we do not know. It may simply have been that he was summoned to attend;
a summons which he could not with dignity refuse, knowing, as he must
have done, that charges would be brought against himself. Of the
proceedings of the Synod we know little. The complaints against Hilary
concerned his conduct, not his faith. This latter was, of course, above
suspicion, and it was not the policy of the court party to attack
orthodoxy in Gaul. He seems to have been charged with exciting popular
discontent; and this, as we have seen, was an accusation which his own
letter had rendered plausible. He tried to raise the question of the
Faith, challenging the doctrine of his opponents. But though a large
majority of a council of Gallic bishops would certainly be in sympathy
with him, he had no success. Their position was not threatened; Hilary,
like Paulinus, was accused of no doctrinal error, and these victims of
Constantius, if they had raised no questions concerning their
neighbours’ faith and made no objections to the Emperor’s tyranny, might
also have passed their days in peace. The tone of the episcopate in Gaul
was, in fact, by no means heroic. If we may trust Sulpicius
Severus <span id="fr_45"></span>[46](#fn_45) , in all these Councils the
opposition was prepared to accept the Emperor’s word about Athanasius,
and excommunicate him, if the general question of the Faith might be
discussed. But the condition was evaded, and the issue never frankly
raised; and, if it was cowardly, it was not unnatural that Hilary should
have been condemned by the Synod, and condemned almost unanimously. Only
Rodanius of Toulouse was punished with him; the sufferers would
certainly have been more numerous had there been any strenuous
remonstrance against the injustice. The Synod sent their decision to the
Cæsar Julian, their immediate ruler. Julian took no action; he may have
felt that the matter was too serious for him to decide without reference
to the Emperor, but it is more likely that he had no wish to outrage the
dominant Church feeling of Gaul and alienate sympathies which he might
need in the future. In any case he refused to pass a sentence which he
must have known would be in accordance with the Emperor’s desire; and
the vote of the Synod, condemning Hilary, was sent to Constantius
himself. He acted upon it at once, and in the summer of the same year,
356, Hilary was exiled to the diocese, or civil district comprising
several provinces, of Asia.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p69"></span>We now come to the most important period
of Hilary’s life. He was already, as we have seen, a Greek scholar and a
follower of Greek theology. He was now to come into immediate contact
with the great problems of the day in the field on which they were being
constantly debated. And he was well prepared to take his part. He had
formed his own convictions before he was acquainted with *homoousion,
homoiousion* or the Nicene <span id="page_xv">p. xv</span> <span
id="ii.iii.i-Page_xv"></span>Creed <span id="fr_46"></span>[47](#fn_46)
. He was therefore in full sympathy with Athanasius on the main point.
And his manner of treating the controversy shews that the policy of
Athanasius was also, in a great measure, his. Like Athanasius, he spares
Marcellus as much as possible. We know that Athanasius till the end
refused to condemn him, though one of the most formidable weapons in the
armoury of the Anti-Nicene party was the conjunction in which they could
plausibly put their two names, as those of the most strenuous opponents
of Arianism. Similarly Hilary never names Marcellus <span
id="fr_47"></span>[48](#fn_47) , as he never names Apollinaris, though
he had the keenest sense of the danger involved in either heresy, and
argues forcibly and often against both. Like Athanasius again, he has no
mercy upon Photinus the disciple, while he spares Marcellus the master;
and it is a small, though clear, sign of dependence that he occasionally
applies Athanasius’ nickname of *Ariomanitæ*, or ‘Arian lunatics,’ to
his opponents. It is certain that Hilary was familiar with the writings
of Athanasius, and borrowed freely from them. But so little has yet been
done towards ascertaining the progress of Christian thought and the
extent of each writer’s contribution to it, that it is impossible to say
which arguments were already current and may have been independently
adopted by Hilary and by Athanasius, and for which the former is
indebted to the latter <span id="fr_48"></span>[49](#fn_48) . Yet it is
universally recognised that the debt exists; and Hilary’s greatness as a
theologian <span id="fr_49"></span>[50](#fn_49) , his mastery of the
subject, would embolden him to borrow and adapt the more freely that he
was dealing as with an equal and a fellow-combatant in the same cause.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p74"></span>Athanasius and Hilary can never have met
face to face. But the eyes and the agents of Athanasius were everywhere,
and he must have known something of the exile and of the services of
Hilary, who was, of course, well acquainted with the history of
Athanasius, though, with the rest of Gaul, he may not have been
whole-hearted in his defence. And now he was the more likely to be drawn
towards him because this was the time of his approximation to the
younger generation of the Conservative School. For it is with them that
Hilary’s affinities are closest and most obvious. The great Cappadocians
were devoted Origenists—we know the service they rendered to their
master by the publication of the *Philocalia*,—and there could be no
stronger bond of union between Hilary and themselves. They were the
outgrowth of that great Asiatic school to which the name of Semiarians,
somewhat unkindly given by Epiphanius, has clung, and which was steadily
increasing in influence over the thought of Asia, the dominant province,
at this time, of the whole Empire. Gregory of Nazianzus, the eldest of
the three great writers, was probably not more than twenty-five years of
age when Hilary was sent into exile, and none of them can have seriously
affected even his latest works. But they represented, in a more perfect
form, the teaching of the best men of the Conservative School; and when
we find that Hilary, who was old enough to be the father of Basil and
the two Gregories, has thoughts in common with them which are not to be
found in Athanasius, we may safely assign this peculiar teaching to the
influence upon Hilary, predisposed by his loyalty to Origen to listen to
the representatives of the Origenist tradition, of this school of
theology. We see one side of this influence in Hilary’s understatement
of the doctrine of the Holy Ghost. The Semiarians were coming to be of
one mind with the Nicenes as to the consubstantial Deity of the Son;
none of them, in all probability, at this time would have admitted the
<span id="page_xvi">p. xvi</span> <span
id="ii.iii.i-Page_xvi"></span>consubstantial Deity of the Spirit, and
the unity of their School was to be wrecked in future years upon this
point. The fact that Hilary could use language so reserved upon this
subject must have led them to welcome his alliance the more heartily.
Neither he nor they could foresee the future of the doctrine, and both
sides must have sincerely thought that they were at one. And, indeed, on
Hilary’s part there was a great willingness to believe in this unity,
which led him, as we shall see, into an unfortunate attempt at
ecclesiastical diplomacy. Another evidence of contact with this Eastern
School, but at its most advanced point, is the remarkable expression,
‘Only-begotten God,’ which Hilary ‘employs with startling freedom,
evidently as the natural expression of his own inmost thought <span
id="fr_50"></span>[51](#fn_50) .’ Dr. Hort, whose words these are,
states that the term is used by Athanasius only twice, once in youth and
once in old age; but that, on the other hand, it is familiar to two of
the Cappadocians, Basil and Gregory of Nyssa. They must have learned it
from some Asiatic writer known to Hilary as a contemporary, to them as
successors. And when we find Hilary <span id="fr_51"></span>[52](#fn_51)
rejecting the baptism of heretics, and so putting himself in opposition
to what had been the Roman view for a century and that of Gaul since the
Council of Arles in 314, and then find this opinion echoed by Gregory of
Nazianzus <span id="fr_52"></span>[53](#fn_52) , we are reminded not
only of Hilary’s general independence of thought, but of the
circumstance that St. Cyprian found his stoutest ally in contesting this
same point in the Cappadocian Firmilian. A comparison of the two sets of
writings would probably lead to the discovery of more coincidences than
have yet been noticed; of the fact itself, of ‘the Semiarian influence
so visible in the *De Synodis* of Hilary, and even in his own later
work <span id="fr_53"></span>[54](#fn_53) ,’ there can be no doubt.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p79"></span>With these affinities, with an adequate
knowledge of the Greek language and a strong sympathy, as well as a
great familiarity, with Greek modes of thought, Hilary found himself in
the summer of the year 356 an exile in Asia Minor. It was exile in the
most favourable circumstances. He was still bishop of Poitiers,
recognised as such by the government, which only forbade him, for
reasons of state ostensibly not connected with theology, to reside
within his diocese. He held free communication with his fellow-bishops
in Gaul, and was allowed to administer his own diocese, so far as
administration by letter was possible, without interruption. And his
diocese did not forget him. We learn from Sulpicius Severus <span
id="fr_54"></span>[55](#fn_54) that he and the others of the little band
of exiles, who had suffered at Arles, and Milan, and Béziers, were the
heroes of the day in their own country. That orthodox bishops should
suffer for the Faith was a new thing in the West; we cannot wonder that
subsidies were raised for their support and delegations sent to assure
them of the sympathy of their flocks. To a man like Hilary, of energy
and ability, of recognised episcopal rank and unimpeached orthodoxy, the
position offered not less but more opportunities of service than
hitherto he had enjoyed. For no restriction was put upon his movements,
so long as he kept within the wide bounds allotted him. He had perfect
leisure for travel or for study, the money needed for the expense of his
journeys, and something of the glory, still very real, with which the
confessor was invested. And his movements were confined to the very
region where he could learn most concerning the question of the hour,
and do most for its solution. In fact, in sending Hilary into such an
exile as this, Constantius had done too much, or too little; he had
injured, and not advanced, his own favourite cause of unity by way of
compromise. In this instance, as in those of Arius and Athanasius and
many others, exile became an efficacious means for <span
id="page_xvii">p. xvii</span> <span id="ii.iii.i-Page_xvii"></span>the
spreading and strengthening of convictions. If Hilary had no great
success, as we shall see, in the Council which he attended, yet his
presence, during these critical years, in a region where men were
gradually advancing to the fuller truth cannot have been without
influence upon their spiritual growth; and his residence in Asia no
doubt confirmed and enriched his own apprehension of the Faith.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p81"></span>It is certain that Hilary was busily
engaged in writing his great work upon the Trinity, and that some parts
of it were actually published, during his exile. But as this work in its
final form would appear to belong to the next stage of Hilary’s life, it
will be well to postpone its consideration for the present, and proceed
at once to his share in the conciliar action of the time. We have no
information concerning his conduct before the year 358, but it is
necessary to say something about the important events which preceded his
publication of the *De Synodis* and his participation in the Council of
Seleucia.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p82"></span>It was a time when new combinations of
parties were being formed. Arianism was shewing itself openly, as it had
not dared to do since Nicæa. In 357 Hilary’s adversaries, Ursacius and
Valens, in a Synod at Sirmium, published a creed which was Arian without
concealment; it was, indeed, as serious a blow to the Emperor’s policy
of compromise as anything that Athanasius or Hilary had ventured. But it
was the work of friends of the Emperor, and shewed that, for the moment
at any rate, the Court had been won over to the extreme party. But the
forces of Conservatism were still the strongest. Within a few months,
early in 358, the great Asiatic prelates, soon to be divided over the
question of the Godhead of the Holy Spirit but still at one, Basil of
Ancyra, Macedonius and others, met at Ancyra and repudiated Arianism
while ignoring, after their manner, the Nicene definition. Then their
delegates proceeded to the Court, now at Sirmium, and won Constantius
back to his old position. Ursacius and Valens, who had no scruples,
signed a Conservative creed, as did the weak Liberius of Rome, anxious
to escape from an exile to which he had been consigned soon after the
banishment of Hilary. It was a great triumph to have induced so
prominent a bishop to minimise—we cannot say that he denied—his own
belief and that of the Western churches. And the Asiatic leaders were
determined to have the spoils of victory. Liberius, of course, was
allowed to return home, for he had proved compliant, and the
Conservatives had no quarrel with those who held the *homoousion*. But
the most prominent of the Arian leaders, those who had the courage of
their conviction, to the number, it is said, of seventy, were exiled. It
is true that Constantius was quickly persuaded by other influences to
restore them; but the theological difference was embittered by the sense
of personal injury, and further conflicts rendered inevitable between
Conservatives and Arians.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p83"></span>It was with this Conservative party,
victorious for the moment, that Hilary had to deal. Its leaders, and
especially Basil of Ancyra, had the ear of the Emperor, and seemed to
hold the future of the Church in their hands. Hilary was on friendly
terms with Basil, with whom, as we have seen, he had much in common, and
corresponded on his behalf with the Western Bishops. He was, indeed, by
the peculiar combination in him of the Eastern and the Western, perhaps
the only man who could have played the part he undertook. He was
thoroughly and outspokenly orthodox, yet had no prejudice in favour of
the Nicene definition. He would have been content, like the earlier
generation of Eastern bishops, with a simple formulary; the Apostles’
Creed, the traditional standard of the West, satisfied the exigencies
even of his own precise thought. And if a personal jealousy of
Athanasius and his school on the part of the Asiatic Conservatives was
one of the chief obstacles to peace, here again Hilary had certain
advantages. We have seen that there was no personal communication
between him and Athanasius; he could ignore, and may even have been
ignorant of, the antipathy of Asia to Alexandria. And he was no absolute
follower of Athanasius’ teaching. We saw that in some important respects
he was an independent <span id="page_xviii">p. xviii</span> <span
id="ii.iii.i-Page_xviii"></span>thinker, and that in others he is on
common ground with the Cappadocians, the heirs of the best thought of
such men as Basil of Ancyra. Nor could he labour under any suspicion of
being involved in the heresy of Marcellus. It was an honourable
tradition of Eastern Christendom to guard against the recrudescence of
such heresy as his, which revived the fallacies of Paul of Samosata and
of Sabellius, and seemed in Asia the most formidable of all possible
errors. Marcellus had forged it as a weapon in defence of the Nicene
faith; and if his doctrine were among the most formidable antagonists of
Arianism, it may well have seemed that there was not much to choose
between the two. And while Athanasius had never condemned Marcellus, and
the West had more than once pronounced him innocent, the general feeling
of the East was decisively against him, and deeply suspicious of any
appearance of sympathy with him. And further, by one of those
complications of personal with theological opposition which were so
sadly frequent, Basil was in possession of that very see of Ancyra from
which the heretic Marcellus had been expelled. Hilary, who was
unconcerned in all this, saw a new hope for the Church in his Asiatic
friends, and his own tendencies of thought must have been a welcome
surprise to them, accustomed as they were to suspect Sabellianism in the
West. The prospect, indeed, was at first sight a fair one. The faith, it
seemed, might be upheld by imperial support, now that it had advocates
who were not prejudiced in the Emperor’s eyes as was Athanasius; and
Athanasius himself, accredited by the testimony of Asia, might recover
his position. Yet Hilary was building on an unsound foundation. The
Semiarian party was not united. Hilary may not have suspected, or may,
in his zeal for the cause, have concealed from himself the fact, that in
the doctrine of the Holy Ghost there lay the seeds of a strife which was
soon to divide his allies as widely as Arius was separated from
Athanasius. And these allies, as a body, were not worthy supporters of
the truth. There were many sincere men among them, but these were mixed
with adventurers, who used the conflict as a means of attaining office,
with as few scruples as any of the other prelates who hung around the
court. But the fatal obstacle to success was that the whole plan
depended on the favour of Constantius. For the moment Basil and his
friends possessed this, but their adversaries were men of greater
dexterity and fewer scruples than they. Valens and Ursacius and their
like were doing their utmost to retrieve defeat and enjoy revenge. It is
significant that Athanasius, as it seems, had no share in Hilary’s hopes
and schemes for drawing East and West together. He had an unrivalled
knowledge of the circumstances, and an open mind, willing to see good in
the Semiarians; had the plan contained the elements of success it would
have received his warm support.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p84"></span>Hilary threw himself heartily into it. He
travelled, we know, extensively; so much so, that his letters from Gaul
failed to reach him in the year 358. This was a serious matter. We have
seen that the exiles from the West had derived great support from their
flocks. Hilary’s own weight as a negotiator must have depended upon the
general knowledge that he did not stand alone, but represented the
public opinion of a great province. For this reason, as well as for his
own peace of mind, it must have been a welcome relief to him to learn,
when letters came at last, that his friends had not forgotten or
deserted him; and he seized the opportunity of reply to send to the
bishops of all the Gallic provinces and of Britain the circular letter
which we call the *De Synodis*, translated in this volume. The
Introduction to it, here given, makes it unnecessary to describe its
contents. It may suffice to say that it is an able and well-written
attempt to explain the Eastern position to Western theologians. He shews
that the Eastern creeds, which had been composed since the Nicene, were
susceptible of an orthodox meaning, and felicitously brings out their
merits by contrast with the unmitigated heresy of the second creed of
Sirmium, which he cites at full length. It must be admitted that there
is a certain amount of special pleading; that his eyes are resolutely
shut to any other aspect of the documents than that which he is
commending to the attention of his readers in Gaul. And he is as boldly
original in his <span id="page_xix">p. xix</span> <span
id="ii.iii.i-Page_xix"></span>rendering of history as of doctrine. He
actually describes the Council of the Dedication, which confirmed the
deposition of Athanasius and propounded a compromising creed, definitely
intended to displace the Nicene, as an ‘assembly of the saints <span
id="fr_55"></span>[56](#fn_55) .’ The West, we know, cared little for
Eastern disputes and formularies. There can have been no great risk that
Hilary’s praise should revolt the minds of his friends, and as little
hope that it would excite any enthusiasm among them. This description,
and a good deal else in the *De Synodis*, was obviously meant to be read
in the land where it was written. When all possible allowance is made
for his sympathy with the best men among the Asiatics, and for the
hopefulness with which he might naturally regard his allies, it is still
impossible to think that he was quite sincere in asserting that their
object in compiling ambiguous creeds was the suppression of Sabellianism
and not the rejection of the *homoousion*. Yet it was natural enough
that he should write as he did, for the prospect must have seemed most
attractive. If this open letter could convince the Eastern bishops that
they were regarded in the West not with suspicion, as teachers of the
inferiority of Christ, but with admiration, as steadfast upholders of
His reality, a great step was made towards union. And if Hilary could
persuade his brethren in Gaul that the imperfect terms in which the East
was accustomed to express its faith in Christ were compatible with sound
belief, an approach could be made from that side also. And in justice to
Hilary we must bear in mind that he does not fall into the error of
Liberius. It was a serious fault for a Western bishop to abandon words
which were, for him and for his Church, the recognised expression of the
truth; it was a very different matter to argue that inadequate terms, in
the mouth of those who were unhappily pledged to the use of them, might
contain the saving Faith. This latter is the argument which Hilary uses.
He urges the East to advance to the definiteness of the Nicene
confession; he urges the West to welcome the first signs of such an
advance, and meantime to recognise the truth that was half-concealed in
their ambiguous documents. The attempt was a bold one, and met, as was
inevitable, with severe criticism from the side of uncompromising
orthodoxy, which we may for the moment leave unnoticed. What Athanasius
thought of the treatise we do not know; it would be unsafe to conjecture
that his own work, which bears the same title and was written in the
following year, when the futility of the hope which had buoyed Hilary up
had been demonstrated, was a silent criticism upon the *De Synodis*of
the other. It is, at least, a success in itself, and was a step towards
the ultimate victory of truth; we cannot say as much of Hilary’s effort,
admirable though its intention was, and though it must have contributed
something to the softening of asperities. But Alexandria and Gaul were
distant, and while the one excited repugnance in the Emperor’s mind, the
other had little influence with him. The decision seemed to lie in the
hands of Basil of Ancyra and his colleagues. The men who had the ear of
Constantius, and had lately induced him to banish the Arians, must in
consistency use their influence for the restoration of exiles who were
suffering for their opposition to Arianism; and this influence, if only
the West would heartily join with them, would be strong enough to secure
even the restoration of Athanasius. Such thoughts were certainly present
in the mind of Hilary when he painted so bright a picture of Eastern
Councils, and represented Constantius as an innocent believer, once
misguided but now returned to the Faith <span
id="fr_56"></span>[57](#fn_56) . From the Semiarian leaders, controlling
the policy of Constantius, he expected peace for the Church, restoration
of the exiles, the suppression of Arianism. And if to some extent he
deceived himself, and was willing to believe and to persuade others that
men’s faith and purpose differed from what in fact it was, we must
remember that it was a time of passionate earnestness, when cool
judgment concerning friend or foe was almost impossible for one who was
involved in that great conflict concerning the Divinity of Christ.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p87"></span><span id="page_xx">p. xx</span> <span
id="ii.iii.i-Page_xx"></span>But the times were not ripe for an
understanding between East and West, and the Asiatics in whom Hilary had
put his trust were not, and did not deserve to be, the restorers of the
Church. Their victory had been complete, but the Emperor was inconstant
and their adversaries were men of talent, who had once guided his
counsels and knew how to recover their position. The policy of
Constantius was, as we know, one of compromise, and it might seem to him
that the prevailing confusion would cease if only a sufficiently
comprehensive formula could be devised and accepted. ‘Specious charity
and colourless indefiniteness <span id="fr_57"></span>[58](#fn_57) ’ was
the policy of the new party, formed by Valens and Arians of every shade,
which won the favour of Constantius within a year of the Semiarian
victory. They had been mortified, had been forced to sign a confession
which they disbelieved, many of them had suffered a momentary exile. Now
they were to have their revenge; not only were the terms of communion to
be so lax that extreme Arianism should be at home within the Church,
but, as in a modern change of ministry, the Semiarians were to yield
their sees to their opponents. To attain these ends a Council was
necessary. The general history of the Homoean intrigues, of their
division of the forces opposed to them by the assembling of a Western
Council at Rimini, of an Eastern at Seleucia, and their apparent
triumph, gained by shameless falsehood, in the former, would be out of
place. Hilary and his Asiatic friends were concerned only with the
Council which met at Seleucia in September, 359. The Emperor, who hoped
for a final settlement, desired that the Council should be as large as
possible, and the governors of provinces exerted themselves to collect
bishops, and to forward them to Seleucia, as was usual, at the public
expense. Among the rest, Hilary, who was, we must remember, a bishop
with a diocese of his own, and of unimpugned orthodoxy, exiled
ostensibly for a political offence, received orders to attend at the
cost of the State <span id="fr_58"></span>[59](#fn_58) . In the Council,
which numbered some 160 bishops, his Semiarian friends were in a
majority of three to one; the uncompromising Nicenes of Egypt and the
uncompromising Arians, taken together, did not number more than a
quarter of the whole. Hilary was welcomed heartily and, as it would
seem, unanimously; but he had to disclaim, on behalf of the Church in
Gaul, the Sabellianism of which it was suspected, and with some reason
after the Western welcome of Marcellus. He stated his faith to the
satisfaction of the Council in accordance with the Nicene
confession <span id="fr_59"></span>[60](#fn_59) . We cannot doubt that
he made use of its very words, for Hilary was not the man to retreat
from the position he held, and the terms of his alliance with the school
of Basil of Ancyra required no such renunciation. The proceedings of the
Council, in which Hilary took no public part, may be omitted. The
Semiarians, strong in numbers and, as they still thought, in the
Emperor’s favour, swept everything before them. They adopted the
ambiguous creed of the Council of the Dedication,—that Council which
Hilary had lately called an ‘assembly of the Saints’—for the Nicenes
were a powerless minority; and they repeated their sentence of
excommunication upon the Arians, who were still fewer in number. They
even ventured to consecrate a successor to Eudoxius, one of the most
extreme, for the great Church of Antioch. Then the Council elected a
commission of ten of the leaders of the majority to present to the
Emperor a report of its proceedings, and dispersed. In spite of some
ominous signs of obstinacy on the part of the Arians, and of favour
towards them shown by the government officials, they seemed to have
succeeded in establishing still more firmly the results attained at
Ancyra two years before, and to have struck another and, as they might
hope, a more effectual blow at the heretics.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p91"></span>But when the deputation, with whom Hilary
travelled, reached Constantinople, they found that the position was
entirely different from their expectation. The intriguing party, whose
aim was to punish and displace the Semiarians, had contrived a double
treason. They misrepresented the Western Council to the Emperor as in
agreement with themselves; <span id="page_xxi">p. xxi</span> <span
id="ii.iii.i-Page_xxi"></span>and they sacrificed their more honest
colleagues in Arianism. They hated those who, like Basil of Ancyra,
maintained the *homoiousion*, the doctrine that the Son is of like
nature with the Father; the Emperor sincerely rejected the logical
Arianism which said that He is of unlike nature. They abandoned their
friends in order to induce Constantius to sacrifice his old Semiarian
advisers; and proposed with success their new Homoean formula, that the
Son is ‘like the Father in all things, as Scripture says.’ His nature is
not mentioned; the last words were a concession to the scruples of the
Emperor. We shall see presently that this rupture with the consistent
Arians is a matter of some importance for the dating of Hilary’s *De
Trinitate*; for the present we must follow the fortunes of himself and
his allies. He had journeyed with them to Constantinople. This was,
apparently, a breach of the order given him to confine himself to the
diocese of Asia; but he had already been commanded to go to Seleucia,
which lay beyond those limits, and his journey to Constantinople may
have been regarded as a legitimate sequel to his former journey. In any
case he was not molested, and was allowed to appear, with the deputation
from Seleucia, at the Court of Constantius. For the last two months of
the year 359 the disputes concerning the Faith still continued. But the
Emperor was firm in his determination to bring about a compromise which
should embrace every one who was not an extreme and conscientious Arian,
and the Homoean leaders supported him ably and unscrupulously. They
falsified the sense of the Council of Rimini and denied their own
Arianism, and Constantius backed them up by threats against the
Seleucian deputation. Hilary, of course, had no official position, and
could speak only for himself. The Western Church seemed to have decided
against its own faith, and the decision of the East, represented by the
ten delegates, was not yet declared, though it must have been probable
that they would succumb to the pressure exercised upon them, and desert
their own convictions and those of the Council whose commission they
held. In these circumstances Hilary had the courage, which we cannot
easily overestimate, to make a personal appeal to Constantius <span
id="fr_60"></span>[61](#fn_60) . It is evident that as yet he is
hopeful, or at least that he thinks it worth while to make an attempt.
He writes with the same customary humility which we found in his former
address to the Emperor. Constantius is ‘most pious,’ ‘good and
religious,’ ‘most gracious,’ and so forth. The sincerity of the appeal
is manifest; Hilary still believes, or is trying to believe, that the
Emperor, who had so lately been on the side of Basil of Ancyra and his
friends, and had at their instigation humiliated and exiled their
opponents, has not transferred his favour once more to the party of
Valens. The address is written with great dignity of style and of
matter. Hilary begins by declaring that the importance of his theme is
such that it enforces attention, however insignificant the speaker may
be; yet (§ 2) his position entitles him to speak. He is a bishop, in
communion with all the churches and bishops of Gaul, and to that very
day distributing the Eucharist by the hands of his presbyters to his own
Church. He is in exile, it is true, but he is guiltless; falsely accused
by designing men who had gained the Emperor’s ear. He appeals to
Julian’s knowledge of his innocence; indeed, the malice of his opponents
had inflicted less of suffering upon himself than of discredit upon the
administration of Julian, under which he had been condemned. The
Emperor’s rescript sentencing Hilary to exile was public; it was
notorious that the charges upon which the sentence was based were false.
Saturninus, the active promoter, if not the instigator, of the attack,
was now in Constantinople. Hilary confidently promises to demonstrate
that the proceedings were a deception of Constantius, and an insult to
Julian; if he fails, he will no longer petition to be allowed to return
to the exercise of his office, <span id="page_xxii">p. xxii</span> <span
id="ii.iii.i-Page_xxii"></span>but will retire to pass the rest of his
days as a layman in repentance. To this end he asks to be confronted
with Saturninus (§ 3), or rather takes for granted that Constantius will
do as he wishes. He leaves the Emperor to determine all the conditions
of the debate, in which, as he repeats, he will wring from Saturninus
the confession of his falsehood. Meanwhile he promises to be silent upon
the subject till the appointed time. Next, he turns to the great subject
of the day. The world’s danger, the guilt of silence, the judgment of
God, fill him with fear; he is constrained to speak when his own
salvation and that of the Emperor and of mankind is at stake, and
encouraged by the consciousness of multitudes who sympathise with him.
He bids the Emperor (§ 4) call back to his mind the Faith which (so he
says) Constantius is longing in vain to hear from his bishops. Those
whose duty is to proclaim the Faith of God are employed, instead, in
composing faiths of their own, and so they revolve in an endless circle
of error and of strife. The sense of human infirmity ought to have made
them content to hold the Faith in the same form of words in which they
had received it. At their baptism they had professed and sworn their
faith, *In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost*; doubt or change are equally unlawful. Yet men were using the
sacred words while they dishonestly assigned to them another meaning, or
even were daring to depart from them. Thus to some the three sacred
Names were empty terms. Hence innovations in the statement of the Faith;
the search for novelties took the place of loyalty to ancient truth, and
the creed of the year displaced the creed of the Gospels. Every one
framed his confession according to his own desire or his own character;
while creeds were multiplying, the one Faith was perishing. Since the
Council of Nicæa (§ 5) there had been no end to this writing of creeds.
So busily were men wrangling over words, seeking novelties, debating
knotty points, forming factions and pursuing ambitions, refusing to
agree and hurling anathemas at one another, that almost all had drifted
away from Christ. The confusion was such that none could either teach or
learn in safety. Within the last year no less than four contradictory
creeds had been promulgated. There was no single point of the Faith
which they or their fathers had held upon which violent hands had not
been laid. And the pitiful creed which for the moment held the field was
that the Son is ‘like the Father’; whether this likeness were perfect or
imperfect was left in obscurity. The result of constant change and
ceaseless dispute was self-contradiction and mutual destruction. This
search for a faith (§ 6) involved the assumption that the true Faith was
not ready to the believer’s hand. They would have it in writing, as
though the heart were not its place. Baptism implied the Faith and was
useless without its acceptance; to teach a new Christ after Baptism, or
to alter the Faith then declared, was sin against the Holy Ghost. The
chief cause of the continuance of the present blasphemy was the love of
applause; men invented grandiloquent paraphrases in place of the
Apostles’ Creed, to delude the vulgar, to conceal their aberrations, to
effect a compromise with other forms of error. They would do anything
rather than confess that they had been wrong. When the storm arises (§
7) the mariner returns to the harbour he had left; the spendthrift
youth, with ruin in prospect, to the sober habits of his father’s home.
So Christians, with shipwreck of the Faith in sight and the heavenly
patrimony almost lost, must return to the safety which lies in the
primitive, Apostolic Baptismal Creed. They must not condemn as
presumptuous or profane the Nicene confession, but eschew it as giving
occasion to attacks upon the Faith and to denials of the truth on the
ground of novelty. There is danger lest innovation creep in, excused as
improvement of this creed; and emendation is an endless process, which
leads the emenders to condemnation of each other. Hilary now (§8)
professes his sincere admiration of Constantius’ devout purpose and
earnestness in seeking the truth, which he who denies is antichrist, and
he who feigns is anathema. He entreats the Emperor to allow him to
expound the Faith, in his own presence, before the Council which was now
debating the subject at Constantinople. <span id="page_xxiii">p.
xxiii</span> <span id="ii.iii.i-Page_xxiii"></span>His exposition shall
be Scriptural; he will use the words of Christ, Whose exile and Whose
bishop he is. The Emperor seeks the Faith; let him hear it not from
modern volumes, but from the books of God. Even in the West it may be
taught, whence shall come some that shall sit at meat in the kingdom of
God. This is a matter not of philosophy, but of the teaching of the
Gospel. He asks audience rather for the Emperor’s sake and for God’s
Churches than for himself. He is sure of the faith that is in him; it is
God’s, and he will never change it. But (§ 9) the Emperor must bear in
mind that every heretic professes that his own is the Scriptural
doctrine. So say Marcellus, Photinus, and the rest. He prays (§ 10) for
the Emperor’s best attention; his plea will be for faith and unity and
eternal life. He will speak in all reverence for Constantius’ royal
position, and for his faith, and what he says shall tend to peace
between East and West. Finally (§ 11) he gives, as an outline of the
address he proposes to deliver, the series of texts on which he will
base his argument. This is what the Holy Spirit has taught him to
believe. To this faith he will ever adhere, loyal to the Faith of his
fathers, and the creed of his Baptism, and the Gospel as he has learnt
it.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p93"></span>In this address, to which we cannot
wonder that Constantius made no response, there is much that is
remarkable. There is no doubt that Hilary’s exile had been a political
measure, and that the Emperor, in this as in the numerous other cases of
the same kind, had acted deliberately and with full knowledge of the
circumstances in the way that seemed to him most conducive to the
interests of permanent peace. Hilary’s assumption that Constantius had
been deceived is a legitimate allusion, which no one could
misunderstand, to a fact which could not be respectfully stated. That he
should have spoken as he did, and indeed that he should have raised the
subject at all, is a clear sign of the uncertainty of the times. A
timorous appeal for mercy would have been useless; a bold statement of
innocence, although, as things turned out, it failed, was an effort
worth making to check the Homoean advance. Saturninus, as we saw, was
one of the Court party among the bishops, and he was an enemy of Julian,
who was soon to permit his deposition. Julian’s knowledge of Hilary can
have been but small; his exile began within a month or two of the
Cæsar’s arrival in Gaul, and Julian was not responsible for it. For good
or for evil, he had little to say in the case. But the suspicions were
already aroused which were soon to lead to Julian’s revolt, and
Constantius had begun to give the orders which would lessen Julian’s
military force, and were, as he supposed, intended to prepare his
downfall. To appeal to Julian and to attack Saturninus was to remind
Constantius very broadly that great interests were at stake, and that a
protector might be found for the creed which he persecuted. And his
double mention of the West (§§ 8, 10) as able to teach the truth, and as
needing to be reconciled with the East, has a political ring. It
suggests that the Western provinces are a united force, with which the
Emperor must reckon. The fact that Constantius, though he did not grant
the meeting in his own presence with Saturninus, which Hilary had asked
for, yet did grant the substance of his prayer, allowing him to return
without obstacle to his diocese, seems to shew that the Emperor felt the
need for caution and concession in the West.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p94"></span>The theological part of the letter is
even more remarkable. Its doctrine is, of course, exactly that of the
*De Trinitate*. The summary of Scripture proofs for the doctrine in §
11, the allusion to unlearned fishermen who have been teachers of the
Faith <span id="fr_61"></span>[62](#fn_61) , and several other passages,
are either anticipations or reminiscences of that work. But the interest
of the letter lies in its bold proposal to go behind all the modern
creeds, of the confusion of which a vivid picture is drawn, and revert
to the baptismal formula. Here is a leading combatant on the Catholic
side actually proposing to withdraw the Nicene confes<span
id="page_xxiv">p. xxiv</span> <span
id="ii.iii.i-Page_xxiv"></span>sion:—‘Amid these shipwrecks of faith,
when our inheritance of the heavenly patrimony is almost squandered, our
safety lies in clinging to that first and only Gospel Faith which we
confessed and apprehended at our Baptism, and in making no change in
that one form which, when we welcome it and listen to it, brings the
right faith. <span id="fr_62"></span>[63](#fn_62) I do not mean that we
should condemn as a godless and blasphemous writing the work of the
Synod of our fathers; yet rash men make use of it as a means of gain
saying’ (§ 7). The Nicene Creed <span id="fr_63"></span>[64](#fn_63) ,
Hilary goes on to say, had been the starting-point of an endless chain
of innovations and amendments, and thus had done harm instead of good.
We have seen that Hilary was not only acting with the Semiarians, but
was nearer to them in many ways than he was to Athanasius. The future of
his friends was now in doubt; not only was their doctrine in danger,
but, after the example they had themselves set, they must have been
certain that defeat meant deposition. This was a concession which only a
sense of extreme urgency could have induced Hilary to make. Yet even now
he avoids the mistake of Liberius. He offers to sign no compromising
creed; he only proposes that all modern creeds be consigned to the same
oblivion. It was, in effect, the offer of another compromise in lieu of
the Homoean; though Hilary makes it perfectly clear what is, in his
eyes, the only sense in which this simple and primitive confession can
honestly be made, yet assuredly those whose doctrine most widely
diverged would have felt able to make it. That the proposal was
sincerely meant, and that his words, uncompromising as they are in
assertion of the truth, were not intended for a simple defiance of the
enemy, is shewn by the list of heretics whom he advances, in § 9, in
proof of his contention that all error claims to be based on Scripture.
Three of them, Montanus, Manichæus and Marcion, were heretics in the
eyes of an Arian as much as of a Catholic; the other three, Marcellus,
Photinus and Sabellius, were those with whom the Arians were constantly
taunting their adversaries. Hilary avoids, deliberately as we may be
sure, the use of any name which could wound his opponents. But bold and
eloquent and true as the appeal of Hilary was, it was still less likely
that his petition for a hearing in Council should be granted than that
he should be allowed to disprove the accusations which had led to his
exile. The Homoean leaders had the victory in their hands, and they knew
it, if Hilary and his friends were still in the dark. They did not want
conciliation, but revenge, and this appeal was foredoomed to failure.
The end of the crisis soon came. The Semiarian leaders were deposed, not
on the charge of heresy, for that would have been inconsistent with the
Homoean position and also with their acquiescence in the Homoean
formula, but on some of those complaints concerning conduct which were
always forthcoming when they were needed. Among the victims was not only
Basil of Ancyra, Hilary’s friend, but also Macedonius of Constantinople,
who was in after days to be the chief of the party which denied the true
Godhead of the Holy Ghost. He and his friends were probably unconscious
at this time of the gulf which divided them from such men as Hilary, who
for their part were content, in the interests of unity, with language
which understated their belief, or else had not yet a clear sense of
their faith upon this point. In any case it was well that the final
victory of the true Faith was not won at this time, and with the aid of
such allies; we may even regard it as a sign of some short-sightedness
on Hilary’s part that he had thrown himself so heartily into their
cause. But he, at any rate, was not to suffer. The two Eastern parties,
Homoean and Semiarian, which alternately ejected one another from their
sees, were very evenly balanced, and though Constantius was now on the
side of the former, his friendship was not to be <span id="page_xxv">p.
xxv</span> <span id="ii.iii.i-Page_xxv"></span>trusted. The solid
orthodoxy of the West was an influence which, as Hilary had hinted,
could not be ignored; and even in the East the Nicenes were a power
worth conciliating. Hence the Homoeans gave a share of the Semiarian
spoils to them <span id="fr_64"></span>[65](#fn_64) ; and it was part of
the same policy, and not, as has been quaintly suggested, because they
were afraid of his arguments, that they permitted Hilary to return to
Gaul. Reasons of state as well as of ecclesiastical interest favoured
his restoration.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p99"></span>In the late revolution, though the Faith
had suffered, individual Catholics had gained. But the party to which
Hilary had attached himself, and from which he had hoped so much was
crushed; and his personal advantage did not compensate, in his eyes, for
the injury to truth. He has left us a memorial of his feelings in the
*Invective against Constantius*, one of the bitterest documents of a
controversy in which all who engaged were too earnest to spare their
opponents. It is an admirable piece of rhetoric suffused with passion,
not the less spontaneous because its form, according to the canons of
taste of that time, is perfect. For we must remember that the education
of the day was literary, its aim being to provide the recipient with a
prompt and felicitous expression of his thoughts, whatever they might
be. The invective was certainly written in the first place as a relief
to Hilary’s own feelings; he could not anticipate that Constantius had
changed his views for the last time; that he would soon cease to be the
master of Gaul, and would be dead within some eighteen months. But the
existence of other attacks upon Constantius, composed about this time,
makes it probable that there was some secret circulation of such
documents; and we can as little accuse the writers of cowardice, when we
consider the Emperor’s far-reaching power, as we can attribute to them
injustice towards him.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p100"></span>The book begins with an animated summons
to resistance:—‘The time for speech is come, the time of silence past.
Let us look for Christ’s coming, for Antichrist is already in power. Let
the shepherds cry aloud, for the hirelings are fled. Let us lay down our
lives for the sheep, for the thieves have entered in and the ravening
lion prowls around. With such words on our lips let us go forth to
martyrdom, for the angel of Satan has transfigured himself into an angel
of light.’ After more Scriptural language of the same kind, Hilary goes
on to say (§ 2) that, though he had been fully conscious of the extent
of the danger to the Faith, he had been strictly moderate in his
conduct. After the exiling of orthodox bishops at Arles and Milan, he
and the bishops of Gaul had contented themselves with abstaining from
communion with Saturninus, Ursacius and Valens. Other heretical bishops
had been allowed a time for repentance. And even after he had been
forced to attend the Synod of Béziers, refused a hearing for the charges
of heresy which he wished to bring, and finally exiled, he had never, in
word or writing, uttered any denunciation against his opponents, the
Synagogue of Satan, who falsely claimed to be the Church of Christ. He
had not faltered in his own belief, but had welcomed every suggestion
that held out a hope of unity; and in that hope he had even refrained
from blaming those who associated or worshipped with the excommunicate.
Setting all personal considerations on one side, he had laboured for a
restoration of the Church through a general repentance. His reserve and
consistency (§ 3) is evidence that what he is about to say is not due to
personal irritation. He speaks in the name of Christ, and his prolonged
silence makes it his duty to speak plainly. It had been happy for him
had he lived in the days of Nero or Decius (§ 4). The Holy Spirit would
have fired him to endure as did the martyrs of Scripture; torments and
death would have been welcome. It would have been a fair fight with an
open enemy. But now (§ 5) Constantius was Antichrist, and waged his
warfare by deceit and flattery. It was scourging then, pampering now; no
longer freedom in prison, but slavery at court, and gold as deadly as
the sword had <span id="page_xxvi">p. xxvi</span> <span
id="ii.iii.i-Page_xxvi"></span>been; martyrs no longer burnt at the
stake, but a secret lighting of the fires of hell. All that seems good
in Constantius, his confession of Christ, his efforts for unity, his
severity to heretics, his reverence for bishops, his building of
churches, is perverted to evil ends. He professes loyalty to Christ, but
his constant aim is to prevent Christ from being honoured equally with
the Father. Hence (§ 6) it is a clear duty to speak out, as the Baptist
to Herod and the Maccabees to Antiochus. Constantius is addressed (§ 7)
in the words in which Hilary would have addressed Nero or Decius or
Maximian had he been arraigned before them, as the enemy of God and His
Church, a persecutor and a tyrant. But he has a peculiar infamy, worse
than theirs, for it is as a pretended Christian that he opposes Christ,
imprisons bishops, overawes the Church by military force, threatens and
starves one council (at Rimini) into submission, and frustrates the
purpose of another (Seleucia) by sowing dissension. To the pagan
Emperors the Church owed a great debt (§ 8); the Martyrs with whom they
had enriched her were still working daily wonders, healing the sick,
casting out evil spirits, suspending the law of gravitation <span
id="fr_65"></span>[66](#fn_65) . But Constantius’ guilt has no
mitigation. A nominal Christian, he has brought unmixed evil upon the
Church. The victims of his perversion cannot even plead bodily suffering
as an excuse for their lapse. The devil is his father, from whom he has
learnt his skill in misleading. He says to Christ, *Lord, Lord*, but
shall not enter the kingdom of heaven (§ 9), for he denies the Son, and
therefore the fatherhood of God. The old persecutors were enemies of
Christ only; Constantius insults the Father also, by making Him lie. He
is a wolf in sheep’s clothing (§ 10). He loads the Church with the gold
of the state and the spoil of pagan temples; it is the kiss with which
Judas betrayed his Master. The clergy receive immunities and remissions
of taxation: it is to tempt them to deny Christ. He will only relate
such acts of Constantius’ tyranny as affect the Church (§ 11). He will
not press, for he does not know the offence alleged, his conduct in
branding bishops on the forehead, as convicts, and setting them to
labour in the mines. But he recounts his long course of oppression and
faction at Alexandria; a warfare longer than that which he had waged
against Persia <span id="fr_66"></span>[67](#fn_66) . Elsewhere, in the
East, he had spread terror and strife, always to prevent Christ being
preached. Then he had turned to the West. The excellent Paulinus had
been driven from Treves, and cruelly treated, banished from all
Christian society <span id="fr_67"></span>[68](#fn_67) , and forced to
consort with Montanist heretics. Again, at Milan, the soldiers had
brutally forced their way through the orthodox crowds and torn bishops
from the altar; a crime like that of the Jews who slew Zacharias in the
Temple. He had robbed Rome also of her bishop, whose restoration was as
disgraceful to the Emperor as his banishment. At Toulouse the clergy had
been shamefully maltreated, and gross irreverence committed in the
Church. These are the deeds of Antichrist. Hitherto, Hilary has spoken
of matters of public notoriety, though not of his own observation. Now
(§ 12) he comes to the Synod of Seleucia, at which he had been present.
He found there as many blasphemers as Constantius chose. Only the
Egyptians, with the exception of George, the intruder into the See of
Athanasius, were avowedly Homoousian. <span id="page_xxvii">p.
xxvii</span> <span id="ii.iii.i-Page_xxvii"></span>Yet of the one
hundred and five bishops who professed the Homoeousian Creed, he found
‘some piety in the words of some.’ But the Anomœans were rank
blasphemers; he gives, in § 13, words from a sermon by their leader,
Eudoxius of Antioch, which were quoted by the opposition, and received
with the abhorrence they deserved. This party found (§ 14) that no
toleration was to be expected for such doctrines, and so forged the
Homoean creed, which condemned equally the *homoousion*, the
*homoiousion* and the *anomoion*. Their insincerity in thus rejecting
their own belief was manifest to the Council, and one of them, who
canvassed Hilary’s support, avowed blank Arianism in the conversation.
The large Homoeousian majority (§ 15) deposed the authors of the Homoean
confession, who flew for aid to Constantius, who received them with
honour and allowed them to air their heresy. The tables were turned; the
minority, aided by the Emperor’s threats of exile, drove the majority,
in the persons of their ten delegates, to conform to the new creed. The
people were coerced by the prefect, the bishops threatened within the
palace walls; the chief cities of the East were provided with heretical
Bishops. It was nothing less than making a present to the devil of the
whole world for which Christ died. Constantius professed (§ 16) that his
aim was to abolish unscriptural words. But what right had he to give
orders to bishops or dictate the language of their sermons? A new
disease needed new remedies; warfare was inevitable when fresh enemies
arose. And, after all, the Homoean formula, ‘like the Father,’ was
itself unscriptural. Scripture is adduced (§ 17) by Hilary to prove that
the Son is not merely like, but equal to, the Father; and (§ 18) one in
nature with Him, having (§ 19) the form and the glory of God. This
‘likeness’ is a trap (§ 20); chaff strewn on water, straw covering a
pit, a hook hidden in the bait. The Catholic sense is the only true
sense in which the word can be used, as is shewn more fully, by
arguments to be found in the *De Trinitate*, in §§ 21, 22. And now he
asks Constantius (§ 23) the plain question, what his creed is. He has
made a hasty progress, by a steep descent, to the nethermost pit of
blasphemy. He began with the Faith, which deserved the name, of Nicæa;
he changed it at Antioch. But he was a clumsy builder; the structure he
raised was always falling, and had to be constantly renewed; creed after
creed had been framed, the safeguards and anathemas of which would have
been needless had he remained steadfast to the Nicene. Hilary does not
lament the creeds which Constantius had abandoned (§ 24); they might be
harmless in themselves, but they represented no real belief. Yet why
should he reject his own creeds? There was no such reason for his
discontent with them as there had been, in his heresy, for his rejection
of the Nicene. This ceaseless variety arose from want of faith; ‘one
Faith, one Baptism,’ is the mark of truth. The result had been to
stultify the bishops. They had been driven to condemn in succession the
accurate *homoousion* and the harmless *homoiousion*, and even the word
*ousia*, or substance. These were the pranks of a mere buffoon, amusing
himself at the expense of the Church, and compelling the bishops, like
dogs returning to their vomit, to accept what they had rejected. So many
had been the contradictory creeds that every one was now, or had been in
the past, a heretic confessed. And this result had only been attained (§
26) by violence, as for instance in the cases of the Eastern and African
bishops. The latter had committed to writing their sentence upon
Ursacius and Valens; the Emperor had seized the document. It might go to
the flames, as would Constantius himself, but the sentence was
registered with God. Other men (§ 27) had waged war with the living, but
Constantius extended his hostility to the dead; he contradicted the
teaching of the saints, and his bishops rejected their predecessors, to
whom they owed their orders, by denying their doctrine. The three
hundred and eighteen at Nicæa were anathema to him, and his own father
who had presided there. Yet though he might scorn the past, he could not
control the future. The truth defined at Nicæa had been solemnly
committed to writing and remained, however Constantius might condemn
<span id="page_xxviii">p. xxviii</span> <span
id="ii.iii.i-Page_xxviii"></span>it. ‘Give ear,’ Hilary concludes, ‘to
the holy meaning of the words, to the unalterable determination of the
Church, to the faith which thy father avowed, to the sure hope in which
man must put his trust, the universal conviction of the doom of heresy;
and learn therefrom that thou art the foe of God’s religion, the enemy
of the tombs of the saints <span id="fr_68"></span>[69](#fn_68) , the
rebellious inheritor of thy father’s piety.’

<span id="ii.iii.i-p105"></span>Here, again, there is much of interest.
Hilary’s painful feeling of isolation is manifest. He had withdrawn from
communion with Saturninus and the few Arians of Gaul, but has to confess
that his own friends were not equally uncompromising. The Gallic
bishops, with their enormous dioceses, had probably few occasions for
meeting, and prudent men could easily avoid a conflict which the Arians,
a feeble minority, would certainly not provoke. The bishops had been
courteous, or more than courteous; and Hilary dared not protest. His
whole importance as a negotiator in the East depended on the belief that
he was the representative of a harmonious body of opinion. To advertise
this departure from his policy of warfare would have been fatal to his
influence. And if weakness, as he must have judged it, was leading his
brethren at home into a recognition of Arians, Constantius and his
Homoean counsellors had ingeniously contrived a still more serious break
in the orthodox line of battle. There was reason in his bitter complaint
of the Emperor’s generosity. He was lavish with his money, and it was
well worth a bishop’s while to be his friend. And of this expenditure
Nicenes were enjoying their share, and that without having to surrender
their personal belief, for all that was required was that they should
not be inquisitive as to their neighbours’ heresies. But Nicene bishops,
of an accommodating character, were not only holding their own; they
were enjoying a share of the spoils of the routed Semiarians. It was
almost a stroke of genius thus to shatter Hilary’s alliance; for it was
certainly not by chance that among the sees to which Nicenes, in full
and formal communion with him, were preferred, was Ancyra itself, from
which his chosen friend Basil had been ejected. Disgusted though Hilary
must have been with such subservience, and saddened by the downfall of
his friends, it is clear that the Emperor’s policy had some success,
even with him. His former hopes being dashed to the ground, he now
turns, with an interest he had never before shewn, to the Nicene Creed
as a bulwark of the Faith. And we can see the same feeling at work in
his very cold recognition that there was ‘some piety in the words of
some’ among his friends at Seleucia. It would be unjust to think of
Hilary as a timeserver, but we must admit that there is something almost
too businesslike in this dismission from his mind of former hopes and
friendships. He looked always to a practical result in the establishment
of truth, and a judgment so sound as his could not fail to see that the
Asiatic negotiations were a closed chapter in his life. And his mind
must have been full of the thought that he was returning to the West,
which had its own interests and its own prejudices, and was impartially
suspicious of all Eastern theologians; whose ‘selfish coldness <span
id="fr_69"></span>[70](#fn_69) ’ towards the East was, indeed, ten years
later still a barrier against unity. If Hilary was to be, as he
purposed, a power in the West, he must promptly resume the Western tone;
and he will have succumbed to very natural infirmity if, in his
disappointment, he was disposed to couple together his allies who had
failed with the Emperor who had caused their failure.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p107"></span>The historical statements of the
Invective, as has been said, cannot always be verified. The account of
the Synod of Seleucia is, however, unjust to Constantius. It was the
free <span id="page_xxix">p. xxix</span> <span
id="ii.iii.i-Page_xxix"></span>expression of the belief of Asia, and if
heretics were present by command of the Emperor, an overwhelming
majority, more or less orthodox, were present by the same command. But
the character and policy of Constantius are delineated fairly enough.
The results, disastrous both to conscience and to peace, are not too
darkly drawn, and no sarcasm could be too severe for the absurd as well
as degrading position to which he had reduced the Church. But the
invective is interesting not only for its contents but as an
illustration of its writer’s character. Strong language meant less in
Latin than in English, but the passionate earnestness of these pages
cannot be doubted. They are not more violent than the attacks of
Athanasius upon Constantius, nor less violent than those of Lucifer; if
the last author is usually regarded as pre-eminent in abuse, he deserves
his reputation not because of the vigour of his denunciation, but
because his pages contain nothing but railing. The change is sudden, no
doubt, from respect for Constantius and hopefulness as to his conduct,
but the provocation, we must remember, had been extreme. If the faith of
the Fathers was intense and, in the best sense, childlike, there is
something childlike also in their gusts of passion, their uncontrolled
emotion in victory or defeat, the personal element which is constantly
present in their controversies. Though, henceforth, ecclesiastical
policy was to be but a secondary interest with Hilary, and diplomacy was
to give place to a more successful attempt to influence thought, yet we
can see in another sphere the same spirit of conflict; for it is evident
that his labours against heresy, beside the more serious satisfaction of
knowing that he was on the side of truth, are lightened by the
logician’s pleasure in exposing fallacy.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p108"></span>The deposition of the Semiarian leaders
took place very early in the year 360, and Hilary’s dismissal homewards,
one of the same series of measures, must soon have followed. If he had
formed the plan of his invective before he left Constantinople, it is
not probable that he wrote it there. It was more probably the employment
of his long homeward journey. His natural route would be by the great
Egnatian Way, which led through Thessalonica to Durazzo, thence by sea
to Brindisi, and so to Rome and the North. It is true that the
historians, or rather Rufinus, from whom the rest appear to have
borrowed all their knowledge, say that Illyricum was one sphere of his
labours for the restoration of the Faith. But a journey by land through
Illyricum, the country of Valens and Ursacius and thoroughly
indoctrinated with Arianism, would not only have been dangerous but
useless. For Hilary’s purpose was to confirm the faithful among the
bishops and to win back to orthodoxy those who had been terrorised or
deceived into error, and thus to cement a new confederacy against the
Homoeans; not to make a vain assault upon what was, for the present, an
impregnable position. And though the Western portion of the *Via
Egnatia* did not pass through the existing political division called
Illyricum, it did lie within the region called in history and literature
by that name. Again, the evidence that Hilary passed through Rome is not
convincing; but since it was his best road, and he would find there the
most important person among those who had wavered in their allegiance to
truth, we may safely accept it. He made it his business, we are
told <span id="fr_70"></span>[71](#fn_70) , to exhort the Churches
through which he passed to abjure heresy and return to the true faith.
But we know nothing of the places through which he passed before
reaching Rome, the see of Liberius, with whom it was most desirable for
him to be on friendly terms. Liberius was not so black as he has
sometimes been painted, but he was not a heroic figure. His position was
exactly that of many other bishops in the Western lands. They had not
denied their own faith, but at one time or another, in most cases at
Rimini, they had admitted that there was room in the same communion for
Arian bishops and for themselves. In the case of Liberius the
circumstances are involved in some obscurity, but it is clear that he
had, in order to obtain remission of his exile, taken a position <span
id="page_xxx">p. xxx</span> <span id="ii.iii.i-Page_xxx"></span>which
was practically that of the old Council of the Dedication <span
id="fr_71"></span>[72](#fn_71) . Hilary, we remember, had called that
Council a ‘Synod of the Saints,’ when speaking of it from the Eastern
point of view. But he had never stooped to such a minimising of the
Faith as its words, construed at the best, involved. Easterns, in their
peculiar difficulties, he was hopeful enough to believe, had framed its
terms in a legitimate sense; he could accept it from them, but could not
use it as the expression of his own belief. So to do would have been a
retrograde step; and this step Liberius had taken, to the scandal of the
Church. Yet he, and all whose position in any way resembled his—all,
indeed, except some few incorrigible ringleaders—were in the Church;
their deflection was, in Hilary’s words, an ‘inward evil.’ And Hilary
was no Lucifer; his desire was to unite all who could be united in
defence of the truth. This was the plan dictated by policy as well as by
charity, and in the case of Liberius, if, as is probable, they met, it
was certainly rewarded with success. Indeed, according to Rufinus,
Hilary was successful at every stage of his journey. Somewhere on his
course he fell in with Eusebius of Vercelli, who had been exiled at the
Council of Milan, had passed his time in the region to the East of that
in which Hilary had been interned, and was now profiting by the same
Homoean amnesty to return to his diocese. He also had been using the
opportunities of travel for the promotion of the Faith. He had come from
Antioch, and therefore had probably landed at or near Naples. He was now
travelling northwards, exhorting as he went. His encounter with Hilary
stimulated him to still greater efforts; but Rufinus tells us <span
id="fr_72"></span>[73](#fn_72) that he was the less successful of the
two, for Hilary, ‘a man by nature mild and winning, and also learned and
singularly apt at persuasion, applied himself to the task with a greater
diligence and skill.’ They do not appear to have travelled in company;
the cities to be visited were too numerous and their own time, eager as
they must have been to reach their homes, too short. But their journey
seems to have been a triumphal progress; the bishops were induced to
renounce their compromise with error, and the people inflamed against
heresy, so that, in the words of Rufinus <span
id="fr_73"></span>[74](#fn_73) , ‘these two men, glorious luminaries as
it were of the universe, flooded Illyricum and Italy and the Gallic
provinces with their splendour, so that even from hidden nooks and
corners all darkness of heresy was banished.’

<span id="ii.iii.i-p113"></span>In the passage just quoted Rufinus
directly connects the publication of Hilary’s masterpiece, usually
called the *De Trinitate*, with this work of reconciliation. After
speaking of his success in it, he proceeds, ‘Moreover he published his
books *Concerning the Faith*, composed in a lofty style, wherein he
displayed the guile of the heretics and the deceptions practiced upon
our friends, together with the credulous and misplaced sincerity of the
latter, with such skill that his ample instructions amended the errors
not only of those whom he encountered, but also of those whom distance
hindered him from meeting face to face.’ Some of the twelve books of
which the work is composed had certainly been published during his
exile, and it is possible that certain portions may date from his later
residence in Gaul. But a study of the work itself leads to the
conclusion that Rufinus was right in the main in placing it at this
stage of Hilary’s life; this was certainly the earliest date at which it
can have been widely influential.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p114"></span>The title which Hilary gave to his work
as a whole was certainly *De Fide, Concerning the Faith*, the name by
which, as we saw, Rufinus describes it. It is probable that its
controversial purpose was indicated by the addition of *contra Arianos*;
but it is certain that its present title, *De Trinitate*, was not given
to it by Hilary. The word *Trinitas* is of extraordinarily rare
occurrence in his writings; the only instances seem to be in *Trin*. i.
22, 36, where he is giving a very condensed summary of the contents of
his work. In the actual course of his argument the word is scrupulously
avoided, as it is in all his other writings. In <span id="page_xxxi">p.
xxxi</span> <span id="ii.iii.i-Page_xxxi"></span>this respect he
resembles Athanasius, who will usually name the Three Persons rather
than employ this convenient and even then familiar term. There may have
been some undesirable connotation in it which he desired to avoid,
though this is hardly probable; it is more likely that both Athanasius
and Hilary, conscious that the use of technical terms of theology was in
their times a playing with edged tools, deliberately avoided a word
which was unnecessary, though it might be useful. And in Hilary’s case
there is the additional reason that to his mind the antithesis of truth
and falsehood was One God or Two Gods <span
id="fr_74"></span>[75](#fn_74) ; that to him, more than to any other
Western theologian, the developed and clearly expressed thought of Three
coequal Persons was strange. Since, then, the word and the thought were
rarely present in his mind, we cannot accept as the title of his work
what is, after all, only a mediæval description.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p116"></span>The composite character of the treatise,
which must still for convenience be called the *De Trinitate*, is
manifest. The beginnings of several of its books, which contain far more
preliminary, and often rhetorical, matter than is necessary to link them
on to their predecessors, point to a separate publication of each; a
course which was, indeed, necessary under the literary conditions of the
time. This piecemeal publication is further proved by the elaborate
summaries of the contents of previous books which are given as, e.g., at
the beginning of *Trin*. x.; and by the frequent repetition of earlier
arguments at a later stage, which shews that the writer could not trust
to the reader’s possession of the whole. Though no such attention has
been devoted to the growth of this work as Noeldechen has paid to that
of the treatises of Tertullian, yet some account of the process can be
given. For although Hilary himself, in arranging the complete treatise,
has done much to make it run smoothly and consecutively, and though the
scribes who have copied it have probably made it appear still more
homogeneous, yet some clues to its construction are left. The first is
his description of the first book as the second (v. 3). This implies
that the fourth is the first; and when we examine the fourth we find
that, if we leave out of consideration a little preliminary matter, it
is the beginning of a refutation of Arianism. It states the Arian case,
explains the necessity of the term *homoousios*, gives a list of the
texts on which the Arians relied, and sets out at length one of their
statements of doctrine, the Epistle of Arius to Alexander, which it
proceeds to demolish, in the remainder of the fourth book and in the
fifth, by arguments from particular passages and from the general sense
of the Old Testament. In the sixth book, for the reason already given,
the Arian Creed is repeated, after a vivid account of the evils of the
time, and the refutation continued by arguments from the New Testament.
In § 2 of this book there is further evidence of the composite character
of the treatise. Hilary says that though in the *first* book he has
already set out the Arian manifesto, yet he thinks good, as he is still
dealing with it, to repeat it in this *sixth*. Hilary seems to have
overlooked the discrepancy, which some officious scribe has half
corrected <span id="fr_75"></span>[76](#fn_75) . The seventh book, he
says at the beginning, is the climax of the whole work. If we take the
*De Trinitate* as a whole, this is a meaningless flourish; but if we
look on to the eighth book, and find an elaborate introduction followed
by a line of argument different from that of the four preceding books,
we must be inclined to think that the seventh is the climax and
termination of what has been an independent work, consisting of four
books. And if we turn to the end of the seventh, and note that it alone
of all the twelve has nothing that can be called a peroration, but ends
in an absolutely bald and businesslike manner, we are almost forced to
conclude that this is because the peroration which it once had, as the
climax of the work, was unsuitable for its new position and has been
wholly removed. Had Hilary written this book as one of the series of
twelve, he would certainly, according to all rules of literary <span
id="page_xxxii">p. xxxii</span> <span
id="ii.iii.i-Page_xxxii"></span>propriety, have given it a formal
termination. In these four books then, the fourth to the seventh, we may
see the nucleus of the *De Trinitate*; not necessarily the part first
written, for he says (iv. 1) <span id="fr_76"></span>[77](#fn_76) that
some parts, at any rate, of the three first books are of earlier date,
but that around which the whole has been arranged. It has a complete
unity of its own, following step by step the Arian Creed, of which we
shall presently speak. It is purely controversial, and quite possibly
the title *Contra Arianos*, for which there is some evidence, really
belongs to this smaller work, though it clung, not unnaturally, to the
whole for which Hilary devised the more appropriate *De Fide*.
Concerning the date of these four books, we can only say that they must
have been composed during his exile. For though he does not mention his
exile, yet he is already a bishop (vi. 2), and knows about the
*homoousion* (iv. 4). We have seen already that his acquaintance with
the Nicene Creed began only just before his exile; he must, therefore,
have written them during his enforced leisure in Asia.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p119"></span>In the beginning of the fourth book
Hilary refers back to the proof furnished in the previous books, written
some time ago, of the Scriptural character of his faith and of the
unscriptural nature of all the heresies. Setting aside the first book,
which does not correspond to this description, we find what he describes
in the second and third. These form a short connected treatise, complete
in itself. It is much more academic than that of which we have already
spoken; it deals briefly with all the current heresies (ii. 4 ff.), but
shews no sign that one of them, more than the others, was an urgent
danger. There is none of the passion of conflict; Hilary is in the mood
for rhetoric, and makes the most of his opportunities. He expatiates,
for instance, on the greatness of his theme (ii. 5), harps almost to
excess upon the fisherman to whom mysteries so great were revealed (ii.
13 ff.), dilates, after the manner of a sermon, upon the condescension
and the glory manifested in the Incarnation, describes miracles with
much liveliness of detail (iii. 5, 20), and ends the treatise (iii.
24–26) with a nobly eloquent statement of the paradox of wisdom which is
folly and folly which is wisdom, and of faith as the only means of
knowing God. The little work, though it deals professedly with certain
heresies, is in the main constructive. It contains far more of positive
assertion of the truth, without reference to opponents, than it does of
criticism of their views. In sustained calmness of tone—it recognises
the existence of honest doubt (iii. 1),—and in literary workmanship, it
excels any other part of the *De Trinitate* and in the latter respect is
certainly superior to the more conversational *Homilies on the Psalms*.
But it suffers, in comparison with the books which follow, by a certain
want of intensity; the reader feels that it was written, in one sense,
for the sake of writing it, and written, in another sense, for purposes
of general utility. It is not, as later portions of the work were,
forged as a weapon for use in a conflict of life and death. Yet,
standing as it does, at the beginning of the whole great treatise, it
serves admirably as an introduction. It is clear, convincing and
interesting, and its eloquent peroration carries the reader on to the
central portion of the work, which begins with the fourth book. Except
that the second book has lost its exordium, for the same reason that the
seventh has lost its conclusion, the two books are complete as well as
homogeneous. Of the date nothing definite can be said. There is no sign
of any special interest in Arianism; and Hilary’s leisure for a paper
conflict with a dead foe like Ebionism suggests that he was writing
before the strife had reached Gaul. The general tone of the two books is
quite consistent with this; and we may regard it as more probable than
not that they were composed before the exile; whether they were
published at the time as a separate treatise, or laid on one side for a
while, cannot be known; the former supposition is the more reasonable.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p120"></span>The remaining books, from the eighth to
the twelfth, appear to have been written <span id="page_xxxiii">p.
xxxiii</span> <span id="ii.iii.i-Page_xxxiii"></span>continuously, with
a view to their forming part of the present connected whole. They were,
no doubt, published separately, and they, with books iv. to vii., may
well be the letters (stripped, of course, in their permanent shape of
their epistolary accessories) which, Hilary feared, were obtaining no
recognition from his friends in Gaul. The last five have certain
references back to arguments in previous books <span
id="fr_77"></span>[78](#fn_77) , while these do not refer forward, nor
do the groups ii. iii. and iv.–vii. refer to one another. But books
viii.–xii. have also internal references, and promise that a subject
shall be fully treated in due course <span
id="fr_78"></span>[79](#fn_78) . We may therefore assume that, when he
began to write book viii., Hilary had already determined to make use of
his previous minor works, and that he now proceeded to complete his task
with constant reference to these. Evidences of exact date are here again
lacking; he writes as a bishop and as an exile <span
id="fr_79"></span>[80](#fn_79) , and under a most pressing necessity.
The preface to book viii., with its description of the dangers of the
time and of Hilary’s sense of the duty of a bishop, seems to represent
the state of mind in which he resolved to construct the present *De
Trinitate*. It is too emphatic for a mere transition from one step in a
continuous discussion to another. Regarding these last five books, then,
as written continuously, with one purpose and with one theological
outlook, we may fix an approximate date for them by two considerations.
They shew, in books ix. and x., that he was thoroughly conscious of the
increasing peril of Apollinarianism. They shew also, by their silence,
that he had determined to ignore what was one of the most obvious and
certainly the most offensive of the current modes of thought. There is
no refutation, except implicitly, and no mention of Anomœanism, that
extreme Arianism which pronounced the Son unlike the Father <span
id="fr_80"></span>[81](#fn_80) . This can be explained only in one way.
We have seen that Hilary thinks Arianism worth attack because it is an
’inward evil;’ that he does not, except in early and leisurely work such
as book ii., pay any attention to heresies which were obviously outside
the Church and had an organization of their own. We have seen also that
the Homoeans cast out their more holiest Anomœan brethren in 359. The
latter made no attempt to retrieve their position within the church;
they proceeded to establish a Church of their own, which was, so they
protested, the true one. It was under Jovian (<span class="c12"><span
id="ii.iii.i-p124.1"></span>a.d.</span> 362–363) that they consecrated
their own bishop for Constantinople <span id="fr_81"></span>[82](#fn_81)
; but the separation must have been visible for some time before that
decisive step was taken. Thus, when the *De Trinitate* took its present
form, Apollinarianism was risen above the Church’s horizon and
Anomœanism was sunk below it. We cannot, therefore, put the completion
of the work earlier shall the remission of Hilary’s exile; we cannot,
indeed, suppose that he had leisure to make it perfect except in his
home. Yet the work must have been for the most part finished before its
writer reached Italy on his return; and the issue or reissue of its
several portions was a natural, and certainly a powerful, measure
towards the end which he had at heart.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p126"></span>There remains the first book, which was
obviously, as Erasmus saw, the last to be composed. It is a survey of
the accomplished task, beginning with that account of Hilary’s spiritual
birth and growth which has already been mentioned. This is a piece of
writing which it is no undue praise to rank, for dignity and felicity of
language, among the noblest examples of Roman eloquence. Hooker, among
English authors, is the one whom it most suggests. Then there follows a
brief summary of the argument of the successive books, and a prayer for
the success of the work. This reads, and perhaps it was meant to read,
as though it were a prayer that he might worthily execute a plan which
as yet existed only in his brain; but it may also be interpreted, in the
more natural sense, as a petition that his hope might not be frustrated,
and that his book might appear to others what he trusted, <span
id="page_xxxiv">p. xxxiv</span> <span id="ii.iii.i-Page_xxxiv"></span>in
his own mind, that it was, true to Scripture, sound in logic, and
written with that lofty gravity which befitted the greatness of his
theme.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p127"></span>After speaking of the construction of
the work, as Hilary framed it, something must be said of certain
interpolations which it has suffered. The most important are those at
the end of book ix. and in x. 8, which flatly contradict his
teaching <span id="fr_82"></span>[83](#fn_82) . They are obvious
intrusions, imperfectly attested by manuscript authority, and condemned
by their own character. Hilary was not the writer to stultify himself
and confuse his readers by so clumsy a device as that of appending a
bald denial of its truth to a long and careful exposition of his
characteristic doctrine. Another passage, where the scholarship seems to
indicate the work of an inferior hand, is *Trin*. x. 40, in which there
is a singular misunderstanding of the Greek Testament <span
id="fr_83"></span>[84](#fn_83) . The writer must have known Greek, for
no manuscript of the Latin Bible would have suggested his mistake, and
therefore he must have written in early days. It is even possible that
Hilary himself was, for once, at fault in his scholarship. Yet, at the
most, the interpolations are few and, where they seriously affect the
sense, are easily detected <span id="fr_84"></span>[85](#fn_84) . Not
many authors of antiquity have escaped so lightly in this respect as
Hilary.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p131"></span>Hilary certainly intended his work to be
regarded as a whole; as a treatise *Concerning the Faith*, for it had
grown into something more than a refutation of Arianism. He has
carefully avoided, so far as the circumstances of the time and the
composite character of the treatise would allow him, any allusion to
names and events of temporary interest; there is, in fact, nothing more
definite than a repetition of the wish expressed in the Second Epistle
to Constantius, that it were possible to recur to the Baptismal formula
as the authoritative statement of the Faith <span
id="fr_85"></span>[86](#fn_85) . It is not, like the *De Synodis*;
written with a diplomatic purpose; it is, though cast inevitably in a
controversial form, a statement of permanent truths. This has involved
the sacrifice of much that would have been of immediate service, and
deprived the book of a great part of its value as a weapon in the
conflicts of the day. But we can see, by the selection he made of a
document to controvert, that Hilary’s choice was deliberate. It was no
recent creed, no confession to which any existing body of partisans was
pledged. He chose for refutation the Epistle of Arius to Alexander,
written almost forty years ago and destitute, it must have seemed, of
any but an historical interest. And it was no extreme statement of the
Arian position. This Epistle was ‘far more temperate and cautious <span
id="fr_86"></span>[87](#fn_86) ’ than its alternative, Arius’ letter to
Eusebius. The same wide outlook as is manifest in this indifference to
the interests of the moment is seen also in Hilary’s silence in regard
to the names of friends and foes. Marcellus, Apollinaris, Eudoxius,
Acacius are a few of those whom it must have seemed that he would do
well to renounce as imagined friends who brought his cause discredit, or
bitter enemies to truth and its advocates. But here also he refrains; no
names are mentioned except those of men whose heresies were already the
commonplaces of controversy. And there is also an absolute silence
concerning the feuds and alliances of the day. No notice is taken of the
loyalty of living confessors or the approximation to truth of
well-meaning waverers. The book contains no sign that it has any but a
general object; it is, as far as possible, an impersonal refutation of
error and statement of truth.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p134"></span>This was the deliberate purpose of
Hilary, and he had certainly counted its cost in immediate popularity
and success. For though, as we have seen, the work did produce, as it
deserved, a considerable effect at the time of its publication, it has
remained ever since, in spite of all its merits, in a certain obscurity.
There can be no doubt that this is largely due to the Mezentian union
with such a document as Arius’ Epistle <span id="page_xxxv">p.
xxxv</span> <span id="ii.iii.i-Page_xxxv"></span>to Alexander of the
decisively important section of the *De Trinitate*. The books in which
that Epistle is controverted were those of vital interest for the age;
and the method which Hilary’s plan constrained him to adopt was such as
to invite younger theologians to compete with him. Future generations
could not be satisfied with his presentation of the case. And again, his
plan of refuting the Arian document point by point <span
id="fr_87"></span>[88](#fn_87) , contrasting as it does with the free
course of his thought in the earlier and later books, tends to repel the
reader. The fourth book proves from certain texts that the Son is God;
the fifth from the same texts that He is true God. Hence this part of
the treatise is pervaded by a certain monotony; a cumulative impression
is produced by our being led forward again and again along successive
lines of argument to the same point, beyond which we make no progress
till the last proof is stated. The work is admirably and convincingly
done, but we are glad to hear the last of the Epistle of Arius to
Alexander, and accompany Hilary in a less embarrassed enquiry.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p136"></span>Yet the whole work has defects of its
own. It is burdened with much repetition; subjects, especially, which
have been treated in books ii. and iii. are discussed again at great
length in later books <span id="fr_88"></span>[89](#fn_88) . The
frequent stress laid upon the infinity of God, the limitations of human
speech and knowledge, the consequent incompleteness of the argument from
analogy, the humility necessary when dealing with infinities apparently
opposed <span id="fr_89"></span>[90](#fn_89) , though it adds to the
solemnity of the writer’s tone and was doubtless necessary when the work
was published in parts, becomes somewhat tedious in the course of a
continuous reading. And something must here be said of the peculiarities
of style. We saw that in places, as for instance in the beginning of the
*De Trinitate*, Hilary can rise to a singularly lofty eloquence. This
eloquence is not merely the unstudied utterance of an earnest faith, but
the expression given to it by one whom natural talent and careful
training had made a master of literary form. Yet, since his training was
that of an age whose standard of taste was far from classical purity,
much that must have seemed to him and to his contemporaries to be
admirably effective can excite no admiration now. He prays, at the end
of the first book, that his diction may be worthy of his theme, and
doubtless his effort was as sincere as his prayer. Had there been less
effort, there would certainly, in the judgment of a modern reader, have
been more success. But he could not foresee the future, and ingenious
affectations such as occur at the end of book viii. § 1, *impietati
insolenti, et insolentiæ vaniloquæ, et vaniloquio seducenti*, with the
jingle of rhymes which follows, are too frequent for our taste in his
pages <span id="fr_90"></span>[91](#fn_90) . Sometimes we find purple
patches which remind us of the rhetoric of Apuleius <span
id="fr_91"></span>[92](#fn_91) ; sometimes an excessive display of
symmetry and antithesis, which suggests to us St. Cyprian at his worst.
Yet Cyprian had the excuse that all his writings are short occasional
papers written for immediate effect; neither he, nor any Latin Christian
before Hilary, had ventured to construct a great treatise of theology,
intended to influence future ages as well as the present. Another
excessive development of rhetoric is the abuse of apostrophe, which
Hilary sometimes rides almost to death, as in his addresses to the
Fisherman, St. John, in the second book <span
id="fr_92"></span>[93](#fn_92) . These blemishes, however, do not
seriously affect his intelligibility. He has earned, in this as in
greater matters, an unhappy reputation for obscurity, which he has, to a
certain extent, deserved. His other writings, even the Commentary on St.
Matthew, are free from the involved language which sometimes makes the
*De Trinitate* hard to understand, and often hard to read with pleasure.
When Hilary was appealing to the Emperor, or addressing his own flock,
as in the *Homilies on the Psalms*, he has command of a style which is
always clear, stately on occasion, never weak or <span
id="page_xxxvi">p. xxxvi</span> <span
id="ii.iii.i-Page_xxxvi"></span>bald; in these cases he resisted, or did
not feel, the temptation to use the resources of his rhetoric. These,
unfortunately, had for their result the production of sentences which
are often marvels of grammatical contortion and elliptical ingenuity.
Yet such sentences, though numerous, are of few and uniform types. In
Hilary’s case, as in that of Tertullian, familiarity makes the reader so
accustomed to them that he instinctively expects their recurrence; and,
at their worst, they are never actual breaches of the laws of the
language. A translator can hardly be an impartial judge in this matter,
for constantly, in passages where the sense is perfectly clear, the
ingenuity with which words and constructions are arranged makes it
almost impossible to render their meaning in idiomatic terms. One can
translate him out of Latin, but not into English. In this he resembles
one of the many styles of St. Augustine. There are passages in the *De
Trinitate*, for instance viii. 27, 28, which it would seem that
Augustine had deliberately imitated; a course natural enough in the case
of one who was deeply indebted to his predecessor’s thought, and must
have looked with reverence upon the great pioneer of systematic theology
in the Latin tongue. But this involution of style, irritating as it
sometimes is, has the compensating advantage that it keeps the reader
constantly on the alert. He cannot skim these pages in the comfortable
delusion that he is following the course of thought without an effort.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p142"></span>The same attention which Hilary demands
from his readers has obviously been bestowed upon the work by himself.
It is the selected and compressed result not only of his general study
of theology, but of his familiarity with the literature and the many
phases of the great Arian controversy <span
id="fr_93"></span>[94](#fn_93) . And he makes it clear that he is
engaged in no mere conflict of wit; his passionate loyalty to the person
of Christ is the obvious motive of his writing. He has taken his side
with full conviction, and he is equally convinced that his opponents
have irrevocably taken theirs. There is little or no reference to the
existence or even the possibility of doubt, no charitable construction
for ambiguous creeds, hardly a word of pleading with those in
error <span id="fr_94"></span>[95](#fn_94) . There is no excuse for
heresy; it is mere insanity, when it is not wilful self-destruction or
deliberate blasphemy. The battle is one without quarter; and sometimes,
we must suspect, Hilary has been misled in argument by the
uncompromising character of the conflict. Every reason advanced for a
pernicious belief, he seems to think, must itself be bad, and be met
with a direct negative. And again, in the heat of warfare he is led to
press his arguments too far. Not only is the best and fullest use of
Scripture made—for Hilary, like Athanasius, is marvellously imbued with
its spirit as well as familiar with its letter—but texts are pressed
into his service, and interpreted sometimes with brilliant
ingenuity <span id="fr_95"></span>[96](#fn_95) , which cannot bear the
meaning assigned them. Yet much of this exegesis must be laid to the
charge of his time, not of himself; and in the *De Trinitate*, as
contrasted with the *Homilies on the Psalms*; he is wisely sparing in
the use of allegorical interpretations. He remembers that he is refuting
enemies, not conversing with friends. And his belief in their conscious
insincerity leads to a certain hardness of tone. They will escape his
conclusions if they possibly can; he must pin them down. Hence texts are
sometimes treated, and deductions drawn from them, as though they were
postulates of geometry; and, however we may admire the machine-like
precision and completeness of the proof, we feel that we are reading
Euclid rather than literature <span id="fr_96"></span>[97](#fn_96) . But
this also is due to that system of exegesis, fatal to any recognition of
the eloquence and poetry of Scripture, of which something will be said
in the next chapter.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p147"></span>These, after all, are but petty flaws in
so great a work. Not only as a thinker, but as a pioneer of thought,
whose treasures have enriched, often unrecognised, the pages <span
id="page_xxxvii">p. xxxvii</span> <span
id="ii.iii.i-Page_xxxvii"></span>of Ambrose and Augustine and all later
theologians, he deserves our reverence. Not without reason was he
ranked, within a generation of his death, with Cyprian and Ambrose, as
one of the three chief glories of Western Christendom <span
id="fr_97"></span>[98](#fn_97) . Jerome and Augustine mention him
frequently and with honour. This is not the place to summarise or
discuss the contents of his works; but the reader cannot fail to
recognise their great and varied value, the completeness of his
refutation of current heresies, the convincing character of his
presentation of the truth, and the originality, restrained always by
scrupulous reverence as well as by intellectual caution, of his
additions to the speculative development of the Faith. We recognise also
the tenacity with which, encumbered as he was with the double task of
simultaneously refuting Arianism and working out his own thoughts, he
has adhered to the main issues. He never wanders into details, but keeps
steadfastly to his course. He refrains, for instance, from all
consideration of the results which Arianism might produce upon the
superstructure of the Faith and upon the conduct of Christians; they are
undermining the foundations, and he never forgets that it is these which
he has undertaken to strengthen and defend. Our confidence in him as a
guide is increased by the eminently businesslike use which he makes of
his higher qualities. This is obvious in the smallest details, as, for
instance, in his judicious abstinence, which will be considered in the
next chapter, from the use of technical terms of theology, when their
employment would have made his task easier, and might even, to
superficial minds, have enhanced his reputation. We see it also in the
talent which he shews in the device of watchwords, which serve both to
enliven his pages and to guide the reader through their argument. Such
is the frequent antithesis of the orthodox *unitas* with the heretical
*unio*, the latter a harmless word in itself and used by Tertullian
indifferently with the former, but seized by the quick intelligence of
Hilary to serve this special end <span id="fr_98"></span>[99](#fn_98) ;
such also, the frequent ‘Not two Gods but One <span
id="fr_99"></span>[100](#fn_99) ,’ and the more obvious contrast between
the Catholic *unum* and the Arian *unus*. Thus, in excellence of
literary workmanship, in sustained cogency and steady progress of
argument, in the full use made of rare gifts of intellect and heart, we
must recognise that Hilary has brought his great undertaking to a
successful issue; that the voyage beset with many perils, to use his
favourite illustration, has safely ended in the haven of Truth and
Faith.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p151"></span>Whether the *De Trinitate* were complete
or not at the time of his return to Poitiers, after the triumphal
passage through Italy, its publication in its final form must very
shortly have followed. But literature was, for the present, to claim
only the smaller share of his attention. Heartily as he must have
rejoiced to be again in his home, he had many anxieties to face. The
bishops of Gaul, as we saw from the Invective against Constantius, had
been less militant against their Arian neighbours than he had wished.
There had been peace in the Church; such peace as could be produced by a
mutual ignoring of differences. And it may well be that the Gallican
bishops, in their prejudice against the East, thought that Hilary
himself had gone too far in the path of conciliation, and that his
alliance with the Semiarians was a much longer step towards compromise
with heresy than their own prudent neutrality. Each side must have felt
that there was something to be explained. Hilary, for his part, by the
publication of the *De Trinitate* had made it perfectly clear that his
faith was above suspicion; and his abstinence in that work from all
mention of existing parties or phases of the controversy shewed that he
had withdrawn from his earlier position. He was now once more a Western
bishop, concerned only with absolute truth and the interests of the
Church in his own province. But he had to reckon with the sterner
champions of the Nicene faith, who <span id="page_xxxviii">p.
xxxviii</span> <span id="ii.iii.i-Page_xxxviii"></span>had not forgotten
the *De Synodis*, however much they might approve the *De Trinitate*.
Some curious fragments survive of the Apology which he was driven to
write by the attacks of Lucifer of Cagliari. Lucifer, one of the exiles
of Milan, was an uncompromising partisan, who could recognise no
distinctions among those who did not accept the Nicene Creed. All were
equally bad in his eyes; no explaining away of differences or attempt at
conciliation was lawful. In days to come he was to be a thorn in the
side of Athanasius, and was to end his life in a schism which he formed
because the Catholic Church was not sufficiently exclusive. We, who know
his after history and turn with repugnance from the monotonous railing
with which his writings, happily brief, are filled, may be disposed to
underestimate the man. But at the time he was a formidable antagonist.
He had the great advantage of being one of the little company of
confessors of the Faith, whom all the West admired. He represented truly
enough the feeling of the Latin Churches, now that the oppression of
their leaders had awakened their hostility to Arianism. And vigorous
abuse, such as the facile pen of Lucifer could pour forth, is always
interesting when addressed to prominent living men, stale though it
becomes when the passions of the moment are no longer felt. Lucifer’s
protest is lost, but we may gather from the fragments of Hilary’s reply
that it was milder in tone than was usual with him. Indeed, confessor
writing to confessor would naturally use the language of courtesy. But
it was an arraignment of the policy which Hilary had adopted, and in
which he had failed, though Athanasius was soon to resume it with better
success. And courteously as it may have been worded, it cannot have been
pleasant for Hilary to be publicly reminded of his failure, and to have
doubts cast upon his consistency; least of all when he was returning to
Gaul with new hopes, but also with new difficulties. His reply, so far
as we can judge of it from the fragments which remain, was of a tone
which would be counted moderate in the controversies of to-day. He
addresses his opponent as ‘Brother Lucifer,’ and patiently explains that
he has been misunderstood. There is no confession that he had been in
the wrong, though he fully admits that the term *homoiousion*,
innocently used by his Eastern friends, was employed by others in a
heretical sense. And he points out that Lucifer himself had spoken of
the ‘likeness’ of Son and Father, probably alluding to a passage in his
existing writings <span id="fr_100"></span>[101](#fn_100) . The use of
this *tu quoque* argument, and a certain apologetic strain which is
apparent in the reply, seem to shew that Hilary felt himself at a
disadvantage. He must have wished the Asiatic episode to be forgotten;
he had now to make his weight felt in the West, where he had good hope
that a direct and uncompromising attack upon Arianism would be
successful.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p153"></span>For a great change was taking place in
public affairs. When Hilary left Constantinople, early in the spring of
the year 360, it was probably a profound secret in the capital that a
rupture between Constantius and Julian was becoming inevitable. In
affairs, civil and ecclesiastical, the Emperor and his favourite, the
bishop Saturnine, must have seemed secure of their dominance in Gaul.
But events moved rapidly. Constantius needed troops to strengthen the
Eastern armies, never adequate to an emergency, for an impending war
with Persia; he may also have desired to weaken the forces of Julian. He
demanded men; those whom Julian detached for Eastern service refused to
march, and proclaim Julian Emperor at Paris. This was in May, some
months, at the least, before Hilary, delayed by his Italian labours in
the cause of orthodoxy, can have reached home. Julian temporised; he
kept up negotiations with Constantius, and employed his army in frontier
warfare. But there could be no doubt of the issue. Conflict was
inevitable, and the West could have little fear as to the result. The
Western armies were the strongest in the Empire; it was with them that,
in the last great trial of strength, <span id="page_xxxix">p.
xxxix</span> <span id="ii.iii.i-Page_xxxix"></span>Constantine the Great
had won the day, and the victory of his nephew, successful and popular
both as a commander and an administrator, must have been anticipated.
Julian’s march against Constantius did not commence till the summer of
the year 361; but long before this the rule of Constantius and the
theological system for which he stood had been rejected by Gaul. The
bishops had not shunned Saturninus, as Hilary had desired; most of them
had been induced to give their sanction to Arianism at the Council of
Rimini. While overshadowed by Constantius and his representative
Saturninus, they had not dared to assert themselves. But now the moment
was come, and with it the leader. Hilary’s arrival in Gaul must have
taken place when the conflict was visibly impending, and he can have had
no hesitation as to the side he should take. Julian’s rule in Gaul began
but a few months before his exile, and they had probably never met face
to face. But Julian had a well earned reputation as a righteous
governor, and Hilary had introduced his name into his second appeal to
Constantius, as a witness to his character and as suffering in fame by
the injustice of Constantius. We must remember that Julian had kept his
paganism carefully concealed, and that all the world, except a few
intimate friends, took it for granted that he was, as the high standard
of his life seemed to indicate, a sincere Christian. And now he had
displaced Constantius in the supreme rule over Gaul, and Saturninus, who
had by this time returned, was powerless. We cannot wonder that Hilary
continued his efforts; that he went through the land, everywhere
inducing the bishops to abjure their own confession made at Rimini. This
the bishops, for their part, were certainly willing to do; they were no
Arians at heart, and their treatment at Rimini, followed as it was by a
fraudulent misrepresentation of the meaning of their words, must have
aroused their just resentment. Under the rule of Julian there was no
risk, there was even an advantage, in shewing their colours; it set them
right both with the new Emperor and with public opinion. But it was not
enough for Hilary’s purpose that the ‘inward evil’ of a wavering faith
should be amended; it was also necessary that avowed heresy should be
expelled. For this the co-operation of Julian was necessary; and before
it was granted Julian might naturally look for some definite
pronouncement on Hilary’s part. To this conjuncture, in the latter half
of the year 360 or the earlier part of 361, we may best assign the
publication of the Invective, already described, against Constantius. It
was a renunciation of allegiance to his old master, not the less clear
because the new is not mentioned. And with the name of Constantius was
coupled that of Saturninus, as his abettor in tyranny and misbelief.
Julian recognised the value of the Catholic alliance by giving effect to
the decision of a Council held at Paris, which deposed Saturninus.
Hilary had no ecclesiastical authority to gather such a Council, but his
character and the eminence of his services no doubt rendered his
colleagues willing to follow him; yet neither he nor they would have
acted as they did without the assurance of Julian’s support. Their
action committed them irrevocably to Julian’s cause; and it must have
seemed that his expulsion of Saturninus committed him irrevocably to the
orthodox side. Yet Julian impartially disbelieving both creeds, had made
the ostensible cause of Saturninus’ exile not his errors of faith, but
some of those charges of misconduct which were always forthcoming when a
convenient excuse was wanted for the banishment of a bishop. Saturninus
was a man of the world, and very possibly his Arianism was only assumed
in aid of his ambition; it is likely enough that his conduct furnished
sufficient grounds for his punishment. The fall of its chief, Sulpicius
Severus says, destroyed the party. The other Arian prelates, who must
have been few in number, submitted to the orthodox tests, with one
exception. Paternus of Périgord, a man of no fame, had the courage of
his convictions. He stubbornly asserted his belief, and shared the fate
of Saturninus. Thus Hilary obtained, what he had failed to get in the
case of the more prominent offender, a clear precedent for the
deposition of bishops guilty of Arianism. <span id="page_xl">p.
xl</span> <span id="ii.iii.i-Page_xl"></span>The synodical letter,
addressed to the Eastern bishops in reply to letters which some of them
had sent to Hilary since his return, was incorporated by him in his
History, to be mentioned hereafter <span
id="fr_101"></span>[102](#fn_101) . The bishops of Gaul assert their
orthodoxy, hold Auxentius, Valens, Ursacius and their like
excommunicate, and have just excommunicated Saturninus. By his action at
Paris, so Sulpicius says, Hilary earned the glory that it was by his
single exertions that the provinces of Gaul were cleansed from the
defilements of heresy <span id="fr_102"></span>[103](#fn_102) .

<span id="ii.iii.i-p156"></span>These events happened before Julian left
the country, in the middle of the summer of 361, on his march against
Constantius; or at least, if the actual proceedings were subsequent to
his departure, they must have quickly followed it, for his sanction was
necessary, and when that was obtained there was no motive for delay. And
now, for some years, Hilary disappears from sight. He tells us nothing
in his writings of the ordinary course of his life and work; even his
informal and discursive Homilies cast no light upon his methods of
administration, his successes or failures, and very little on the
character of his flock. There was no further conflict within the Church
of Gaul during Hilary’s lifetime. The death of Constantius, which
happened before Julian could meet him in battle, removed all political
anxiety. Julian himself was too busy with the revival of paganism in the
East to concern himself seriously with its promotion in the
Latin-speaking provinces, from which he was absent, and for which he
cared less. The orthodox cause in Gaul did not suffer by his apostasy.
His short reign was followed by the still briefer rule of the Catholic
Jovian. Next came Valentinian, personally orthodox, but steadily
refusing to allow depositions on account of doctrine. Under him Arianism
dwindled away; Catholic successors were elected to Arian prelates, and
the process would have been hastened but by a few years had Hilary been
permitted to expel Auxentius from Milan, as we shall presently see him
attempting to do.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p157"></span>This was his last interference in the
politics of the Church, and does not concern us as yet. His chief
interest henceforth was to be in literary work; in popularising and, as
he thought, improving upon the teaching of Origen. He commented upon the
book of Job, as we know from Jerome and Augustine. The former says that
this, and his work on the Psalms, were translations from Origen. But
that is far from an accurate account of the latter work, and may be
equally inaccurate concerning the former. The two fragments which St.
Augustine has preserved from the Commentary on Job are so short that we
cannot draw from them any conclusion as to the character of the book. If
we may trust Jerome, its length was somewhat more than a quarter of that
of the *Homilies on the* *Psalms* <span
id="fr_103"></span>[104](#fn_103) , in their present form. It is
unfortunate, but not surprising, that the work should have fallen into
oblivion. It was, no doubt, allegorical in its method, and nothing of
that kind could survive in competition with Gregory the Great’s
inimitable *Moralia* on Job.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p159"></span>Hilary’s other adaptation from Origen,
the *Homilies on the Psalms*, happily remains to us. It is at least as
great a work as the *De Trinitate*, and one from which we can learn even
more what manner of man its writer was. For the *De Trinitate* is an
appeal to all thoughtful Christians of the time, and written for future
generations as well as for them; characteristic, as it is, in many ways
of the author, the compass of the work and the stateliness of its
rhetoric tend to conceal his personality. But the *Homilies* <span
id="fr_104"></span>[105](#fn_104) *on the Psalms*, which would seem to
have <span id="page_xli">p. xli</span> <span
id="ii.iii.i-Page_xli"></span>reached us in the notes of a shorthand
writer, so artless and conversational is the style, shew us Hilary in
another aspect. He is imparting instruction to his own familiar
congregation; and he knows his people so well that he pours out whatever
is passing through his mind. In fact, he seems often to be thinking
aloud on subjects which interest him rather than addressing himself to
the needs of his audience. Practical exhortation has, indeed, a much
smaller space than mystical exegesis and speculative Christology. Yet
abstruse questions are never made more obscure by involution of style.
The language is free and flowing, always that of an educated man who has
learnt facility by practice. And here, strange as it seems to a reader
of the *De Trinitate*, he betrays a preference for poetical words <span
id="fr_105"></span>[106](#fn_105) , which shews that his renunciation of
such ornament elsewhere is deliberate. Yet, even here, he indulges in no
definite reminiscences of the poets.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p162"></span>There remains only one trace, though it
is sufficient, of the original circumstances of delivery. The Homily on
[Psalm xiv.](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#000)<span
id="ii.iii.i-p162.1"></span> begins with the words, ‘The Psalm which has
been read.’ The Psalms were sung as an act of worship, not read as a
lesson, in the normal course of divine service; and therefore we must
assume that the Psalm to be expounded was recited, by the rector or
another, as an introduction to the Homily. We need not be surprised that
such notices, which must have seemed to possess no permanent interest,
have been edited away. Many of the Homilies are too long to have been
delivered on one or even two occasions, yet the ascription of praise
with which Hilary, like Origen, always concludes, <span
id="fr_106"></span>[107](#fn_106) has been omitted in every case except
at the end of the whole discourse. This shews that Hilary himself, or
more probably some editor, has put the work into its final shape. But
this editing of the Homilies has not extended to the excision of the
numerous repetitions, which were natural enough when Hilary was
delivering each as a commentary complete in itself, and do not offend us
when we read the discourse on a single Psalm, though they certainly
disfigure the work when regarded as a treatise on the whole Psalter.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p164"></span>It is probably due to the accidents of
time that our present copies of the Homilies are imperfect. We are,
indeed, better off than was Jerome. His manuscript contained Homilies on
[Ps. 1:0](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#000), [Ps.
2:0](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#000), [Ps.
51:0](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#000)<span
id="ii.iii.i-p164.1"></span>–62, 118–150, according to the Latin
notation. We have, in addition to these, Homilies which are certainly
genuine on [Ps. 13:0](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#000), [Ps.
14:0](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#000), [Ps.
63:0](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#000)<span
id="ii.iii.i-p164.2"></span>–69; and others on the titles of [Psalms
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#000)<span id="ii.iii.i-p164.3"></span>
and 91, which are probably spurious <span
id="fr_107"></span>[108](#fn_107) . Some more Homilies of uncertain
origin which have been fathered upon Hilary, and may be found in the
editions, may be left out of account. In the Homily on [Psalm
59](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#000)<span id="ii.iii.i-p165.1"></span>,
§ 2, he mentions one, unknown to Jerome as to ourselves, on [Psalm
44](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#000)<span id="ii.iii.i-p165.2"></span>;
and this allusion, isolated though it is, suggests that the Homilies
contained, or were meant to contain, a commentary on the whole Book of
Psalms, composed in the order in which they stand. There is, of course,
nothing strange in the circulation in ancient times of imperfect copies;
a well-known instance is that of St. Augustine’s copy of Cyprian which
did not contain an epistle which has come down to us. This series of
Homilies was probably continuous as well as complete. The incidental
allusions to the events of the times contain nothing inconsistent with
the supposition that he began at the beginning of the Psalter and went
on to the end. We might, indeed, construe the language of that on [Psalm
52](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#000)<span id="ii.iii.i-p165.3"></span>,
§ 13, concerning prosperous clergy, who heap up wealth for themselves
and live in luxury, as an allusion to men like Saturninus, but the
passage is vague, and a vivid recollection, <span id="page_xlii">p.
xlii</span> <span id="ii.iii.i-Page_xlii"></span>not a present evil, may
have suggested it. More definite, and indeed a clear note of time, is
the Homily on [Psalm 63](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#000)<span
id="ii.iii.i-p165.4"></span>, where heathenism is aggressive and is
become a real danger, of which Hilary speaks in the same terms as he
does of heresy. This contrasts strongly with such language as that of
the Homily on [Psalm 67](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#000)<span
id="ii.iii.i-p165.5"></span>, § 20, where the heathen are daily flocking
into the Church, or of that on [Psalm
137](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#000)<span id="ii.iii.i-p165.6"></span>,
§ 10, where paganism has collapsed, its temples are ruined and its
oracles silent; such words as the former could only have been written in
the short reign of Julian. Other indications, such as the frequent
warnings against heresy and denunciations of heretics, are too general
to help in fixing the date. On the whole, it would seem a reasonable
hypothesis that Hilary began his connected series of *Homilies on the
Psalms* soon after his return to Gaul, that he had made good progress
with them when Julian publicly apostatised, and that they were not
completed till the better times of Valentinian.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p166"></span>He was conversing in pastoral intimacy
with his people, and hence we cannot be surprised that he draws, perhaps
unconsciously, on the results of his own previous labours. For instance,
on [Psalm 61](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#000)<span
id="ii.iii.i-p166.1"></span>, § 2, he gives what is evidently a
reminiscence, yet with features of its own and not as a professed
autobiography, of his mental history as described in the opening of the
*De Trinitate*. And while the direct controversy against Arianism is not
avoided, there is a manifest preference for the development of Hilary’s
characteristic Christology, which had already occupied him in the later
books of the *De Trinitate*. We must, indeed, reconstruct his doctrine
in this respect even more from the Homilies than from the *De
Trinitate*; and in the later work he not only expands what he had
previously suggested, but throws out still further suggestions which he
had not the length of life to present in a more perfect form. But the
Homilies contain much that is of far less permanent interest. Wherever
he can <span id="fr_108"></span>[109](#fn_108) , he brings in the
mystical interpretation of numbers, that strange vagary of the Eastern
mind which had, at least from the time of Irenæus and the Epistle of
Barnabas, found a congenial home in Christian thought. This and other
distortions of the sense of Scripture, which are the result in Hilary,
as in Origen, of a prosaic rather than a poetical turn of mind, will
find a more appropriate place for discussion at the beginning of the
next chapter. Allusions to the mode of worship of his time are very
rare <span id="fr_109"></span>[110](#fn_109) , as are details of
contemporary life. Of general encouragement to virtue and denunciation
of vice there is abundance, and it repeats with striking fidelity the
teaching of Cyprian. Hilary displays the same Puritanism in regard to
jewelry as does Cyprian <span id="fr_110"></span>[111](#fn_110) , and
the same abhorrence of public games and spectacles. Of these three
elements, the Christology, the mysticism, the moral teaching, the
Homilies are mainly compact. They carry on no sustained argument and
contain, as has been said, a good deal of repetition. In fact, a
continuous reader will probably form a worse impression of their quality
than he who is satisfied with a few pages at a time. They are eminently
adapted for selection, and the three Homilies, those on [Ps.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#000), [Ps.
53:0](../../../bib/kjv/psa053.htm#000)<span id="ii.iii.i-p169.2"></span>
and 130, which have been translated for this volume, may be inadequate,
yet are fairly representative, as specimens of the instruction which
Hilary conveys in this work.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p170"></span>It has been said that the practical
teaching of Hilary is that of Cyprian. But this is not a literary
debt <span id="fr_111"></span>[112](#fn_111) ; the writer to whom almost
all the exegesis is due, by borrowing of substance or of method, is
Origen, except where the spirit of the fourth century has been at work.
Yet other authors have been consulted, and this not only for general
information, as in the case, already cited, of the elder Pliny, but for
interpretation of the Psalms. For instance, a strange legend concerning
Mount Hermon is cited on [Psalm
132](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#000)<span id="ii.iii.i-p171.2"></span>,
§ 6, from a writer whose name Hilary does not know; and on [Psalm
133](../../../bib/kjv/psa133.htm#000)<span id="ii.iii.i-p171.3"></span>,
§ 4, he has consulted several writers and rejects the opinion of them
all. But these authorities, whoever they may have been, were of little
<span id="page_xliii">p. xliii</span> <span
id="ii.iii.i-Page_xliii"></span>importance for his purpose in comparison
with Origen. Still we can only accept Jerome’s assertion that the
Homilies are translated from Origen in a qualified sense. Hilary was
writing for the edification of his own flock, and was obliged to modify
much that Origen had said if he would serve their needs, for religious
thought had changed rapidly in the century which lay between the two,
and a mere translation would have been as coldly received as would a
reprint of some commentary of the age of George II. to-day. And Hilary’s
was a mind too active and independent to be the slave of a traditional
interpretation. We must, therefore, expect to find a considerable
divergence; and we cannot be surprised that Hilary, as he settled down
to his task, grew more and more free in his treatment of Origen’s
exegesis.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p172"></span>Unhappily the remains of Origen’s work
upon the Psalms, though considerable, are fragmentary, and of the
fragments scattered through *Catenæ* no complete or critical edition has
yet been made. Still, insufficient as the material would be for a
detailed study and comparison, enough survives to enable us to form a
general idea of the relation between the two writers. Origen <span
id="fr_112"></span>[113](#fn_112) composed Homilies upon the Psalter, a
Commentary upon it, and a summary treatise, called the *Enchiridion*.
The first of these works was Hilary’s model; Origen’s Homilies were
diffuse extemporary expositions, ending, like Hilary’s, with an
ascription of praise. It is unfortunate that, of the few which survive,
all treat of Psalms on which Hilary’s Homilies are lost. But it is
doubtful whether Hilary knew the other writings of Origen upon the
Psalter. We have ourselves a very small knowledge of them, for the
*Catenæ* are not in the habit of giving more than the name of the author
whom they cite. Yet it may well be that some of the apparent
discrepancies between the explanations given by Hilary and by Origen are
due to the loss of the passage from Origen’s Homily which would have
agreed with Hilary, and to the survival of the different rendering given
in the Commentary or the *Enchiridion*; some, no doubt, are also due to
the carelessness and even dishonesty of the compilers of *Catenæ* in
stating the authorship of their selections. But though it is possible
that Hilary had access to all Origen’s writings on the Psalms, there is
no reason to suppose that he possessed a copy of his *Hexapla*. The only
translation of the Old Testament which he names beside the Septuagint is
that of Aquila; he is aware that there are others, but none save the
Septuagint has authority or deserves respect, and his rare allusions to
them are only such as we find in Origen’s Homilies, and imply no such
exhaustive knowledge of the variants as a possessor of the *Hexapla*
would have.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p174"></span>A comparison of the two writers shews
the closeness of their relation, and if we had Origen’s complete
Homilies, and not mere excerpts, the debt of Hilary would certainly be
still more manifest. For the compilers of Catenæ have naturally selected
what was best in Origen, and most suited for short extracts; his
eccentricities have been in great measure omitted. Hence we may err in
attributing to Hilary much that is perverse in his comments; there is an
abundance of wild mysticism in the fragments of Origen, but its
proportion to the whole is undoubtedly less in their present state than
in their original condition. Hilary’s method was that of paraphrasing,
not of servile translation. There is apparently only one literal
rendering of an extant passage of Origen, and that a short one <span
id="fr_113"></span>[114](#fn_113) ; but paraphrases, which often become
very diffuse expansions, are constant <span
id="fr_114"></span>[115](#fn_114) . But a just comparison between the
two must embrace their differences as well as their resemblances. Hilary
has exercised a silent criticism in omitting many of Origen’s textual
disquisitions. He gives, it is true, many various readings, but his
confidence in the Septuagint often renders him indifferent in regard to
<span id="page_xliv">p. xliv</span> <span
id="ii.iii.i-Page_xliv"></span>divergencies which Origen had taken
seriously. The space which the latter devotes to the Greek versions
Hilary employs in correcting the errors and variations of the Latin, or
in explaining the meaning of Greek words. But these are matters which
rather belong to the next chapter, concerning, as they do, Hilary’s
attitude towards Scripture. It is more significant of his tone of mind
that he has omitted Origen’s speculations on the resurrection of the
body, preserved by Epiphanius <span id="fr_115"></span>[116](#fn_115) ,
and on the origin of evil <span id="fr_116"></span>[117](#fn_116) .
Again, Origen delights to give his readers a choice of interpretations;
Hilary chooses one of those which Origen has given, and makes no mention
of the other. This is his constant habit in the earlier part of the
Homilies; towards the end, however, he often gives a rendering of his
own, and also mentions, either as possible or as wrong, that which
Origen had offered. Or else, though he only makes his own suggestion,
yet it is obvious to those who have Origen at hand that he has in his
mind, and is refuting for his own satisfaction, an alternative which he
does not think good to lay before his audience <span
id="fr_117"></span>[118](#fn_117) . A similar liberty with his original
occurs in the Homily on [Psalm
135](../../../bib/kjv/psa135.htm#000)<span id="ii.iii.i-p179.2"></span>,
§ 12:—‘The purposes of the present discourse and of this place forbid us
to search more deeply.’ This must have seemed a commonplace to his
hearers; but it happens that Origen’s speculations upon the passage have
survived, and we can see that Hilary was rather making excuses to
himself for his disregard of them than directly addressing his
congregation. Apart from the numerous instances where Hilary derives a
different result from the same data, there are certain cases where he
accepts the current Latin text, though it differed from Origen’s Greek,
and draws, without any reference to Origen, his own conclusions as to
the meaning <span id="fr_118"></span>[119](#fn_118) . These, again, seem
to be confined to the latter part of the work, and may be the result of
occasional neglect to consult the authorities, rather than a deliberate
departure from Origen’s teaching.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p181"></span>But the chief interest of the comparison
between the writings of these two Fathers upon the Psalms lies in the
insight which it affords into their respective modes of thought.
Fragmentary as they are, Origen’s words are a manifestly genuine and not
inadequate expression of his mind; and Hilary, a recognised authority
and conscious of his powers, has so moulded and transformed his
original, now adapting and now rejecting, that he has made it, even on
the ground which is common to both, a true and sufficient representation
of his own mental attitude. The Roman contrasts broadly with the Greek.
He constantly illustrates his discourse with historical incidents of
Scripture, taken in their literal sense; there are few such in Origen.
Origen is full, as usual, of praises of the contemplative state; in
speculation upon Divine things consists for him the happiness everywhere
promised to the saints. Hilary ignores abstract speculation, whether as
a method of interpretation or as a hope for the future, and actually
describes <span id="fr_119"></span>[120](#fn_119) the contemplation of
God’s dealings with men as merely one among other modes of preparation
for eternal blessings. In the same discourse he paraphrases the words of
Origen, ‘He who has done all things that conduce to the knowledge of
God,’ by ‘They who have the abiding sense of a cleansed heart <span
id="fr_120"></span>[121](#fn_120) .’ Though he is the willing slave of
the allegorical method, yet he revolts from time to time against its
excesses in Origen; their treatment of [Psalm
126](../../../bib/kjv/psa126.htm#000)<span id="ii.iii.i-p183.2"></span>,
in the one case practical, in the other mystical, is a typical
example <span id="fr_121"></span>[122](#fn_121) . Hilary’s attention is
fixed on concrete things; the enemies denounced in the Psalms mean for
him the heretics of the day, while Origen had recognised in them the
invisible agency of evil spirits <span id="fr_122"></span>[123](#fn_122)
. The words ‘Who teacheth my hands to fight’ suggest to Origen
intellectual weapons and victories; they remind Hilary of the ‘I have
<span id="page_xlv">p. xlv</span> <span
id="ii.iii.i-Page_xlv"></span>overcome the world’ of Christ <span
id="fr_123"></span>[124](#fn_123) . In fact, the thought of Hilary was
so charged with definite convictions concerning Christ, and so impressed
with their importance that his very earnestness and concentration
betrays him into error of interpretation. It would be an insufficient,
yet not a false, contrast between him and Origen to say that the latter
distorts, with an almost playful ingenuity, the single words or phrases
of Scripture, while Hilary, with masterful indifference to the
principles of exegesis, will force a whole chapter to render the sense
which he desires. And his obvious sincerity, his concentration of
thought upon one great and always interesting doctrine, his constant
appeal to what seems to be, and sometimes is, the exact sense of
Scripture, and the vigour of his style, far better adapted to its
purpose than that of Origen; all these render him an even more
convincing exponent than the other of the bad system of interpretation
which both have adopted. Sound theological deductions and wise moral
reflections on every page make the reader willing to pardon a vicious
method, for Hilary’s doctrine is never based upon his exegesis of the
Psalms. No primary truth depends for him upon allegory or mysticism, and
it may be that he used the method with the less caution because he
looked for nothing more than that it should illustrate and confirm what
was already established. Since, then, the permanent interest of the work
is that it shews us what seemed to Hilary, as a representative of his
age, to be the truth, and we have in it a powerful and original
presentation of that truth, we can welcome, as a quaint and not
ungraceful enlivening of his argument, this ingenuity of
misinterpretation. And we may learn also a lesson for ourselves of the
importance of the doctrine which he inculcates with such perseverance.
Confronting him as it did, in various aspects, at every turn and in the
most unlikely places during his journey through the Psalter, his faith
concerning Christ was manifestly in Hilary’s eyes the vital element of
religion.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p187"></span>The *Homilies on the Psalms* have never
been a popular work. Readable as they are, and free from most of the
difficulties which beset the *De Trinitate*, posterity allowed them to
be mutilated, and, as we saw, only a portion has come down to us. Their
chief influence, like that of the other treatise, has been that which
Hilary has exercised through them upon writers of greater fame. Ambrose
has borrowed from them liberally and quite uncritically for his own
exposition of certain of the Psalms; and Ambrose, accredited by his own
fame and that of his greater friend Augustine, has quite overshadowed
the fame of Hilary. The Homilies may, perhaps, have also suffered from
an undeserved suspicion that anything written by the author of the *De
Trinitate* would be hard to read. They have, in any case, been little
read; and yet, as the first important example in Latin literature of the
allegorical method, and as furnishing the staple of a widely studied
work of St. Ambrose, they have profoundly affected the course of
Christian thought. Their historical interest as well as their intrinsic
value commands our respect.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p188"></span>In his Homily on [Psalm
138](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#000)<span id="ii.iii.i-p188.1"></span>,
§ 4, Hilary briefly mentions the Patriarchs as examples of faith and
adds, ‘but these are matters of which we must discourse more suitably
and fully in their proper place.’ This is a promise to which till of
late no known work of our writer corresponded. Jerome had, indeed,
informed us <span id="fr_124"></span>[125](#fn_124) that Hilary had
composed a treatise entitled *De Mysteriis*, but no one had connected it
with his words in the Homily. It had been supposed that the lost
treatise dealt with the sacraments, in spite of the facts that it is
Hilary’s custom to speak of types as ‘mysteries,’ and that the
sacraments are a theme upon which he never dwells. But in 1887 a great
portion of Hilary’s actual treatise on the Mysteries was recovered in
the same manuscript which contained the more famous *Pilgrimage to the
Holy Places* of Silvia of Aquitaine <span
id="fr_125"></span>[126](#fn_125) . It is a short treatise of two books,
unhappily mutilated at the beginning, in the middle and near the end,
though the peroration has survived. The title is <span id="page_xlvi">p.
xlvi</span> <span id="ii.iii.i-Page_xlvi"></span>lost, but there is no
reason to doubt that Jerome was nearly right in calling it a
*tractatus*, though he would have done better had he used the plural. It
is written in the same easy style as the *Homilies on the Psalms*, and
if it was not originally delivered as two homilies, as is probable, it
must be a condensation of several discourses into a more compact form.
The first book deals with the Patriarchs, the second with the Prophets,
regarded as types of Christ. The whole is written from the point of view
with which Hilary’s other writings have made us familiar. Every deed
recorded in Scripture proclaims or typifies or proves the advent of the
incarnate Christ, and it is Hilary’s purpose to display the whole of His
work as reflected in the Old Testament, like an image in a mirror. He
begins with Adam and goes on to Moses, deriving lessons from the lives
of all the chief characters, often with an exercise of great ingenuity.
For instance, in the history of the Fall Eve is the Church, which is
sinful but shall be saved through bearing children in Baptism <span
id="fr_126"></span>[127](#fn_126) ; the burning bush is a type of the
endurance of the Church, of which St. Paul speaks in [2 Cor. iv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#008)<span
id="ii.iii.i-p191.1"></span> <span id="fr_127"></span>[128](#fn_127) ;
the manna was found in the morning, the time of Christ’s Resurrection
and therefore of the reception of heavenly food in the Eucharist. They
who collect too much are heretics with their excess of argument <span
id="fr_128"></span>[129](#fn_128) . In the second book we have a
fragmentary and desultory treatment of incidents in the lives of the
Prophets, which Hilary ends by saying that in all the events which he
has recorded we recognise ‘God the Father and God the Son, and God the
Son from God the Father, Jesus Christ, God and Man <span
id="fr_129"></span>[130](#fn_129) .’ The peroration, in fact, reads like
a summary of the argument of the *De Trinitate*. Of the genuineness of
the little work there can be no doubt. Its language, its plan, its
arguments are unmistakably those of Hilary <span
id="fr_130"></span>[131](#fn_130) . The homilies were probably delivered
soon after he had finished his course on the Psalms, of which they
contain some reminiscences, such as we saw are found in the later
*Homilies on the Psalms* of earlier passages in the same. In all
probability the subject matter of the *De Mysteriis* is mainly drawn
from Origen. It is too short, and too much akin to Hilary’s more
important writings, to cast much light upon his modes of thought. He
has, indeed, no occasion to speak here upon the points on which his
teaching is most original and characteristic.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p196"></span>In this same manuscript, discovered by
Gamurrini at Arezzo, are the remains of what professes to be Hilary’s
collection of hymns. He has always had the fame of being the earliest
Latin hymn writer. This was, indeed, a task which the circumstances of
his life must have suggested to him. The conflict with Arianism forced
him to become the pioneer of systematic theology in the Latin tongue; it
also drove him into exile in the East, where he must have acquainted
himself with the controversial use made of hymnody by the Arians. Thus
it was natural that he should have introduced hymns also into the West.
But if the *De Trinitate* had little success, the hymns were still more
unfortunate. Jerome tells us that Hilary complained of finding the Gauls
unteachable in sacred song <span id="fr_131"></span>[132](#fn_131) ; and
there is no reason to suppose that he had any wide or permanent success
in introducing hymns into public worship <span
id="fr_132"></span>[133](#fn_132) . If Hilary must have the credit of
originality in this respect, the honour of turning his suggestion to
account belongs to Ambrose, whose fame in more respects than one is
built upon foundations laid by the other. And if but a scanty remnant of
the verse of Ambrose, popular as it was, survives, we cannot be
surprised that not a line remains which can safely be <span
id="page_xlvii">p. xlvii</span> <span
id="ii.iii.i-Page_xlvii"></span>attributed to Hilary, though authorities
who deserve respect have pronounced in favour of more than one of the
five hymns which we must consider.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p199"></span>Hilary’s own opinion concerning the use
of hymns can best be learnt from his Homilies of [Psalms
64](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#000)<span id="ii.iii.i-p199.1"></span>
and 65. In the former (§ 12) the Church’s delightful exercise of singing
hymns at morning and evening is one of the chief tokens which she has of
God’s mercy towards her. In the latter (§ 1) we are told that sacred
song requires the accompaniment of instrumental harmonies; that the
combination to this end of different forms of service and of art
produces a result acceptable to God. The lifting of the voice to God in
exultation, as an act of spiritual warfare against the devil and his
hosts, is given as an example of the uses of hymnody (§ 4). It is a
means of putting the enemy to flight; ‘Whoever he be that takes his post
outside the Church, let him hear the voice of the people at their
prayers, let him mark the multitudinous sound of our hymns, and in the
performance of the divine Sacraments let him recognise the responses
which our loyal confession makes. Every adversary must needs be
affrighted, the devil routed, death conquered in the faith of the
Resurrection, by such jubilant utterance of our exultant voice. The
enemy will know that this gives pleasure to God and assurance to our
hope, even this public and triumphant raising of our voice in song.’
Original composition, both of words and music, is evidently in Hilary’s
mind; and we can see that he is rather recommending a useful novelty
than describing an established practice. It is a remarkable coincidence
that the five hymns which are called his are, in fact, a song of triumph
over the devil, and a hymn in praise of the Resurrection, which are, so
their editor thinks, actually alluded to in the Homily cited above; a
confession of faith; and a morning hymn and one which has been taken for
an evening hymn. These are exactly the subjects which correspond to
Hilary’s description.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p200"></span>But, when we come to the examination of
these hymns in detail, the gravest doubts arise. The first three were
discovered in the same manuscript to which we owe the *De Mysteriis*.
They formed part of a small collection, which cannot have numbered more
than seven or eight hymns, of which these three only have escaped, not
without some mutilation. That which stands first is the confession of
faith, the matter of which contains nothing that is inconsistent with
Hilary’s time. But beyond this, and the fact that the manuscript
ascribes it to Hilary, there is nothing to suggest his authorship. It is
a dreary production in a limping imitation of an Horatian metre; an
involved argumentative statement of Catholic doctrine, in which it would
be difficult to say whether verse or subject suffers the more from their
unwanted union. The sequence of thought is helped out by the mechanical
device of an alphabetical arrangement of the stanzas, but even this
assistance could not make it intelligible to an ordinary
congregation <span id="fr_133"></span>[134](#fn_133) . And the want of
literary skill in the author makes it impossible to suppose that Hilary
is he; classical knowledge was still on too high a level for an educated
man to perpetrate such solecisms.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p215"></span>In the same manuscript there follow,
after an unfortunate gap, the two hymns to which it has been suggested
that Hilary alludes in his Homily on [Psalm
65](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#000)<span id="ii.iii.i-p215.1"></span>,
those which celebrate the praises of the Resurrection and the triumph
over Satan. The former is by a woman’s hand, and the feminine forms of
the language must have made it, one would think, unsuitable for
congregational singing. There is no reason why the poem should not date
from the fourth century; indeed, since it is written by a neophyte, that
date is more probable than a later time, when adult converts to
Christianity were more scarce. It has considerable merits; it is <span
id="page_xlviii">p. xlviii</span> <span
id="ii.iii.i-Page_xlviii"></span>fervid in tone and free in movement,
and has every appearance of being the expression of genuine feeling. It
is, in fact, likely enough that, if it were written in Hilary’s day, he
should have inserted it in a collection of sacred verse. Concerning its
authorship the suggestion has been made <span
id="fr_134"></span>[135](#fn_134) that it was written by Florentia, a
heathen maiden converted by Hilary near Seleucia, who followed him to
Gaul, lived, died, and was buried by him in his diocese. The story of
Florentia rests on no better authority than the worthless biography of
Hilary, written by Fortunatus, who, moreover, says nothing about hymns
composed by her. Neither proof nor disproof is possible: unless we
regard the defective Latinity as evidence in favour of a Greek origin
for the authoress. The third hymn, which celebrates the triumph of
Christ over Satan, may or may not be the work of the same hand as the
second. It bears much more resemblance to it than to the laborious and
prosaic effusion which stands first. The manuscript which contains these
three hymns distinctly assigns the first, and one or more which have
perished, to Hilary:—‘*Incipiunt hymni eiusdem*.’ Whether a fresh title
stood before the later hymns, which clearly belong to another, we cannot
say; the collection is too short for this to be probable. It is obvious
that, if we have in this manuscript the remains of a hymn-book for
actual use, it was, like ours, a compilation; brief as it was, it may
have been as large as the cumbrous shape of ancient volumes would allow
to be cheaply multiplied and conveniently used. Many popular treatises,
as for instance some by Tertullian and Cyprian, were quite as short. Who
the compiler may have been must remain unknown. We must attach some
importance to the evidence of the manuscript which has restored to us
the *De Mysteriis* and the *Pilgrimage of Silvia*; and we may reasonably
suppose that this collection was made in the time, and even with the
sanction, of Hilary, though we cannot accept him as the author of any of
the three hymns which remain.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p217"></span>The spurious letter to his imaginary
daughter Abra was apparently written with the ingenious purpose of
fathering upon Hilary the morning hymn, *Lucis Largitor splendide*. This
is a hymn of considerable beauty, in the same metre as the genuine
Ambrosian hymns. But there is this essential difference, that while in
the latter the rules of classical versification as regards the length of
syllables are scrupulously followed, in the former these rules are
ignored, and rhythm takes the place of quantity. This is a sufficient
proof that the hymn is of a later date than Ambrose, and, *a fortiori*,
than Hilary. There remains the so-called evening hymn, which has been
supposed to be the companion to the last <span
id="fr_135"></span>[136](#fn_135) . This, again, is alphabetical, and
contains in twenty-three stanzas a confession of sin, an appeal to
Christ and an assertion of orthodoxy. The rules of metre are neglected
in favour of an uncouth attempt at rhythm. Latin appears to have been a
dead language to the writer <span id="fr_136"></span>[137](#fn_136) ,
who adorns his lines with little pieces of pagan mythology, and whose
taste is indicated by his description of heretics as ‘barking Sabellius
and grunting Simon.’ The hymn is probably the work of some bombastic
monk, perhaps of the time of Charles the Great; unlike the other four,
it cannot possibly date from Hilary’s generation.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p220"></span>Omitting certain fragments of treatises
of which Hilary may, or may not, have been the author <span
id="fr_137"></span>[138](#fn_137) , we now come to his attack upon
Auxentius of Milan, and to the last of <span id="page_xlix">p.
xlix</span> <span id="ii.iii.i-Page_xlix"></span>his complete works.
Dionysius of Milan had been, as we saw, a sufferer in the same cause as
Hilary. But he had been still more hardly treated; he had not only been
exiled, but his place had been taken by Auxentius, an Eastern Arian of
the school favoured by Constantius. Dionysius died in exile, and
Auxentius remained in undisputed possession of the see. He must have
been a man of considerable ability; perhaps, as we have mentioned, he
was the creator of the so-called Ambrosian ritual, and certainly he was
the leader of the Arian party in Italy and the further West. The very
fact that Constantius and his advisers chose him for so great a post as
the bishopric of Milan proves that they had confidence in him. He
justified their trust, holding his own without apparent difficulty at
Milan and working successfully in the cause of compromise at Ariminum
and elsewhere. Athanasius mentions him often and bitterly as a leader of
the heretics; and he must be ranked with Ursacius and Valens as one of
the most unscrupulous of his party. While Constantius reigned Auxentius
was, of course, safe from attack. But at the end of the year 364 Hilary
thought that the opportunity was come. Since his last entry into the
conflict Julian and his successor Jovian had died, and Valentinian had
for some months been Emperor. He had just divided the Roman Empire with
his brother Valens, himself choosing the Western half with Milan for his
capital, while he gave Constantinople and the East to Valens. The latter
was a man of small abilities, unworthy to reign, and a convinced Arian;
Valentinian, with many faults, was a strong ruler, and favoured the
cause of orthodoxy. But he was, before all else, a soldier and a
statesman; his orthodoxy was, perhaps, a mere acquiescence in the
predominant belief among his subjects, and it had, in any case, much
less influence over his conduct than had Arianism over that of Valens.
It must have seemed to Hilary and to Eusebius of Vercelli that there was
danger to the Church in the possession by Auxentius of so commanding a
position as that of bishop of Milan, with constant access to the
Emperor’s ear; and especially now that the Emperor was new to his work
and had no knowledge, perhaps no strong convictions, concerning the
points at issue. As far as they could judge, their success or failure in
displacing Auxentius would influence the fortunes of the Church for a
generation at least. It would, therefore, be unjust to accuse Hilary as
a mere busy-body. He interfered, it is true, outside his own province,
but it was at a serious crisis; and his knowledge of the Western Church
must have assured him that, if he did not act, the necessary protest
would probably remain unmade.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p222"></span>Hilary, then, in company with his any
Eusebius, hastened to Milan in order to influence the mind of
Valentinian against Auxentius, and to waken the dormant orthodoxy of the
Milanese Church. For there seems to have been little local opposition to
the Arian bishop: no organised congregation of Catholics in the city
rejected his communion. On the other hand, there was no militant
Arianism; the worship conducted by Auxentius could excite no scruples,
and in his teaching he would certainly avoid the points of difference.
He and his school had no desire to persecute orthodoxy because it was
orthodox. From their point of view, the Faith had been settled in such a
way that their own position was unassailable, and all they wished was to
live and to let live. And we must remember that the Council of Rimini,
disgraceful as the manner was in which its decision had been reached,
was still the rule of the Faith for the Western Church. Hilary and
Eusebius had induced a multitude of bishops, amid the applause of their
flocks, to recant; but private expressions of opinion, however numerous,
could not erase the definitions of Rimini from <span id="page_l">p.
l</span> <span id="ii.iii.i-Page_l"></span>the records of the Church. It
was not till the year 369 that a Council at Rome expunged them. The
first object of the allies was to excite opposition to the Arian, and in
this they had some success. Auxentius, in his petition to the Emperor,
which we possess, asserts that they stirred up certain of the laity, who
had been in communion neither with himself nor with his predecessors, to
call him a heretic. The immediate predecessor of Auxentius was the
Catholic Dionysius, and we cannot suppose that this is a fair
description of Hilary’s followers. But it is probable that the
malcontents were not numerous, for none but enthusiasts would venture
into apparent schism on account of a heresy which was certainly not
conspicuous. How long Hilary was allowed to continue his efforts is
unknown. Valentinian reached Milan in the November of 364, and left it
in the Autumn of the following year; and before his departure his
decision had frustrated Hilary’s purpose. We only know that, as soon as
the matter grew serious, Auxentius appealed to the Emperor. There was no
point more important in the eyes of the government than unity within the
local Churches, and Auxentius, being formally in the right, must have
made his appeal with much confidence. His success was immediate. The
Emperor issued what Hilary calls a ’grievous edict <span
id="fr_138"></span>[139](#fn_138) ,’ the terms of which Hilary does not
mention. He only says that under the pretext, and with the desire, of
unity, Valentinian threw the faithful Church of Milan into confusion. In
other words, he forbade Hilary to agitate for a separation of the people
from their bishop.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p224"></span>But Hilary, silenced in the city,
exerted himself at court. With urgent importunity, he tells us, he
pressed his charges against Auxentius, and induced the Emperor to
appoint a commission to consider them. In due time this commission met.
It consisted of two lay officials, with ‘some ten’ bishops as
assessors <span id="fr_139"></span>[140](#fn_139) . Hilary and Eusebius
were present, as well as the accused. Auxentius pleaded his own cause,
beginning with the unfortunate attack upon his adversaries that they had
been deposed by Council, and therefore had no *locus standi* as accusers
of a bishop. This was untrue; Hilary, we know, had been banished, but
his see had never been declared vacant, nor, in all probability, had
that of Eusebius. They were not intruders, like Auxentius, though even
he had gained some legality for his position from the death of Dionysius
in exile. The failure of this plea was so complete that Hilary, in his
account of the matter, declares that it is not worth his while to repeat
his defence. Next came the serious business of the commission. This was
not the theological enquiry after truth, but the legal question whether,
in fact, the teaching of Auxentius was in conformity with recognised
standards. Hilary had asserted that his creed differed from that of the
Emperor and of all other Christians, and had asserted it in very
unsparing language. He now maintained his allegation, and, in doing so,
gave Auxentius a double advantage. For he diverged into the general
question of theology, while Auxentius stuck to the letter of the
decisions of Rimini; and the words of Hilary had been such that he could
claim to be a sufferer from calumny. Hilary’s account of the doctrinal
discussion is that he forced the reluctant Auxentius by his questions to
the very edge of a denial of the Faith; that Auxentius escaped from this
difficulty by a complete surrender, to which Hilary pinned him down by
making him sign an orthodox confession, in terms to which he had several
times agreed during the course of the debate; that Hilary remitted this
confession through the Quæstor, the lay president of the commission, to
the Emperor. This document, which Hilary says that he appended to his
explanatory letter, is unfortunately lost. The brief account of the
matter which Auxentius gives is not inconsistent with Hilary’s. He tells
us that he began by protesting that he had never known or seen Arius,
and did not even know what his <span id="page_li">p. li</span> <span
id="ii.iii.i-Page_li"></span>doctrine was; he proceeded to declare that
he still believed and preached the truths which he had been taught in
his infancy and of which he had satisfied himself by study of Scripture;
and he gives a summary of the statement of faith which he made before
the commission. But he says not a word about the passage of arms between
Hilary and himself, of his defeat, and of the enforced signature of a
confession which contradicted his previous assertions.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p226"></span>Hilary’s account of the proceedings must
certainly be accepted. But, though his moral and dialectical victory was
complete, it is obvious that he had gained no advantage for his cause.
He had taunted Auxentius as an adherent of Arius. Auxentius had an
immediate reply, which put his opponent in the wrong. We cannot doubt
that he spoke the truth, when he said that he had never known Arius; and
it certainly was the case, that in the early years of the fourth
century, inadequate statements of the doctrine of the Trinity were
widely prevalent and passed without dispute. It was also true that the
dominant faction at the court of Constantius, of which Auxentius had
been a leader, had in the most effectual way disclaimed complicity with
Arianism by ejecting its honest professors from their sees and by
joining with their lips in the universal condemnation of the founder of
that heresy. But if this was their shame, it was also, in such
circumstances as those of Auxentius, their protection. And Auxentius
held one of the greatest positions in the church, and even in the state,
now that Milan was to be, so it seemed, the capital of the West. The
spirit of the government at that time was one of almost Chinese
reverence for official rank; and it must have seemed an outrage that the
irresponsible bishop of a city, mean in comparison with Milan, should
assail Auxentius in such terms as Hilary had used. Even though he had
admitted, instead of repudiating, the affinity with Arius, there would
have been an impropriety in the use of that familiar weapon, the
labelling of a party with the name of its most discredited and unpopular
member. We may be sure that Auxentius, a man of the world, would derive
all possible advantage from this excessive vehemence of his adversary.
In the debate itself, where Hilary would have the advantage not only of
a sound cause, but of greater earnestness, we cannot be surprised that
he won the victory. Auxentius was probably indifferent at heart; Hilary
had devoted his life and all his talents to the cause, but such a
victory could have no results, beyond lowering Auxentius in public
esteem and self-respect. It does not appear from his words or from those
of Hilary, that the actual creed of Rimini was imported into the
dispute. It was on it that Auxentius relied; if he did not expressly
contradict its terms, the debate became a mere discussion concerning
abstract truth. The legal standard of doctrine was no more affected by
his unwilling concession than it had been a few years before by the
numerous repudiations, prompted by Hilary and Eusebius, of the vote
given at Rimini. The confession which Hilary annexed in triumph to his
narrative was the mere incidental expression of a private opinion, which
Auxentius, in his further plea, could afford to leave unnoticed.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p227"></span>The commissioners no doubt made their
report privately to the Emperor. We do not know its tenour, but from the
sequel we may be sure that they gave it as their opinion that Auxentius
was the lawful bishop of Milan. Some time passed before Valentinian
spoke. Whether Hilary took any further steps to influence his decision
is unknown; but we possess a memorial addressed ‘to the most blessed and
glorious Emperors Valentinian and Valens’ by Auxentius. The two brothers
were, by mutual arrangement, each sovereign within his own dominion, but
they ruled as colleagues, not as rivals; and Auxentius must have taken
courage from the thought that it would seem unnatural and impolitic for
the elder to seize this first opportunity of proclaiming his dissent
from the cherished convictions of the younger, by degrading one of the
very school which his brother delighted to honour. For what had been
proposed was not the silent filling of a vacant place, but the public
ejection of a bishop whose <span id="page_lii">p. lii</span> <span
id="ii.iii.i-Page_lii"></span>station was not much less prominent than
that of Athanasius himself, and his ejection on purely theological
grounds. Constantius himself had rarely been so bold; his acts of
oppression, as in Hilary’s case, were usually cloaked by some allegation
of misconduct on the victim’s part. But Auxentius had more than the
character of Valens and political considerations on which to rely. In
the forefront of his defence he put the Council of Rimini. This attack
by Hilary and his friends was, according to him, the attempt of a
handful of men to break up the unity attained by the labours of that
great assembly of six hundred bishops <span
id="fr_140"></span>[141](#fn_140) . He declared his firm assent to all
its decisions; every heresy that it had condemned he condemned. He sent
with his address a copy of the Acts of the Council, and begged the
Emperor to have them read to him. Its language would convince him that
Hilary and Eusebius, bishops long deposed, were merely plotting
universal schism. This, with his own account of the proceedings before
the commission and a short statement of his belief, forms his appeal to
the Emperor. It was composed with great skill, and was quite
unanswerable. His actual possession of the see, the circumstances of the
time, the very doctrine of the Church—for only a Council could undo what
a Council had done—rendered his position unassailable. And if he was in
the right, Hilary and his colleague were in the wrong. Nothing but
success could have saved them from the humiliation to which they were
now subjected, of being expelled from Milan and bidden to return to
their homes, while the Emperor publicly recognised Auxentius by
receiving the Communion at his hands. Yet morally they had been in the
right throughout. The strong legal position of Auxentius and the canons
of that imposing Council of six hundred bishops behind which he screened
himself had been obtained by deliberate fraud and oppression. He and his
creed could not have, and did not deserve to have, any stability. Yet
Valentinian was probably in the right, even in the interests of truth,
in refusing to make a martyr of Auxentius. There would have been
reprisals in the East, where the Catholic cause had far more to lose
than had Arianism in the West; and general considerations of equity and
policy must have inclined him to allow the Arian to pass the remainder
of his days in peace. But we cannot wonder that Hilary failed to
appreciate such reasons. He had thrown himself with all his heart into
the attack, and risked in it his public credit as bishop and confessor
and first of Western theologians. Hence his published account of the
transaction is tinged with a pardonable shade of personal resentment. It
was, indeed, necessary that he should issue a statement. The assault and
the repulse were rendered conspicuous by time and place, and by the
eminence of the persons engaged; and it was Hilary’s duty to see that
the defeat which he had incurred brought no injury upon his cause. He
therefore addressed a public letter ‘to the beloved brethren who abide
in the Faith of the fathers and repudiate the Arian heresy, the bishops
and all their flocks.’ He begins by speaking of the blessings of peace,
which the Christians of that day could neither enjoy nor promote, beset
as they were by the forerunners of Antichrist, who boasted of the peace,
in other words of the harmonious concurrence in blasphemy, which they
had brought about. They bear themselves not as bishops of Christ but as
priests of Antichrist. This is not random abuse (§ 2), but sober
recognition of the fact, stated by St. John, that there are many
Antichrists. For these men assume the cloak of piety, and pretend to
preach the Gospel, with the one object of inducing others to deny
Christ. It was (§ 3) the misery and folly of the day that men
endeavoured to promote the cause of God by human means and the favour of
the world. Hilary asks bishops, who believe in their office, whether the
Apostles had secular support when by their preaching they converted the
greater part of mankind. They were not adorned with palace dignities;
scourged and fettered, they sang their hymns. It was in obedience to no
royal edict that Paul gathered a Church for Christ; <span
id="page_liii">p. liii</span> <span id="ii.iii.i-Page_liii"></span>he
was exposed to public view in the theatre. Nero and Vespasian and Decius
were no patrons of the Church; it was through their hatred that the
truth had thriven. The Apostles laboured with their hands and worshipped
in garrets and secret places, and in defiance of senate or monarch
visited, it might be said, every village and every tribe. Yet it was
these rebels who had the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven; the more they
were forbidden, the more they preached, and the power of God was made
manifest. But now (§ 4) the Faith finds favour with men.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p229"></span>The Church seeks for secular support,
and in so doing insults Christ by the implication that his support is
insufficient. She in her turn holds out the threat of exile and prison.
It was her endurance of these that drew men to her; now she imposes her
faith by violence. She craves for favours at the hands of her
communicants; once it was her consecration that she braved the
threatenings of persecutors. Bishops in exile spread the Faith; now it
is she that exiles bishops. She boasts that the world loves her; the
world’s hatred was the evidence that she was Christ’s. The ruin is
obvious which has fallen upon the Church. The time of Antichrist,
disguised as an angel of light, has come. The true Christ is hidden from
almost every mind and heart. Antichrist is now obscuring the truth that
he may assert falsehood hereafter. Hence the conflicting opinions of the
time, the doctrine of Arius and of his heirs, Valens, Ursacius,
Auxentius and their fellows. Their preaching of novelties concerning
Christ is the work of Antichrist, who is using them to introduce his own
worship. This is proved (§ 6) by a statement of their minimising and
prevaricating doctrine, which has, however, made no impression upon the
guileless and well-meaning laity. Then (§§ 7–9) comes Hilary’s account
of his proceedings at Milan, strongly coloured by the intensity of his
feelings. The Emperor’s first refusal to interfere with Auxentius is a
‘command that the Church of the Milanese, which confesses that Christ is
true God, of one divinity and substance with the Father, should be
thrown into confusion under the pretext, and with the desire, of unity.’
The canons of Rimini are described as those of the Thracian Nicæa;
Auxentius’ protest that he had never known Arius is met by the assertion
that he had been ordained to the presbyterate in an Arian Church under
George of Alexandria. Hilary refuses to discuss the Council of Rimini;
it had been universally and righteously repudiated. His ejection from
Milan, in spite of his protests that Auxentius was a liar and a
renegade, is a revelation of the mystery of ungodliness. For Auxentius
(§§ 10, 11) had spoken with two contrary voices; the one that of the
confession which Hilary had driven him to sign, the other that of
Rimini. His skill in words could deceive even the elect, but he had been
clearly exposed. Finally (§ 12) Hilary regrets that he cannot state the
case to each bishop and Church in person. He begs them to make the best
of his letter; he dares not make it fully intelligible by circulating
with it the Arian blasphemies which he had assailed. He bids them beware
of Antichrist, and warns against love and reverence for the material
structure of their churches, wherein Antichrist will one day have his
seat. Mountains and woods and dens of beasts and prison and morasses are
the places of safety; in them some of the Prophets had lived, and some
had died. He bids them shun Auxentius as an angel of Satan, an enemy of
Christ, a deceiver and a blasphemer. ‘Let him assemble against me what
synods he will, let him proclaim me, as he has often done already, a
heretic by public advertisement, let him direct, at his will, the wrath
of the mighty against me; yet, being an Arian, he shall be nothing less
than a devil in my eyes. Never will I desire peace except with them who,
following the doctrine of our fathers at Nicæa, shall make the Arians
anathema and proclaim the true divinity of Christ.’

<span id="ii.iii.i-p230"></span>These are the concluding words of
Hilary’s last public utterance. We see him again giving an unreserved
adhesion, in word as well as in heart, to the Nicene confession. It was
the course dictated by policy as well as by conviction. His cautious
language in earlier days had done good service to the Church in the
East, and had made it easier for those who had compromised themselves at
Rimini to reconcile themselves with him and with the truth for <span
id="page_liv">p. liv</span> <span id="ii.iii.i-Page_liv"></span>which he
stood. But by this time all whom he could wish to win had given in their
adhesion; Auxentius and the few who held with him, if such there were,
were irreconcilable. They took their stand upon the Council of Rimini,
and their opponents found in the doctrine of Nicæa the clear and
uncompromising challenge which was necessary for effective warfare. But
if Hilary’s doctrinal position is definite, his theory of the relations
of church and State, if indeed his indignation allowed him to think of
them, is obscure. An orthodox Emperor was upholding an Arian, and
Hilary, while giving Valentinian credit for personal good faith, is as
eager as in the worst days of Constantius for a severance. We must,
however, remember that this manifesto, though it is the expression of a
settled policy in the matter of doctrine, is in other respects the
unguarded outpouring of an injured feeling. And here again we find the
old perplexity of the ‘inward evil.’ Auxentius is represented as in the
church and outside it at the same time. He is an Antichrist, a devil,
all that is evil; but Hilary is threatened and it is the Church that
threatens, submission to an Arian is enforced and it is the church which
enforces it <span id="fr_141"></span>[142](#fn_141) . And if Auxentius
had adhered to the confession which Hilary had induced him to sign, all
objection to his episcopate would apparently have ceased. The time had
not come, if it ever can come, for the solution of such problems.
Meantime Hilary did his best, so far as words could do it, to brush
aside the sophistries behind which Auxentius was defending himself. The
doctrine of Rimini is named that of Nicæa, in Thrace, where the
discreditable and insignificant assembly met in which its terms were
settled; the Church of Alexandria under the intruder George is frankly
called Arian. It was an appeal to the future as well as an apology for
himself. But certainly it could not move Valentinian, nor can Hilary
have expected that it should. And, after all, Valentinian’s action was
harmless, at least. By Hilary’s own confession, Auxentius had no
influence for evil over his flock, and these proceedings must have
warned him, if he needed the warning, that abstinence from aggressive
Arianism was necessary if he would end his days in peace. The Emperor’s
policy remained unchanged. At the Roman Council of the year 369 the
Western bishops formally annulled the proceedings of Rimini, and so
deprived Auxentius of his legal position. At the same time, as the
logical consequence, they condemned him to deposition, but Valentinian
refused to give effect to their sentence, and Auxentius remained bishop
of Milan till his death in the year 374. He had outlived Hilary and
Eusebius, and also Athanasius, the promoter of the last attack upon him;
he had also outlived whatever Arianism there had been in Milan. His
successor, St. Ambrose, had the enthusiastic support of his people in
his conflicts with Arian princes. The Church could have gained little by
Hilary’s success, and yet we cannot be sure that, in a broad sense, he
failed. So resolute a bearing must have effectually strengthened the
convictions of Valentinian and the fears of Auxentius.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p232"></span>There remains one work of Hilary to be
considered. This was a history of the Arian controversy in such of its
aspects as had fallen under his own observation. We know from Jerome’s
biography of Hilary that he wrote a book against Valens and Ursacius,
containing an account of the Councils of Rimini and Seleucia. They had
been his adversaries throughout his career, and had held their own
against him. To them, at least as much as to Constantius, the overthrow
of his Asiatic friends was due, and to them he owed the favour, which
must have galled him, of permission to return to his diocese. Auxentius
was one of their allies, and the failure of Hilary’s attack upon him
made it clear that these men too, as subjects of Valentinian, were safe
from merited deposition. Their worldly success was manifest; it was a
natural and righteous task which Hilary undertook when he exposed their
true character. It was clear that while Valens and Valentinian lived—and
they were in early middle life—there would be an armed peace within the
Western Church; that the overthrow of bishop by bishop in theological
strife would be <span id="page_lv">p. lv</span> <span
id="ii.iii.i-Page_lv"></span>forbidden. The pen was the only weapon left
to Hilary, and he used it to give an account of events from the time of
that Council of Arles, in the year 353, which was the beginning for Gaul
of the Arian conflict. He followed its course, with especial reference
to Ursacius and Valens, until the year 367, or at least the end of 366;
the latest incident recorded in the fragments which we possess must have
happened within a few months of his death. The work was less a history
than a collection of documents strung together by an explanatory
narrative. It is evident that it was not undertaken as a literary
effort; its aim is not the information of future generations, but the
solemn indictment at the bar of public opinion of living offenders. It
must have been, when complete, a singularly businesslike production,
with no graces of style to render it attractive and no generalisations
to illuminate its pages. Had the whole been preserved, we should have
had a complete record of Hilary’s life; as it is, we have thirteen
valuable fragments <span id="fr_142"></span>[143](#fn_142) , to which we
owe a considerable part of our general knowledge of the time, though
they tell us comparatively little of his own career. ‘The commencement
of the work has happily survived, and from it we learn the spirit in
which he wrote. He begins (Fragment i. §§ 1, 2) with an exposition of
St. Paul’s doctrine of faith, hope, and love. He testifies, with the
Apostle, that the last is the greatest. The inseparable bond, of which
he is conscious, of God’s love for him and his for God, has detached him
from worldly interests. He, like others (§ 3), might have enjoyed ease
and prosperity and imperial friendship, and have been, as they were, a
bishop only in name and a burden upon the Church. But the condition
imposed was that of tampering with Gospel truths, wilful blindness to
oppression and the condonation of tyranny. Public opinion, ill-informed
and unused to theological subtleties, would not have observed the
change. But it would have been a cowardly declension from the love of
Christ to which he could not stoop. He feels (§ 4) the difficulty of the
task he undertakes. The devil and the heretics had done their worst,
multitudes had been terrified into denial of their convictions. The
story was complicated by the ingenuity in evil of the plotters, and
evidence was difficult to obtain. The scene of intrigue could not be
clearly delineated, crowded as it was with the busy figures of bishops
and officers, putting every engine into motion against men of apostolic
mind. The energy with which they propagated slander was the measure of
its falsehood. They had implanted in the public mind the belief that the
exiled bishops had suffered merely for refusing to condemn Athanasius;
that they were inspired by obstinacy, not by principle. Out of reverence
for the Emperor, whose throne is from God (§ 5), Hilary will not comment
upon his usurped jurisdiction over a bishop, nor on the manner in which
it was exercised; nor yet on the injustice whereby bishops were forced
to pass sentence upon the accused in his absence. In this volume he will
give the true causes of trouble, in comparison of which such tyranny,
grievous though it be, is of small account. Once before—this, no doubt,
was at Béziers—he had spoken his mind upon the matter. But that was a
hasty and unprepared utterance, delivered to an audience as eager to
silence him as he was to speak. He will, therefore (§ 6), give a full
and consecutive narrative of events from the council of Arles onwards,
with such an account of the question there debated as will <span
id="page_lvi">p. lvi</span> <span id="ii.iii.i-Page_lvi"></span>shew the
true merits of Paulinus, and make it clear that nothing less than the
Faith was at stake. He ends his introduction (§ 7) by warning the reader
that this is a work which needs to be seriously studied. The multitude
of letters and of synods which he must adduce will merely confuse and
disgust him, if he do not bear in mind the dates and the persons, and
the exact sense in which terms are used. Finally, he reminds him of the
greatness of the subject. This is the knowledge of God, the hope of
eternity; it is the duty of a Christian to acquire such knowledge as
shall enable him to form and to maintain his own conclusions. The
excerpts from the work have evidently been made by some one who was
interested in Italy and Illyricum rather than in Gaul, and thought that
the documents were more important than the narrative. Hence Hilary’s
character is as little illustrated as the events of his life. Nor can
the date of the work be precisely fixed. It is clear that he had already
taken up his final attitude of uncompromising adherence to the Nicene
Symbol; that is to say, he began to write after all the waverers had
been reclaimed from contact with Arianism. He must, therefore, have
written the book in his latest years; and it is manifest that after he
had brought the narrative down to the time of his return from exile, he
continued to add to it from time to time even till the end of his life.
For the last incident recorded in the Fragments, the secession from the
party of Valens and Ursacius of an old and important ally, Germinius of
Sirmium, must have come to his knowledge very shortly before his death.
He had had little success in his warfare with error; if he and his
friends had held their own, they had not succeeded either in synod or at
court in overthrowing their enemies; and it is pleasant to think that
this gleam of comfort came to brighten the last days of Hilary <span
id="fr_143"></span>[144](#fn_143) . The news must have reached Gaul
early in the year 367, and no subsequent event of importance can have
come to his knowledge.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p235"></span>But though we have reached the term of
Hilary’s life, there remains one topic on which something must be said,
his relation to St. Martin of Tours. Martin, born in Pannonia, the
country of Valens and Ursacius, but converted from paganism under
Catholic influences, was attracted by Hilary, already a bishop, and
spent some years in his society before the outbreak of the Arian strife
in Gaul. Hilary, we are told, wished to ordain him a priest, but at his
urgent wish refrained, and admitted him instead to the humble rank of an
exorcist. At an uncertain date, which cannot have long preceded Hilary’s
exile, he felt himself moved to return to his native province in order
to convert his parents, who were still pagans. He succeeded in the case
of his mother and of many of his countrymen. But he was soon compelled
to abandon his labours, for he had, as a true disciple of Hilary,
regarded it as his duty to oppose the Arianism dominant in <span
id="page_lvii">p. lvii</span> <span id="ii.iii.i-Page_lvii"></span>the
province. Opposition to the bishops on the part of a man holding so low
a station in the Church was a civil as well as an ecclesiastical
offence, and Martin can have expected no other treatment than that which
he received, of scourging and expulsion from the province. Hilary was by
this time in exile, and Martin turned to Milan, where the heresy of the
intruder Auxentius called forth his protests, which were silenced by
another expulsion. He next retired to a small island off the Italian
coast, where he lived in seclusion till he heard of Hilary’s return. He
hastened to Rome, so Fortunatus tells us, to meet his friend, but missed
him on the way; and followed him at once to Poitiers. There Hilary gave
him a site near the city, on which he founded the first monastery in
that region, over which he presided for the rest of Hilary’s life and
for four years after his death. In the year 371 he was consecrated
bishop of Tours, and so continued till his death twenty-five years
later. It is clear that Martin was never able to exert any influence
over the mind or action of Hilary, whose interests were in an
intellectual sphere above his reach. But the courage and tenacity with
which Martin held and preached the Faith was certainly inspired to some
considerable extent by admiration of Hilary and confidence in his
teaching. And the joy which Hilary expresses, as we have seen, in his
later *Homilies on the Psalms* over the rapid spread of Christianity in
Gaul, was no doubt occasioned by the earlier triumphs of Martin among
the peasantry. The two men were formed each to be the complement of the
other. It was the work of Hilary to prove with cogent clearness to
educated Christians, that reason as well as piety dictated an acceptance
of the Catholic Faith; the mission of Martin was to those who were
neither educated nor Christian, and his success in bringing the Faith
home to the lives and consciences of the pagan masses marks him out as
one of the greatest among the preachers of the Gospel. Both of them
actively opposed Arianism, and both suffered in the conflict. But the
confessorship of neither had any perceptible share in promoting the
final victory of truth. Their true glory is that they were
fellow-labourers equally successful in widely separate parts of the same
field; and Hilary is entitled, beyond the honour due to his own
achievements, to a share in that of St. Martin, whose merits he
discovered and fostered.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p236"></span>We have now reached the end of Hilary’s
life. Sulpicius Severus <span id="fr_144"></span>[145](#fn_144) tells us
that he died in the sixth year from his return. He had probably reached
Poitiers early in the year 361; we have seen that the latest event
recorded in the fragments of his history must have come to his knowledge
early in 367. There is no reason to doubt that this was the conclusion
of the history, and no consideration suggests that Sulpicius was wrong
in his date. We may therefore assign the death of Hilary, with
considerable confidence, to the year 367, and probably to its middle
portion. Of the circumstances of his death nothing is recorded. This is
one of the many signs that his contemporaries did not value him at his
true worth. To them he must have been the busy and somewhat unsuccessful
man of affairs; their successors in the next generation turned away from
him and his works to the more attractive writings and more commanding
characters of Ambrose and Augustine. Yet certainly no firmer purpose or
more convinced faith, perhaps no keener intellect has devoted itself to
the defence and elucidation of truth than that of Hilary: and it may be
that Christian thinkers in the future will find an inspiration of new
and fruitful thoughts in his writings.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[i:1](2090005.htm#fr_0) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p5"></span> An actual dependence on Gregory of Nyssa
has sometimes been ascribed to Hilary. But Gregory was surely too young
for this. He may himself have borrowed from Hilary; but more probably
both derived their common element from Eastern writers like Basil of
Ancyra.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[i:2](2090005.htm#fr_1) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p6"></span> This is certainly the best translation of
*Tractatus*; the word is discussed on a later page.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[ii:3](2090005.htm#fr_2) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p9"></span> The latest date which I have seen
assigned for his birth is 320, by Fechtrup, in Wetzer-Welte’s
Encyclopædia. But this is surely inconsistent with his styling Ursacius
and Valens, in his first Epistle to Constantine, ‘ignorant and
unprincipled youths.’ This was written about the year 355 before Hilary
knew much of the Arian controversy or the combatants, and was
ludicrously inappropriate, for Ursacius and Valens were elderly men. He
had found the words either in some of Athanasius’ writings or in the
records of the Council of Sardica, and borrowed them without enquiry. He
could not have done so had he been only some thirty-five years of age;
at fifty-five they are natural enough.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[ii:4](2090005.htm#fr_3) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p10"></span> It is impossible to agree with Zingerle
(*Comment. Wölfflin*. p. 218) that Hilary was under the necessity of
using a Greek and Latin Glossary. Such a passage as *Tract. in Ps*.
cxxxviii. 43, to which he appeals, shows rather the extent than the
smallness of Hilary’s knowledge of Greek. What he frankly confesses,
there as elsewhere, is ignorance of Hebrew. The words of Jerome (*Ep*.
34, 3 f.) about Hilary’s friend, the presbyter Heliodorus, to whom he
used to refer for explanations of Origen on the Psalms, are equally
incapable of being employed to prove Hilary’s defective Greek.
Heliodorus knew Hebrew, and Hilary for want of Hebrew found Origen’s
notes on the Hebrew text difficult to understand, and for this reason,
according to Jerome, used to consult his friend; not because he was
unfamiliar with Greek.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[ii:5](2090005.htm#fr_4) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p11"></span> His vocabulary is very poorly treated in
the dictionaries; one of the many signs of the neglect into which he has
fallen. There are at least twenty-four words in the *Tractatus super
Psalmos* which are omitted in the last edition of Georges’ lexicon, and
these good Latin words, not technical terms invented for purposes of
argument. Among the most interesting is *quotiensque* for
*quotienscumque*; an unnoticed use is the frequent *cum quando* for
*quandoquidem*. Of Hilary’s other writings there is as yet no
trustworthy text; from them the list of new words could at least be
doubled.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[iii:6](2090005.htm#fr_5) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p12"></span> *Ep.* 70, 5,*ad Magnum.*

<span id="fn_6"></span>[iii:7](2090005.htm#fr_6) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p13"></span> *Ep.* 58, 10,*ad Paulinum.*

<span id="fn_7"></span>[iii:8](2090005.htm#fr_7) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p14"></span> *Comm. in Gall.* ii.*pref.*

<span id="fn_8"></span>[iii:9](2090005.htm#fr_8) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p15"></span> Cf. *Tract. in Ps*. xiii. 1, *Trin*. i.
38.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[iii:10](2090005.htm#fr_9) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p16"></span> Yet he strangely reproaches his Old
Latin Bible with the use of *nimis* for *ualde*, *Tract. in Ps*.
cxxxviii. 38. This employment of relative for positive terms had been
common in literature for at least a century and a half.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[iv:11](2090005.htm#fr_10) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p19"></span> E.g. *Trin*. v. 11, vii. 14, ix. 4.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[iv:12](2090005.htm#fr_11) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p20"></span> *Trin*. ii. 22.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[iv:13](2090005.htm#fr_12) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p21"></span> *Trin*. x. 14. This is a very remarkable
allusion. Celsus, vii. *præf*., confidently assumes that all surgical
operation must be painful.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[iv:14](2090005.htm#fr_13) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p22"></span> *Comm. in Matt*. xxi. 8.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[iv:15](2090005.htm#fr_14) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p23"></span> *Trin*. xi. 15.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[iv:16](2090005.htm#fr_15) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p24"></span> *Tract. in [Ps.
cxviii.](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#000)<span
id="ii.iii.i-p24.1"></span> Ain.* 16; it is from Plin. N.H. 37, 32.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[iv:17](2090005.htm#fr_16) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p25"></span> *Tract. in Ps*. lvii. 3. It suggests
Virgil, Ovid, Silius, and others.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[iv:18](2090005.htm#fr_17) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p26"></span> *Trin*. vii. 3.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[iv:19](2090005.htm#fr_18) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p27"></span> *Ep*. 70, 5, *Vir. Ill.* 100.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[v:20](2090005.htm#fr_19) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p29"></span> *Tract. in Ps*. i. 7, lxi. 2, lxiii. 5,
&c. As usual, Hilary does not name his opponents.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[v:21](2090005.htm#fr_20) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p30.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p31"></span> Hilary’s legendary daughter Abra, to
whom he is said to have written a letter printed in the editions of his
works, is now generally abandoned by the best authorities, e.g. by
Fechtrup, the writer, in Wetzer-Welte’s Encyclopædia, of the best short
life of Hilary.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[v:22](2090005.htm#fr_21) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p32.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p33"></span> *De Doctr. Chr.* ii. 40.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[v:23](2090005.htm#fr_22) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p33.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p34"></span> *Trin*. viii. 13–17.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[vi:24](2090005.htm#fr_23) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p34.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p35"></span> This is on the assumption, which seems
probable, that Irenæus was not yet translated from the Greek. He
certainly influenced Tertullian, and through him Hilary; and his
doctrine of the *recapitulation* of mankind in Christ, reappearing as it
does in Hilary, though not in Tertullian, suggests that our writer had
made an independent study of Irenæus. Even if the present wretched
translation existed, he would certainly read the Greek.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[vii:25](2090005.htm#fr_24) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p37.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p38"></span> Dr. Bigg’s Bampton Lectures upon them
are full of hints for the student of Hilary.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[vii:26](2090005.htm#fr_25) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p38.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p39"></span> *Vir. Ill.* 100.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[vii:27](2090005.htm#fr_26) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p39.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p40"></span> E.g. *Tract. in Ps*. cxxix. 4 f.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[vii:28](2090005.htm#fr_27) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p40.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p41"></span> E.g. *Trin*. ix. 6.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[viii:29](2090005.htm#fr_28) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p42.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p43"></span> *Comm. in Matt.* v. 1. It may be
mentioned that the chapters of the Commentary do not coincide with those
of the Gospel.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[viii:30](2090005.htm#fr_29) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p43.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p44"></span> *Comm. in Matt.* xvi. 4, *theotetam quam
deitatem Latini nuncupant*, xxvi. 5, *theotetam quam deitatem
nuncupamus*. The strange accusative *theotetam* makes it the more
probable that we have here a specimen of the primitive Greek vocabulary
of Latin Christendom of which so few examples, e.g. Baptism and
Eucharist, have survived. Cyprian had probably the chief share in
destroying it; but the subject has never been examined as it deserves.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[viii:31](2090005.htm#fr_30) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p44.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p45"></span> So especially xii. 18. There is
similarly a possible allusion to Marcellus’ teaching in xi. 9, which,
however, may equally well be a reminiscence of some cognate earlier
heresy.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[viii:32](2090005.htm#fr_31) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p45.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p46"></span> Maffei’s Introduction, §15.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[viii:33](2090005.htm#fr_32) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p46.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p47"></span> xxxi. 3, *penes quem erat antequam
nasceretur*

<span id="fn_33"></span>[viii:34](2090005.htm#fr_33) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p47.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p48"></span> See Ebert, *Litteratur des
Mittelalters,* i. 139.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[ix:35](2090005.htm#fr_34) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p49.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p50"></span> *Syn*. 91; *regeneratus pridem et in
episcopatu aliquantisper manens*. The renderings ‘long ago’ and ‘for
some time’ in this translation seem rather too strong.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[ix:36](2090005.htm#fr_35) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p50.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p51"></span> E.g. *Trin*. viii. 1. The bishop is a
prince of the Church.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[ix:37](2090005.htm#fr_36) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p51.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p52"></span> *Sacerdos* in Hilary, as in all writers
till near the end of the fourth century, means ‘bishop’ always.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[x:38](2090005.htm#fr_37) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p54.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p55"></span> By Dr. Robertson of King’s College,
London. This, and Professor Gwatkin’s *Studies of Arianism*, are the
best English accounts.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[x:39](2090005.htm#fr_38) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p55.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p56"></span> *Syn*. 91.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[x:40](2090005.htm#fr_39) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p56.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p57"></span> The *Apologia contra Arianos*, p. 100
ff. in Dr. Robertson’s translation.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[xi:41](2090005.htm#fr_40) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p58.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p59"></span> *Origines du culte chrétien*, p. 88.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[xi:42](2090005.htm#fr_41) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p59.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p60"></span> Gwatkin, *Studies of Arianism*, p. 134.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[xi:43](2090005.htm#fr_42) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p60.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p61"></span> *Ib.*, p. 28.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[xii:44](2090005.htm#fr_43) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p61.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p62"></span> *Trin.* vii. 3.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[xii:45](2090005.htm#fr_44) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p63.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p64"></span> There is much more evidence to this
effect in Reuter, *Augustinische Studien*, p. 182 f. It was probably due
to jealousy between West and East; cf. the way in which John of
Jerusalem ignored the African decision in Pelagius’ case. But the West
was ignorant, as well as jealous, of the East. Even in his last years,
after his sojourn in Asia Minor, Hilary believed that Jerusalem was, as
had been prophesied, an uninhabited ruin; *Tr. in Ps*. cxxiv. § 2,
cxxxi. §§ 18, 23, cxlvi. § 1.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[xiv:46](2090005.htm#fr_45) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p67.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p68"></span> *Chron*. ii. 39.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[xv:47](2090005.htm#fr_46) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p69.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p70"></span> *Syn.* 91.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[xv:48](2090005.htm#fr_47) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p70.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p71"></span> This sparing of Marcellus, in the case
of a Western like Hilary, may have been a concession to the incapacity
of the West, e.g. Julius of Rome and the Council of Sardica, to see his
error. But this is not so likely as that it was a falling in with the
general policy of Athanasius, as was the rare mention of the
*homoousion*; cf. Gwatkin, *op. cit*. 42 n. Hilary was singularly
independent of Western opinion, and his whole aim was to win the East.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[xv:49](2090005.htm#fr_48) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p71.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p72"></span> No such examination seems to have been
made as that to which Reuter in his admirable *Augustinische Studien*
has subjected some of the thoughts of St. Augustine.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[xv:50](2090005.htm#fr_49) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p72.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p73"></span> Harnack, *Dogmengeschichte*, ii. p. 243
n. (ed. 3). Hilary is, ‘making all allowance for dependence on
Athanasius, an independent thinker, who has, indeed, excelled the bishop
of Alexandria as a theologian.’

<span id="fn_50"></span>[xvi:51](2090005.htm#fr_50) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p74.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p75"></span> Hort, *Two Dissertations*, p. 27.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[xvi:52](2090005.htm#fr_51) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p75.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p76"></span> *Trin.* viii. 40.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[xvi:53](2090005.htm#fr_52) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p76.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p77"></span> Cf. Gwatkin, *Studies of Arianism*, p.
130.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[xvi:54](2090005.htm#fr_53) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p77.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p78"></span> *Ib.*, p. 159. It would not be fair to
judge Hilary by the *de Synodis* alone. The would-be diplomatist, in his
eagerness to bring about a reconciliation, is not quite just either to
the facts or to his own feelings.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[xvi:55](2090005.htm#fr_54) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p79.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p80"></span> *Chron.* ii. 39.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[xix:56](2090005.htm#fr_55) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p84.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p85"></span> *Syn.* 32.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[xix:57](2090005.htm#fr_56) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p85.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p86"></span> *Ib.* 78.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[xx:58](2090005.htm#fr_57) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p87.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p88"></span> Gwatkin, *Studies of Arianism*, p. 163.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[xx:59](2090005.htm#fr_58) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p88.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p89"></span> Sulp. Sev. *Chron*. ii. 42.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[xx:60](2090005.htm#fr_59) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p89.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p90"></span> Sulp. Sev. ii. 42, *iuxta ea, quæ Nicææ
erant a patribus conscripta*.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[xxi:61](2090005.htm#fr_60) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p91.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p92"></span> Sulpicius Severus, *Chron*. ii. 45, says
that he addressed at this time three petitions to the Emperor. This is,
of course, not impossible; but it is more likely that he had in his mind
the two appeals, that before the exile and the present one, and the
Invective.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[xxiii:62](2090005.htm#fr_61) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p94.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p95"></span> Cf. *Trin.* ii. 13 ff.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[xxiv:63](2090005.htm#fr_62) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p95.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p96"></span> Reading *habet* for *habeo*, but the
text is obscure.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[xxiv:64](2090005.htm#fr_63) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p96.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p97"></span> It is true that the Nicene Council is
not named here, but the allusion is obvious. The Conservatives had
actually objected to the novelty of the Creed; and the Arians had, as
Hilary goes on to say, used the pretext of novelty to destroy the
Gospel. The Council of Nicæa was thirty-five years before, and is very
accurately described as a ‘Synod of our fathers.’

<span id="fn_64"></span>[xxv:65](2090005.htm#fr_64) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p97.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p98"></span> Cf. Gwatkin, *Studies of Arianism*, p.
182.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[xxvi:66](2090005.htm#fr_65) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p100.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p101"></span> ‘Bodies lifted up without support,
women hanging by the feet without their garments falling about their
face.’ The other references which the Benedictine editor gives for this
curious statement are evidently borrowed from this of Hilary. From the
time of the first Apologists exorcism is, of course, constantly appealed
to as an evidence of the truth of Christianity, but usually, in somewhat
perfunctory language, and without the assertion that the writer has
himself seen what he records. Hilary himself does not profess to be an
eye-witness.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[xxvi:67](2090005.htm#fr_66) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p101.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p102"></span> This is a telling point. Constantius
had been notoriously unsuccessful in his Persian Wars.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[xxvi:68](2090005.htm#fr_67) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p102.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p103"></span> The text is corrupt, but it is not
probable that Hilary means that Paulinus was first relegated to Phrygia
and then to some pagan frontier district, if such there was. It is quite
in Hilary’s present vein to assume that because the Montanists were
usually called after the province of their origin, in which they were
still numerous, therefore all Phrygians were heretics and outside the
pale of Christendom. If *hordeo* be read for *horreo* the passage is
improved. Paulinus had either to be satisfied with rations of barley
bread, the food of slaves, or else to beg from the heretics. Such
treatment is very improbable, when we remember Hilary’s own comfort in
exile. But passions were excited, and men believed the worst of their
opponents. We may compare the falsehoods in Walker’s *Sufferings of the
Clergy*, and in Neal’s *Puritans*, which were eagerly believed in and
after our own Civil War.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[xxviii:69](2090005.htm#fr_68) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p103.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p104"></span> Hilary had previously (§ 27) asserted
that ‘the Apostle has taught us to communicate with the tombs of the
saints.’ This is an allusion to [Rom. xii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#013)<span id="ii.iii.i-p104.1"></span>,
with the strange reading ‘tombs’ for ‘necessities’ (<span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iii.i-p104.2"></span>μνείαις</span> for <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iii.i-p104.3"></span>χρείαις</span>), which
has, in fact, considerable authority in the <span class="c12"><span
id="ii.iii.i-p104.4"></span>mss.</span> of the New Testament and in the
Latin Christian writers. How far this reading may have been the cause,
how far the effect, of the custom of celebrating the Eucharist at the
tombs of Martyrs, it is impossible to say. The custom was by this time
more than a century old, and one of its purposes was to maintain the
sense of unity with the saints of the past. Constantius, by denying
their doctrine, had made himself their enemy.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[xxviii:70](2090005.htm#fr_69) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p105.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p106"></span> Gwatkin, *Studies of Arianism*, p. 244.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[xxix:71](2090005.htm#fr_70) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p108.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p109"></span> Rufinus, *Hist. Eccl*. i. 30, 31, and,
dependent on him, Socrates iii. 10 and Sozomen v. 13.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[xxx:72](2090005.htm#fr_71) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p109.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p110"></span> Cf. Dr. Bright, *Waymarks*, p. 217.
*n*.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[xxx:73](2090005.htm#fr_72) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p110.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p111"></span> *Hist. Eccl*. i. 30, 31.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[xxx:74](2090005.htm#fr_73) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p111.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p112"></span> *Op. cit*. i. 31. The recantation of
Liberius and of the Italian bishops may be read in Hilary’s 12th
Fragment.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[xxxi:75](2090005.htm#fr_74) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p114.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p115"></span> E.g. *Trin.* i. 17.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[xxxi:76](2090005.htm#fr_75) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p116.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p117"></span> Similarly in iv. 2 he alludes to the
first book, meaning that which we call first, though, as we saw, in v. 3
he speaks of our fifth as his second.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[xxxii:77](2090005.htm#fr_76) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p117.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p118"></span> i.e. in the passage introduced as a
connecting link with the books which now precede it, when the whole work
was put into its present shape.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[xxxiii:78](2090005.htm#fr_77) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p120.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p121"></span> E.g. ix. 31 to iii. 12, ix. 43 to vii.
17.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[xxxiii:79](2090005.htm#fr_78) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p121.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p122"></span> E.g. x. 54 *in*.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[xxxiii:80](2090005.htm#fr_79) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p122.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p123"></span> viii. 1, x. 4.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[xxxiii:81](2090005.htm#fr_80) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p123.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p124"></span> This heresy is not even mentioned in
xii. 6, where the opening was obvious.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[xxxiii:82](2090005.htm#fr_81) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p124.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p125"></span> Dr. Gwatkin, *Studies of Arianism*, p.
226.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[xxxiv:83](2090005.htm#fr_82) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p127.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p128"></span> Cf. Gore’s *Dissertations*, p. 134.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[xxxiv:84](2090005.htm#fr_83) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p128.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p129"></span> St. [Luke xxii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#032)<span id="ii.iii.i-p129.1"></span>,
where <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.i-p129.2"></span>ἐδεήθην</span> is translated as a passive.
Christ *is entreated* for Peter. There seems to be no parallel in Latin
theology.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[xxxiv:85](2090005.htm#fr_84) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p129.3"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p130"></span> E.g. the cento from the *De Trinitate*
attached to the Invective against Constantius.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[xxxiv:86](2090005.htm#fr_85) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p131.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p132"></span> ii. I.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[xxxiv:87](2090005.htm#fr_86) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p132.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p133"></span> Newman, *Arians of the Fourth Century*,
ii. v. 2.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[xxxv:88](2090005.htm#fr_87) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p134.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p135"></span> v. 6.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[xxxv:89](2090005.htm#fr_88) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p136.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p137"></span> E.g. bk. iii. is largely reproduced in
ix.; ii. 9 f. = xi. 46 f.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[xxxv:90](2090005.htm#fr_89) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p137.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p138"></span> E.g. i. 19, ii. 2, iii. 1, iv. 2, viii.
53, xi. 46 f.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[xxxv:91](2090005.htm#fr_90) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p138.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p139"></span> Cf. v. 1 (beginning of column 130 in
Migne), x. 4.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[xxxv:92](2090005.htm#fr_91) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p139.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p140"></span> E.g. v. 3 *fin*.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[xxxv:93](2090005.htm#fr_92) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p140.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p141"></span> Cf. *Ad Const*. ii. 8, in writing which
his own words in the *De Trinitate* must have come into his mind. He had
probably borrowed the thought from Origen, *contra Celsum*, i. 62.
Similar apostrophes are in v. 19, vi. 19 f., 33.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[xxxvi:94](2090005.htm#fr_93) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p142.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p143"></span> Cf. x. 57 *in*.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[xxxvi:95](2090005.htm#fr_94) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p143.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p144"></span> All instance is xi. 24 *in*.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[xxxvi:96](2090005.htm#fr_95) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p144.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p145"></span> E.g. in his masterly treatment, from
his point of view, of the Old Testament Theophanies, iv. 15 f.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[xxxvi:97](2090005.htm#fr_96) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p145.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p146"></span> Cf. viii. 26 f., ix. 41.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[xxxvii:98](2090005.htm#fr_97) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p147.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p148"></span> Orosius, *Apol*. 1.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[xxxvii:99](2090005.htm#fr_98) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p148.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p149"></span> E.g. iv. 42, *fin*.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[xxxvii:100](2090005.htm#fr_99) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p149.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p150"></span> E.g. i. 17.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[xxxviii:101](2090005.htm#fr_100) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p151.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p152"></span> Cf. Krüger, *Lucifer Bischof von
Calaris*, p. 39.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[xl:102](2090005.htm#fr_101) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p153.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p154"></span> Fragment xi.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[xl:103](2090005.htm#fr_102) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p154.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p155"></span> *Chron.* ii. 45.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[xl:104](2090005.htm#fr_103) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p157.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p158"></span> Jerome, *Apol. adv. Rufinum,* i. 2,
says that the total length of the Commentaries on Job and the Psalms was
about 40,000 lines, i.e. Virgilian hexameters. The latter, at a tough
estimate, must be nearly 35,000 lines in its present state. But Jerome,
as we shall see, was not acquainted with so many Homilies as have come
down to us; we must deduct about 5,000 lines, and this will leave l0,000
for the Commentary on Job, making it two sevenths of the length of the
other. Jerome, however, is not careful in his statements of lengths; he
calls the short *De Synodis* ‘a very long book,’ *Ep*. v. 2.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[xl:105](2090005.htm#fr_104) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p159.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p160"></span> *Tractatus*ought to be translated thus.
It is the term, and the only term, used so early as this for the
bishop’s address to the congregation; in fact, one might almost say that
*tractare, tractatus* in Christian language had no other meaning. It is
an anachronism in the fourth century to render *prædicare* by ‘preach;’
cf. Duchesne, *Liber Pontificalis,* i. 126.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[xli:106](2090005.htm#fr_105) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p160.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p161"></span> E.g. *fundamen*, *Tr. in Ps*. cxxviii.
10, *germen*, cxxxiv. 1, *revolubilis*, ii. 23, *peccamen*, ii. 9 *fin*.
and often. The shape of sentences, though simple, is always good; to
take one test word, *sæpe*, which was almost if not quite extinct in
common use, occurs fairly often near the end of a period, where it was
needed for rhythm, which *frequenter* would have spoiled. Some Psalms,
e.g. xiii., xiv., are treated more rhetorically than others.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[xli:107](2090005.htm#fr_106) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p162.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p163"></span> [Psalm
li.](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#000)<span id="ii.iii.i-p163.1"></span>
is the only exception, due, no doubt, to careless transcription. The
Homilies on the titles of [Psalms
ix.](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#000)<span id="ii.iii.i-p163.2"></span>
and xci. do not count; they are probably spurious, and in any case are
incomplete, as the text of the Psalms is not discussed.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[xli:108](2090005.htm#fr_107) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p164.4"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p165"></span> So Zingerle, Preface, p. xiv, to whom
we owe the excellent Vienna Edition of the Homilies, the only part of
Hilary’s writing which has as yet appeared in a critical text. The
writer of the former of these two Homilies, in § 2, says that the title
of a Psalm always corresponds to the contents. This is quite contrary to
Hilary’s teaching, who frequently points out and ingeniously explains
what seem to him, to be discrepancies.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[xlii:109](2090005.htm#fr_108) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p166.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p167"></span> E.g. in the *Instruction* or discourse
preparatory to the Homilies, and in the introductory sections of that on
[Ps. 118](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#000)<span
id="ii.iii.i-p167.1"></span> (119).

<span id="fn_109"></span>[xlii:110](2090005.htm#fr_109) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p167.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p168"></span> E.g. *Instr. in Ps*., § 12, the fifty
days of rejoicing during which Christians must not prostrate themselves
in prayer, nor fast.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[xlii:111](2090005.htm#fr_110) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p168.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p169"></span> [Ps.
118](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#000)<span id="ii.iii.i-p169.1"></span>,
*Ain*., § 16.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[xlii:112](2090005.htm#fr_111) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p170.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p171"></span> The account of exorcism given on [Ps.
64](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#000)<span id="ii.iii.i-p171.1"></span>,
§ 10, suggests Cyprian, *Ad. Don*. 5, but the subject is such a
commonplace that nothing definite can be said.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[xliii:113](2090005.htm#fr_112) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p172.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p173"></span> He is here cited by the volume and page
of the edition by Lommatzsch. His system of interpretation is admirably
described in the fourth of Dr. Bigg’s Bampton Lectures, *The Christian
Platonists of Alexandria*.

<span id="fn_113"></span>[xliii:114](2090005.htm#fr_113) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p174.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p175"></span> Hil. *Tr. in Ps*. 13, § 3, *his igitur
ita grassantibus*, sq. = Origen (ed. Lommatzsch) xii. 38.

<span id="fn_114"></span>[xliii:115](2090005.htm#fr_114) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p175.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p176"></span> E.g. *Instr. in Ps*., § 15 = Origen in
Eusebius, *H.E*. vi. 25 (Philocalia 3), Hilary on [Ps.
51](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#000)<span id="ii.iii.i-p176.1"></span>,
§§ 3, 7 = Origen xii. 353, 354, and very often on [Ps.
118](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#000)<span id="ii.iii.i-p176.2"></span>
(119), e.g. the Introduction = Or. xiii. 67 f., *Aleph*, § 12 = *ib*.
70, *Beth*, § 6 = *ib*. 71, *Caph*, §§ 4, 9 = *ib*. 82, 83, &c.

<span id="fn_115"></span>[xliv:116](2090005.htm#fr_115) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p176.3"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p177"></span> *Hæres.* 64, 12 f.

<span id="fn_116"></span>[xliv:117](2090005.htm#fr_116) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p177.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p178"></span> Origen xiii. 134. Hilary has omitted
this from his Homily on [Ps. 134](../../../bib/kjv/psa134.htm#000)<span
id="ii.iii.i-p178.1"></span>, § 12.

<span id="fn_117"></span>[xliv:118](2090005.htm#fr_117) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p178.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p179"></span> Instances of such independence are [Ps.
118](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#000)<span id="ii.iii.i-p179.1"></span>,
*Daleth*, § 6 (xiii. 74), 119, § 15 (*ib*. 108), 122, § 2 (*ib*. 112),
133, § 3 (*ib*. 131). The references to Origen are in brackets.

<span id="fn_118"></span>[xliv:119](2090005.htm#fr_118) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p179.3"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p180"></span> E.g. [Ps.
118](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#000)<span id="ii.iii.i-p180.1"></span>,
*Heth*, § 10, 121, § 1; Origen xiii. 80, 111.

<span id="fn_119"></span>[xliv:120](2090005.htm#fr_119) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p181.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p182"></span> [Ps.
118](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#000)<span id="ii.iii.i-p182.1"></span>,
*Gimel*, § 21.

<span id="fn_120"></span>[xliv:121](2090005.htm#fr_120) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p182.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p183"></span> Origen xiii. 72; Hilary, [Ps.
118](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#000)<span id="ii.iii.i-p183.1"></span>,
*Gimel*, § 1.

<span id="fn_121"></span>[xliv:122](2090005.htm#fr_121) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p183.3"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p184"></span> Cf. also [Ps.
118](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#000)<span id="ii.iii.i-p184.1"></span>,
*Heth*, § 7, *Koph*, § 4, with Origen xiii. 79, 98. Here again the
spirit of independence manifests itself towards the end of the work.

<span id="fn_122"></span>[xliv:123](2090005.htm#fr_122) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p184.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p185"></span> Cf. [Ps.
118](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#000)<span id="ii.iii.i-p185.1"></span>,
*Samech*, § 6; Origen xiii. 92.

<span id="fn_123"></span>[xlv:124](2090005.htm#fr_123) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p185.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p186"></span> [Ps.
143](../../../bib/kjv/psa143.htm#000)<span id="ii.iii.i-p186.1"></span>,
§ 4; Origen xiii. 149.

<span id="fn_124"></span>[xlv:125](2090005.htm#fr_124) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p188.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p189"></span> *Vir. Ill.* 100.

<span id="fn_125"></span>[xlv:126](2090005.htm#fr_125) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p189.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p190"></span> J. F. Gamurrini, *S. Hilarii Tractatus
de Mysteriis et Hymni*, etc., 4to., Rome, 1887. The *De Mysteriis*
occupies pp. 3–28.

<span id="fn_126"></span>[xlvi:127](2090005.htm#fr_126) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p190.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p191"></span> Ed. Gamurrini, p. 5.

<span id="fn_127"></span>[xlvi:128](2090005.htm#fr_127) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p191.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p192"></span> *Ib.* p. 17.

<span id="fn_128"></span>[xlvi:129](2090005.htm#fr_128) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p192.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p193"></span> *Ib.* p. 21; there is the not uncommon
play on the two senses of *colligere*.

<span id="fn_129"></span>[xlvi:130](2090005.htm#fr_129) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p193.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p194"></span> *Ib.* p. 27.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[xlvi:131](2090005.htm#fr_130) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p194.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p195"></span> It must be confessed that some
authorities refuse to regard this work as the *De Mysteriis* of Hilary.
Among these is Ebert, *Litteratur des Mittelalters, p.* 142, who admits
that the matter might be Hilary’s, but denies that the manner and style
are his.

<span id="fn_131"></span>[xlvi:132](2090005.htm#fr_131) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p196.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p197"></span> *Comm. in Ep. ad Gal.* ii. *pref*.:
*Hilarius in hymnorum carmine Gallos indociles vocat*. This may mean
that Hilary actually used the words ‘stubborn Gauls’ in one of his
hymns. There would be nothing extraordinary in this; the early efforts,
and especially those of the Arians which Hilary imitated for a better
purpose, often departed widely from the propriety of later compositions,
as we shall see in one of those attributed to Hilary himself.

<span id="fn_132"></span>[xlvi:133](2090005.htm#fr_132) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p197.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p198"></span> It is true that the Fourth Council of
Toledo (<span class="c12"><span id="ii.iii.i-p198.1"></span>a.d.</span>
633) in its 13th canon couples Hilary with Ambrose as the writer of
hymns in actual use. But these canons are verbose productions, and this
may be a mere literary flourish, natural enough in countrymen and
contemporaries of Isidore of Seville, who knew, no doubt from Jerome’s
*Viri Illustres*, that Hilary was the first Latin hymn writer.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[xlvii:134](2090005.htm#fr_133) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p200.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p201"></span> Two of the simplest stanzas are as
follows:—

<span id="ii.iii.i-p202"></span>Extra quam caper potest

<span id="ii.iii.i-p203"></span>mens humana

<span id="ii.iii.i-p204"></span>manet Filius in Patre,

<span id="ii.iii.i-p205"></span>rursus quem penes sit Pater

<span id="ii.iii.i-p206"></span>dignus, qui genitus est

<span id="ii.iii.i-p207"></span>Filius in Deum.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p208"></span>Felix quid potuit fide

<span id="ii.iii.i-p209"></span>res tantas penitus

<span id="ii.iii.i-p210"></span>credulus assequi,

<span id="ii.iii.i-p211"></span>ut incorporeo ex Deo

<span id="ii.iii.i-p212"></span>profectus fuerit

<span id="ii.iii.i-p213"></span>primogenitus Dei.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p214"></span>It is written in stanzas of six lines in
the <span class="c12"><span id="ii.iii.i-p214.1"></span>ms.</span>; the
metre is the second Asclepiad. Gamurrini, the discoverer, and Fechtrup
(in Wetzer-Welte’s Encyclopædia) regard it as the work of Hilary, but
the weight of opinion is against them.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[xlviii:135](2090005.htm#fr_134) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p215.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p216"></span> By Gamurrini in *Studì e documenti,*
1884, p. 83 f.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[xlviii:136](2090005.htm#fr_135) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p217.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p218"></span> Printed in full by Mai, *Patrum Nova
Bibliotheca, p.* 490. He suspends judgment, and will not say that it is
unworthy of Hilary. The Benedictine editor, Coustant, gives a few
stanzas as specimens, and summarily rejects it.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[xlviii:137](2090005.htm#fr_136) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p218.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p219"></span> The four quarters of the universe are
*ortus, occasus, aquilo, septentrio*; one of these last must mean the
south. This would point to some German land as the home of the author;
in no country of Romance tongue could such an error have been
perpetrated. *Perire* is used for *perdere*, but this is not
unparalleled.

<span id="fn_137"></span>[xlviii:138](2090005.htm#fr_137) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p220.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p221"></span> In Mai’s *Patrum Nova Bibliotheca*,
vol. i., is a short treatise on the Genealogies of Christ. The method of
interpretation is the same as Hilary’s, but the language is not his; and
the terms used of the Virgin in §§ 11, 12, are not as early as the
fourth century. In the same volume is an exposition of the beginning of
St. John’s Gospel in an anti-Arian sense. In spite of some difference of
vocabulary, there is no strong reason why this should not be by Hilary;
cf. especially, §§ 5–7. Mai also prints in the same volume a short
fragment on the Paralytic (St. [Matt. ix.
2](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#002)<span id="ii.iii.i-p221.1"></span>),
too brief for a judgment to be formed. In Pitra’s *Spicilegium
Solesmense*, vol. i., is a brief discussion on the first chapters of
Genesis, dealing chiefly with the Fall. It appears, like the Homilies on
the Psalms, to be the report of some extemporary addresses, and is more
likely than any of the preceding to be the work of Hilary. It is quite
in his style, but the contents are unimportant. But we must remember
that the scribes were rarely content to confess that they were ignorant
of the name of an author whom they transcribed; and that, being as
ill-furnished with scruples as with imagination, they assigned
everything that came to hand to a few familiar names. Two further works
ascribed to Hilary are obviously not his. Pitra, in the volume already
cited, has printed considerable remains of a Commentary on the Pauline
Epistles, which really belongs to Theodore of Mopsuestia; and a
Commentary on the seven Canonical Epistles, recently published in the
*Spicilegium Casinense*, vol. iii., is there attributed, with much
reason, to his namesake of Arles.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[l:139](2090005.htm#fr_138) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p222.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p223"></span> *Contra Auxentium,* §7.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[l:140](2090005.htm#fr_139) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p224.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p225"></span> It is clear from Hilary’s account
(*Contra Auxentium,* § 7) that the decision lay with the laymen.
Auxentius, in his account of the matter, does not even mention the
bishops.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[lii:141](2090005.htm#fr_140) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p227.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p228"></span> This was a gross exaggeration. They
cannot have been more than 400, and probably were less and we must
remember that the Homoean decision was only obtained by fraud, as
Auxentius well knew.

<span id="fn_141"></span>[liv:142](2090005.htm#fr_141) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p230.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p231"></span> §4.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[lv:143](2090005.htm#fr_142) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p232.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p233"></span> There are fifteen in the collection,
but the second and third which are as long as the rest together, and are
obviously extracts from the same work, are not by Hilary. He expressly
says (Fragm. i. § 6) that he will commence with the council of Arles and
the exile of Paulinus. These documents narrate at great length events
which began six years earlier, and with which Hilary and his province
had no direct concern. This proves that the fragments are not a portion
of the *Liber adversus Ursacium et Valentem*. Internal evidence proves
not less clearly that they cannot be excerpts from some other work of
Hilary. In Fragm. ii. § 21 we are told that apparently in the year 349,
Athanasius excommunicated Marcellus of Ancyra. It is of course,
notorious that he never did so; the mistake is one which Hilary could
not possibly have made. None the less, these fragments are both in
themselves and in the documents which they embody, one of our most
important authorities for the transactions they narrate, and are
indisputably contemporary and authentic. Nor is there any reasonable
doubt as to the genuineness of the thirteen. Those of them which reveal
the inconstancy of Liberius have been assailed by some Roman Catholic
writers, though they are accepted by others. The same suspicion has
extended to others among the fragments, because they are found in
company with these revelations concerning Liberius. But the doubts have
been suggested by the wish to disbelieve.

<span id="fn_143"></span>[lvi:144](2090005.htm#fr_143) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p233.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p234"></span> This correspondence which Hilary has
preserved (Fragm. xiii.–xv.) is interesting as shewing how difficult it
must have been for the laity to determine who was, and who was not, a
heretic, when all parties used the same Scriptural terms in commendation
of themselves and condemnation of their opponents. It begins with a
public letter in which Germinius makes a declaration of faith in
Homoeousion terms, without any mention of the reasons which had induced
him to depart from the Homoean position. This is followed by a
reproachful letter, also intended for publicity, from Valens, Ursacius,
and others. They had refused to attend to the rumour of his defection;
but now are compelled, by his own published letter, to ask the plain
question, whether or not he adheres to ‘the Catholic Faith set forth and
confirmed by the Holy Council at Rimini.’ If he had added to the Homoean
formula, which was that the Son is ‘like the Father,’ the words ‘in
substance’ or ‘in all things,’ he had fallen into the justly condemned
heresy of Basil of Ancyra. They demand an explicit statement that he
never had said, and never would say, anything of the kind; and warn him
that he is gravely suspected, complaints of his teaching having been
made by certain of his clergy to neighbouring bishops, which they trust
will be proved groundless. Germinius made no direct reply to this
letter, but addressed a manifesto to a number of more sympathetic
bishops, containing the scriptural proofs of the divinity of Christ and
recalling the fact that the Homoean leaders, before their own victory,
had acquiesced in the Homoeousian confession. Any teaching to the
contrary is the work, not of God, but of the spirit of this world, and
he entreats those whom he addresses to circulate his letter as widely as
possible, lest any should fall through ignorance into the snares of the
devil. Germinius was assured of safety in writing thus. Valentinian’s
support of Auxentius had proved that bishops might hold what opinions
they would on the great question provided they were not avowed Arians.
Germinius had been a leader of the Homoean party, and it is at least
possible that his change of front was due to his knowledge that the
Emperor, though he would not eject Homoeans, had no sympathy with them
and would allow them no influence. In fact, the smaller the share of
conscience, the greater the historical interest of Germinius’ action as
shewing the decline of Homoean influence in the West.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[lvii:145](2090005.htm#fr_144) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p236.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p237"></span> *Chron*. ii. 45.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Theology of St. Hilary of Poitiers.](2090006)
