[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2090025)  [Next](2090027) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.i"></span> <span id="page_235">p. 235</span> <span
id="ii.vi.i-Page_235"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.i-p1"></span><span class="c16"><span
id="ii.vi.i-p1.1"></span>Introduction to the Homilies on Psalms I.,
LIII., CXXX.</span>

<span id="ii.vi.i-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="ii.vi.i-p3"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="ii.vi.i-p3.1"></span>Some</span> account of St. Hilary’s *Homilies
on the Psalms* has already been given in the Introduction to this
volume, pp. xl.–xlv. A few words remain to be said concerning his
principle of exposition. This may be gathered from his own statement in
the fifth sections of the *Instructio Psalmorum*, the discourse
preliminary to the Homilies:—‘There is no doubt that the language of the
Psalms must be interpreted by the light of the teaching of the Gospel.
Thus, whoever he be by whose mouth the Spirit of prophecy has spoken,
the whole purpose of his words is our instruction concerning the glory
and power of the coming, the Incarnation, the Passion, the kingdom of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and of our resurrection. Moreover, all the
prophecies are shut and sealed to worldly sense and pagan wisdom, as
Isaiah says, *And all these words shall be unto you as the sayings of
this book which is sealed* <span id="fr_1357"></span>[1358](#fn_1357) .…
The whole is a texture woven of allegorical and typical meanings,
whereby are spread before our view all the mysteries of the
Only-begotten Son of God, Who was to be born in the body, to suffer, to
die, to rise again, to reign forever with, those who share His glory
because they believed on Him, to be the Judge of the rest of mankind.’
It is true that Hilary from time to time discriminates, and sometimes
very shrewdly, between passages which must, and others which must not,
be thus interpreted, but for the most part the commentary is theological
and therefore mystical. The Psalter is not used for the establishment of
doctrine. No position for which Hilary had not another and an
independent defence is maintained on the strength of an allegorical
explanation, and no deductions are drawn from such allegories. They are
simply used for the cumulative confirmation of truth otherwise revealed.
The result is a commentary much more illustrative of Hilary’s own
thought to of that of the writers of the Psalms; and great as are the
merits of the Homilies, they are counter-balanced by obvious and serious
defects. There is, of course, little interest taken in the circumstances
in which the Psalms were written. They are, in Hilary’s eyes,
essentially prophecies, and he is content as a rule to describe the
writer simply as ‘the Prophet.’ And as with the history, so with the
spirit of the Psalter. There is little evidence that he recognised in it
the noblest and most perfect expression of human devotion towards God,
and still less that he appreciated the elevation of its poetry. For the
latter failure there is ample excuse. The Septuagint and Old Latin
versions of the Psalms have for us venerable antiquity and sacred
associations, but they can hardly be said to appeal to the imagination.
Now while Hilary of course regarded the Greek translation as
authoritative on account both of our Lord’s use of it and of general
consent, he treats it not as literature but rather in the spirit of a
lawyer interpreting and applying the terms of an ancient charter. Nor is
it likely that the Latin version would move Hilary as it sometimes moves
us who read it to-day and find a certain dignity and power in its
unpolished sentences. Its roughness could only shock, and its obscurity
perplex, one who, as we have said already (Intr. iii.), could think and
express himself clearly in what was to him a living and a cultivated
language. But with all his disadvantages he has produced a great and
profoundly Christian work, of permanent value and interest and of
abiding influence upon thought, theological and moral. For in these
Homilies, and not least in those which are here translated, the Roman
genius for moral reflection is manifest, and the pattern set which St.
Ambrose was to follow with success in such work as his *De officiis
ministrorum*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1357"></span>[235:1358](2090026.htm#fr_1357) <span
id="ii.vi.i-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.i-p4"></span> [Is. xxix.
11](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#011)<span id="ii.vi.i-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homilies on the Psalms.](2090027)
