[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2090008)  [Next](2090010) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.ii"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p1"></span> <span id="page_4">p. 4</span> <span
id="ii.iv.ii-Page_4"></span><span class="c16"><span
id="ii.iv.ii-p1.1"></span>On the Councils, or, The Faith of the
Easterns.</span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p3"></span>To the most dearly loved and blessed
brethren our fellow-bishops of the province of Germania Prima and
Germania Secunda, Belgica Prima and Belgica Secunda, Lugdunensis Prima
and Lugdunensis Secunda, and the province of Aquitania, and the province
of Novempopulana, and to the laity and clergy of Tolosa in the Provincia
Narbonensis, and to the bishops of the provinces of Britain, Hilary the
servant of Christ, eternal salvation in God our Lord.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p4"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="ii.iv.ii-p4.1"></span>I had</span> determined, beloved brethren, to
send no letter to you concerning the affairs of the Church in
consequence of your prolonged silence. For when I had by writing from
several cities of the Roman world frequently informed you of the faith
and efforts of our religious brethren, the bishops of the East, and how
the Evil One profiting by the discords of the times had with envenomed
lips and tongue hissed out his deadly doctrine, I was afraid. I feared
lest while so many bishops were involved in the serious danger of
disastrous sin or disastrous mistake, you were holding your peace
because a defiled and sin-stained conscience tempted you to despair.
Ignorance I could not attribute to you; you had been too often warned. I
judged therefore that I also ought to observe silence towards you,
carefully remembering the Lord’s saying, that those who after a first
and second entreaty, and in spite of the witness of the Church, neglect
to hear, are to be unto us as heathen men and publicans <span
id="fr_452"></span>[453](#fn_452) .

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p6"></span>2. But when I received the letters that
your blessed faith inspired, and understood that their slow arrival and
their paucity were due to the remoteness and secrecy of my place of
exile, I rejoiced in the Lord that you had continued pure and undefiled
by the contagion of any execrable heresy, and that you were united with
me in faith and spirit, and so were partakers of that exile into which
Saturninus, fearing his own conscience, had thrust me after beguiling
the Emperor, and after that you had denied him communion for the whole
three years ago until now. I equally rejoiced that the impious and
infidel creed which was sent straightway to you from Sirmium was not
only not accepted by you, but condemned as soon as reported and
notified. I felt that it was now binding on me as a religious duty to
write sound and faithful words to you as my fellow-bishops, who
communicate with me in Christ. I, who through fear of what might have
been could at one time only rejoice with my own conscience that I was
free from all these errors, was now bound to express delight at the
purity of our common faith. Praise God for the unshaken stability of
your noble hearts, for your firm house built on the foundation of the
faithful rock, for the undefiled and unswerving constancy of a will that
has proved immaculate! For since the good profession at the Council of
Biterræ, where I denounced the ringleaders of this heresy with some of
you for my witnesses, it has remained and still continues to remain,
pure, unspotted and scrupulous.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p7"></span>3. You awaited the noble triumph of a holy
and steadfast perseverance without yielding to the threats, the powers
and the assaults of Saturninus: and when all the waves of awakening
blasphemy struggled against God, you who still remain with me faithful
in Christ did not give way when threatened with the onset of heresy, and
now by meeting that onset you have broken all its violence. Yes,
brethren, you have conquered, to the abundant joy of those who share
your faith: and your unimpaired constancy gained the double glory of
keeping a pure conscience and giving an authoritative example. For the
fame of your <span id="page_5">p. 5</span> <span
id="ii.iv.ii-Page_5"></span>unswerving and unshaken faith has moved
certain Eastern bishops, late though it be, to some shame for the heresy
fostered and supported in those regions: and when they heard of the
godless confession composed at Sirmium, they contradicted its audacious
authors by passing certain decrees themselves. And though they withstood
them not without in their turn raising some scruples, and inflicting
some wounds upon a sensitive piety, yet they withstood them so
vigorously as to compel those who at Sirmium yielded to the views of
Potamius and Hosius as accepting and confirming those views, to declare
their ignorance and error in so doing; in fact they had to condemn in
writing their own action. And they subscribed with the express purpose
of condemning something else in advance <span
id="fr_453"></span>[454](#fn_453) .

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p9"></span>4. But your invincible faith keeps the
honourable distinction of conscious worth, and content with repudiating
crafty, vague, or hesitating action, safely abides in Christ, preserving
the profession of its liberty. You abstain from communion with those who
oppose their bishops with their blasphemies and keep them in exile, and
do not by assenting to any crafty subterfuge bring yourselves under a
charge of unrighteous judgment. For since we all suffered deep and
grievous pain at the actions of the wicked against God, within our
boundaries alone is communion in Christ to be found from the time that
the Church began to be harried by disturbances such as the expatriation
of bishops, the deposition of priests, the intimidation of the people,
the threatening of the faith, and the determination of the meaning of
Christ’s doctrine by human will and power. Your resolute faith does not
pretend to be ignorant of these facts or profess that it can tolerate
them, perceiving that by the act of hypocritical assent it would bring
itself before the bar of conscience.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p10"></span>5. And although in all your actions, past
and present, you bear witness to the uninterrupted independence and
security of your faith; yet in particular you prove your warmth and
fervour of spirit by the fact that some of you whose letters have
succeeded in reaching me have expressed a wish that I, unfit as I am,
should notify to you what the Easterns have since said in their
confessions of faith. They affectionately laid the additional burden
upon me of indicating my sentiments on all their decisions. I know that
my skill and learning are inadequate, for I feel it most difficult to
express in words my own belief as I understand it in my heart; far less
easy must it be to expound the statements of others.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p11"></span>6. Now I beseech you by the mercy of the
Lord, that as I will in this letter according to your desire write to
you of divine things and of the witness of a pure conscience to our
faith, no one will think to judge me by the beginning of my letter
before he has read the conclusion of my argument. For it is unfair
before the complete argument has been grasped, to conceive a prejudice
on account of initial statements, the reason of which is yet unknown,
since it is not with imperfect statements before us that we must make a
decision for the sake of investigation, but on the conclusion for the
sake of knowledge. I have some fear, not about you, as God is witness of
my heart, but about some who in their own esteem are very cautious and
prudent but do not understand the blessed apostle’s precept not to think
of themselves more highly than they ought <span
id="fr_454"></span>[455](#fn_454) : for I am afraid that they are
unwilling to know all those facts, the complete account of which I will
offer at the end, and at the same time they avoid drawing the true
conclusion from the aforesaid facts. But whoever takes up these lines to
read and examine them has only to be consistently patient with me and
with himself and peruse the whole to its completion. Perchance all this
assertion of my faith will result in those who conceal their heresy
being unable to practise the deception they wish, and in true Catholics
attaining the object which they desire.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p13"></span>7. Therefore I comply with your
affectionate and urgent wish, and I have set down all the creeds which
have been promulgated at different times and places since the holy
Council of Nicæa, with my appended explanations of all the phrases and
even words employed. If they be thought to contain anything faulty, no
one can impute the fault to me: for I am only a reporter, as you wished
me to be, and not an author. But if anything is found to be laid down in
right and apostolic fashion, no one can doubt that it is no credit to
the interpreter but to the originator. In any case I have sent you a
faithful account of these transactions: it is for you to determine by
the decision your faith inspires whether their spirit is Catholic or
heretical.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p14"></span>8. For although it was necessary to reply
to <span id="page_6">p. 6</span> <span id="ii.iv.ii-Page_6"></span>your
letters, in which you offered me Christian communion with your faith,
(and, moreover, certain of your number who were summoned to the Council
which seemed pending in Bithynia did refuse with firm consistency of
faith to hold communion with any but myself outside Gaul), it also
seemed fit to use my episcopal office and authority, when heresy was so
rife, in submitting to you by letter some godly and faithful counsel.
For the word of God cannot be exiled as our bodies are, or so chained
and bound that it cannot be imparted to you in any place. But when I had
learnt that synods were to meet in Ancyra and Ariminum, and that one or
two bishops from each province in Gaul would assemble there, I thought
it especially needful that I, who am confined in the East, should
explain and make known to you the grounds of those mutual suspicious
which exist between us and the Eastern bishops, though some of you know
those grounds; in order that whereas you had condemned and they had
anathematized this heresy that spreads from Sirmium, you might
nevertheless know with what confession of faith the Eastern bishops had
come to the same result that you had come to, and that I might prevent
you, whom I hope to see as shining lights in future Councils, differing,
through a mistake about words, even a hair’s-breadth from pure Catholic
belief, when your interpretation of the apostolic faith is identically
the same and you are Catholics at heart.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p15"></span>9. Now it seems to me right and
appropriate, before I begin my argument about suspicions and dissensions
as to words, to give as complete an account as possible of the decisions
of the Eastern bishops adverse to the heresy compiled at Sirmium. Others
have published all these transactions very plainly, but much obscurity
is caused by a translation from Greek into Latin, and to be absolutely
literal is to be sometimes partly unintelligible.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p16"></span>10. You remember that in the
*Blasphemia*, lately written at Sirmium, the object of the authors was
to proclaim the Father to be the one and only God of all things, and
deny the Son to be God: and while they determined that men should hold
their peace about <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.ii-p16.1"></span>ὁμοούσιον</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iv.ii-p16.2"></span>ὁμοιούσιον</span>, they
determined that God the Son should be asserted to be born not of God the
Father, but of nothing, as the first creatures were, or of another
essence than God, as the later creatures. And further that in saying the
Father was greater in honour, dignity, splendour and majesty, they
implied that the Son lacked those things which constitute the Father’s
superiority. Lastly, that while it is affirmed that His birth is
unknowable, we were commanded by this Compulsory Ignorance Act not to
know that He is of God: just as if it could be commanded or decreed that
a man should know what in future he is to be ignorant of, or be ignorant
of what he already knows. I have subjoined in full this pestilent and
godless blasphemy, though against my will, to facilitate a more complete
knowledge of the worth and reason of the replies made on the opposite
side by those Easterns who endeavoured to counteract all the wiles of
the heretics according to their understanding and comprehension.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p17"></span>*A copy of the* Blasphemia*composed at
Sirmium by Osius and Polamius.*

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p18"></span>11. Since there appeared to be some
misunderstanding respecting the faith, all points have been carefully
investigated and discussed at Sirmium in the presence of our most
reverend brothers and fellow-bishops, Valens, Ursacius and Germinius.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p19"></span>It is evident that there is one God, the
Father Almighty, according as it is believed throughout the whole world;
and His only Son Jesus Christ our Saviour, begotten of Him before the
ages. But we cannot and ought not to say that there are two Gods, for
the Lord Himself said, *I will go unto My Father and your Father, unto
My God and your God* <span id="fr_455"></span>[456](#fn_455) . So there
is one God over all, as the Apostle hath taught us, *Is He God of the
Jews only? Is He not also of the Gentiles? Yes, of the Gentiles also:
seeing it is one God, which shall justify the circumcision by faith, and
the uncircumcision through faith.* And in all other things they agreed
thereto, nor would they allow any difference.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p21"></span>But since some or many persons were
disturbed by questions concerning substance, called in Greek <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iv.ii-p21.1"></span>οὐσία</span>, that is, to
make it understood more exactly, as to <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.ii-p21.2"></span>ὁμοούσιον</span>, or what is called <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iv.ii-p21.3"></span>ὁμοιούσιον</span> , there
ought to be no mention made of these at all. Nor ought any exposition to
be made of them for the reason and consideration that they are not
contained in the divine Scriptures, and that they are above man’s
understanding, nor can any man declare the birth of the Son, of whom it
is written, *Who shall declare His generation* <span
id="fr_456"></span>[457](#fn_456) *?* For it is plain that only the
Father knows how He begot the Son, and the Son how He was begotten of
the Father. There is no question that the Father is greater. No one can
doubt that the Father is greater than the Son in honour, dignity,
splendour, majesty, and in the very name of Father, the Son Himself
testifying, *He that sent Me is greater than I* <span
id="fr_457"></span>[458](#fn_457) . And no one <span id="page_7">p.
7</span> <span id="ii.iv.ii-Page_7"></span>is ignorant that it is
Catholic doctrine that there are two Persons of Father and Son; and that
the Father is greater, and that the Son is subordinated to the Father,
together with all things which the Father has subordinated to Him, and
that the Father has no beginning and is invisible, immortal and
impassible, but that the Son has been begotten of the Father, God of
God, Light of Light, and that the generation of this Son, as is
aforesaid, no one knows but His Father. And that the Son of God Himself,
our Lord and God, as we read, took flesh, that is, a body, that is, man
of the womb of the Virgin Mary, of the Angel announced. And as all the
Scriptures teach, and especially the doctor of the Gentiles himself, He
took of Mary the Virgin, man, through whom He suffered. And the whole
faith is summed up and secured in this, that the Trinity must always be
preserved, as we read in the Gospel, *Go ye and baptize all nations in
the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost* <span
id="fr_458"></span>[459](#fn_458) . Complete and perfect is the number
of the Trinity. How the Paraclete, the Spirit, is through the Son: Who
was sent and came according to His promise in order to instruct, teach
and sanctify the apostles and all believers.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p25"></span>12. After these many and most impious
statements had been made, the Eastern bishops on their side again met
together and composed definitions of their confession. Since, however,
we have frequently to mention the words essence and substance, we must
determine the meaning of essence, lest in discussing facts we prove
ignorant of the signification of our words. Essence is a reality which
is, or the reality of those things from which it is, and which subsists
inasmuch as it is permanent. Now we can speak of the essence, or nature,
or genus, or substance of anything. And the strict reason why the word
essence is employed is because it is always. But this is identical with
substance, because a thing which is, necessarily subsists in itself, and
whatever thus subsists possesses unquestionably a permanent genus,
nature or substance. When, therefore, we say that essence signifies
nature, or genus, or substance, we mean the essence of that thing which
permanently exists in the nature, genus, or substance. Now, therefore,
let us review the definitions of faith drawn up by the Easterns.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p26"></span>I. “If any one hearing that the Son is
the image of the invisible God, says that the image of God is the same
as the invisible God, as though refusing to confess that He is truly
Son: let him be anathema.”

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p27"></span>13. Hereby is excluded the assertion of
those who wish to represent the relationship of Father and Son as a
matter of names, inasmuch as every image is similar in species to that
of which it is an image. For no one is himself his own image, but it is
necessary that the image should demonstrate him of whom it is an image.
So an image is the figured and indistinguishable likeness of one thing
equated with another. Therefore the Father is, and the Son is, because
the Son is the image of the Father: and he who is an image, if he is to
be truly an image, must have in himself his original’s species, nature
and essence in virtue of the fact that he is an image.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p28"></span>II. “And if any one hearing the Son say,
*As the Father hath life in Himself, so also hath He given to the Son to
have life in Himself* <span id="fr_459"></span>[460](#fn_459) , shall
say that He who has received life from the Father, and who also
declares, *I live by the Father* <span id="fr_460"></span>[461](#fn_460)
, is the same as He who gave life: let him be anathema.”

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p31"></span>14. The person of the recipient and of
the giver are distinguished so that the same should not be made one and
sole. For since he is under anathema who has believed that, when
recipient and giver are mentioned one solitary and unique person is
implied, we may not suppose that the selfsame person who gave received
from Himself. For He who lives and He through whom He lives are not
identical, for one lives to Himself, the other declares that He lives
through the Author of His life, and no one will declare that He who
enjoys life and He through whom His life is caused are personally
identical.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p32"></span>III. “And if any one hearing that the
Only-begotten Son is like the invisible God, denies that the Son who is
the image of the invisible God (whose image is understood to include
essence) is Son in essence, as though denying His true Sonship: let him
be anathema.”

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p33"></span>15. It is here insisted that the nature
is indistinguishable and entirely similar. For since He is the
Only-begotten Son of God and the image of the invisible God, it is
necessary that He should be of an essence similar in species and nature.
Or what distinction can be made between Father and Son affecting their
nature with its similar genus, when the Son subsisting through the
nature begotten in Him is invested with the properties of the Father,
viz., glory, worth, power, invisibility, essence? And while these
prerogatives of divinity are equal we neither understand the one to be
less because He is Son, nor the other to be greater because <span
id="page_8">p. 8</span> <span id="ii.iv.ii-Page_8"></span>He is Father;
since the Son is the image of the Father in species, and not dissimilar
in genus; since the similarity of a Son begotten of the substance of His
Father does not admit of any diversity of substance, and the Son and
image of the invisible God embraces in Himself the whole form of His
Father’s divinity both in kind and in amount: and this is to be truly
Son, to reflect the truth of the Father’s form by the perfect likeness
of the nature imaged in Himself.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p34"></span>IV. “And if any one hearing this text,
*For as the Father hath life in Himself so also He hath given to the Son
to have life in Himself* <span id="fr_461"></span>[462](#fn_461) ;
denies that the Son is like the Father even in essence, though He
testifies that it is even as He has said; let him be anathema. For it is
plain that since the life which is understood to exist in the Father
signifies substance, and the life of the Only-begotten which was
begotten of the Father is also understood to mean substance or essence,
He there signifies a likeness of essence to essence.”

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p36"></span>16. With the Son’s origin as thus stated
is connected the perfect birth of the undivided nature. For what in each
is life, that in each is signified by essence. And in the life which is
begotten of life, *i.e.* in the essence which is born of essence, seeing
that it is not born unlike (and that because life is of life), He keeps
in Himself a nature wholly similar to His original, because there is no
diversity in the likeness of the essence that is born and that begets,
that is, of the life which is possessed and which has been given. For
though God begat Him of Himself, in likeness to His own nature, He in
whom is the unbegotten likeness did not relinquish the property of His
natural substance. For He only has what He gave; and as possessing life
He gave life to be possessed. And thus what is born of essence, as life
of life, is essentially like itself, and the essence of Him who is
begotten and of Him who begets admits no diversity or unlikeness.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p37"></span>V. “If any one hearing the words *formed*
or *created* it and *begat me* spoken by the same lips <span
id="fr_462"></span>[463](#fn_462) , refuses to understand this *begat
me* of likeness of essence, but says that *begat me* and *formed me* are
the same: as if to deny that the perfect Son of God was here signified
as Son under two different expressions, as Wisdom has given us to
piously understand, and asserts that *formed me* and *begat me* only
imply formation and not sonship: let him be anathema.”

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p39"></span>17. Those who say that the Son of God is
only a creature or formation are opposed on the fact that they say they
have read *The Lord formed* or *created me*, which seems to imply
formation or creation; but they omit the following sentence, which is
the key to the first, and from the first wrest authority for their
impious statement that the Son is a creature, because Wisdom has said
that she was created. But if she were created, how could she be also
born? For all birth, of whatever kind, attains its own nature from the
nature that begets it: but creation takes its beginning from the power
of the Creator, the Creator being able to form a creature from nothing.
So Wisdom, who said that she was created, does in the next sentence say
that she was also begotten, using the word creation of the act of the
changeless nature of her Parent, which nature, unlike the manner and
wont of human parturition, without any detriment or change of self
created from itself what it begat. Similarly a Creator has no need of
passion or intercourse or parturition. And that which is created out of
nothing begins to exist at a definite moment. And He who creates makes
His object through His mere power, and creation is the work of might,
not the birth of a nature from a nature that besets it. But because the
Son of God was not begotten after the manner of corporeal childbearing,
but was born perfect God of perfect God; therefore Wisdom says that she
was created, excluding in her manner of birth every kind of corporeal
process.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p40"></span>18. Moreover, to shew that she possesses
a nature that was born and not created, Wisdom has added that she was
begotten, that by declaring that she was created and also begotten, she
might completely explain her birth. By speaking of creation she implies
that the nature of the Father is changeless, and she also shews that the
substance of her nature begotten of God the Father is genuine and real.
And so her words about creation and generation have explained the
perfection of her birth: the former that the Father is changeless, the
latter the reality of her own nature. The two things combined become
one, and that one is both in perfection: for the Son being born of God
without any change in God, is so born of the Father as to be created;
and the Father, who is changeless in Himself and the Son’s Father by
nature, so forms the Son as to beget Him. Therefore the heresy which has
dared to aver that the Son of God is a creature is condemned because
while the first statement shews the impossible perfection of the
divinity, the second, which asserts His natural generation, crushes the
<span id="page_9">p. 9</span> <span id="ii.iv.ii-Page_9"></span>impious
opinion that He was created out of nothing.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p41"></span>VI. “And if any one grant the Son only a
likeness of activity, but rob Him of the likeness of essence which is
the corner-stone of our faith, in spite of the fact that the Son Himself
reveals His essential likeness with the Father in the words, *For as the
Father hath life in Himself, so also hath He given to the Son to have
life in Himself* <span id="fr_463"></span>[464](#fn_463) , as well as
His likeness in activity by teaching us that *What things soever the
Father doeth, these also doeth the Son likewise* <span
id="fr_464"></span>[465](#fn_464) , such a man robs himself of the
knowledge of eternal life which is in the Father and the Son, and let
him be anathema.”

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p44"></span>19. The heretics when beset by
authoritative passages in Scripture are wont only to grant that the Son
is like the Father in might while they deprive Him of similarity of
nature. This is foolish and impious, for they do not understand that
similar might can only be the result of a similar nature. For a lower
nature can never attain to the might of a higher and more powerful
nature. What will the men who make these assertions say about the
omnipotence of God the Father, if the might of a lower nature is made
equal to His own? For they cannot deny that the Son’s power is the same,
seeing that He has said *What things soever the Father doeth, these also
doeth the Son likewise.*

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p45"></span>No, a similarity of nature follows on a
similarity of might when He says, *As the Father hath life in Himself,
so also hath He given to the Son to have life in Himself.* In life is
implied nature and essence; this, Christ teaches, has been given Him to
have as the Father hath. Therefore similarity of life contains
similarity of might: for there cannot be similarity of life where the
nature is dissimilar. So it is necessary that similarity of essence
follows on similarity of might: for as what the Father does, the Son
does also, so the life that the Father has He has given to the Son to
have likewise. Therefore we condemn the rash and impious statements of
those who confess a similarity of might but have dared to preach a
dissimilarity of nature, since it is the chief ground of our hope to
confess that in the Father and the Son there is an identical divine
substance.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p46"></span>VII. “And if any one professing that he
believes that there is a Father and a Son, says that the Father is
Father of an essence unlike Himself but of similar activity; for
speaking profane and novel words against the essence of the Son and
nullifying His true divine Sonship, let him be anathema.”

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p47"></span>20. By confused and involved expressions
the heretics very frequently elude the truth and secure the ears of the
unwary by the mere sound of common words, such as the titles Father and
Son, which they do not truthfully utter to express a natural and genuine
community of essence: for they are aware that God is called the Father
of all creation, and remember that all the saints are named sons of God.
In like manner they declare that the relationship between the Father and
the Son resembles that between the Father and the universe, so that the
names Father and Son are rather titular than real. For the names are
titular if the Persons have a distinct nature of a different essence,
since no reality can be attached to the name of father unless it be
based on the nature of his offspring. So the Father cannot be called
Father of an alien substance unlike His own, for a perfect birth
manifests no diversity between itself and the original substance.
Therefore we repudiate all the impious assertions that the Father is
Father of a Son begotten of Himself and yet not of His own nature. We
shall not call God Father for having a creature like Him in might and
activity, but for begetting a nature of an essence not unlike or alien
to Himself: for a natural birth does not admit of any dissimilarity with
the Father’s nature. Therefore those are anathema who assert that the
Father is Father of a nature unlike Himself, so that something other
than God is born of God, and who suppose that the essence of the Father
degenerated in begetting the Son. For so far as in them lies they
destroy the very birthless and changeless essence of the Father by
daring to attribute to Him in the birth of His Only-begotten an
alteration and degeneration of His natural essence.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p48"></span>VIII. “And if any one understanding that
the Son is like in essence to Him whose Son He is admitted to be, says
that the Son is the same as the Father, or part of the Father, or that
it is through an emanation or any such passion as is necessary for the
procreation of corporeal children that the incorporeal Son draws His
life from the incorporeal Father: let him be anathema.”

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p49"></span>21. We have always to beware of the vices
of particular perversions, and countenance no opportunity for delusion.
For many heretics say that the Son is like the Father in divinity in
order to support the theory that in virtue of this similarity the Son is
the same Person as the Father: for this undivided similarity appears to
countenance a belief in a single monad. For what does not differ in kind
seems to retain identity of nature.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p50"></span>22. But birth does not countenance this
<span id="page_10">p. 10</span> <span id="ii.iv.ii-Page_10"></span>vain
imagination; for such identity without differentiation excludes birth.
For what is born has a father who caused its birth. Nor because the
divinity of Him who is being born is inseparable from that of Him who
begets, are the Begetter and the Begotten the same Person; while on the
other hand He who is born and He who begets cannot be unlike. He is
therefore anathema who shall proclaim a similarity of nature in the
Father and the Son in order to abolish the personal meaning of the word
Son: for while through mutual likeness one differs in no respect from
the other, yet this very likeness, which does not admit of bare union,
confesses both the Father and the Son because the Son is the changeless
likeness of the Father. For the Son is not part of the Father so that He
who is born and He who begets can be called one Person. Nor is He an
emanation so that by a continual flow of a corporeal uninterrupted
stream the flow is itself kept in its source, the source being identical
with the flow in virtue of the successive and unbroken continuity. But
the birth is perfect, and remains alike in nature; not taking its
beginning materially from a corporeal conception and bearing, but as an
incorporeal Son drawing His existence from an incorporeal Father
according to the likeness which belongs to an identical nature.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p51"></span>IX. “And if any one, because the Father
is never admitted to be the Son and the Son is never admitted to be the
Father, when he says that the Son is other than the Father (because the
Father is one Person and the Son another, inasmuch as it is said, *There
is another that beareth witness of Me, even the father who sent
Me* <span id="fr_465"></span>[466](#fn_465) ), does in anxiety for the
distinct personal qualities of the Father and the Son which in the
Church must be piously understood to exist, fear that the Son and the
Father may sometimes be admitted to be the same Person, and therefore
denies that the Son is like in essence to the Father: let him be
anathema.”

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p53"></span>23. It was said unto the apostles of the
Lord, *Be ye wise as serpents, and harmless as doves* <span
id="fr_466"></span>[467](#fn_466) . Christ therefore wished there to be
in us the nature of different creatures: but in such a sort that the
harmlessness of the dove might temper the serpent’s wisdom, and the
wisdom of the serpent might instruct the harmlessness of the dove, and
that so wisdom might be made harmless and harmlessness wise. This
precept has been observed in the exposition of this creed. For the
former sentence of which we have spoken guarded against the teaching of
a unity of person under the cloak of an essential likeness, and against
the denial of the Son’s birth as the result of an identity of nature,
lest we should understand God to be a single monad because one Person
does not differ in kind from the other. In the next sentence, by
harmless and apostolic wisdom we have again taken refuge in that wisdom
of the serpent to which we are bidden to be conformed no less than to
the harmlessness of the dove, lest perchance through a repudiation of
the unity of persons on the ground that the Father is one Person and the
Son another, a preaching of the dissimilarity of their natures should
again take us unawares, and lest on the ground that He who sent and He
who was sent are two Persons (for the Sent and the Sender cannot be one
Person) they should be considered to have divided and dissimilar
natures, though He who is born and He who begets Him cannot be of a
different essence. So we preserve in Father and in Son the likeness of
an identical nature through an essential birth: yet the similarity of
nature does not injure personality by making the Sent and the Sender to
be but one. Nor do we do away with the similarity of nature by admitting
distinct personal qualities, for it is impossible that the one God
should be called Son and Father to Himself. So then the truth as to the
birth supports the similarity of essence and the similarity of essence
does not undermine the personal reality of the birth. Nor again does a
profession of belief in the Begetter and the Begotten exclude a
similarity of essence; for while the Begetter and the Begotten cannot be
one Person, He who is born and He who begets cannot be of a different
nature.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p55"></span>X. “And if any one admits that God became
Father of the Only-begotten Son at any point in time and not that the
Only-begotten Son came into existence without passion beyond all times
and beyond all human calculation: for contravening the teaching of the
Gospel which scorned any interval of times between the being of the
Father and the Son and faithfully has instructed us that *In the
beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was
God* <span id="fr_467"></span>[468](#fn_467) , let him be anathema.”

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p57"></span>24. It is a pious saying that the Father
is not limited by times: for the true meaning of the name of Father
which He bore before time began surpasses comprehension. Although
religion teaches us to ascribe to Him this name of Father through which
comes the <span id="page_11">p. 11</span> <span
id="ii.iv.ii-Page_11"></span>impassible origin of the Son, yet He is not
bound in time, for the eternal and infinite God cannot be understood as
having become a Father in time, and according to the teaching of the
Gospel the Only-begotten God the Word is recognized even in the
beginning rather to be with God than to be born.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p58"></span>XI. “And if any one says that the Father
is older in time than His Only-begotten Son, and that the Son is younger
than the Father: let him be anathema.”

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p59"></span>25. The essential likeness conformed to
the Father’s essence in kind is also taught to be identical in time:
lest He who is the image of God, who is the Word, who is God with God in
the beginning, who is like the Father, by the insertion of times between
Himself and the Father should not have in Himself in perfection that
which is both image, and Word, and God. For if He be proclaimed to be
younger in time, He has lost the truth of the image and likeness: for
that is no longer likeness which is found to be dissimilar in time. For
that very fact that God is Father prevents there being any time in which
He was not Father: consequently there can be no time in the Son’s
existence in which He was not Son. Wherefore we must neither call the
Father older than the Son nor the Son younger than the Father: for the
true meaning of neither name can exist without the other.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p60"></span>XII. “And if any one attributes the
timeless substance (*i.e.* Person) of the Only-begotten Son derived from
the Father to the unborn essence of God, as though calling the Father
Son: let him be anathema <span id="fr_468"></span>[469](#fn_468) .”

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p62"></span>26. The above definition when it denied
that the idea of time could be applied to the birth of the Son seemed to
have given an occasion for heresy (we saw that it would be monstrous if
the Father were limited by time, but that He would be so limited if the
Son were subjected to time), so that by the help of this repudiation of
time, the Father who is unborn might under the appellation of Son be
proclaimed as both Father and Son in a single and unique Person. For in
excluding times from the Son’s birth it seemed to countenance the
opinion that there was no birth, so that He whose birth is not in time
might be considered not to have been born at all. Wherefore, lest at the
suggestion of this denial of time the heresy of the unity of Persons
should insinuate itself, that impiety is condemned which dares to refer
the timeless birth to the unique and singular Person of the unborn
essence. For it is one thing to be outside time and another to be
unborn; the first admits of birth (though outside time), the other, so
far as it is, is the one sole author from eternity of its being what it
is.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p63"></span>27. We have reviewed, beloved brethren,
all the definitions of faith made by the Eastern bishops which they
formulated in their assembly against the recently emerging heresy. And
we, as far as we have been able, have adapted the wording of our
exposition to express their meaning, following their diction rather than
desiring to be thought the originators of new phrases. In these words
they decree the principles of their conscience and a long maintained
doctrine against a new and profane impiety. Those who compiled this
heresy at Sirmium, or accepted it after its compilation, they have
thereby compelled to confess their ignorance and to sign such decrees.
There the Son is the perfect image of the Father: there under the
qualities of an identical essence, the Person of the Son is not
annihilated and confounded with the Father: there the Son is declared to
be image of the Father in virtue of a real likeness, and does not differ
in substance from the Father, whose image He is: there on account of the
life which the Father has and the life which the Son has received, the
Father can have nothing different in substance (this being implied in
life) from that which the Son received to have: there the begotten Son
is not a creature, but is a Person undistinguished from the Father’s
nature: there, just as an identical might belongs to the Father and the
Son, so their essence admits of no difference: there the Father by
begetting the Son in no wise degenerates from Himself in Him through any
difference of nature: there, though the likeness of nature is the same
in each, the proper qualities which mark this likeness are repugnant to
a confusion of Persons, so that there is not one subsisting Person who
is called both Father and Son: there, though it is piously affirmed that
there is both a Father who sends and a Son who is sent, yet no
distinction in essence is drawn between the Father and the Son, the Sent
and the Sender: there the truth of God’s Fatherhood is not bound by
limits of time: there the Son is not later in time: there beyond all
time is a perfect birth which refutes the error that the Son could not
be born.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p64"></span><span id="page_12">p. 12</span> <span
id="ii.iv.ii-Page_12"></span>28. Here, beloved brethren, is the entire
creed which was published by some Easterns, few in proportion to the
whole number of bishops, and which first saw light at the very times
when you repelled the introduction of this heresy. The reason for its
promulgation was the fact that they were bidden to say nothing of the
<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.iv.ii-p64.1"></span>ὁμοούσιον</span>.
But even in former times, through the urgency of these numerous causes,
it was necessary at different occasions to compose other creeds, the
character of which will be understood from their wording. For when you
are fully aware of the results, it will be easier for us to bring to a
full consummation, such as religion and unity demand, the argument in
which we are interested.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p65"></span>*An exposition of the faith of the Church
made at the Council held on the occasion of the* Dedication*of the
church at Antioch by ninety-seven bishops there present, because of
suspicions felt as to the orthodoxy of a certain bishop* <span
id="fr_469"></span>[470](#fn_469)

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p67"></span>29. “We believe in accordance with
evangelical and apostolic tradition in one God the Father Almighty, the
Creator, Maker and Disposer of all things that are, and from whom are
all things.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p68"></span>“And in one Lord Jesus Christ, His
Only-begotten Son, God through whom are all things, who was begotten of
the Father, God of God, whole God of whole God, One of One, perfect God
of perfect God, King of King, Lord of Lord, the Word, the Wisdom, the
Life, true Light, true Way, the Resurrection, the Shepherd, the Gate,
unable to change or alter, the unvarying image of the essence and might
and glory of the Godhead, the first-born of all creation, who always was
in the beginning with God, the Word of God, according to what is said in
the Gospel, *and the Word was God*, through whom all things were made,
and in whom all things subsist, who in the last days came down from
above, and was born of a virgin according to the Scriptures, and was
made the Lamb <span id="fr_470"></span>[471](#fn_470) , the Mediator
between God and man, the Apostle of our faith, and leader of life. For
He said, *I came down from heaven, not to do Mine own will, but the will
of Him that sent me* <span id="fr_471"></span>[472](#fn_471) . Who
suffered and rose again for us on the third day, and ascended into
heaven, and sitteth on the right hand of the Father, and is to come
again with glory to judge the quick and the dead.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p71"></span>“And in the Holy Ghost, who was given to
them that believe, to comfort, sanctify and perfect, even as our Lord
Jesus Christ ordained His disciples, saying, *Go ye, and teach all
nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and
of the Holy Ghost* <span id="fr_472"></span>[473](#fn_472) , manifestly,
that is, of a Father who is truly Father, and clearly of a Son who is
truly Son, and a Holy Ghost who is truly a Holy Ghost, these words not
being set forth idly and without meaning, but carefully signifying the
Person, and order, and glory of each of those who are named, to teach us
that they are three Persons, but in agreement one.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p73"></span>30. “Having therefore held this faith
from the beginning, and being resolved to hold it to the end in the
sight of God and Christ, we say anathema to every heretical and
perverted sect, and if any man teaches contrary to the wholesome and
right faith of the Scriptures, saying that there is or was time, or
space, or age before the Son was begotten, let him be anathema. And if
any one say that the Son is a formation like one of the things that are
formed, or a birth resembling other births, or a creature like the
creatures, and not as the divine Scriptures have affirmed in each
passage aforesaid, or teaches or proclaims as the Gospel anything else
than what we have received: let him be anathema. For all those things
which were written in the divine Scriptures by Prophets and by Apostles
we believe and follow truly and with fear.”

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p74"></span>31. Perhaps this creed has not spoken
expressly enough of the identical similarity of the Father and the Son,
especially in concluding that the names Father, Son and Holy Ghost
referred to *the Person and order and glory of each of those who are
named to teach us that they are three Persons, but in agreement one.*

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p75"></span>32. But in the first place we must
remember that the bishops did not assemble at Antioch to oppose the
heresy which has dared to declare that the substance of the Son is
unlike that of the Father, but to oppose that which, in spite of the
Council of Nicæa, presumed to attribute the three names to the Father.
Of this we will treat in its proper place. I recollect that at the
beginning of my argument I besought the patience and forbearance of my
readers and hearers until the completion <span id="page_13">p. 13</span>
<span id="ii.iv.ii-Page_13"></span>of my letter, lest any one should
rashly rise to judge me before he was acquainted with the entire
argument. I ask it again. This assembly of the saints wished to strike a
blow at that impiety which by a mere counting of names evades the truth
as to the Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost; which represents that
there is no personal cause for each name, and by a false use of these
names makes the triple nomenclature imply only one Person, so that the
Father alone could be also called both Holy Ghost and Son. Consequently
they declared there were three substances, meaning three subsistent
Persons, and not thereby introducing any dissimilarity of essence to
separate the substance of Father and Son. For the words *to teach us
that they are three in substance, but in agreement one*, are free from
objection, because as the Spirit is also named, and He is the Paraclete,
it is more fitting that a unity of agreement should be asserted than a
unity of essence based on likeness of substance.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p76"></span>33. Further the whole of the above
statement has drawn no distinction whatever between the essence and
nature of the Father and the Son. For when it is said, *God of God,
whole God of whole God*, there is no room for doubting that whole God is
born of whole God. For the nature of God who is of God admits of no
difference, and as whole God of whole God He is in all in which the
Father is. *One of One* excludes the passions of a human birth and
conception, so that since He is One of One, He comes from no other
source, nor is different nor alien, for He is One of One, perfect God of
perfect God. Except in having a cause of its origin His birth does not
differ from the birthless nature since the perfection of both Persons is
the same. *King of King*. A power that is expressed by one and the same
title allows no dissimilarity of power. *Lord of Lord*. In ‘Lord’ also
the lordship is equal: there can be no difference where domination is
confessed of both without diversity. But plainest of all is the
statement appended after several others, *unable to change or alter, the
unvarying image of the Godhead and essence and might and glory*. For as
God of God, whole God of whole God, One of One, perfect God of perfect
God, King of King and Lord of Lord, since in all that glory and nature
of Godhead in which the Father ever abides, the Son born of Him also
subsists; He derives this also from the Father’s substance that He is
unable to change. For in His birth that nature from which He is born is
not changed; but the Son has maintained a changeless essence since His
origin is in a changeless nature. For though He is an image, yet the
image cannot alter, since in Him was born the image of the Father’s
essence, and there could not be in Him a change of nature caused by any
unlikeness to the Father’s essence from which He was begotten. Now when
we are taught that He was brought into being as the first of all
creation, and He is Himself said to have always been in the beginning
with God as God the Word, the fact that He was brought into being shews
that He was born, and the fact that He always was, shews that He is not
separated from the Father by time. Therefore this Council by dividing
the three substances, which it did to exclude a monad God with a
threefold title, did not introduce any separation of substance between
the Father and the Son. The whole exposition of faith makes no
distinction between Father and Son, the Unborn and the Only-begotten, in
time, or name, or essence, or dignity, or domination. But our common
conscience demands that we should gain a knowledge of the other creeds
of the same Eastern bishops, composed at different times and places,
that by the study of many confessions we may understand the sincerity of
their faith.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p77"></span>The Creed according to the Council of the
East.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p78"></span>34. “We, the holy synod met in Sardica
from different provinces of the East, namely, Thebais, Egypt, Palestine,
Arabia, Phœnicia, Cœle Syria, Mesopotamia, Cilicia, Cappadocia, Pontus,
Paphlagonia, Galatia, Bithynia and Hellespont, from Asia, namely, the
two provinces of Phrygia, Pisidia, the islands of the Cyclades,
Pamphylia, Caria, Lydia, from Europe, namely, Thrace, Hæmimontus <span
id="fr_473"></span>[474](#fn_473) , Mœsia, and the two provinces of
Pannonia, have set forth this creed.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p80"></span>“We believe in one God, the Father
Almighty, Creator and Maker of all things, from whom all fatherhood in
heaven and earth is named:

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p81"></span>“And we believe in His Only-begotten Son
our Lord Jesus Christ, who before all ages was begotten of the Father,
God of God, Light of Light, through whom were made all things which are
in heaven and earth, visible and invisible: who is the Word and Wisdom
and Might and Life and true Light: and who in the last days for our sake
was incarnate, and was born of the holy Virgin, who was crucified and
dead and buried, And rose from the dead on the third day, And <span
id="page_14">p. 14</span> <span id="ii.iv.ii-Page_14"></span>was
received into heaven, And sitteth on the right hand of the Father, And
shall come to judge the quick and the dead and to give to every man
according to his works: Whose kingdom remaineth without end for ever and
ever. For He sitteth on the right hand of the Father not only in this
age, but also in the age to come.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p82"></span>“We believe also in the Holy Ghost, that
is, the Paraclete, whom according to His promise He sent to His apostles
after His return into the heavens to teach them and to bring all things
to their remembrance, through whom also the souls of them that believe
sincerely in Him are sanctified.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p83"></span>“But those who say that the Son of God is
sprung from things non-existent or from another substance and not from
God, and that there was a time or age when He was not, the holy Catholic
Church holds them as aliens. Likewise also those who say that there are
three Gods, or that Christ is not God and that before the ages He was
neither Christ nor Son of God, or that He Himself is the Father and the
Son and the Holy Ghost, or that the Son is incapable of birth; or that
the Father begat the Son without purpose or will: the holy Catholic
Church anathematizes.”

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p84"></span>35. In the exposition of this creed,
concise but complete definitions have been employed. For in condemning
those who said that the Son sprang from things non-existent, it
attributed to Him a source which had no beginning but continues
perpetually. And lest this source from which He drew His permanent birth
should be understood to be any other substance than that of God, it also
declares to be blasphemers those who said that the Son was born of some
other substance and not of God. And so since He does not draw His
subsistence from nothing, or spring from any other source than God, it
cannot be doubted that He was born with those qualities which are God’s;
since the Only-begotten essence of the Son is generated neither from
things which are non-existent nor from any other substance than the
birthless and eternal substance of the Father. But the creed also
rejects intervals of times or ages: on the assumption that He who does
not differ in nature cannot be separable by time.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p85"></span>36. On every side, where anxiety might be
felt, approach is barred to the arguments of heretics lest it should be
declared that there is any difference in the Son. For those are
anathematized who say that there are three Gods: because according to
God’s true nature His substance does not admit a number of applications
of the title, except as it is given to individual men and angels in
recognition of their merit, though the substance of their nature and
that of God is different. In that sense there are consequently many
gods. Furthermore in the nature of God, God is one, yet in such a way
that the Son also is God, because in Him there is not a different
nature: and since He is God of God, both must be God, and since there is
no difference of kind between them there is no distinction in their
essence. A number of titular Gods is rejected; because there is no
diversity in the quality of the divine nature. Since therefore he is
anathema who says there are many Gods and he is anathema who denies that
the Son is God; it is fully shewn that the fact that each has one and
the same name arises from the real character of the similar substance in
each: since in confessing the Unborn God the Father, and the
Only-begotten God the Son, with no dissimilarity of essence between
them, each is called God, yet God must be believed and be declared to be
one. So by the diligent and watchful care of the bishops the creed
guards the similarity of the nature begotten and the nature begetting,
confirming it by the application of one name.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p86"></span>37. Yet to prevent the declaration of one
God seeming to affirm that God is a solitary monad without offspring of
His own, it immediately condemns the rash suggestion that because God is
one, therefore God the Father is one and solitary, having in Himself the
name of Father and of Son: since in the Father who begets and the Son
who comes to birth one God must be declared to exist on account of the
substance of their nature being similar in each. The faith of the saints
knows nothing of the Son being incapable of birth: because the nature of
the Son only draws its existence from birth. But the nature of the birth
is in Him so perfect that He who was born of the substance of God is
born also of His purpose and will. For from His will and purpose, not
from the process of a corporeal nature, springs the absolute perfection
of the essence of God born from the essence of God. It follows that we
should now consider that creed which was compiled not long ago when
Photinus was deposed from the episcopate.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p87"></span>A copy of the creed composed at Sirmium
by the Easterns to oppose Photinus.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p88"></span>38. “We believe in one God the Father
Almighty, the Creator and Maker, from whom every fatherhood in heaven
and in earth is named.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p89"></span>“And in His only Son Jesus Christ our
Lord, who was born of the Father before all ages, God of God, Light of
Light, through whom <span id="page_15">p. 15</span> <span
id="ii.iv.ii-Page_15"></span>all things were made in heaven and in
earth, visible and invisible. Who is the Word and Wisdom and Might and
Life and true Light: who in the last days for our sake took a body, And
was born of the holy Virgin, And was crucified, And was dead and buried:
who also rose from the dead on the third day, And ascended into heaven,
And sitteth on the right hand of the Father, And shall come at the end
of the world to judge the quick and the dead; whose kingdom continueth
without end and remaineth for perpetual ages. For He shall be sitting at
the right hand of the Father not only in this age, but also in the age
to come.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p90"></span>“And in the Holy Ghost, that is, the
Paraclete, whom according to His promise He sent to the apostles after
He ascended into heaven to teach them and to remind them of all things,
through whom also are sanctified the souls of those who believe
sincerely in Him.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p91"></span>I. “But those who say that the Son is
sprung from things non-existent, or from another substance and not from
God, and that there was a time or age when He was not, the holy Catholic
Church regards as aliens.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p92"></span>II. “If any man says that the Father and
the Son are two Gods: let him be anathema.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p93"></span>III. “And if any man says that God is
one, but does not confess that Christ, God the Son of God, ministered to
the Father in the creation of all things: let him be anathema.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p94"></span>IV. “And if any man dares to say that the
Unborn God, or a part of Him, was born of Mary: let him be anathema.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p95"></span>V. “And if any man say that the Son born
of Mary was, before born of Mary, Son only according to foreknowledge or
predestination, and denies that He was born of the Father before the
ages and was with God, and that all things were made through Him: let
him be anathema.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p96"></span>VI. “If any man says that the substance
of God is expanded and contracted: let him be anathema.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p97"></span>VII. “If any man says that the expanded
substance of God makes the Son; or names Son His supposed expanded
substance: let him be anathema.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p98"></span>VIII. “If any man says that the Son of
God is the internal or uttered Word of God: let him be anathema.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p99"></span>IX. “If any man says that the man alone
born of Mary is the Son: let him be anathema.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p100"></span>X. “If any man though saying that God
and Man was born of Mary, understands thereby the Unborn God: let him be
anathema.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p101"></span>XI. “If any man hearing *The Word was
made Flesh* <span id="fr_474"></span>[475](#fn_474) thinks that the Word
was transformed into Flesh, or says that He suffered change in taking
Flesh: let him be anathema.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p103"></span>XII. “If any man hearing that the only
Son of God was crucified, says that His divinity suffered corruption, or
pain, or change, or diminution, or destruction: let him be anathema.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p104"></span>XIII. “If any man says *Let us make
man* <span id="fr_475"></span>[476](#fn_475) was not spoken by the
Father to the Son, but by God to Himself: let him be anathema.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p106"></span>XIV. “If any man says that the Son did
not appear to Abraham, but the Unborn God, or a part of Him: let him be
anathema.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p107"></span>XV. “If any man says that the Son did
not wrestle with Jacob as a man, but the Unborn God, or a part of Him:
let him be anathema.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p108"></span>XVI. “If any man does not understand
*The Lord rained from the Lord* to be spoken of the Father and the Son,
but that the Father rained from Himself: let him be anathema. For the
Lord the Son rained from the Lord the Father.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p109"></span>XVII. “If any man says that the Lord and
the Lord, the Father and the Son are two Gods, because of the aforesaid
words: let him be anathema. For we do not make the Son the equal or peer
of the Father, but understand the Son to be subject. For He did not come
down to Sodom without the Father’s will, nor rain from Himself but *from
the Lord*, to wit by the Father’s authority; nor does He sit at the
Father’s right hand by His own authority, but He hears the Father
saying. *Sit thou on My right hand* <span
id="fr_476"></span>[477](#fn_476) .

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p111"></span>XVIII. “If any man says that the Father
and the Son and the Holy Ghost are one Person: let him be anathema.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p112"></span>XIX. “If any man speaking of the Holy
Ghost the Paraclete says that He is the Unborn God: let him be anathema.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p113"></span>XX. “If any man denies that, as the Lord
has taught us, the Paraclete is different from the Son; for He said,
*And the Father shall send you another Comforter, whom I shall
ask* <span id="fr_477"></span>[478](#fn_477) : let him be anathema.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p115"></span>XXI. “If any man says that the Holy
Spirit is a part of the Father or of the Son: let him be anathema.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p116"></span>XXII. “If any man says that the Father
and the Son and the Holy Spirit are three Gods: let him be anathema.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p117"></span>XXIII. “If any man after the example of
the Jews understands as said for the destruction of the Eternal
Only-begotten God the words, *I am the first God, and I am the last*
<span id="page_16">p. 16</span> <span id="ii.iv.ii-Page_16"></span>*God,
and beside Me there is no God* <span id="fr_478"></span>[479](#fn_478) ,
which were spoken for the destruction of idols and them that are no
gods: let him be anathema.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p119"></span>XXIV. “If any man says that the Son was
made by the will of God, like any object in creation: let him be
anathema.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p120"></span>XXV. “If any man says that the Son was
born against the will of the Father: let him be anathema. For the Father
was not forced against His own will, or induced by any necessity of
nature to beget the Son: but as soon as He willed, before time and
without passion He begat Him of Himself and shewed Him forth.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p121"></span>XXVI. “If any man says that the Son is
incapable of birth and without beginning, saying as though there were
two incapable of birth and unborn and without beginning, and makes two
Gods: let him be anathema. For the Head, which is the beginning of all
things, is the Son; but the Head or beginning of Christ is God: for so
to One who is without beginning and is the beginning of all things, we
refer the whole world through Christ.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p122"></span>XXVII. “Once more we strengthen the
understanding of Christianity by saying, If any man denies that Christ
who is God and Son of God, personally existed before time began and
aided the Father in the perfecting of all things; but says that only
from the time that He was born of Mary did He gain the name of Christ
and Son and a beginning of His deity: let him be anathema.”

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p123"></span>39. The necessity of the moment urged
the Council to set forth a wider and broader exposition of the creed
including many intricate questions, because the heresy which Photinus
was reviving was sapping our Catholic home by many secret mines. Their
purpose was to oppose every form of stealthy subtle heresy by a
corresponding form of pure and unsullied faith, and to have as many
complete explanations of the faith as there were instances of peculiar
faithlessness. Immediately after the universal and unquestioned
statement of the Christian mysteries, the explanation of the faith
against the heretics begins as follows.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p124"></span>I. “But those who say that the Son is
sprung from things non-existent, or from another substance and not from
God, and that there was a time or age when He was not, the holy Catholic
Church regards as aliens.”

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p125"></span>40. What ambiguity is there here? What
is omitted that the consciousness of a sincere faith could suggest? He
does not spring from things non-existent: therefore His origin has
existence. There is no other substance extant to be His origin, but that
of God: therefore nothing else can be born in Him but all that is God;
because His existence is not from nothing, and He draws subsistence from
no other source. He does not differ in time: therefore the Son like the
Father is eternal. And so the Unborn Father and the Only-begotten Son
share all the same qualities. They are equal in years, and that very
similarity between the sole-existing paternal essence and its offspring
prevents distinction in any quality.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p126"></span>II. “If any man says that the Father and
the Son are two Gods: let him be anathema.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p127"></span>III. “And if any man says that God is
one, but does not confess that Christ who is God and eternal Son of God
ministered to the Father in the creation of all things: let him be
anathema.”

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p128"></span>41. The very statement of the name as
our religion states it gives us a clear insight into the fact. For since
it is condemned to say that the Father and the Son are two Gods, and it
is also accursed to deny that the Son is God, any opinion as to the
substance of the one being different from that of the other in asserting
two Gods is excluded. For there is no other essence, except that of God
the Father, from which God the Son of God was born before time. For
since we are compelled to confess God the Father, and roundly declare
that Christ the Son of God is God, and between these two truths lies the
impious confession of two Gods: They must on the ground of their
identity of nature and name be one in the kind of their essence if the
name of their essence is necessarily one.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p129"></span>IV. “If any one dares to say that the
Unborn God, or a part of Him, was born of Mary: let him be anathema.”

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p130"></span>42. The fact of the essence declared to
be one in the Father and the Son having one name on account of their
similarity of nature seemed to offer an opportunity to heretics to
declare that the Unborn God, or a part of Him, was born of Mary. The
danger was met by the wholesome resolution that he who declared this
should be anathema. For the unity of the name which religion employs and
which is based on the exact similarity of their natural essence, has not
repudiated the Person of the begotten essence so as to represent, under
cover of the unity of name, that the substance of God is singular and
undifferentiated because we predicate one name for the essence of each,
that is, predicate one God, on account of the exactly similar substance
of the undivided nature in each Person.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p131"></span>V. “If any man say that the Son existed
before Mary only according to foreknowledge or predestination, and
denies that He was born of the Father before the ages and with <span
id="page_17">p. 17</span> <span id="ii.iv.ii-Page_17"></span>God, and
that all things were made through Him: let him be anathema.”

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p132"></span>43. While denying that the God of us
all, the Son of God, existed before He was born in bodily form, some
assert that He existed according to foreknowledge and predestination,
and not according to the essence of a personally subsistent nature: that
is, because the Father predestined the Son to have existence some day by
being born of the Virgin, He was announced to us by the Father’s
foreknowledge rather than born and existent before the ages in the
substance of the divine nature, and that all things which He Himself
spake in the prophets concerning the mysteries of His incarnation and
passion were simply said concerning Him by the Father according to His
foreknowledge. Consequently this perverse doctrine is condemned, so that
we know that the Only-begotten Son of God was born of the Father before
all worlds, and formed the worlds and all creation, and that He was not
merely predestined to be born.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p133"></span>VI. “If any man says that the substance
of God is expanded and contracted: let him be anathema.”

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p134"></span>44. To contract and expand are bodily
affections: but God who is a Spirit and breathes where He listeth, does
not expand or contract Himself through any change of substance.
Remaining free and outside the bond of any bodily nature, He supplies
out of Himself what He wills, when He wills, and where He wills.
Therefore it is impious to ascribe any change of substance to such an
unfettered Power.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p135"></span>VII. “If any man says that the expanded
substance of God makes the Son, or names Son His expanded substance: let
him be anathema.”

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p136"></span>45. The above opinion, although meant to
teach the immutability of God, yet prepared the way for the following
heresy. Some have ventured to say that the Unborn God by expansion of
His substance extended Himself as far as the holy Virgin, in order that
this extension produced by the increase of His nature and assuming
manhood might be called Son. They denied that the Son who is perfect God
born before time began was the same as He who was afterwards born as
Man. Therefore the Catholic Faith condemns all denial of the
immutability of the Father and of the birth of the Son.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p137"></span>VIII. “If any man says that the Son is
the internal or uttered Word of God: let him be anathema.”

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p138"></span>46. Heretics, destroying as far as in
them lies the Son of God, confess Him to be only the word, going forth
as an utterance from the speaker’s lips and the unembodied sound of an
impersonal voice: so that God the Father has as Son a word resembling
any word we utter in virtue of our inborn power of speaking. Therefore
this dangerous deceit is condemned, which asserts that God the Word, who
was in the beginning with God, is only the word of a voice sometimes
internal and sometimes expressed.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p139"></span>IX. “If any man says that the man alone
born of Mary is the Son: let him be anathema.”

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p140"></span>We cannot declare that the Son of God is
born of Mary without declaring Him to be both Man and God. But lest the
declaration that He is both God and Man should give occasion to deceit,
the Council immediately adds,

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p141"></span>X. “If any man though saying that God
and Man was born of Mary, understands thereby the Unborn God: let him be
anathema.”

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p142"></span>47. Thus is preserved both the name and
power of the divine substance. For since he is anathema who says that
the Son of God by Mary is man and not God; and he falls under the same
condemnation who says that the Unborn God became man: God made Man is
not denied to be God but denied to be the Unborn God, the Father being
distinguished from the Son not under the head of nature or by diversity
of substance, but only by such pre-eminence as His birthless nature
gives.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p143"></span>XI. “If any man hearing *The Word was
made Flesh* thinks that the Word was transformed into Flesh, or says
that He suffered change in taking Flesh: let him be anathema.”

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p144"></span>48. This preserves the dignity of the
Godhead: so that in the fact that the Word was made Flesh, the Word, in
becoming Flesh, has not lost through being Flesh what constituted the
Word, nor has become transformed into Flesh, so as to cease to be the
Word; but the Word was made Flesh <span
id="fr_479"></span>[480](#fn_479) in order that the Flesh might begin to
be what the Word is. Else whence came to His Flesh miraculous power in
working, glory on the Mount, knowledge of the thoughts of human hearts,
calmness in His passion, life in His death? God knowing no change, when
made Flesh lost nothing of the prerogatives of His substance.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p146"></span>XII. “If any man hearing that the only
Son <span id="page_18">p. 18</span> <span
id="ii.iv.ii-Page_18"></span>of God was crucified, says that His
divinity suffered corruption or pain or change or diminution or
destruction: let him be anathema.”

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p147"></span>49. It is clearly shewn why the Word,
though He was made Flesh, was nevertheless not transformed into Flesh.
Though these kinds of suffering affect the infirmity of the flesh, yet
God the Word when made Flesh could not change under suffering. Suffering
and change are not identical. Suffering of every kind causes all flesh
to change through sensitiveness and endurance of pain. But the Word that
was made Flesh, although He made Himself subject to suffering, was
nevertheless unchanged by the liability to suffer. For He was able to
suffer, and yet the Word was not possible. Possibility denotes a nature
that is weak; but suffering in itself is the endurance of pains
inflicted, and since the Godhead is immutable and yet the Word was made
Flesh, such pains found in Him a material which they could affect though
the Person of the Word had no infirmity or possibility. And so when He
suffered His Nature remained immutable because like His Father, His
Person is of an impassible essence, though it is born <span
id="fr_480"></span>[481](#fn_480) .

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p149"></span>XIII. “If any man says *Let us make
man* <span id="fr_481"></span>[482](#fn_481) was not spoken by the
Father to the Son, but by God to Himself: let him be anathema.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p151"></span>XIV. “If any man says that the Son did
not appear to Abraham <span id="fr_482"></span>[483](#fn_482) , but the
Unborn God, or a part of Him: let him be anathema.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p153"></span>XV. “If any man says that the Son did
not wrestle with Jacob as a man <span id="fr_483"></span>[484](#fn_483)
, but the Unborn God, or a part of Him: let him be anathema.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p155"></span>XVI. “If any man does not understand
*The Lord rained from the Lord* <span id="fr_484"></span>[485](#fn_484)
to be spoken of the Father and the Son, but says that the Father rained
from Himself: let him be anathema. For the Lord the Son rained from the
Lord the Father.”

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p157"></span>50. These points had to be inserted into
the creed because Photinus, against whom the synod was held, denied
them. They were inserted lest any one should dare to assert that the Son
of God did not exist before the Son of the Virgin, and should attach to
the Unborn God with the foolish perversity of an insane heresy all the
above passages which refer to the Son of God, and while applying them to
the Father, deny the Person of the Son. The clearness of these
statements absolves us from the necessity of interpreting them.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p158"></span>XVII. “If any man says that the Lord and
the Lord, the Father and the Son, are two Gods because of the aforesaid
words: let him be anathema. For we do not make the Son the equal or peer
of the Father, but understand the Son to be subject. For He did not come
down to Sodom without the Father’s will, nor rain from Himself but *from
the Lord*, to wit, by the Father’s authority; nor does He sit at the
Father’s right hand by His own authority, but because He hears the
Father saying, *Sit Thou on My right hand* <span
id="fr_485"></span>[486](#fn_485) .”

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p160"></span>51. The foregoing and the following
statements utterly remove any ground for suspecting that this definition
asserts a diversity of different deities in the Lord and the Lord. No
comparison is made because it was seen to be impious to say that there
are two Gods: not that they refrain from making the Son equal and peer
of the Father in order to deny that He is God. For, since he is anathema
who denies that Christ is God, it is not on that score that it is
profane to speak of two equal Gods. God is One on account of the true
character of His natural essence and because from the Unborn God the
Father, who is the one God, the Only-begotten God the Son is born, and
draws His divine Being only from God; and since the essence of Him who
is begotten is exactly similar to the essence of Him who begot Him,
there must be one name for the exactly similar nature. That the Son is
not on a level with the Father and is not equal to Him is chiefly shewn
in the fact that He was subjected to Him to render obedience, in that
the Lord rained from the Lord and that the Father did not, as Photinus
and Sabellius say, rain from Himself, as the Lord from the Lord; in that
He then sat down at the right hand of God when it was told Him to seat
Himself; in that He is sent, in that He receives, in that He submits in
all things to the will of Him who sent Him. But the subordination of
filial love is not a diminution of essence, nor does pious duty cause a
degeneration of nature, since in spite of the fact that both the Unborn
Father is God and the Only-begotten Son of God is God, God is
nevertheless One, and the subjection and dignity of the Son are both
taught in that by being called Son He is made subject to that name which
because it implies that God is His Father is yet a name which denotes
His nature. Having a name which <span id="page_19">p. 19</span> <span
id="ii.iv.ii-Page_19"></span>belongs to Him whose Son He is, He is
subject to the Father both in service and name; yet in such a way that
the subordination of His name bears witness to the true character of His
natural and exactly similar essence.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p161"></span>XVIII. “If any man says that the Father
and the Son are one Person: let him be anathema.”

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p162"></span>52. Sheer perversity calls for no
contradiction: and yet the mad frenzy of certain men has been so violent
as to dare to predicate one Person with two names.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p163"></span>XIX. “If any man speaking of the Holy
Ghost the Paraclete say that He is the Unborn God: let him be anathema.”

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p164"></span>53. The further clause makes liable to
anathema the predicating Unborn God of the Paraclete. For it is most
impious to say that He who was sent by the Son for our consolation is
the Unborn God.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p165"></span>XX. “If any man deny that, as the Lord
has taught us, the Paraclete is different from the Son; for He said,
*And the Further shall send you another Comforter, whom I shall ask: let
him be anathema.*”

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p166"></span>54. We remember that the Paraclete was
sent by the Son, and at the beginning the creed explained this. But
since through the virtue of His nature, which is exactly similar, the
Son has frequently called His own works the works of the Father, saying,
*I do the works of My Father* <span id="fr_486"></span>[487](#fn_486) :
so when He intended to send the Paraclete, as He often promised, He said
sometimes that He was to be sent from the Father, in that He was piously
wont to refer all that He did to the Father. And from this the heretics
often seize an opportunity of saying that the Son Himself is the
Paraclete: while by the fact that He promised to pray that another
Comforter should be sent from the Father, He shews the difference
between Him who is sent and Him who asked.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p168"></span>XXI. “If any man says that the Holy
Spirit is a part of the Father or of the Son: let him be anathema.”

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p169"></span>55. The insane frenzy of the heretics,
and not any genuine difficulty, rendered it necessary that this should
be written. For since the name of Holy Spirit has its own signification,
and the Holy Spirit the Paraclete has the office and rank peculiar to
His Person, and since the Father and the Son are everywhere declared to
be immutable: how could the Holy Spirit be asserted to be a part either
of the Father or of the Son? But since this folly is often affirmed amid
other follies by godless men, it was needful that the pious should
condemn it.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p170"></span>XXII. “If any man says that the Father
and the Son and the Holy Spirit are three Gods: let him be anathema.”

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p171"></span>56. Since it is contrary to religion to
say that there are two Gods, because we remember and declare that
nowhere has it been affirmed that there is more than one God: how much
more worthy of condemnation is it to name three Gods in the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost? Nevertheless, since heretics say this, Catholics rightly
condemn it.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p172"></span>XXIII. “If any man, after the example of
the Jews, understand as said for the destruction of the Eternal
Only-begotten God, the words, *I am the first God, and I am the last
God, and beside Me there is no God* <span
id="fr_487"></span>[488](#fn_487) , which were spoken for the
destruction of idols and them that are no gods: let him be anathema.”

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p174"></span>57. Though we condemn a plurality of
gods and declare that God is only one, we cannot deny that the Son of
God is God. Nay, the true character of His nature causes the name that
is denied to a plurality to be the privilege of His essence. The words,
*Beside Me there is no God*, cannot rob the Son of His divinity: because
beside Him who is of God there is no other God. And these words of God
the Father cannot annul the divinity of Him who was born of Himself with
an essence in no way different from His own nature. The Jews interpret
this passage as proving the bare unity of God, because they are ignorant
of the Only-begotten God. But we, while we deny that there are two Gods,
abhor the idea of a diversity of natural essence in the Father and the
Son. The words, *Beside Me there is no God*, take away an impious belief
in false gods. In confessing that God is One, and also saying that the
Son is God, our use of the same name affirms that there is no difference
of substance between the two Persons.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p175"></span>XXIV. “If any man says that the Son was
made by the will of God, like any object in creation: let him be
anathema.”

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p176"></span>58. To all creatures the will of God has
given substance: but a perfect birth gave to the Son a nature from a
substance that is impossible and itself unborn. All created things are
such as God willed them to be: but the Son who is born of God has such a
personality as God has. God’s nature did not produce a nature unlike
itself: but the Son begotten of God’s substance has derived the essence
of His nature by virtue of His origin, <span id="page_20">p. 20</span>
<span id="ii.iv.ii-Page_20"></span>not from an act of will after the
manner of creatures.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p177"></span>XXV. “If any man says that the Son was
born against the will of the Father: let him be anathema. For the Father
was not forced against His own will, or induced against His will by any
necessity of nature, to beget His Son; but as soon as He willed, before
time and without passion He begat Him of Himself and shewed Him forth.”

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p178"></span>59. Since it was taught that the Son did
not, like all other things, owe His existence to God’s will, lest He
should be thought to derive His essence only at His Father’s will and
not in virtue of His own nature, an opportunity seemed thereby to be
given to heretics to attribute to God the Father a necessity of
begetting the Son from Himself, as though He had brought forth the Son
by a law of nature in spite of Himself. But such liability to be acted
upon does not exist in God the Father: in the ineffable and perfect
birth of the Son it was neither mere will that begat Him nor was the
Father’s essence changed or forced at the bidding of a natural law. Nor
was any substance sought for to beget Him, nor is the nature of the
Begetter changed in the Begotten, nor is the Father’s unique name
affected by time. Before all time the Father, out of the essence of His
nature, with a desire that was subject to no passion, gave to the Son a
birth that conveyed the essence of His nature.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p179"></span>XXVI. “If any man says that the Son is
incapable of birth and without beginning, speaking as though there were
two incapable of birth and unborn and without beginning, and makes two
Gods: let him be anathema. For the Head, which is the beginning of all
things, is the Son; but the Head or beginning of Christ is God: for so
to One who is without beginning and is the beginning of all things, we
refer the whole world through Christ.”

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p180"></span>60. To declare the Son to be incapable
of birth is the height of impiety. God would no longer be One: for the
nature of the one Unborn God demands that we should confess that God is
one. Since therefore God is one, there cannot be two incapable of birth:
because God is one (although both the Father is God and the Son of God
is God) for the very reason that incapability of birth is the only
quality that can belong to one Person only. The Son is God for the very
reason that He derives His birth from that essence which cannot be born.
Therefore our holy faith rejects the idea that the Son is incapable of
birth in order to predicate one God incapable of birth and consequently
one God, and in order to embrace the Only-begotten nature, begotten from
the unborn essence, in the one name of the Unborn God. For the Head of
all things is the Son: but the Head of the Son is God. And to one God
through this stepping-stone and by this confession all things are
referred, since the whole world takes its beginning from Him to whom God
Himself is the beginning.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p181"></span>XXVII. “Once more we strengthen the
understanding of Christianity by saying, If any man denies that Christ,
who is God and the Son of God, existed before time began and aided the
Father in the perfecting of all things; but says that only from the time
that He was born of Mary did He gain the name of Christ and Son and a
beginning of His deity: let him be anathema.”

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p182"></span>61. A condemnation of that heresy on
account of which the Synod was held necessarily concluded with an
explanation of the whole faith that was being opposed. This heresy
falsely stated that the beginning of the Son of God dated from His birth
of Mary. According to evangelical and apostolic doctrine the
corner-stone of our faith is that our Lord Jesus Christ, who is God and
Son of God, cannot be separated from the Father in title or power or
difference of substance or interval of time.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p183"></span>62. You perceive that the truth has been
sought by many paths through the advice and opinions of different
bishops, and the ground of their views has been set forth by the
separate declarations inscribed in this creed. Every separate point of
heretical assertion has been successfully refuted. The infinite and
boundless God cannot be made comprehensible by a few words of human
speech. Brevity often misleads both learner and teacher, and a
concentrated discourse either causes a subject not to be understood, or
spoils the meaning of an argument where a thing is hinted at, and is not
proved by full demonstration. The bishops fully understood this, and
therefore have used for the purpose of teaching many definitions and a
profusion of words that the ordinary understanding might find no
difficulty, but that their hearers might be saturated with the truth
thus differently expressed, and that in treating of divine things these
adequate and manifold definitions might leave no room for danger or
obscurity.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p184"></span>63. You must not be surprised, dear
brethren, that so many creeds have recently been written. The frenzy of
heretics makes it necessary. The danger of the Eastern Churches is so
great that it is rare to find either priest or layman that belongs to
this faith, of the orthodoxy of which you may judge. Certain individuals
have acted so wrongly as to support the side of evil, and the strength
of the wicked <span id="page_21">p. 21</span> <span
id="ii.iv.ii-Page_21"></span>has been increased by the exile of some of
the bishops, the cause of which you are acquainted with. I am not
speaking about distant events or writing down incidents of which I know
nothing: I have heard and seen the faults which we now have to combat.
They are not laymen but bishops who are guilty. Except the bishop
Eleusius <span id="fr_488"></span>[489](#fn_488) and his few comrades,
the greater part of the ten provinces of Asia, in which I am now
staying, really know not God. Would that they knew nothing about Him,
for their ignorance would meet with a readier pardon than their
detraction. These faithful bishops do not keep silence in their pain.
They seek for the unity of that faith of which others have long since
robbed them. The necessity of a united exposition of that faith was
first felt when Hosius forgot his former deeds and words, and a fresh
yet festering heresy broke out at Sirmium. Of Hosius I say nothing, I
leave his conduct in the background lest man’s judgment should forget
what once he was. But everywhere there are scandals, schisms and
treacheries. Hence some of those who had formerly written one creed were
compelled to sign another. I make no complaint against these
long-suffering Eastern bishops, it was enough that they gave at least a
compulsory assent to the faith after they had once been willing to
blaspheme. I think it a subject of congratulation that a single penitent
should be found among such obstinate, blaspheming and heretical bishops.
But, brethren, you enjoy happiness and glory in the Lord, who meanwhile
retain and conscientiously confess the whole apostolic faith, and have
hitherto been ignorant of written creeds. You have not needed the
letter, for you abounded in the spirit. You required not the office of a
hand to write what you believed in your hearts and professed unto
salvation. It was unnecessary for you to read as bishops what you held
when new-born converts. But necessity has introduced the custom of
expounding creeds and signing expositions. Where the conscience is in
danger we must use the letter. Nor is it wrong to write what it is
wholesome to confess.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p186"></span>64. Kept always from guile by the gift
of the Holy Spirit, we confess and write of our own will that there are
not two Gods but one God; nor do we therefore deny that the Son of God
is also God; for He is God of God. We deny that there are two incapable
of birth, because God is one through the prerogative of being incapable
of birth; nor does it follow that the Unbegotten is not God, for His
source is the Unborn substance. There is not one subsistent Person, but
a similar substance in both Persons. There is not one name of God
applied to dissimilar natures, but a wholly similar essence belonging to
one name and nature. One is not superior to the other on account of the
kind of His substance, but one is subject to the other because born of
the other. The Father is greater because He is Father, the Son is not
the less because He is Son. The difference is one of the meaning of a
name and not of a nature. We confess that the Father is not affected by
time, but do not deny that the Son is equally eternal. We assert that
the Father is in the Son because the Son has nothing in Himself unlike
the Father: we confess that the Son is in the Father because the
existence of the Son is not from any other source. We recognize that
their nature is mutual and similar because equal: we do not think them
to be one Person because they are one: we declare that they are through
the similarity of an identical nature one, in such a way that they
nevertheless are not one Person.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p187"></span>65. I have expounded, beloved brethren,
my belief in our common faith so far as our wonted human speech
permitted and the Lord, whom I have ever besought, as He is my witness,
has given me power. If I have said too little, nay, if I have said
almost nothing, I ask you to remember that it is not belief but words
that are lacking. Perhaps I shall thereby prove that my human nature,
though not my will, is weak: and I pardon my human nature if it cannot
speak as it would of God, for it is enough for its salvation to have
believed the things of God.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p188"></span>66. Since your faith and mine, so far as
I am conscious, is in no danger before God, and I have shewn you, as you
wished, the creeds that have been set forth by the Eastern bishops
(though I repeat that they were few in number, for, considering how
numerous the Eastern Churches are, that faith is held by few), I have
also declared my own convictions about divine things, according to the
doctrine of the apostles. It remains for you to investigate without
suspicion the points that mislead the unguarded temper of our simple
minds, for there is now no opportunity left of hearing. And although I
shall no longer fear that sentence will not be passed upon me in
accordance with the whole exposition of the creed, I ask you to allow me
to express <span id="page_22">p. 22</span> <span
id="ii.iv.ii-Page_22"></span>a wish that I may not have the sentence
passed until the exposition is actually completed.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p189"></span>67. Many of us, beloved brethren,
declare the substance of the Father and the Son to be one in such a
spirit that I consider the statement to be quite as much wrong as right.
The expression contains both a conscientious conviction and the
opportunity for delusion. If we assert the one substance, understanding
it to mean the likeness of natural qualities and such a likeness as
includes not only the species but the genus, we assert it in a truly
religious spirit, provided we believe that the one substance signifies
such a similitude of qualities that the unity is not the unity of a
monad but of equals. By equality I mean exact similarity so that the
likeness may be called an equality, provided that the equality imply
unity because it implies an equal pair, and that the unity which implies
an equal pair be not wrested to mean a single Person. Therefore the one
substance will be asserted piously if it does not abolish the subsistent
personality or divide the one substance into two, for their substance by
the true character of the Son’s birth and by their natural likeness is
so free from difference that it is called one.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p190"></span>68. But if we attribute one substance to
the Father and the Son to teach that there is a solitary personal
existence although denoted by two titles: then though we confess the Son
with our lips we do not keep Him in our hearts, since in confessing one
substance we then really say that the Father and the Son constitute one
undifferentiated Person. Nay, there immediately arises an opportunity
for the erroneous belief that the Father is divided, and that He cut off
a portion of Himself to be His Son. That is what the heretics mean when
they say the substance is one: and the terminology of our good
confession so gratifies them that it aids heresy when the word <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iv.ii-p190.1"></span>ὁμοούσιος</span> is left
by itself, undefined and ambiguous. There is also a third error. When
the Father and the Son are said to be of one substance this is thought
to imply a prior substance, which the two equal Persons both possess.
Consequently the word implies three things, one original substance and
two Persons, who are as it were fellow-heirs of this one substance. For
as two fellow-heirs are two, and the heritage of which they are
fellow-heirs is anterior to them, so the two equal Persons might appear
to be sharers in one anterior substance. The assertion of the one
substance of the Father and the Son signifies either that there is one
Person who has two titles, or one divided substance that has made two
imperfect substances, or that there is a third prior substance which has
been usurped and assumed by two and which is called one because it was
one before it was severed into two. Where then is there room for the
Son’s birth? Where is the Father or the Son, if these names are
explained not by the birth of the divine nature but a severing or
sharing of one anterior substance?

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p191"></span>69. Therefore amid the numerous dangers
which threaten the faith, brevity of words must be employed sparingly,
lest what is piously meant be thought to be impiously expressed, and a
word be judged guilty of occasioning heresy when it has been used in
conscientious and unsuspecting innocence. A Catholic about to state that
the substance of the Father and the Son is one, must not begin at that
point: nor hold this word all important as though true faith did not
exist where the word was not used. He will be safe in asserting the one
substance if he has first said that the Father is unbegotten, that the
Son is born, that He draws His personal subsistence from the Father,
that He is like the Father in might, honour and nature, that He is
subject to the Father as to the Author of His being, that He did not
commit robbery by making Himself equal with God, in whose form He
remained, that He was obedient unto death. He did not spring from
nothing, but was born. He is not incapable of birth but equally eternal.
He is not the Father, but the Son begotten of Him. He is not any portion
of God, but is whole God. He is not Himself the source but the image;
the image of God born of God to be God. He is not a creature but is God.
Not another God in the kind of His substance, but the one God in virtue
of the essence of His exactly similar substance. God is not one in
Person but in nature, for the Born and the Begetter have nothing
different or unlike. After saying all this, he does not err in declaring
one substance of the Father and the Son. Nay, if he now denies the one
substance he sins.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p192"></span>70. Therefore let no one think that our
words were meant to deny the one substance. We are giving the very
reason why it should not be denied. Let no one think that the word ought
to be used by itself and unexplained. Otherwise the word <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iv.ii-p192.1"></span>ὁμοούσιος</span> is not
used in a religious spirit. I will not endure to hear that Christ was
born of Mary unless I also hear, *In the beginning was the Word, and the
Word was God* <span id="fr_489"></span>[490](#fn_489) . I will not hear
Christ was hungry, unless I hear that after His fast of forty days He
said, *Man doth not live by bread alone* <span
id="fr_490"></span>[491](#fn_490) . I will not hear He thirsted unless I
also hear *Whosoever drinketh of the water* <span id="page_23">p.
23</span> <span id="ii.iv.ii-Page_23"></span>*that I shall give him
shall never thirst* <span id="fr_491"></span>[492](#fn_491) . I will not
hear Christ suffered unless I hear, *The hour is come that the Son of
man should be glorified* <span id="fr_492"></span>[493](#fn_492) . I
will not hear He died unless I hear He rose again. Let us bring forward
no isolated point of the divine mysteries to rouse the suspicions of our
hearers and give an occasion to the blasphemers. We must first preach
the birth and subordination of the Son and the likeness of His nature,
and then we may preach in godly fashion that the Father and the Son are
of one substance. I do not personally understand why we ought to preach
before everything else, as the most valuable and important of doctrines
and in itself sufficient, a truth which cannot be piously preached
before other truths, although it is impious to deny it after them.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p197"></span>71. Beloved brethren, we must not deny
that there is one substance of the Father and the Son, but we must not
declare it without giving our reasons. The one substance must be derived
from the true character of the begotten nature, not from any division,
any confusion of Persons, any sharing of an anterior substance. It may
be right to assert the one substance, it may be right to keep silence
about it. You believe in the birth and you believe in the likeness. Why
should the word cause mutual suspicions, when we view the fact in the
same way? Let us believe and say that there is one substance, but in
virtue of the true character of the nature and not to imply a
blasphemous unity of Persons. Let the oneness be due to the fact that
there are similar Persons and not a solitary Person.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p198"></span>72. But perhaps the word *similarity*
may not seem fully appropriate. If so, I ask how I can express the
equality of one Person with the other except by such a word? Or is to be
like not the same thing as to be equal? If I say the divine nature is
one I am suspected of meaning that it is undifferentiated: if I say the
Persons are similar, I mean that I compare what is exactly like. I ask
what position *equal* holds between *like* and *one?* I enquire whether
it means similarity rather than singularity. Equality does not exist
between things unlike, nor does similarity exist in one. What is the
difference between those that are similar and those that are equal? Can
one equal be distinguished from the other? So those who are equal are
not unlike. If then those who are unlike are not equals, what can those
who are like be but equals?

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p199"></span>73. Therefore, beloved brethren, in
declaring that the Son is like in all things to the Father, we declare
nothing else than that He is equal. Likeness means perfect equality, and
this fact we may gather from the Holy Scriptures, *And Adam lived two
hundred and thirty years, and begat a son according to his own image and
according to his own likeness; and called his name Seth* <span
id="fr_493"></span>[494](#fn_493) . I ask what was the nature of his
likeness and image which Adam begot in Seth? Remove bodily infirmities,
remove the first stage of conception, remove birth-pangs, and every kind
of human need. I ask whether this likeness which exists in Seth differs
in nature from the author of his being, or whether there was in each an
essence of a different kind, so that Seth had not at his birth the
natural essence of Adam? Nay, he had a likeness to Adam, even though we
deny it, for his nature was not different. This likeness of nature in
Seth was not due to a nature of a different kind, since Seth was
begotten from only one father, so we see that a likeness of nature
renders things equal because this likeness betokens an exactly similar
essence. Therefore every son by virtue of his natural birth is the equal
of his father, in that he has a natural likeness to him. And with regard
to the nature of the Father and the Son the blessed John teaches the
very likeness which Moses says existed between Seth and Adam, a likeness
which is this equality of nature. He says, *Therefore the Jews sought
the more to kill Him, because He not only had broken the Sabbath, but
said also that God was His father, making Himself equal with God* <span
id="fr_494"></span>[495](#fn_494) . Why do we allow minds that are
dulled with the weight of sin to interfere with the doctrines and
sayings of such holy men, and impiously match our rash though sluggish
senses against their impregnable assertions? According to Moses, Seth is
the likeness of Adam, according to John, the Son is equal to the Father,
yet we seek to find a third impossible something between the Father and
the Son. He is like the Father, He is the Son of the Father, He is born
of Him: this fact alone justifies the assertion that they are one.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p202"></span>74. I am aware, dear brethren, that
there are some who confess the likeness, but deny the equality. Let them
speak as they will, and insert the poison of their blasphemy into
ignorant ears. If they say that there is a difference between likeness
and equality, I ask whence equality can be obtained? If the Son is like
the Father in essence, might, glory and eternity, I ask why they decline
to say He is equal? In the above creed an anathema was pronounced on any
man who should say that the Father was Father of an essence unlike
Himself. Therefore if He gave to Him whom <span id="page_24">p.
24</span> <span id="ii.iv.ii-Page_24"></span>He begat without effect
upon Himself a nature which was neither another nor a different nature,
He cannot have given Him any other than His own. Likeness then is the
sharing of what is one’s own, the sharing of one’s own is equality, and
equality admits of no difference <span id="fr_495"></span>[496](#fn_495)
. Those things which do not differ at all are one. So the Father and the
Son are one, not by unity of Person but by equality of nature.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p204"></span>75. Although general conviction and
divine authority sanction no difference between likeness and equality,
since both Moses and John would lead us to believe the Son is like the
Father and also His equal, yet let us consider whether the Lord, when
the Jews were angry with Him for calling God His Father and thus making
Himself equal with God, did Himself teach that He was equal with God. He
says, *The Son can do nothing of Himself, but what He seeth the Father
do* <span id="fr_496"></span>[497](#fn_496) . He shewed that the Father
originates by saying *Can do nothing of Himself*, He calls attention to
His own obedience by adding, *but what He seeth the Father do*. There is
no difference of might, He says He can do nothing that He does not see
because it is His nature and not His sight that gives Him power. But His
obedience consists in His being able only when He sees. And so by the
fact that He has power when He sees, He shews that He does not gain
power by seeing but claims power on the authority of seeing. The natural
might does not differ in Father and Son, the Son’s equality of power
with the Father not being due to any increase or advance of the Son’s
nature but to the Father’s example. In short that honour which the Son’s
subjection retained for the Father belongs equally to the Son on the
strength of His nature. He has Himself added, *What things soever He
doeth, these also doeth the Son likewise* <span
id="fr_497"></span>[498](#fn_497) . Surely then the likeness implies
equality. Certainly it does, even though we deny it: *for these also
doeth the Son likewise.* Are not things *done likewise* the same? Or do
not the same things admit equality? Is there any other difference
between likeness and equality, when things that are done likewise are
understood to be made the same? Unless perchance any one will deny that
the same things are equal, or deny that similar things are equal, for
things that are done in like manner are not only declared to be equal
but to be the same things.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p207"></span>76. Therefore, brethren, likeness of
nature can be attacked by no cavil, and the Son cannot be said to lack
the true qualities of the Father’s nature because He is like Him. No
real likeness exists where there is no equality of nature, and equality
of nature cannot exist unless it imply unity, not unity of person but of
kind. It is right to believe, religious to feel, and wholesome to
confess, that we do not deny that the substance of the Father and the
Son is one because it is similar, and that it is similar because they
are one.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p208"></span>77. Beloved, after explaining in a
faithful and godly manner the meaning of the phrases *one substance*, in
Greek <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.ii-p208.1"></span>ὁμοούσιον</span>, and *similar substance* or
<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.iv.ii-p208.2"></span>ὁμοιούσιον</span>,
and shewing very completely the faults which may arise from a deceitful
brevity or dangerous simplicity of language, it only remains for me to
address myself to the holy bishops of the East. We have no longer any
mutual suspicions about our faith, and those which before now have been
due to mere misunderstanding are being cleared away. They will pardon me
if I proceed to speak somewhat freely with them on the basis of our
common faith.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p209"></span>78. Ye who have begun to be eager for
apostolic and evangelical doctrine, kindled by the fire of faith amid
the thick darkness of a night of heresy, with how great a hope of
recalling the true faith have you inspired us by consistently checking
the bold attack of infidelity! In former days it was only in obscure
corners that our Lord Jesus Christ was denied to be the Son of God
according to His nature, and was asserted to have no share in the
Father’s essence, but like the creatures to have received His origin
from things that were not. But the heresy now bursts forth backed by
civil authority, and what it once muttered in secret it has of late
boasted of in open triumph. Whereas in former times it has tried by
secret mines to creep into the Catholic Church, it has now put forth
every power of this world in the fawning manners of a false religion.
For the perversity of these men has been so audacious that when they
dared not preach this doctrine publicly themselves, they beguiled the
Emperor to give them hearing. For they did beguile an ignorant sovereign
so successfully that though he was busy with war he expounded their
infidel creed, and before he was regenerate by baptism imposed a form of
faith upon the churches. Opposing bishops they drove into exile. They
drove me also to wish for exile, by trying to force me to commit
blasphemy. May I always be an exile, if only the truth begins to be
preached again! I thank God that the Emperor, through your warnings,
<span id="page_25">p. 25</span> <span
id="ii.iv.ii-Page_25"></span>acknowledged his ignorance, and through
these your definitions of faith came to recognize an error which was not
his own but that of his advisers. He freed himself from the reproach of
impiety in the eyes of God and men, when he respectfully received your
embassy, and after you had won from him a confession of his ignorance,
shewed his knowledge of the hypocrisy of the men whose influence brought
him under this reproach.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p210"></span>79. These are deceivers, I both fear and
believe they are deceivers, beloved brethren; for they have ever
deceived. This very document is marked by hypocrisy. They excuse
themselves for having desired silence as to <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.ii-p210.1"></span>ὁμοούσιον</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iv.ii-p210.2"></span>ὁμοιούσιον</span> on the
ground that they taught that the meaning of the words was identical.
Rustic bishops, I trow, and untutored in the significance of <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iv.ii-p210.3"></span>ὁμοοίσιον</span>: as
though there had never been any Council about the matter, or any
dispute. But suppose they did not know what <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.ii-p210.4"></span>ὁμοούσιον</span> was, or were really unaware
that <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.ii-p210.5"></span>ὁμοιούσιον</span> meant of a like essence.
Granted that they were ignorant of this, why did they wish to be
ignorant of the generation of the Son? If it cannot be expressed in
words, is it therefore unknowable? But if we cannot know *how* He was
born, can we refuse to know even this, that God the Son being born not
of another substance but of God, has not an essence differing from the
Father’s? Have they not read that the Son is to be honoured even as the
Father, that they prefer the Father in honour? Were they ignorant that
the Father is seen in the Son, that they make the Son differ in dignity,
splendour and majesty? Is this due to ignorance that the Son, like all
other things, is made subject to the Father, and while thus subjected is
not distinguished from them? A distinction does exist, for the
subjection of the Son is filial reverence, the subjection of all other
things is the weakness of things created. They knew that He suffered,
but when, may I ask, did they come to know that He jointly suffered?
They avoid the words <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.ii-p210.6"></span>ὁμοούσιον</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iv.ii-p210.7"></span>ὁμοιούσιον</span>,
because they are not in Scripture: I enquire whence they gathered that
the Son jointly suffered? Can they mean that there were two Persons who
suffered? This is what the word leads us to believe. What of those
words, *Jesus Christ the Son of God?* Is Jesus Christ one, and the Son
of God another? If the Son of God is not one and the same inwardly and
outwardly, if ignorance on such a point is permissible, then believe
that they were ignorant of the meaning of <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.ii-p210.8"></span>ὁμοούσιον</span>. But if on these points
ignorance leads to blasphemy and yet cannot find even a false excuse, I
fear that they lied in professing ignorance of the word <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iv.ii-p210.9"></span>ὁμοιούσιον</span>. I do
not greatly complain of the pardon you extended them; it is reverent to
reserve for God His own prerogatives, and mistakes of ignorance are but
human. But the two bishops, Ursacius and Valens, must pardon me for not
believing that at their age and with their experience they were really
ignorant. It is very difficult not to think they are lying, seeing that
it is only by a falsehood that they can clear themselves on another
score. But God rather grant that I am mistaken than that they really
knew. For I had rather be judged in the wrong than that your faith
should be contaminated by communion with the guilt of heresy.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p211"></span>80. Now I beseech you, holy brethren, to
listen to my anxieties with indulgence. The Lord is my witness that in
no matter do I wish to criticise the definitions of your faith, which
you brought to Sirmium. But forgive me if I do not understand certain
points; I will comfort myself with the recollection that *the spirits of
the prophets are subject to the prophets* <span
id="fr_498"></span>[499](#fn_498) . Perhaps I am not presumptuous in
gathering from this that I too may understand something that another
does not know. Not that I have dared to hint that you are ignorant of
anything according to the measure of knowledge: but for the unity of the
Catholic faith suffer me to be as anxious as yourselves.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p213"></span>81. Your letter on the meaning of <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iv.ii-p213.1"></span>ὁμοούσιον</span> and
<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.iv.ii-p213.2"></span>ὁμοιούσιον</span>,
which Valens, Ursacius and Germinius demanded should be read at Sirmium,
I understand to have been on certain points no less cautious than
outspoken. And with regard to <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.ii-p213.3"></span>ὁμοούσιον</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iv.ii-p213.4"></span>ὁμοιούσιον</span> your
proof has left no difficulty untouched. As to the latter, which implies
the similarity of essence, our opinions are the same. But in dealing
with the <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.ii-p213.5"></span>ὁμοούσιον</span>, or the one essence, you
declared that it ought to be rejected because the use of this word led
to the idea that there was a prior substance which two Persons had
divided between themselves. I see the flaw in that way of taking it. Any
such sense is profane, and must be rejected by the Church’s common
decision. The second reason that you added was that our fathers, when
Paul of Samosata was pronounced a heretic, also rejected the word <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iv.ii-p213.6"></span>ὁμοούσιον</span>, on the
ground that by attributing this title to God he had taught that He was
single and undifferentiated, and at once Father and to Himself.
Wherefore the Church still regards it as most profane to exclude the
different personal qualities, and, under the mask <span id="page_26">p.
26</span> <span id="ii.iv.ii-Page_26"></span>of the aforesaid
expressions, to revive the error of confounding the Persons and denying
the personal distinctions in the Godhead. Thirdly you mentioned this
reason for disapproving of the <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.ii-p213.7"></span>ὁμοούσιον</span> that in the Council of
Nicæa our fathers were compelled to adopt the word on account of those
who said the Son was a creature: although it ought not to be accepted,
because it is not to be found in Scripture. Your saying this causes me
some astonishment. For if the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.ii-p213.8"></span>ὁμοούσιον</span> must be repudiated on
account of its novelty, I am afraid that the word <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iv.ii-p213.9"></span>ὁμοιούσιον</span> which
is equally absent in Scripture, is in some danger.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p214"></span>82. But I am not needlessly critical on
this point. For I had rather use an expression that is new than commit
sin by rejecting it. So, then, we will pass by this question of
innovation, and see whether the real question is not reduced to
something which all our fellow-Christians unanimously condemn. What man
in his senses will ever declare that there is a third substance, which
is common to both the Father and the Son? And who that has been reborn
in Christ and confessed both the Son and the Father will follow him of
Samosata in confessing that Christ is Himself to Himself both Father and
Son? So in condemning the blasphemies of the heretics we hold the same
opinion, and such an interpretation of <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.ii-p214.1"></span>ὁμοούσιον</span> we not only reject but
hate. The question of an erroneous interpretation is at an end, when we
agree in condemning the error.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p215"></span>83. But when I at last turn to speak on
the third point, I pray you to let there be no conflict of suspicions
where there is peace at heart. Do not think I would advance anything
hurtful to the progress of unity. For it is absurd to fear cavil about a
word when the fact expressed by the word presents no difficulty. Who
objects to the fact that the Council of Nicæa adopted the word <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iv.ii-p215.1"></span>ὁμοούσιον́̈</span> He who
does so, must necessarily like its rejection by the Arians. The Arians
rejected the word, that God the Son might not be asserted to be born of
the substance of God the Father, but formed out of nothing, like the
creatures. This is no new thing that I speak of. The perfidy of the
Arians is to be found in many of their letters and is its own witness.
If the godlessness of the negation then gave a godly meaning to the
assertion, I ask why we should now criticise a word which was then
rightly adopted because it was wrongly denied? If it was rightly
adopted, why after supporting the right should that which extinguished
the wrong be called to account? Having been used as the instrument of
evil it came to be the instrument of good <span
id="fr_499"></span>[500](#fn_499) .

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p217"></span>84. Let us see, therefore, what the
Council of Nicæa intended by saying <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.ii-p217.1"></span>ὁμοούσιον</span>, that is, of one substance:
not certainly to hatch the heresy which arises from an erroneous
interpretation of <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.ii-p217.2"></span>ὁμοούσιον</span>. I do not think the Council
says that the Father and the Son divided and shared a previously
existing substance to make it their own. It will not be adverse to
religion to insert in our argument the creed which was then composed to
preserve religion.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p218"></span>“We believe in one God the Father
Almighty, Maker of all things visible and invisible:

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p219"></span>“And in one our Lord Jesus Christ, the
Son of God, born of the Father, Only-begotten, that is, of the substance
of the Father, God of God, Light of Light, Very God of very God, born
not made, of one substance with the Father (which in Greek they call
<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.iv.ii-p219.1"></span>ὁμοοίσιον</span>);
By whom all things were made which are in heaven and in earth, Who for
our salvation came down, And was incarnate, And was made man, And
suffered, And rose again the third day, And ascended into heaven, And
shall come to judge the quick and the dead.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p220"></span>“And in the Holy Ghost.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p221"></span>“But those who say, There was when He
was not, And before He was born He was not, And that He was made of
things that existed not, or of another substance and essence, saying
that God was able to change and alter, to these the Catholic Church says
anathema.”

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p222"></span>Here the Holy Council of religious men
introduces no prior substance divided between two Persons, but the Son
born of the substance of the Father. Do we, too, deny or confess
anything else? And after other explanations of our common faith, it
says, Born not made, of one substance with the Father (which in Greek
they call <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.ii-p222.1"></span>ὁμοούσιον</span>). What occasion is there
here for an erroneous interpretation? The Son is declared to be born of
the substance of the Father, not made: lest while the word born implies
His divinity, the word made should imply He is a creature. For the same
reason we have *of one substance*, not to teach that there is one
solitary divine Person, but that the Son is born of the substance of God
and subsists from no other source, nor in any diversity caused by a
difference of substance. Surely again this is our faith, that He
subsists from no other source, and He is not unlike the <span
id="page_27">p. 27</span> <span id="ii.iv.ii-Page_27"></span>Father. Is
not the meaning here of the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.ii-p222.2"></span>ὁμοούσιον</span> that the Son is produced of
the Father’s nature, the essence of the Son having no other origin, and
that both, therefore, have one unvarying essence? As the Son’s essence
has no other origin, we may rightly believe that both are of one
essence, since the Son could be born with no substance but that derived
from the Father’s nature which was its source.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p223"></span>85. But perhaps on the opposite side it
will be said that it ought to meet with disapproval, because an
erroneous interpretation is generally put upon it. If such is our fear,
we ought to erase the words of the Apostle, *There is one Mediator
between God and men, the man Christ Jesus* <span
id="fr_500"></span>[501](#fn_500) , because Photinus uses this to
support his heresy, and refuse to read it because he interprets it
mischievously. And the fire or the sponge should annihilate the Epistle
to the Philippians, lest Marcion should read again in it, *And was found
in fashion as a man* <span id="fr_501"></span>[502](#fn_501) , and say
Christ’s body was only a phantasm and not a body. Away with the Gospel
of John, lest Sabellius learn from it, *I and the Father are one* <span
id="fr_502"></span>[503](#fn_502) . Nor must those who now affirm the
Son to be a creature find it written, *The Father is greater than*
*I* <span id="fr_503"></span>[504](#fn_503) . Nor must those who wish to
declare that the Son is unlike the Father read: *But of that day and
hour knoweth no man, no, not the angels which are in heaven, neither the
Son, but the Father* <span id="fr_504"></span>[505](#fn_504) . We must
dispense, too, with the books of Moses, lest the darkness be thought
coeval with God who dwells in the unborn light, since in Genesis the day
began to be after the night; lest the years of Methuselah extend later
than the date of the deluge, and consequently more than eight souls were
saved <span id="fr_505"></span>[506](#fn_505) ; lest God hearing the cry
of Sodom when the measure of its sins was full should come down as
though ignorant of the cry to see if the measure of its sins was full
according to the cry, and be found to be ignorant of what He knew; lest
any one of those who buried Moses should have known his sepulchre when
he was buried; lest these passages, as the heretics think, should prove
that the contradictions of the law make it its own enemy. So as they do
not understand them, we ought not to read them. And though I should not
have said it myself unless forced by the argument, we must, if it seems
fit, abolish all the divine and holy Gospels with their message of our
salvation, lest their statements be found inconsistent; lest we should
read that the Lord who was to send the Holy Spirit was Himself born of
the Holy Spirit; lest He who was to threaten death by the sword to those
who should take the sword, should before His passion command that a
sword should be brought; lest He who was about to descend into hell
should say that He would be in paradise with the thief; lest finally the
Apostles should be found at fault, in that when commanded to baptize in
the name of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost, they baptized
in the name of Jesus only. I speak to you, brethren, to you, who are no
longer nourished with milk, but with meat, and are strong <span
id="fr_506"></span>[507](#fn_506) . Shall we, because the wise men of
the world have not understood these things, and they are foolish unto
them, be wise as the world is wise and believe these things foolish?
Because they are hidden from the godless, shall we refuse to shine with
the truth of a doctrine which we understand? We prejudice the cause of
divine doctrines when we think that they ought not to exist, because
some do not regard them as holy. If so, we must not glory in the cross
of Christ, because it is a stumbling-block to the world; and we must not
preach death in connection with the living God, lest the godless argue
that God is dead.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p231"></span>86. Some misunderstand <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iv.ii-p231.1"></span>ὁμοούσιον</span>; does
that prevent me from understanding it? The Samosatene was wrong in using
the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.ii-p231.2"></span>ὁμοούσιον</span>; does that make the Arians
right in denying it? Eighty bishops once rejected it; but three hundred
and eighteen recently accepted it. And for my own part I think the
number sacred, for with such a number Abraham overcame the wicked kings,
and was blessed by Him who is a type of the eternal priesthood. The
former disapproved of it to oppose a heretic: the latter surely approved
of it to oppose a heretic. The authority of the fathers is weighty, is
the sanctity of their successors trivial? If their opinions were
contradictory, we ought to decide which is the better: but if both their
approval and disapproval established the same fact, why do we carp at
such good decisions?

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p232"></span>87. But perhaps you will reply, ‘Some of
those who were then present at Nicæa have now decreed that we ought to
keep silence about the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.ii-p232.1"></span>ὁμοούσιον</span>.’ Against my will I must
answer: Do not the very same men rule that we must keep silence about
the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.ii-p232.2"></span>ὁμοιούσιον</span>? I beseech you that there
may be <span id="page_28">p. 28</span> <span
id="ii.iv.ii-Page_28"></span>found no one of them but Hosius, that old
man who loves a peaceful grave too well, who shall be found to think
that we ought to keep silence about both. Amid the fury of the heretics
into what straits shall we fall at last, if while we do not accept both,
we keep neither? For there seems to be no impiety in saying that since
neither is found in Scripture, we ought to confess neither or both.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p233"></span>88. Holy brethren, I understand by <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iv.ii-p233.1"></span>ὁμοούσιον</span> God of
God, not of an essence that is unlike, not divided but born, and that
the Son has a birth which is unique, of the substance of the unborn God,
that He is begotten yet co-eternal and wholly like the Father. I
believed this before I knew the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.ii-p233.2"></span>ὁμοούσιον</span> but it greatly helped my
belief. Why do you condemn my faith when I express it by <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iv.ii-p233.3"></span>ὁμοούσιον</span> while
you cannot disapprove it when expressed by <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.ii-p233.4"></span>ὁμοιούσιον</span>? For you condemn my faith,
or rather your own, when you condemn its verbal equivalent. Do others
misunderstand it? Let us join in condemning the misunderstanding, but
not deprive our faith of its security. Do you think we must subscribe to
the Samosatene Council to prevent any one from using <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iv.ii-p233.5"></span>ὁμοούσιον</span> in the
sense of Paul of Samosata? Then let us also subscribe to the Council of
Nicæa, so that the Arians may not impugn the word. Have we to fear that
<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.iv.ii-p233.6"></span>ὁμοιούσιον</span>
does not imply the same belief as <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.ii-p233.7"></span>ὁμοούσιον</span>? Let us decree that there
is no difference between being of one or of a similar substance. The
word <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.ii-p233.8"></span>ὁμοούσιον</span> can be understood in a
wrong sense. Let us prove that it can be understood in a very good
sense. We hold one and the same sacred truth. I beseech you that we
should agree that this truth, which is one and the same, should be
regarded as sacred. Forgive me, brethren, as I have so often asked you
to do. You are not Arians: why should you be thought to be Arians by
denying the <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.ii-p233.9"></span>ὁμοούσιον</span>?

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p234"></span>89. But you say: ‘The ambiguity of the
word <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.ii-p234.1"></span>ὁμοούσιον</span> troubles and offends me.’ I
pray you hear me again and be not offended. I am troubled by the
inadequacy of the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.ii-p234.2"></span>ὁμοιούσιον</span>. Many deceptions come from
similarity. I distrust vessels plated with gold, for I may be deceived
by the metal underneath: and yet that which is seen resembles gold. I
distrust anything that looks like milk, lest that which is offered to me
be milk but not sheep’s milk: for cow’s milk certainly looks like it.
Sheep’s milk cannot be really like sheep’s milk unless drawn from a
sheep. True likeness belongs to a true natural connection. But when the
true natural connection exists, the <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.ii-p234.3"></span>ὁμοούσιον</span> is implied. It is a
likeness according to essence when one piece of metal is like another
and not plated, if milk which is of the same colour as other milk is not
different in taste. Nothing can be like gold but gold, or like milk that
did not belong to that species. I have often been deceived by the colour
of wine: and yet by tasting the liquor have recognized that it was of
another kind. I have seen meat look like other meat, but afterwards the
flavour has revealed the difference to me. Yes, I fear those
resemblances which are not due to a unity of nature.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p235"></span>90. I am afraid, brethren, of the brood
of heresies which are successively produced in the East: and I have
already read what I tell you I fear. There was nothing whatever
suspicious in the document which some of you, with the assent of certain
Orientals, took on your embassy to Sirmium to be there subscribed. But
some misunderstanding has arisen in reference to certain statements at
the beginning which I believe you, my holy brethren, Basil, Eustathius,
and Eleusius, omitted to mention lest they should give offence. If it
was right to draw them up, it was wrong to bury them in silence. But if
they are now unmentioned because they were wrong we must beware lest
they should be repeated at some future time. Out of consideration for
you I have hitherto said nothing about this: yet you know as well as I
do that this creed was not identical with the creed of Ancyra. I am not
talking gossip: I possess a copy of the creed, and I did not get it from
laymen, it was given me by bishops.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p236"></span>91. I pray you, brethren, remove all
suspicion and leave no occasion for it. To approve of <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iv.ii-p236.1"></span>ὁμοιούσιον</span>, we
need not disapprove of <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.ii-p236.2"></span>ὁμοούσιον</span>. Let us think of the many
holy prelates now at rest: what judgment will the Lord pronounce upon us
if we now say anathema to them? What will be our case if we push the
matter so far as to deny that they were bishops and so deny that we are
ourselves bishops? We were ordained by them and are their successors.
Let us renounce our episcopate, if we took its office from men under
anathema. Brethren, forgive my anguish: it is an impious act that you
are attempting. I cannot endure to hear the man anathematized who says
<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.iv.ii-p236.3"></span>ὁμοούσιον</span>
and says it in the right sense. No fault can be found with a word which
does no harm to the meaning of religion. I do not know the word <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iv.ii-p236.4"></span>ὁμοιούσιον</span>, or
understand it, unless it confesses a similarity of essence. I call the
God of heaven and earth to witness, that when I had heard neither word,
my belief was always such that I should have interpreted <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iv.ii-p236.5"></span>ὁμοιούσιον</span> by
<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.iv.ii-p236.6"></span>ὁμοούσιον</span>.
That is, I believed that nothing could be similar according to nature
<span id="page_29">p. 29</span> <span
id="ii.iv.ii-Page_29"></span>unless it was of the same nature. Though
long ago regenerate in baptism, and for some time a bishop, I never
heard of the Nicene creed until I was going into exile, but the Gospels
and Epistles suggested to me the meaning of <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.ii-p236.7"></span>ὁμοούσιον</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iv.ii-p236.8"></span>ὁμοιούσιον</span>. Our
desire is sacred. Let us not condemn the fathers, let us not encourage
heretics, lest while we drive one heresy away, we nurture another. After
the Council of Nicæa our fathers interpreted the due meaning of <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iv.ii-p236.9"></span>ὁμοούσιον</span> with
scrupulous care; the books are extant, the facts are fresh in men’s
minds: if anything has to be added to the interpretation, let us consult
together. Between us we can thoroughly establish the faith, so that what
has been well settled need not be disturbed, and what has been
misunderstood may be removed.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p237"></span>92. Beloved brethren, I have passed
beyond the bounds of courtesy, and forgetting my modesty I have been
compelled by my affection for you to write thus of many abstruse matters
which until this our age were unattempted and left in silence. I have
spoken what I myself believed, conscious that I owed it as my soldier’s
service to the Church to send to you in accordance with the teaching of
the Gospel by these letters the voice of the office which I hold in
Christ. It is yours to discuss, to provide and to act, that the
inviolable fidelity in which you stand you may still keep with
conscientious hearts, and that you may continue to hold what you hold
now. Remember my exile in your holy prayers. I do not know, now that I
have thus expounded the faith, whether it would be as sweet to return
unto you again in the Lord Jesus Christ as it would be full of peace to
die. That our God and Lord may keep you pure and undefiled unto the day
of His appearing is my desire, dearest brethren.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_452"></span>[4:453](2090009.htm#fr_452) <span
id="ii.iv.ii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p5"></span> [Matt. xiii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#015)<span id="ii.iv.ii-p5.1"></span> ff.

<span id="fn_453"></span>[5:454](2090009.htm#fr_453) <span
id="ii.iv.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p8"></span> *Hosius*, bishop of Cordova in Spain, had
been sent by Constantine to Alexandria at the outbreak of the Arian
controversy. He had presided at the Council of Nicæa in 325, and had
taken part in the Council of Sardica in 343, when the Nicene Creed was
reaffirmed. In his extreme old age he was forced with blows to accept
this extreme Arian Creed drawn up at the third Council of Sirmium in the
summer of 357. This is what is stated by Socrates, and it is
corroborated by Athanasius, *Hist. Arian*, c. 45, where it is added that
he anathematized Arianism before dying. Hilary certainly does Hosius an
injustice in declaring him to be joint-author of the ‘blasphemous’
creed.

<span id="fn_454"></span>[5:455](2090009.htm#fr_454) <span
id="ii.iv.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p12"></span> [Rom. xii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#003)<span id="ii.iv.ii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_455"></span>[6:456](2090009.htm#fr_455) <span
id="ii.iv.ii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p20"></span> [John xx.
17](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#017)<span id="ii.iv.ii-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_456"></span>[6:457](2090009.htm#fr_456) <span
id="ii.iv.ii-p21.4"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p22"></span> [Is. liii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#008)<span id="ii.iv.ii-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_457"></span>[6:458](2090009.htm#fr_457) <span
id="ii.iv.ii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p23"></span> [John xiv.
28](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#028)<span id="ii.iv.ii-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_458"></span>[7:459](2090009.htm#fr_458) <span
id="ii.iv.ii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p24"></span> [Matt. xxviii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#019)<span id="ii.iv.ii-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_459"></span>[7:460](2090009.htm#fr_459) <span
id="ii.iv.ii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p29"></span> [John v.
26](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#026)<span id="ii.iv.ii-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_460"></span>[7:461](2090009.htm#fr_460) <span
id="ii.iv.ii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p30"></span> [John
6.57](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#057)<span id="ii.iv.ii-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_461"></span>[8:462](2090009.htm#fr_461) <span
id="ii.iv.ii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p35"></span> [John v.
26](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#026)<span id="ii.iv.ii-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_462"></span>[8:463](2090009.htm#fr_462) <span
id="ii.iv.ii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p38"></span> [Prov. viii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#022)<span id="ii.iv.ii-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_463"></span>[9:464](2090009.htm#fr_463) <span
id="ii.iv.ii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p42"></span> [John v.
26](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#026)<span id="ii.iv.ii-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_464"></span>[9:465](2090009.htm#fr_464) <span
id="ii.iv.ii-p42.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p43"></span> [John
5.19](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#019)<span id="ii.iv.ii-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_465"></span>[10:466](2090009.htm#fr_465) <span
id="ii.iv.ii-p51.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p52"></span> [John v.
32](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#032)<span id="ii.iv.ii-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_466"></span>[10:467](2090009.htm#fr_466) <span
id="ii.iv.ii-p53.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p54"></span> [Matt. x.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#016)<span id="ii.iv.ii-p54.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_467"></span>[10:468](2090009.htm#fr_467) <span
id="ii.iv.ii-p55.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p56"></span> [John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span id="ii.iv.ii-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_468"></span>[11:469](2090009.htm#fr_468) <span
id="ii.iv.ii-p60.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p61"></span> *Substantia* is in this passage used as
the equivalent of Person. The word was used by Tertullian in the sense
of <span class="Greek"><span id="ii.iv.ii-p61.1"></span>οὐσία</span>,
and this early Latin use of the word is the use which eventually
prevailed. The meaning of the word in Hilary is influenced by its
philological equivalent in Greek. At the beginning of the fourth century
<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.iv.ii-p61.2"></span>ὑπόστασις</span>
was used in the same sense as <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.ii-p61.3"></span>οὐσία</span>. The latter word meant
‘reality,’ the former word ‘the basis of existence.’ Athanasius,
however, began the practice of restricting <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.ii-p61.4"></span>ὑπόστασις</span> to the divine *Persons*.
Hilary consequently here uses *substantia* in this new sense of the word
<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.iv.ii-p61.5"></span>ὑπόστασις</span>.
The Alexandrine Council of 362 sanctioned as allowable the use of <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iv.ii-p61.6"></span>ὑπόστασις</span> in the
sense of Person, and by the end of the century the old usage practically
disappeared.

<span id="fn_469"></span>[12:470](2090009.htm#fr_469) <span
id="ii.iv.ii-p65.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p66"></span> The *Council at Antioch* of 341,
generally known as the Dedication Council, assembled for the dedication
of the great cathedral church which had been commenced there by the
emperor Constantine, who did not live to see its completion. Four creeds
were then drawn up, if we reckon a document which was drawn up at
Antioch by a continuation of the Council in the following year. The
second, and most important, of these creeds became the creed of the
Semi-Nicene party. Capable of a wholly orthodox interpretation, it was
insufficient of itself to repel Arianism, but not insufficient to be
used as an auxiliary means of opposing it. Hilary throughout assumes
that it is not to be interpreted in an Arian sense, and uses it as an
introduction to Nicene theology.

<span id="fn_470"></span>[12:471](2090009.htm#fr_470) <span
id="ii.iv.ii-p68.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p69"></span> *Lamb* is Hilary’s mistake for *Man*. He
doubtless read the original in a Greek manuscript which had the word
<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.iv.ii-p69.1"></span>ἄνθρωπον</span>
written in its abbreviated form <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.ii-p69.2"></span>ἀνον</span>. This would readily be mistaken
for the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.ii-p69.3"></span>ἀρνίον</span>, lamb. The Latin word used by
Hilary as a substitute for *Apostle* is *prædestinatus*, for which word
it seems impossible to account.

<span id="fn_471"></span>[12:472](2090009.htm#fr_471) <span
id="ii.iv.ii-p69.4"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p70"></span> [John vi.
28](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#028)<span id="ii.iv.ii-p70.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_472"></span>[12:473](2090009.htm#fr_472) <span
id="ii.iv.ii-p71.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p72"></span> [Matt. xxviii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#019)<span id="ii.iv.ii-p72.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_473"></span>[13:474](2090009.htm#fr_473) <span
id="ii.iv.ii-p78.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p79"></span> Mount Haemus is the mountain range which
at this period formed the boundary between the provinces of Thracia and
Mœsia Inferior. Hæmimontus was grouped with Mœsia Inferior under the
Vicarius of Thrace.

<span id="fn_474"></span>[15:475](2090009.htm#fr_474) <span
id="ii.iv.ii-p101.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p102"></span> [John i.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014)<span id="ii.iv.ii-p102.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_475"></span>[15:476](2090009.htm#fr_475) <span
id="ii.iv.ii-p104.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p105"></span> [Gen. i.
26](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#026)<span id="ii.iv.ii-p105.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_476"></span>[15:477](2090009.htm#fr_476) <span
id="ii.iv.ii-p109.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p110"></span> [Ps. cix
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#001)<span id="ii.iv.ii-p110.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_477"></span>[15:478](2090009.htm#fr_477) <span
id="ii.iv.ii-p113.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p114"></span> [John xiv.
16](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#016)<span id="ii.iv.ii-p114.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_478"></span>[16:479](2090009.htm#fr_478) <span
id="ii.iv.ii-p117.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p118"></span> [Isa.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000), [Isa.
44:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#006)<span
id="ii.iv.ii-p118.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_479"></span>[17:480](2090009.htm#fr_479) <span
id="ii.iv.ii-p144.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p145"></span> *The Flesh*, without ceasing to be
truly flesh, is represented as becoming divine like the Word. That is,
the humanity becomes so endowed with power, and knowledge, and holiness
through the unction of the Holy Ghost that its natural properties are
“deified.” These and similar phrases are freely used by the Fathers of
the fourth century, and may be compared with [John
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014), [2 Pet.
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#004)<span id="ii.iv.ii-p145.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_480"></span>[18:481](2090009.htm#fr_480) <span
id="ii.iv.ii-p147.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p148"></span> *Passibility* may not be affirmed of
the divine nature of Christ which is incapable of any change or
limitation within itself. At the same time the Word may be said to have
suffered inasmuch as the suffering affected the flesh which He assumed.
This subject was afterwards, carefully developed by St. John of Damascus
<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.iv.ii-p148.1"></span>περὶ ὀρθοδόξου
πίστεως</span>, III. 4. In c. 79, Hilary criticises the Arian statement
that the Son “jointly suffered,” a word which meant that the divine
nature of the Son shared in the sufferings which were endured by His
humanity. This phrase, like the statement of Arius that the Logos was
“capable of change” implied that the Son only possessed a secondary
divinity.

<span id="fn_481"></span>[18:482](2090009.htm#fr_481) <span
id="ii.iv.ii-p149.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p150"></span> [Gen. i.
26](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#026)<span id="ii.iv.ii-p150.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_482"></span>[18:483](2090009.htm#fr_482) <span
id="ii.iv.ii-p151.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p152"></span> [Gen.
18.1](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#001)<span
id="ii.iv.ii-p152.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_483"></span>[18:484](2090009.htm#fr_483) <span
id="ii.iv.ii-p153.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p154"></span> [Gen.
32.26](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#026)<span
id="ii.iv.ii-p154.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_484"></span>[18:485](2090009.htm#fr_484) <span
id="ii.iv.ii-p155.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p156"></span> [Gen.
19.24](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#024)<span
id="ii.iv.ii-p156.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_485"></span>[18:486](2090009.htm#fr_485) <span
id="ii.iv.ii-p158.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p159"></span> [Ps. cx.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#001)<span id="ii.iv.ii-p159.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_486"></span>[19:487](2090009.htm#fr_486) <span
id="ii.iv.ii-p166.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p167"></span> [John x.
37](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#037)<span id="ii.iv.ii-p167.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_487"></span>[19:488](2090009.htm#fr_487) <span
id="ii.iv.ii-p172.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p173"></span> [Is. xliv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#006)<span id="ii.iv.ii-p173.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_488"></span>[21:489](2090009.htm#fr_488) <span
id="ii.iv.ii-p184.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p185"></span> *Eleusius* is criticised by Socrates
II. 40, for disliking any attempt at a repudiation of the “Dedication”
creed of 341, although the “Dedication” creed was little better than a
repudiation of the Nicene creed. He was, in fact, a semi-Arian. But his
vigorous opposition to the extreme form of Arianism and the hopefulness
with which Hilary always regarded the semi-Arians, here invest him with
a reputation for the “true knowledge of God.” In 381 he refused to
accept the Nicene creed or take part in the Council of Constantinople.

<span id="fn_489"></span>[22:490](2090009.htm#fr_489) <span
id="ii.iv.ii-p192.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p193"></span> [John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span id="ii.iv.ii-p193.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_490"></span>[22:491](2090009.htm#fr_490) <span
id="ii.iv.ii-p193.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p194"></span> [Matt. iv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#004)<span id="ii.iv.ii-p194.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_491"></span>[23:492](2090009.htm#fr_491) <span
id="ii.iv.ii-p194.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p195"></span> [John iv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#013)<span id="ii.iv.ii-p195.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_492"></span>[23:493](2090009.htm#fr_492) <span
id="ii.iv.ii-p195.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p196"></span> [John
12.23](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#023)<span
id="ii.iv.ii-p196.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_493"></span>[23:494](2090009.htm#fr_493) <span
id="ii.iv.ii-p199.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p200"></span> [Gen. v.
3](../../../bib/kjv/gen005.htm#003)<span id="ii.iv.ii-p200.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_494"></span>[23:495](2090009.htm#fr_494) <span
id="ii.iv.ii-p200.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p201"></span> [John v.
18](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#018)<span id="ii.iv.ii-p201.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_495"></span>[24:496](2090009.htm#fr_495) <span
id="ii.iv.ii-p202.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p203"></span> *Proprietas*, or *sharing one’s own*.
The word *proprietas* is not here used in a technical sense. In its
technical sense *proprietas* or <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.ii-p203.1"></span>ἰδιότης</span> signifies the special
property of each Person of the Godhead, and the word is used to secure
the distinctions of the three Persons and exclude any Sabellian
misunderstanding.

<span id="fn_496"></span>[24:497](2090009.htm#fr_496) <span
id="ii.iv.ii-p204.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p205"></span> [John v.
19](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#019)<span id="ii.iv.ii-p205.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_497"></span>[24:498](2090009.htm#fr_497) <span
id="ii.iv.ii-p205.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p206"></span> [John
5.19](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#019)<span
id="ii.iv.ii-p206.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_498"></span>[25:499](2090009.htm#fr_498) <span
id="ii.iv.ii-p211.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p212"></span> [1 Cor. xiv.
32](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#032)<span id="ii.iv.ii-p212.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_499"></span>[26:500](2090009.htm#fr_499) <span
id="ii.iv.ii-p215.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p216"></span> *Impiare se*is used by Plautus, *Rud*.
1, 3, 8, in the sense of <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.ii-p216.1"></span>ἀσεβεῖν</span>. The sentence probably refers
to the misuse of the word by Paul of Samosata.

<span id="fn_500"></span>[27:501](2090009.htm#fr_500) <span
id="ii.iv.ii-p223.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p224"></span> [1 Tim. ii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#005)<span id="ii.iv.ii-p224.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_501"></span>[27:502](2090009.htm#fr_501) <span
id="ii.iv.ii-p224.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p225"></span> [Phil. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007)<span id="ii.iv.ii-p225.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_502"></span>[27:503](2090009.htm#fr_502) <span
id="ii.iv.ii-p225.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p226"></span> [John x.
30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030)<span id="ii.iv.ii-p226.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_503"></span>[27:504](2090009.htm#fr_503) <span
id="ii.iv.ii-p226.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p227"></span> [John
14.28](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#028)<span
id="ii.iv.ii-p227.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_504"></span>[27:505](2090009.htm#fr_504) <span
id="ii.iv.ii-p227.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p228"></span> [Mark xiii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#032)<span id="ii.iv.ii-p228.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_505"></span>[27:506](2090009.htm#fr_505) <span
id="ii.iv.ii-p228.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p229"></span> *Methuselah’s*age was a favourite
problem with the early Church. See Aug. *de Civ. Dei*, xv. 13, and *de
pecc. orig*. ii. 23, where it is said to be one of those points on which
a Christian can afford to be ignorant. According to the Septuagint,
Methuselah lived for fourteen years after the deluge, so that more than
‘eight souls’ survived, and [1 Pet. iii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#020)<span id="ii.iv.ii-p229.1"></span>,
appeared to be incorrect. According to the Hebrew and Vulgate there is
no difficulty, as Methuselah is represented as dying before the deluge.

<span id="fn_506"></span>[27:507](2090009.htm#fr_506) <span
id="ii.iv.ii-p229.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p230"></span> [Heb. v.
12](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#012)<span id="ii.iv.ii-p230.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: De Trinitate or On the Trinity.](2090010)
