[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2090100)  [Next](2090102) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xix"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xix-p1"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iii.iv.iii.xix-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIX</span>.—*Concerning the
theandric energy.*

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xix-p2"></span>When the blessed Dionysius <span
id="fr_2196"></span>[2197](#fn_2196) says that Christ exhibited to us
some sort of novel theandric energy <span
id="fr_2197"></span>[2198](#fn_2197) , he does not do away with the
natural energies by saying that one energy resulted from the union of
the divine with the human energy: for in the same way we could speak of
one new nature resulting from the union of the divine with the human
nature. For, according to the holy Fathers, things that have one energy
have also one essence. But he wished to indicate the novel and ineffable
manner in which the natural energies of Christ manifest themselves, a
manner befitting the ineffable manner in which the natures of Christ
mutually permeate one another, and further how strange and wonderful
and, in the nature of things, unknown was His life as man <span
id="fr_2198"></span>[2199](#fn_2198) , and lastly the manner of <span
id="page_68b">p. 68b</span> <span
id="iii.iv.iii.xix-Page_68b"></span>the mutual interchange arising from
the ineffable union. For we hold that the energies are not divided and
that the natures do not energise separately, but that each conjointly in
complete community with the other energises with its own proper
energy <span id="fr_2199"></span>[2200](#fn_2199) . For the human part
did not energise merely in a human manner, for He was not mere man; nor
did the divine part energise only after the manner of God, for He was
not simply God, but He was at once God and man. For just as in the case
of natures we recognise both their union and their natural difference,
so is it also with the natural wills and energies.

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xix-p7"></span>Note, therefore, that in the case of
our Lord Jesus Christ, we speak sometimes of His two natures and
sometimes of His one person: and the one or the other is referred to one
conception. For the two natures are one Christ, and the one Christ is
two natures. Wherefore it is all the same whether we say “Christ
energises according to either of His natures,” or “either nature
energises in Christ in communion with the other.” The divine nature,
then, has communion with the flesh in its energising, because it is by
the good pleasure of the divine will that the flesh is permitted to
suffer and do the things proper to itself, and because the energy of the
flesh is altogether saving, and this is an attribute not of human but of
divine energy. On the other hand the flesh has communion with the
divinity of the Word in its energising, because the divine energies are
performed, so to speak, through the organ of the body, and because He
Who energises at once as God and man is one and the same.

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xix-p8"></span>Further observe <span
id="fr_2200"></span>[2201](#fn_2200) that His holy mind also performs
its natural energies, thinking and knowing that it is God’s mind and
that it is worshipped by all creation, and remembering the times He
spent on earth and all He suffered, but it has communion with the
divinity of the Word in its energising and orders and governs the
universe, thinking and knowing and ordering not as the mere mind of man,
but as united in subsistence with God and acting as the mind of God.

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xix-p10"></span>This, then, the theandric energy
makes plain that when God became man, that is when He became incarnate,
both His human energy was divine, that is deified, and not without part
in His divine energy, and His divine energy was not without part in His
human energy, but either was observed in conjunction with the other. Now
this manner of speaking is called a periphrasis, viz., when one embraces
two things in one statement <span id="fr_2201"></span>[2202](#fn_2201) .
For just as in the case of the flaming sword we speak of the cut burn as
one, and the burnt cut as one, but still hold that the cut and the burn
have different energies and different natures, the burn having the
nature of fire and the cut the nature of steel, in the same way also
when we speak of one theandric energy of Christ, we understand two
distinct energies of His two natures, a divine energy belonging to His
divinity, and a human energy belonging to His humanity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2196"></span>[67b:2197](2090101.htm#fr_2196) <span
id="iii.iv.iii.xix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xix-p3"></span> *Dionys., Epist*. 4, *ad Caium*.

<span id="fn_2197"></span>[67b:2198](2090101.htm#fr_2197) <span
id="iii.iv.iii.xix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xix-p4"></span> See *Severus, Ep*. 3, *ad Joann.
Hegum.; Anastas., Sinait. Hodegus*, p. 240.

<span id="fn_2198"></span>[67b:2199](2090101.htm#fr_2198) <span
id="iii.iv.iii.xix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xix-p5"></span> *Max., Dial. cum Pyrrh*.

<span id="fn_2199"></span>[68b:2200](2090101.htm#fr_2199) <span
id="iii.iv.iii.xix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xix-p6"></span> *Leo, Epist*. 1 *ad Flav*.

<span id="fn_2200"></span>[68b:2201](2090101.htm#fr_2200) <span
id="iii.iv.iii.xix-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xix-p9"></span> Perhaps from *Joann. Scythop*., bk.
viii.; cf. *Niceph., C.P. Antirrh*., III. 59.

<span id="fn_2201"></span>[68b:2202](2090101.htm#fr_2201) <span
id="iii.iv.iii.xix-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xix-p11"></span> *Max., Dogm. ad Marin.,* p. 43.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Concerning the natural and innocent passions.](2090102)
