[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2090029)  [Next](2090031) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.ii.iii"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.ii.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="ii.vi.ii.iii-p1.1"></span>Psalm CXXX. (CXXXI.).</span>

<span id="ii.vi.ii.iii-p2"></span>O Lord, my heart is not exalted,
neither have mine eyes been lifted up.

<span id="ii.vi.ii.iii-p3"></span>1. This Psalm, a short one, which
demands an analytical rather than a homiletical treatment, teaches us
the lesson of humility and meekness. Now, as we have in a great number
of other places spoken about humility, there is no need to repeat the
same things here. Of course we are bound to bear in mind in how great
need our faith stands of humility when we hear the Prophet thus speaking
of it as equivalent to the performance of the highest works: *O Lord, my
heart is not exalted*. For a troubled heart is the noblest sacrifice in
the eyes of God. The heart, therefore, must not be lifted up by
prosperity, but humbly kept within the bounds of meekness through the
fear of God.

<span id="ii.vi.ii.iii-p4"></span>2. *Neither have Mine eyes been lifted
up*. The strict sense of the Greek here conveys a different meaning;
<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.vi.ii.iii-p4.1"></span>οὐδὲ
ἐμετεωρίσθησαν οἱ ὀφθαλμοί μου,</span> that is, have not been lifted up
from one object to look on another. Yet the eyes must be lifted up in
obedience to the Prophet’s words: *Lift up your eyes and see who hath
displayed all these things* <span id="fr_1402"></span>[1403](#fn_1402) .
And the Lord says in the gospel: *Lift up your eyes, and look on the
fields, that they are white unto harvest* <span
id="fr_1403"></span>[1404](#fn_1403) . The eyes, then, are to be lifted
up: not, however, to transfer their gaze elsewhere, but to remain fixed
once for all upon that to which they have been raised.

<span id="ii.vi.ii.iii-p7"></span>3. Then follows: *Neither have I
walked amid great things, nor amid wonderful things that are above me*.
It is most dangerous to walk amid mean things, and not to linger amid
wonderful things. God’s utterances are great; He Himself is wonderful in
the highest: how then can the psalmist pride himself as on a good work
for not walking amid great and wonderful things? It is the addition of
the words, *which are above me*, that shews that the walking is not amid
those things which men commonly regard as great and wonderful. <span
id="page_248">p. 248</span> <span id="ii.vi.ii.iii-Page_248"></span>For
David, prophet and king as he was, once was humble and despised and
unworthy to sit at his father’s table; but he found favour with God, he
was anointed to be king, he was inspired to prophesy. His kingdom did
not make him haughty, he was not moved by hatreds: he loved those that
persecuted him, he paid honour to his dead enemies, he spared his
incestuous and murderous children. In his capacity of sovereign he was
despised, in that of father he was wounded, in that of prophet he was
afflicted; yet he did not call for vengeance as a prophet might, nor
exact punishment as a father, nor requite insults as a sovereign. And so
he did not walk amid things great and wonderful which were above him.

<span id="ii.vi.ii.iii-p8"></span>4. Let us see what comes next: *If I
was not humble-minded but have lifted up my soul*. What inconsistency on
the Prophet’s part! He does not lift up his heart: he does lift up his
soul. He does not walk amid things great and wonderful that are above
him; yet his thoughts are not mean. He is exalted in mind and cast down
in heart. He is humble in his own affairs: but he is not humble in his
thought. For his thought reaches to heaven, his soul is lifted up on
high. But his heart, *out of which proceed*, according to the Gospel,
*evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts, false
witness, railings* <span id="fr_1404"></span>[1405](#fn_1404) , is
humble, pressed down beneath the gentle yoke of meekness. We must strike
a middle course, then, between humility and exaltation, so that we may
be humble in heart but lifted up in soul and thought.

<span id="ii.vi.ii.iii-p10"></span>5. Then he goes on: *Like a weaned
child upon his mother’s breast, so wilt thou reward my soul*. We are
told that when Isaac was weaned Abraham made a feast because now that he
was weaned he was on the verge of boyhood and was passing beyond milk
food. The Apostle feeds all that are imperfect in the faith and still
babes in the things of God with the milk of knowledge. Thus to cease to
need milk marks the greatest possible advance. Abraham proclaimed by a
joyful feast that his son had come to stronger meat, and the Apostle
refuses bread to the carnal-minded and those that are babes in Christ.
And so the Prophet prays that God, because he has not lifted up his
heart, nor walked amid things great and wonderful that are above him,
because he has not been humble-minded but did lift up his soul, may
reward his soul, lying like a weaned child upon his mother: that is to
say that he may be deemed worthy of the reward of the perfect, heavenly
and living bread, on the ground that by reason of his works already
recorded he has now passed beyond the stage of milk.

<span id="ii.vi.ii.iii-p11"></span>6. But he does not demand this living
bread from heaven for himself alone, he encourages all mankind to hope
for it by saying: *Let Israel hope in the Lord from henceforth and for
evermore*. He sets no temporal limit to our hope, he bids our faithful
expectation stretch out into infinity. We are to hope for ever and ever,
winning the hope of future life through the hope of our present life
which we have in Christ Jesus our Lord, Who is blessed for ever and
ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1402"></span>[247:1403](2090030.htm#fr_1402) <span
id="ii.vi.ii.iii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.ii.iii-p5"></span> [Is. xl.
26](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#026)<span
id="ii.vi.ii.iii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1403"></span>[247:1404](2090030.htm#fr_1403) <span
id="ii.vi.ii.iii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.ii.iii-p6"></span> St. [John iv.
35](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#035)<span
id="ii.vi.ii.iii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1404"></span>[248:1405](2090030.htm#fr_1404) <span
id="ii.vi.ii.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.ii.iii-p9"></span> St. [Matt. xv.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#019)<span
id="ii.vi.ii.iii-p9.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John of Damascus: Exposition of the Orthodox Faith.](2090031)
