[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bui06)  [Next](bui08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002J9HH0G/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Builders*, by Joseph Fort Newton, \[1914\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span> <span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

*This society was called the Dionysian Artificers, as Bacchus was
supposed to be the inventor of building theaters; and they performed the
Dionysian festivities. From this period, the Science of Astronomy which
had given rise to the Dionysian rites, became connected with types taken
from the art of building. The Ionian societies . . . extended their
moral views, in con-junction with the art of building, to many useful
purposes, and to the practice of acts of benevolence. They had
significant words to distinguish their members; and for the same purpose
they used emblems taken from the art of building*.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

—JOSEPH DA COSTA, *Dionysian Artificers*.

</div>

*We need not then consider it improbable, if in the dark centuries when
the Roman empire was dying out, and its glorious temples falling into
ruin; when the arts and sciences were falling into disuse or being
enslaved; and when no place was safe from persecution and warfare, the
guild of the Architects should fly for safety to almost the only free
spot in Italy; and here, though they could no longer practice their
craft, they preserved the legendary knowledge and precepts which, as
history implies, came down to them through Vitruvius from older sources,
some say from Solomon's builders themselves*.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

—LEADER SCOTT, *The Cathedral Builders*.

</div>

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

### CHAPTER V

### The Collegia

SO far in our study we have found that from earliest time architecture
was related to religion; that the working tools of the builder were
emblems of moral truth; that there were great secret orders using the
Drama of Faith as a rite of initiation; and that a hidden doctrine was
kept for those accounted worthy, after trial, to be entrusted with it.
Secret societies, born of the nature and need of man, there have been
almost since recorded history began; <span id="fr_53"></span>[1](#fn_53.md)
but as yet we have come upon no separate and distinct order of builders.
For aught we know there may have been such in plenty, but we have no
intimation, much less a record, of the fact. That is to say, history has
a vague story to tell us of the earliest orders of the builders.

However, it is more than a mere plausible inference that from the
beginning architects were members of secret orders; for, as we have
seen, not only the truths of religion and philosophy, but also the

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

facts of science and the laws of art, were held as secrets to be known
only to the few. This was so, apparently without exception, among all
ancient peoples; so much so, indeed, that we may take it as certain that
the builders of old time were initiates. Of necessity, then, the arts of
the craft were secrets jealously guarded, and the architects themselves,
while they may have employed and trained ordinary workmen, were men of
learning and influence. Such glimpses of early architects as we have
con-firm this inference, as, for example, the noble hymn to the Sun-god
written by Suti and Hor, two architects employed by Amenhotep III, of
Egypt. <span id="fr_54"></span>[1](#fn_54.md) Just when the builders began
to form orders of their own no one knows, but it was perhaps when the
Mystery-cults began to journey abroad into other lands. What we have to
keep in mind is that all the arts had their home in the temple, from
which, as time passed, they spread out fan-wise along all the paths of
culture.

Keeping in mind the secrecy of the laws of building, and the sanctity
with which all science and art were regarded, we have a key whereby to
interpret

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

the legends woven about the building of the temple of Solomon. Few
realize how high that temple on Mount Moriah towered in the history of
the olden world, and how the story of its building haunted the legends
and traditions of the times following. Of these legends there were many,
some of them wildly improbable, but the persistence of the tradition,
and its consistency withal, despite many variations, is a *fact of no
small moment*. Nor is this tradition to be wondered at, since time has
shown that the building of the temple at Jerusalem was an event of
world-importance, not only to the Hebrews, but to other nations, more
especially the Phoenicians. The histories of both peoples make much of
the building of the Hebrew temple, of the friendship of Solomon and
Hiram I, of Tyre, and of the harmony between the two peoples; and
Phoenician tradition has it that Solomon presented Hiram with a
duplicate of the temple, which was erected in Tyre. <span
id="fr_55"></span>[1](#fn_55.md)

Clearly, the two nations were drawn closely together, and this fact
carried with it a mingling of religious influences and ideas, as was
true between the Hebrews and other nations, especially Egypt and
Phoenicia, during the reign of Solomon. Now

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

the religion of the Phoenicians at this time, as all agree, was the
Egyptian religion in a modified form, Dionysius having taken the role of
Osiris in the drama of faith in Greece, Syria, and Asia Minor. Thus we
have the Mysteries of Egypt, in which Moses was learned, brought to the
very door of the temple of Solomon, and that, too, at a time favorable
to their impress. The Hebrews were not architects, and it is plain from
the records that the temple—and, indeed, the palaces of Solomon—were
designed and erected by Phoenician builders, and for the most part by
Phoenician workmen and materials. Josephus adds that the architecture of
the temple was of the style called Grecian. So much would seem to be
fact, whatever may be said of the legends flowing from it.

If, then, the laws of building were secrets known only to initiates,
there must have been a secret Order of architects who built the temple
of Solomon. Who were they? They were almost certainly the *Dionysian
Artificers*—not to be confused with the play-actors called by the same
name later—an Order of builders who erected temples, stadia, and
theaters in Asia Minor, and who were at the same time an order of the
Mysteries under the tutelage of Bacchus before that worship declined, as
it did later in Athens and Rome, into mere revelry. <span
id="fr_56"></span>[1](#fn_56.md) As

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

such, they united the art of architecture with the old Egyptian drama of
faith, representing in their ceremonies the murder of Dionysius by the
Titans and his return to life. So that, blending the symbols of
Astronomy with those of Architecture, by a slight change made by a
natural process, how easy for the master-artist of the temple-builders
to become the hero of the ancient drama of immortality. <span
id="fr_57"></span>[1](#fn_57.md)

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Whether or not
this fact can be verified from history, such is the form in which the
tradition has come down to us, surviving through long ages and
triumphing over all vicissitude. <span id="fr_58"></span>[1](#fn_58.md)
Secret orders have few records and their story is hard to tell, but this
account is perfectly in accord with the spirit and setting of the
situation, and there is neither fact nor reason against it. While this
does not establish it as true historically, it surely gives it validity
as a prophecy, if nothing more. <span id="fr_59"></span>[2](#fn_59.md)

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

After all, then, the tradition that Masonry, not unlike the Masonry we
now know, had its origin while the temple of King Solomon was building,
and was given shape by the two royal friends, may not be so fantastic as
certain superior folk seem to think it. How else can we explain the fact
that when the Knights of the Crusades went to the Holy Land they came
back a secret, oath-bound fraternity? Also, why is it that, through the
ages, we see bands of builders coming from the East calling themselves
"sons of Solomon," and using his interlaced triangle-seal as their
emblem? Strabo, as we have seen, traced the Dionysiac builders eastward
into Syria, Persia, and even India. They may also be traced westward.
Traversing Asia Minor, they entered Europe by way of Constantinople, and
we follow them through Greece to Rome, where already several centuries
before Christ we find them bound together in corporations called
Collegia. These lodges flourished in all parts of the Roman Empire,
traces of their existence having been discovered in England as early as
the middle of the first century of our era.

#### II

Krause was the first to point out a prophecy of Masonry in the old
orders of builders, following

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

their footsteps—not connectedly, of course, for there are many
gaps—through the Dionysiac fraternity of Tyre, through the Roman
Collegia, to the architects and Masons of the Middle Ages. Since he
wrote, however, much new material has come to light, but the date of the
advent of the builders in Rome is still uncertain. Some trace it to the
very founding of the city, while others go no further back than King
Numa, the friend of Pythagoras. <span id="fr_60"></span>[1](#fn_60.md) By
any account, they were of great antiquity, and their influence in Roman
history was far-reaching. They followed the Roman legions to remote
places, building cities, bridges, and temples, and it was but natural
that Mithra, the patron god of soldiers, should have influenced their
orders. Of this an example may be seen in the remains of the ancient
Roman villa at Morton, on the Isle of Wight. <span
id="fr_61"></span>[2](#fn_61.md)

As Rome grew in power and became a vast, all-embracing empire, the
individual man felt, more

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

and more, his littleness and loneliness. This feeling, together with the
increasing specialization of industry, begat a passion for association,
and Collegia of many sorts were organized. Even a casual glance at the
inscriptions, under the heading *Artes et Opificia*, will show the
enormous development of skilled handicrafts, and how minute was their
specialization. Every trade soon had its secret order, or union, and so
powerful did they become that the emperors found it necessary to abolish
the right of free association. Yet even such edicts, though effective
for a little time, were helpless as against the universal craving for
combination. Ways were easily found whereby to evade the law, which had
exempted from its restrictions orders consecrated by their antiquity or
their religious character. Most of the Collegia became funerary and
charitable in their labors, humble folk seeking to escape the dim,
hopeless obscurity of plebeian life, and the still more hopeless
obscurity of death. Pathetic beyond words are some of the inscriptions
telling of the horror and loneliness of the grave, of the day when no
kindly eye would read the forgotten name, and no hand bring offerings of
flowers. Each collegium held memorial services, and marked the tomb of
its dead with the emblems of its trade: if a baker, with a loaf of
bread; if a builder, with a square, compasses, and the level.

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

From the first the Colleges of Architects seem to have enjoyed special
privileges and exemptions, owing to the value of their service to the
state, and while we do not find them called Free-masons they were such
in law and fact long before they wore the name. They were permitted to
have their own constitutions and regulations, both secular and
religious. In form, in officers, in emblems a Roman Collegium resembled
very much a modern Masonic Lodge. For one thing, no College could
consist of less than three persons, and so rigid was this rule that the
saying, "three make a college," became a maxim of law. Each College was
presided over by a Magister, or Master, with two *decuriones*, or
wardens, each of whom extended the commands of the Master to "the
brethren of his column." There were a secretary, a treasurer, and a
keeper of archives, and, as the colleges were in part religious and
usually met near some temple, there was a *sacerdos*, or, as we would
say, a priest, or chaplain. The members were of three orders, not unlike
apprentices, fellows, and masters, or colleagues. What ceremonies of
initiation were used we do not know, but that they were of a religious
nature seems certain, as each College adopted a patron deity from among
the many then worshiped. Also, as the Mysteries of Isis and Mithra ruled
the Roman

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

world by turns, the ancient drama of eternal life was never far away.

Of the emblems of the Collegia, it is enough to say that here again we
find the simple tools of the builder used as teachers of truth for life
and hope in death. Upon a number of sarcophagi, still extant, we find
carved the square, the compasses, the cube, the plummet, the circle, and
always the level. There is, besides, the famous Collegium uncovered at
the excavation of Pompeii in 1878, having been buried under the ashes
and lava of Mount Vesuvius since the year 79 A. D. It stood near the
Tragic Theater, not far from the Temple of Isis, and by its arrangement,
with two columns in front and interlaced triangles on the walls, was
identified as an ancient lodge room. Upon a pedestal in the room was
found a rare bit of art, unique in design and exquisite in execution,
now in the National Museum at Naples. It is described by S. R. Forbes,
in his *Rambles in Naples*, as follows:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">It is a mosaic table of square shape, fixed in a
strong wooden frame. The ground is of grey green stone, in the middle of
which is a human skull, made of white, grey, and black colors. In
appearance the skull is quite natural. The eyes, nostrils, teeth, ears,
and coronal are all well executed. Above the skull is a level of colored
wood, the points being of brass; and from the top to the point, by a
white thread, is suspended a plumb-line. Below <span id="page_84">p.
84</span> the skull is a wheel of six spokes, and on the upper rim of
the wheel there is a butterfly with wings of red, edged with yellow; its
eyes blue. . . On the left is an upright spear, resting on the ground;
from this there hangs, attached to a golden cord, a garment of scarlet,
also a purple robe; whilst the upper part of the spear is surrounded by
a white braid of diamond pattern. To the right is a gnarled thorn stick,
from which hangs a coarse, shaggy piece of cloth in yellow, grey, and
brown colors, tied with a ribbon; and above it is a leather knapsack. .
. Evidently this work of art, by its composition, is mystical and
symbolical.</span>

</div>

No doubt; and for those who know the meaning of these emblems there is a
feeling of kinship with those men, long since fallen into dust, who
gathered about such an altar. They wrought out in this work of art their
vision of the old-worn pilgrim way of life, with its vicissitude and
care, the level of mortality to which all are brought at last by death,
and the winged, fluttering hope of man. Always a journey with its horny
staff and wallet, life is sometimes a battle needing a spear, but for
him who walks uprightly by the plumb-line of rectitude, there is a true
and victorious hope at the end.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Of wounds and sore defeat  
I made my battle stay,  
Winged sandals for my feet  
I wove of my delay. <span id="page_85">p. 85</span>  
Of weariness and fear  
I made a shouting spear,  
Of loss and doubt and dread  
And swift on-coming doom  
I made a helmet for my head,  
And a waving plume.</span>

</div>

#### III

Christianity, whose Founder was a Carpenter, made a mighty appeal to the
working classes of Rome. As Deissmann and Harnack have shown, the secret
of its expansion in the early years was that it came down to the man in
the street with its message of hope and joy. Its appeal was hardly heard
in high places, but it was welcomed by the men who were weary and heavy
ladened. Among the Collegia it made rapid progress, its Saints taking
the place of pagan deities as patrons, and its spirit of love welding
men into closer, truer union. When Diocletian determined to destroy
Christianity, he was strangely lenient and patient with the Collegia, so
many of whose members were of that faith. Not until they refused to make
a statue of Æsculapius did he vow vengeance and turn on them, venting
his fury. In the persecution that followed four Master Masons and one
humble apprentice suffered cruel torture and death, but they became the

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Four Crowned
Martyrs, the story of whose heroic fidelity unto death haunted the
legends of later times. <span id="fr_62"></span>[1](#fn_62.md) They were
the patron saints alike of Lombard and Tuscan builders, and, later, of
the working Masons of the Middle Ages, as witness the poem in their
praise in the oldest record of the Craft, the *Regius MS*.

With the breaking up of the College of Architects and their expulsion
from Rome, we come upon a period in which it is hard to follow their
path. Happily the task has been made less baffling by recent research,
and if we are unable to trace them all the way much light has been let
into the darkness. Hitherto there has been a hiatus also in the history
of architecture between the classic art of Rome, which is said to have
died when the Empire fell to

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

pieces, and the rise of Gothic art. Just so, in the story of the
builders one finds a gap of like length, between the Collegia of Rome
and the cathedral artists. While the gap cannot, as yet, be perfectly
bridged, much has been done to that end by Leader Scott in *The
Cathedral Builders: The Story of a Great Masonic Guild*—a book itself a
work of art as well as of fine scholarship. Her thesis is that the
missing link is to be found in the Magistri Comacini, a guild of
architects who, on the break-up of the Roman Empire, fled to Comacina, a
fortified island in Lake Como, and there kept alive the traditions of
classic art during the Dark Ages; that from them were developed in
direct descent the various styles of Italian architecture; and that,
finally, they carried the knowledge and practice of architecture and
sculpture into France, Spain, Germany, and England. Such a thesis is
difficult, and, from its nature, not susceptible of absolute proof, but
the writer makes it as certain as anything can well be.

While she does not positively affirm that the Comacine Masters were the
veritable stock from which the Freemasonry of the present day sprang,
"we may admit," she says, "that they were the link between the classic
Collegia and all other art and trade Guilds of the Middle Ages. *They
were Free-masons because they were builders of a privileged* 

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

*class, absolved from taxes and servitude, and free to travel about in
times of feudal bondage*." The name Free-mason—*Libera muratori*—may not
actually have been used thus early, but the Comacines were *in fact free
builders long before the name was employed*—free to travel from place to
place, as we see from their migrations; free to fix their own prices,
while other workmen were bound to feudal lords, or by the Statutes of
Wages. The author quotes in the original Latin an Edict of the Lombard
King Rotharis, dated November 22, 643, in which certain privileges are
confirmed to the *Magistri Comacini* and their *colligantes*. From this
Edict it is clear that it is no new order that is alluded to, but an old
and powerful body of Masters capable of acting as architects, with men
who executed work under them. For the Comacines were not ordinary
workmen, but artists, including architects, sculptors, painters, and
decorators, and if affinities of style left in stone be adequate
evidence, to them were due the changing forms of architecture in Europe
during the cathedral-building period. Everywhere they left their
distinctive impress in a way so unmistakable as to leave no doubt.

Under Charlemagne the Comacines began their many migrations, and we find
them following the missionaries of the church into remote places, from

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Sicily to Britain,
building churches. When Augustine went to convert the British, the
Comacines followed to provide shrines, and Bede, as early as 674, in
mentioning that builders were sent for from Gaul to build the church at
Wearmouth, uses phrases and words found in the Edict of King Rotharis.
For a long time the changes in style of architecture, appearing
simultaneously everywhere over Europe, from Italy to England, puzzled
students. <span id="fr_63"></span>[1](#fn_63.md) Further knowledge of this
powerful and widespread order explains it. It also accounts for the fact
that no individual architect can be named as the designer of any of the
great cathedrals. Those cathedrals were the work, not of individual
artists, but of an order who planned, built, and adorned them. In 1355
the painters of Siena seceded, as the German Masons did later, and the
names of individual artists who worked for fame and glory begin to
appear; but up to that time the Order was supreme. Artists from Greece
and Asia Minor, driven from their homes, took refuge with the Comacines,
and Leader Scott finds in this order a possible link, by tradition at
least, with the temple of Solomon. At any rate, all through the Dark
Ages the name and fame of the Hebrew king lived in the minds of the
builders.

An inscribed stone, dating from 712, shows that

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

the Comacine Guild was organized as *Magistri* and *Discipuli*, under a
*Gastaldo*, or Grand Master, the very same terms as were kept in the
lodges later. Moreover, they called their meeting places loggia, a long
list of which the author recites from the records of various cities,
giving names of officers, and, often, of members. They, too, had their
masters and wardens, their oaths, tokens, grips, and passwords which
formed a bond of union stronger than legal ties. They wore white aprons
and gloves, and revered the Four Crowned Martyrs of the Order. Square,
compasses, level, plumb-line, and arch appear among their emblems. "King
Solomon's Knot" was one of their symbols, and the endless, interwoven
cord, symbol of Eternity which has neither beginning nor end, was
another. Later, however, the Lion's Paw seems to have become their chief
emblem. From illustrations given by the author they are shown in their
regalia, with apron and emblems, clad as the keepers of a great art and
teaching of which they were masters.

Here, of a truth, is something more than prophecy, and those who have
any regard for facts will not again speak lightly of an order having
such ancestors as the great Comacine Masters. Had Fergusson known their
story, he would not have paused in his *History of Architecture* to
belittle the Free-masons

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

as incapable of designing a cathedral, while puzzling the while as to
who did draw the plans for those dreams of beauty and prayer. Hereafter,
if any one asks to know who uplifted those massive piles in which was
portrayed the great drama of [mediaeval](errata.htm#2.md) worship, he need
not remain uncertain. With the decline of Gothic architecture the order
of Free-masons also suffered decline, as we shall see, but did not cease
to exist—continuing its symbolic tradition amidst varying, and often
sad, vicissitude until 1717, when it became a fraternity teaching
spiritual faith by allegory and moral science by symbols.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_53"></span>[73:1](bui07.htm#fr_53.md) *Primitive Secret
Societies*, by H. Webster; *Secret Societies of all Ages and Lands*, by
W. C. Heckethorn.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[74:1](bui07.htm#fr_54.md) We may add the case of
Weshptah, one of the viziers of the Fifth Dynasty in Egypt, about 2700
B. C., and also the royal architect, for whom the great tomb was built,
endowed, and furnished by the king (*Religion in Egypt*, by Breasted,
lecture ii); also the statue of Semut, chief of Masons under Queen
Hatasu, now in Berlin.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[75:1](bui07.htm#fr_55.md) *Historians His. World*,
vol. ii, chap. iii. Josephus gives an elaborate account of the temple,
including the correspondence between Solomon and Hiram of Tyre (*Jewish
Antiquities*, bk. viii, chaps. 2-6).

<span id="fn_56"></span>[76:1](bui07.htm#fr_56.md) *Symbolism of Masonry*,
Mackey, chap. vi; also in Mackey's *Encyclopedia of Masonry*, both of
which were drawn from *History* <span id="page_77">p. 77</span> *of
Masonry*, by Laurie, chap. i; and Laurie in turn derived his facts from
a *Sketch for the History of the Dionysian Artificers, A Fragment*, by
H. J. Da Costa (1820). Why Waite and others brush the Dionysian
architects aside as a dream is past finding out in view of the evidence
and authorities put; forth by Da Costa, nor do they give any reason for
so doing. "Lebedos was the seat and assembly of the *Dionysian
Artificers*, who inhabit Ionia to the Hellespont; there they had
annually their solemn meetings and festivities in honor of Bacchus,"
wrote Strabo (lib. xiv, 921). They were a secret society having signs
and words to distinguish their members (Robertson's *Greece*), and used
emblems taken from the art of building (Eusebius, *de Prep. Evang*. iii,
c. 12). They entered Asia Minor and Phoenicia fifty years before the
temple of Solomon was built, and Strabo traces them on into Syria,
Persia, and India. Surely here are facts not to be swept aside as
romance because, forsooth, they do not fit certain theories. Moreover,
they explain many things, as we shall see.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[77:1](bui07.htm#fr_57.md) Rabbinic legend has it
that all the workmen on the temple were killed, so that they should not
build another temple devoted to idolatry (*Jewish Encyclopedia*, article
"Freemasonry"). Other legends equally absurd cluster about the temple
and its building, none of which is to be taken literally. As a fact,
Hiram the architect, or rather artificer in metals, did not lose his
life, but, as Josephus tells us, lived to good age and died at Tyre.
What the legend is trying to tell us, however, is that at the building
of the temple the Mysteries mingled with Hebrew faith, each .mutually
influencing the other.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[78:1](bui07.htm#fr_58.md) Strangely enough, there
is a sect or tribe called the Druses, now inhabiting the Lebanon
district, who claim to be not only the descendants of the Phoenicians,
but *the builders of King Solomon's temple*. So persistent and important
among them is this tradition that their religion is built about it—if
indeed it be not something more than a legend. They have Khalwehs, or
temples, built after the fashion of lodges, with three degrees of
initiation, and, though an agricultural folk, they use signs and tools
of building as emblems of moral truth. They have signs, grips, and
passwords for recognition. In the words of their lawgiver, Hamze, their
creed reads: "The belief in the Truth of One God shall take the place of
Prayer; the exercise of brotherly love shall take the place of Fasting;
and the daily practice of acts of Charity shall take the place of
Alms-giving." Why such a people, having such a tradition? Where did they
get it? What may this fact set in the fixed and changeless East mean?
(See the essay of Hackett Smith on "The Druses and Their Relation to
Freemasonry," and the discussion following, *Ars Quatuor Coronatorum*,
iv. 7-19.)

<span id="fn_59"></span>[78:2](bui07.htm#fr_59.md) Rawlinson, in his
*History of Phoenicia*, says the people "had for ages possessed the
mason's art, it having been brought in very early days from Egypt." Sir
C. Warren found on the foundation stones at Jerusalem Mason's marks in
Phoenician letters (A. Q. C;., ii, 125; iii, 68).

<span id="fn_60"></span>[80:1](bui07.htm#fr_60.md) See essay on "A Masonic
Built City," by S. R. Forbes, a study of the plan and building of Rome,
*Ars Quatuor Coronatorum*, iv, 86. As there will be many references to
the proceedings of the Coronatorum Lodge of Research, it will be
convenient hereafter to use only its initials, *A. Q. C.*, in behalf of
brevity. For an account of the Collegia in early Christian times, see
*Roman Life from Nero to Aurelius*, by Dill (bk. ii, chap. iii); also
*De Collegia*, by Mommsen. There is an excellent article in Mackey's
*Encyclopedia of Freemasonry*, and Gould, *His. Masonry*, vol. i, chap.
i.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[80:2](bui07.htm#fr_61.md) See *Masonic Character
of Roman Villa at Morton*, by J. F. Crease (*A. Q. C.*, iii, 38-59).

<span id="fn_62"></span>[86:1](bui07.htm#fr_62.md) Their names were
Claudius, Nicostratus, Simphorianus, Castorius, and Simplicius. Later
their bodies were brought from Rome to Toulouse where they were placed
in a chapel erected in their honor in the church of St. Sernin
(*Martyrology*, by Du Saussay). They became patron saints of Masons in
Germany, France, and England (*A. Q. C.*, xii, 196). In a fresco on the
walls of the church of St. Lawrence at Rotterdam, partially preserved,
they are painted with compasses and trowel in hand. With them, however,
is another figure, clad in oriental robe, also holding compasses, but
with a royal, not a martyr's, crown. Is he Solomon? Who else can he be?
The fresco dates from 1641, and was painted by F. Wounters (*A. Q. C.*,
xii, 202). Even so, those humble workmen, faithful to their faith,
became saints of the church, and reign with Solomon! Once the fresco was
whitewashed, but the coating fell off and they stood forth with
compasses and trowel as before.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[89:1](bui07.htm#fr_63.md) *History of Middle
Ages*, Hallam, vol. ii, 547.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I. Free-masons](bui08.md)
