[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bui00)  [Next](bui02.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002J9HH0G/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Builders*, by Joseph Fort Newton, \[1914\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

# THE ANTEROOM

Fourteen years ago the writer of this volume entered the temple of
Freemasonry, and that date stands out in memory as one of the most
significant days in his life. There was a little spread on the night of
his raising, and, as is the custom, the candidate was asked to give his
impressions of the Order. Among other things, he made request to know if
there was any little book which would tell a young man the things he
would most like to know about Masonry—what it was, whence it came, what
it teaches, and what it is trying to do in the world? No one knew of
such a book at that time, nor has any been found to meet a need which
many must have felt before and since. By an odd coincidence, it has
fallen to the lot of the author to write the little book for which he
made request fourteen years ago.

This bit of reminiscence explains the purpose of the present volume, and
every book must be judged by its spirit and purpose, not less than by
its style and contents. Written as a commission from the Grand Lodge of
Iowa, and approved by that Grand body, a copy of this book is to be
presented to every

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

man upon whom the degree of Master Mason is conferred within this Grand
Jurisdiction. Naturally this intention has determined the method and
arrangement of the book, as well as the matter it contains; its aim
being to tell a young man entering the order the antecedents of Masonry,
its development, its philosophy, its mission, and its ideal. Keeping
this purpose always in mind, the effort has been to prepare a brief,
simple, and vivid account of the origin, growth, and teaching of the
Order, so written as to provoke a deeper interest in and a more earnest
study of its story and its service to mankind.

No work of this kind has been undertaken, so far as is known, by any
Grand Lodge in this country or abroad—at least, not since the old Pocket
Companion, and other such works in the earlier times; and this is the
more strange from the fact that the need of it is so obvious, and its
possibilities so fruitful and important. Every one who has looked into
the vast literature of Masonry must often have felt the need of a
concise, compact, yet comprehensive survey to clear the path and light
the way. Especially must those feel such a need who are not accustomed
to traverse long and involved periods of history, and more especially
those who have neither the time nor the opportunity to sift ponderous
volumes to find out the facts. Much of our literature—indeed,

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

by far the larger part of it—was written before the methods of
scientific study had arrived, and while it fascinates, it does not
convince those who are used to the more critical habits of research.
Consequently, without knowing it, some of our most earnest Masonic
writers have made the Order a target for ridicule by their extravagant
claims as to its antiquity. They did not make it clear in what sense it
is ancient, and not a little satire has been aimed at Masons for their
gullibility in accepting as true the wildest and most absurd legends.
Besides, no history of Masonry has been written in recent years, and
some important material has come to light in the world of historical and
archeological scholarship, making not a little that has hitherto been
obscure more clear; and there is need that this new knowledge be related
to what was already known. While modern research aims at accuracy, too
often its results are dry pages of fact, devoid of literary beauty and
spiritual appeal—a skeleton without the warm robe of flesh and blood.
Striving for accuracy, the writer has sought to avoid making a dusty
chronicle of facts and figures, which few would have the heart to
follow, with what success the reader must decide.

Such a book is not easy to write, and for two reasons: it is the history
of a secret Order, much of whose lore is not to be written, and it
covers a bewildering

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

stretch of time, asking that the contents of innumerable volumes—many of
them huge, disjointed, and difficult to digest—be compact within a small
space. Nevertheless, if it has required a prodigious labor, it is
assuredly worth while in behalf of the young men who throng our temple
gates, as well as for those who are to cone after us. Every line of this
book has been written in the conviction that the real history of Masonry
is great enough, and its simple teaching grand enough, without the
embellishment of legend, much less of occultism. It proceeds from first
to last upon the assurance that all that we need to do is to remove the
scaffolding from the historic temple of Masonry and let it stand out in
the sunlight, where all men can see its beauty and symmetry, and that it
will command the respect of the most critical and searching intellects,
as well as the homage of all who love mankind. By this faith the long
study has been guided; in this confidence it has been completed.

To this end the sources of Masonic scholarship, stored in the library of
the Grand Lodge of Iowa, have been explored, and the highest authorities
have been cited wherever there is uncertainty—copious references serving
not only to substantiate the statements made, but also, it is hoped, to
guide the reader into further and more detailed research. Also, in

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

respect of issues still open to debate and about which differences of
opinion obtain, both sides have been given a hearing, so far as space
would allow, that the student may weigh and decide the question for
himself. Like all Masonic students of recent times, the writer is richly
indebted to the great Research Lodges of England—especially to the
Quatuor Coronati Lodge, No. 2076—without whose proceedings this study
would have been much harder to write, if indeed it could have been
written at all. Such men as Gould, Hughan, Speth, Crawley, Thorp, to
name but a few—not forgetting Pike, Parvin, Mackey, Fort, and others in
this country—deserve the perpetual gratitude of the fraternity. If, at
times, in seeking to escape from mere legend, some of them seemed to go
too far toward another extreme—forgetting that there is much in Masonry
that cannot be traced by name and date—it was but natural in their
effort in behalf of authentic history and accurate scholarship. Alas,
most of those named belong now to a time that is gone and to the people
who are no longer with us here, but they are recalled by an humble
student who would pay them the honor belonging to great men and great
Masons.

This book is divided into three parts, as everything Masonic should be:
Prophecy, History, and

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Interpretation.
The first part has to do with the hints and foregleams of Masonry in the
early history, tradition, mythology, and symbolism of the race—finding
its foundations in the nature and need of man, and showing how the
stones wrought out by time and struggle were brought from afar to the
making of Masonry as we know it. The second part is a story of the order
of builders through the centuries, from the building of the Temple of
Solomon to the organization of the mother Grand Lodge of England, and
the spread of the Order all over the civilized world. The third part is
a statement and exposition of the faith of Masonry, its philosophy, its
religious meaning, its genius, and its ministry to the individual, and
through the individual to society and the state. Such is a bare outline
of the purpose, method, plan, and spirit of the work, and if these be
kept in mind it is believed that it will tell its story and confide its
message.

When a man thinks of our mortal lot—its greatness and its pathos, how
much has been wrought out in the past, and how binding is our obligation
to preserve and enrich the inheritance of humanity—there comes over him
a strange warming of the heart toward all his fellow workers; and
especially toward the young, to whom we must soon entrust all that we
hold sacred. All through these pages the

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

wish has been to make the young Mason feel in what a great and benign
tradition he stands, that he may the more earnestly strive to be a Mason
not merely in form, but in faith, in spirit, and still more, in
character; and so help to realize somewhat of the beauty we all have
dreamed—lifting into the light the latent powers and unguessed
possibilities of this the greatest order of men upon the earth. Everyone
can do a little, and if each does his part faithfully the sum of our
labors will be very great, and we shall leave the world fairer than we
found it, richer in faith, gentler in justice, wiser in pity—for we pass
this way but once, pilgrims seeking a country, even a City that hath
foundations.

J. F. N.

*Cedar Rapids, Iowa*, September 7, 1914.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Table of Contents](bui02.md)
