[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bui05)  [Next](bui07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002J9HH0G/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Builders*, by Joseph Fort Newton, \[1914\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span> <span id="page_55">p. 55</span> <span
id="page_56">p. 56</span>

*The value of man does not consist in the truth which he possesses, or
means to possess, but in the sincere pain which he hath taken to find it
out. For his powers do not augment by possessing truth, but by
investigating it, wherein consists his only perfectibility. Possession
lulls the energy of man, and makes him idle and proud. If God held
inclosed in his right hand absolute truth, and in his left only the
inward lively impulse toward truth, and if He said to me: Choose! even
at the risk of exposing mankind to continual erring, I most humbly would
seize His left hand, and say: Father, give! absolute truth belongs to
Thee alone*.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

G. E. LESSING, *Nathan the Wise*.

</div>

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

### CHAPTER IV

### The Secret Doctrine

#### I

GOD ever shields us from premature ideas, said the gracious and wise
Emerson; and so does nature. She holds back her secrets until man is fit
to be entrusted with them, lest by rashness he destroy himself. Those
who seek find, not because the truth is far off, but because the
discipline of the quest makes them ready for the truth, and worthy to
receive it. By a certain sure instinct the great teachers of our race
have regarded the highest truth less as a gift bestowed than as a trophy
to be won. Everything must not be told to everybody. Truth is power, and
when held by untrue hands it may become a plague. Even Jesus had His
"little flock" to whom He confided much which He kept from the world, or
else taught it in parables cryptic and veiled. <span
id="fr_46"></span>[1](#fn_46) One of His sayings in explanation of His
method is quoted by Clement of Alexandria in his *Homilies*:

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">It was not from grudgingness that our Lord gave the
charge in a certain Gospel: "*My mystery is for Me and the sons of My
house*." <span id="fr_47"></span>[1](#fn_47)</span>

</div>

This more withdrawn teaching, hinted in the saying of the Master, with
the arts of spiritual culture employed, has come to be known as the
Secret Doctrine, or the Hidden Wisdom. A persistent tradition affirms
that throughout the ages, and in every land, behind the system of faith
accepted by the masses an inner and deeper doctrine has been held and
taught by those able to grasp it. This hidden faith has undergone many
changes of outward expression, using now one set of symbols and now
another, but its central tenets have remained the same; and necessarily
so, since the ultimates of thought are ever immutable. By the same
token, those who have eyes to see have no difficulty in penetrating the
varying veils of expression and identifying the underlying truths; thus
confirming in the arcana of faith what we found to be true in its
earliest forms—the oneness of the human mind and the unity of truth.

There are those who resent the suggestion that there is, or can be,
secrecy in regard to spiritual truths which, if momentous at all, are of
common moment to all. For this reason Demonax, in the Lucian play, would
not be initiated, because, if the

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Mysteries were
bad, he would not keep silent as a warning; and if they were good, he
would proclaim them as a duty. The objection is, however, unsound, as a
little thought will reveal. Secrecy in such matters inheres in the
nature of the truths themselves, not in any affected superiority of a
few elect minds. Qualification for the knowledge of higher things is,
and must always be, a matter of personal fitness. Other qualification
there is none. For those who have that fitness the Secret Doctrine is as
clear as sunlight, and for those who have it not the truth would still
be secret though shouted from the house-top. The Grecian Mysteries were
certainly secret, yet the fact of their existence was a matter of common
knowledge, and there was no more secrecy about their sanctuaries than
there is about a cathedral. Their presence testified to the public that
a deeper than the popular faith did exist, but the right to admission
into them depended upon the whole-hearted wish of the aspirant, and his
willingness to fit himself to know the truth. The old maxim applies
here, that when the pupil is ready the teacher is found waiting, and he
passes on to know a truth hitherto hidden because he lacked either the
aptitude or the desire.

All is mystery as of course, but mystification is another thing, and the
tendency to befog a theme which needs to be clarified, is to be
regretted. Here

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

lies, perhaps, the real reason for the feeling of resentment against the
idea of a Secret Doctrine, and one must admit that it is not without
justification. For example, we are told that behind the age-long
struggle of man to know the truth there exists a hidden fraternity of
initiates, adepts in esoteric lore, known to themselves but not to the
world, who have had in their keeping, through the centuries, the high
truths which they permit to be dimly adumbrated in the popular faiths,
but which the rest of the race are too obtuse, even yet, to grasp save
in an imperfect and limited degree. These hidden sages, it would seem,
look upon our eager aspiring humanity much like the patient masters of
an idiot school, watching it go on forever seeking without finding,
while they sit in seclusion keeping the keys of the occult. <span
id="fr_48"></span>[1](#fn_48) All of which would be very wonderful, if
true. It is, however, only one more of those fascinating fictions with
which mystery-mongers entertain themselves, and deceive others. Small
wonder

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

that thinking men turn from such fanciful folly with mingled feelings of
pity and disgust. Sages there have been in every land and time, and
their lofty wisdom has the unity which inheres in all high human
thought, but that there is now, or has ever been, a conscious, much less
a continuous, fellowship of superior souls holding as secrets truths
denied to their fellow-men, verges upon the absurd.

Indeed, what is called the Secret Doctrine differs not one whit from
what has been taught openly and earnestly, so far as such truth can be
taught in words or pictured in symbols, by the highest minds of almost
every land and language. The difference lies less in what is taught than
in the way in which it is taught; not so much in matter as in method.
Also, we must not forget that, with few exceptions, the men who have led
our race farthest along the way toward the Mount of Vision, have not
been men who learned their lore from any coterie of esoteric experts,
but, rather, men who told in song what they had been taught in
sorrow—initiates into eternal truth, to be sure, but by the grace of God
and the divine right of genius! <span id="fr_49"></span>[1](#fn_49)
Seers, sages,

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

mystics, saints—these are they who, having sought in sincerity, found in
reality, and the memory of them is a kind of religion. Some of them,
like Pythagoras, were trained for their quest in the schools of the
Secret Doctrine, but others went their way alone, though never
unattended, and, led by "the vision splendid," they came at last to the
gate and passed into the City.

Why, then, it may be asked, speak of such a thing as the Secret Doctrine
at all, since it were better named the Open Secret of the world? For two
reasons, both of which have been intimated: first, in the olden times
unwonted knowledge of any kind was a very dangerous possession, and the
truths of science and philosophy, equally with religious ideas other
than those in vogue among the multitude, had to seek the protection of
obscurity. If this necessity gave designing priestcraft its opportunity,
it nevertheless offered the security and silence needed by the thinker
and seeker after truth in dark

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

times. Hence there arose in the ancient world, wherever the human mind
was alive and spiritual, systems of exoteric and esoteric instruction;
that is, of truth taught openly and truth concealed. Disciples were
advanced from the outside to the inside of this divine philosophy, as we
have seen, by degrees of initiation. Whereas, by symbols, dark sayings,
and dramatic ritual the novice received only hints of what was later
made plain.

Second, this hidden teaching may indeed be described as the open secret
of the world, because it is open, yet understood only by those fit to
receive it. What kept it hidden was no arbitrary restriction, but only a
lack of insight and fineness of mind to appreciate and assimilate it.
Nor could it be otherwise; and this is as true today as ever it was in
the days of the Mysteries, and so it will be until whatever is to be the
end of mortal things. Fitness for the finer truths cannot be conferred;
it must be developed. Without it the teachings of the sages are enigmas
that seem unintelligible, if not contradictory. In so far, then, as the
discipline of initiation, and its use of art in drama and symbol, help
toward purity of soul and spiritual awakening, by so much do they
prepare men for the truth; by so much and no further. So that, the
Secret Doctrine, whether as taught by the ancient Mysteries or by modern
Masonry, is less a doctrine than a

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

discipline; a method of organized spiritual culture, and as such has a
place and a ministry among men.

#### II

Perhaps the greatest student in this field of esoteric teaching and
method, certainly the greatest now living, is Arthur Edward Waite, to
whom it is a pleasure to pay tribute. By nature a symbolist, if not a
sacramentalist, he found in such studies a task for which he was almost
ideally fitted by temperament, training, and genius. Engaged in
business, but not absorbed by it, years of quiet, leisurely toil have
made him master of the vast literature and lore of his subject, to the
study of which he brought a religious nature, the accuracy and skill of
a scholar, a sureness and delicacy of insight at once sympathetic and
critical, the soul of a poet, and a patience as untiring as it is
rewarding; qualities rare indeed, and still more rarely blended.
Prolific but seldom prolix, he writes with grace, ease, and lucidity,
albeit in a style often opulent, and touched at times with lights and
jewels from old alchemists, antique liturgies, remote and haunting
romance, secret orders of initiation, and other recondite sources not
easily traced. Much learning and many kinds of wisdom are in his pages,
and withal an air of serenity, of tolerance; and if he is of those

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

who turn down another street when miracles are performed in the
neighborhood, it is because, having found the inner truth, he asks for
no sign.

Always he writes in the conviction that all great subjects bring us back
to the one subject which is alone great, and that scholarly criticisms,
folk-lore, and deep philosophy are little less than useless if they fall
short of directing us to our true end—the attainment of that living
Truth which is about us everywhere. He conceives of our mortal life as
one eternal Quest of that living Truth, taking many phases and forms,
yet ever at heart the same aspiration, to trace which he has made it his
labor and joy to essay. Through all his pages he is following out the
tradition of this Quest, in its myriad aspects, especially since the
Christian era, disfigured though it has been at times by superstition,
and distorted at others by bigotry, but still, in what guise soever,
containing as its secret the meaning of the life of man from his birth
to his reunion with God who is his Goal. And the result is a series of
volumes noble in form, united in aim, unique in wealth of revealing
beauty, and of unequalled worth. <span id="fr_50"></span>[1](#fn_50)

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

Beginning as far back as 1886, Waite issued his study of the *Mysteries
of Magic*, a digest of the writings of Eliphas Levi, to whom Albert Pike
was more indebted than he let us know. Then followed the *Real History
of the Rosicrucians*, which traces, as far as any mortal may trace, the
thread of fact whereon is strung the romance of a fraternity the very
existence of which has been doubted and denied by turns. Like all his
work, it bears the impress of knowledge from the actual sources,
betraying his extraordinary learning and his exceptional experience in
this kind of inquiry. Of the Quest in its distinctively Christian
aspect, he has written in *The Hidden Church of the Holy Graal*; a work
of rare beauty, of bewildering richness, written in a style which,
partaking of the quality of the story told, is not at all after the
manner of these days. But the Graal Legend is only one aspect of the
old-world sacred Quest, uniting the symbols of chivalry with Christian
faith. Masonry is another; and no one may ever hope to write of *The
Secret Tradition in Masonry* with more insight and charm, or a touch
more sure and revealing, than this gracious student for whom Masonry
perpetuates the instituted

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Mysteries of
antiquity, with much else derived from innumerable store-houses of
treasure. His last work is a survey of *The Secret Doctrine in Israel*,
being a study of the *Zohar*, <span id="fr_51"></span>[1](#fn_51) or
Hebrew "Book of Splendor," a feat for which no Hebrew scholar has had
the heart. This Bible of Kabbalism is indeed so confused and confusing
that only a "golden dustman" would have had the patience to sift out its
gems from the mountain of dross, and attempt to reduce its
wide-weltering chaos to order. Even Waite, with all his gift of research
and narration, finds little more than gleams of dawn in a dim forest,
brilliant vapors, and glints that tell by their very perversity and
strangeness.

Whether this age-old legend of the Quest be woven about the Cup of
Christ, a Lost Word, or a design left unfinished by the death of a
Master Builder, it has always these things in common: first, the
memorials of a great *loss* which has befallen humanity by sin, making
our race a pilgrim host ever in search; second, the intimation that what
was lost still exists somewhere in time and the world, although

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

deeply buried; third, the faith that it will ultimately be found and the
vanished glory restored; fourth, the substitution of something temporary
and less than the best, albeit never in a way to adjourn the quest;
fifth, and more rarely, the felt presence of that which was lost under
veils close to the hands of all. What though it take many forms, from
the pathetic pilgrimage of the *Wandering Jew* to the journey to
fairyland in quest of *The Blue Bird*, it is ever and always the same.
These are but so many symbols of the fact that men are made of one blood
and born to one need; that they should seek the Lord, if haply they
might feel after Him, and find Him, though He is not far from every one
of us; for in Him we live and move and have our being. <span
id="fr_52"></span>[1](#fn_52)

What, then, is the Secret Doctrine, of which this seer-like scholar has
written with so many improvisations of eloquence and emphasis, and of
which each of us is in quest? What, indeed, but that which all the world
is seeking—knowledge of Him whom to know aright is the fulfillment of
every human need: the kinship of the soul with God; the life of purity,
honor, and piety demanded by that high heredity; the unity and
fellowship of the race in duty and destiny; and the faith that the soul
is

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

deathless as God its Father is deathless! Now to accept this faith as a
mere philosophy is one thing, but to realize it as an experience of the
innermost heart is another and a deeper thing. *No man knows the Secret
Doctrine until it has become the secret of his soul, the reigning
reality of his thought, the inspiration of his acts, the form and color
and glory of his life*. Happily, owing to the growth of the race in
spiritual intelligence and power, the highest truth is no longer held as
a sacred secret. Still, if art has efficacy to surprise and reveal the
elusive Spirit of Truth, when truth is dramatically presented it is made
vivid and impressive, strengthening the faith of the strongest and
bringing a ray of heavenly light to many a baffled seeker.

Ever the Quest goes on, though it is permitted some of us to believe
that the Lost Word has been found, in the only way in which it can ever
be found—even in the life of Him who was "the Word made flesh," who
dwelt among us and whose grace and beauty we know. Of this Quest Masonry
is an aspect, continuing the high tradition of humanity, asking men to
unite in the search for the thing most worth finding, that each may
share the faith of all. Apart from its rites, there is no mystery in
Masonry, save the mystery of all great and

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

simple things. So far from being hidden or occult, its glory lies in its
openness, and its emphasis upon the realities which are to the human
world what light and air are to nature. Its mystery is of so great a
kind that it is easily overlooked; its secret almost too simple to be
found out.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_46"></span>[57:1](bui06.htm#fr_46) Matt. 13:10, 11.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[58:1](bui06.htm#fr_47) *Unwritten Sayings of
Our Lord*, David Smith, vii.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[60:1](bui06.htm#fr_48) By occultism is meant
the belief in, and the claim to be able to use, a certain range of
forces neither natural, nor, technically, supernatural, but more
properly to be called preternatural—often, though by no means always,
for evil or selfish ends. Some extend the term occultism to cover
mysticism and the spiritual life generally, but that is not a legitimate
use of either word. Occultism seeks to get; mysticism to give. The one
is audacious and seclusive, the other humble and open; and if we are not
to end in blunderland we must not confound the two (*Mysticism*, by E.
Underhill, part i, chap. vii).

<span id="fn_49"></span>[61:1](bui06.htm#fr_49) Much time would have
been saved, and not a little confusion avoided, had this obvious fact
been kept in mind. Even so charming a book as *Jesus, the Last Great
Initiate*, by Schure—not to speak of *The Great Work and Mystic
Masonry*—is clearly, though not intentionally, misleading. Of a piece
with this is the effort, apparently deliberate and concerted, to rob the
Hebrew race of all <span id="page_62">p. 62</span> spiritual
originality, as witness so able a work as *Our Own Religion in Persia*,
by Mills, to name no other. Our own religion? Assuredly, if by that is
meant the one great, universal religion of humanity. But the sundering
difference between the Bible and any other book that speaks to mankind
about God and Life and Death, sets the Hebrew race apart as supreme in
its religious genius, as the Greeks were in philosophical acumen and
artistic power, and the Romans in executive skill. Leaving all theories
of inspiration out of account, facts are facts, and the Bible has no
peer in the literature of mankind.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[65:1](bui06.htm#fr_50) Some there are who think
that much of the best work of Mr. Waite is in his poetry, of which there
are two volumes, *A Book of Mystery and Vision*, and *Strange Houses of
Sleep*. There one meets a fine spirit, alive to the glory of the world
and all that charms the soul and sense of man, yet seeing past these;
rich and <span id="page_66">p. 66</span> significant thought so closely
wedded to emotion that each seems either. Other books not to be omitted
are his slender volume of aphorisms, *Steps to the Crown*, his *Life of
Saint-Martin*, and his *Studies in Mysticism*; for what he touches he
adorns.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[67:1](bui06.htm#fr_51) Even the *Jewish
Encyclopedia*, and such scholars as Zunz, Graetz, Luzzatto, Jost, and
Munk avoid this jungle, as well they might, remembering the legend of
the four sages in "the enclosed garden:" one of whom looked around and
died; another lost his reason; a third tried to destroy the garden; and
only one came out with his wits. See *The Cabala*, by Pick, and *The
Kabbalah Unveiled*, by MacGregor.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[68:1](bui06.htm#fr_52) Acts 17:26-28.1

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. The Collegia](bui07)
