[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bui08)  [Next](bui10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002J9HH0G/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Builders*, by Joseph Fort Newton, \[1914\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span> <span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

*Noe person (of what degree soever) shalbee accepted a Free Mason,
unless hee shall have a lodge of five Free Masons at least; whereof one
to be a master, or warden, of that limitt, or division, wherein such
Lodge shalbee kept, and another of the trade of Free Masonry.*

*That noe person shalbee accepted a Free Mason, but such as are of able
body, honest parentage, good reputation, and observers of the laws of
the land.*

*That noe person shalbee accepted a Free Mason, or know the secrets of
said Society, until hee bath first taken the oath of secrecy hereafter
following: "I, A. B., doe in the presence of Almighty God, and my
fellows, and brethren here present, promise and declare, that I will not
at any time hereafter, by any act or circumstance whatsoever, directly
or indirectly, publish, discover, reveal, or make known any of the
secrets, privileges, or counsels, of the fraternity or fellowship of
Free Masonry, which at this time, or any time hereafter, shalbee made
known unto mee soe helpe mee God, and the holy contents of this
booke*."—HARLEIAN MS, 1600-1650

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

### CHAPTER II

### Fellowcrafts

#### I

HAVING followed the Free-masons over a long period of history, it is now
in order to give some account of the ethics, organization, laws,
emblems, and workings of their lodges. Such a study is at once easy and
difficult by turns, owing to the mass of material, and to the further
fact that in the nature of things much of the work of a secret order is
not, and has never been, matter for record. By this necessity, not a
little must remain obscure, but it is hoped that even those not of the
order may derive a definite notion of the principles and practices of
the old Craft-masonry, from which the Masonry of today is descended. At
least, such a sketch will show that, from times of old, the order of
Masons has been a teacher of morality, charity, and truth, unique in its
genius, noble in its spirit, and benign in its influence.

Taking its ethical teaching first, we have only to turn to the *Old
Charges* or *Constitutions* of the

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

order, with their quaint blending of high truth and homely craft-law, to
find the moral basis of universal Masonry. These old documents were a
part of the earliest ritual of the order, and were recited or read to
every young man at the time of his initiation as an Entered Apprentice.
As such, they rehearsed the legends, laws, and ethics of the craft for
his information, and, as we have seen, they insisted upon the antiquity
of the order, as well as its service to mankind—a fact peculiar to
Masonry, for *no other order has ever claimed such a legendary or
traditional history*. Having studied that legendary record and its value
as history, it remains to examine the moral code laid before the
candidate who, having taken a solemn oath of loyalty and secrecy, was
instructed in his duties as an Apprentice and his conduct as a man. What
that old code lacked in subtlety is more than made up in simplicity, and
it might all be stated in the words of the Prophet: "To do justly, to
love mercy, and to walk humbly before God,"—the old eternal moral law,
founded in faith, tried by time, and approved as valid for men of every
clime, creed, and condition.

Turning to the *Regius MS*, we find fifteen "points" or rules set forth
for the guidance of Fellowcrafts, and as many for the rule of Master
Masons. <span id="fr_82"></span>[1](#fn_82) Later the number was reduced
to nine,

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

but so far from being an abridgment, it was in fact an elaboration of
the original code; and by the time we reach the *Roberts* and *Watson
MSS* a similar set of requirements for Apprentices had been adopted—or
rather recorded, for they had been in use long before. It will make for
clearness if we reverse the order and take the Apprentice charge first,
as it shows what manner of men were admitted to the order. No man was
made a Mason save by his own free choice, and he had to prove himself a
freeman of lawful age, of legitimate birth, of sound body, of clean
habits, and of good repute, else he was not eligible. Also, he had to
bind himself by solemn oath to serve under rigid rules for a period of
seven years, vowing absolute obedience—for the old-time Lodge was a
school in which young

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

men studied, not only the art of building and its symbolism, but the
seven sciences as well. At first the Apprentice was little more than a
servant, doing the most menial work, his period of endenture being at
once a test of his character and a training for his work. If he proved
himself trustworthy and proficient, his wages were increased, albeit his
rules of conduct were never relaxed. How austere the discipline was may
be seen from a summary of its rules:

Confessing faith in God, an Apprentice vowed to honor the Church, the
State, and the Master under whom he served, agreeing not to absent
himself from the service of the order, by day or night, save with the
license of the Master. He must be honest, truthful, upright, faithful in
keeping the secrets of the craft, or the confidence of the Master, or of
any Free-mason, when communicated to him as such. Above all he must be
chaste, never committing adultery or fornication, and he must not marry,
or contract himself to any woman, during his apprenticeship. He must be
obedient to the Master without argument or murmuring, respectful to all
Free-masons, courteous, avoiding obscene or uncivil speech, free from
slander, dissension, or dispute. He must not haunt or frequent any
tavern or ale-house, or so much as go into them except it be upon

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

an errand of the Master or with his consent, using neither cards, dice,
nor any unlawful game, "Christmas time excepted." He must not steal
anything even to the value of a penny, or suffer it to be done, or
shield anyone guilty of theft, but report the fact to the Master with
all speed.

After seven long years the Apprentice brought his masterpiece to the
Lodge—or, in earlier times, to the annual Assembly <span
id="fr_83"></span>[1](#fn_83)—and on strict trial and due examination
was declared a Master. Thereupon he ceased to be a pupil and servant,
passed into the yanks of F'ellowcrafts, and became a free man capable,
for the first time in his life, of earning his living and choosing his
own employer. Having selected a Mark <span id="fr_84"></span>[2](#fn_84)
by which his work could be identified,

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

he could then take his kit of tools and travel as a Master of his art,
receiving the wages of a Master—not, however, without first reaffirming
his vows of honesty, truthfulness, fidelity, temperance, and chastity,
and assuming added obligations to uphold the honor of the order. Again
he was sworn not to lay bare, nor to tell to any man what he heard or
saw done in the Lodge, and to keep the secrets of a fellow Mason as
inviolably as his own—unless such a secret imperiled the good name of
the craft. He furthermore promised to act as mediator between his Master
and his Fellows, and to deal justly with both parties. If he saw a
Fellow hewing a stone which he was in a fair way to spoil, he must help
him without loss of time, if able to do so, that the whole work be not
ruined. Or if he met a fellow Mason in distress, or sorrow, he must aid
him so far as lay within his power. In short, he must live in justice
and honor with all men, especially with the members of the order, "that
the bond of mutual charity and love may augment and continue."

Still more binding, if possible, were the vows of a Fellowcraft when he
was elevated to the dignity of Master of the Lodge or of the Work. Once

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

more he took solemn oath to keep the secrets of the order unprofaned,
and more than one old MS quotes the Golden Rule as the law of the
Master's office. He must be steadfast, trusty, and true; pay his Fellows
truly; take no bribe; and as a judge stand upright. He must attend the
annual Assembly, unless disabled by illness, if within fifty miles—the
distance varying, however, in different MSS. He must be careful in
admitting Apprentices, taking only such as are fit both physically and
morally, and keeping none without assurance that he would stay seven
years in order to learn his craft. He must be patient with his pupils,
instruct them diligently, encourage them with increased pay, and not
permit them to work at night, "unless in the pursuit of knowledge, which
shall be a sufficient excuse." He must be wise and discreet, and
undertake no work he cannot both perform and complete equally to the
profit of his employer and the craft. Should a Fellow be overtaken by
error, he must be gentle, skilful, and forgiving, seeking rather to help
than to hurt, abjuring scandal and bitter words. He must not attempt to
supplant a Master of the Lodge or of the Work, or belittle his work, but
recommend it and assist him in improving it. He must be liberal in
charity to those in need, helping a Fellow who has fallen upon evil lot,
giving him work and

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

wages for at least a fortnight, or if he has no work, "relieve him with
money to defray his reasonable charges to the next Lodge." For the rest,
he must in all ways act in a manner befitting the nobility of his office
and his order.

Such were some of the laws of the moral life by which the old
Craft-masonry sought to train its members, not only to be good workmen,
but to be good and true men, serving their Fellows; to which, as the
Rawlinson MS tells us, "divers new articles have been added by the free
choice and good consent and best advice of the Perfect and True Masons,
Masters, and Brethren." If, as an ethic of life, these laws seem simple
and rudimentary, they are none the less fundamental, and they remain to
this day the only gate and way by which those must enter who would go up
to the House of the Lord. As such they are great and saving things to
lay to heart and act upon, and if Masonry taught nothing else its title
to the respect of mankind would be clear. They have a double aspect:
first, the building of a spiritual man upon immutable moral foundations;
and second, the great and simple religious faith in the Fatherhood of
God, the Brotherhood of man, and the Life Eternal, taught by Masonry
from its earliest history to this good day. Morality and theistic
religion—upon these two rocks Masonry

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

has always stood, and they are the only basis upon which man may ever
hope to rear the spiritual edifice of his life, even to the capstone
thereof.

#### II

Imagine, now, a band of these builders, bound together by solemn vows
and mutual interests, journeying over the most abominable roads toward
the site selected for an abbey or cathedral. Traveling was attended with
many dangers, and the company was therefore always well armed, the
disturbed state of the country rendering such a precaution necessary.
Tools and provisions belonging to the party were carried on pack-horses
or mules, placed in the center of the convoy, in charge of keepers. The
company consisted of a Master Mason directing the work, Fellows of the
craft, and Apprentices serving their time. Besides these we find
subordinate laborers, not of the Lodge though in it, termed layers,
setters, tilers, and so forth. Masters and Fellows wore a distinctive
costume, which remained almost unchanged in its fashion for no less than
three centuries. <span id="fr_85"></span>[1](#fn_85) Withal, it was a
serious

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

company, but in nowise solemn, and the tedium of the journey was no
doubt beguiled by song, story, and the humor incident to travel.

"Wherever they came," writes Mr. Hope in his *Essay on Architecture*,
"in the suite of missionaries, or were called by the natives, or arrived
of their own accord, to seek employment, they appeared headed by a chief
surveyor, who governed the whole troop, and named one man out of every
ten, under the name of warden, to overlook the other nine, set
themselves to building temporary huts for their habitation around the
spot where the work was to be carried on, regularly organized their
different departments, fell to work, sent for fresh supplies of their
brethren as the object demanded, and, when all was finished, again they
raised their encampment, and went elsewhere to undertake other work."

Here we have a glimpse of the methods of the Free-masons, of their
organization, almost military in its order and dispatch, and of their
migratory life; although they had a more settled life than this ungainly
sentence allows, for long time was required

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

for the building of a great cathedral. Sometimes, it would seem, they
made special contracts with the inhabitants of a town where they were to
erect a church, containing such stipulations as, that a Lodge covered
with tiles should be built for their accommodation, and that every
laborer should be provided with a white apron of a peculiar kind of
leather and gloves to shield the hands from stone and slime. <span
id="fr_86"></span>[1](#fn_86) At all events, the picture we have is that
of a little community or village of workmen, living in rude dwellings,
with a Lodge room at the center adjoining a slowly rising cathedral—the
Master busy with his plans and the care of his craft; Fellows shaping
stones for walls, arches, or spires; Apprentices fetching tools or
mortar, and when necessary, tending the sick, and performing

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

all offices of a similar nature. Always the Lodge was the center of
interest and activity, a place of labor, of study, of devotion, as well
as the common room for the social life of the order. Every morning, as
we learn from the Fabric Rolls of York Minster, began with devotion,
followed by the directions of the Master for the work of the day, which
no doubt included study of the laws of the art, plans of construction,
and the mystical meaning of ornaments and emblems. Only Masons were in
attendance at such times, the Lodge being closed to all others, and
guarded by a Tiler <span id="fr_87"></span>[1](#fn_87) against "the
approach of cowans <span id="fr_88"></span>[2](#fn_88) and
eavesdroppers." Thus the

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

work of each day was begun, moving forward amidst the din and litter of
the hours, until the craft was called from labor to rest and
refreshment; and thus a cathedral was uplifted as a monument to the
Order, albeit the names of the builders are faded and lost. Employed for
years on the same building, and living together in the Lodge, it is not
strange that Free-masons came to know and love one another, and to have
a feeling of loyalty to their craft, unique, peculiar, and enduring.
Traditions of fun and frolic, of song and feast and gala-day, have
floated down to us, telling of a comradeship as joyous as it was
genuine. If their life had hardship and vicissitude, it had also its
grace and charm of friendship, of sympathy, service, and community of
interest, and the joy that comes of devotion to a high and noble art.

When a Mason wished to leave one Lodge and go elsewhere to work, as he
was free to do when he desired, he had no difficulty in making himself
known

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

to the men of his craft by certain signs, grips, and words. <span
id="fr_89"></span>[1](#fn_89) Such tokens of recognition were necessary
to men who traveled afar in those uncertain days, especially when
references or other means of identification were ofttimes impossible.
All that many people knew about the order was that its members had a
code of secret signs, and that no Mason need be friendless or alone when
other Masons were within sight or hearing; so that the very name of the
craft came to stand for any mode of hidden recognition. Steele, in the
*Tatler*, speaks of a class of people who have "their signs and tokens
like Free-masons."

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> There were more
than one of these signs and tokens, as we are more than once told in the
*Harleian MS*, for example, which speaks of "words and signs." What they
were may not be here discussed, but it is safe to say that a Master
Mason of the Middle Ages, were he to return from the land of shadows,
could perhaps make himself known as such in a Fellowcraft Lodge of
today. No doubt some things would puzzle him at first, but he would
recognize the officers of the Lodge, its form, its emblems, its great
altar Light, and its moral truth taught in symbols. Besides, he could
tell us, if so minded, much that we should like to learn about the craft
in the olden times, its hidden mysteries, the details of its rites, and
the meaning of its symbols when the poetry of building was yet alive.

#### III

This brings us to one of the most hotly debated questions in Masonic
history—the question as to the number and nature of the degrees made use
of in the old craft lodges. Hardly any other subject has so deeply
engaged the veteran archaeologists of the order, and while it ill
becomes any one glibly to decide such an issue, it is at least permitted
us, after studying all of value that has been written on both sides, to
sum up what seems to be the truth arrived

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

at. <span id="fr_90"></span>[1](#fn_90) While such a thing as a written
record of an ancient degree—aside from the *Old Charges*, which formed a
part of the earliest rituals—is unthinkable, we are not left altogether
to the mercy of conjecture in a matter so important. Cesare Cantu tells
us that the Comacine Masters "were called together in the Loggie by a
grand-master to treat of affairs common to the order, to receive
novices, and *confer superior degrees on others*." <span
id="fr_91"></span>[2](#fn_91) Evidence of a sort similar is abundant,
but not a little confusion will be avoided if the following
considerations be kept in mind:

First, that during its purely operative period the ritual of Masonry was
naturally less formal and ornate than it afterwards became, from the
fact that its very life was a kind of ritual and its symbols were always
visibly present in its labor. By the same token, as it ceased to be
purely operative, and others not actually architects were admitted to
its fellowship, of necessity its rites became more

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

formal—"*very formall*," as Dugdale said in 1686, <span
id="fr_92"></span>[1](#fn_92)—portraying in ceremony what had long been
present in its symbolism and practice.

Second, that with the decline of the old religious art of building—for
such it was in very truth—some of its symbolism lost its luster, its
form surviving but its meaning obscured, if not entirely faded. Who
knows, for example—even with the Klein essay on *The Great Symbol* <span
id="fr_93"></span>[2](#fn_93) in hand—what Pythagoras meant by his
lesser and greater Tetractys? That they were more than mathematical
theorems is plain, yet even Plutarch missed their meaning. In the same
way, some of the emblems in our Lodges are veiled, or else wear meanings
invented after the fact, in lieu of deeper meanings hidden, or but dimly
discerned. Albeit, the great emblems still speak in truths simple and
eloquent, and remain to refine, instruct, and exalt.

Third, that when Masonry finally became a purely speculative or
symbolical fraternity, no longer an order of practical builders, its
ceremonial inevitably became more elaborate and imposing—its old habit
and custom, as well as its symbols and teachings, being enshrined in its
ritual. More than this, knowing how "Time the white god makes all things

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

holy, and what is old becomes religion," it is no wonder that its
tradition became every year more authoritative; so that the tendency was
not, as many have imagined, to add to its teaching, but to preserve and
develop its rich deposit of symbolism, and to avoid any break with what
had come down from the past.

Keeping in mind this order of evolution in the history of Masonry, we
may now state the facts, so far as they are known, as to its early
degrees; dividing it into two periods, the Operative and the
Speculative. <span id="fr_94"></span>[1](#fn_94) An Apprentice in the
olden days was "entered" as a novice of the craft, first, as a purely
business proceeding, not unlike our modern indentures, or articles.
Then, or shortly afterwards—probably

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

at the annual Assembly—there was a ceremony of initiation making him a
Mason—including an oath, the recital of the craft legend as re-corded in
the *Old Charges*, instruction in moral conduct and deportment as a
Mason, and the imparting of certain secrets. At first this degree,
although comprising secrets, does not seem to have been mystic at all,
but a simple ceremony intended to impress upon the mind of the youth the
high moral life required of him. Even Guild-masonry had such a rite of
initiation, as Hallam remarks, and if we may trust the Findel version of
the ceremony used among the German Stone-masons, it was very like the
first degree as we now have it—though one has always the feeling that it
was embellished in the light of later time. <span
id="fr_95"></span>[1](#fn_95)

So far there is no dispute, but the question is whether any other degree
was known in the early lodges. Both the probabilities of the case,
together with such facts as we have, indicate that there was another and
higher degree. For, if all the secrets of the order were divulged to an
Apprentice, he could, after working four years, and just when he was
becoming valuable, run away, give himself out as a Fellow, and receive
work and wages as such. If there was only one set of secrets, this
deception

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

might be practiced to his own profit and the injury of the craft—unless,
indeed, we revise all our ideas held hitherto, and say that his
initiation did not take place until he was out of his articles. This,
however, would land us in worse difficulties later on. Knowing the
fondness of the men of the Middle Ages for ceremony, it is hardly
conceivable that the day of all days when an Apprentice, having worked
for seven long years, acquired the status of a Fellow, was allowed to go
unmarked, least of all in an order of men to whom building was at once
an art and an allegory. So that, not only the [exigencies](errata.htm#6)
of his occupation, but the importance of the day to a young man, and the
spirit of the order, justify such a conclusion.

Have we any evidence tending to confirm this inference? Most certainly;
so much so that it is not easy to interpret the hints given in the *Old
Charges* upon any other theory. For one thing, in nearly all the MSS,
from the *Regius Poem* down, we are told of two rooms or resorts, the
Chamber and the Lodge—sometimes called the Bower and the Hall—and the
Mason was charged to keep the "counsells" proper to each place. This
would seem to imply that an Apprentice had access to the Chamber or
Bower, but not to the Lodge itself—at least not at all times. It may be
argued that the "other counsells"

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

referred to were merely technical secrets, but that is to give the case
away, since they were secrets held and communicated as such. By natural
process, as the order declined and actual building ceased, *its
technical secrets became ritual secrets*, though they must always have
had symbolical meanings. Further, while we have record of only one
oath—which does not mean that there *was* only one—signs, tokens, and
words are nearly always spoken of in the plural; and if the secrets of a
Fellowcraft were purely technical—which some of us do not believe—they
were at least accompanied and protected by certain signs, tokens, and
passwords. From this it is clear that the advent of an Apprentice into
the ranks of a Fellow was in fact a degree, or contained the essentials
of a degree, including a separate set. of signs and secrets.

When we pass to the second period, and men of wealth and learning who
were not actual architects began to enter the order—whether as patrons
of the art or as students and mystics attracted by its symbolism—other
evidences of change appear. They, of course, were not required to serve
a seven year apprenticeship, and they would naturally be Fellows, not
Masters, because they were in no sense masters of the craft. Were these
Fellows made acquainted with the secrets of an Apprentice? If

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

so, then the two degrees were either conferred in one evening, or
else—what seems to have been the fact—they were welded into one; since
we hear of men being made Masons in a single evening. <span
id="fr_96"></span>[1](#fn_96) Customs differed, no doubt, in different
Lodges, some of which were chiefly operative, or made up of men who had
been working Masons, with only a sprinkling of men not workmen who had
been admitted; while others were purely symbolical Lodges as far back as
1645. Naturally in Lodges of the first kind the two degrees were kept
separate, and in the second they were merged—the one degree becoming all
the while more elaborate. Gradually the men who had been Operative
Masons became fewer in the Lodges—chiefly those of higher position, such
as master builders, architects, and so on—until the order became a
purely speculative fraternity, having no longer any trade object in
view.

Not only so, but throughout this period of transition, and even earlier,
we hear intimations of "the Master's Part," and those hints increase in
number as the office of Master of the Work lost its practical aspect
after the cathedral-building period. What was the Master's Part?
Unfortunately, while the number of degrees may be indicated, their
nature and details cannot be discussed without grave indiscretion;

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

but nothing is plainer than that *we need not go outside Masonry itself
to find the materials out of which all three degrees, as they now exist,
were developed*. <span id="fr_97"></span>[1](#fn_97) Even the French
Companionage, or Sons of Solomon, had the legend of the Third Degree
long before 1717, when some imagine it to have been invented. If little
or no mention of it is found among English Masons before that date, that
is no reason for thinking that it was unknown. *Not until 1841 was it
known to have been a secret of the Companionage in Prance, so deeply and
carefully was it hidden*. <span id="fr_98"></span>[2](#fn_98) Where so
much is dim one may not be dogmatic, but what seems to have taken place
in 1717 was, not the *addition* of a third degree

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

made out of whole cloth, but the *conversion* of two degrees into three.

That is to say, Masonry is too great an institution to have been made in
a day, much less by a few men, but was a slow evolution through long
time, unfolding its beauty as it grew. Indeed, it was like one of its
own cathedrals upon which one generation of builders wrought and
vanished, and another followed, until, amidst vicissitudes of time and
change, of decline and revival, the order itself became a temple of
Freedom and Fraternity—its history a disclosure of its innermost soul in
the natural process of its transition from actual architecture to its
"more noble and glorious purpose." For, since what was evolved from
Masonry must always have been involved in it—not something alien added
to it from extraneous sources, as some never tire of trying to show—we
need not go outside the order itself to learn what Masonry is, certainly
not to discover its motif and its genius; its later and more elaborate
form being only an expansion and exposition of its inherent nature and
teaching. Upon this fact the present study insists with all emphasis, as
over against those who go hunting in every odd nook and corner to find
whence Masonry came, and where it got its symbols and degrees.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_82"></span>[128:1](bui09.htm#fr_82) Our present craft
nomenclature is all wrong; the old order was first Apprentice, then
Master, then Fellowcraft—mastership being, <span id="page_129">p.
129</span> not a degree conferred, but a reward of skill as a workman
and of merit as a man. The confusion today is due, no doubt, to the
custom of the German Guilds, where a Fellowcraft had to serve an
additional two years as a journeyman before becoming a Master. No such
restriction was known in England. Indeed, the reverse was true, and it
was not the Fellowcraft but the Apprentice who prepared his masterpiece,
and if it was accepted, he became a Master. Having won his mastership,
he was entitled to become a Fellowcraft—that is, a peer and fellow of
the fraternity which hitherto he had only served. Also, we must
distinguish between a Master and the Master of the Work, now represented
by the Master of the Lodge. Between a Master and the Master of the Work
there was no difference, of course, except an accidental one; they were
both Masters and Fellows. Any Master (or Fellow) could become a Master
of the Work at any time, provided he was of sufficient skill and had the
luck to be chosen as such either by the employer, or the Lodge, or both.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[131:1](bui09.htm#fr_83) The older MSS indicate
that initiations took place, for the most part, at the annual
Assemblies, which were bodies not unlike the Grand Lodges of today,
presided over by a President—a Grand Master in fact, though not in name.
Democratic in government, as Masonry has always been, they received
Apprentices, examined candidates for mastership, tried cases, adjusted
disputes, and regulated the craft; but they were also occasions of
festival and social good will. At a later time they declined, and the
functions of initiation more and more reverted to the Lodges.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[131:2](bui09.htm#fr_84) The subject of Mason's
Marks is most interesting, particularly with reference to the origin and
growth of Gothic architecture, but too intricate to be entered upon
here. As for example, an essay entitled "Scottish Mason's Marks Compared
with Those of Other Countries," by Prof. T. H. Lewis, *British
Archaeological Association*, 1888, and the theory there advanced that
some great unknown architect introduced Gothic architecture from the
East, as shown by the <span id="page_132">p. 132</span> difference in
Mason's Marks as compared with those of the Norman period. (Also
proceedings of *A. Q. C.*, iii, 65-81.)

<span id="fn_85"></span>[135:1](bui09.htm#fr_85) *History of Masonry*,
Steinbrenner. It consisted of a short black tunic—in summer made of
linen, in winter of wool—open at the sides, with a gorget to which a
hood was attached; round the waist was a leathern girdle, from which
depended a sword and a satchel. Over the tunic was a black scapulary,
similar to the habit of a priest, tucked under the girdle when they were
working, but on holydays allowed to hang down. No doubt this garment
also served as a coverlet at night, as was the custom of the Middle
Ages, sheets and blankets being luxuries enjoyed only by the rich and
titled (*History of Agriculture and Prices* in England, T. Rogers). On
their heads they wore large felt or straw hats, and tight leather
breeches and long boots completed the garb.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[137:1](bui09.htm#fr_86) Gloves were more widely
used in the olden times than now, and the practice of giving them as
presents was common in mediaeval times. Often, when the harvest was
over, gloves were distributed to the laborers who gathered it (*History
of Prices in England*, Rogers), and richly embroidered gloves formed an
offering gladly accepted by princes. Indeed, the bare hand was regarded
as a symbol of hostility, and the gloved hand a token of peace and
goodwill. For Masons, however, the white gloves and apron had meanings
hardly guessed by others, and their symbolism remains to this day with
its simple and eloquent appeal. (See chapter on "Masonic Clothing and
Regalia," in *Things a Freemason Should Know*, by J. W. Crowe, an
interesting article by Rylands, *A. Q. C.*, vol. v, and the delightful
essay on "Gloves," by Dr. Mackey, in his *Symbolism of Freemasonry*.)
Not only the tools of the builder, but his clothing, had moral meaning.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[138:1](bui09.htm#fr_87) *Tiler*—like the word
*cable-tow*—is a word peculiar to the language of Masonry, and means one
who guards the Lodge to see that only Masons are within ear-shot. It
probably derives from the Middle Ages when the makers of tiles for
roofing were also of migratory habits (*History of Prices in England*,
Rogers), and accompanied the Free-masons to perform their share of the
work of covering buildings. Some tiler was appointed to act as sentinel
to keep off intruders, and hence, in course of time, the name of Tiler
came to be applied to any Mason who guarded the Lodge.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[138:2](bui09.htm#fr_88) Much has been written
of the derivation and meaning of the word *cowan*, some finding its
origin in a Greek term meaning "dog." (See "An Inquiry Concerning
Cowans," by D. Ramsay, Review of Freemasonry, vol. i.) But its origin is
still to seek, unless we accept it as an old Scotch word of contempt
(*Dictionary of Scottish Language*, Jamieson). Sir Walter Scott uses it
as such in Rob Roy, "she doesna’ value a Cawmil mair as a cowan" (chap.
xxix). Masons used the word to describe a "dry-diker, one who built
without cement," or a Mason without the word. Unfortunately, we still
have cowans in this sense—men who try to be Masons <span
id="page_139">p. 139</span> without using the cement of brotherly love.
If only they *could* be kept out! Blackstone describes an eavesdropper
as "a common nuisance punishable by fine." Legend says that the old-time
Masons punished such prying persons, who sought to learn their signs and
secrets, by holding them under the eaves until the water ran in at the
neck and out at the heels. What penalty was inflicted in dry weather, we
are not informed. At any rate, they had contempt for a man who tried to
make use of the signs of the craft without knowing its art and ethics.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[140:1](bui09.htm#fr_89) This subject is most
fascinating. Even in primitive ages there seems to have been a kind of
universal sign-language employed, at times, by all peoples. Among widely
separated tribes the signs were very similar, owing, perhaps, to the
fact that they were natural gestures of greeting, of warning, or of
distress. There is intimation of this in the Bible, when the life of
Ben-Hadad was saved by a sign given (I Kings, 20:30-35). Even among the
North American Indians a sign-code of like sort was known (*Indian
Masonry*, R. C. Wright, chap iii). "Mr. Ellis, by means of his knowledge
as a Master Mason, actually passed himself into the sacred part or
adytum of one of the temples of India" (*Anacalypsis*, G. Higgins, vol.
i, 767). See also the experience of Haskett Smith among the Druses,
already referred to (*A. Q. C.*, iv, 11). Kipling has a rollicking story
with the Masonic sign-code for a theme, entitled *The Man Who Would be
King*, and his imagination is positively uncanny. If not a little of the
old sign-language of the race lives to this day in Masonic Lodges, it is
due not only to the exigencies of the craft, but also to the instinct of
the order for the old, the universal, the *human*; its genius for making
use of all the ways and means whereby men may be brought to know and
love and help one another.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[142:1](bui09.htm#fr_90) Once more it is a
pleasure to refer to the transactions of the Quatuor Coronati Lodge of
Research, whose essays and discussions of this issue, as of so many
others, are the best survey of the whole question from all sides. The
paper by J. W. Hughan arguing in behalf of only one degree in the old
time lodges, and a like paper by G. W. Speth in behalf of two degrees,
with the materials for the third, cover the field quite thoroughly and
in full light of all the facts (*A. Q. C.*, vol. x, 127; vol. xi, 47).
As for the Third Degree, that will be considered further along.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[142:2](bui09.htm#fr_91) *Storia di Como*, vol.
i, 440.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[143:1](bui09.htm#fr_92) *Natural History of
Wiltshire*, by John Aubrey, written, but not published, in 1686.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[143:2](bui09.htm#fr_93) *A. Q. C.*, vol. x, 82.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[144:1](bui09.htm#fr_94) Roughly speaking, the
year 1600 may be taken as a date dividing the two periods. Addison,
writing in the *Spectator*, March 1, 1711, draws the following
distinction between a speculative and an operative member of a trade or
profession: "I live in the world rather as a spectator of mankind, than
as one of the species, by which means I have made myself a speculative
statesman, soldier, merchant, and *artisan*, without ever meddling with
any practical part of life." By a Speculative Mason, then, is meant a
man who, though not an actual architect, sought and obtained membership
among Free-masons. Such men, scholars and students, began to enter the
order as early as 1600, if not earlier. If by Operative Mason is meant
one who attached no moral meaning to his tools, there were none such in
the olden time—all Masons, even those in the Guilds, using their tools
as moral emblems in a way quite unknown to builders of our day. ’Tis a
pity that this light of poetry has faded from our toil, and with it the
joy of work.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[145:1](bui09.htm#fr_95) *History of Masonry*,
p. 66.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[148:1](bui09.htm#fr_96) For a single example,
the *Diary* of Elias Ashmole, under date of 1646.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[149:1](bui09.htm#fr_97) Time out of mind it has
been the habit of writers, both within the order and without, to treat
Masonry as though it were a kind of agglomeration of archaic remains and
platitudinous moralizings, made up of the heel-taps of Operative legend
and the fag-ends of Occult lore. Far from it! If this were the fact the
present writer would be the first to admit it, but it is not the fact.
Instead, the idea that an order so noble, so heroic in its history, so
rich in symbolism, so skilfully adjusted, and with so many traces of
remote antiquity, was the creation of pious fraud, or else of an
ingenious conviviality, passes the bounds of credulity and enters the
domain of the absurd. This fact will be further emphasized in the
chapter following, to which those are respectfully referred who go
everywhere else, *except to Masonry itself*, to learn what Masonry is
and how it came to be.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[149:2](bui09.htm#fr_98) *Livre du
Compagnonnage*, by Agricol Perdiguier, 1841. George Sand's novel, *Le
Compagnon du Tour de France*, was published the same year. See full
account of this order in Gould, *History of Masonry*, vol. i, chap. v.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. Accepted Masons](bui10)
