[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bui04)  [Next](bui06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002J9HH0G/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Builders*, by Joseph Fort Newton, \[1914\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span> <span id="page_37">p. 37</span> <span
id="page_38">p. 38</span>

*And so the Quest goes on. And the Quest, as it may be, ends in
attainment—we know not where and when: so long as we can conceive of our
separate existence, the quest goes on—an attainment continued
henceforward. And ever shall the study of the ways which have been
followed by those who have passed in front be a help on our own path*.

*It is well, it is of all things beautiful and perfect, holy and high of
all, to be conscious of the path which does in fine lead thither where.
we seek to go, namely, the goal which is in God. Taking nothing with us
which does not belong to ourselves, leaving nothing behind us that is of
our real selves, we shall find in the great attainment that the
companions of our toil are with us. And the place is the Valley of
Peace*.

—ARTHUR EDWARD WAITE, *The Secret Tradition*.

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

### CHAPTER III

### The Drama of Faith

MAN does not live by bread alone; he lives by Faith, Hope, and Love, and
the first of these was Faith. Nothing in the human story is more
striking than the persistent, passionate, profound protest of man
against death. Even in the earliest time we see him daring to stand
erect at the gates of the grave, disputing its verdict, refusing to let
it have the last word, and making argument in behalf of his soul. For
Emerson, as for Addison, that fact alone was proof enough of
immortality, as revealing a universal intuition of eternal life. Others
may not be so easily convinced, but no man who has the heart of a man
can fail to be impressed by the ancient, heroic faith of his race.

Nowhere has this faith ever been more vivid or victorious than among the
old Egyptians. <span id="fr_34"></span>[1](#fn_34.md) In the

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

ancient *Book of the Dead*—which is, indeed, a Book of
Resurrection—occur the words: "The soul to heaven; the body to earth;"
and that first faith is our faith today. Of King Unas, who lived in the
third millennium, it is written: "Behold, thou hast not gone as one
dead, but as one living." Nor has any one in our day set forth this
faith with more simple eloquence than the Hymn to Osiris, in the Papyrus
of Hunefer. So in the Pyramid Texts the dead are spoken of as Those Who
Ascend, the Imperishable Ones who shine as stars, and the gods are
invoked to witness the death of the King "Dawning as a Soul." There is
deep prophecy, albeit touched with poignant pathos, in these broken
exclamations written on the pyramid walls:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Thou diest not! Have ye said that he would die? He
diest not; this King Pepi lives forever! Live! Thou shalt not die! He
has escaped his day of death! Thou livest, thou livest, raise thee up!
Thou diest not, stand up, raise thee up! Thou perishest not eternally!
Thou diest not! <span id="fr_35"></span>[1](#fn_35.md)</span>

</div>

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

Nevertheless, nor poetry nor chant nor solemn ritual could make death
other than death; and the pyramid Texts, while refusing to utter the
fatal word, give wistful reminiscences of that blessed age "before death
came forth." However high the faith of man, the masterful negation and
collapse of the body was a fact, and it was to keep that daring faith
alive and aglow that The Mysteries were instituted. Beginning, it may
be, in incantation, they rose to heights of influence and beauty, giving
dramatic portrayal of the unconquerable faith of man. Watching the sun
rise from the tomb of night, and the spring return in glory after the
death of winter, man reasoned from analogy—justifying a faith that held
him as truly as he held it—that the race, sinking into the grave, would
rise triumphant over death.

#### I

There were many variations on this theme as the drama of faith evolved,
and as it passed from land to land; but the Motif was ever the same, and
they all were derived, directly or indirectly, from the old Osirian
passion-play in Egypt. Against the back-ground of the ancient Solar
religion, Osiris made his advent as Lord of the Nile and fecund Spirit
of

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

vegetable life—son of Nut the sky-goddess and Geb the earth-god; and
nothing in the story of the Nile-dwellers is more appealing than his
conquest of the hearts of the people against all odds. <span
id="fr_36"></span>[1](#fn_36.md) Howbeit, that history need not detain us
here, except to say that by the time his passion had become the drama of
national faith, it had been bathed in all the tender hues of human life;
though somewhat of its solar radiance still lingered in it. Enough to
say that of all the gods, called into being by the hopes and fears of
men who dwelt in times of yore on the banks of the Nile, Osiris was the
most beloved. Osiris the benign father, Isis his sorrowful and faithful
wife, and Horus whose filial piety and heroism shine like diamonds in a
heap of stones—about this trinity were woven the ideals of Egyptian
faith and family life. Hear now the story of the oldest drama of the
race, which for more than three thousand years held captive the hearts
of men. <span id="fr_37"></span>[2](#fn_37.md)

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

Osiris was Ruler of Eternity, but by reason of his visible shape seemed
nearly akin to man—revealing a divine humanity. His success was chiefly
due, however, to the gracious speech of Isis, his sister-wife, whose
charm men could neither reckon nor resist. Together they labored for the
good of man, teaching him to discern the plants fit for food, themselves
pressing the grapes and drinking the first cup of wine. They made known
the veins of metal running through the earth, of which man was ignorant,
and taught him to make weapons. They initiated man into the intellectual
and moral life, taught him ethics and religion, how to read the starry
sky, song and dance and the rhythm of music. Above all, they evoked in
men a sense of immortality, of a destiny beyond the tomb. Nevertheless,
they had enemies at once stupid and cunning, keen-witted but
short-sighted—the dark force of evil which still weaves the fringe of
crime on the borders of human life.

Side by side with Osiris, lived the impious Set-Typhon, as Evil ever
haunts the Good. While Osiris was absent, Typhon—whose name means
serpent—filled with envy and malice, sought to usurp his throne; but his
plot was frustrated by Isis. Whereupon he resolved to kill Osiris. This
he did, having invited him to a feast, by persuading him to enter a
chest, offering, as if in jest, to pre-sent the richly carved chest to
any one of his guests

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

who, lying down inside it, found he was of the same size. When Osiris
got in and stretched himself out, the conspirators closed the chest, and
flung it into the Nile. <span id="fr_38"></span>[1](#fn_38.md) Thus far,
the gods had not known death. They had grown old, with white hair and
trembling limbs, but old age had not led to death. As soon as Isis heard
of this infernal treachery, she cut her hair, clad herself in a garb of
mourning, ran thither and yon, a prey to the most cruel anguish, seeking
the body. Weeping and distracted, she never tarried, never tired in her
sorrowful quest.

Meanwhile, the waters carried the chest out to sea, as far as Byblos in
Syria, the town of Adonis, where it lodged against a shrub of arica, or
tamarisk—like an acacia tree. <span id="fr_39"></span>[2](#fn_39.md) Owing
to the virtue of

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

the body, the shrub, at its touch, shot up into a tree, growing around
it, and protecting it, until the king of that country cut the tree which
hid the chest in its bosom, and made from it a column for his palace. At
last Isis, led by a vision, came to Byblos, made herself known, and
asked for the column. Hence the picture of her weeping over a broken
column torn from the palace, while Horus, god of Time, stands behind her
pouring ambrosia on her hair. She took the body back to Egypt, to the
city of Bouto; but Typhon, hunting by moonlight, found the chest, and
having recognized the body of Osiris, mangled it and scattered it beyond
recognition. Isis, embodiment of the old world-sorrow for the dead,
continued her pathetic quest, gathering piece by piece the body of her
dismembered husband, and giving him decent interment. Such was the life
and death of Osiris, but as his career pictured the cycle of nature, it
could not of course end here.

Horus fought with Typhon, losing an eye in the battle, but finally
overthrew him and took him prisoner. There are several versions of his
fate, but he seems to have been tried, sentenced, and executed—"cut in
three pieces," as the Pyramid Texts relate. Thereupon the faithful son
went in solemn procession to the grave of his father, opened it, and
called upon Osiris to rise: "Stand up! Thou shalt

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

not end, thou shalt not perish!" But death was deaf. Here the Pyramid
Texts recite the mortuary ritual, with its hymns and chants; but in
vain. At length Osiris awakes, weary and feeble, and by the aid of the
strong grip of the lion-god he gains control of his body, and is lifted
from death to life. <span id="fr_40"></span>[1](#fn_40.md) Thereafter, by
virtue of his victory over death, Osiris becomes Lord of the Land of
Death, his scepter an Ank Cross, his throne a Square.

#### II

Such, in brief, was the ancient allegory of eternal life, upon which
there were many elaborations as the drama unfolded; but always, under
whatever variation of local color, of national accent or emphasis, its
central theme remained the same. Often perverted and abused, it was
everywhere a dramatic expression of the great human aspiration for
triumph over death and union with God, and the belief in the ultimate
victory of Good over Evil. Not otherwise would this drama have held the
hearts of men through long ages, and won the eulogiums of the most
enlightened men of antiquity—of Pythagoras, Socrates, Plato, Euripides,
Plutarch, Pindar, Isocrates, Epictetus, and Marcus Aurelius. Writing to
his wife after the loss of their little girl,

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Plutarch commends
to her the hope set forth in the mystic rites and symbols of this drama,
as, elsewhere, he testifies that it kept him "as far from superstition
as from atheism," and helped him to approach the truth. For deeper minds
this drama had a double meaning, teaching not only immortality after
death, but the awakening of man upon earth from animalism to a life of
purity, justice, and honor. How nobly this practical aspect was taught,
and with what fineness of spiritual insight, may be seen in *Secret
Sermon on the Mountain* in the Hermetic lore of Greece: <span
id="fr_41"></span>[1](#fn_41.md)

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">What may I say, my son? I can but tell thee this.
Whenever I see within myself the Simple Vision brought to birth out of
God's mercy, I have passed through myself into a Body that can never
die. Then I am not what I was before. . . They who are thus born are
children of a Divine race. This race, my son, is never taught; but when
He willeth it, its memory is restored by God. It is the "Way of Birth in
God." . . Withdraw into thyself and it will come. *Will*, and it comes
to pass.</span>

</div>

Isis herself is said to have established the first temple of the
Mysteries, the oldest being those practiced at Memphis. Of these there
were two orders, the Lesser to which the many were eligible, and which
consisted of dialogue and ritual, with certain signs, tokens, grips,
passwords; and the Greater,

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

reserved for the few who approved themselves worthy of being entrusted
with the highest secrets of science, philosophy, and religion. For these
the candidate had to undergo trial, purification, danger, austere
asceticism, and, at last, regeneration through dramatic death amid
rejoicing. Such as endured the ordeal with valor were then taught,
orally and by symbol, the highest wisdom to which man had attained,
including geometry, astronomy, the fine arts, the laws of nature, as
well as the truths of faith. Awful oaths of secrecy were exacted, and
Plutarch describes a man kneeling, his hands bound, a cord round his
body, and a knife at his throat—death being the penalty of violating the
obligation. Even then, Pythagoras had to wait almost twenty years to
learn the hidden wisdom of Egypt, so cautious were they of candidates,
especially of foreigners. But he made noble use of it when, later, he
founded a secret order of his own at Crotona, in Greece, in which, among
other things, he taught geometry, using numbers as symbols of spiritual
truth. <span id="fr_42"></span>[1](#fn_42.md)

From Egypt the Mysteries passed with little change to Asia Minor,
Greece, and Rome, the

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

names of local gods being substituted for those of Osiris and Isis. The
Grecian or Eleusinian Mysteries, established 1800 B. C., represented
Demeter and Persephone, and depicted the death of Dionysius with stately
ritual which led the neophyte from death into life and immortality. They
taught the unity of God, the immutable necessity of morality, and a life
after death, investing initiates with signs and passwords by which they
could know each other in the dark as well as in the light. The Mithraic
or Persian Mysteries celebrated the eclipse of the Sun-god, using the
signs of the zodiac, the processions of the seasons, the death of
nature, and the birth of spring. The Adoniac or Syrian cults were
similar, Adonis being killed, but revived to point to life through
death. In the Cabirie Mysteries on the island of Samothrace, Atys the
Sun was killed by his brothers the Seasons, and at the vernal equinox
was restored to life. So, also, the Druids, as far north as England,
taught of one God the tragedy of winter and summer, and conducted the
initiate through the valley of death to life everlasting. <span
id="fr_43"></span>[1](#fn_43.md)

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

Shortly before the Christian era, when faith was failing and the world
seemed reeling to its ruin, there was a great revival of the
Mystery-religions. Imperial edict was powerless to stay it, much less
stop it. From Egypt, from the far East, they came rushing in like a
tide, Isis "of the myriad names" [vying](errata.htm#1.md) with Mithra, the
patron saint of the soldier, for the homage of the multitude. If we ask
the secret reason for this influx of mysticism, no single answer can be
given to the question. What influence the reigning mystery-cults had
upon the new, uprising Christianity is also hard to know, and the issue
is still in debate. That they did influence the early Church is evident
from the writings of the Fathers, and some go so far as to say that the
Mysteries died at last only to live again in the ritual of the Church.
St. Paul in his missionary journeys came in contact with the Mysteries,
and even makes use of some of their technical terms in his
epistles; <span id="fr_44"></span>[1](#fn_44.md) but he condemned them on
the ground that what

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

they sought to teach in drama can be known only by spiritual
experience—a sound insight, though surely drama may assist to that
experience, else public worship might also come under ban.

#### III

Toward the end of their power, the Mysteries fell into the mire and
became corrupt, as all things human are apt to do: even the Church
itself being no exception. But that at their highest and best they were
not only lofty and noble, but elevating and refining, there can be no
doubt, and that they served a high purpose is equally clear. No one, who
has read in the *Metamorphoses* of Apuleius the initiation of Lucius
into the Mysteries of Isis, can doubt that the effect on the votary was
profound and purifying. He tells us that the ceremony of initiation "is,
as it were, to suffer death," and that he stood in the presence of the
gods, "ay,

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

stood near and worshiped." *Far hence ye profane, and all who are
polluted by sin*, was the motto of the Mysteries, and Cicero testifies
that what a man learned in the house of the hidden place made him want
to live nobly, and gave him happy hopes for the hour of death.

Indeed, the Mysteries, as Plato said, <span
id="fr_45"></span>[1](#fn_45.md) were established by men of great genius
who, in the early ages, strove to teach purity, to ameliorate the
cruelty of the race, to refine its manners and morals, and to restrain
society by stronger bonds than those which human laws impose. No mystery
any longer attaches to what they taught, but only as to the particular
rites, dramas, and symbols used in their teaching. They taught faith in
the unity and spirituality of God, the sovereign authority of the moral
law, heroic purity of soul, austere discipline of character, and the
hope of a life beyond the tomb. Thus in ages of darkness, of complexity,
of conflicting peoples, tongues, and faiths, these great orders toiled
in behalf of friendship, bringing men together under a banner of faith,
and training them for a nobler moral life. Tender and tolerant of all
faiths, they formed an all-embracing moral and spiritual fellowship
which rose above barriers of nation, race, and creed, satisfying the
craving of men for

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

unity, while evoking in them a sense of that eternal mysticism out of
which all religions were born. Their ceremonies, so far as we know them,
were stately dramas of the moral life and the fate of the soul. Mystery
and secrecy added impressiveness, and fable and enigma disguised in
imposing spectacle the laws of justice, piety, and the hope of
immortality.

Masonry stands in this tradition; and if we may not say that it is
historically related to the great ancient orders, it is their spiritual
descendant, and renders much the same ministry to our age which the
Mysteries rendered to the olden world. It is, indeed, the same stream of
sweetness and light flowing in our day—like the fabled river Alpheus
which, gathering the waters of a hundred rills along the hillsides of
Arcadia, sank, lost to sight, in a chasm in the earth, only to reappear
in the fountain of Arethusa. This at least is true: the Greater Ancient
Mysteries were prophetic of Masonry whose drama is an epitome of
universal initiation, and whose simple symbols are the depositaries of
the noblest wisdom of mankind. As such, it brings men together at the
altar of prayer, keeps alive the truths that make us men, seeking, by
every resource of art, to make tangible the power of love, the worth of
beauty, and the reality of the ideal.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_34"></span>[39:1](bui05.htm#fr_34.md) Of course, faith in
immortality was in nowise peculiar to Egypt, but was universal; as vivid
in *The Upanishads* of India as in the Pyramid records. It rests upon
the consensus of the insight, experience, and aspiration of the race.
But the records of Egypt, like its monuments, are richer than those of
other nations, if not <span id="page_40">p. 40</span> older. Moreover,
the drama of faith with which we have to do here had its origin in
Egypt, whence it spread to Tyre, Athens, and Rome—and, as we shall see,
even to England. For brief expositions of Egyptian faith see *Egyptian
Conceptions of Immortality*, by G. A. Reisner, and *Religion and Thought
in Egypt*, by J. H. Breasted.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[40:1](bui05.htm#fr_35.md) Pyramid Texts, 775,
1262, 1453, 1477.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[42:1](bui05.htm#fr_36.md) For a full account of
the evolution of the Osirian theology from the time it emerged from the
mists of myth until its conquest, see *Religion and Thought in Egypt*,
by Breasted, the latest, if not the most brilliant, book written in the
light of the completest translation of the Pyramid Texts (especially
lecture v).

<span id="fn_37"></span>[42:2](bui05.htm#fr_37.md) Much has been written
about the Egyptian Mysteries from the days of Plutarch's *De Iside et
Osiride* and the *Metamorphoses* of Apuleius to the huge volumes of
Baron Sainte Croix. For popular reading the *Kings and Gods of Egypt*,
by Moret (chaps. iii-iv), and the delightfully vivid *Hermes and Plato*,
by Schure, could hardly be surpassed. But Plutarch and Apuleius, both
initiates, are our best authorities, even if their oath of silence
prevents them from telling us what we most want to know.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[44:1](bui05.htm#fr_38.md) Among the Hindoos, whose
Chrisna is the same as the Osiris of Egypt, the gods of summer were
beneficent, making the days fruitful. But "the three wretches" who
presided over winter, were cut off from the zodiac; and as they were
"found missing," they were accused of the death of Chrisna.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[44:2](bui05.htm#fr_39.md) A literary parallel in
the story of *Æneas*, by [Virgil](errata.htm#0.md), is most suggestive.
Priam, king of Troy, in the beginning of the Trojan war committed his
son Polydorus to the care of Polymester, king of Thrace, and sent him a
great sum of money. After Troy was taken the Thracian, for the sake of
the money, killed the young prince and privately buried him. Æneas,
coming into that country, and accidentally plucking up a shrub that was
near him on the side of the hill, discovered the murdered body of
Polydorus. Other legends of such accidental discoveries of unknown
graves haunted the olden time, and may have been suggested by the story
of Isis.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[46:1](bui05.htm#fr_40.md) *The Gods of the
Egyptians*, by B. A. W. Budge; *La Place des Victores*, by Austin Fryar,
especially the colored plates.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[47:1](bui05.htm#fr_41.md) *Quests New and Old*, by
G. R. S. Mead.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[48:1](bui05.htm#fr_42.md) *Pythagoras*, by Edouard
Schure—a fascinating story of that great thinker and teacher. The use of
numbers by Pythagoras must not, however, be confounded with the
mystical, or rather fantastic, mathematics of the Kabbalists of a later
time.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[49:1](bui05.htm#fr_43.md) For a vivid account of
the spread of the Mysteries of Isis and Mithra over the Roman Empire,
see *Roman Life from Nero to Aurelius*, by Dill (bk. iv, chaps. v-vi).
Franz Cumont is the great authority on Mithra, and his *Mysteries of
Mithra* and *Oriental Religions* trace the origin and influence of that
cult with accuracy, insight, <span id="page_50">p. 50</span>and charm.
W. W. Reade, brother of Charles Reade the novelist, left a study of *The
Veil of Isis, or Mysteries of the Druids*, finding in the vestiges of
Druidism "the Emblems of Masonry."

<span id="fn_44"></span>[50:1](bui05.htm#fr_44.md) Col. 2:8-19. See
*Mysteries Pagan and Christian*, by C. Cheethan; also *Monumental
Christianity*, by Lundy, especially chapter on "The Discipline of the
Secret." For a full discussion of the attitude of St. Paul, see *St.
Paul and the Mystery-Religions*, by Kennedy, a work of fine scholarship.
That Christianity had its esoteric <span id="page_51">p. 51</span> is
plain—as it was natural—from the writings of the Fathers, including
Origen, Cyril, Basil, Gregory, Ambrose, Augustine, and others.
Chrysostom often uses the word *initiation* in respect of Christian
teaching, while Tertullian denounces the pagan mysteries as counterfeit
imitations by Satan of the Christian secret rites and teachings: "He
also baptises those who believe in him, and promises that they shall
come forth, cleansed of their sins." Other Christian writers were more
tolerant, finding in Christ the answer to the aspiration uttered in the
Mysteries; and therein, it may be, they were right.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[52:1](bui05.htm#fr_45.md) *Phaedo*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. The Secret Doctrine](bui06.md)
