[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bui09)  [Next](bui11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002J9HH0G/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Builders*, by Joseph Fort Newton, \[1914\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span> <span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

*The SYSTEM, as taught in the regular LODGES, may have some Redundancies
or Defects, occasion’d by the Ignorance or Indolence of the old members.
And indeed, considering through what Obscurity and Darkness the MYSTERY
has been deliver’d down; the many Centuries it has survived; the many
Countries and Languages, and SECTS and PARTIES it has run through; we
are rather to wonder that it ever arrived to the present Age, without
more Imperfection. It has run long in muddy Streams, and as it were,
under Ground. But notwithstanding the great Rust it may have contracted,
there is much of the OLD F'ABRICK remaining: the essential Pillars of
the Building may be discov’d through the Rubbish, tho’ the
Superstructure be overrun with Moss and Ivy, and the Stones, by Length
of Time, be disjointed. And therefore, as the Bust of an OLD Hero is of
great Value among the Curious, tho’ it has lost an Eye, the Nose or the
Right Hand; so Masonry with all its Blemishes and Misfortunes, instead
of appearing ridiculous, ought to be receiv’d with some Candor and
Esteem, from a Veneration of its ANTIQUITY*.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

—*Defence of Masonry*, 1730

</div>

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

### CHAPTER III

### Accepted Masons

#### I

WHATEVER may be dim in the history of Freemasonry, and in the nature of
things much must remain hidden, its symbolism may be traced in unbroken
succession through the centuries; and its symbolism is its soul. So much
is this true, that it may almost be said that had the order ceased to
exist in the period when it was at its height, its symbolism would have
survived and developed, so deeply was it wrought into the mind of
mankind. When, at last, the craft finished its labors and laid down its
tools, its symbols, having served the faith of the worker, became a
language for the thoughts of the thinker.

Few realize the service of the science of numbers to the faith of man in
the morning of the world, when he sought to find some kind of key to the
mighty maze of things. Living amidst change and seeming chance, he found
in the laws of numbers a path by which to escape the awful sense of life
as a series of accidents in the hands of a capricious

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Power; and, when
we think of it, his insight was not invalid. "All things are in
numbers," said the wise Pythagoras; "the world is a living arithmetic in
its development—a realized geometry in its repose." Nature is a realm of
numbers; crystals are solid geometry. Music, of all arts the most divine
and exalting, moves with measured step, using geometrical figures, and
cannot free itself from numbers without dying away into discord. Surely
it is not strange that a science whereby men obtained such glimpses of
the unity and order of the world should be hallowed among them,
imparting its form to their faith. <span id="fr_99"></span>[1](#fn_99.md)
Having revealed so much, mathematics came to wear mystical meanings in a
way quite alien to our prosaic habit of thinking—faith in our day having
betaken itself to other symbols.

Equally so was it with the art of building—a living allegory in which
man imitated in miniature

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

the world-temple, and sought by every device to discover the secret of
its stability. Already we have shown how, from earliest times, the
simple symbols of the builder became a part of the very life of
humanity, giving shape to its thought, its faith, its dream. Hardly a
language but bears their impress, as when we speak of a Rude or Polished
mind, of an Upright man who is a Pillar of society, of the Level of
equality, or the Golden Rule by which we would Square our actions. They
are so natural, so inevitable, and so eloquent withal, that we use them
without knowing it. Sages have always been called Builders, and it was
no idle fancy when Plato and Pythagoras used imagery drawn from the art
of building to utter their highest thought. Everywhere in literature,
philosophy, and life it is so, and naturally so. Shakespeare speaks of
"square-men," and when Spenser would build in stately lines the Castle
of Temperance, he makes use of the Square, Circle, and Triangle: <span
id="fr_100"></span>[1](#fn_100.md)

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

The frame thereof seem’d partly circulaire  
  And part triangular: O work divine!  
Those two the first and last proportions are;  
  The one imperfect, mortal, feminine.

The other immortal, perfect, masculine,  
  And twixt them both a quadrate was the base, <span id="page_156">p.
156</span>  
Proportion’d equally by seven and nine;  
  Nine was the circle set in heaven's place  
  All which compacted made a goodly diapase.

</div>

During the Middle Ages, as we know, men revelled in symbolism, often of
the most recondite kind, and the emblems of Masonry are to be found all
through the literature, art, and thought of that time. Not only on
cathedrals, tombs, and monuments, where we should expect to come upon
them, but in the designs and decorations of dwellings, on vases,
pottery, and trinkets, in the water-marks used by paper-makers and
printers, and even as initial letters in books—everywhere one finds the
old, familiar emblems. <span id="fr_101"></span>[1](#fn_101.md) Square,
Rule, Plumb-line, the perfect Ashlar, the two Pillars, the Circle within
the parallel lines, the Point within the Circle, the Compasses, the
Winding Staircase, the numbers Three, Five, Seven, Nine, the double
Triangle—these and other such symbols were used alike by Hebrew
Kabbalists and Rosicrucian Mystics. Indeed, so abundant is the
evidence—if the matter were in dispute and needed proof—especially after
the revival of symbolism under Albertus Magnus in 1249,

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

that a whole book might be filled with it. Typical are the lines left by
a poet who, writing in 1623, sings of God as the great Logician whom the
conclusion never fails, and whose counsel rules without command: <span
id="fr_102"></span>[1](#fn_102.md)

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Therefore can none foresee his end  
Unless on God is built his hope.  
And if we here below would learn  
By Compass, Needle, Square, and Plumb,  
We never must o’erlook the mete  
Wherewith our God hath measur’d us.</span>

</div>

For all that, there are those who never weary of trying to find where,
in the misty mid-region of conjecture, the Masons got their immemorial
emblems. One would think, after reading their endless essays, that the
symbols of Masonry were loved and preserved by all the world—*except by
the Masons themselves*. Often these writers imply, if they do not
actually assert, that our order begged, borrowed, or cribbed its emblems
from Kabbalists or Rosicrucians, whereas the truth is exactly the other
way round—those impalpable fraternities, whose vague, fantastic thought
was always seeking a local habitation and a body, making use of the
symbols of Masonry the better to reach the minds of men. Why

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

all this unnecessary mystery—not to say mystification—when the facts are
so plain, written in records and carved in stone? While Kabbalists were
contriving their curious cosmogonies, the Masons went about their work,
leaving record of their symbols in deeds, not in creeds, albeit holding
always to their simple faith, and hope, and duty—as in the lines left on
an old brass Square, found in an ancient bridge near Limerick, bearing
date of 1517:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Strive to live with love and care  
Upon the Level, by the Square.</span>

</div>

Some of our Masonic writers <span id="fr_103"></span>[1](#fn_103.md)—more
than one likes to admit—have erred by confusing Freemasonry with
Guild-masonry, to the discredit of the

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

former. Even Oliver once concluded that the secrets of the working
Masons of the Middle Ages were none other than the laws of
Geometry—hence the letter *G*; forgetting, it would seem, that Geometry
had mystical meanings for them long since lost to us. As well say that
the philosophy of Pythagoras was repeating the Multiplication Table!
Albert Pike held that we are "not warranted in assuming that, among
Masons generally—in the *body* of Masonry—the symbolism of Freemasonry
is of earlier date then 1717." <span id="fr_104"></span>[1](#fn_104.md)
Surely that is to err. If we had only the Mason's Marks that have come
down to us, nothing else would be needed to prove it an error. Of
course, for deeper minds all emblems have deeper meanings, and there may
have been many Masons who did not fathom the symbolism of the order. No
more do we; but the symbolism itself, of hoar antiquity, was certainly
the common inheritance and treasure of the working Masons of the Lodges
in England and Scotland before, indeed centuries before, the year 1717.

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

#### II

Therefore it is not strange that men of note and learning, attracted by
the wealth of symbolism in Masonry, as well as by its spirit of
fraternity—perhaps, also, by its secrecy—began at an early date to ask
to be accepted as members of the order: hence *Accepted Masons*. <span
id="fr_105"></span>[1](#fn_105.md) How far back the custom of admitting
such men to the Lodges goes is not clear, but hints of it are
discernible in the oldest documents of the order; and this whether or no
we accept as historical the membership of Prince Edwin in the tenth
century, of whom the *Regius Poem* says,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Of speculatyfe he was a master.</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> This may only mean
that he was amply skilled in the knowledge, as well as the practice, of
the art, although, as Gould points out, the *Regius MS* contains
intimations of thoughts above the heads of many to whom it was
read. <span id="fr_106"></span>[2](#fn_106.md) Similar traces of Accepted
Masons are found in the *Cooke MS*, compiled in 1400 or earlier. Hope
suggests <span id="fr_107"></span>[3](#fn_107.md) that the

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

earliest members of this class were ecclesiastics who wished to study to
be architects and designers, so as to direct the erection of their own
churches; the more so, since the order had "so high and sacred a
destination, was so entirely exempt from all local, civil jurisdiction,"
and enjoyed the sanction and protection of the Church. Later, when the
order was in disfavor with the Church, men of another sort—scholars,
mystics, and lovers of liberty—sought its degrees.

At any rate, the custom began early and continued through the years,
until Accepted Masons were in the majority. Noblemen, gentlemen, and
scholars entered the order as Speculative Masons, and held office as
such in the old Lodges, the first name recorded in actual minutes being
John Boswell, who was present as a member of the Lodge of Edinburgh in
1600. Of the forty-nine names on the roll of the Lodge of Aberdeen in
1670, thirty-nine were Accepted Masons not in any way connected with the
building trade. In England the earliest reference to the initiation of a
Speculative Mason, in Lodge minutes, is of the year 1641. On the 10th of
May that year, Robert Moray, "General Quartermaster of the Armie off
Scottland," as the record runs, was initiated at Newcastle by members of
the "Lodge of Edinburgh," who were with the Scottish

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Army. A still more
famous example was that of Ashmole, whereof we read in the *Memoirs of
the Life of that Learned Antiquary, Elias Ashmole, Drawn up by Himself
by Way of Diary*, published in 1717, which contains two entries as
follows, the first dated in 1646:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">*Octob* 16.4 *Hor*. 30 Minutes *post merid*. I was
made a Freemason at *Warrington* in Lancashire, with Colonel *Henry
Wainwaring* of *Kartichain* in *Cheshire*; the names of those that were
there at the Lodge, Mr. *Richard Panket Warden*, Mr. *James Collier*,
Mr. *Richard Sankey*, *Henry Littler*, *John Ellani*, *Richard Ellani*
and *Hugh Brewer*.</span>

</div>

Such is the record, italics and all; and it has been shown, by hunting
up the wills of the men present, that the members of the Warrington
Lodge in 1646 were, nearly all of them—every one in fact, so far as is
known—Accepted Masons. Thirty-five years pass before we discover the
only other Masonic entries in the *Diary*, dated March, 1682, which read
as follows:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

About 5 p. m. I received a Summons to appear at a Lodge to be held the
next day, at Masons Hall, London. Accordingly I went, and about Noone
were admitted into the Fellowship of Free Masons, Sir. William Wilson,
Knight, Capt. Richard Borthwick, Mr. Will. Woodman, Mr. Wm. Grey, M.
Samuell Taylor and Mr. William Wise. <span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

I was the Senior Fellow among them (it being 35 years since I was
admitted). There were present beside myselfe the Fellowes afternamed:
\[Then follows a list of names which conveys no information.\] Wee all
dyned at the halfe moone Taverne in Cheapside at a Noble Dinner prepared
at the charge of the new-accepted Masons.

</div>

Space is given to those entries, not because they are very important,
but because Ragon and others have actually held that Ashmole made
Masonry—as if any one man made Masonry! ’Tis surely strange, if this be
true, that only two entries in his Diary refer to the order; but that
does not disconcert the theorists who are so wedded to their idols as to
have scant regard for facts. No, the circumstance that Ashmole was a
Rosicrucian, an Alchemist, a delver into occult lore, is enough, the
absence of any allusion to him thereafter only serving to confirm the
fancy—the theory being that a few adepts, seeing Masonry about to
crumble and decay, seized it, introduced their symbols into it, making
it the mouthpiece of their high, albeit hidden, teaching. How
fascinating! and yet how baseless in fact! There is no evidence that a
Rosicrucian fraternity existed—save on paper, having been woven of a
series of romances written as early as 1616, and ascribed to
Andrea—until a later time; and even when it did take form, it was quite
distinct from

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Masonry.
Occultism, to be sure, is elusive, coming we know not whence, and
hovering like a mist trailing over the hills. Still, we ought to be able
to find in Masonry *some* trace of Rosicrucian influence, some hint of
the lofty wisdom it is said to have added to the order; but no one has
yet done so. Did all that high, Hermetic mysticism evaporate entirely,
leaving not a wraith behind, going as mysteriously as it came to that
far place which no mortal may explore? <span
id="fr_108"></span>[1](#fn_108.md)

Howbeit, the *fact* to be noted is that, thus early—and earlier, for the
Lodge had been in existence some time when Ashmole was initiated—the
Warrington Lodge was made up of Accepted Masons. Of the ten men present
in the London Lodge, mentioned

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

in the second entry in the *Diary*, Ashmole was the senior, but he was
not a member of the Masons' Company, though the other nine were, and
also two of the neophytes. No doubt this is the Lodge which Conder, the
historian of the Company, has traced back to 1620, "and were the books
of the Company prior to that date in existence, we should no doubt be
able to trace the custom of receiving accepted members back to
pre-reformation times." <span id="fr_109"></span>[1](#fn_109.md) From an
entry in the books of the Company, dated 1665, it appears that

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">There was hanging up in the Hall a list of the
*Accepted Masons* enclosed in a "faire frame, with a lock and key." Why
was this? No doubt the Accepted Masons, or those who were initiated into
the esoteric aspect of the Company, did not include the *whole* Company,
and this was a list of the "enlightened ones," whose names were thus
honored and kept on record, probably long after their decease. . . This
we cannot say for certain, but we can say that as early as 1620, and
inferentially very much earlier, there were certain members of the
Masons' Company and others who met from time to time to form a Lodge for
the purpose of Speculative Masonry. <span
id="fr_110"></span>[2](#fn_110.md)</span>

</div>

Conder also mentions a copy of the *Old Charges*, or Gothic
Constitutions, in the chest of the London Masons' Company, known as *The
Book of the Constitutions* 

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

*of the Accepted Masons*; and this he identifies with the *Regius MS*.
Another witness during this period is Randle Holme, of Chester, whose
references to the Craft in his *Acadamie Armory*, 1688, are of great
value, for that he writes "as a member of that society called
Free-masons." The *Harleian MS* is in his handwriting, and on the next
leaf there is a remarkable list of twenty-six names, including his own.
It is the only list of the kind known in England, and a careful
examination of all the sources of information relative to the Chester
men shows that nearly all of them were Accepted Masons. Later on we come
to the *Natural History of Staffordshire*, by Dr. Plott, 1686, in which,
though in an unfriendly manner, we are told many things about Craft
usages and regulations of that day. Lodges had to be formed of at least
five members to make a quorum, gloves were presented to candidates, and
a banquet following initiations was a custom. He states that there were
several signs and passwords by which the members were able "to be known
to one another all over the nation," his faith in their effectiveness
surpassing that of the most credulous in our day.

Still another striking record is found in *The Natural History of
Wiltshire*, by John Aubrey, the MS of which in the Bodleian Library,
Oxford, is

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

dated 1686; and on the reverse side of folio 72 of this MS is the
following note by Aubrey: "This day \[May 18, 1681 \] is a great
convention at St. Pauls Church of the fraternity, of the free \[then he
crossed out the word Free and inserted Accepted\] Masons; where Sir
Christopher Wren is to be adopted a Brother: and Sir Henry Goodric of ye
Tower and divers others." <span id="fr_111"></span>[1](#fn_111.md) From
which we may infer that there were Assemblies before 1717, and that they
were of sufficient importance to be known to a non-Mason. Other evidence
might be adduced, but this is enough to show that Speculative Masonry,
so far from being a novelty, was very old at the time when many suppose
it was invented. With the great fire

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

of London, in 1666, there came a renewed interest in Masonry, many who
had abandoned it flocking to the capital to rebuild the city and
especially the Cathedral of St. Paul. Old Lodges were revived, new ones
were formed, and an effort was made to renew the old annual, or
quarterly, Assemblies, while at the same time Accepted Masons increased
both in numbers and in zeal.

Now the crux of the whole matter as regards Accepted Masons lies in the
answer to such questions as these: Why did soldiers, scholars,
antiquarians, clergymen, lawyers, and even members of the nobility ask
to be accepted as members of the order of Free-masons? Wherefore their
interest in the Order at all? What attracted them to it as far back as
1600, and earlier? What held them with increasing power and an
ever-deepening interest? Why did they continue to enter the Lodges until
they had the rule of them? There must have been something more in their
motive than a simple desire for association, for they had their clubs,
societies, and learned fellowships. Still less could a mere curiosity to
learn certain signs and passwords have held such men for long, even in
an age of quaint conceits in the matter of association and when
architecture was affected as a fad. No, there is only one explanation:
that these men saw in

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Masonry a deposit
of the high and simple wisdom of old, preserved in tradition and taught
in symbols—little understood, it may be, by many members of the
order—and this it was that they sought to bring to light, turning
history into allegory and legend into drama, and making it a teacher of
wise and beautiful truth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_99"></span>[154:1](bui10.htm#fr_99.md) There is a beautiful
lecture on the moral meaning of Geometry by Dr. Hutchinson, in *The
Spirit of Masonry*—one of the oldest, as it is one of the noblest, books
in our Masonic literature. Plutarch reports Plato as saying, "God is
always geometrizing" (*Diog. Laert.*, iv, 2). Elsewhere Plato remarks
that "Geometry rightly treated is the knowledge of the Eternal"
(*Republic*, 527b), and over the porch of his Academy at Athens he wrote
the words, "Let no one who is ignorant of Geometry enter my doors." So
Aristotle and all the ancient thinkers, whether in Egypt or India.
Pythagoras, Proclus tells us, was concerned only with number and
magnitude: number absolute, in arithmetic; number applied, in music; and
so forth—whereof we read in the *Old Charges* (see "The Great Symbol,"
by Klein, *A. Q. C.*, x, 82).

<span id="fn_100"></span>[155:1](bui10.htm#fr_100.md) Faerie Queene, bk.
ii, canto ix, 22.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[156:1](bui10.htm#fr_101.md) *Lost Language of
Symbolism*, by Bayley, also *A New Light on the Renaissance*, by the
same author; *Architecture of the Renaissance in England*, by J. A.
Gotch; and "Notes on Some Masonic Symbols," by W. H. Rylands, *A. Q.
C.*, viii, 84. Indeed, the literature is as prolific as the facts.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[157:1](bui10.htm#fr_102.md) J. V. Andreae,
*Ehreneich Hohenfelder von Aister Haimb*. A verbatim translation of the
second line quoted would read, "Unless in God he has his building."

<span id="fn_103"></span>[158:1](bui10.htm#fr_103.md) When, for example,
Albert Pike, in his letter, "Touching Masonic Symbolism," speaks of the
"poor, rude, unlettered, uncultivated working Stone-masons," who
attended the Assemblies, he is obviously confounding Free-masons with
the rough Stone-masons of the Guilds. Over against these words, read a
brilliant article in the *Contemporary Review*, October, 1913, by L. M.
Phillips, entitled, "The Two Ways of Building," showing how the
Free-masons, instead of working under architects outside the order,
chose the finer minds among them as leaders and created the different
styles of architecture in Europe. "Such," he adds, "was the high limit
of talent and intelligence which the creative spirit fostered among
workmen. . . The entire body being trained and educated in the same
principles and ideas, the most backward and inefficient, as they worked
at the vaults which their own skillful brethren had planned, might feel
the glow of satisfaction arising from the conscious realization of their
own aspirations. Thus the whole body of constructive knowledge
maintained its unity. . . Thus it was by free associations of workmen
training their own leaders that <span id="page_159">p. 159</span> the
great Gothic edifices of the medieval ages were construct-ed. . . A
style so imaginative and so spiritual might almost be the dream of a
poet or the vision of a saint. Really it is the creation of the sweat
and labor of workingmen, and every iota of the boldness, dexterity and
knowledge which it embodies was drawn out of the practical experience
and experiments of manual labor." This describes the Comacine Masters,
but not the poor, rude, unlettered Stone-masons whom Pike had in mind.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[159:1](bui10.htm#fr_104.md) Letter "Touching
Masonic Symbolism."

<span id="fn_105"></span>[160:1](bui10.htm#fr_105.md) Some Lodges, however,
would never admit such members. As late as April 24, 1786, two brothers
were proposed as members of Domatic Lodge, No. 177, London, and were
rejected because they were not Operative Masons (*History Lion and Lamb
Lodge*, 192, London, by Abbott).

<span id="fn_106"></span>[160:2](bui10.htm#fr_106.md) "On the Antiquity of
Masonic Symbolism," *A. Q. C.*, iii, 7.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[160:3](bui10.htm#fr_107.md) *Historical Essay on
Architecture*, chap. xxi.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[164:1](bui10.htm#fr_108.md) Those who wish to
pursue this Quixotic quest will find the literature abundant and very
interesting. For example, such essays as that by F. W. Brockbank in
*Manchester Association for Research*, vol. i, 1909-10; and another by
A. F. A. Woodford, *A. Q. C.*, i, 28. Better still is the *Real History
of the Rosicrucians*, by Waite (chap. xv), and for a complete and final
explosion of all such fancies we have the great chapter in Gould's
*History of Masonry* (vol. ii, chap. xiii). It seems a pity that so much
time and labor and learning had to be expended on theories so fragile,
but it was necessary; and no man was better fitted for the study than
Gould. Perhaps the present writer is unkind, or at least impatient; if
so he humbly begs forgiveness; but after reading tomes of conjecture
about the alleged Rosicrucian origin of Masonry, he is weary of the
wide-eyed wonder of mystery-mongers about things that never were, and
which would be of no value if they had been. (Read *The Rosicrucian
Cosmo-Conception, or Christian Occult Science*, by Max Heindel, and be
instructed in matters whereof no mortal knoweth.)

<span id="fn_109"></span>[165:1](bui10.htm#fr_109.md) *The Hole Craft and
Fellowship of Masons*, by Edward Conder.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[165:2](bui10.htm#fr_110.md) *Ibid.*,
Introduction.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[167:1](bui10.htm#fr_111.md) Whether Sir
Christopher Wren was ever Grand Master, as tradition affirms, is open to
debate, and some even doubt his membership in the order (Gould, *History
of Masonry*). Unfortunately, he has left no record, and the
*Parentalia*, written by his son, helps us very little, containing
nothing more than his theory that the Order began with Gothic
architecture. Ashmole, if we may trust his friend, Dr. Knipe, had
planned to write a *History of Masonry* refuting the theory of Wren that
Freemasonry took its rise from a Bull granted by the Pope, in the reign
of Henry III, to some Italian architects, holding, and rightly so, that
the Bull "was confirmatory only, and did not by any means create our
fraternity, or even establish it in this kingdom" (*Life of Ashmole*, by
Campbell). This item makes still more absurd the idea that Ashmole
himself created Masonry, whereas he was only a student of its
antiquities. Wren was probably never an Operative Mason—though an
architect—but he seems to have become an Accepted member of the
fraternity in his last years, since his neglect of the order, due to his
age, is given as a reason for the organization of the first Grand Lodge.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. Grand Lodge of England](bui11.md)
