[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bui10)  [Next](bui12.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002J9HH0G/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Builders*, by Joseph Fort Newton, \[1914\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span> <span id="page_171">p. 171</span>
<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

*The doctrines of Masonry are the most beautiful that it is possible to
imagine. They breathe the simplicity of the earliest ages animated by
the love of a martyred God. That word which the Puritans translated*
CHARITY*, but which is really* LOVE*, is the key-stone which supports
the entire edifice of this mystic science. Love one another, teach one
another, help one another. That is all our doctrine, all our science,
all our law. We have no narrow-minded prejudices; we do not debar from
our society this sect or that sect; it is sufficient for us that a man
worships God, no matter under what name or in what manner. Ah! rail
against us bigoted and ignorant men, if you will. Those who listen to
the truths which Masonry inculcates can readily forgive you. It is
impossible to be a good Mason without being a good man*.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

—WINWOOD READE, *The Veil of Isis*.

</div>

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

### CHAPTER IV

### Grand Lodge of England

WHILE praying in a little chapel one day, Francis of Assisi was exhorted
by an old Byzantine crucifix: "Go now, and rebuild my Church, which is
falling into ruins." In sheer loyalty he had a lamp placed; then he saw
his task in a larger way, and an artist has painted him carrying stones
and mortar. Finally there burst upon him the full import of the
allocution—that he himself was to be the corner-stone of a renewed and
purified Church. Purse and prestige he flung to the winds, and went
along the highways of Umbria calling men back from the rot of luxury to
the ways of purity, pity, and gladness, his life at once a poem and a
power, his faith a vision of the world as love and comradeship.

That is a perfect parable of the history of Masonry. Of old the working
Masons built the great cathedrals, and we have seen them not only
carrying stones, but drawing triangles, squares, and circles in such a
manner as to show that they assigned

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

to those figures high mystical meanings. But the real Home of the Soul
cannot be built of brick and stone; it is a house not made with hands.
Slowly it rises, fashioned of the thoughts, hopes, prayers, dreams, and
righteous acts of devout and free men; built of their hunger for truth,
their love of God, and their loyalty to one another. There came a day
when the Masons, laying aside their stones, became workmen of another
kind, not less builders than before, but using truths for tools and
dramas for designs, uplifting such a temple as Watts dreamed of
decorating with his visions of the august allegory of the evolution of
man.

#### I

From every point of view, the organization of the Grand Lodge of
England, in 1717, was a significant and far-reaching event. Not only did
it divide the story of Masonry into before and after, giving a new date
from which to reckon, but it was a way-mark in the intellectual and
spiritual history of mankind. One has only to study that first Grand
Lodge, the influences surrounding it, the men who composed it, the
Constitutions adopted, and its spirit and purpose, to see that it was
the beginning of a movement of profound meaning. When we see it in the
setting of its age—as revealed, for example,

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

in the Journals of Fox and Wesley, which from being religious
time-tables broadened into detailed panoramic pictures of the period
before, and that following, the Grand Lodge—the Assembly on 1717 becomes
the more remarkable. Against such a background, when religion and morals
seemed to reach the nadir of depredation, the men of that Assembly stand
out as prophets of liberty of faith and righteousness of life. <span
id="fr_112"></span>[1](#fn_112.md)

Some imagination is needed to realize the moral declension of that time,
as it is portrayed—to use a single example—in the sermon by the Bishop
of Litchfield before the Society for the Reformation of Manners, in
1724. Lewdness, drunkenness, and degeneracy, he said, were well nigh
universal, no class being free from the infection. Murders were common
and foul, wanton and obscene books found so good a market as to
encourage the publishing of them. Immorality of every kind was so
hardened as to be defended, yes, justified on principle. The

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

rich were debauched and indifferent; the poor were as miserable in their
labor as they were coarse and cruel in their sport. Writing in 1713,
Bishop Burnet said that those who came to be ordained as clergymen were
"ignorant to a degree not to be comprehended by those who are not
obliged to know it." Religion seemed dying or dead, and to mention the
word provoked a laugh. Wesley, then only a lad, had not yet come with
his magnificent and cleansing evangel. Empty formalism on one side, a
dead polemical dogmatism on the other, bigotry, bitterness, intolerance,
and interminable feud everywhere, no wonder Bishop Butler sat oppressed
in his castle with hardly a hope surviving.

As for Masonry, it had fallen far and fallen low betimes, but with the
revival following the great fire of London, in 1666, it had taken on new
life and a bolder spirit, and was passing through a transition—or,
rather, a transfiguration! For, when we compare the Masonry of, say,
1688 with that of 1723, we discover that much more than a revival had
come to pass. Set the instructions of the *Old Charges*—not all of them,
however, for even in earliest times some of them escaped the stamp of
the Church <span id="fr_113"></span>[1](#fn_113.md)—in respect of religion
alongside the

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

same article in the *Constitutions* of 1723, and the contrast is
amazing. The old charge read: "The first charge is this, that you be
true to God and Holy Church and use no error or heresy." Hear now the
charge in 1723:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">*A Mason is obliged by his Tenure, to obey the moral
law; and if he rightly understands the Art, he will never be a stupid
Atheist nor an irreligious Libertine. But though in ancient times Masons
were charged in every country to be of the religion of that country or
nation, whatever it was, yet it is now thought more expedient only to
oblige them to that religion in which all men agree, leaving their
particular Opinions to themselves: that is, to be Good men and True, or
Men of Honor and Honesty, by whatever Denomination or Persuasion they
may be distinguished; whereby Masonry becomes the Centre of Union and
the Means of conciliating true Friendship among persons that must have
remained at a perpetual distance*.</span>

</div>

If that statement had been written yesterday, it would be remarkable
enough. But when we consider that it was set forth in 1723, amidst
bitter sectarian rancor and intolerance unimaginable, it rises up as
forever memorable in the history of men! The man who wrote that
document, did we know his

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

name, is entitled to be held till the end of time in the grateful and
venerative memory of his race. The temper of the times was all for
relentless partisanship, both in religion and in politics. The
alternative offered in religion was an ecclesiastical tyranny, allowing
a certain liberty of belief, or a doctrinal tyranny, allowing a slight
liberty of worship; a sad choice in truth. It is, then, to the
everlasting honor of the century, that, in the midst of its clashing
extremes, the Masons appeared with heads unbowed, abjuring both
tyrannies and championing both liberties. <span
id="fr_114"></span>[1](#fn_114.md) Ecclesiastically and doctrinally they
stood in the open, while Romanist and Protestant, Anglican and Puritan,
Calvinist and Arminian waged bitter war, filling the air with angry
maledictions. These men of latitude in a cramped age felt pent up alike
by narrowness of ritual and by narrowness of creed, and they cried out
for room and air, for liberty and charity!

Though differences of creed played no part in Masonry,
[nevertheless](errata.htm#7.md) it held religion in high esteem,

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

and was then, as now, the steadfast upholder of the only two articles of
faith that never were invented by man—the existence of God and the
immortality of the soul! Accordingly, every Lodge was opened and closed
with prayer to the "Almighty Architect of the universe;" and when a
Lodge of mourning met in memory of a brother fallen asleep, the formula
was: "He has passed over into the eternal East,"—to that region whence
cometh light and hope. Unsectarian in religion, the Masons were also
non-partisan in politics: one principle being common to them all—love of
country, respect for law and order, and the desire for human
welfare. <span id="fr_115"></span>[1](#fn_115.md) Upon that basis the first
Grand

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Lodge was founded,
and upon that basis Masonry rests today—holding that a unity of spirit
is better than a uniformity of opinion, and that beyond the great and
simple "religion in which all men agree" no dogma is worth a breach of
charity.

#### II

With honorable pride in this tradition of spiritual faith and
intellectual freedom, we are all the more eager to recite such facts as
are known about the organization of the first Grand Lodge. How many
Lodges of Masons existed in London at that time is a matter of
conjecture, but there must have been a number. What bond, if any, united
them, other than their esoteric secrets and customs, is equally unknown.
Nor is there any record to tell us whether all the Lodges in and about
London were invited to join in the movement. Unfortunately the minutes
of the Grand Lodge only commence on June 24, 1723, and our only history
of the events is that found in *The New Book of Constitutions*, by Dr.
James Anderson, in 1738. However, if not an actor in the scene, he was
in a position to know the facts from eye-witnesses, and his book

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

was approved by the Grand Lodge itself. His account is so brief that it
may be given as it stands:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

King George I enter’d *London* most magnificently on 20 *Sept.* 1714.
And after the Rebellion was over A. D. 1716, the few *Lodges* at
*London* finding themselves neglected by Sir *Christopher Wren*, thought
fit to cement under a *Grand Master* as the Centre of Union and Harmony,
*viz.*, the *Lodges* that met,

1\. At the *Goose* and *Gridiron* Ale house in *St. Paul's Church-Yard*.

2\. At the *Crown* Ale-house in *Parker's Lane* near *Drury Lane*.

3\. At the *Apple-Tree* Tavern in *Charles-street*, *Covent-Garden*.

4\. At the *Rummer* and *Grape* Tavern in *Channel-Row*, *Westminster*.

They and some other old Brothers met at the said *Apple-Tree*, and
having put into the chair the *oldest Master* Mason (now the *Master* of
a *Lodge*) they constituted themselves a Grand Lodge pro Tempore in *Due
Form*, and forthwith revived the Quarterly *Communication* of the
*Officers* of Lodges (call’d the GRAND LODGE) resolv’d to hold the
*Annual* Assembly *and Feast*, and then to chuse a Grand Master from
among themselves, till they should have the Honor of a Noble Brother at
their Head.

Accordingly, on *St. John's Baptist's Day*, in the 3d year of King
George I, A. D. 1717, the ASSEMBLY and *Feast* of the *Free and Accepted
Masons* was held at the foresaid *Goose* and *Gridiron* Ale-house. <span
id="page_182">p. 182</span>

Before Dinner, the *oldest Master* Mason (now the *Master* of a *Lodge*)
in the Chair, proposed a List of proper Candidates; and the Brethren by
a majority of Hands elected Mr. Anthony Sayer, *Gentleman*, *Grand
Master of Masons* (Mr. *Jacob Lamball*, Carpenter, Capt. *Joseph
Elliot*, Grand Wardens) who being forthwith invested with the Badges of
Office and Power by the said *oldest Master*, and install’d, was duly
congratulated by the Assembly who paid him the Homage.

Sayer, *Grand Master*, commanded the *Masters* and *Wardens* of Lodges
to meet the *Grand* Officers every *Quarter* in *Communication*, at the
Place that he should appoint in the Summons sent by the *Tyler*.

</div>

So reads the only record that has come down to us of the founding of the
Grand Lodge of England. Preston and others have had no other authority
than this passage for their descriptions of the scene, albeit when
Preston wrote, such facts as he added may have been learned from men
still living. Who were present, beyond the three officers named, has so
far eluded all research, and the only variation in the accounts is found
in a rare old book called *Multa Paucis*, which asserts that six Lodges,
not four, were represented. Looking at this record in the light of what
we know of the Masonry of that period, a number of things are suggested:

First, so far from being a revolution, the organization of the Grand
Lodge was a revival of the old quarterly and annual Assembly, born,
doubtless, of a felt need of community of action for the welfare

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

of the Craft. There was no idea of innovation, but, as Anderson states
in a note, "it should meet Quarterly *according to ancient Usage*,"
tradition having by this time become authoritative in such matters.
Hints of what the old usages were are given in the observance of St.
John's Day <span id="fr_116"></span>[1](#fn_116.md) as a feast, in the
democracy of the order and its manner of voting by a show of hands, in
its deference to the oldest Master Mason, its use of badges of
office, <span id="fr_117"></span>[2](#fn_117.md) its ceremony of
installation, all in a lodge duly tyled.

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

Second, it is clear that, instead of being a deliberately planned effort
to organize Masonry in general, the Grand Lodge was intended at first to
affect only London and Westminster; <span
id="fr_118"></span>[1](#fn_118.md) the desire being to weld a link of
closer fellowship and coöperation between the Lodges. While we do not
know the names of the moving spirits—unless we may infer that the men
elected to office were such—nothing is clearer than that the initiative
came from the heart of the order itself, and was in no sense imposed
upon it from without; and so great was the necessity for it that, when
once started, link after link was added until it "put a girdle around
the earth."

Third, of the four Lodges <span id="fr_119"></span>[2](#fn_119.md) known to
have taken part, only one—that meeting at the Rummer and Grape
Tavern—had a majority of Accepted Masons

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

in its membership; the other three being Operative Lodges, or largely
so. Obviously, then, the movement was predominantly a movement of
Operative Masons—or of men who had been Operative Masons—and not, as has
been so often implied, the design of men who simply made use of the
remnants of operative Masonry the better to exploit some hidden
philosophy. Yet it is worthy of note that the leading men of the craft
in those early years were, nearly all of them, Accepted Masons and
members of the Rummer and Grape Lodge. Besides Dr. Anderson, the
historian, both George Payne and Dr. Desaguliers, the second and third
Grand Masters, were of that Lodge. In 1721 the Duke of Montagu was
elected to the chair, and thereafter members of the nobility sat in the
East until it became the custom for the Prince of Wales to be Grand
Master of Masons in England. <span id="fr_120"></span>[1](#fn_120.md)

Fourth, why did Masonry alone of all trades and professions live after
its work was done, preserving not only its identity of organization, but
its old emblems and usages, and transforming them into instruments of
religion and righteousness? The cathedrals had long been finished or
left incomplete; the spirit of Gothic architecture was dead and the
style treated almost with contempt. The occupation

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

of the Master Mason was gone, his place having been taken by the
architect who, like Wren and Inigo Jones, was no longer a child of the
Lodges as in the old days, but a man trained in books and by foreign
travel. Why did not Freemasonry die, along with the Guilds, or else
revert to some kind of trades-union? Surely here is the best possible
proof that it had never been simply an order of architects building
churches, but a moral and spiritual fellowship—the keeper of great
symbols and a teacher of truths that never die. So and only so may
anyone ever hope to explain the story of Masonry, and those who do not
see this fact have no clue to its history, much less an understanding of
its genius.

Of course these pages cannot recite in detail the history and growth of
the Grand Lodge, but a few of the more salient events may be noted. As
early as 1719 the *Old Charges*, or Gothic Constitutions, began to be
collected and collated, a number having already been burned by
scrupulous Masons to prevent their falling into strange hands. In 1721,
Grand Master Montagu found fault with the *Old Charges* as being
inadequate, and ordered Dr. Anderson to make a digest of them with a
view to formulating a better set of regulations for the rule of the
Lodges. Anderson obeyed—he seems to have been engaged in such a work
already, and may

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

have suggested the idea to the Grand Master—and a committee of fourteen
"learned brethren" was appointed to examine the MS and make report. They
suggested a few amendments, and the book was ordered published by the
Grand Master, appearing in the latter part of 1723. This first issue,
however, did not contain the account of the organization of the Grand
Lodge, which does not seem to have been added until the edition of 1738.
How much Past Grand Master Payne had to do with this work is not
certain, but the chief credit is due to Dr. Anderson, who deserves the
perpetual gratitude of the order—the more so if he it was who wrote the
article, already quoted, setting forth the religious attitude of the
order. That article, by whomsoever written, is one of the great
documents of mankind, and it would be an added joy to know that it was
penned by a minister. <span id="fr_121"></span>[1](#fn_121.md) The *Book of
Constitutions*, which

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

is still the groundwork of Masonry, has been printed in many editions,
and is accessible to every one.

Another event in the story of the Grand Lodge, never to be forgotten,
was a plan started in 1724 of raising funds of General Charity for
distressed Masons. Proposed by the Earl of Dalkeith, it at once met with
enthusiastic support, and it is a curious coincidence that one of the
first to petition for relief was Anthony Sayer, first Grand Master. The
minutes do not state whether he was relieved at that time, but we know
that sums of money were voted to him in 1730, and again in 1741. This
Board of Benevolence, as it came to be called, became very important, it
being unanimously agreed in 1733 that all such business as could not be
conveniently despatched by the Quarterly Communication should be
referred to it. Also, that all Masters of Regular Lodges, together with
all present, former, and future Grand Officers should be members of the
Board. Later this Board was still further empowered to hear complaints
and to report thereon to the Grand Lodge. Let it also be noted that in
actual practice the Board of Charity gave free play to

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

one of the most admirable principles of Masonry—helping the needy and
unfortunate, whether within the order or without.

#### III

Once more we come to a much debated question, about which not a little
has been written, and most of it wide of the mark—the question of the
origin of the Third Degree. Here again students have gone hither and yon
hunting in every cranny for the motif of this degree, and it would seem
that their failure to find it would by this time have turned them back
to the only place where they may ever hope to discover it—in Masonry
itself. But no; they are bound to bring mystics, occultists, alchemists,
Culdees or Cabalists—even the *Vehmgerichte* of Germany—into the making
of Masonry somewhere, if only for the sake of glamor, and this is the
last opportunity to do it. <span id="fr_122"></span>[1](#fn_122.md) Willing
to give due credit

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

to Cabalists and Rosicrucians, the present writer rejects all such
theories on the ground that there is no reason for thinking that they
helped to make Masonry, *much less any fact to prove it*.

Hear now a review of the facts in the case. No one denies that the
Temple of Solomon was much in the minds of men at the time of the
organization of the Grand Lodge, and long before—as in the Bacon romance
of the *New Atlantis* in 1597. <span id="fr_123"></span>[1](#fn_123.md)

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Broughton, Selden,
Lightfoot, Walton, Lee, Prideaux, and other English writers were deeply
interested in the Hebrew Temple, not, however, so much in its symbolical
suggestion as in its form and construction—a model of which was brought
to London by Judah Templo in the reign of Charles II. <span
id="fr_124"></span>[1](#fn_124.md) It was much the same on the Continent,
but so far from being a new topic of study and discussion, we may trace
this interest in the Temple all through the Middle Ages. Nor was it
peculiar to the Cabalists, at least not to such a degree that they must
needs be brought in to account for the Biblical imagery and symbolism in
Masonry. Indeed, it might with more reason be argued that Masonry
explains the interest in the Temple than otherwise. For, as James
Fergusson remarks—and there is no higher authority than the historian of
architecture: "There is perhaps no building of the ancient world which
has excited so much attention since the time of its destruction, as the
Temple of Solomon built in Jerusalem, and its successor as built by
Herod. *Throughout the Middle Ages it influenced to a considerable
degree the forms of Christian churches, and its peculiarities were the
watchwords and rallying points of associations of builders*." <span
id="fr_125"></span>[2](#fn_125.md) Clearly, the notion that interest in the
Temple was new, and

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

that its symbolical meaning was imposed upon Masonry as something novel,
falls flat.

But we are told that there is no hint of the Hiramic legend, still less
any intimation of a tragedy associated with the building of the Temple.
No Hiramic legend! No hint of tragedy! Why, both were almost as old as
the Temple itself, rabbinic legend affirming that "*all the workmen were
killed that they should not build another Temple devoted to idolatry,
Hiram himself being translated to heaven like Enoch*." <span
id="fr_126"></span>[1](#fn_126.md) The Talmud has many variations of this
legend. Where would one expect the legends of the Temple to be kept
alive and be made use of in ceremonial, if not in a religious order of
builders like the Masons? Is it surprising that we find so few
references in later literature to what was thus held as a sacred secret?
As we have seen, the legend of Hiram was kept as a profound secret until
1841 by the French Companionage, who almost certainly learned it from
the Free-masons. Naturally it was never made a matter of record, <span
id="fr_127"></span>[2](#fn_127.md) but was

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

transmitted by oral tradition within the order; and it was also natural,
if not inevitable, that the legend of the master-artist of the Temple
should be "the Master's Part" among Masons who were temple-builders. How
else explain the veiled allusions to the name in the *Old Charges* as
read to Entered Apprentices, if it was not a secret reserved for a
higher rank of Mason? Why any disguise at all if it had no hidden
meaning? Manifestly the motif of the Third Degree was purely Masonic,
and we need not go outside the traditions of the order to account for
it.

Not content to trace the evolution of Masonry, even so able a man as
Albert Pike will have it that to a few men of intelligence who belonged
to one of the four old lodges in 1717 "is to be ascribed the authorship
of the Third Degree, and the introduction of Hermetic and other symbols
into Masonry; that they framed the three degrees for the purpose of
communicating their doctrines, veiled by their symbols, to those fitted
to receive them, and gave to others trite moral explanations they could
comprehend." <span id="fr_128"></span>[1](#fn_128.md) How gracious of them
to vouchsafe even trite explanations, but why frame a set of degrees

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

to conceal what they wished to hide? This is the same idea of something
alien imposed upon Masonry from without, with the added suggestion,
novel indeed, that Masonry was organized to hide the truth, rather than
to teach it. But did Masonry have to go outside its own history and
tradition to learn Hermetic truths and symbols? Who was Hermes? Whether
man or myth no one knows, but he was a great figure in the Egyptian
Mysteries, and was called the Father of Wisdom. <span
id="fr_129"></span>[1](#fn_129.md) What was his wisdom? From such fragments
of his lore as have floated down to us, impaired, it may be, but always
vivid, we discover that his wisdom was only a high spiritual faith and
morality taught in visions and rhapsodies, and using numbers as symbols.
Was such wisdom new to Masonry? Had not Hermes himself been a hero of
the order from the first, of whom we read in the *Old Charges*, in which
he has a place of honor alongside Euclid and Pythagoras? Wherefore go
elsewhere than to Masonry itself to trace the *pure* stream of Hermetic
faith through the ages? Certainly the men of the Grand Lodge were
adepts, but they were *Masonic adepts seeking to bring the buried temple
of Masonry to light and reveal it in a setting befitting its beauty*,
not cultists making use of it to exploit a private scheme of the
universe.

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

Who were those "men of intelligence" to whom Pike ascribed the making of
the Third Degree of Masonry? Tradition has fixed upon Desaguliers as the
ritualist of the Grand Lodge, and Lyon speaks of him as "the pioneer and
co-fabricator of symbolical Masonry." <span
id="fr_130"></span>[1](#fn_130.md) This, however, is an exaggeration,
albeit Desaguliers was worthy of high eulogy, as were Anderson and
Payne, who are said to have been his collaborators. <span
id="fr_131"></span>[2](#fn_131.md) But the fact is that

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

the Third Degree was not made; it grew—like the great cathedrals, no one
of which can be ascribed to a single artist, but to an order of men
working in unity of enterprise and aspiration. The process by which the
old ritual, described in the *Sloane MS*, was divided and developed into
three degrees between 1717 and 1730 was so gradual, so imperceptible,
that no exact date can be set; still less can it be attributed to any
one or two men. From the minutes of the Musical Society we learn that
the Lodge at the Queen's Head in Hollis Street was using three distinct
degrees in 1724. As early as 1727 we come upon the custom of setting
apart a separate night for the Master's Degree, the drama having
evidently become more elaborate.

Further than this the Degree may not be discussed, except to say that
the Masons, tiring of the endless quarrels of sects, turned for relief
to the Ancient Mysteries as handed down in their traditions—the old,
high, heroic faith in God, and in the soul of man as the one
unconquerable thing upon this earth. If, as Aristotle said, it be the
mission of tragedy to cleanse and exalt us, leaving us subdued with a
sense of pity and hope and fortified against ill fortune, it is
permitted us to add that in

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

simplicity, depth, and power, in its grasp of the realities of the life
of man, its portrayal of the stupidity of evil and the splendor of
virtue, its revelation of that in our humanity which leads it to defy
death, giving up everything, even to life itself, rather than defame,
defile, or betray its moral integrity, and in its prophecy of the
victory of light over shadow, there is not another drama known among men
like the Third Degree of Masonry. Edwin Booth, a loyal Mason, and no
mean judge of the essence of tragedy, left these words:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">In all my research and study, in all my close
analysis of the masterpieces of Shakespeare, in my earnest determination
to make those plays appear real on the mimic stage, I have never, and
nowhere, met tragedy so real, so sublime, so magnificent as the legend
of Hiram. It is substance without shadow—the manifest destiny of life
which requires no picture and scarcely a word to make a lasting
impression upon all who can understand. To be a Worshipful Master, and
to throw my whole soul into that work, with the candidate for my
audience and the Lodge for my stage, would be a greater personal
distinction than to receive the plaudits of people in the theaters of
the world.</span>

</div>

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_112"></span>[175:1](bui11.htm#fr_112.md) We should not forget
that noble dynasty of large and liberal souls in the seventeenth
century—John Hales, Chillingsworth, Which-cote, John Smith, Henry More,
Jeremy Taylor—whose *Liberty of Prophesying* set the principle of
toleration to stately strains of eloquence—Sir Thomas Browne, and
Richard Baxter; saints, every one of them, finely-poised,
sweet-tempered, repelled from all extremes alike, and walking the middle
path of wisdom and charity. Milton, too, taught tolerance in a bigoted
and bitter age (see *Seventeenth Century Men of Latitude*, E. A.
George).

<span id="fn_113"></span>[176:1](bui11.htm#fr_113.md) For instance the
*Cooke MS*, next to the oldest of all, as well as the *W. Watson* and
*York No. 4 MSS*. It is rather surprising, in view of the supremacy of
the Church in those times, to find such <span id="page_177">p.
177</span> evidence of what Dr. Mackey called the chief mission of
primitive Masonry—the preservation of belief in the unity of God. These
MSS did not succumb to the theology of the Church, and their invocations
remind us more of the God of Isaiah than of the decrees of the Council
of Nicæa.

<span id="fn_114"></span>[178:1](bui11.htm#fr_114.md) It was, perhaps, a
picture of the Masonic Lodges of that era that Toland drew in his
*Socratic Society*, published in 1720, which, however, he clothed in a
vesture quite un-Grecian. At least, the symposia or brotherly feasts of
his society, their give-and-take of questions and answers, their
aversion to the rule of mere physical force, to compulsory religious
belief, and to creed hatred, as well as their mild and tolerant
disposition and their brotherly regard for one another, remind one of
the spirit and habits of the Masons of that day.

<span id="fn_115"></span>[179:1](bui11.htm#fr_115.md) Now is as good a time
as another to name certain curious theories which have been put forth to
account for the origin of Masonry in general, and of the organization of
the Grand Lodge in particular. They are as follows: First, that it was
all due to an imaginary Temple of Solomon described by Lord Bacon in a
utopian romance called the *New Atlantis*; and this despite the fact
that the temple in the Bacon story was not a house at all, but the name
of an ideal state. Second, that the object of Freemasonry and the origin
of the Third Degree was the restoration of Charles II to the throne of
England; the idea being that the Masons, who called themselves "Sons of
the Widow," meant thereby to express their allegiance to the Queen.
Third, that Freemasonry was founded by Oliver Cromwell—he of all men!—to
defeat the royalists. Fourth, that Free-masons were derived from the
order of the Knights Templars. Even Lessing once held this theory, but
seems later to have given it up. Which one of these theories surpasses
the others in absurdity, it would be hard to say. De Quincey explodes
them one by one with some detail in his "Inquiry into the <span
id="page_180">p. 180</span> Origin of the Free-masons," to which he
might also have added his own pet notion of the Rosicrucian origin of
the order—it being only a little less fantastic than the rest (De
Quincey's Works, vol. xvi).

<span id="fn_116"></span>[183:1](bui11.htm#fr_116.md) Of the Masonic feasts
of St. John the Baptist and St. John the Evangelist much has been
written, and to little account. In pre-Christian times, as we have seen,
the Roman Collegia were wont to adopt pagan deities as patrons. When
Christianity came, the names of its saints—some of them martyrs of the
order of builders—were substituted for the old pagan gods. Why the two
Saints John were chosen by Masons—rather than St. Thomas, who was the
patron saint of architecture—has never been made clear. At any rate,
these two feasts, coming at the time of the summer and winter solstices,
are in reality older than Christianity, being reminiscences of the old
Light Religion in which Masonry had its origin.

<span id="fn_117"></span>[183:2](bui11.htm#fr_117.md) The badge of office
was a huge white apron, such as we see in Hogarth's picture of the
*Night*. The collar was of much the same shape as that at present in
use, only shorter. When the color was changed to blue, and why, is
uncertain, but probably not until 1813, when we begin to see both apron
and collar edged with blue. (See chapter on "Clothing and Regalia," in
*Things a Freemason Ought to Know*, by J. W. Crowe.) In 1727 the
officers of all private—or as we would say, subordinate—Lodges were
ordered to wear "the jewels of Masonry hanging to a white apron." In
1731 we find the Grand Master wearing gold or gilt jewels pendant to
blue ribbons about the neck, and a white leather apron *lined* with blue
silk.

<span id="fn_118"></span>[184:1](bui11.htm#fr_118.md) This is clear from
the book of *Constitutions* of 1723, which is said to be "for the use of
Lodges in London." Then follow the names of the Masters and Wardens of
twenty Lodges, all in London. There was no thought at the time of
imposing the authority of the Grand Lodge upon the country in general,
much less upon the world. Its growth we shall sketch later. For an
excellent article on "The Foundation of Modern Masonry," by G. W. Speth,
giving details of the organization of the Grand Lodge and its changes,
see *A. Q. C.*, ii, 86. If an elaborate account is wanted, it may be
found in Gould's *History of Masonry*, vol. iii.

<span id="fn_119"></span>[184:2](bui11.htm#fr_119.md) *History of the Four
Lodges*, by R. F. Gould. Apparently the Goose and Gridiron Lodge—No.
1—is the only one of the four now in existence. After various changes of
name it is now the Lodge of Antiquity, No. 2.

<span id="fn_120"></span>[185:1](bui11.htm#fr_120.md) *Royal Masons*, by G.
W. Speth.

<span id="fn_121"></span>[187:1](bui11.htm#fr_121.md) From a meager sketch
of Dr. Anderson in the Gentlemen's Magazine, 1783, we learn that he was
a native of Scotland—the place of his birth is not given—and that for
many years he was minister of the Scots Presbyterian Church in Swallow
Street, Piccadilly, and well known to the folk of that faith in
London—called "Bishop" Anderson by his friends. He married the widow of
an army officer, who bore him a son and a daughter. Although a learned
man—compiler of a book of *Royal Genealogies*, which seems to have been
his hobby—he was somewhat imprudent in business, having lost most of his
property in 1720. Whether he was a Mason before coming to London is
unknown, but he took a great part in the work of the Grand Lodge,
entering it, apparently, in <span id="page_188">p. 188</span> 1721.
Toward the close of his life he suffered many misfortunes, but of what
description we are not told. He died in 1739. Perhaps his learning was
exaggerated by his Masonic eulogists, but he was a noble man and
manifestly a useful one (Gould's *History of Masonry*, vol. iii).

<span id="fn_122"></span>[189:1](bui11.htm#fr_122.md) Having emphasized
this point so repeatedly, the writer feels it just to himself to state
his own position, lest he be thought a kind of materialist, or at least
an enemy of mysticism. Not so. Instead, he has long been an humble
student of the great mystics; they are his best friends—as witness his
two little books, *The Eternal Christ*, and *What Have the Saints to
Teach Us*? But mysticism is one thing, and mystification is another, and
the former may be stated in this way:

First, by mysticism—only another word for spirituality—is meant our
sense of an Unseen World, of our citizenship in it, of God and the soul,
and of all the forms of life and beauty as symbols <span
id="page_190">p. 190</span> of things higher than themselves. That is to
say, if a man has any religion at all that is not mere theory or form,
he is a mystic; the difference between him and Plato or St. Francis
being only a matter of genius and spiritual culture—between a boy
whistling a tune and Beethoven writing music.

Second, since mysticism is native to the soul of man and the common
experience of all who rise above the animal, it is not an exclusive
possession of any set of adepts to be held as a secret. Any man who bows
in prayer, or lifts his thought heavenward, is an initiate into the
eternal mysticism which is the strength and solace of human life.

Third, the old time Masons were religious men, and as such sharers in
this great human experience of divine things, and did not need to go to
Hidden Teachers to learn mysticism. They lived and worked in the light
of it. It shone in their symbols, as it does in all symbols that have
any meaning or beauty. It is, indeed, the soul of symbolism, every
emblem being an effort to express a reality too great for words.

So, then, Masonry is mystical as music is mystical—like poetry, and
love, and faith, and prayer, and all else that makes it worth our time
to live; but its mysticism is sweet, sane, and natural, far from
fantastic, and in nowise eerie, unreal, or unbalanced. Of course these
words fail to describe it, as all words must, and it is therefore that
Masonry uses parables, pictures, and symbols.

<span id="fn_123"></span>[190:1](bui11.htm#fr_123.md) *Seventeenth Century
Descriptions of Solomon's Temple*, by Prof. S. P. Johnston (*A. Q. C.*,
xii, 135).

<span id="fn_124"></span>[191:1](bui11.htm#fr_124.md) *Transactions Jewish
Historical Society of England*, vol. ii.

<span id="fn_125"></span>[191:2](bui11.htm#fr_125.md) Smith's *Dictionary
of the Bible*, article "Temple."

<span id="fn_126"></span>[192:1](bui11.htm#fr_126.md) *Jewish
Encyclopedia*, art. "Freemasonry." Also *Builder's Rites*, G. W. Speth.

<span id="fn_127"></span>[192:2](bui11.htm#fr_127.md) In the *Book of
Constitutions*, 1723, Dr. Anderson dilates at length on the building of
the Temple—including a note on the meaning of the name Abif, which, it
will be remembered, was not found in the Authorized Version of the
Bible; and then he suddenly breaks off with the words: "*But leaving
what must not, indeed cannot, be communicated in Writing*." It is
incredible that he thus introduced <span id="page_193">p. 193</span>
among Masons a name and legend unknown to them. Had he done so, would it
have met with such instant and universal acceptance by old Masons who
stood for the ancient usages of the order?

<span id="fn_128"></span>[193:1](bui11.htm#fr_128.md) Letter to Gould
"Touching Masonic Symbolism."

<span id="fn_129"></span>[194:1](bui11.htm#fr_129.md) *Hermes and Plato*,
Edouard Schure.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[195:1](bui11.htm#fr_130.md) *History of the Lodge
of Edinburgh*.

<span id="fn_131"></span>[195:2](bui11.htm#fr_131.md) Steinbrenner,
following Findel, speaks of the Third Degree as if it were a pure
invention, quoting a passage from *Ahiman Rezon*, by Lawrence Dermott,
to prove it. He further states that Anderson and Desaguliers were
"publicly accused of manufacturing the degree, *which they never
denied*" (*History of Masonry*, chap. vii). But inasmuch as they were
not accused of it until they had been many years in their graves, their
silence is hardly to be wondered at. Dr. Mackey styles Desaguliers "the
Father of Modern Speculative Masonry," and attributes to him, more than
to any other one man, the present existence of the order as a living
institution (*Encyclopedia of Freemasonry*). Surely that is going too
far, much as Desaguliers deserves to be honored by the order. Dr. J. T.
Desaguliers was a French Protestant clergyman, whose family came to
England following the revocation of the Edict of Nantes. He was
graduated from Christ Church College, Oxford, in 1710, succeeding Neill
as lecturer in Experimental Philosophy. He was especially learned in
natural philosophy, mathematics, geometry, and optics, having lectured
before the King on various occasions. He was very popular in the Grand
Lodge, and his power as an orator made his manner of conferring a degree
impressive—which may explain his having been accused of inventing the
degrees. He was a loyal and able Mason, a student of the history and
ritual of the order, and was elected as the third Grand Master of Masons
in England. Like Anderson, his later life is said to have been beclouded
<span id="page_196">p. 196</span> by poverty and sorrow, though some of
the facts are in dispute (Gould's *History of Masonry*, vol. iii).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. Universal Masonry](bui12.md)
