[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2060055)  [Next](2060057) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.XLV"></span>

<span id="v.XLV-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="v.XLV-p1.1"></span>Letter XLV. To Asella.</span>

<span id="v.XLV-p2"></span>After leaving Rome for the East, Jerome
writes to Asella to refute the calumnies by which he had been assailed,
especially as regards his intimacy with Paula and Eustochium. Written on
board ship at Ostia, in August, 385 <span class="c17"><span
id="v.XLV-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span>

<span id="v.XLV-p3"></span>1. Were I to think myself able to requite
your kindness I should be foolish. God is able in my stead to reward a
soul which is consecrated to Him. So unworthy, indeed, am I of your
regard that I have never ventured to estimate its value or even to wish
that it might be given me for Christ’s sake. Some consider me a wicked
man, laden with iniquity; and such language is more than justified by my
actual sins. Yet in dealing with the bad you do well to account them
good. It is dangerous to judge another man’s servant; <span
id="fr_919"></span>[920](#fn_919) and to speak evil of the righteous is
a sin not easily pardoned. The day will surely come <span
id="page_59">p. 59</span> <span id="v.XLV-Page_59"></span>when you and I
shall mourn for others; for not a few will be in the flames.

<span id="v.XLV-p5"></span>2. I am said to be an infamous turncoat, a
slippery knave, one who lies and deceives others by Satanic arts. Which
is the safer course, I should like to know, to invent or credit these
charges against innocent persons, or to refuse to believe them, even of
the guilty? Some kissed my hands, yet attacked me with the tongues of
vipers; sympathy was on their lips, but malignant joy in their hearts.
The Lord saw them and had them in derision, <span
id="fr_920"></span>[921](#fn_920) reserving my poor self and them for
judgment to come. One would attack my gait or my way of laughing;
another would find something amiss in my looks; another would suspect
the simplicity of my manner. Such is the company in which I have lived
for almost three years.

<span id="v.XLV-p7"></span>It often happened that I found myself
surrounded with virgins, and to some of these I expounded the divine
books as best I could. Our studies brought about constant intercourse,
this soon ripened into intimacy, and this, in turn, produced mutual
confidence. If they have ever seen anything in my conduct unbecoming a
Christian let them say so. Have I taken any one’s money? Have I not
disdained all gifts, whether small or great? Has the chink of any one’s
coin been heard in my hand? <span id="fr_921"></span>[922](#fn_921) Has
my language been equivocal, or my eye wanton? No; my sex is my one
crime, and even on this score I am not assailed, save when there is a
talk of Paula going to Jerusalem. Very well, then. They believed my
accuser when he lied; why do they not believe him when he retracts? He
is the same man now that he was then, and yet he who before declared me
guilty now confesses that I am innocent. Surely a man’s words under
torture are more trustworthy than in moments of gayety, except, indeed,
that people are prone to believe falsehoods designed to gratify their
ears, or, worse still, stories which, till then uninvented, they have
urged others to invent.

<span id="v.XLV-p9"></span>3. Before I became acquainted with the family
of the saintly Paula, all Rome resounded with my praises. Almost every
one concurred in judging me worthy of the episcopate. Damasus, of
blessed memory, spoke no words but mine. <span
id="fr_922"></span>[923](#fn_922) Men called me holy, humble, eloquent.

<span id="v.XLV-p11"></span>Did I ever cross the threshold of a light
woman? Was I ever fascinated by silk dresses, or glowing gems, or rouged
faces, or display of gold? Of all the ladies in Rome but one had power
to subdue me, and that one was Paula. She mourned and fasted, she was
squalid with dirt, her eyes were dim from weeping. For whole nights she
would pray to the Lord for mercy, and often the rising sun found her
still at her prayers. The psalms were her only songs, the Gospel her
whole speech, continence her one indulgence, fasting the staple of her
life. The only woman who took my fancy was one whom I had not so much as
seen at table. But when I began to revere, respect, and venerate her as
her conspicuous chastity deserved, all my former virtues forsook me on
the spot.

<span id="v.XLV-p12"></span>4. Oh! envy, that dost begin by tearing
thyself! Oh! cunning malignity of Satan, that dost always persecute
things holy! Of all the ladies in Rome, the only ones that caused
scandal were Paula and Melanium, who, despising their wealth and
deserting their children, uplifted the cross of the Lord as a standard
of religion. Had they frequented the baths, or chosen to use perfumes,
or taken advantage of their wealth and position as widows to enjoy life
and to be independent, they would have been saluted as ladies of high
rank and saintliness. As it is, of course, it is in order to appear
beautiful that they put on sackcloth and ashes, and they endure fasting
and filth merely to go down into the Gehenna of fire! As if they could
not perish with the crowd whom the mob applauds! <span
id="fr_923"></span>[924](#fn_923) If it were Gentiles or Jews who thus
assailed their mode of life, they would at least have the consolation of
failing to please only those whom Christ Himself has failed to please.
But, shameful to say, it is Christians who thus neglect the care of
their own households, and, disregarding the beams in their own eyes,
look for motes in those of their neighbors. <span
id="fr_924"></span>[925](#fn_924) They pull to pieces every profession
of religion, and think that they have found a remedy for their own doom,
if they can disprove the holiness of others, if they can detract from
every one, if they can show that those who perish are many, and sinners,
a great multitude.

<span id="v.XLV-p15"></span>5. You bathe daily; another regards such
over-niceness as defilement. You surfeit yourself on wild fowl and pride
yourself on eating sturgeon; I, on the contrary, fill my belly with
beans. You find pleasure in troops of laughing girls; I prefer Paula and
Melanium who weep. You covet what belongs to others; they disdain what
is their own. You like wines flavored with honey; they drink cold water,
more delicious still. You count as lost what you cannot have, eat up,
<span id="page_60">p. 60</span> <span id="v.XLV-Page_60"></span>and
devour on the moment; they believe in the Scriptures, and look for good
things to come. And if they are wrong, and if the resurrection of the
body on which they rely is a foolish delusion, what does it matter to
you? We, on our side, look with disfavor on such a life as yours. You
can fatten yourself on your good things as much as you please; I for my
part prefer paleness and emaciation. You suppose that men like me are
unhappy; we regard you as more unhappy still. Thus we reciprocate each
other’s thoughts, and appear to each other mutually insane.

<span id="v.XLV-p16"></span>6. I write this in haste, dear Lady Asella,
as I go on board, overwhelmed with grief and tears; yet I thank my God
that I am counted worthy of the world’s hatred. <span
id="fr_925"></span>[926](#fn_925) Pray for me that, after Babylon, I may
see Jerusalem once more; that Joshua, the son of Josedech, may have
dominion over me, <span id="fr_926"></span>[927](#fn_926) and not
Nebuchadnezzar, that Ezra, whose name means helper, may come and restore
me to my own country. I was a fool in wishing to sing the Lord’s song in
a strange land, <span id="fr_927"></span>[928](#fn_927) and in leaving
Mount Sinai, to seek the help of Egypt. I forgot that the Gospel warns
us <span id="fr_928"></span>[929](#fn_928) that he who goes down from
Jerusalem immediately falls among robbers, is spoiled, is wounded, is
left for dead. But, although priest and Levite may disregard me, there
is still the good Samaritan who, when men said to him, “Thou art a
Samaritan and hast a devil,” <span id="fr_929"></span>[930](#fn_929)
disclaimed having a devil, but did not disclaim being a Samaritan, <span
id="fr_930"></span>[931](#fn_930) this being the Hebrew equivalent for
our word guardian. Men call me a mischief-maker, and I take the title as
a recognition of my faith. For I am but a servant, and the Jews still
call my master a magician. The apostle, <span
id="fr_931"></span>[932](#fn_931) likewise, is spoken of as a deceiver.
There hath no temptation taken me but such as is common to man. <span
id="fr_932"></span>[933](#fn_932) How few distresses have I endured, I
who am yet a soldier of the cross! Men have laid to my charge a crime of
which I am not guilty; <span id="fr_933"></span>[934](#fn_933) but I
know that I must enter the kingdom of heaven through evil report as well
as through good. <span id="fr_934"></span>[935](#fn_934)

<span id="v.XLV-p27"></span>7. Salute Paula and Eustochium, who,
whatever the world may think, are always mine in Christ. Salute Albina,
your mother, and Marcella, your sister; Marcellina also, and the holy
Felicitas; and say to them all: “We must all stand before the judgment
seat of Christ, <span id="fr_935"></span>[936](#fn_935) and there shall
be revealed the principle by which each has lived.”

<span id="v.XLV-p29"></span>And now, illustrious model of chastity and
virginity, remember me, I beseech you, in your prayers, and by your
intercessions calm the waves of the sea.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_919"></span>[58:920](2060056.htm#fr_919) <span
id="v.XLV-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.XLV-p4"></span> [Rom. xiv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#004)<span id="v.XLV-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_920"></span>[59:921](2060056.htm#fr_920) <span
id="v.XLV-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.XLV-p6"></span> [Ps. ii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#004)<span id="v.XLV-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_921"></span>[59:922](2060056.htm#fr_921) <span
id="v.XLV-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.XLV-p8"></span> Cf. [1 Sam. xii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#003)<span id="v.XLV-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_922"></span>[59:923](2060056.htm#fr_922) <span
id="v.XLV-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.XLV-p10"></span> Damasus meus sermo erat, or “spoke of none
but me.”

<span id="fn_923"></span>[59:924](2060056.htm#fr_923) <span
id="v.XLV-p12.1"></span>

<span id="v.XLV-p13"></span> Ironical.

<span id="fn_924"></span>[59:925](2060056.htm#fr_924) <span
id="v.XLV-p13.1"></span>

<span id="v.XLV-p14"></span> [Matt. vii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#003)<span id="v.XLV-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_925"></span>[60:926](2060056.htm#fr_925) <span
id="v.XLV-p16.1"></span>

<span id="v.XLV-p17"></span> [Joh. xv.
18](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#018)<span id="v.XLV-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_926"></span>[60:927](2060056.htm#fr_926) <span
id="v.XLV-p17.2"></span>

<span id="v.XLV-p18"></span> [Haggai i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#001)<span id="v.XLV-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_927"></span>[60:928](2060056.htm#fr_927) <span
id="v.XLV-p18.2"></span>

<span id="v.XLV-p19"></span> [Ps. cxxxvii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#004)<span id="v.XLV-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_928"></span>[60:929](2060056.htm#fr_928) <span
id="v.XLV-p19.2"></span>

<span id="v.XLV-p20"></span> [Luke x.
30-35](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#030)<span id="v.XLV-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_929"></span>[60:930](2060056.htm#fr_929) <span
id="v.XLV-p20.2"></span>

<span id="v.XLV-p21"></span> [Joh. viii.
48](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#048)<span id="v.XLV-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_930"></span>[60:931](2060056.htm#fr_930) <span
id="v.XLV-p21.2"></span>

<span id="v.XLV-p22"></span> [Joh. viii.
49](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#049)<span id="v.XLV-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_931"></span>[60:932](2060056.htm#fr_931) <span
id="v.XLV-p22.2"></span>

<span id="v.XLV-p23"></span> *I.e.* Paul. See [2 Cor. vi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#009)<span id="v.XLV-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_932"></span>[60:933](2060056.htm#fr_932) <span
id="v.XLV-p23.2"></span>

<span id="v.XLV-p24"></span> [1 Cor. x.
13](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#013)<span id="v.XLV-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_933"></span>[60:934](2060056.htm#fr_933) <span
id="v.XLV-p24.2"></span>

<span id="v.XLV-p25"></span> He means the sin of incontinence.

<span id="fn_934"></span>[60:935](2060056.htm#fr_934) <span
id="v.XLV-p25.1"></span>

<span id="v.XLV-p26"></span> [2 Cor. vi.
8](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#008)<span id="v.XLV-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_935"></span>[60:936](2060056.htm#fr_935) <span
id="v.XLV-p27.1"></span>

<span id="v.XLV-p28"></span> [Rom. xiv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#010)<span id="v.XLV-p28.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter XLVI](2060057)
