[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2060092)  [Next](2060094) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.LXXXII"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXII-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="v.LXXXII-p1.1"></span>Letter LXXXII. To Theophilus Bishop of
Alexandria.</span>

<span id="v.LXXXII-p2"></span>Two years after his former attempt (see
Letter LXIII.) Theophilus again wrote to Jerome urging him to be
reconciled with John of Jerusalem. Jerome replies that there is nothing
he desires more earnestly than peace but that this must be real and not
a hollow truce. He speaks very bitterly of John who has, he alleges,
intrigued to procure his banishment from Palestine. He also deals with
the ordination of his brother Paulinian (for which see Letter LI.) and
defends himself for having translated Origen’s commentaries by adducing
the example of Hilary of Poitiers. This letter should be compared with
the Treatise “Against John of Jerusalem” in this volume. Its date is 399
<span class="c17"><span id="v.LXXXII-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span>

<span id="v.LXXXII-p3"></span>1. Your letter shews you to possess that
heritage of the Lord of which when going to the Father he said to the
apostles, “peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you,” <span
id="fr_2495"></span>[2496](#fn_2495) and to own the happiness described
in the words, “blessed are the peace-makers.” <span
id="fr_2496"></span>[2497](#fn_2496) You coax as a father, you teach as
a master, you enjoin as a bishop. You come to me not with a rod and
severity but in a spirit of kindness, gentleness, and meekness. <span
id="fr_2497"></span>[2498](#fn_2497) Your opening words echo the
humility of Christ who saved men not with thunder and lightning <span
id="fr_2498"></span>[2499](#fn_2498) but as a wailing babe in the manger
and as a silent sufferer upon the cross. You <span id="page_171">p.
171</span> <span id="v.LXXXII-Page_171"></span>have read the prediction
made in one who was a type of Him, “Lord, remember David and all his
meekness,” <span id="fr_2499"></span>[2500](#fn_2499) and you know how
it was fulfilled afterwards in Himself. “Learn of me,” He said, “for I
am meek and lowly in heart.” <span id="fr_2500"></span>[2501](#fn_2500)
You have quoted many passages from the sacred books in praise of peace,
you have flitted like a bee over the flowery fields of scripture, you
have culled with cunning eloquence all that is sweet and conducive to
concord. I was already running after peace, but you have made me quicken
my pace: my sails were set for the voyage but your exhortation has
filled them with a stronger breeze. I drink in the sweet streams of
peace not reluctantly and with aversion but eagerly and with open mouth.

<span id="v.LXXXII-p10"></span>2. But what can I do, I who can only wish
for peace and have no power to bring it about? Even though the wish may
win its recompense with God, its futility must still sadden him who
cherishes it. When the apostle said, “as much as lieth in you, live
peaceably with all men,” <span id="fr_2501"></span>[2502](#fn_2501) he
knew quite well that the realisation of peace depends upon the consent
of two parties. The prophet truly cries “They say Peace, peace: and yet
there is no peace.” <span id="fr_2502"></span>[2503](#fn_2502) To
overthrow peace by actions while professing it in words is not hard. To
point out its advantages is one thing and to strive for it another.
Men’s speeches may be all for unity but their actions may enforce
bondage. I wish for peace as much as others; and not only do I wish for
it, I ask for it. But the peace which I want is the peace of Christ; a
true peace, a peace without rancour, a peace which does not involve war,
a peace which will not reduce opponents but will unite friends. How can
I term domination peace? I must call things by their right names. Where
there is hatred there let men talk of feuds; and where there is mutual
esteem, there only let peace be spoken of. For my part I neither rend
the church nor separate myself from the communion of the fathers. From
my very cradle, I may say, I have been reared on Catholic milk; and no
one can be a better churchman than one who has never been a heretic. But
I know nothing of a peace that is without love or of a communion that is
without peace. In the gospel I read:—“if thou bring thy gift to the
altar and there rememberest that thy brother hath aught against thee;
leave there thy gift before the altar and go thy way; first be
reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift.” <span
id="fr_2503"></span>[2504](#fn_2503) If then we may not offer gifts that
are our own unless we are at peace with our brothers; how much less can
we receive the body of Christ if we cherish enmity in our hearts? How
can I conscientiously approach Christ’s eucharist and answer the
Amen <span id="fr_2504"></span>[2505](#fn_2504) if I doubt the charity
of him who ministers it?

<span id="v.LXXXII-p15"></span>3. Hear me, I beg you with patience and
do not take truthfulness for flattery. Is any man reluctant to
communicate with you? Does any turn his face away when you hold out your
hand? Does any at the holy banquet offer you the kiss of Judas? <span
id="fr_2505"></span>[2506](#fn_2505) At your approach the monks instead
of trembling rejoice. They race to meet you and leaving their dens in
the desert are fain to master you by their humility. What compels them
to come forth? Is it not their love for you? What draws together the
scattered dwellers in the desert? Is it not the esteem in which they
hold you? A parent ought to love his children; and not only a parent but
a bishop ought to be loved by his children. Neither ought to be feared.
There is an old saying: <span id="fr_2506"></span>[2507](#fn_2506) “whom
a man fears he hates; and whom he hates, he would fain see dead.”
Accordingly, while for the young the holy scripture makes fear the
beginning of knowledge, <span id="fr_2507"></span>[2508](#fn_2507) it
also tells us that “perfect love casteth out fear.” <span
id="fr_2508"></span>[2509](#fn_2508) You exact no obedience from them;
therefore the monks obey you. You offer them a kiss; therefore they bow
the neck. You shew yourself a common soldier; therefore they make you
their general. Thus from being one among many you become one above many.
Freedom is easily roused if attempts are made to crush it. No one gets
more from a free man than he who does not force him to be a slave. I
know the canons of the church; I know what rank her ministers hold; and
from men and books I have daily up to the present learned and gathered
many things. The kingdom of the mild David was quickly dismembered by
one who chastised his people with scorpions and fancied that his fingers
were thicker than his father’s loins. <span
id="fr_2509"></span>[2510](#fn_2509) The Roman people refused to brook
insolence even in a king. <span id="fr_2510"></span>[2511](#fn_2510)
Moses was leader of the host of Israel; he brought ten plagues upon
Egypt; sky, earth, and sea alike obeyed his commands: yet he is spoken
of as “very meek above all the men which were” at that time “upon the
face of the earth.” <span id="fr_2511"></span>[2512](#fn_2511) He
maintained his forty-years’ supremacy because he tempered the insolence
of office with gentleness and meekness. When he was being stoned by the
people he <span id="page_172">p. 172</span> <span
id="v.LXXXII-Page_172"></span>made intercession for them; <span
id="fr_2512"></span>[2513](#fn_2512) nay more he wished to be blotted
out of God’s book sooner than that the flock committed to him should
perish. <span id="fr_2513"></span>[2514](#fn_2513) He sought to imitate
the Shepherd who would, he knew, carry on his shoulders even the
wandering sheep. “The good Shepherd”—they are the Lord’s own
words—“layeth down his life for the sheep.” <span
id="fr_2514"></span>[2515](#fn_2514) One of his disciples can wish to be
anathema from Christ for his brethren’s sake, his kinsmen according to
the flesh who were Israelites. <span
id="fr_2515"></span>[2516](#fn_2515) If then Paul can desire to perish
that the lost may not be lost, how much should good parents not provoke
their children to wrath <span id="fr_2516"></span>[2517](#fn_2516) or by
too great severity embitter those who are naturally mild.

<span id="v.LXXXII-p28"></span>4. The limits of a letter compel me to
restrain myself; otherwise, indignation would make me diffuse. In an
epistle which its writer regards as conciliatory but which to me appears
full of malice my opponent <span id="fr_2517"></span>[2518](#fn_2517)
admits that I have never calumniated him or accused him of heresy. Why
then does he calumniate me by spreading a rumour that I am infected with
that awful malady and am in revolt against the Church? Why is he so
ready to spare his real assailants and so eager to injure me who have
done nothing to injure him? Before my brother’s ordination he said
nothing of any dogmatic difference between himself and pope Epiphanius.
What then can have “forced” him—I use his own word—publicly to argue a
point which no one had yet raised? One so full of wisdom as you knows
well the danger of such discussions and that silence is in such cases
the safest course; except, indeed, on some occasion which renders it
imperative to deal with great matters. What ability and eloquence it
must have needed to compress into a single sermon—as he boasts to have
done <span id="fr_2518"></span>[2519](#fn_2518) —all the topics which
the most learned writers have treated in detail in voluminous treatises!
But this is nothing to me: it is for the hearers of the sermon to notice
and for the writer of the letter to realize. But as for me he ought of
his own accord to acquit me of bringing the charge against him. I was
not present and did not hear the sermon. I was only one of the many,
indeed hardly one of them; for while others were crying out I held my
peace. Let us confront the accused and the accuser, and let us give
credit to him whose services, life, and doctrine are seen to be the
best.

<span id="v.LXXXII-p31"></span>5. You see, do you not, that I shut my
eyes to many things and touch upon others only in the most cursory
manner, hinting at what I suppose rather than saying out what I think.

<span id="v.LXXXII-p32"></span>I understand and approve your
manœuvres; <span id="fr_2519"></span>[2520](#fn_2519) how in the
interests of the peace of the Church you stop your ears when you come
within range of the Sirens. Moreover, trained as you have been from
childhood in sacred studies, you know exactly what is meant by each
expression which you use. You knowingly employ ambiguous terms and
carefully balanced sentences so as not to condemn others <span
id="fr_2520"></span>[2521](#fn_2520) or repudiate us. <span
id="fr_2521"></span>[2522](#fn_2521) But it is not a pure faith and a
frank confession which look for quibbles or circumlocutions. What is
simply believed must be professed with equal simplicity. For my part I
could cry out—though it were amid the swords and fires of Babylon, “why
does the answer evade the question? why is there no frank,
straightforward declaration?” From beginning to end all is shrinking,
compromise, ambiguity: as though he were trying to walk on spikes of
corn. His blood boils with eagerness for peace; yet he will not give a
straightforward answer! others are free to insult him; for, when he is
insulted, he does not venture to retaliate. I meantime hold my peace:
for the present I shall let it be thought that I am too busy, or
ignorant, or afraid; for how would he treat me were I to accuse him, if
when I praise him—as he admits himself that I do—he secretly traduces
me?

<span id="v.LXXXII-p36"></span>6. His whole letter is less an exposition
of his faith than a mass of calumnies aimed at myself. Without any of
those mutual courtesies which men may use towards each other without
flattery, he takes up my name again and again, flouts it, and bandies it
about as though I were blotted out of the book of the living. He thinks
that he has beaten me black and blue with his letter; and that I live
for the trifles at which he aims, I who from my boyhood have been shut
up in a monastic cell, and have always made it my aim to be rather than
to seem a good man. Some of us, it is true, he mentions with respect,
but only that he may afterwards wound us more deeply. As if, forsooth,
we too have no open secrets to reveal! One of his charges is that we
have allowed a slave to be ordained. Yet he himself has clergymen of the
same class, and he must have read of Onesimus who, being made regenerate
by Paul in prison, <span id="fr_2522"></span>[2523](#fn_2522) from a
slave became a deacon. Then he throws out that the slave in question was
a common informer; and, lest he should be compelled to prove the charge,
declares he has it from hearsay only! Why, <span id="page_173">p.
173</span> <span id="v.LXXXII-Page_173"></span>if I had chosen to repeat
the talk of the crowd and to listen to scandal-mongers, he would have
learned before now that I too know what all the world knows and have
heard the same stories as other people. He declares farther that
ordination has been given to this slave as a reward for a slander spread
abroad by him. Does not such cunning and subtlety appal one? And is
there any answer to eloquence so overwhelming? Which is best, to spread
a calumny or to suffer from one? To accuse a man whose love you may
afterwards wish for, or to pardon a sinner? And is it more tolerable
that a common informer should be made a consul than that he should be
made an ædile? <span id="fr_2523"></span>[2524](#fn_2523) He knows what
I pass over in silence and what I say; what I myself have heard and
what—from the fear of Christ—I perhaps refuse to believe.

<span id="v.LXXXII-p39"></span>7. He charges me with having translated
Origen into Latin. In this I do not stand alone for the confessor Hilary
has done the same, and we are both at one in this that while we have
rendered all that is useful, we have cut away all that was harmful. Let
him read our versions for himself, if he knows how (and as he constantly
converses and daily associates with Italians, <span
id="fr_2524"></span>[2525](#fn_2524) I think he cannot be ignorant of
Latin); or else, if he cannot quite take it in, let him use his
interpreters and then he will come to know that I deserve nothing but
praise for the work on which he grounds a charge against me. For, while
I have always allowed to Origen his great merit as an interpreter and
critic of the scriptures, I have invariably denied the truth of his
doctrines. Is it I then that let him loose upon the crowd? Is it I that
act sponsor to other preachers like him? No, for I know that a
difference must be made between the apostles and all other preachers.
The former always speak the truth; but the latter being men sometimes go
astray. It would be a strange defence of Origen surely to admit his
faults and then to excuse them by saying that other men have been guilty
of similar ones! As if, when you cannot venture to defend a man openly,
you may hope to shield him by imputing his mistake to a number of
others! As for the six thousand volumes of Origen of which he speaks, it
is impossible that any one should have read books which have never been
written: and I for my part find it easier to suppose that this falsehood
is due to the man who professes to have heard it rather than to him who
is said to have told it. <span id="fr_2525"></span>[2526](#fn_2525)

<span id="v.LXXXII-p42"></span>8. Again he avers that my brother <span
id="fr_2526"></span>[2527](#fn_2526) is the cause of the disagreement
which has arisen, a man who is content to stay in a monastic cell and
who regards the clerical office as onerous rather than honourable. And
although up to this very day he has spoon-fed us with insincere
protestations of peace, he has caused commotion in the minds of the
western bishops <span id="fr_2527"></span>[2528](#fn_2527) by telling
them that a mere youth, hardly more than a boy, has been ordained <span
id="fr_2528"></span>[2529](#fn_2528) presbyter of Bethlehem in his own
diocese. If this is the truth, all the bishops of Palestine must be
aware of it. For the monastery of the reverend pope Epiphanius—called
the old monastery—where my brother was ordained presbyter is situated in
the district of Eleutheropolis <span
id="fr_2529"></span>[2530](#fn_2529) and not in that of Ælia. <span
id="fr_2530"></span>[2531](#fn_2530) Furthermore his age is well known
to your Holiness; and as he has now attained to thirty years I apprehend
that no blame can attach to him on that score. Indeed this particular
age is stamped as full and complete by the mystery of Christ’s assumed
manhood. Let him call to mind the ancient law, and he will see that
after his twenty-fifth year a Levite might be chosen to the
priesthood; <span id="fr_2531"></span>[2532](#fn_2531) or if in this
passage he prefers to follow the Hebrew he will find that candidates for
the priesthood must be thirty years old. And that he may not venture to
say that “old things are passed away; and, behold, all things are become
new,” <span id="fr_2532"></span>[2533](#fn_2532) let him hear the
apostle’s words to Timothy, “Let no man despise thy youth.” <span
id="fr_2533"></span>[2534](#fn_2533) Certainly when my opponent was
himself ordained bishop, he was not much older than my brother is now.
And if he argues that youth is no hindrance to a bishop but that it is
to a presbyter because a young elder <span
id="fr_2534"></span>[2535](#fn_2534) is a contradiction in terms, I ask
him this question: Why has he himself ordained a presbyter of this age
or younger still, and that too to minister in another man’s church? But
if he cannot be at peace with my brother unless he consents to submit
and to renounce the bishop who has ordained him, he shews plainly that
his object is not peace but revenge, and that he will not rest satisfied
with the quietude of repose and peace unless he is able to inflict to
the full every penalty that he now threatens. Had he himself ordained my
brother, it would have made no difference to this latter. So dearly does
he love seclusion that he would even then have continued to live <span
id="page_174">p. 174</span> <span id="v.LXXXII-Page_174"></span>quietly
and would not have exercised his office. And should the bishop have seen
fit to rend the church on that score, he would then have owed him
nothing save the respect which is due to all who offer sacrifice. <span
id="fr_2535"></span>[2536](#fn_2535)

<span id="v.LXXXII-p53"></span>9. So much for his prolix defence of
himself or I should rather say his attack on me. In this letter I have
only answered him briefly and cursorily that from what I have said he
may perceive what I do not say, and may know that as I am a human being
I am a rational animal and well able to understand his shrewdness, and
that I am not so obtuse or brutish as to catch only the sound of his
words and not their meaning. I now ask of you to pardon my chagrin and
to allow that if it is arrogant to answer back, it is yet more arrogant
to bring baseless charges. Yet my answer has indicated what I might have
said rather than has actually said it. Why do men look for peace at a
distance? and why do they wish to have it enforced by word of command?
Let them shew themselves peacemakers, and peace will follow at once. Why
do they use the name of your holiness to terrorize us, when your
letter—strange contrast to their harsh and menacing words—breathes only
peace and meekness? For that the letter which Isidore the presbyter has
brought for me from you does make for peace and harmony I know by this,
that these insincere professors of a wish for peace have refused to
deliver it to me. Let them choose whichever alternative they please.
Either I am a good man or I am a bad one. If I am a good one let them
leave me in quiet: if I am a bad one, why do they desire to be in bad
company? Surely my opponent has learnt by experience the value of
humility. He who now tears asunder things which, formerly separate, he
of his own will put together, proves that in severing now what he then
joined, he is acting at the instigation of another. <span
id="fr_2536"></span>[2537](#fn_2536)

<span id="v.LXXXII-p55"></span>10. Recently he sought and obtained a
decree of exile against me, and I only wish that he had been able to
carry it out, <span id="fr_2537"></span>[2538](#fn_2537) so that, as the
will is imputed to him for the deed, so I too not in will only but in
deed might wear the crown of exile. The church of Christ has been
founded by shedding its own blood not that of others, by enduring
outrage not by inflicting it. Persecutions have made it grow; martyrdoms
have crowned it. Or if the Christians among whom I live are unique in
their love of severity and know only how to persecute and not how to
undergo persecution, there are Jews here, there are heretics professing
various false doctrines, and in particular the foulest of all, I mean,
Manichæism. Why is it that they do not venture to say a word against
them? Why am I the only person they wish to drive into exile? Am I who
communicate with the church the only person of whom it can be said that
he rends the church? I put it to you, is it not a fair demand either
that they should expel these others as well as myself, or that, if they
keep them, they should keep me too? All the same they honour men by
sending them into exile, for by so doing they separate them from the
company of heretics. It is a monk, <span
id="fr_2538"></span>[2539](#fn_2538) shame to say, who menaces monks and
obtains decrees of exile against them; and that too a monk who boasts
that he holds an apostolic chair. But the monastic tribe does not
succumb to terrorism: it prefers to expose its neck to the impending
sword rather than to allow its hands to be tied. Is not every monk an
exile from his country? Is he not an exile from the whole world? Where
is the need for the public authority, the cost of a rescript, the
journeyings up and down the earth to obtain one? Let him but touch me
with his little finger, and I will go into exile of myself. “The earth
is the Lord’s and the fulness thereof.” <span
id="fr_2539"></span>[2540](#fn_2539) Christ is not shut up in any one
spot.

<span id="v.LXXXII-p59"></span>11. Moreover when he writes that, though
I seem to be separated from communion with him, I in reality hold
communion with him through you and through the church of Rome: he need
not go so far afield, for I am connected with him in the same way also
here in Palestine. And lest even this should appear distant, in this
village of Bethlehem I hold communion with his presbyters as much as I
can. Thus it is clear that a private chagrin is not to be taken for the
cause of the church, and that one man’s choler, or even that of several
stirred up by him, ought not to be styled the displeasure of the church.
Accordingly I now repeat what I said at the beginning of my letter that
I for my part am desirous of Christ’s peace, that I pray for harmony,
and that I request you to admonish him not to exact peace but to purpose
it. Let him be satisfied with the pain which he has caused by the
insults that he has inflicted upon me in the past. Let him efface old
wounds by a little new charity. Let him shew himself what he was before,
when of his own choice he bestowed upon me his esteem. Let his words no
longer be tinged with a gall that flows from the heart of another. Let
him do what he wishes himself, and not what others <span
id="page_175">p. 175</span> <span id="v.LXXXII-Page_175"></span>force
him to wish. Either as a pontiff, let him exercise authority over all
alike, or as a follower of the apostle, let him serve all for the
salvation of all. <span id="fr_2540"></span>[2541](#fn_2540) If he will
shew himself such, I am ready freely to yield and to hold out my arms;
he will find me a friend and a kinsman, and will perceive that in Christ
I am submissive to him as to all the saints. “Charity,” writes the
apostle, “suffereth long and is kind; charity envieth not;…is not puffed
up…beareth all things, believeth all things.” <span
id="fr_2541"></span>[2542](#fn_2541) Charity is the mother of all
virtues, and the apostle’s words about faith, hope and charity <span
id="fr_2542"></span>[2543](#fn_2542) are like that threefold cord which
is not quickly broken. <span id="fr_2543"></span>[2544](#fn_2543) We
believe, we hope, and through our faith and hope we are joined together
in the bond of charity. <span id="fr_2544"></span>[2545](#fn_2544) It is
for these virtues that I and others have left our homes, it is for these
that we would live peaceably without any contention in the fields and
alone; paying all due veneration to Christ’s pontiffs—so long as they
preach the right faith—not because we fear them as lords but because we
honour them as fathers deferring also to bishops as bishops, but
refusing to serve under compulsion, beneath the shadow of episcopal
authority, men whom we do not choose to obey. I am not so much puffed up
in mind as not to know what is due to the priests of Christ. For he who
receives them, receives not them but Him, whose bishops they are. <span
id="fr_2545"></span>[2546](#fn_2545) But let them be content with the
honour which is theirs. Let them know that they are fathers and not
lords, especially in relation to those who scorn the ambitions of the
world and count peace and repose the best of all things. And may Christ
who is Almighty God grant to your prayers that I and my opponent may be
united not in a feigned and hollow peace but in true and sincere mutual
esteem, lest biting and devouring one another we be consumed one of
another. <span id="fr_2546"></span>[2547](#fn_2546)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2495"></span>[170:2496](2060093.htm#fr_2495) <span
id="v.LXXXII-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXII-p4"></span> [Joh. xiv.
27](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#027)<span id="v.LXXXII-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2496"></span>[170:2497](2060093.htm#fr_2496) <span
id="v.LXXXII-p4.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXII-p5"></span> [Matt. v.
9](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#009)<span id="v.LXXXII-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2497"></span>[170:2498](2060093.htm#fr_2497) <span
id="v.LXXXII-p5.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXII-p6"></span> [1 Cor. iv.
21](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#021)<span id="v.LXXXII-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2498"></span>[170:2499](2060093.htm#fr_2498) <span
id="v.LXXXII-p6.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXII-p7"></span> Cf. [Heb. xii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#018)<span id="v.LXXXII-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2499"></span>[171:2500](2060093.htm#fr_2499) <span
id="v.LXXXII-p7.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXII-p8"></span> [Ps. cxxxii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#001)<span id="v.LXXXII-p8.1"></span>,
LXX.

<span id="fn_2500"></span>[171:2501](2060093.htm#fr_2500) <span
id="v.LXXXII-p8.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXII-p9"></span> [Matt. xi.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#029)<span id="v.LXXXII-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2501"></span>[171:2502](2060093.htm#fr_2501) <span
id="v.LXXXII-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXII-p11"></span> [Rom. xii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#018)<span id="v.LXXXII-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2502"></span>[171:2503](2060093.htm#fr_2502) <span
id="v.LXXXII-p11.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXII-p12"></span> [Jer. xi.
14](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#014)<span id="v.LXXXII-p12.1"></span>,
LXX.

<span id="fn_2503"></span>[171:2504](2060093.htm#fr_2503) <span
id="v.LXXXII-p12.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXII-p13"></span> [Matt.
5:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#023),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#024)<span id="v.LXXXII-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2504"></span>[171:2505](2060093.htm#fr_2504) <span
id="v.LXXXII-p13.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXII-p14"></span> [1 Cor. xiv.
16](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#016)<span id="v.LXXXII-p14.1"></span>,
where in the Greek ‘giving of thanks’ is ‘eucharist.’

<span id="fn_2505"></span>[171:2506](2060093.htm#fr_2505) <span
id="v.LXXXII-p15.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXII-p16"></span> [Matt.
26:48](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#048),
[49](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#049)<span id="v.LXXXII-p16.1"></span>:
the kiss of peace formed an integral part of the eucharistic office from
primitive till mediæval times.

<span id="fn_2506"></span>[171:2507](2060093.htm#fr_2506) <span
id="v.LXXXII-p16.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXII-p17"></span> Attributed by Cicero to Ennius.

<span id="fn_2507"></span>[171:2508](2060093.htm#fr_2507) <span
id="v.LXXXII-p17.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXII-p18"></span> [Prov. i.
7](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#007)<span id="v.LXXXII-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2508"></span>[171:2509](2060093.htm#fr_2508) <span
id="v.LXXXII-p18.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXII-p19"></span> [1 Joh. iv.
18](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#018)<span id="v.LXXXII-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2509"></span>[171:2510](2060093.htm#fr_2509) <span
id="v.LXXXII-p19.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXII-p20"></span> [1 Kings xii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#010)<span id="v.LXXXII-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2510"></span>[171:2511](2060093.htm#fr_2510) <span
id="v.LXXXII-p20.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXII-p21"></span> Tarquin the Proud the last king of Rome
was driven into exile because of his many acts of tyranny.

<span id="fn_2511"></span>[171:2512](2060093.htm#fr_2511) <span
id="v.LXXXII-p21.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXII-p22"></span> [Nu. xii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#003)<span id="v.LXXXII-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2512"></span>[172:2513](2060093.htm#fr_2512) <span
id="v.LXXXII-p22.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXII-p23"></span> [Exod. xvii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#004)<span id="v.LXXXII-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2513"></span>[172:2514](2060093.htm#fr_2513) <span
id="v.LXXXII-p23.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXII-p24"></span> [Exod.
32:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#031),
[32](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#032)<span id="v.LXXXII-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2514"></span>[172:2515](2060093.htm#fr_2514) <span
id="v.LXXXII-p24.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXII-p25"></span> [John
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#011), [Luke
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#005)<span id="v.LXXXII-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2515"></span>[172:2516](2060093.htm#fr_2515) <span
id="v.LXXXII-p25.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXII-p26"></span> [Rom.
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#004)<span id="v.LXXXII-p26.1"></span>,
R.V.

<span id="fn_2516"></span>[172:2517](2060093.htm#fr_2516) <span
id="v.LXXXII-p26.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXII-p27"></span> [Eph. vi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#004)<span id="v.LXXXII-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2517"></span>[172:2518](2060093.htm#fr_2517) <span
id="v.LXXXII-p28.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXII-p29"></span> John, Bishop of Jerusalem, who had
accused Jerome of Origenism, a charge which was brought against himself
by Epiphanius (see Letter LI.).

<span id="fn_2518"></span>[172:2519](2060093.htm#fr_2518) <span
id="v.LXXXII-p29.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXII-p30"></span> Jerome represents John as saying that he
took advantage of a verse in the lesson “to preach on faith and all the
dogmas of the Church” (c. Joh. [Jer.
ii.](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#000)<span id="v.LXXXII-p30.1"></span>).

<span id="fn_2519"></span>[172:2520](2060093.htm#fr_2519) <span
id="v.LXXXII-p32.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXII-p33"></span> Jerome now addresses John of Jerusalem.

<span id="fn_2520"></span>[172:2521](2060093.htm#fr_2520) <span
id="v.LXXXII-p33.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXII-p34"></span> The Origenists.

<span id="fn_2521"></span>[172:2522](2060093.htm#fr_2521) <span
id="v.LXXXII-p34.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXII-p35"></span> The orthodox.

<span id="fn_2522"></span>[172:2523](2060093.htm#fr_2522) <span
id="v.LXXXII-p36.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXII-p37"></span> [Philemon
10](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#010)<span id="v.LXXXII-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2523"></span>[173:2524](2060093.htm#fr_2523) <span
id="v.LXXXII-p37.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXII-p38"></span> The highest and lowest offices in the
Roman magistracy. Jerome insinuates that if the ordained slave was a
common informer so also was John of Jerusalem.

<span id="fn_2524"></span>[173:2525](2060093.htm#fr_2524) <span
id="v.LXXXII-p39.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXII-p40"></span> A hit at Rufinus.

<span id="fn_2525"></span>[173:2526](2060093.htm#fr_2525) <span
id="v.LXXXII-p40.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXII-p41"></span> The statement that he had read 6000
volumes of Origen was attributed to Epiphanius by Rufinus and John of
Jerusalem. Cf. Apol. c. Ruf. ii. c. 13.

<span id="fn_2526"></span>[173:2527](2060093.htm#fr_2526) <span
id="v.LXXXII-p42.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXII-p43"></span> Paulinian, who had been ordained by
Epiphanius.

<span id="fn_2527"></span>[173:2528](2060093.htm#fr_2527) <span
id="v.LXXXII-p43.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXII-p44"></span> Sacerdotes; lit. ‘sacrificing priests.’

<span id="fn_2528"></span>[173:2529](2060093.htm#fr_2528) <span
id="v.LXXXII-p44.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXII-p45"></span> Not by himself but by Epiphanius.

<span id="fn_2529"></span>[173:2530](2060093.htm#fr_2529) <span
id="v.LXXXII-p45.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXII-p46"></span> Otherwise Lydda, a town in the south of
Judah at this time the seat of a bishopric.

<span id="fn_2530"></span>[173:2531](2060093.htm#fr_2530) <span
id="v.LXXXII-p46.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXII-p47"></span> Ælia Capitolina was the name given by
Hadrian to the colony established by him on the site of Jerusalem.

<span id="fn_2531"></span>[173:2532](2060093.htm#fr_2531) <span
id="v.LXXXII-p47.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXII-p48"></span> [Nu. iv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#003)<span id="v.LXXXII-p48.1"></span>,
LXX. A.V. follows the Hebrew.

<span id="fn_2532"></span>[173:2533](2060093.htm#fr_2532) <span
id="v.LXXXII-p48.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXII-p49"></span> [2 Cor. v.
17](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#017)<span id="v.LXXXII-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2533"></span>[173:2534](2060093.htm#fr_2533) <span
id="v.LXXXII-p49.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXII-p50"></span> [1 Tim. iv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#012)<span id="v.LXXXII-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2534"></span>[173:2535](2060093.htm#fr_2534) <span
id="v.LXXXII-p50.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXII-p51"></span> The word ‘presbyter’ means elder.

<span id="fn_2535"></span>[174:2536](2060093.htm#fr_2535) <span
id="v.LXXXII-p51.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXII-p52"></span> Here as frequently in Jerome the word
‘sacerdos’ is used to denote a bishop.

<span id="fn_2536"></span>[174:2537](2060093.htm#fr_2536) <span
id="v.LXXXII-p53.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXII-p54"></span> Probably Isidore, who had taken a view
hostile to Jerome, and who at this time fell under the displeasure of
Theophilus.

<span id="fn_2537"></span>[174:2538](2060093.htm#fr_2537) <span
id="v.LXXXII-p55.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXII-p56"></span> The execution of the decree was stopped
by the sudden death of the imperial minister Rufinus.

<span id="fn_2538"></span>[174:2539](2060093.htm#fr_2538) <span
id="v.LXXXII-p56.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXII-p57"></span> John of Jerusalem.

<span id="fn_2539"></span>[174:2540](2060093.htm#fr_2539) <span
id="v.LXXXII-p57.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXII-p58"></span> [Ps. xxiv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#001)<span id="v.LXXXII-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2540"></span>[175:2541](2060093.htm#fr_2540) <span
id="v.LXXXII-p59.1"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXII-p60"></span> Cf. [1 Cor. ix.
19](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#019)<span id="v.LXXXII-p60.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2541"></span>[175:2542](2060093.htm#fr_2541) <span
id="v.LXXXII-p60.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXII-p61"></span> [1 Cor. xiii.
4-7](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#004)<span id="v.LXXXII-p61.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2542"></span>[175:2543](2060093.htm#fr_2542) <span
id="v.LXXXII-p61.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXII-p62"></span> [1 Cor. xiii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#013)<span id="v.LXXXII-p62.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2543"></span>[175:2544](2060093.htm#fr_2543) <span
id="v.LXXXII-p62.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXII-p63"></span> [Eccl. iv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#012)<span id="v.LXXXII-p63.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2544"></span>[175:2545](2060093.htm#fr_2544) <span
id="v.LXXXII-p63.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXII-p64"></span> Cf. [Col. iii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#014)<span id="v.LXXXII-p64.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2545"></span>[175:2546](2060093.htm#fr_2545) <span
id="v.LXXXII-p64.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXII-p65"></span> Cf. [Joh. xiii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#020)<span id="v.LXXXII-p65.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2546"></span>[175:2547](2060093.htm#fr_2546) <span
id="v.LXXXII-p65.2"></span>

<span id="v.LXXXII-p66"></span> [Gal. v.
15](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#015)<span id="v.LXXXII-p66.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter LXXXIII](2060094)
