[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2060119)  [Next](2060121) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.CIX"></span>

<span id="v.CIX-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="v.CIX-p1.1"></span>Letter CIX. To Riparius.</span>

<span id="v.CIX-p2"></span>Riparius, a presbyter of Aquitaine had
written to inform Jerome that Vigilantius (for whom see Letter LXI.) was
preaching in southern Gaul against the worship of relics and the keeping
of night vigils; and this apparently with the consent of his bishop.
Jerome now replies in a letter more noteworthy for its bitterness than
for its logic. Nevertheless he offers to write a full confutation of
Vigilantius if Riparius will send him the book containing his heresies.
This Riparius subsequently did and then Jerome wrote his treatise
*Against Vigilantius*, the most extreme and least convincing of all his
works.

<span id="v.CIX-p3"></span>The date of the letter is 404 <span
class="c17"><span id="v.CIX-p3.1"></span>a.d.</span>

<span id="v.CIX-p4"></span>1. Now that I have received a letter from
you, if I do not answer it I shall be guilty of pride, and if I do I
shall be guilty of rashness. For the matters concerning which you ask my
opinion are such that they cannot either be spoken of or listened to
without profanity. You tell me that Vigilantius (whose very name
*Wakeful* is a contradiction: he ought rather to be described as
*Sleepy*) has again opened his fetid lips and is pouring forth a torrent
of filthy venom upon the relics of the holy martyrs; and that he calls
us who cherish them ashmongers and idolaters who pay homage to dead
men’s bones. Unhappy wretch! to be wept over by all Christian men, who
sees not that in speaking thus he makes himself one with the Samaritans
and the Jews who hold dead bodies unclean and regard as defiled even
vessels which have been in the same house with them, following the
letter that killeth and not the spirit that giveth life. <span
id="fr_3017"></span>[3018](#fn_3017) We, it is true, refuse to worship
or adore, I say not the relics of the martyrs, but even the sun and
moon, the angels and archangels, the Cherubim and Seraphim and “every
name that is named, not only in this world but also in that which is to
come.” <span id="fr_3018"></span>[3019](#fn_3018) For we may not serve
the creature rather than the Creator, who is blessed for ever. <span
id="fr_3019"></span>[3020](#fn_3019) Still we honour the relics of the
martyrs, that we may adore Him whose martyrs they are. We honour the
servants that their honour may be reflected upon their Lord who Himself
says:—“he that receiveth you receiveth me.” <span
id="fr_3020"></span>[3021](#fn_3020) I ask Vigilantius, Are the relics
of Peter and of Paul unclean? Was the body of Moses unclean, of which we
are told (according to the correct Hebrew text) that it was buried by
the Lord Himself? <span id="fr_3021"></span>[3022](#fn_3021) And do we,
every time that we enter the basilicas of apostles and prophets and
martyrs, pay homage to the shrines of idols? Are the tapers which burn
before their tombs only the tokens of idolatry? I will go farther still
and ask a question which will make this theory recoil upon the head of
its inventor and which will either kill or cure that frenzied brain of
his, so that simple souls shall be no more subverted by his sacrilegious
reasonings. Let him answer me this, Was the Lord’s body unclean when it
was placed in the sepulchre? And did the angels clothed in white raiment
merely watch over a corpse dead and defiled, that ages afterwards this
sleepy fellow might indulge in dreams and vomit forth his filthy
surfeit, so as, like the persecutor Julian, either to destroy the
basilicas of the saints or to convert them into heathen temples?

<span id="v.CIX-p10"></span>2. I am surprised that the reverend
bishop <span id="fr_3022"></span>[3023](#fn_3022) <span id="page_213">p.
213</span> <span id="v.CIX-Page_213"></span>in whose diocese he is said
to be a presbyter acquiesces in this his mad preaching, and that he does
not rather with apostolic rod, nay with a rod of iron, shatter this
useless vessel <span id="fr_3023"></span>[3024](#fn_3023) and deliver
him for the destruction of the flesh that the spirit may be saved. <span
id="fr_3024"></span>[3025](#fn_3024) He should remember the words that
are said: “When thou sawest a thief, then thou consentedst unto him; and
hast been partaker with adulterers;” <span
id="fr_3025"></span>[3026](#fn_3025) and in another place, “I will early
destroy all the wicked of the land; that I may cut off all wicked doers
from the city of the Lord;” <span id="fr_3026"></span>[3027](#fn_3026)
and again “Do not I hate them, O Lord, that hate thee? and am not I
grieved with those that rise up against thee? I hate them with perfect
hatred.” <span id="fr_3027"></span>[3028](#fn_3027) If the relics of the
martyrs are not worthy of honour, how comes it that we read “Precious in
the sight of the Lord is the death of his saints?” <span
id="fr_3028"></span>[3029](#fn_3028) If dead men’s bones defile those
that touch them, how came it that the dead Elisha raised another man
also dead, and that life came to this latter from the body of the
prophet which according to Vigilantius must have been unclean? In that
case every encampment of the host of Israel and the people of God was
unclean; for they carried the bodies of Joseph and of the patriarchs
with them in the wilderness, and carried their unclean ashes even into
the holy land. In that case Joseph, who was a type of our Lord and
Saviour, was a wicked man; for he carried up Jacob’s bones with great
pomp to Hebron merely to put his unclean father beside his unclean
grandfather and great grandfather, that is, one dead body along with
others. The wretch’s tongue should be cut out, or he should be put under
treatment for insanity. As he does not know how to speak, he should
learn to be silent. I have myself before now seen the monster, and have
done my best to bind the maniac with texts of scripture, as Hippocrates
binds his patients with chains; but “he went away, he departed, he
escaped, he broke out,” <span id="fr_3029"></span>[3030](#fn_3029) and
taking refuge between the Adriatic and the Alps of King Cotius <span
id="fr_3030"></span>[3031](#fn_3030) declaimed in his turn against me.
For all that a fool says must be regarded as mere noise and mouthing.

<span id="v.CIX-p20"></span>3. You may perhaps in your secret thoughts
find fault with me for thus assailing a man behind his back. I will
frankly admit that my indignation overpowers me; I cannot listen with
patience to such sacrilegious opinions. I have read of the javelin of
Phinehas, <span id="fr_3031"></span>[3032](#fn_3031) of the harshness of
Elijah, <span id="fr_3032"></span>[3033](#fn_3032) of the jealous anger
of Simon the zealot, <span id="fr_3033"></span>[3034](#fn_3033) of the
severity of Peter in putting to death Ananias and Sapphira, <span
id="fr_3034"></span>[3035](#fn_3034) and of the firmness of Paul who,
when Elymas the sorcerer withstood the ways of the Lord, doomed him to
lifelong blindness. <span id="fr_3035"></span>[3036](#fn_3035) There is
no cruelty in regard for God’s honour. Wherefore also in the Law it is
said: “If thy brother or thy friend or the wife of thy bosom entice thee
from the truth, thine hand shall be upon them and thou shalt shed their
blood, <span id="fr_3036"></span>[3037](#fn_3036) and so shalt thou put
the evil away from the midst of Israel.” <span
id="fr_3037"></span>[3038](#fn_3037) Once more I ask, Are the relics of
the martyrs unclean? If so, why did the apostles allow themselves to
walk in that funeral procession before the body—the unclean body—of
Stephen? Why did they make great lamentation over him, <span
id="fr_3038"></span>[3039](#fn_3038) that their grief might be turned
into our joy?

<span id="v.CIX-p29"></span>You tell me farther that Vigilantius
execrates vigils. In this surely he goes contrary to his name. The
Wakeful one wishes to sleep and will not hearken to the Saviour’s words,
“What, could ye not watch with me one hour? Watch and pray that ye enter
not into temptation: the spirit indeed is willing but the flesh is
weak.” <span id="fr_3039"></span>[3040](#fn_3039) And in another place a
prophet sings: “At midnight I will rise to give thanks unto thee because
of thy righteous judgments.” <span id="fr_3040"></span>[3041](#fn_3040)
We read also in the gospel how the Lord spent whole nights in
prayer <span id="fr_3041"></span>[3042](#fn_3041) and how the apostles
when they were shut up in prison kept vigil all night long, singing
their psalms until the earth quaked, and the keeper of the prison
believed, and the magistrates and citizens were filled with
terror. <span id="fr_3042"></span>[3043](#fn_3042) Paul says: “continue
in prayer and *watch* in the same,” <span
id="fr_3043"></span>[3044](#fn_3043) and in another place he speaks of
himself as “in watchings often.” <span
id="fr_3044"></span>[3045](#fn_3044) Vigilantius may sleep if he pleases
and may choke in his sleep, destroyed by the destroyer of Egypt and of
the Egyptians. But let us say with David: “Behold, he that keepeth
Israel shall neither slumber nor sleep.” <span
id="fr_3045"></span>[3046](#fn_3045) So will the Holy One and the
Watcher come to us. <span id="fr_3046"></span>[3047](#fn_3046) And if
ever by reason of our sins He fall asleep, let us say to Him: “Awake,
why sleepest thou, O Lord;” <span id="fr_3047"></span>[3048](#fn_3047)
and when our ship is tossed by the waves let us rouse Him and say,
“Master, save us: we perish.” <span id="fr_3048"></span>[3049](#fn_3048)

<span id="v.CIX-p40"></span>4. I would dictate more were it not that the
limits of a letter impose upon me a modest silence. I might have gone
on, had you sent me the books which contain this man’s rhapsodies, for
in that case I should have known what points I had to refute. As it is I
am only beating the air <span id="fr_3049"></span>[3050](#fn_3049) and
revealing not so <span id="page_214">p. 214</span> <span
id="v.CIX-Page_214"></span>much his infidelity—for this is patent to
all—as my own faith. But if you wish me to write against him at greater
length, send me those wretched dronings of his and in my answer he shall
hear an echo of John the Baptist’s words “Now also the axe is laid unto
the root of the trees; therefore every tree which bringeth not forth
good fruit is hewn down and cast into the fire.” <span
id="fr_3050"></span>[3051](#fn_3050)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3017"></span>[212:3018](2060120.htm#fr_3017) <span
id="v.CIX-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.CIX-p5"></span> [2 Cor. iii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#006)<span id="v.CIX-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3018"></span>[212:3019](2060120.htm#fr_3018) <span
id="v.CIX-p5.2"></span>

<span id="v.CIX-p6"></span> [Eph. i.
21](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#021)<span id="v.CIX-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3019"></span>[212:3020](2060120.htm#fr_3019) <span
id="v.CIX-p6.2"></span>

<span id="v.CIX-p7"></span> [Rom. i.
25](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#025)<span id="v.CIX-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3020"></span>[212:3021](2060120.htm#fr_3020) <span
id="v.CIX-p7.2"></span>

<span id="v.CIX-p8"></span> [Matt. x.
40](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#040)<span id="v.CIX-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3021"></span>[212:3022](2060120.htm#fr_3021) <span
id="v.CIX-p8.2"></span>

<span id="v.CIX-p9"></span> [Deut. xxxiv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#006)<span id="v.CIX-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3022"></span>[212:3023](2060120.htm#fr_3022) <span
id="v.CIX-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v.CIX-p11"></span> Probably Exuperius of Toulouse.

<span id="fn_3023"></span>[213:3024](2060120.htm#fr_3023) <span
id="v.CIX-p11.1"></span>

<span id="v.CIX-p12"></span> [Ps. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#009)<span id="v.CIX-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3024"></span>[213:3025](2060120.htm#fr_3024) <span
id="v.CIX-p12.2"></span>

<span id="v.CIX-p13"></span> [1 Cor. v.
5](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#005)<span id="v.CIX-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3025"></span>[213:3026](2060120.htm#fr_3025) <span
id="v.CIX-p13.2"></span>

<span id="v.CIX-p14"></span> [Ps. l.
18](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#018)<span id="v.CIX-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3026"></span>[213:3027](2060120.htm#fr_3026) <span
id="v.CIX-p14.2"></span>

<span id="v.CIX-p15"></span> [Ps. ci.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#008)<span id="v.CIX-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3027"></span>[213:3028](2060120.htm#fr_3027) <span
id="v.CIX-p15.2"></span>

<span id="v.CIX-p16"></span> [Ps.
39:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#021),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#022)<span id="v.CIX-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3028"></span>[213:3029](2060120.htm#fr_3028) <span
id="v.CIX-p16.2"></span>

<span id="v.CIX-p17"></span> [Ps. cxvi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#015)<span id="v.CIX-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3029"></span>[213:3030](2060120.htm#fr_3029) <span
id="v.CIX-p17.2"></span>

<span id="v.CIX-p18"></span> Cic. Cat. ii. 1, of Catiline.

<span id="fn_3030"></span>[213:3031](2060120.htm#fr_3030) <span
id="v.CIX-p18.1"></span>

<span id="v.CIX-p19"></span> A contemporary and ally of Augustus.

<span id="fn_3031"></span>[213:3032](2060120.htm#fr_3031) <span
id="v.CIX-p20.1"></span>

<span id="v.CIX-p21"></span> [Num.
25:7](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#008)<span id="v.CIX-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3032"></span>[213:3033](2060120.htm#fr_3032) <span
id="v.CIX-p21.2"></span>

<span id="v.CIX-p22"></span> [1 Kings xviii.
40](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#040)<span id="v.CIX-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3033"></span>[213:3034](2060120.htm#fr_3033) <span
id="v.CIX-p22.2"></span>

<span id="v.CIX-p23"></span> [Luke vi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#015)<span id="v.CIX-p23.1"></span>: so
called probably because he came from the most fanatical party among the
Pharisees.

<span id="fn_3034"></span>[213:3035](2060120.htm#fr_3034) <span
id="v.CIX-p23.2"></span>

<span id="v.CIX-p24"></span> [Acts v.
1-10](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#001)<span id="v.CIX-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3035"></span>[213:3036](2060120.htm#fr_3035) <span
id="v.CIX-p24.2"></span>

<span id="v.CIX-p25"></span> [Acts xiii.
8-11](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#008)<span id="v.CIX-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3036"></span>[213:3037](2060120.htm#fr_3036) <span
id="v.CIX-p25.2"></span>

<span id="v.CIX-p26"></span> [Deut. xiii.
6-9](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#006)<span id="v.CIX-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3037"></span>[213:3038](2060120.htm#fr_3037) <span
id="v.CIX-p26.2"></span>

<span id="v.CIX-p27"></span> [Deut. xiii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#005)<span id="v.CIX-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3038"></span>[213:3039](2060120.htm#fr_3038) <span
id="v.CIX-p27.2"></span>

<span id="v.CIX-p28"></span> [Acts viii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#002)<span id="v.CIX-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3039"></span>[213:3040](2060120.htm#fr_3039) <span
id="v.CIX-p29.1"></span>

<span id="v.CIX-p30"></span> [Matt.
26:40](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#040),
[41](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#041)<span id="v.CIX-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3040"></span>[213:3041](2060120.htm#fr_3040) <span
id="v.CIX-p30.2"></span>

<span id="v.CIX-p31"></span> [Ps. cxix.
62](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#062)<span id="v.CIX-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3041"></span>[213:3042](2060120.htm#fr_3041) <span
id="v.CIX-p31.2"></span>

<span id="v.CIX-p32"></span> [Luke vi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#012)<span id="v.CIX-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3042"></span>[213:3043](2060120.htm#fr_3042) <span
id="v.CIX-p32.2"></span>

<span id="v.CIX-p33"></span> [Acts xvi.
25-38](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#025)<span id="v.CIX-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3043"></span>[213:3044](2060120.htm#fr_3043) <span
id="v.CIX-p33.2"></span>

<span id="v.CIX-p34"></span> [Col. iv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#002)<span id="v.CIX-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3044"></span>[213:3045](2060120.htm#fr_3044) <span
id="v.CIX-p34.2"></span>

<span id="v.CIX-p35"></span> [2 Cor. xi.
27](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#027)<span id="v.CIX-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3045"></span>[213:3046](2060120.htm#fr_3045) <span
id="v.CIX-p35.2"></span>

<span id="v.CIX-p36"></span> [Ps. cxxi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#004)<span id="v.CIX-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3046"></span>[213:3047](2060120.htm#fr_3046) <span
id="v.CIX-p36.2"></span>

<span id="v.CIX-p37"></span> [Dan. iv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#013)<span id="v.CIX-p37.1"></span>.
Jerome gives the Hebrew word for watcher, viz. <span
id="v.CIX-p37.2"></span>ריע

<span id="fn_3047"></span>[213:3048](2060120.htm#fr_3047) <span
id="v.CIX-p37.3"></span>

<span id="v.CIX-p38"></span> [Ps. xliv.
23](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#023)<span id="v.CIX-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3048"></span>[213:3049](2060120.htm#fr_3048) <span
id="v.CIX-p38.2"></span>

<span id="v.CIX-p39"></span> [Matt.
8:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#025), [Luke
8:24](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#024)<span id="v.CIX-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3049"></span>[213:3050](2060120.htm#fr_3049) <span
id="v.CIX-p40.1"></span>

<span id="v.CIX-p41"></span> Cf. [1 Cor. ix.
26](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#026)<span id="v.CIX-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3050"></span>[214:3051](2060120.htm#fr_3050) <span
id="v.CIX-p41.2"></span>

<span id="v.CIX-p42"></span> [Matt. iii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#010)<span id="v.CIX-p42.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter CX](2060121)
