[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2060140)  [Next](2060142) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.CXXX"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="v.CXXX-p1.1"></span>Letter CXXX. To Demetrias.</span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p2"></span>Jerome writes to Demetrias, a highborn lady
of Rome who had recently embraced the vocation of a virgin. After
narrating her life’s history first at Rome and then in Africa, he goes
on to lay down rules and principles to guide her in her new life. These
which cover the whole field of ascetic practice and include the duties
of study, of prayer, of fasting, of obedience, of giving up money for
Christ, and of constant industry, are in substance similar to those
which thirty years before Jerome had suggested to Eustochium (Letter
XXII.). The tone of the letter is however milder and less fanatical; the
asceticism recommended is not so severe; there is less of rhapsody and
more of common sense. This letter should also be compared with the
letter addressed to Demetrias by Pelagius, which is given in Vol. xi. of
Jerome’s works (Migne’s Patr. Lat. xxx. ed.). The date is 414 <span
class="c17"><span id="v.CXXX-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p3"></span>1. Of all the subjects that I have treated
from my youth up until now, either with my <span id="page_261">p.
261</span> <span id="v.CXXX-Page_261"></span>own pen or that of my
secretaries I have dealt with none more difficult than that which now
occupies me. I am going to write to Demetrias a virgin of Christ and a
lady whose birth and riches make her second to none in the Roman world.
If, therefore, I employ language adequate to describe her virtue, I
shall be thought to flatter her; and if I suppress some details on the
score that they might appear incredible, my reserve will not do justice
to her undoubted merits. What am I to do then? I am unequal to the task
before me, yet I cannot venture to decline it. Her grandmother and her
mother are both women of mark, and they have alike authority to command,
faith to seek and perseverance to obtain that which they require. It is
not indeed anything very new or special that they ask of me; my wits
have often been exercised upon similar themes. What they wish for is
that I should raise my voice and bear witness as strongly as I can to
the virtues of one who—in the words of the famous orator <span
id="fr_3614"></span>[3615](#fn_3614) —is to be praised less for what she
is than for what she gives promise of being. Yet, girl though she is,
she has a glowing faith beyond her years, and has started from a point
at which others think it a mark of signal virtue to leave off.

<span id="v.CXXX-p5"></span>2. Let detraction stand aloof and envy give
way; let no charge of self seeking be brought against me. I write as a
stranger to a stranger, at least so far as the personal appearance is
concerned. For the inner man finds itself well known by that knowledge
whereby the apostle Paul knew the Colossians and many other believers
whom he had never seen. How high an esteem I entertain for this virgin,
nay more what a miracle of virtue I think her, you may judge by the fact
that being occupied in the explanation of Ezekiel’s description of the
temple—the hardest piece in the whole range of scripture—and finding
myself in that part of the sacred edifice wherein is the Holy of Holies
and the altar of incense, I have chosen by way of a brief rest to pass
from that altar to this, that upon it I might consecrate to eternal
chastity a living offering acceptable to God <span
id="fr_3615"></span>[3616](#fn_3615) and free from all stain. I am aware
that the bishop <span id="fr_3616"></span>[3617](#fn_3616) has with
words of prayer covered her holy head with the virgin’s bridal-veil,
reciting the while the solemn sentence of the apostle: “I wish to
present you all as a chaste virgin to Christ.” <span
id="fr_3617"></span>[3618](#fn_3617) She stood as a queen at his right
hand, her clothing of wrought gold and her raiment of needlework. <span
id="fr_3618"></span>[3619](#fn_3618) Such was the coat of many colours,
that is, formed of many different virtues, which Joseph wore; and
similar ones were of old the ordinary dress of king’s daughters.
Thereupon <span id="fr_3619"></span>[3620](#fn_3619) the bride herself
rejoices and says: “the king hath brought me into his chambers,” <span
id="fr_3620"></span>[3621](#fn_3620) and the choir of her companions
responds: “the king’s daughter is all glorious within.” <span
id="fr_3621"></span>[3622](#fn_3621) Thus she is a professed virgin.
Still these words of mine will not be without their use. The speed of
racehorses is quickened by the applause of spectators; prize fighters
are urged to greater efforts by the cries of their backers; and when
armies are drawn up for battle and swords are drawn, the general’s
speech does much to fire his soldiers’ valour. So also is it on the
present occasion. The grandmother and the mother have planted, but it is
I that water and the Lord that giveth the increase. <span
id="fr_3622"></span>[3623](#fn_3622)

<span id="v.CXXX-p14"></span>3. It is the practice of the rhetoricians
to exalt him who is the subject of their praises by referring to his
forefathers and the past nobility of his race, so that a fertile root
may make up for barren branches and that you may admire in the stem what
you have not got in the fruit. Thus I ought now to recall the
distinguished names of the Probi and of the Olybrii, and that
illustrious Anician house, the representatives of which have seldom or
never been unworthy of the consulship. Or I ought to bring forward
Olybrius our virgin’s father, whose untimely loss Rome has had to mourn.
I fear to say more of him, lest I should intensify the pain of your
saintly mother, and lest the commemoration of his virtues should become
a renewing of her grief. He was a dutiful son, a loveable husband, a
kind master, a popular citizen. He was made consul while still a
boy; <span id="fr_3623"></span>[3624](#fn_3623) but the goodness of his
character made him more illustrious as a senator. He was happy in his
death <span id="fr_3624"></span>[3625](#fn_3624) for it saved him from
seeing the ruin of his country; and happier still in his offspring, for
the distinguished name of his great grandmother Demetrias has become yet
more distinguished now that his daughter Demetrias has vowed herself to
perpetual chastity.

<span id="v.CXXX-p17"></span>4. But what am I doing? Forgetful of my
purpose and filled with admiration for this young man, I have spoken in
terms of praise of mere worldly advantages; whereas I should rather have
commended our virgin for having rejected all these, and for having
determined to regard herself not as a wealthy or a high born lady, but
simply as a woman like other women. Her strength of mind almost passes
belief. Though she had silks and jewels freely at her disposal, and
though <span id="page_262">p. 262</span> <span
id="v.CXXX-Page_262"></span>she was surrounded by crowds of eunuchs and
serving-women, a bustling household of flattering and attentive
domestics, and though the daintiest feasts that the abundance of a large
house could supply were daily set before her; she preferred to all these
severe fasting, rough clothing, and frugal living. For she had read the
words of the Lord: “they that wear soft clothing are in kings’
houses.” <span id="fr_3625"></span>[3626](#fn_3625) She was filled with
admiration for the manner of life followed by Elijah and by John the
Baptist; both of whom confined and mortified their loins with girdles of
skin, <span id="fr_3626"></span>[3627](#fn_3626) while the second of
them is said to have come in the spirit and power of Elijah as the
forerunner of the Lord. <span id="fr_3627"></span>[3628](#fn_3627) As
such he prophesied while still in his mother’s womb, <span
id="fr_3628"></span>[3629](#fn_3628) and before the day of judgment won
the commendation of the Judge. <span
id="fr_3629"></span>[3630](#fn_3629) She admired also the zeal of Anna
the daughter of Phanuel, who continued even to extreme old age to serve
the Lord in the temple with prayers and fastings. <span
id="fr_3630"></span>[3631](#fn_3630) When she thought of the four
virgins who were the daughters of Philip, <span
id="fr_3631"></span>[3632](#fn_3631) she longed to join their band and
to be numbered with those who by their virginal purity have attained the
grace of prophecy. With these and similar meditations she fed her mind,
dreading nothing so much as to offend her grandmother and her mother.
Although she was encouraged by their example, she was discouraged by
their expressed wish and desire; not indeed that they disapproved of her
holy purpose, but that the prize was so great that they did not venture
to hope for it, or to aspire to it. Thus this poor novice in Christ’s
service was sorely perplexed. She came to hate all her fine apparel and
cried like Esther to the Lord: “Thou knowest that I abhor the sign of my
high estate”—that is to say, the diadem which she wore as queen—“and
that I abhor it as a menstruous rag.” <span
id="fr_3632"></span>[3633](#fn_3632) Among the holy and highborn ladies
who have seen and known her some have been driven by the tempest which
has swept over Africa, from the shores of Gaul to a refuge in the holy
places. These tell me that secretly night after night, though no one
knew of it but the virgins dedicated to God in her mother’s and
grandmother’s retinue, Demetrias, refusing sheets of linen and beds of
down, spread a rug of goat’s hair upon the ground and watered her face
with ceaseless tears. Night after night she cast herself in thought at
the Saviour’s knees and implored him to accept her choice, to fulfil her
aspiration, and to soften the hearts of her grandmother and of her
mother.

<span id="v.CXXX-p26"></span>5. Why do I still delay to relate the
sequel? When her wedding day was now close at hand and when a marriage
chamber was being got ready for the bride and bridegroom; secretly
without any witnesses and with only the night to comfort her, she is
said to have nerved herself with such considerations as these: “What
ails you, Demetrias? Why are you so fearful of defending your chastity?
What you need is freedom and courage. If you are so panic-stricken in
time of peace, what would you do if you were called on to undergo
martyrdom? If you cannot bear so much as a frown from your own, how
would you steel yourself to face the tribunals of persecutors? If men’s
examples leave you unmoved, at least gather courage and confidence from
the blessed martyr Agnes <span id="fr_3633"></span>[3634](#fn_3633) who
vanquished the temptations both of youth and of a despot and by her
martyrdom hallowed the very name of chastity. Unhappy girl! you know
not, you know not to whom your virginity is due. It is not long since
you have trembled in the hands of the barbarians and clung to your
grandmother and your mother cowering under their cloaks for safety. You
have seen yourself a prisoner <span id="fr_3634"></span>[3635](#fn_3634)
and your chastity not in your own power. You have shuddered at the
fierce looks of your enemies; you have seen with secret agony the
virgins of God ravished. Your city, once the capital of the world, is
now the grave of the Roman people; and will you on the shores of Libya,
yourself an exile, accept an exile for a husband? Where will you find a
matron to be present at your bridal? <span
id="fr_3635"></span>[3636](#fn_3635) Whom will you get to escort you
home? No tongue but a harsh Punic one will sing for you the wanton
Fescennine verses. <span id="fr_3636"></span>[3637](#fn_3636) Away with
all hesitations! ‘Perfect love’ of God ‘casteth out fear.’ <span
id="fr_3637"></span>[3638](#fn_3637) Take to yourself the shield of
faith, the breastplate of righteousness, the helmet of salvation, <span
id="fr_3638"></span>[3639](#fn_3638) and sally forth to battle. The
preservation of your chastity involves a martyrdom of its own. Why do
you fear your grandmother? Why do you dread your mother? Perhaps they
may themselves wish for you a course which they do not think you wish
for yourself.” When by these and other arguments she had wrought herself
to the necessary pitch of resolution, she cast from her as so many
hindrances all her ornaments and worldly attire. <span id="page_263">p.
263</span> <span id="v.CXXX-Page_263"></span>Her precious necklaces,
costly pearls, and glowing gems she put back in their cases. Then
dressing herself in a coarse tunic and throwing over herself a still
courser cloak she came in at an unlooked for moment, threw herself down
suddenly at her grandmother’s knees, and with tears and sobs shewed her
what she really was. That staid and holy woman was amazed when she
beheld her granddaughter in so strange a dress. Her mother was
completely overcome for joy. Both women could hardly believe that true
which they had longed to be true. Their voices stuck in their
throats, <span id="fr_3639"></span>[3640](#fn_3639) and, what with
blushing and turning pale, with fright and with joy, they were a prey to
many conflicting emotions.

<span id="v.CXXX-p34"></span>6. I must needs give way here and not
attempt to describe what defies description. In the effort to explain
the greatness of that joy past all belief, the flow of Tully’s eloquence
would run dry and the bolts poised and hurled by Demosthenes would
become spent and fall short. Whatever mind can conceive or speech can
interpret of human gladness was seen then. Mother and child, grandmother
and granddaughter kissed each other again and again. The two elder women
wept copiously for joy, they raised the prostrate girl, they embraced
her trembling form. In her purpose they recognized their own mind, and
congratulated each other that now a virgin was to make a noble house
more noble still by her virginity. She had found they said, a way to
benefit her family and to lessen the calamity of the ruin of Rome. Good
Jesus! What exultation there was all through the house! Many virgins
sprouted out at once as shoots from a fruitful stem, and the example set
by their patroness and lady was followed by a host both of clients and
servants. Virginity was warmly espoused in every house and although
those who made profession of it were as regards the flesh of lower rank
than Demetrias they sought one reward with her, the reward of chastity.
My words are too weak. Every church in Africa danced for joy. The news
reached not only the cities, towns, and villages but even the scattered
huts. Every island between Africa and Italy was full of it, the glad
tidings ran far and wide, disliked by none. Then Italy put off her
mourning and the ruined walls of Rome resumed in part their olden
splendour; for they believed the full conversion of their fosterchild to
be a sign of God’s favour towards them. You would fancy that the Goths
had been annihilated and that that concourse of deserters and slaves had
fallen by a thunderbolt from the Lord on high. There was less elation in
Rome when Marcellus won his first success at Nola <span
id="fr_3640"></span>[3641](#fn_3640) after thousands of Romans had
fallen at the Trebia, Lake Thrasymenus, and Cannæ. There was less joy
among the nobles cooped up in the capitol, on whom the future of Rome
depended, when after buying their lives with gold they heard that the
Gauls had at length been routed. <span
id="fr_3641"></span>[3642](#fn_3641) The news penetrated to the coasts
of the East, and this triumph of Christian glory was heard of in the
remote cities of the interior. What Christian virgin was not proud to
have Demetrias as a companion? What mother did not call Juliana’s womb
blessed? Unbelievers may scoff at the doubtfulness of rewards to come.
Meantime, in becoming a virgin you have gained more than you have
sacrificed. Had you become a man’s bride but one province would have
known of you; while as a Christian virgin you are known to the whole
world. Mothers who have but little faith in Christ are unhappily wont to
dedicate to virginity only deformed and crippled daughters for whom they
can find no suitable husbands. Glass beads, as the saying goes, are
thought equal to pearls. <span id="fr_3642"></span>[3643](#fn_3642) Men
who pride themselves on their religion give to their virgin daughters
sums scarcely sufficient for their maintenance, and bestow the bulk of
their property upon sons and daughters living in the world. Quite
recently in this city a rich presbyter left two of his daughters who
were professed virgins with a mere pittance, while he provided his other
children with ample means for self-indulgence and pleasure. The same
thing has been done, I am sorry to say, by many women who have adopted
the ascetic life. Would that such instances were rare, but unfortunately
they are not. Yet the more frequent they are the more blessed are those
who refuse to follow an example which is set them by so many.

<span id="v.CXXX-p38"></span>7. All Christians are loud in their praises
of Christ’s holy yokefellows, <span id="fr_3643"></span>[3644](#fn_3643)
because they gave to Demetrias when she professed herself a virgin the
money which had been set apart as a dowry for her marriage. They would
not wrong her heavenly bridegroom; in fact they wished her to come to
Him with all her previous riches, that these might not be wasted on the
things of the world, but might relieve the distress of God’s servants.

<span id="v.CXXX-p40"></span>Who would believe it? That Proba, who of
all persons of high rank and birth in the <span id="page_264">p.
264</span> <span id="v.CXXX-Page_264"></span>Roman world bears the most
illustrious name, whose holy life and universal charity have won for her
esteem even among the barbarians, who has made nothing of the regular
consulships enjoyed by her three sons, Probinus, Olybrius, and
Probus,—that Proba, I say, now that Rome has been taken and its contents
burned or carried off, is said to be selling what property she has and
to be making for herself friends of the mammon of unrighteousness, that
these may receive her into everlasting habitations! <span
id="fr_3644"></span>[3645](#fn_3644) Well may the church’s ministers,
whatever their degree, and those monks who are only monks in name, blush
for shame that they are buying estates, when this noble lady is selling
them.

<span id="v.CXXX-p42"></span>Hardly had she escaped from the hands of
the barbarians, hardly had she ceased weeping for the virgins whom they
had torn from her arms, when she was overwhelmed by a sudden and
unbearable bereavement, one too which she had had no cause to fear, the
death of her loving son. <span id="fr_3645"></span>[3646](#fn_3645) Yet
as one who was to be grandmother to a Christian virgin, she bore up
against this death-dealing stroke, strong in hope of the future and
proving true of herself the words of the lyric:

<span id="v.CXXX-p44"></span>“Should the round world in fragments burst,
its fall

<span id="v.CXXX-p45"></span>May strike the just, may slay, but not
appal.” <span id="fr_3646"></span>[3647](#fn_3646)

<span id="v.CXXX-p47"></span>We read in the book of Job how, while the
first messenger of evil was yet speaking, there came also another; <span
id="fr_3647"></span>[3648](#fn_3647) and in the same book it is written:
“is there not a temptation”—or as the Hebrew better gives it—“a warfare
to man upon earth?” <span id="fr_3648"></span>[3649](#fn_3648) It is for
this end that we labour, it is for this end that we risk our lives in
the warfare of this world, that we may be crowned in the world to come.
That we should believe this to be true of men is nothing wonderful, for
even the Lord Himself was tempted, <span
id="fr_3649"></span>[3650](#fn_3649) and of Abraham the scripture bears
witness that God tempted him. <span id="fr_3650"></span>[3651](#fn_3650)
It is for this reason also that the apostle says: “we glory in
tribulations.…knowing that tribulation worketh patience; and patience
experience; and experience hope; and hope maketh not ashamed;” <span
id="fr_3651"></span>[3652](#fn_3651) and in another passage: “Who shall
separate us from the love of Christ? Shall tribulation or distress or
persecution or famine or nakedness or peril or sword? As it is written,
For thy sake we are killed all the day long; we are accounted as sheep
for the slaughter.” <span id="fr_3652"></span>[3653](#fn_3652) The
prophet Isaiah comforts those in like case in these words: “ye that are
weaned from the milk, ye that are drawn from the breasts, look for
tribulation upon tribulation, but also for hope upon hope.” <span
id="fr_3653"></span>[3654](#fn_3653) For, as the apostle puts it “the
sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the
glory which shall be revealed in us.” <span
id="fr_3654"></span>[3655](#fn_3654) Why I have here brought together
all these passages the sequel will make plain.

<span id="v.CXXX-p56"></span>Proba who had seen from the sea the smoke
of her native city and had committed her own safety and that of those
dear to her to a fragile boat, found the shores of Africa even more
cruel than those which she had left. For one <span
id="fr_3655"></span>[3656](#fn_3655) lay in wait for her of whom it
would be hard to say whether he was more covetous or heartless, one who
cared for nothing but wine and money, one who under pretence of serving
the mildest of emperors <span id="fr_3656"></span>[3657](#fn_3656) stood
forth as the most savage of all despots. If I may be allowed to quote a
fable of the poets, he was like Orcus <span
id="fr_3657"></span>[3658](#fn_3657) in Tartarus. Like him too he had
with him a Cerberus, <span id="fr_3658"></span>[3659](#fn_3658) not
three headed but many headed, ready to seize and rend everything within
his reach. He tore betrothed daughters from their mothers’ arms <span
id="fr_3659"></span>[3660](#fn_3659) and sold high-born maidens in
marriage to those greediest of men, the merchants of Syria. No plea of
poverty induced him to spare either ward or widow or virgin dedicated to
Christ. Indeed he looked more at the hands than at the faces of those
who appealed to him. Such was the dread Charybdis and such the
hound-girt Scylla which this lady encountered in fleeing from the
barbarians; monsters who neither spared the shipwrecked nor heeded the
cry of those made captive. Cruel wretch! <span
id="fr_3660"></span>[3661](#fn_3660) at least imitate the enemy of the
Roman Empire. The Brennus of our day <span
id="fr_3661"></span>[3662](#fn_3661) took only what he found, but you
seek what you cannot find.

<span id="v.CXXX-p64"></span>Virtue, indeed, is always exposed to envy,
and cavillers may marvel at the secret agreement by which Proba
purchased the chastity of her numerous companions. They may allege that
the count who could have taken all would not have been satisfied <span
id="fr_3662"></span>[3663](#fn_3662) with a part; and that she could not
have questioned his claim since in spite of her rank she was but a slave
in his despotic hands. I perceive also that I am laying myself open to
the attacks of enemies and that I may seem to be flattering a lady of
the highest birth and distinction. Yet these men will not be able to
accuse me when <span id="page_265">p. 265</span> <span
id="v.CXXX-Page_265"></span>they learn that hitherto I have said nothing
about her. I have never either in the lifetime of her husband or since
his decease praised her for the antiquity of her family or for the
extent of her wealth and power, subjects which others might perhaps have
improved in mercenary speeches. My purpose is to praise the grandmother
of my virgin in a style befitting the church, and to thank her for
having aided with her goodwill the desire which Demetrias has formed.
For the rest my cell, my food and clothing, my advanced years, and my
narrow circumstances sufficiently refute the charge of flattery. In what
remains of my letter I shall direct all my words to Demetrias herself,
whose holiness ennobles her as much as her rank, and of whom it may be
said that the higher she climbs the more terrible will be her fall.

<span id="v.CXXX-p66"></span>For the rest

<span id="v.CXXX-p67"></span>This one thing, child of God, I lay on
thee;

<span id="v.CXXX-p68"></span>Yea before all, and urge it many
times: <span id="fr_3663"></span>[3664](#fn_3663)

<span id="v.CXXX-p70"></span>Love to occupy your mind with the reading
of scripture. Do not in the good ground of your breast gather only a
crop of darnel and wild oats. Do not let an enemy sow tares among the
wheat when the householder is asleep <span
id="fr_3664"></span>[3665](#fn_3664) (that is when the mind which ever
cleaves to God is off its guard); but say always with the bride in the
song of songs: “By night I sought him whom my soul loveth. Tell me where
thou feedest, where thou makest thy flock to rest at noon;” <span
id="fr_3665"></span>[3666](#fn_3665) and with the psalmist: “my soul
followeth hard after thee: thy right hand upholdeth me;” <span
id="fr_3666"></span>[3667](#fn_3666) and with Jeremiah: “I have not
found it hard.…to follow thee,” <span
id="fr_3667"></span>[3668](#fn_3667) for “there is no grief in Jacob
neither is there travail in Israel.” <span
id="fr_3668"></span>[3669](#fn_3668) When you were in the world you
loved the things of the world. You rubbed your cheeks with rouge and
used whitelead to improve your complexion. You dressed your hair and
built up a tower on your head with tresses not your own. I shall say
nothing of your costly earrings, your glistening pearls from the depths
of the Red Sea, <span id="fr_3669"></span>[3670](#fn_3669) your bright
green emeralds, your flashing onyxes, your liquid sapphires,—tones which
turn the heads of matrons, and make them eager to possess the like. For
you have relinquished the world and besides your baptismal vow have
taken a new one; you have entered into a compact with your adversary and
have said: “I renounce thee, O devil, and thy world and thy pomp and thy
works.” Observe, therefore, the treaty that you have made, and keep
terms with your adversary while you are in the way of this world.
Otherwise he may some day deliver you to the judge and prove that you
have taken what is his; and then the judge will deliver you to the
officer—at once your foe and your avenger—and you will be cast into
prison; into that outer darkness <span
id="fr_3670"></span>[3671](#fn_3670) which surrounds us with the greater
horror as it severs us from Christ the one true light. <span
id="fr_3671"></span>[3672](#fn_3671) And you shall by no means come out
thence till you have paid the uttermost farthing, <span
id="fr_3672"></span>[3673](#fn_3672) that is, till you have expiated
your most trifling sins; for we shall give account of every idle word in
the day of judgment. <span id="fr_3673"></span>[3674](#fn_3673)

<span id="v.CXXX-p81"></span>8. In speaking thus I do not wish to utter
an ill-omened prophecy against you but only to warn you as an
apprehensive and prudent monitor who in your case fears even what is
safe. What says the scripture? “If the spirit of the ruler rise up
against thee, leave not thy place.” <span
id="fr_3674"></span>[3675](#fn_3674) We must always stand under arms and
in battle array, ready to engage the foe. When he tries to dislodge us
from our position and to make us fall back, we must plant our feet
firmly down, and say with the psalmist, “he hath set my feet upon a
rock” <span id="fr_3675"></span>[3676](#fn_3675) and “the rocks are a
refuge for the conies.” <span id="fr_3676"></span>[3677](#fn_3676) In
this latter passage for ‘conies’ many read ‘hedgehogs.’ Now the hedgehog
is a small animal, very shy, and covered over with thorny bristles. When
Jesus was crowned with thorns and bore our sins and suffered for us, it
was to make the roses of virginity and the lilies of chastity grow for
us out of the brambles and briers which have formed the lot of women
since the day when it was said to Eve, “in sorrow thou shalt bring forth
children; and thy desire shall be to thy husband and he shall rule over
thee.” <span id="fr_3677"></span>[3678](#fn_3677) We are told that the
bridegroom feeds among the lilies, <span
id="fr_3678"></span>[3679](#fn_3678) that is, among those who have not
defiled their garments, for they have remained virgins <span
id="fr_3679"></span>[3680](#fn_3679) and have hearkened to the precept
of the Preacher: “let thy garments be always white.” <span
id="fr_3680"></span>[3681](#fn_3680) As the author and prince of
virginity He says boldly of Himself: “I am the rose of Sharon and the
lily of the valleys.” <span id="fr_3681"></span>[3682](#fn_3681) “The
rocks” then “are a refuge for the conies” who when they are persecuted
in one city flee into another <span id="fr_3682"></span>[3683](#fn_3682)
and have no fear that the prophetic words “refuge failed me” <span
id="fr_3683"></span>[3684](#fn_3683) will be fulfilled in their case.
“The high hills are a refuge for the wild goats,” <span
id="fr_3684"></span>[3685](#fn_3684) and their food are the serpents
which a little child draws out of their holes. Meanwhile the leopard
lies down with the kid and the <span id="page_266">p. 266</span> <span
id="v.CXXX-Page_266"></span>lion eats straw like the ox; <span
id="fr_3685"></span>[3686](#fn_3685) not of course that the ox may learn
ferocity from the lion but that the lion may learn docility from the ox.

<span id="v.CXXX-p94"></span>But let us turn back to the passage first
quoted, “If the spirit of the ruler rise up against thee, leave not thy
place,” a sentence which is followed by these words: “for yielding
pacifieth great offences.” <span id="fr_3686"></span>[3687](#fn_3686)
The meaning is, that if the serpent finds his way into your thoughts you
must “keep your heart with all diligence” <span
id="fr_3687"></span>[3688](#fn_3687) and sing with David, “cleanse thou
me from secret faults: keep back thy servant also from presumptuous
sins,” and come not to “the great transgression” <span
id="fr_3688"></span>[3689](#fn_3688) which is sin in act. Rather slay
the allurements to vice while they are still only thoughts; and dash the
little ones of the daughter of Babylon against the stones <span
id="fr_3689"></span>[3690](#fn_3689) where the serpent can leave no
trail. Be wary and vow a vow unto the Lord: “let them not have dominion
over me: then shall I be upright and I shall be innocent from the great
transgression.” <span id="fr_3690"></span>[3691](#fn_3690) For elsewhere
also the scripture testifies, “I will visit the iniquity of the fathers
upon the children unto the third and fourth generation.” <span
id="fr_3691"></span>[3692](#fn_3691) That is to say, God will not punish
us at once for our thoughts and resolves but will send retribution upon
their offspring, that is, upon the evil deeds and habits of sin which
arise out of them. As He says by the mouth of Amos: “for three
transgressions of such and such a city and for four I will not turn away
the punishment thereof.” <span id="fr_3692"></span>[3693](#fn_3692)

<span id="v.CXXX-p102"></span>9. I cull these few flowers in passing
from the fair field of the holy scriptures. They will suffice to warn
you that you must shut the door of your breast and fortify your brow by
often making the sign of the cross. Thus alone will the destroyer of
Egypt find no place to attack you; thus alone will the first-born of
your soul escape the fate of the first-born of the Egyptians; <span
id="fr_3693"></span>[3694](#fn_3693) thus alone will you be able with
the prophet to say: “my heart is fixed, O God, my heart is fixed; I will
sing and give praise. Awake up, my glory; awake, psaltery and
harp.” <span id="fr_3694"></span>[3695](#fn_3694) For, sin stricken as
she is, even Tyre is bidden to take up her harp <span
id="fr_3695"></span>[3696](#fn_3695) and to do penance; like Peter she
is told to wash away the stains of her former foulness with bitter
tears. Howbeit, let us know nothing of penitence, lest the thought of it
lead us into sin. It is a plank for those who have had the misfortune to
be shipwrecked; <span id="fr_3696"></span>[3697](#fn_3696) but an
inviolate virgin may hope to save the ship itself. For it is one thing
to look for what you have cast away, and another to keep what you have
never lost. Even the apostle kept under his body and brought it into
subjection, lest having preached to others he might himself become a
castaway. <span id="fr_3697"></span>[3698](#fn_3697) Heated with the
violence of sensual passion he made himself the spokesman of the human
race: “O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me from the body of
this death?” and again, “I know that in me, that is in my flesh,
dwelleth no good thing: for to will is present with me; but how to
perform that which is good, I find not. For the good that I would, I do
not: but the evil which I would not, that I do;” <span
id="fr_3698"></span>[3699](#fn_3698) and once more: “they that are in
the flesh cannot please God. But ye are not in the flesh, but in the
spirit, if so be that the spirit of God dwell in you.” <span
id="fr_3699"></span>[3700](#fn_3699)

<span id="v.CXXX-p110"></span>10. After you have paid the most careful
attention to your thoughts, you must then put on the armour of fasting
and sing with David: “I chastened my soul with fasting,” <span
id="fr_3700"></span>[3701](#fn_3700) and “I have eaten ashes like
bread,” <span id="fr_3701"></span>[3702](#fn_3701) and “as for me when
they troubled me my clothing was sackcloth.” <span
id="fr_3702"></span>[3703](#fn_3702) Eve was expelled from paradise
because she had eaten of the forbidden fruit. Elijah on the other hand
after forty days of fasting was carried in a fiery chariot into heaven.
For forty days and forty nights Moses lived by the intimate converse
which he had with God, thus proving in his own case the complete truth
of the saying, “man doth not live by bread only but by every word that
proceedeth out of the mouth of the Lord.” <span
id="fr_3703"></span>[3704](#fn_3703) The Saviour of the world, who in
His virtues and His mode of life has left us an example to follow, <span
id="fr_3704"></span>[3705](#fn_3704) was, immediately after His baptism,
taken up by the spirit that He might contend with the devil, <span
id="fr_3705"></span>[3706](#fn_3705) and after crushing him and
overthrowing him might deliver him to his disciples to trample under
foot. For what says the apostle? “God shall bruise Satan under your feet
shortly.” <span id="fr_3706"></span>[3707](#fn_3706) And yet after the
Saviour had fasted forty days, it was through food that the old enemy
laid a snare for him, saying, “If thou be the Son of God, command that
these stones be made bread.” <span id="fr_3707"></span>[3708](#fn_3707)
Under the law, in the seventh month after the blowing of trumpets and on
the tenth day of the month, a fast was proclaimed for the whole Jewish
people, and that soul was cut off from among his people which on that
day preferred self-indulgence to self-denial. <span
id="fr_3708"></span>[3709](#fn_3708) In Job it is written of behemoth
that “his strength is in his loins, and his force is in the navel of his
<span id="page_267">p. 267</span> <span
id="v.CXXX-Page_267"></span>belly.” <span
id="fr_3709"></span>[3710](#fn_3709) Our foe uses the heat of youthful
passion to tempt young men and maidens and “sets on fire the wheel of
our birth.” <span id="fr_3710"></span>[3711](#fn_3710) He thus fulfils
the words of Hosea, “they are all adulterers, their heart is like an
oven;” <span id="fr_3711"></span>[3712](#fn_3711) an oven which only
God’s mercy and severe fasting can extinguish. These are “the fiery
darts” <span id="fr_3712"></span>[3713](#fn_3712) with which the devil
wounds men and sets them on fire, and it was these which the king of
Babylon used against the three children. But when he made his fire
forty-nine cubits high <span id="fr_3713"></span>[3714](#fn_3713) he did
but turn to his own ruin <span id="fr_3714"></span>[3715](#fn_3714) the
seven weeks which the Lord had appointed for a time of salvation. <span
id="fr_3715"></span>[3716](#fn_3715) And as then a fourth bearing a form
like the son of God slackened the terrible heat <span
id="fr_3716"></span>[3717](#fn_3716) and cooled the flames of the
blazing fiery furnace, until, menacing as they looked, they became quite
harmless, so is it now with the virgin soul. The dew of heaven and
severe fasting quench in a girl the flame of passion and enable her soul
even in its earthly tenement to live the angelic life. Therefore the
chosen vessel <span id="fr_3717"></span>[3718](#fn_3717) declares that
concerning virgins he has no commandment of the Lord. <span
id="fr_3718"></span>[3719](#fn_3718) For you must act against nature or
rather above nature if you are to forswear your natural function, to cut
off your own root, to cull no fruit but that of virginity, to abjure the
marriage-bed, to shun intercourse with men, and while in the body to
live as though out of it.

<span id="v.CXXX-p130"></span>11. I do not, however, lay on you as an
obligation any extreme fasting or abnormal abstinence from food. Such
practices soon break down weak constitutions and cause bodily sickness
before they lay the foundations of a holy life. It is a maxim of the
philosophers that virtues are means, and that all extremes are of the
nature of vice; <span id="fr_3719"></span>[3720](#fn_3719) and it is in
this sense that one of the seven wise men propounds the famous saw
quoted in the comedy, “In nothing too much.” <span
id="fr_3720"></span>[3721](#fn_3720) You must not go on fasting until
your heart begins to throb and your breath to fail and you have to be
supported or carried by others. No; while curbing the desires of the
flesh, you must keep sufficient strength to read scripture, to sing
psalms, and to observe vigils. For fasting is not a complete virtue in
itself but only a foundation on which other virtues may be built. The
same may be said of sanctification and of that chastity without which no
man shall see the Lord. <span id="fr_3721"></span>[3722](#fn_3721) Each
of these is a step on the upward way, yet none of them by itself will
avail to win the virgin’s crown. The gospel teaches us this in the
parable of the wise and foolish virgins; the former of whom enter into
the bridechamber of the bridegroom, while the latter are shut out from
it because not having the oil of good works <span
id="fr_3722"></span>[3723](#fn_3722) they allow their lamps to
fail. <span id="fr_3723"></span>[3724](#fn_3723) This subject of fasting
opens up a wide field in which I have often wandered myself, <span
id="fr_3724"></span>[3725](#fn_3724) and many writers have devoted
treatises to the subject. I must refer you to these if you wish to learn
the advantages of self-restraint and on the other hand the evils of
over-feeding.

<span id="v.CXXX-p137"></span>12. Follow the example of your
Spouse: <span id="fr_3725"></span>[3726](#fn_3725) be subject to your
grandmother and to your mother. Never look upon a man, especially upon a
young man, except in their company. Never know a man whom they do not
know. It is a maxim of the world that the only sure friendship is one
based on an identity of likes and dislikes. <span
id="fr_3726"></span>[3727](#fn_3726) You have been taught by their
example as well as instructed by the holy life of your home to aspire to
virginity, to recognize the commandments of Christ, to know what is
expedient for you and what course you ought to choose. But do not regard
what is your own as absolutely your own. Remember that part of it
belongs to those who have communicated their chastity to you and from
whose honourable marriages and beds undefiled <span
id="fr_3727"></span>[3728](#fn_3727) you have sprung up like a choice
flower. For you are destined to produce perfect fruit if only you will
humble yourself under the mighty hand of God, <span
id="fr_3728"></span>[3729](#fn_3728) always remembering that it is
written: “God resisteth the proud and giveth grace to the humble.” <span
id="fr_3729"></span>[3730](#fn_3729) Now where there is grace, this is
not given in return for works but is the free gift of the giver, so that
the apostles’ words are fulfilled: “it is not of him that willeth nor of
him that runneth, but of God that sheweth mercy.” <span
id="fr_3730"></span>[3731](#fn_3730) And yet it is ours to will and not
to will; and all the while the very liberty that is ours is only ours by
the mercy of God.

<span id="v.CXXX-p144"></span>13. Again in selecting for yourself
eunuchs and maids and servingmen look rather to their characters than to
their good looks; for, whatever their age or sex, and even if mutilation
ensures in them a compulsory chastity, you must take account of their
dispositions, for these cannot be operated on save by the fear of
Christ. When you are present buffoonery and loose talk must find no
place. You should never hear an improper word; if you do hear one, you
must not be carried away by it. Abandoned men often make use of a single
light expression to <span id="page_268">p. 268</span> <span
id="v.CXXX-Page_268"></span>try the gates of chastity. <span
id="fr_3731"></span>[3732](#fn_3731) Leave to worldlings the privileges
of laughing and being laughed at. One who is in your position ought to
be serious. Cato the Censor, in old time a leading man in your city,
(the same who in his last days turned his attention to Greek literature
without either blushing for himself as censor or despairing of success
on account of his age) is said by Lucilius <span
id="fr_3732"></span>[3733](#fn_3732) to have laughed only once in his
life, and the same remark is made about Marcus Crassus. These men may
have affected this austere mien to gain for themselves reputation and
notoriety. For so long as we dwell in the tabernacle of this body and
are enveloped with this fragile flesh, we can but restrain and regulate
our affections and passions; we cannot wholly extirpate them. Knowing
this the psalmist says: “be ye angry and sin not;” <span
id="fr_3733"></span>[3734](#fn_3733) which the apostle explains thus:
“let not the sun go down upon your wrath.” <span
id="fr_3734"></span>[3735](#fn_3734) For, if to be angry is human, to
put an end to one’s anger is Christian.

<span id="v.CXXX-p149"></span>14. I think it unnecessary to warn you
against covetousness since it is the way of your family both to have
riches and to despise them. The apostle too tells us that covetousness
is idolatry, <span id="fr_3735"></span>[3736](#fn_3735) and to one who
asked the Lord the question: “Good Master what good thing shall I do
that I may have eternal life?” He thus replied: “If thou wilt be
perfect, go and sell that thou hast and give to the poor, and thou shalt
have treasure in heaven; and come and follow me.” <span
id="fr_3736"></span>[3737](#fn_3736) Such is the climax of complete and
apostolic virtue—to sell all that one has and to distribute to the
poor, <span id="fr_3737"></span>[3738](#fn_3737) and thus freed from all
earthly encumbrance to fly up to the heavenly realms with Christ. To us,
or I should rather say to you, a careful stewardship is entrusted,
although in such matters full freedom of choice is left to every
individual, whether old or young. Christ’s words are “if thou wilt be
perfect.” I do not compel you, He seems to say, I do not command you,
but I set the palm before you, I shew you the prize; it is for you to
choose whether you will enter the arena and win the crown. Let us
consider how wisely Wisdom has spoken. “Sell that thou hast.” To whom is
the command given? Why, to him to whom it was said, “if thou wilt be
perfect.” Sell not a part of thy goods but “all that thou hast.” And
when you have sold them, what then? “Give to the poor.” Not to the rich,
not to your kinsfolk, not to minister to self indulgence; but to relieve
need. It does not matter whether a man is a priest or a relation or a
connexion, you must think of nothing but his poverty. Let your praises
come from the stomachs of the hungry and not from the rich banquets of
the overfed. We read in the Acts of the Apostles how, while the blood of
the Lord was still warm and believers were in the fervour of their first
faith, they all sold their possessions and laid the price of them at the
apostles’ feet (to shew that money ought to be trampled underfoot) and
“distribution was made unto every man according as he had need.” <span
id="fr_3738"></span>[3739](#fn_3738) But Ananias and Sapphira proved
timid stewards, and what is more, deceitful ones; therefore they brought
on themselves condemnation. For having made a vow they offered their
money to God as if it were their own and not His to whom they had vowed
it; and keeping back for their own use a part of that which belonged to
another, through fear of famine which true faith never fears, they drew
down on themselves suddenly the avenging stroke, which was meant not in
cruelty towards them but as a warning to others. <span
id="fr_3739"></span>[3740](#fn_3739) In fact the apostle Peter by no
means called down death upon them as Porphyry <span
id="fr_3740"></span>[3741](#fn_3740) foolishly says. He merely announced
God’s judgment by the spirit of prophecy, that the doom of two persons
might be a lesson to many. From the time of your dedication to perpetual
virginity your property is yours no longer; or rather is now first truly
yours because it has come to be Christ’s. Yet while your grandmother and
mother are living you must deal with it according to their wishes. If,
however, they die and rest in the sleep of the saints (and I know that
they desire that you should survive them); when your years are riper,
and your will steadier, and your resolution stronger, you will do with
your money what seems best to you, or rather what the Lord shall
command, knowing as you will that hereafter you will have nothing save
that which you have here spent on good works. Others may build churches,
may adorn their walls when built with marbles, may procure massive
columns, may deck the unconscious capitals with gold and precious
ornaments, may cover church doors with silver and adorn the altars with
gold and gems. I do not blame those who do these things; I do not
repudiate them. <span id="fr_3741"></span>[3742](#fn_3741) Everyone must
follow his own judgment. And it is better to spend one’s money thus than
to hoard it up and brood over it. However <span id="page_269">p.
269</span> <span id="v.CXXX-Page_269"></span>your duty is of a different
kind. It is yours to clothe Christ in the poor, to visit Him in the
sick, to feed Him in the hungry, to shelter Him in the homeless,
particularly such as are of the household of faith, <span
id="fr_3742"></span>[3743](#fn_3742) to support communities of virgins,
to take care of God’s servants, of those who are poor in spirit, who
serve the same Lord as you day and night, who while they are on earth
live the angelic life and speak only of the praises of God. Having food
and raiment they rejoice and count themselves rich. They seek for
nothing more, contented if only they can persevere in their design. For
as soon as they begin to seek more they are shewn to be undeserving even
of those things that are needful.

<span id="v.CXXX-p158"></span>The preceding counsels have been addressed
to a virgin who is wealthy and a lady of rank.

<span id="v.CXXX-p159"></span>15. But what I am now going to say will be
addressed to the virgin alone. I shall take into consideration, that is,
not your circumstances but yourself. In addition to the rule of psalmody
and prayer which you must always observe at the third, sixth, and ninth
hours, at evening, at midnight, and at dawn, <span
id="fr_3743"></span>[3744](#fn_3743) you should determine how much time
you will bind yourself to give to the learning and reading of scripture,
aiming to please and instruct the soul rather than to lay a burthen upon
it. When you have spent your allotted time in these studies, often
kneeling down to pray as care for your soul will impel you to do; have
some wool always at hand, shape the threads into yarn with your thumb,
attach them to the shuttle, and then throw this to weave a web, or roll
up the yarn which others have spun or lay it out for the weavers.
Examine their work when it is done, find fault with its defects, and
arrange how much they are to do. If you busy yourself with these
numerous occupations, you will never find your days long; however late
the summer sun may be in setting, a day will always seem too short on
which something remains undone. By observing such rules as these you
will save yourself and others, you will set a good example as a
mistress, and you will place to your credit the chastity of many. For
the scripture says: “the soul of every idler is filled with
desires.” <span id="fr_3744"></span>[3745](#fn_3744) Nor may you excuse
yourself from toil on the plea that God’s bounty has left you in want of
nothing. No; you must labour with the rest, that being always busy you
may think only of the service of the Lord. I shall speak quite plainly.
Even supposing that you give all your property to the poor, Christ will
value nothing more highly than what you have wrought with your own
hands. You may work for yourself or to set an example to your virgins;
or you may make presents to your mother and grandmother to draw from
them larger sums for the relief of the poor.

<span id="v.CXXX-p162"></span>16. I have all but passed over the most
important point of all. While you were still quite small, bishop
Anastasius of holy and blessed memory ruled the Roman church. <span
id="fr_3745"></span>[3746](#fn_3745) In his days a terrible storm of
heresy <span id="fr_3746"></span>[3747](#fn_3746) came from the East and
strove first to corrupt and then to undermine that simple faith which an
apostle has praised. <span id="fr_3747"></span>[3748](#fn_3747) However
the bishop, rich in poverty and as careful of his flock as an apostle,
at once smote the noxious thing on the head, and stayed the hydra’s
hissing. Now I have reason to fear—in fact a report has reached me to
this effect—that the poisonous germs of this heresy still live and
sprout in the minds of some to this day. I think, therefore, that I
ought to warn you, in all kindness and affection, to hold fast the faith
of the saintly Innocent, the spiritual son of Anastasius and his
successor in the apostolic see; and not to receive any foreign doctrine,
however wise and discerning you may take yourself to be. Men of this
type whisper in corners and pretend to inquire into the justice of God.
Why, they ask, was a particular soul born in a particular province? What
is the reason that some are born of Christian parents, others among wild
beasts and savage tribes who have no knowledge of God? Wherever they can
strike the simple with their scorpion-sting and form an ulcer fitted to
their purpose, there they diffuse their venom. “Is it for nothing, think
you,”—thus they argue—“that a little child scarcely able to recognize
its mother by a laugh or a look of joy, <span
id="fr_3748"></span>[3749](#fn_3748) which has done nothing either good
or evil, is seized by a devil or overwhelmed with jaundice or doomed to
bear afflictions which godless men escape, while God’s servants have to
bear them?” Now if God’s judgments, they say, are “true and righteous
altogether,” <span id="fr_3749"></span>[3750](#fn_3749) and if “there is
no unrighteousness in Him,” <span id="fr_3750"></span>[3751](#fn_3750)
we are compelled by reason to believe that our souls have pre-existed in
heaven, that they are condemned to and, if I may so say, buried in human
bodies because of some ancient sins, and that we are punished in this
valley of weeping <span id="fr_3751"></span>[3752](#fn_3751) for old
misdeeds. This according to them is the prophet’s reason for saying:
“Before I was afflicted I went astray,” <span
id="fr_3752"></span>[3753](#fn_3752) and again, “Bring my soul out of
prison.” <span id="fr_3753"></span>[3754](#fn_3753) They explain in the
same way the question of the disciples in the gospel: “Who did sin, this
<span id="page_270">p. 270</span> <span id="v.CXXX-Page_270"></span>man
or his parents, that he was born blind?” <span
id="fr_3754"></span>[3755](#fn_3754) and other similar passages.

<span id="v.CXXX-p173"></span>This godless and wicked teaching was
formerly ripe in Egypt and the East; and now it lurks secretly like a
viper in its hole among many persons in those parts, defiling the purity
of the faith and gradually creeping on like an inherited disease till it
assails a large number. But I am sure that if you hear it you will not
accept it. For you have preceptresses under God whose faith is a rule of
sound doctrine. You will understand what I mean, for God will give you
understanding in all things. You must not ask me on the spot to give you
a refutation of this dreadful heresy and of others worse still; for were
I to do so I should “criticize where I ought to forbid,” <span
id="fr_3755"></span>[3756](#fn_3755) and my present object is not to
refute heretics but to instruct a virgin. However, I have defeated their
wiles and counterworked their efforts to undermine the truth in a
treatise <span id="fr_3756"></span>[3757](#fn_3756) which by God’s help
I have written; and if you desire to have this, I shall send it to you
promptly and with pleasure. I say, if you desire to have it, for as the
proverb says, wares proffered unasked are little esteemed, and a
plentiful supply brings down prices, which are always highest where
scarcity prevails.

<span id="v.CXXX-p176"></span>17. Men often discuss the comparative
merits of life in solitude and life in a community; and the preference
is usually given to the first over the second. Still even for men there
is always the risk that, being withdrawn from the society of their
fellows, they may become exposed to unclean and godless imaginations,
and in the fulness of their arrogance and disdain may look down upon
everyone but themselves, and may arm their tongues to detract from the
clergy or from those who like themselves are bound by the vows of a
solitary life. <span id="fr_3757"></span>[3758](#fn_3757) Of such it is
well said by the psalmist, “as for the children of men their teeth are
spears and arrows and their tongue a sharp sword.” <span
id="fr_3758"></span>[3759](#fn_3758) Now if all this is true of men, how
much more does it apply to women whose fickle and vacillating minds, if
left to their own devices, soon degenerate. I am myself acquainted with
anchorites of both sexes who by excessive fasting have so impaired their
faculties that they do not know what to do or where to turn, when to
speak or when to be silent. Most frequently those who have been so
affected have lived in solitary cells, cold and damp. Moreover if
persons untrained in secular learning read the works of able church
writers, they only acquire from them a wordy fluency and not, as they
might do, a fuller knowledge of the scriptures. The old saying is found
true of them, although they have not the wit to speak, they cannot
remain silent. They teach to others the scriptures that they do not
understand themselves; and if they are fortunate enough to convince
them, they take upon themselves airs as men of learning. <span
id="fr_3759"></span>[3760](#fn_3759) In fact, they set up as instructors
of the ignorant before they have gone to school themselves. It is a good
thing therefore to defer to one’s betters, to obey those set over one,
to learn not only from the scriptures but from the example of others how
one ought to order one’s life, and not to follow that worst of teachers,
one’s own self-confidence. Of women who are thus presumptuous the
apostle says that they “are carried about with every wind of
doctrine, <span id="fr_3760"></span>[3761](#fn_3760) ever learning and
never able to come to the knowledge of the truth.” <span
id="fr_3761"></span>[3762](#fn_3761)

<span id="v.CXXX-p182"></span>18. Avoid the company of married women who
are devoted to their husbands and to the world, that your mind may not
become unsettled by hearing what a husband says to his wife, or a wife
to her husband. Such conversations are filled with deadly venom. To
express his condemnation of them the apostle has taken a verse of a
profane writer and has pressed it into the service of the church. It may
be literally rendered at the expense of the metre: “evil communications
corrupt good manners.” <span id="fr_3762"></span>[3763](#fn_3762) No;
you should choose for your companions staid and serious women,
particularly widows and virgins, persons of approved conversation, of
few words, and of a holy modesty. Shun gay and thoughtless girls, who
deck their heads and wear their hair in fringes, who use cosmetics to
improve their skins and affect tight sleeves, dresses without a crease,
and dainty buskins; and by pretending to be virgins more easily sell
themselves into destruction. Moreover, the character and tastes of a
mistress are often inferred from the behaviour of her attendants. Regard
as fair and lovable and a fitting companion one who is unconscious of
her good looks and careless of her appearance; who does not expose her
breast out of doors or throw back her cloak to reveal her neck; who
veils all of her face except her eyes, and only uses these to find her
way.

<span id="v.CXXX-p184"></span>19. I hesitate about what I am going to
say but, as often happens, whether I like it or not, it must be said;
not that I have <span id="page_271">p. 271</span> <span
id="v.CXXX-Page_271"></span>reason to fear anything of the kind in your
case, for probably you know nothing of such things and have never even
heard of them, but that in advising you I may warn others. A virgin
should avoid as so many plagues and banes of chastity all ringletted
youths who curl their hair and scent themselves with musk; to whom may
well be applied the words of Petronius Arbiter, “too much perfume makes
an ill perfume.” <span id="fr_3763"></span>[3764](#fn_3763) I need not
speak of those who by their pertinacious visits to virgins bring
discredit both on themselves and on these; for, even if nothing wrong is
done by them, no wrong can be imagined greater than to find oneself
exposed to the calumnies and attacks of the heathen. I do not here speak
of all, but only of those whom the church itself rebukes, whom sometimes
it expels, and against whom the censure of bishops and presbyters is not
seldom directed. For, as it is, it is almost more dangerous for giddy
girls to shew themselves in the abodes of religion than even to walk
abroad. Virgins who live in communities and of whom large numbers are
assembled together, should never go out by themselves or unaccompanied
by their mother. <span id="fr_3764"></span>[3765](#fn_3764) A hawk often
singles out one of a flight of doves, pounces on it and tears it open
till it is gorged with its flesh and blood. Sick sheep stray from the
flock and fall into the jaws of wolves. I know some saintly virgins who
on holy days keep at home to avoid the crowds and refuse to go out when
they must either take a strong escort, or altogether avoid all public
places.

<span id="v.CXXX-p187"></span>It is about thirty years since I published
a treatise *on the preservation of virginity,* <span
id="fr_3765"></span>[3766](#fn_3765) in which I felt constrained to
oppose certain vices and to lay bare the wiles of the devil for the
instruction of the virgin to whom it was addressed. My language then
gave offence to a great many, for everyone applied what I said to
himself and instead of welcoming my admonitions turned away from me as
an accuser of his deeds. Was it any use, do you ask, thus to arm a host
of remonstrants and to show by my complaints the wounds which my
conscience received? Yes, I answer, for, while they have passed away, my
book still remains. I have also written short exhortations to several
virgins and widows, and in these smaller works I have gathered together
all that there is to be said on the subject. So that I am reduced to the
alternative of repeating exhortations which seem superfluous or of
omitting them to the serious injury of this treatise. The blessed
Cyprian has left a noble work on virginity; <span
id="fr_3766"></span>[3767](#fn_3766) and many other writers, both Greek
and Latin, have done the same. Indeed the virginal life has been praised
both with tongue and pen among all nations and particularly among the
churches. Most, however, of those who have written on the subject have
addressed themselves to such as have not yet chosen virginity, and who
need help to enable them to choose aright. But I and those to whom I
write have made our choice; and our one object is to remain constant to
it. Therefore, as our way lies among scorpions and adders, among snares
and banes, let us go forward staff in hand, our loins girded and our
feet shod; <span id="fr_3767"></span>[3768](#fn_3767) that so we may
come to the sweet waters of the true Jordan, and enter the land of
promise and go up to the house of God. Then shall we sing with the
prophet: “Lord, I have loved the habitation of thy house and the place
where thine honour dwelleth;” <span id="fr_3768"></span>[3769](#fn_3768)
and again: “one thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek
after; that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my
life.” <span id="fr_3769"></span>[3770](#fn_3769)

<span id="v.CXXX-p193"></span>Happy is the soul, happy is the virgin in
whose heart there is room for no other love than the love of Christ. For
in Himself He is wisdom and chastity, patience and justice and every
other virtue. Happy too is she who can recall a man’s face without the
least sigh of regret, and who has no desire to set eyes on one whom,
after she has seen him, she may find herself unwilling to give up. Some
there are, however, who by their ill-behaviour bring discredit on the
holy profession of virginity and upon the glory of the heavenly and
angelic company who have made it. These must be frankly told either to
marry if they cannot contain, or to contain if they will not marry. It
is also a matter for laughter or rather for tears, that when mistresses
walk abroad they are preceded by maids better dressed than themselves;
indeed so usual has this become that, if of two women you see one less
neat than the other, you take her for the mistress as a matter of
course. And yet these maids are professed virgins. Again not a few
virgins choose sequestered dwellings where they will not be under the
eyes of others, in order that they may live more freely than they
otherwise could do. They take baths, do what they please, and try as
much as they can to escape notice. We see these things and yet we put up
with them; in fact, if we catch sight of the glitter of gold, we are
ready to account of them as good works.

<span id="v.CXXX-p194"></span>20. I end as I began, not content to have
<span id="page_272">p. 272</span> <span
id="v.CXXX-Page_272"></span>given you but a single warning. Love the
holy scriptures, and wisdom will love you. Love wisdom, and it will keep
you safe. Honour wisdom, and it will embrace you round about. <span
id="fr_3770"></span>[3771](#fn_3770) Let the jewels on your breast and
in your ears be the gems of wisdom. Let your tongue know no theme but
Christ, let no sound pass your lips that is not holy, and let your words
always reproduce that sweetness of which your grandmother and your
mother set you the example. Imitate them, for they are models of virtue.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3614"></span>[261:3615](2060141.htm#fr_3614) <span
id="v.CXXX-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p4"></span> Cicero in his Dialogue on the Republic. Cf.
Or. xxx.

<span id="fn_3615"></span>[261:3616](2060141.htm#fr_3615) <span
id="v.CXXX-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p6"></span> [Rom. xii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#001)<span id="v.CXXX-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3616"></span>[261:3617](2060141.htm#fr_3616) <span
id="v.CXXX-p6.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p7"></span> Pontifex.

<span id="fn_3617"></span>[261:3618](2060141.htm#fr_3617) <span
id="v.CXXX-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p8"></span> [2 Cor. xi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#002)<span id="v.CXXX-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3618"></span>[261:3619](2060141.htm#fr_3618) <span
id="v.CXXX-p8.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p9"></span> [Ps.
45:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#009),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#014)<span id="v.CXXX-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3619"></span>[261:3620](2060141.htm#fr_3619) <span
id="v.CXXX-p9.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p10"></span> *i.e*. After receiving the veil.

<span id="fn_3620"></span>[261:3621](2060141.htm#fr_3620) <span
id="v.CXXX-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p11"></span> [Song of Sol.
1.4](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#004)<span id="v.CXXX-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3621"></span>[261:3622](2060141.htm#fr_3621) <span
id="v.CXXX-p11.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p12"></span> [Ps. xlv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#013)<span id="v.CXXX-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3622"></span>[261:3623](2060141.htm#fr_3622) <span
id="v.CXXX-p12.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p13"></span> [1 Cor. iii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#006)<span id="v.CXXX-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3623"></span>[261:3624](2060141.htm#fr_3623) <span
id="v.CXXX-p14.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p15"></span> In the year 395 <span class="c17"><span
id="v.CXXX-p15.1"></span>a.d.</span>

<span id="fn_3624"></span>[261:3625](2060141.htm#fr_3624) <span
id="v.CXXX-p15.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p16"></span> Which took place before the fall of Rome
in 410 <span class="c17"><span id="v.CXXX-p16.1"></span>a.d.</span>

<span id="fn_3625"></span>[262:3626](2060141.htm#fr_3625) <span
id="v.CXXX-p17.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p18"></span> [Matt. xi.
8](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#008)<span id="v.CXXX-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3626"></span>[262:3627](2060141.htm#fr_3626) <span
id="v.CXXX-p18.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p19"></span> [2 Kings
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#008), [Matt.
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#004)<span id="v.CXXX-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3627"></span>[262:3628](2060141.htm#fr_3627) <span
id="v.CXXX-p19.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p20"></span> [Matt.
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#014), [Luke
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#017)<span id="v.CXXX-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3628"></span>[262:3629](2060141.htm#fr_3628) <span
id="v.CXXX-p20.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p21"></span> [Luke i.
41](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#041)<span id="v.CXXX-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3629"></span>[262:3630](2060141.htm#fr_3629) <span
id="v.CXXX-p21.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p22"></span> [Matt. xi.
7-14](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#007)<span id="v.CXXX-p22.1"></span>.
Jerome here borrows a phrase from Cyprian, de Op. et El. xv.

<span id="fn_3630"></span>[262:3631](2060141.htm#fr_3630) <span
id="v.CXXX-p22.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p23"></span> [Luke
2:36](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#036),
[37](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#037)<span id="v.CXXX-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3631"></span>[262:3632](2060141.htm#fr_3631) <span
id="v.CXXX-p23.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p24"></span> [Acts xxi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#009)<span id="v.CXXX-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3632"></span>[262:3633](2060141.htm#fr_3632) <span
id="v.CXXX-p24.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p25"></span> Esther xiv. 16<span
id="v.CXXX-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3633"></span>[262:3634](2060141.htm#fr_3633) <span
id="v.CXXX-p26.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p27"></span> A virgin 13 years old beheaded at Rome
under Diocletian after vain efforts first made to overcome her faith by
subjecting her to assault and outrage.

<span id="fn_3634"></span>[262:3635](2060141.htm#fr_3634) <span
id="v.CXXX-p27.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p28"></span> See § 7 for the cruelties of the Count
Herælian.

<span id="fn_3635"></span>[262:3636](2060141.htm#fr_3635) <span
id="v.CXXX-p28.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p29"></span> Quam habitura pronubam?

<span id="fn_3636"></span>[262:3637](2060141.htm#fr_3636) <span
id="v.CXXX-p29.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p30"></span> Wedding songs so called from the place of
their origin, Fescennia in Etruria. See Catullus LXI. for the several
customs here mentioned.

<span id="fn_3637"></span>[262:3638](2060141.htm#fr_3637) <span
id="v.CXXX-p30.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p31"></span> [1 John iv.
18](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#018)<span id="v.CXXX-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3638"></span>[262:3639](2060141.htm#fr_3638) <span
id="v.CXXX-p31.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p32"></span> [Eph. vi.
14-17](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#014)<span id="v.CXXX-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3639"></span>[263:3640](2060141.htm#fr_3639) <span
id="v.CXXX-p32.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p33"></span> Virg., A. ii. 774.

<span id="fn_3640"></span>[263:3641](2060141.htm#fr_3640) <span
id="v.CXXX-p34.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p35"></span> Over Hannibal, <span class="c17"><span
id="v.CXXX-p35.1"></span>b.c.</span> 216. Jerome is quoting from Cicero,
Brutus, III.

<span id="fn_3641"></span>[263:3642](2060141.htm#fr_3641) <span
id="v.CXXX-p35.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p36"></span> The reference is to the siege of the
Capitol by Brennus and the Gauls, <span class="c17"><span
id="v.CXXX-p36.1"></span>b.c.</span> 390.

<span id="fn_3642"></span>[263:3643](2060141.htm#fr_3642) <span
id="v.CXXX-p36.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p37"></span> See note on Letter LXXIX. § 7.

<span id="fn_3643"></span>[263:3644](2060141.htm#fr_3643) <span
id="v.CXXX-p38.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p39"></span> *i.e.* Juliana and Proba, the mother and
grandmother of Demetrias.

<span id="fn_3644"></span>[264:3645](2060141.htm#fr_3644) <span
id="v.CXXX-p40.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p41"></span> [Luke xvi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#009)<span id="v.CXXX-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3645"></span>[264:3646](2060141.htm#fr_3645) <span
id="v.CXXX-p42.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p43"></span> *i.e.* Olybrius, the father of Demetrias.

<span id="fn_3646"></span>[264:3647](2060141.htm#fr_3646) <span
id="v.CXXX-p45.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p46"></span> Horace, Carm. iii. 3. 7, 8.

<span id="fn_3647"></span>[264:3648](2060141.htm#fr_3647) <span
id="v.CXXX-p47.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p48"></span> [Job i.
16](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#016)<span id="v.CXXX-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3648"></span>[264:3649](2060141.htm#fr_3648) <span
id="v.CXXX-p48.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p49"></span> [Job vii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#001)<span id="v.CXXX-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3649"></span>[264:3650](2060141.htm#fr_3649) <span
id="v.CXXX-p49.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p50"></span> [Matt. iv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#001)<span id="v.CXXX-p50.1"></span>, sqq.

<span id="fn_3650"></span>[264:3651](2060141.htm#fr_3650) <span
id="v.CXXX-p50.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p51"></span> [Gen. xxii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#001)<span id="v.CXXX-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3651"></span>[264:3652](2060141.htm#fr_3651) <span
id="v.CXXX-p51.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p52"></span> [Rom. v.
3-5](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#003)<span id="v.CXXX-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3652"></span>[264:3653](2060141.htm#fr_3652) <span
id="v.CXXX-p52.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p53"></span> [Rom.
8:35](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#035),
[36](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#036)<span id="v.CXXX-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3653"></span>[264:3654](2060141.htm#fr_3653) <span
id="v.CXXX-p53.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p54"></span> [Isa.
28:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#010)<span id="v.CXXX-p54.1"></span>,
LXX.

<span id="fn_3654"></span>[264:3655](2060141.htm#fr_3654) <span
id="v.CXXX-p54.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p55"></span> [Rom. viii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#018)<span id="v.CXXX-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3655"></span>[264:3656](2060141.htm#fr_3655) <span
id="v.CXXX-p56.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p57"></span> Heraclian, Count of Africa.

<span id="fn_3656"></span>[264:3657](2060141.htm#fr_3656) <span
id="v.CXXX-p57.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p58"></span> Honorius.

<span id="fn_3657"></span>[264:3658](2060141.htm#fr_3657) <span
id="v.CXXX-p58.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p59"></span> *i.e.* Pluto, king of the lower world.

<span id="fn_3658"></span>[264:3659](2060141.htm#fr_3658) <span
id="v.CXXX-p59.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p60"></span> Sabinus, the son-in-law of Heraclian.

<span id="fn_3659"></span>[264:3660](2060141.htm#fr_3659) <span
id="v.CXXX-p60.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p61"></span> Virg., A. x. 79.

<span id="fn_3660"></span>[264:3661](2060141.htm#fr_3660) <span
id="v.CXXX-p61.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p62"></span> Jerome here apostrophizes Heraclian.

<span id="fn_3661"></span>[264:3662](2060141.htm#fr_3661) <span
id="v.CXXX-p62.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p63"></span> Alaric the Goth.

<span id="fn_3662"></span>[264:3663](2060141.htm#fr_3662) <span
id="v.CXXX-p64.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p65"></span> Reading *dedignatus for dignatus.*

<span id="fn_3663"></span>[265:3664](2060141.htm#fr_3663) <span
id="v.CXXX-p68.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p69"></span> Virg., A. iii. 435.

<span id="fn_3664"></span>[265:3665](2060141.htm#fr_3664) <span
id="v.CXXX-p70.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p71"></span> [Matt. xiii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#025)<span id="v.CXXX-p71.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3665"></span>[265:3666](2060141.htm#fr_3665) <span
id="v.CXXX-p71.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p72"></span> [Cant.
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#001), [Cant.
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#007)<span id="v.CXXX-p72.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3666"></span>[265:3667](2060141.htm#fr_3666) <span
id="v.CXXX-p72.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p73"></span> [Ps. lxiii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#008)<span id="v.CXXX-p73.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3667"></span>[265:3668](2060141.htm#fr_3667) <span
id="v.CXXX-p73.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p74"></span> [Jer. xvii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#016)<span id="v.CXXX-p74.1"></span>,
LXX.

<span id="fn_3668"></span>[265:3669](2060141.htm#fr_3668) <span
id="v.CXXX-p74.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p75"></span> [Nu. xxiii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#021)<span id="v.CXXX-p75.1"></span>,
LXX.

<span id="fn_3669"></span>[265:3670](2060141.htm#fr_3669) <span
id="v.CXXX-p75.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p76"></span> *i.e.* The Indian Ocean.

<span id="fn_3670"></span>[265:3671](2060141.htm#fr_3670) <span
id="v.CXXX-p76.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p77"></span> [Matt. viii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#012)<span id="v.CXXX-p77.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3671"></span>[265:3672](2060141.htm#fr_3671) <span
id="v.CXXX-p77.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p78"></span> [Joh. viii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#012)<span id="v.CXXX-p78.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3672"></span>[265:3673](2060141.htm#fr_3672) <span
id="v.CXXX-p78.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p79"></span> [Matt.
5:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#025),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#026)<span id="v.CXXX-p79.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3673"></span>[265:3674](2060141.htm#fr_3673) <span
id="v.CXXX-p79.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p80"></span> [Matt. xii.
36](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#036)<span id="v.CXXX-p80.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3674"></span>[265:3675](2060141.htm#fr_3674) <span
id="v.CXXX-p81.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p82"></span> [Eccles. x.
4](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#004)<span id="v.CXXX-p82.1"></span>.
Jerome takes ‘the ruler’ to be the devil.

<span id="fn_3675"></span>[265:3676](2060141.htm#fr_3675) <span
id="v.CXXX-p82.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p83"></span> [Ps. xl.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#002)<span id="v.CXXX-p83.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3676"></span>[265:3677](2060141.htm#fr_3676) <span
id="v.CXXX-p83.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p84"></span> [Ps. civ.
18](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#018)<span id="v.CXXX-p84.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3677"></span>[265:3678](2060141.htm#fr_3677) <span
id="v.CXXX-p84.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p85"></span> [Gen. iii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#016)<span id="v.CXXX-p85.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3678"></span>[265:3679](2060141.htm#fr_3678) <span
id="v.CXXX-p85.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p86"></span> [Song of Sol.
2.16](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#016)<span id="v.CXXX-p86.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3679"></span>[265:3680](2060141.htm#fr_3679) <span
id="v.CXXX-p86.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p87"></span> [Rev. xiv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#004)<span id="v.CXXX-p87.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3680"></span>[265:3681](2060141.htm#fr_3680) <span
id="v.CXXX-p87.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p88"></span> [Eccles. ix.
8](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#008)<span id="v.CXXX-p88.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3681"></span>[265:3682](2060141.htm#fr_3681) <span
id="v.CXXX-p88.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p89"></span> [Song of Sol.
2.1](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#001)<span id="v.CXXX-p89.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3682"></span>[265:3683](2060141.htm#fr_3682) <span
id="v.CXXX-p89.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p90"></span> [Matt. x.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#023)<span id="v.CXXX-p90.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3683"></span>[265:3684](2060141.htm#fr_3683) <span
id="v.CXXX-p90.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p91"></span> [Ps. cxlii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#004)<span id="v.CXXX-p91.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3684"></span>[265:3685](2060141.htm#fr_3684) <span
id="v.CXXX-p91.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p92"></span> [Ps. civ.
18](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#018)<span id="v.CXXX-p92.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3685"></span>[266:3686](2060141.htm#fr_3685) <span
id="v.CXXX-p92.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p93"></span> [Isa. xi.
6-8](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#006)<span id="v.CXXX-p93.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3686"></span>[266:3687](2060141.htm#fr_3686) <span
id="v.CXXX-p94.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p95"></span> [Eccles. x.
4](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#004)<span id="v.CXXX-p95.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3687"></span>[266:3688](2060141.htm#fr_3687) <span
id="v.CXXX-p95.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p96"></span> [Prov. iv.
23](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#023)<span id="v.CXXX-p96.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3688"></span>[266:3689](2060141.htm#fr_3688) <span
id="v.CXXX-p96.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p97"></span> [Ps. xix.
12-14](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#012)<span id="v.CXXX-p97.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3689"></span>[266:3690](2060141.htm#fr_3689) <span
id="v.CXXX-p97.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p98"></span> [Ps. cxxxvii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#009)<span id="v.CXXX-p98.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3690"></span>[266:3691](2060141.htm#fr_3690) <span
id="v.CXXX-p98.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p99"></span> [Ps. xix.
13](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#013)<span id="v.CXXX-p99.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3691"></span>[266:3692](2060141.htm#fr_3691) <span
id="v.CXXX-p99.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p100"></span> [Nu. xiv.
18](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#018)<span id="v.CXXX-p100.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3692"></span>[266:3693](2060141.htm#fr_3692) <span
id="v.CXXX-p100.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p101"></span> [Amos i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#003)<span id="v.CXXX-p101.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3693"></span>[266:3694](2060141.htm#fr_3693) <span
id="v.CXXX-p102.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p103"></span> [Exod.
12:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#023),
[29](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#029)<span id="v.CXXX-p103.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3694"></span>[266:3695](2060141.htm#fr_3694) <span
id="v.CXXX-p103.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p104"></span> [Ps.
57:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#008)<span id="v.CXXX-p104.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3695"></span>[266:3696](2060141.htm#fr_3695) <span
id="v.CXXX-p104.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p105"></span> [Isa.
23:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#016)<span id="v.CXXX-p105.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3696"></span>[266:3697](2060141.htm#fr_3696) <span
id="v.CXXX-p105.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p106"></span> See Letter CXXII. § 4.

<span id="fn_3697"></span>[266:3698](2060141.htm#fr_3697) <span
id="v.CXXX-p106.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p107"></span> [1 Cor. ix.
27](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#027)<span id="v.CXXX-p107.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3698"></span>[266:3699](2060141.htm#fr_3698) <span
id="v.CXXX-p107.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p108"></span> [Rom.
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#024),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#018),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#019)<span id="v.CXXX-p108.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3699"></span>[266:3700](2060141.htm#fr_3699) <span
id="v.CXXX-p108.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p109"></span> [Rom.
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#009)<span id="v.CXXX-p109.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3700"></span>[266:3701](2060141.htm#fr_3700) <span
id="v.CXXX-p110.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p111"></span> [Ps. lxix.
10](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#010)<span id="v.CXXX-p111.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3701"></span>[266:3702](2060141.htm#fr_3701) <span
id="v.CXXX-p111.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p112"></span> [Ps. cii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#009)<span id="v.CXXX-p112.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3702"></span>[266:3703](2060141.htm#fr_3702) <span
id="v.CXXX-p112.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p113"></span> [Ps. xxxv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#013)<span id="v.CXXX-p113.1"></span>,
Vulg.

<span id="fn_3703"></span>[266:3704](2060141.htm#fr_3703) <span
id="v.CXXX-p113.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p114"></span> [Deut. viii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#003)<span id="v.CXXX-p114.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3704"></span>[266:3705](2060141.htm#fr_3704) <span
id="v.CXXX-p114.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p115"></span> [John
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#015), [1 Pet.
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#021)<span id="v.CXXX-p115.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3705"></span>[266:3706](2060141.htm#fr_3705) <span
id="v.CXXX-p115.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p116"></span> [Matt. iv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#001)<span id="v.CXXX-p116.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3706"></span>[266:3707](2060141.htm#fr_3706) <span
id="v.CXXX-p116.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p117"></span> [Rom. xvi.
20](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#020)<span id="v.CXXX-p117.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3707"></span>[266:3708](2060141.htm#fr_3707) <span
id="v.CXXX-p117.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p118"></span> [Matt. iv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#003)<span id="v.CXXX-p118.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3708"></span>[266:3709](2060141.htm#fr_3708) <span
id="v.CXXX-p118.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p119"></span> [Lev.
23:27](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#027),
[29](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#029)<span id="v.CXXX-p119.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3709"></span>[267:3710](2060141.htm#fr_3709) <span
id="v.CXXX-p119.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p120"></span> [Job xl.
16](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#016)<span id="v.CXXX-p120.1"></span>.
Cf. Letter XXII. § 11.

<span id="fn_3710"></span>[267:3711](2060141.htm#fr_3710) <span
id="v.CXXX-p120.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p121"></span> [Jas. iii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#006)<span id="v.CXXX-p121.1"></span>,
R.V. marg.

<span id="fn_3711"></span>[267:3712](2060141.htm#fr_3711) <span
id="v.CXXX-p121.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p122"></span> [Hos. vii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#004)<span id="v.CXXX-p122.1"></span>,
Vulg.

<span id="fn_3712"></span>[267:3713](2060141.htm#fr_3712) <span
id="v.CXXX-p122.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p123"></span> [Eph. vi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#016)<span id="v.CXXX-p123.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3713"></span>[267:3714](2060141.htm#fr_3713) <span
id="v.CXXX-p123.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p124"></span> <span id="v.CXXX-p124.1"></span>Song of
the Three Holy Children 24.

<span id="fn_3714"></span>[267:3715](2060141.htm#fr_3714) <span
id="v.CXXX-p124.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p125"></span> [Dan.
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#016),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#025),
[32](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#032)<span id="v.CXXX-p125.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3715"></span>[267:3716](2060141.htm#fr_3715) <span
id="v.CXXX-p125.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p126"></span> [Lev. xxv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#008)<span id="v.CXXX-p126.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3716"></span>[267:3717](2060141.htm#fr_3716) <span
id="v.CXXX-p126.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p127"></span> [Dan. iii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#025)<span id="v.CXXX-p127.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3717"></span>[267:3718](2060141.htm#fr_3717) <span
id="v.CXXX-p127.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p128"></span> [Acts ix.
15](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#015)<span id="v.CXXX-p128.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3718"></span>[267:3719](2060141.htm#fr_3718) <span
id="v.CXXX-p128.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p129"></span> [1 Cor. vii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#025)<span id="v.CXXX-p129.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3719"></span>[267:3720](2060141.htm#fr_3719) <span
id="v.CXXX-p130.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p131"></span> See Letter CVIII. § 20.

<span id="fn_3720"></span>[267:3721](2060141.htm#fr_3720) <span
id="v.CXXX-p131.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p132"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.CXXX-p132.1"></span>Μηδὲν ᾽άγαν</span> quoted by Terence (Andria,
61).

<span id="fn_3721"></span>[267:3722](2060141.htm#fr_3721) <span
id="v.CXXX-p132.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p133"></span> [Heb. xii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#014)<span id="v.CXXX-p133.1"></span>,
R.V.

<span id="fn_3722"></span>[267:3723](2060141.htm#fr_3722) <span
id="v.CXXX-p133.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p134"></span> See Jerome’s commentary on the parable.

<span id="fn_3723"></span>[267:3724](2060141.htm#fr_3723) <span
id="v.CXXX-p134.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p135"></span> [Matt. xxv.
1-12](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#001)<span id="v.CXXX-p135.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3724"></span>[267:3725](2060141.htm#fr_3724) <span
id="v.CXXX-p135.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p136"></span> See Letters XXII., LII., etc.

<span id="fn_3725"></span>[267:3726](2060141.htm#fr_3725) <span
id="v.CXXX-p137.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p138"></span> [Luke ii.
51](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#051)<span id="v.CXXX-p138.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3726"></span>[267:3727](2060141.htm#fr_3726) <span
id="v.CXXX-p138.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p139"></span> Sall. Cat. i. 20.

<span id="fn_3727"></span>[267:3728](2060141.htm#fr_3727) <span
id="v.CXXX-p139.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p140"></span> [Heb. xiii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#004)<span id="v.CXXX-p140.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3728"></span>[267:3729](2060141.htm#fr_3728) <span
id="v.CXXX-p140.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p141"></span> [1 Pet. v.
6](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#006)<span id="v.CXXX-p141.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3729"></span>[267:3730](2060141.htm#fr_3729) <span
id="v.CXXX-p141.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p142"></span> [1 Pet. v.
5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#005)<span id="v.CXXX-p142.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3730"></span>[267:3731](2060141.htm#fr_3730) <span
id="v.CXXX-p142.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p143"></span> [Rom. ix.
16](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#016)<span id="v.CXXX-p143.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3731"></span>[268:3732](2060141.htm#fr_3731) <span
id="v.CXXX-p144.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p145"></span> Cf. Letter XXII. § 24.

<span id="fn_3732"></span>[268:3733](2060141.htm#fr_3732) <span
id="v.CXXX-p145.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p146"></span> The fragment of Lucilius (preserved by
Cic. de Fin. V. 30) says nothing of Cato: possibly therefore the text is
here corrupt. See for Cato Letter LII. § 3.

<span id="fn_3733"></span>[268:3734](2060141.htm#fr_3733) <span
id="v.CXXX-p146.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p147"></span> [Ps. iv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#004)<span id="v.CXXX-p147.1"></span>,
LXX.

<span id="fn_3734"></span>[268:3735](2060141.htm#fr_3734) <span
id="v.CXXX-p147.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p148"></span> [Eph. iv.
26](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#026)<span id="v.CXXX-p148.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3735"></span>[268:3736](2060141.htm#fr_3735) <span
id="v.CXXX-p149.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p150"></span> [Eph. v.
5](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#005)<span id="v.CXXX-p150.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3736"></span>[268:3737](2060141.htm#fr_3736) <span
id="v.CXXX-p150.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p151"></span> [Matt.
19:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#016),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#021)<span id="v.CXXX-p151.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3737"></span>[268:3738](2060141.htm#fr_3737) <span
id="v.CXXX-p151.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p152"></span> [Luke xviii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#022)<span id="v.CXXX-p152.1"></span>.
Cf. Letter CXIX. § 4.

<span id="fn_3738"></span>[268:3739](2060141.htm#fr_3738) <span
id="v.CXXX-p152.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p153"></span> [Acts
4:34](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#034),
[35](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#035)<span id="v.CXXX-p153.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3739"></span>[268:3740](2060141.htm#fr_3739) <span
id="v.CXXX-p153.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p154"></span> [Acts v.
1-10](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#001)<span id="v.CXXX-p154.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3740"></span>[268:3741](2060141.htm#fr_3740) <span
id="v.CXXX-p154.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p155"></span> A philosopher of the Neoplatonic school
(fl. 232–300 <span class="c17"><span
id="v.CXXX-p155.1"></span>a.d.</span>). Of his books against
Christianity only small fragments remain.

<span id="fn_3741"></span>[268:3742](2060141.htm#fr_3741) <span
id="v.CXXX-p155.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p156"></span> But see Letter LII. § 10.

<span id="fn_3742"></span>[269:3743](2060141.htm#fr_3742) <span
id="v.CXXX-p156.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p157"></span> [Gal. vi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#010)<span id="v.CXXX-p157.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3743"></span>[269:3744](2060141.htm#fr_3743) <span
id="v.CXXX-p159.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p160"></span> See note on Letter XXII. § 37.

<span id="fn_3744"></span>[269:3745](2060141.htm#fr_3744) <span
id="v.CXXX-p160.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p161"></span> [Prov. xiii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#004)<span id="v.CXXX-p161.1"></span>,
LXX. comp. Letter CXXV. § 11.

<span id="fn_3745"></span>[269:3746](2060141.htm#fr_3745) <span
id="v.CXXX-p162.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p163"></span> Anastasius was pope from 398 to 402 <span
class="c17"><span id="v.CXXX-p163.1"></span>a.d.</span>

<span id="fn_3746"></span>[269:3747](2060141.htm#fr_3746) <span
id="v.CXXX-p163.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p164"></span> That of the Origenists.

<span id="fn_3747"></span>[269:3748](2060141.htm#fr_3747) <span
id="v.CXXX-p164.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p165"></span> [Rom. i.
8](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#008)<span id="v.CXXX-p165.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3748"></span>[269:3749](2060141.htm#fr_3748) <span
id="v.CXXX-p165.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p166"></span> Virg. Ecl. iv. 60.

<span id="fn_3749"></span>[269:3750](2060141.htm#fr_3749) <span
id="v.CXXX-p166.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p167"></span> [Ps. xix.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#009)<span id="v.CXXX-p167.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3750"></span>[269:3751](2060141.htm#fr_3750) <span
id="v.CXXX-p167.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p168"></span> [Ps. xcii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#015)<span id="v.CXXX-p168.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3751"></span>[269:3752](2060141.htm#fr_3751) <span
id="v.CXXX-p168.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p169"></span> [Ps. lxxxiv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#006)<span id="v.CXXX-p169.1"></span>,
R.V.

<span id="fn_3752"></span>[269:3753](2060141.htm#fr_3752) <span
id="v.CXXX-p169.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p170"></span> [Ps. cxix.
67](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#067)<span id="v.CXXX-p170.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3753"></span>[269:3754](2060141.htm#fr_3753) <span
id="v.CXXX-p170.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p171"></span> [Ps. cxlii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#007)<span id="v.CXXX-p171.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3754"></span>[270:3755](2060141.htm#fr_3754) <span
id="v.CXXX-p171.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p172"></span> [John ix.
2](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#002)<span id="v.CXXX-p172.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3755"></span>[270:3756](2060141.htm#fr_3755) <span
id="v.CXXX-p173.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p174"></span> A phrase borrowed from Cicero (p. Sext.
Rosc.).

<span id="fn_3756"></span>[270:3757](2060141.htm#fr_3756) <span
id="v.CXXX-p174.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p175"></span> Apparently Letter CXXIV. concerning
Origen’s book on *First Principles.*

<span id="fn_3757"></span>[270:3758](2060141.htm#fr_3757) <span
id="v.CXXX-p176.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p177"></span> Cf. Letter CXXV. § 9.

<span id="fn_3758"></span>[270:3759](2060141.htm#fr_3758) <span
id="v.CXXX-p177.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p178"></span> [Ps. lvii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#004)<span id="v.CXXX-p178.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3759"></span>[270:3760](2060141.htm#fr_3759) <span
id="v.CXXX-p178.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p179"></span> Cf. Letters LIII. § 7, and LXVI. § 9.

<span id="fn_3760"></span>[270:3761](2060141.htm#fr_3760) <span
id="v.CXXX-p179.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p180"></span> [Eph. iv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#014)<span id="v.CXXX-p180.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3761"></span>[270:3762](2060141.htm#fr_3761) <span
id="v.CXXX-p180.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p181"></span> [2 Tim. iii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#007)<span id="v.CXXX-p181.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3762"></span>[270:3763](2060141.htm#fr_3762) <span
id="v.CXXX-p182.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p183"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
33](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#033)<span id="v.CXXX-p183.1"></span>;
the words are quoted from a lost comedy of Menander.

<span id="fn_3763"></span>[271:3764](2060141.htm#fr_3763) <span
id="v.CXXX-p184.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p185"></span> The words are not extant in Petronius but
occur in Martial ii. 12. 4.

<span id="fn_3764"></span>[271:3765](2060141.htm#fr_3764) <span
id="v.CXXX-p185.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p186"></span> *i.e.* the head of the community.

<span id="fn_3765"></span>[271:3766](2060141.htm#fr_3765) <span
id="v.CXXX-p187.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p188"></span> Letter XXII. to Eustochium.

<span id="fn_3766"></span>[271:3767](2060141.htm#fr_3766) <span
id="v.CXXX-p188.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p189"></span> See Letter XXII. § 22 *ante*.

<span id="fn_3767"></span>[271:3768](2060141.htm#fr_3767) <span
id="v.CXXX-p189.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p190"></span> [Exod. xii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#011)<span id="v.CXXX-p190.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3768"></span>[271:3769](2060141.htm#fr_3768) <span
id="v.CXXX-p190.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p191"></span> [Ps. xxvi.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#008)<span id="v.CXXX-p191.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3769"></span>[271:3770](2060141.htm#fr_3769) <span
id="v.CXXX-p191.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p192"></span> [Ps. xxvii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#004)<span id="v.CXXX-p192.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3770"></span>[272:3771](2060141.htm#fr_3770) <span
id="v.CXXX-p194.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXX-p195"></span> Cf. Letter LII. § 3.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter CXXXI](2060142)
