[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2060006)  [Next](2060008) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.IV"></span>

<span id="iv.IV-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="iv.IV-p1.1"></span>IV.—<span class="c17"><span
id="iv.IV-p1.2"></span>The Writings of Jerome.</span></span>

<span id="iv.IV-p2"></span>The following is a list of the writings
arranged under various heads, and showing the date of composition and
the place held by each in the Edition of Vallarsi, the eleven volumes of
which will be found in Migne’s Patrologia, vols. xxii. to xxx. The
references are to the volumes of Jerome’s works (i.–xi.) in that
edition.

<span id="iv.IV-p3"></span>I. Bible translations:

<span id="iv.IV-p4"></span>(1) From the Hebrew.—The Vulgate of the Old
Testament, written at Bethlehem, begun 391, finished 404, vol. ix.

<span id="iv.IV-p5"></span>(2) From the Septuagint.—The Psalms as used
at Rome, written in Rome, 383, and the Psalms as used in Gaul, written
at Bethlehem about 388. These two are in parallel columns in vol. x. The
Gallican Psaltery is collated with the Hebrew, and shows by obeli (†)
the parts which are in the LXX. and not in the Hebrew, and by asterisks
(\*) the parts which are in the Hebrew and not in the Greek.

<span id="iv.IV-p6"></span>The Book of Job, forming a part of the
translation of the LXX. made between 386 and 392 at Bethlehem, the rest
of which was lost (Ep. 134<span id="iv.IV-p6.1"></span>), vol. x.

<span id="iv.IV-p7"></span>(3) From the Chaldee.—The Books of Tobit and
Judith, Bethlehem, 398, vol. x.

<span id="iv.IV-p8"></span>(4) From the Greek.—The Vulgate version of
the New Testament made at Rome between 382 and 385. The preface is only
to the Gospels, but Jerome speaks of and quotes from his version of the
other part also (De Vir. Ill. 135; Ep. 71<span id="iv.IV-p8.1"></span>
and 27), vol. x.

<span id="iv.IV-p9"></span>II. Commentaries:

<span id="iv.IV-p10"></span>(1) Original.—Ecclesiastes, vol. iii.,
Bethlehem, 388; Isaiah, vol. iv., Bethlehem, 410; [Jeremiah
i.](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#000)<span
id="iv.IV-p10.1"></span>–xxxii., 41, vol. iv., Bethlehem, 419; Ezekiel,
vol. v., Bethlehem, 410–14; Daniel, vol. v., Bethlehem, 407; the Minor
Prophets, vol. vi., Bethlehem, at various times between 391 and 406;
Matthew, vol. vii., Bethlehem, 398; Galatians, Ephesians, Titus,
Philemon, vol. vii, Bethlehem, 388.

<span id="iv.IV-p11"></span>(2) Translated from Origen.—Homilies on
Jeremiah and Ezekiel, vol. v., Bethlehem, 381; on Luke, vol. vii.,
Bethlehem, 389; Canticles, vol. iii., Rome and Bethlehem, 385–87.

<span id="iv.IV-p12"></span>There is also a Commentary on Job, and a
specimen of one on the Psalms, attributed to Jerome, vol. vii., and the
translation of Origen’s Homilies on Isaiah, also attributed to him, vol.
iv.

<span id="iv.IV-p13"></span>Books illustrative of Scripture:

<span id="iv.IV-p14"></span>(1) Book of Hebrew names, or Glossary of
Proper Names in the Old Testament, Bethlehem, 388, vol. iii. 1.

<span id="iv.IV-p15"></span>(2) Book of Questions on Genesis, Bethlehem,
388, vol. iii. 301.

<span id="iv.IV-p16"></span>(3) A translation of Eusebius’ book on the
sites and names of Hebrew places, Bethlehem, 388, vol. iii. 321.

<span id="iv.IV-p17"></span>(4) Translation of Didymus on the Holy
Spirit, Rome and Bethlehem, 385–87, vol. ii. 105.

<span id="iv.IV-p18"></span>IV. Books on Church History and Controversy
(all in vol. ii.):

<span id="iv.IV-p19"></span>(1) Book of Illustrious Men, or Catalogue of
Ecclesiastical Writers, Bethlehem, 392.

<span id="iv.IV-p20"></span>(2) Dialogue with a Luciferian, Antioch,
379.

<span id="iv.IV-p21"></span>(3) Lives of the Hermits: Paulus, Desert,
374; Malchus and Hilarion, Bethlehem, 390.

<span id="iv.IV-p22"></span><span id="page_xxvi">p. xxvi</span> <span
id="iv.IV-Page_xxvi"></span>(4) Translation of the Rule of Pachomius,
Bethlehem, 404.

<span id="iv.IV-p23"></span>(5) Books of ascetic controversy, against
Helvidius, Rome, 304; against Jovinian, Bethlehem, 393; against
Vigilantius, Bethlehem, 406.

<span id="iv.IV-p24"></span>(6) Books of personal controversy, against
John, Bishop of Jerusalem, Bethlehem, 397 or 398; against Rufinus, i.
and ii. 402, iii. 404.

<span id="iv.IV-p25"></span>(7) Dialogue with a Pelagian, Bethlehem,
416.

<span id="iv.IV-p26"></span>V. General History:

<span id="iv.IV-p27"></span>Translation of the Chronicle of Eusebius,
with Jerome’s additions, vol. viii., Constantinople, 382.

<span id="iv.IV-p28"></span>VI. Personal:

<span id="iv.IV-p29"></span>The series of letters, vol. i. [Ep.
i.](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#000)<span id="iv.IV-p29.1"></span>,
Aquileia, 311; 2–4, Antioch, 374; 5–17, Desert 374–79; 18,
Constantinople, 381; 19–45, Rome, 382–85; 46–148, Bethlehem, 386–418.

<span id="iv.IV-p30"></span>The works attributed to Jerome, but not
genuine, which are given in Vallarsi’s edition are: A breviary,
commentary, and preface on the Psalms, vol. vii.; some Greek fragment
and a lexicon of Hebrew names; the names of places in the Acts; the ten
names of God; the benedictions of the patriarchs; the ten temptations in
the desert; a commentary on the Song of Deborah; Hebrew Questions in
Kings and Chronicles; an exposition of Job, vol. iii.; three letters in
vol. i., and fifty-one in vol. xi., together with several miscellaneous
writings in vol. xi. most of which are by Pelagius.

<span id="iv.IV-p31"></span>*Bibliography*.—The writings of Jerome were,
on the whole, well preserved, owing to the great honour in which he was
held, in the Middle Ages. Considering the number of the <span
class="c17"><span id="iv.IV-p31.1"></span>mss</span>., the variations
are not numerous. The Editio Princeps of the Letters and a few of the
Treatises appeared in Rome in 1470, and another almost contemporaneous
with this in Maintz (Schöffer), after which they were reprinted in
Venice (1476), Rome (1479), Parma (1480), Nürenberg (1485), and in
several other places. The Editio Princeps of the Commentaries appeared
in Nürenberg in 1477, and was several times reprinted in other places;
that of the Translation of Origen’s Homilies on St. Luke, etc., in
Basle, 1475; that of the Lives of the Hermits in Nürenberg, 1476, and of
the Chronicle at Milan in 1475.

<span id="iv.IV-p32"></span>But the true Editio Princeps, containing
Jerome’s works as a whole, is that of Erasmus (Basle, 1516–20), who
bestowed on it his great critical power, aided by his strong admiration
for Jerome. He was assisted by Œcolampadius and other scholars. This
held its ground till 1560, when an edition appeared by Marianus
Victorius, afterwards Bishop of Rieti (Rome, Paulus Manutius), which
enlarged the notes and corrected the text of Erasmus, but, like him,
included many spurious writings. This edition was dedicated to Pius V.
and Gregory XIII., and was the favourite edition of the Roman Church. In
1684 appeared the edition of Tribbechovius of Gotha (Frankfort and
Leipzig) which embodied the emendations of critics up to that date, and
was published at the expense of the Protestant Frederick, Duke of
Saxony. In 1693 came the Benedictine edition of Martianay and Pouget
(Paris), which gave the original text of the Vulgate and a new, though
still very imperfect arrangement of the Letters and Treatises. But all
previous editions were thrown into the shade by that of Dominic Vallarsi
the learned priest of Verona (folio ed., Verona, 1734–42; quarto,
Venice, 1766–72). In this edition the Treatises are separated from the
Letters, and both Letters and Treatises are arranged in order of time,
the dates and the process by which they are arrived at being clearly
given. I have only in one or two instances found reason to alter
Vallarsi’s dates. The explanatory notes, however, are not as complete as
might be wished, and the references are often wrong or imperfect. This
edition is reprinted by Migne, who marks the pages of it in large print
in the text, and most modern writers refer to it alone, as has been done
in this volume.

<span id="iv.IV-p33"></span>*Literature*.—Three short Lives of Jerome,
composed in the Middle Ages by unknown authors (one of which was falsely
attributed to Gennadius), are given by Vallarsi in his Prolegomena (vol.
i. 175–214); one of these is said by Zockler to be by Sebastian of Monte
Cassino. Another, written in the fourteenth century by John Andreas of
Bologna, was printed at Basle in 1514; and a work by Lasserré was
published at Paris in 1530, with a curious title, “La Vie de Monseigneur
Sainct Hierome,” with “La Vie de Madame Saincte Paule”; and later works
belonging to the uncritical region of thought were published later in
Madrid by Bonadies in 1595, and by Cermellus in Ferrara (1648), the
latter entirely made up of quotations from Jerome’s writings.

<span id="iv.IV-p34"></span>Meanwhile the critical faculty had been
aroused. Erasmus and Marianus Victorius prefixed Lives of Jerome to
their editions of his works in 1516 and 1565; and Baronius in his Annals
and Du Pin in his *Bibliotheque des Auteurs Ecclésiastiques* (1686)
brought to light <span id="page_xxvii">p. xxvii</span> <span
id="iv.IV-Page_xxvii"></span>additional facts. Martianay at the close of
his edition of Jerome’s works published a *Life*, embodying many records
of Jerome from the Fathers, but with many mistakes of chronology, some
of which were rectified by Tillemont in his painstaking *Mémoires*
(Paris, 1707) and by Ceillier in his *Histoire des Auteurs
Ecclésiastiques* (Paris, 1742). The work of Sebastiano Dolci (Ancona,
1750) is entirely taken from Jerome’s own writings.

<span id="iv.IV-p35"></span>But in reference to the Life as to the
Writings of Jerome a new epoch was made by Vallarsi in the Preface and
the Life prefixed to his Edition of Jerome. Though somewhat dry, it is
thoroughly trustworthy, and in Migne’s edition more accessible than any
other to those who read Latin. The Bollandist Stilling (Acta Sanctorum,
vol. viii., Antwerp, 1762), is less occupied with additions to our
knowledge of the man and his works than with the honouring of the Saint.
The work of the learned Dane, Engelstoft (1797), gives a more
comprehensive estimate of Jerome’s historical position than any of his
predecessors. The account of Jerome in Schrökh’s Ecclesiastical History
(1786) and the articles of Cölln in Ersch and Grüber’s Encyclopädie and
of Hagenbach in Herzog’s Real-Encyclopädie are excellent. In French we
have the account of Jerome’s ascetic influence in Montalembert’s *Monks
of the West* (Paris, 1861); and the *Histoire de St. Jérome* by
Collombet (Paris, 1844) is useful in the appreciation of the personal
and archæological part of the subject, though accepting with uncritical
partisanship the polemical attitude of Jerome. We may add for English
readers the articles <span class="c17"><span
id="iv.IV-p35.1"></span>Hieronymus</span> in the *Dictionaries of Greek
and Roman Biography* and *of Christian Biography*.

<span id="iv.IV-p36"></span>Our own generation has produced two
excellent works: that of Dr. Otto Zöckler, *Hieronymus*, *Sein Leben und
Werken* (Gotha, Perthes, 1865), and that of Amédée Thierry, *Saint
Jérome*, *la Société chrétienne à Rome et l’émigration romaine en terre
sainte* (Paris, 1867, originally published in the *Revue des Deux
Mondes*). The former is a lucid, impartial, and comprehensive account of
Jerome’s Life and Writings; the latter, a series of very vivid and
interesting sketches of Jerome himself, his friends and his times,
which, though generally accurate, is occasionally swayed from truth by
imagination, and at times is betrayed by sympathy with the modern Roman
Catholic system into mistakes of judgment. Both these writers give
copious and enlightening extracts from Jerome’s writings in the
original; but the value of those of Thierry is lessened by the
references being to the ill-arranged edition of Martianay instead of
that of Vallarsi.

<span id="iv.IV-p37"></span>It will be sufficiently obvious why it has
been impossible to include all the works of Jerome in the present
translation, but a few explanations may be desirable.

<span id="iv.IV-p38"></span>An exact translation of the Vulgate would
serve no good purpose; and, if made, would naturally form part of a
series designed to illustrate the criticism of the Scriptures.

<span id="iv.IV-p39"></span>The Commentaries and works illustrative of
the Scriptures would by themselves form two volumes of equal size with
the present. Though they contain much that is interesting—the opinions
of various writers, such as Origen, Apollinarius, Gregory Nazianzen, or
Didymus, a few celebrated passages, such as that which caused the
controversy between Jerome and Augustin, and a few remarkable allusions
to historical events, such as the capture of Rome by Heraclian—the
general tenour of them is hardly of sufficient importance to justify the
labour of translation or the bulk and expense of the additional volumes.
An exception might be made in favour of the Book on the Site and Names
of Hebrew Places; but this is a work of Eusebius rather than Jerome (see
pp. 485, 486 and Prolegomena to Eusebius, Vol. i. of this series); and
it was necessary to confine the Translation of Jerome to a single
volume, with the exception of the Book *On Illustrious Men* and the
*Apology against Rufinus*, which will be found in Vol. iii. of this
Series.

<span id="iv.IV-p40"></span>The Chronicle of Eusebius would, if
translated at all, find its place in the works of Eusebius.

<span id="iv.IV-p41"></span>The Books on Church History and Controversy
are given in full.

<span id="iv.IV-p42"></span>Of the Letters, which, excepting the
Vulgate, form the most important legacy of Jerome to posterity, all
those which have a personal or a historical interest have been
translated. The only omissions are (1) the exegetical letters, to which
what has been said of the Commentaries applies; (2) the letters to
Augustin, which will be found in Vol. i. of the first series of this
Library, annexed to the letters of Augustin to which they are replies;
and (3) the encyclicals and letters of Theophilus, which have been
summarised.

<span id="iv.IV-p43"></span>For a separate statement of the works which
are given in this volume the reader will naturally consult the table of
contents; and, for a more detailed account of the books themselves, the
introductions prefixed to each.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V](2060008)
