[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2060013)  [Next](2060015) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.III"></span>

<span id="v.III-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="v.III-p1.1"></span>Letter III. To Rufinus the Monk. <span
id="fr_22"></span>[23](#fn_22) </span>

<span id="v.III-p3"></span>Written from Antioch, 374 <span
class="c17"><span id="v.III-p3.1"></span>a.d.</span>, to Rufinus in
Egypt. Jerome narrates his travels and the events which have taken place
since his arrival in Syria, particularly the deaths of Innocent and
Hylas (§3). He also describes the life of Bonosus, who was now a hermit
on an island in the Adriatic (§4). The main object of the letter is to
induce Rufinus to come to Syria.

<span id="v.III-p4"></span>1. That God gives more than we ask Him
for, <span id="fr_23"></span>[24](#fn_23) and that He often grants us
things which “eye hath not seen nor ear heard, neither have they entered
into the heart of man,” <span id="fr_24"></span>[25](#fn_24) I knew
indeed before from the mystic declaration of the sacred volumes; but
now, dearest Rufinus, I have had proof of it in my own case. For I who
fancied it too bold a wish to be allowed by an exchange of letters to
counterfeit to myself your presence in the flesh, hear that you are
penetrating the remotest parts of Egypt, visiting the monks and going
round God’s family upon earth. Oh, if only the Lord Jesus Christ would
suddenly transport me to you as Philip was transported to the
eunuch, <span id="fr_25"></span>[26](#fn_25) and Habakkuk to
Daniel, <span id="fr_26"></span>[27](#fn_26) with what a close embrace
would I clasp your neck, how fondly would I press kisses upon that mouth
which has so often joined with me of old in error or in wisdom. But as I
am unworthy (not that you should so come to me but) that I should so
come to you, and because my poor body, weak even when well, has been
shattered by frequent illnesses; I send this letter to meet you instead
of coming myself, in the hope that it may bring you hither to me caught
in the meshes of love’s net.

<span id="v.III-p9"></span>2. My first joy at such unexpected good
tidings was due to our brother, Heliodorus. I desired to be sure of it,
but did not dare to feel sure, especially as he told me that he had only
heard it from some one else, and as the strangeness of the news impaired
the credit of the story. Once more my wishes hovered in uncertainty and
my mind wavered, till an Alexandrian monk who had some time previously
been sent over by the dutiful zeal of the people to the Egyptian
confessors (in will already martyrs <span id="fr_27"></span>[28](#fn_27)
), impelled me by his presence to believe the tidings. Even then, I must
admit I still hesitated. For on <span id="page_5">p. 5</span> <span
id="v.III-Page_5"></span>the one hand he knew nothing either of your
name or country: yet on the other what he said seemed likely to be true,
agreeing as it did with the hint which had already reached me. At last
the truth broke upon me in all its fulness, for a constant stream of
persons passing through brought the report: “Rufinus is at Nitria, and
has reached the abode of the blessed Macarius.” <span
id="fr_28"></span>[29](#fn_28) At this point I cast away all that
restrained my belief, and then first really grieved to find myself ill.
Had it not been that my wasted and enfeebled frame fettered my
movements, neither the summer heat nor the dangerous voyage should have
had power to retard the rapid steps of affection. Believe me, brother, I
look forward to seeing you more than the storm-tossed mariner looks for
his haven, more than the thirsty fields long for the showers, more than
the anxious mother sitting on the curving shore expects her son.

<span id="v.III-p12"></span>3. After that sudden whirlwind <span
id="fr_29"></span>[30](#fn_29) dragged me from your side, severing with
its impious wrench the bonds of affection in which we were knit
together,

<span id="v.III-p14"></span>The dark blue raincloud lowered o’er my
head:

<span id="v.III-p15"></span>On all sides were the seas, on all the
sky. <span id="fr_30"></span>[31](#fn_30)

<span id="v.III-p17"></span>I wandered about, uncertain where to go.
Thrace, Pontus, Bithynia, the whole of Galatia and Cappadocia, Cilicia
also with its burning heat, one after another shattered my energies. At
last Syria presented itself to me as a most secure harbor to a
shipwrecked man. Here, after undergoing every possible kind of sickness,
I lost one of my two eyes; for Innocent, <span
id="fr_31"></span>[32](#fn_31) the half of my soul, <span
id="fr_32"></span>[33](#fn_32) was taken away from me by a sudden attack
of fever. The one eye which I now enjoy, and which is all in all to me,
is our Evagrius, <span id="fr_33"></span>[34](#fn_33) upon whom I with
my constant infirmities have come as an additional burden. We had with
us also Hylas, <span id="fr_34"></span>[35](#fn_34) the servant of the
holy Melanium, <span id="fr_35"></span>[36](#fn_35) who by his stainless
conduct had wiped out the taint of his previous servitude. His death
opened afresh the wound which had not yet healed. But as the apostle’s
words forbid us to mourn for those who sleep, <span
id="fr_36"></span>[37](#fn_36) and as my excess of grief has been
tempered by the joyful news that has since come to me, I recount this
last, that, if you have not heard it, you may learn it; and that, if you
know it already, you may rejoice over it with me.

<span id="v.III-p24"></span>4. Bonosus, <span
id="fr_37"></span>[38](#fn_37) your friend, or, to speak more truly,
mine as well as yours, is now climbing the ladder foreshown in Jacob’s
dream. <span id="fr_38"></span>[39](#fn_38) He is bearing his cross,
neither taking thought for the morrow <span
id="fr_39"></span>[40](#fn_39) nor looking back at what he has
left. <span id="fr_40"></span>[41](#fn_40) He is sowing in tears that he
may reap in joy. <span id="fr_41"></span>[42](#fn_41) As Moses in a type
so he in reality is lifting up the serpent in the wilderness. <span
id="fr_42"></span>[43](#fn_42) This is a true story, and it may well put
to shame the lying marvels described by Greek and Roman pens. For here
you have a youth educated with us in the refining accomplishments of the
world, with abundance of wealth, and in rank inferior to none of his
associates; yet he forsakes his mother, his sisters, and his dearly
loved brother, and settles like a new tiller of Eden on a dangerous
island, with the sea roaring round its reefs; while its rough crags,
bare rocks, and desolate aspect make it more terrible still. No peasant
or monk is to be found there. Even the little Onesimus <span
id="fr_43"></span>[44](#fn_43) you know of, in whose kisses he used to
rejoice as in those of a brother, in this tremendous solitude no longer
remains at his side. Alone upon the island—or rather not alone, for
Christ is with him—he sees the glory of God, which even the apostles saw
not save in the desert. He beholds, it is true, no embattled towns, but
he has enrolled his name in the new city. <span
id="fr_44"></span>[45](#fn_44) Garments of sackcloth disfigure his
limbs, yet so clad he will be the sooner caught up to meet Christ in the
clouds. <span id="fr_45"></span>[46](#fn_45) No watercourse pleasant to
the view supplies his wants, but from the Lord’s side he drinks the
water of life. <span id="fr_46"></span>[47](#fn_46) Place all this
before your eyes, dear friend, and with all the faculties of your mind
picture to yourself the scene. When you realize the effort of the
fighter then you will be able to praise his victory. Round the entire
island roars the frenzied sea, while the beetling crags along its
winding shores resound as the billows beat against them. No grass makes
the ground green; there are no shady copses and no fertile fields.
Precipitous cliffs surround his dreadful abode as if it were a prison.
But he, careless, fearless, and armed from head to foot with the
apostle’s armor, <span id="fr_47"></span>[48](#fn_47) now listens to God
by reading the <span id="page_6">p. 6</span> <span
id="v.III-Page_6"></span>Scriptures, now speaks to God as he prays to
the Lord; and it may be that, while he lingers in the island, he sees
some vision such as that once seen by John. <span
id="fr_48"></span>[49](#fn_48)

<span id="v.III-p37"></span>5. What snares, think you, is the devil now
weaving? What stratagems is he preparing? Perchance, mindful of his old
trick, <span id="fr_49"></span>[50](#fn_49) he will try to tempt Bonosus
with hunger. But he has been answered already: “Man shall not live by
bread alone.” <span id="fr_50"></span>[51](#fn_50) Perchance he will lay
before him wealth and fame. But it shall be said to him: “They that
desire to be rich fall into a trap <span id="fr_51"></span>[52](#fn_51)
and temptations,” <span id="fr_52"></span>[53](#fn_52) and “For me all
glorying is in Christ.” <span id="fr_53"></span>[54](#fn_53) He will
come, it may be, when the limbs are weary with fasting, and rack them
with the pangs of disease; but the cry of the apostle will repel him:
“When I am weak, then am I strong,” and “My strength is made perfect in
weakness.” <span id="fr_54"></span>[55](#fn_54) He will hold out threats
of death; but the reply will be: “I desire to depart and to be with
Christ.” <span id="fr_55"></span>[56](#fn_55) He will brandish his fiery
darts, but they will be received on the shield of faith. <span
id="fr_56"></span>[57](#fn_56) In a word, Satan will assail him, but
Christ will defend. Thanks be to Thee, Lord Jesus, that in Thy day I
have one able to pray to Thee for me. To Thee all hearts are open, Thou
searchest the secrets of the heart, <span id="fr_57"></span>[58](#fn_57)
Thou seest the prophet shut up in the fish’s belly in the midst of the
sea. <span id="fr_58"></span>[59](#fn_58) Thou knowest then how he and I
grew up together from tender infancy to vigorous manhood, how we were
fostered in the bosoms of the same nurses, and carried in the arms of
the same bearers; and how after studying together at Rome we lodged in
the same house and shared the same food by the half savage banks of the
Rhine. Thou knowest, too, that it was I who first began to seek to serve
Thee. Remember, I beseech Thee, that this warrior of Thine was once a
raw recruit with me. I have before me the declaration of Thy majesty:
“Whosoever shall teach and not do shall be called least in the kingdom
of heaven.” <span id="fr_59"></span>[60](#fn_59) May he enjoy the crown
of virtue, and in return for his daily martyrdoms may he follow the Lamb
robed in white raiment! <span id="fr_60"></span>[61](#fn_60) For “in my
Father’s house are many mansions,” <span id="fr_61"></span>[62](#fn_61)
and “one star differeth from another star in glory.” <span
id="fr_62"></span>[63](#fn_62) Give me strength to raise my head to a
level with the saints’ heels! <span id="fr_63"></span>[64](#fn_63) I
willed, but he performed. Do Thou therefore pardon me that I failed to
keep my resolve, and reward him with the guerdon of his deserts.

<span id="v.III-p53"></span>I may perhaps have been tedious, and have
said more than the short compass of a letter usually allows; but this, I
find, is always the case with me when I have to say anything in praise
of our dear Bonosus.

<span id="v.III-p54"></span>6. However, to return to the point from
which I set out, I beseech you do not let me pass wholly out of sight
and out of mind. A friend is long sought, hardly found, and with
difficulty kept. Let those who will, allow gold to dazzle them and be
borne along in splendor, their very baggage glittering with gold and
silver. Love is not to be purchased, and affection has no price. The
friendship which can cease has never been real. Farewell in Christ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_22"></span>[4:23](2060014.htm#fr_22) <span
id="v.III-p1.2"></span>

<span id="v.III-p2"></span> In Jerome’s day this term included
all—whether hermits or cœnobites—who forsook the world and embraced an
ascetic life.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[4:24](2060014.htm#fr_23) <span
id="v.III-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.III-p5"></span> Cf. [Eph. iii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#020)<span id="v.III-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[4:25](2060014.htm#fr_24) <span
id="v.III-p5.2"></span>

<span id="v.III-p6"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#009)<span id="v.III-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[4:26](2060014.htm#fr_25) <span
id="v.III-p6.2"></span>

<span id="v.III-p7"></span> [Acts viii.
26-30](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#026)<span id="v.III-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[4:27](2060014.htm#fr_26) <span
id="v.III-p7.2"></span>

<span id="v.III-p8"></span> [Bel
33-36](../../../bib/apo/bel001.htm#033)<span id="v.III-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[4:28](2060014.htm#fr_27) <span
id="v.III-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.III-p10"></span> Priests, monks, and others who, because
they would not declare themselves Arians, were banished by order of
Valens to Heliopolis in Phenicia.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[5:29](2060014.htm#fr_28) <span
id="v.III-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v.III-p11"></span> There were two hermits of this name in
Egypt, and it is not certain which is meant. One of them was a disciple
of Antony.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[5:30](2060014.htm#fr_29) <span
id="v.III-p12.1"></span>

<span id="v.III-p13"></span> The ascetic community at Aquileia, of which
Jerome and Rufinus were the leaders, had been broken up, perhaps through
the efforts of Lupicinus, the bishop of Stridon.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[5:31](2060014.htm#fr_30) <span
id="v.III-p15.1"></span>

<span id="v.III-p16"></span> Virg. A. iii. 193, 194: v. 9.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[5:32](2060014.htm#fr_31) <span
id="v.III-p17.1"></span>

<span id="v.III-p18"></span> See Letter I.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[5:33](2060014.htm#fr_32) <span
id="v.III-p18.1"></span>

<span id="v.III-p19"></span> Hor. C. i. 3, 8.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[5:34](2060014.htm#fr_33) <span
id="v.III-p19.1"></span>

<span id="v.III-p20"></span> See Letter I. § 15.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[5:35](2060014.htm#fr_34) <span
id="v.III-p20.1"></span>

<span id="v.III-p21"></span> A freedman of Melanium.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[5:36](2060014.htm#fr_35) <span
id="v.III-p21.1"></span>

<span id="v.III-p22"></span> A young Roman widow who had given up the
world that she might adopt the ascetic life. She accompanied Rufinus to
the East and settled with him on the Mount of Olives. She is mentioned
again in Letters IV., XXXIX., XLV., and others.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[5:37](2060014.htm#fr_36) <span
id="v.III-p22.1"></span>

<span id="v.III-p23"></span> [1 Thess. iv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#013)<span id="v.III-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[5:38](2060014.htm#fr_37) <span
id="v.III-p24.1"></span>

<span id="v.III-p25"></span> Jerome’s foster-brother who had accompanied
him on his first visit to Rome. He was now living as a hermit on a small
island in the neighborhood of Aquileia. See Letter VII. § 3.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[5:39](2060014.htm#fr_38) <span
id="v.III-p25.1"></span>

<span id="v.III-p26"></span> [Gen. xxviii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#012)<span id="v.III-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[5:40](2060014.htm#fr_39) <span
id="v.III-p26.2"></span>

<span id="v.III-p27"></span> [Matt. vi.
34](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#034)<span id="v.III-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[5:41](2060014.htm#fr_40) <span
id="v.III-p27.2"></span>

<span id="v.III-p28"></span> [Luke ix.
62](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#062)<span id="v.III-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[5:42](2060014.htm#fr_41) <span
id="v.III-p28.2"></span>

<span id="v.III-p29"></span> [Ps. cxxvi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#005)<span id="v.III-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[5:43](2060014.htm#fr_42) <span
id="v.III-p29.2"></span>

<span id="v.III-p30"></span> [Nu. xxi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#009)<span id="v.III-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[5:44](2060014.htm#fr_43) <span
id="v.III-p30.2"></span>

<span id="v.III-p31"></span> Of this child nothing is known.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[5:45](2060014.htm#fr_44) <span
id="v.III-p31.1"></span>

<span id="v.III-p32"></span> *I.e.* the new Jerusalem. [Rev.
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#002), [Isa.
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#003)<span id="v.III-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[5:46](2060014.htm#fr_45) <span
id="v.III-p32.2"></span>

<span id="v.III-p33"></span> [1 Thess. iv.
17](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#017)<span id="v.III-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[5:47](2060014.htm#fr_46) <span
id="v.III-p33.2"></span>

<span id="v.III-p34"></span> [John
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#014), [John
19:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#034)<span id="v.III-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[5:48](2060014.htm#fr_47) <span
id="v.III-p34.2"></span>

<span id="v.III-p35"></span> [Eph. vi.
13-17](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#013)<span id="v.III-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[6:49](2060014.htm#fr_48) <span
id="v.III-p35.2"></span>

<span id="v.III-p36"></span> [Rev.
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#010)<span id="v.III-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[6:50](2060014.htm#fr_49) <span
id="v.III-p37.1"></span>

<span id="v.III-p38"></span> [Gen.
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#001), [Matt.
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#001)<span id="v.III-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[6:51](2060014.htm#fr_50) <span
id="v.III-p38.2"></span>

<span id="v.III-p39"></span> [Matt. iv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#004)<span id="v.III-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[6:52](2060014.htm#fr_51) <span
id="v.III-p39.2"></span>

<span id="v.III-p40"></span> Literally “mousetrap.” This variant is
peculiar to Cyprian and Jerome.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[6:53](2060014.htm#fr_52) <span
id="v.III-p40.1"></span>

<span id="v.III-p41"></span> [1 Tim. vi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#009)<span id="v.III-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[6:54](2060014.htm#fr_53) <span
id="v.III-p41.2"></span>

<span id="v.III-p42"></span> [1 Cor. i.
31](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#031)<span id="v.III-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[6:55](2060014.htm#fr_54) <span
id="v.III-p42.2"></span>

<span id="v.III-p43"></span> [2 Cor.
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#010),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#009)<span id="v.III-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[6:56](2060014.htm#fr_55) <span
id="v.III-p43.2"></span>

<span id="v.III-p44"></span> [Philip. i.
23](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#023)<span id="v.III-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[6:57](2060014.htm#fr_56) <span
id="v.III-p44.2"></span>

<span id="v.III-p45"></span> [Eph. vi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#016)<span id="v.III-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[6:58](2060014.htm#fr_57) <span
id="v.III-p45.2"></span>

<span id="v.III-p46"></span> [Acts
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#024), [Rev.
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#023)<span id="v.III-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[6:59](2060014.htm#fr_58) <span
id="v.III-p46.2"></span>

<span id="v.III-p47"></span> [Jonah
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#002)<span id="v.III-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[6:60](2060014.htm#fr_59) <span
id="v.III-p47.2"></span>

<span id="v.III-p48"></span> [Matt. v.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#019)<span id="v.III-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[6:61](2060014.htm#fr_60) <span
id="v.III-p48.2"></span>

<span id="v.III-p49"></span> [Rev. xiv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#004)<span id="v.III-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[6:62](2060014.htm#fr_61) <span
id="v.III-p49.2"></span>

<span id="v.III-p50"></span> [John xiv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#002)<span id="v.III-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[6:63](2060014.htm#fr_62) <span
id="v.III-p50.2"></span>

<span id="v.III-p51"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
41](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#041)<span id="v.III-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[6:64](2060014.htm#fr_63) <span
id="v.III-p51.2"></span>

<span id="v.III-p52"></span> Quoted from Tert. de C. F. ii. 7.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter IV](2060015)
