[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2060176)  [Next](2060178) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.ix.III"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p1"></span> <span id="page_472">p. 472</span> <span
id="vi.ix.III-Page_472"></span><span class="c14"><span
id="vi.ix.III-p1.1"></span>Book III.</span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p2"></span>1. Critob. I am charmed with the
exuberance of your eloquence, but at the same time I would remind you
that, <span id="fr_5281"></span>[5282](#fn_5281) “In the multitude of
words there wanteth not transgression.” And how does it bear upon the
question before us? You will surely admit that those who have received
Christian baptism are without sin. And that being free from sin they are
righteous. And that once they are righteous, they can, if they take
care, preserve their righteousness, and so through life avoid all sin.

<span id="vi.ix.III-p4"></span>Attic. Do you not blush to follow the
opinion of Jovinian, which has been exploded and condemned? For he
relies upon just the same proofs and arguments as you do; nay, rather,
you are all eagerness for his inventions, and desire to preach in the
East what was formerly <span id="fr_5282"></span>[5283](#fn_5282)
condemned at Rome, and not long ago in <span
id="fr_5283"></span>[5284](#fn_5283) Africa. Read then the reply which
was given to him, and you will there find the answer to yourself. For in
the discussion of doctrines and disputed points, we must have regard not
to persons but to things. And yet let me tell you that baptism condones
past offences, and does not preserve righteousness in the time to come;
the keeping of that is dependent on toil and industry, as well as
earnestness, and above all on the mercy of God. It is ours to ask, to
Him it belongs to bestow what we ask; ours to begin, His it is to
finish; ours to offer what we can, His to fulfil what we cannot
perform. <span id="fr_5284"></span>[5285](#fn_5284) “For except the Lord
build the house, they labour in vain that build it. Except the Lord keep
the city, the watchman waketh but in vain.” Wherefore the Apostle <span
id="fr_5285"></span>[5286](#fn_5285) bids us so run that we may attain.
All indeed run, but one receiveth the crown. And in the <span
id="fr_5286"></span>[5287](#fn_5286) Psalm it is written, “O Lord, thou
hast crowned us with thy favour as with a shield.” For our victory is
won and the crown of our victory is gained by His protection and through
His shield; and here we run that hereafter we may attain; there he shall
receive the crown who in this world has proved the conqueror. And when
we have been baptized we are told, <span
id="fr_5287"></span>[5288](#fn_5287) “Behold thou art made whole; sin no
more lest a worse thing happen unto thee.” And again, <span
id="fr_5288"></span>[5289](#fn_5288) “Know ye not that ye are a temple
of God, and that the Spirit of God dwelleth in you? If any man profane
the temple of God, him shall God destroy.” And in another place, <span
id="fr_5289"></span>[5290](#fn_5289) “The Lord is with you so long as ye
are with Him: if ye forsake Him, He will also forsake you.” Where is the
man, do you suppose, in whom as in a shrine and sanctuary the purity of
Christ is permanent, and in whose case the serenity of the temple is
saddened by no cloud of sin? We cannot always have the same countenance,
though the philosophers falsely boast that this was the experience of
Socrates; how much less can our minds be always the same! As men have
many expressions of countenance, so also do the feelings of their hearts
vary. If it were possible for us to be always immersed in the waters of
baptism, sins would fly over our heads and leave us untouched. The Holy
Spirit would protect us. But the enemy assails us, and when conquered
does not depart, but is ever lying in ambush, that he may secretly shoot
the upright in heart.

<span id="vi.ix.III-p13"></span>2. In the Gospel according to the
Hebrews, which is written in the Chaldee and Syrian language, but in
Hebrew characters, and is used by the Nazarenes to this day (I mean the
Gospel according to the Apostles, or, as is generally maintained, the
Gospel according to Matthew, a copy of which is in the library at
Cæsarea), we find, “Behold, the mother of our Lord and His brethren said
to Him, John Baptist baptizes for the remission of sins; let us go and
be baptized by him. But He said to them, what sin have I committed that
I should go and be baptized by him? Unless, haply, the very words which
I have said are only ignorance.” And in the same volume, “If thy brother
sin against thee in word, and make amends to thee, receive him seven
times in a day.” Simon, His disciple, said to Him, “Seven times in a
day?” The Lord answered and said to him, “I say unto thee until seventy
times seven.” Even the prophets, after they were anointed with the Holy
Spirit, were guilty of sinful words. Ignatius, an apostolic man and a
martyr, boldly writes, <span id="fr_5290"></span>[5291](#fn_5290) “The
Lord chose Apostles who were sinners above all men.” It is of their
speedy conversion that the Psalmist sings, <span
id="fr_5291"></span>[5292](#fn_5291) “Their infirmities were multiplied;
afterwards they made haste.” If you do not allow the authority of this
evidence, at least admit its antiquity, and see what has been the
opinion of all good churchmen. Suppose a person who has <span
id="page_473">p. 473</span> <span id="vi.ix.III-Page_473"></span>been
baptized to have been carried off by death either immediately, or on the
very day of his baptism, and I will generously concede that he neither
thought nor said anything whereby, through error and ignorance, he fell
into sin. Does it follow that he will, therefore, be without sin,
because he appears not to have overcome, but to have avoided sin? Is not
the true reason rather that by the mercy of God he was released from the
prison of sins and departed to the Lord? We also say this, that God can
do what He wills; and that man of himself and by his own will cannot, as
you maintain, be without sin. If he can, it is idle for you now to add
the word grace, for, with such a power, he has no need of it. If,
however, he cannot avoid sin without the grace of God, it is folly for
you to attribute to him an ability which he does not possess. For
whatever depends upon another’s will, is not in the power of him whose
ability you assert, but of him whose aid is clearly indispensable.

<span id="vi.ix.III-p16"></span>3. C. What do you mean by this
perversity, or, rather, senseless contention? Will you not grant me even
so much—that when a man leaves the waters of baptism he is free from
sin?

<span id="vi.ix.III-p17"></span>A. Either I fail to express my meaning
clearly, or you are slow of apprehension.

<span id="vi.ix.III-p18"></span>C. How so?

<span id="vi.ix.III-p19"></span>A. Remember both what you maintained and
also what I say. You argued that a man can be free from sin if he
chooses. I reply that it is an impossibility; not that we are to think
that a man is not free from sin immediately after baptism, but that that
time of sinlessness is by no means to be referred to human ability, but
to the grace of God. Do not, therefore, claim the power for man, and I
will admit the fact. For how can a man be able who is not able of
himself? Or what is that sinlessness which is conditioned by the
immediate death of the body? Should the man’s life be prolonged, he will
certainly be liable to sins and to ignorance.

<span id="vi.ix.III-p20"></span>C. Your logic stops my mouth. You do not
speak with Christian simplicity, but entangle me in some fine
distinctions between being and ability to be.

<span id="vi.ix.III-p21"></span>A. Is it I who play these tricks with
words? The article came from your own workshop. For you say, not that a
man is free from sin, but that he is able to be; I, on the other hand,
will grant what you deny, that a man is free from sin by the grace of
God, and yet will maintain that he is not able of himself.

<span id="vi.ix.III-p22"></span>C. It is useless to give commandments if
we cannot keep them.

<span id="vi.ix.III-p23"></span>A. No one doubts that God commanded
things possible. But because men do not what they might, therefore the
whole world is subject to the judgment of God, and needs His mercy. On
the other hand, if you can produce a man who has fulfilled the whole
law, you will certainly be able to show that there is a man who does not
need the mercy of God. For everything which can happen must either take
place in the past, the present, or the future. As to your assertion that
a man can be without sin if he chooses, show that it has happened in the
past, or at all events that it does happen at the present day; the
future will reveal itself. If, however, you can point to no one who
either is, or has been, altogether free from sin, it remains for us to
confine our discussion to the future. Meanwhile, you are vanquished and
a captive as regards two out of three periods of time, the past and the
present. If anyone hereafter shall be greater than patriarchs, prophets,
apostles, inasmuch as he is without sin, then you may perhaps be able to
convince future generations as to their time.

<span id="vi.ix.III-p24"></span>4. C. Talk as you like, argue as you
please, you will never wrest from me free will, which God bestowed once
for all, nor will you be able to deprive me of what God has given, the
ability if I have the will.

<span id="vi.ix.III-p25"></span>A. By way of example let us take one
proof: <span id="fr_5292"></span>[5293](#fn_5292) “I have found David,
the Son of Jesse, a man after Mine own heart, who shall do all My will.”
There is no doubt that David was a holy man, and yet he who was chosen
that he might do all God’s will is blamed for certain actions. Of course
it was possible for him who was chosen for the purpose to do all God’s
will. Nor is God to blame Who beforehand spoke of his doing all His will
as commanded, but blame does attach to him who did not what was
foretold. For God did not say that He had found a man who would
unfailingly do His bidding and fulfil His will, but only one who would
do all His will. And we, too, say that a man can avoid sinning, if he
chooses, according to his local and temporal circumstances and physical
weakness, so long as his mind is set upon righteousness and the string
is well stretched upon the lyre. But if a man grow a little remiss it is
with him as with the boatman pulling against the stream, who finds that,
if he slackens but for a moment, the craft glides back and he is carried
by the flowing waters whither he would not. Such is the state of man; if
we are a little careless we learn our weakness, and find that our power
is limited. Do you suppose that the Apostle Paul, when he wrote <span
id="fr_5293"></span>[5294](#fn_5293) “the coat (or cloak) that I left at
Troas with Carpus, bring when thou comest, and the books, especially
<span id="page_474">p. 474</span> <span
id="vi.ix.III-Page_474"></span>the parchments,” was thinking of heavenly
mysteries, and not of those things which are required for daily life and
to satisfy our bodily necessities? Find me a man who is never hungry,
thirsty, or cold, who knows nothing of pain, or fever, or the torture of
strangury, and I will grant you that a man can think of nothing but
virtue. When the Apostle was <span id="fr_5294"></span>[5295](#fn_5294)
struck by the servant, he delivered himself thus against the High Priest
who commanded the blow to be given: “God shall strike thee, thou whited
wall.” We miss the patience of the Saviour Who was led as a lamb to the
slaughter, and opened not His mouth, but mercifully said to the
smiter, <span id="fr_5295"></span>[5296](#fn_5295) “If I have spoken
evil, bear witness of the evil; but if well, why smitest thou Me?” We do
not disparage the Apostle, but declare the glory of God Who suffered in
the flesh and overcame the evil inflicted on the flesh and the weakness
of the flesh—to say nothing of what the Apostle says elsewhere: <span
id="fr_5296"></span>[5297](#fn_5296) “Alexander, the coppersmith, did me
much evil; the Lord, the righteous Judge, will recompense him in that
day.”

<span id="vi.ix.III-p31"></span>5. C. I have been longing to say
something, but have checked the words as they were bursting from my
lips. You compel me to say it.

<span id="vi.ix.III-p32"></span>A. Who hinders you from saying what you
think? Either what you are going to say is good—and you ought not to
deprive us of what is good—or it is bad, and, therefore, it is not
regard for us, but shame that keeps you silent.

<span id="vi.ix.III-p33"></span>C. I will say, I will say after all,
what I think. Your whole argument tends to this: You accuse nature, and
blame God for creating man such as he is.

<span id="vi.ix.III-p34"></span>A. Is this what you wished, and yet did
not wish, to say? Pray speak out, so that all may have the benefit of
your wisdom. Are you censuring God because he made man to be man? Let
the angels also complain because they are angels. Let every creature
discuss the question, Why it is as it was created? and not what the
Creator could have made it. I must now amuse myself with the rhetorical
exercises of childhood, and passing from the gnat and the ant to
cherubim and seraphim, inquire why each was not created with a happier
lot. And when I reach the exalted powers, I will argue the point: Why
God alone is only God, and did not make all things gods? For, according
to you, He will either be unable to do so, or will be guilty of envy.
Censure Him, and demand why He allows the devil to be in this world, and
carry off the crown when you have won the victory.

<span id="vi.ix.III-p35"></span>C. I am not so senseless as to complain
of the existence of the devil, through whose malice death entered into
the world; but what grieves me is this: that dignitaries of the Church,
and those who usurp the title of master, destroy free will; and once
that is destroyed, the way is open for the Manichæans.

<span id="vi.ix.III-p36"></span>A. Am I the destroyer of free will
because, throughout the discussion, my single aim has been to maintain
the omnipotence of God as well as free will?

<span id="vi.ix.III-p37"></span>C. How can you have free will, and yet
say that man can do nothing without God’s assistance?

<span id="vi.ix.III-p38"></span>A. If he is to be blamed who couples
free will and God’s help, it follows that we ought to praise him who
does away with God’s help.

<span id="vi.ix.III-p39"></span>C. I am not making God’s help
unnecessary, for to His grace we owe all our ability; but I and those
who think with me keep both within their own bounds. To God’s grace we
assign the gift of the power of free choice; to our own will, the doing,
or the not doing, of a thing; and thus rewards and punishments for doing
or not doing can be maintained.

<span id="vi.ix.III-p40"></span>6. A. You seem to me to be lost in
forgetfulness, and to be going over the lines of argument already
traversed as though not a word had been previously said. For, by this
long discussion, it has been established that the Lord, by the same
grace wherewith He bestowed upon us free choice, assists and supports us
in our individual actions.

<span id="vi.ix.III-p41"></span>C. Why, then, does He crown and praise
what He has Himself wrought in us?

<span id="vi.ix.III-p42"></span>A. That is to say, our will which
offered all it could, the toil which strove in action, and the humility
which ever looked to the help of God.

<span id="vi.ix.III-p43"></span>C. So, then, if we have not done what He
commanded, either God was willing to assist us, or He was not. If He was
willing and did assist us, and yet we have not done what we wished, then
He, and not we, has been overcome. But if He would not help, the man is
not to be blamed who wished to do His will, but God, who was able to
help, but would not.

<span id="vi.ix.III-p44"></span>A. Do you not see that your dilemma has
landed you in a deep abyss of blasphemy? Whichever way you take it, God
is either weak or malevolent, and He is not so much praised because He
is the author of good and gives His help, as abused for not restraining
evil. Blame Him, then, because He allows the existence of the devil, and
has suffered, and still suffers, evil to be done in the world. This is
what Marcion asks, and the whole pack of heretics who mutilate the Old
<span id="page_475">p. 475</span> <span
id="vi.ix.III-Page_475"></span>Testament, and have mostly spun an
argument something like this: Either God knew that man, placed in
Paradise, would transgress His command, or He did not know. If He knew,
man is not to blame, who could not avoid God’s foreknowledge, but He Who
created him such that he could not escape the knowledge of God. If He
did not know, in stripping Him of foreknowledge you also take away His
divinity. Upon the same showing God will be deserving of blame for
choosing Saul, who was to prove one of the worst of kings. And the
Saviour must be convicted either of ignorance, or of unrighteousness,
inasmuch as He said in the Gospel, <span
id="fr_5297"></span>[5298](#fn_5297) “Did I not choose you the twelve,
and one of you is a devil?” Ask Him why He chose Judas, a traitor? Why
He entrusted to him the bag when He knew that he was a thief? Shall I
tell you the reason? God judges the present, not the future. He does not
make use of His foreknowledge to condemn a man though He knows that he
will hereafter displease Him; but such is His goodness and unspeakable
mercy that He chooses a man who, He perceives, will meanwhile be good,
and who, He knows, will turn out badly, thus giving him the opportunity
of being converted and of repenting. This is the Apostle’s meaning when
he says, <span id="fr_5298"></span>[5299](#fn_5298) “Dost thou not know
that the goodness of God leadeth thee to repentance? but after thy
hardness and impenitent heart treasurest up for thyself wrath in the day
of wrath and revelation of the righteous judgment of God, Who will
render to every man according to his works.” For Adam did not sin
because God knew that he would do so; but God inasmuch as He is God,
foreknew what Adam would do of his own free choice. You may as well
accuse God of falsehood because He said by the mouth of Jonah: <span
id="fr_5299"></span>[5300](#fn_5299) “Yet three days, and Nineveh shall
be overthrown.” But God will reply by the mouth of Jeremiah, <span
id="fr_5300"></span>[5301](#fn_5300) “At what instant I shall speak
concerning a nation, and concerning a kingdom, to pluck up, and to break
down, and to destroy it; if that nation, concerning which I have spoken,
turn from their evil, I will repent of the evil that I thought to do
unto them. And at what instant I shall speak concerning a nation, and
concerning a kingdom, to build and to plant it; if it do evil in my
sight, that it obey not my voice, then I will repent of the good,
wherewith I said I would benefit them.” Jonah, on a certain occasion,
was indignant because, at God’s command, he had spoken falsely; but his
sorrow was proved to be ill founded, since he would rather speak truth
and have a countless multitude perish, than speak falsely and have them
saved. His position was thus illustrated: <span
id="fr_5301"></span>[5302](#fn_5301) “Thou grievest over the ivy (or
gourd), for the which thou hast not laboured, neither madest it grow,
which came up in a night, and perished in a night; and should not I have
pity on Nineveh, that great city, wherein are more than six score
thousand persons that cannot discern between their right hand and their
left hand?” If there was so vast a number of children and simple folk,
whom you will never be able to prove sinners, what shall we say of those
inhabitants of both sexes who were at different periods of life?
According to Philo, and the wisest of philosophers, Plato (so the
“Timæus” tells us), in passing from infancy to decrepit old age, we go
through seven stages, which so gradually and so gently follow one
another that we are quite insensible of the change.

<span id="vi.ix.III-p50"></span>C. The drift of your whole argument is
this—what the Greeks call <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.ix.III-p50.1"></span>αὐτέξουσιον</span> , and we free will, you
admit in terms, but in effect destroy. For you make God the author of
sin, in asserting that man can of himself do nothing, but that he must
have the help of God to Whom is imputed all we do. But we say that,
whether a man does good or evil, it is imputed to him on account of the
faculty of free choice, inasmuch as he did what he chose, and not to Him
Who once for all gave him free choice.

<span id="vi.ix.III-p51"></span>A. Your shuffling is to no purpose; you
are caught in the snares of truth. For upon this showing, even if He
does not Himself assist, according to you He will be the author of evil,
because He might have prevented it and did not. It is an old maxim that
if a man can deliver another from death and does not, he is a homicide.

<span id="vi.ix.III-p52"></span>C. I withdraw and yield the point; you
have won; provided, however, that victory is the subverting of the truth
by specious words, that is to say, not by truth, but by falsehood. For I
might make answer to you in the Apostle’s words, <span
id="fr_5302"></span>[5303](#fn_5302) “Though I be rude in speech, yet
not in knowledge.” When you speak, your rhetorical tricks are too much
for me, and I seem to agree with you; but when you stop speaking, it all
goes out of my head, and I see quite clearly that your argument does not
flow from the fountains of truth and Christian simplicity, but rests on
the laboured subtleties of the philosophers.

<span id="vi.ix.III-p54"></span>A. Do you wish me, then, once more to
resort to the evidence of Scripture? If so, what becomes of the boast of
your disciples <span id="page_476">p. 476</span> <span
id="vi.ix.III-Page_476"></span>that no one can answer your arguments or
solve the questions you raise?

<span id="vi.ix.III-p55"></span>C. I not only wish, but am eager that
you should do so. Show me any place in Holy Scripture where we find
that, the power of free choice being lost, a man does what of himself he
either would not, or could not do.

<span id="vi.ix.III-p56"></span>8. A. We must use the words of Scripture
not as you propose, but as truth and reason demand. Jacob says in his
prayer, <span id="fr_5303"></span>[5304](#fn_5303) “If the Lord God will
be with me, and will keep me in this way that I go, and will give me
bread to eat, and raiment to put on, so that I come again to my father’s
house in peace, then shall the Lord be my God, and this stone, which I
have set up for a token, shall be God’s house; and of all that Thou
shalt give me I will surely give the tenth unto Thee.” He did not say,
If thou preserve my free choice, and I gain by my toil food and raiment,
and return to my father’s house. He refers everything to the will of
God, that he may be found worthy to receive that for which he prays. On
Jacob’s return from Mesopotamia <span
id="fr_5304"></span>[5305](#fn_5304) an army of angels met him, who are
called God’s camp. He afterwards contended with an angel in the form of
a man, and was strengthened by God; whereupon, instead of Jacob, the
*supplanter,* he received the name, *the most upright of God.* For he
would not have dared to return to his cruel brother unless he had been
strengthened and secured by the Lord’s help. In the sequel we
read, <span id="fr_5305"></span>[5306](#fn_5305) “The sun rose upon him
after he passed over Phanuel,” which is, being interpreted, *the face of
God.* Hence <span id="fr_5306"></span>[5307](#fn_5306) Moses also says,
“I have seen the Lord face to face, and my life is preserved,” not by
any natural quality—but by the condescension of God, Who had mercy. So
then the Sun of Righteousness rises upon us when God makes His face to
shine upon us and gives us strength. Joseph in Egypt was shut up in
prison, and we next hear that the keeper of the prison, believing in his
fidelity, committed everything to his hand. And the reason is
given: <span id="fr_5307"></span>[5308](#fn_5307) “Because the Lord was
with him: and whatsoever he did, the Lord made it to prosper.”
Wherefore, also, dreams were suggested to Pharaoh’s attendants, and
Pharaoh had one which none could interpret, that so Joseph might be
released, and his father and brethren fed, and Egypt saved in the time
of famine. Moreover, God <span id="fr_5308"></span>[5309](#fn_5308) said
to Israel, in a vision of the night, “I am the God of thy fathers; fear
not to go down into Egypt; for I will make of thee there a great nation,
and I will go down with thee into Egypt; and I will also surely bring
thee up again, and Joseph shall put his hand upon thine eyes.” Where in
this passage do we find the power of free choice? Is not the whole
circumstance that he ventured to go to his son, and entrust himself to a
nation that knew not the Lord, due to the help of the God of his
fathers? The people was released from Egypt with a strong hand and an
outstretched arm; not the hand of Moses and Aaron, but of Him who set
the people free by signs and wonders, and at last smote the firstborn of
Egypt, so that they who at <span id="fr_5309"></span>[5310](#fn_5309)
first were persistent in keeping the people, eagerly urged them to
depart. Solomon <span id="fr_5310"></span>[5311](#fn_5310) says, “Trust
in the Lord with all thine heart, and lean not upon thine own
understanding: in all thy ways acknowledge Him, and He shall direct thy
paths.” Understand what He says—that we must not trust in our wisdom,
but in the Lord alone, by Whom the steps of a man are directed. Lastly,
we are bidden to show Him our ways, and make them known, for they are
not made straight by our own labour, but by His assistance and mercy.
And so it is written, <span id="fr_5311"></span>[5312](#fn_5311) “Make
my way right before Thy face,” so that what is right to Thee may seem
also right to me. Solomon says the same— <span
id="fr_5312"></span>[5313](#fn_5312) “Commit thy works unto the Lord,
and thy thoughts shall be established.” Our thoughts are then
established when we commit all we do to the Lord our helper, resting it,
as it were, upon the firm and solid rock, and attribute everything to
Him.

<span id="vi.ix.III-p67"></span>9. The Apostle Paul, rapidly recounting
the benefits of God, ended with the words, <span
id="fr_5313"></span>[5314](#fn_5313) “And who is sufficient for these
things?” Wherefore, also, in another place he <span
id="fr_5314"></span>[5315](#fn_5314) says, “Such confidence have we
through Christ to Godward; not that we are sufficient of ourselves to
think anything as of ourselves; but our sufficiency is from God; Who
also made us sufficient as ministers of a new covenant; not of the
letter but of the spirit; for the letter killeth, but the spirit giveth
life.” Do we still dare to pride ourselves on free will, and to abuse
the benefits of God to the dishonour of the giver? Whereas the same
chosen vessel openly <span id="fr_5315"></span>[5316](#fn_5315) writes,
“We have this treasure in earthen vessels, that the exceeding greatness
of the power may be of God, and not from ourselves.” Therefore, also, in
another place, checking the impudence of the heretics, he <span
id="fr_5316"></span>[5317](#fn_5316) says, “He that glorieth, let him
glory in the Lord. For not he that commendeth himself is approved, but
whom the Lord commendeth.” And again, <span
id="fr_5317"></span>[5318](#fn_5317) “In nothing was I behind the very
chiefest Apostles, <span id="page_477">p. 477</span> <span
id="vi.ix.III-Page_477"></span>though I be nothing.” Peter, disturbed by
the greatness of the miracles he witnessed, said to the Lord, <span
id="fr_5318"></span>[5319](#fn_5318) “Depart from me, for I am a sinful
man.” And the Lord said to His disciples, <span
id="fr_5319"></span>[5320](#fn_5319) “I am the vine and ye are the
branches: He that abideth in Me and I in him, the same beareth much
fruit, for apart from Me ye can do nothing.” Just as the vine branches
and shoots immediately decay when they are severed from the parent stem,
so all the strength of men fades and perishes, if it be bereft of the
help of God. “No one,” <span id="fr_5320"></span>[5321](#fn_5320) He
says, “can come unto Me except the Father Who sent Me draw him.” When He
says, “No one can come unto Me,” He shatters the pride of free will;
because, even if a man will to go to Christ, except that be realized
which follows—“unless My heavenly Father draw him”—desire is to no
purpose, and effort is in vain. At the same time it is to be noted that
he who is drawn does not run freely, but is led along either because he
holds back and is sluggish, or because he is reluctant to go.

<span id="vi.ix.III-p76"></span>10. Now, how can a man who cannot by his
own strength and labour come to Jesus, at the same time avoid all sins?
and avoid them perpetually, and claim for himself a name which belongs
to the might of God? For if He and I are both without sin, what
difference is there between me and God? One more proof only I will
adduce, that I may not weary you and my hearers. <span
id="fr_5321"></span>[5322](#fn_5321) Sleep was removed from the eyes of
Ahasuerus, whom the Seventy call Artaxerxes, that he might turn over the
memoirs of his faithful ministers and come upon Mordecai, by whose
evidence he was delivered from a conspiracy; and that thus Esther might
be more acceptable, and the whole people of the Jews escape imminent
death. There is no doubt that the mighty sovereign to whom belonged the
whole East, from India to the North and to Ethiopia, after feasting
sumptuously on delicacies gathered from every part of the world would
have desired to sleep, and to take his rest, and to gratify his free
choice of sleep, had not the Lord, the provider of all good things,
hindered the course of nature, so that in defiance of nature the
tyrant’s cruelty might be overcome. If I were to attempt to produce all
the instances in Holy Writ, I should be tedious. All that the saints say
is a prayer to God; their whole prayer and supplication a strong
wrestling for the pity of God, so that we, who by our own strength and
zeal cannot be saved, may be preserved by His mercy. But when we are
concerned with grace and mercy, free will is in part void; in part, I
say, for so much as this depends upon it, that we wish and desire, and
give assent to the course we choose. But it depends on God whether we
have the power in His strength and with His help to perform what we
desire, and to bring to effect our toil and effort.

<span id="vi.ix.III-p78"></span>11. C. I simply said that we find the
help of God not in our several actions, but in the grace of creation and
of the law, that free will might not be destroyed. But there are many of
us who maintain that all we do is done with the help of God.

<span id="vi.ix.III-p79"></span>A. Whoever says that must leave your
party. Either, then, say the same yourself and join our side, or, if you
refuse, you will be just as much our enemy as those who do not hold our
views.

<span id="vi.ix.III-p80"></span>C. I shall be on your side if you speak
my sentiments, or rather you will be on mine if you do not contradict
them. You admit health of body, and deny health of the soul, which is
stronger than the body. For sin is to the soul what disease or a wound
is to the body. If then you admit that a man may be healthy so far as he
is flesh, why do you not say he may be healthy so far as he is spirit?

<span id="vi.ix.III-p81"></span>A. I will follow in the line you point
out,

<span id="vi.ix.III-p82"></span>“and you to-day

<span id="vi.ix.III-p83"></span>Shall ne’er escape; where’r you call, I
come.”

<span id="vi.ix.III-p84"></span>C. I am ready to listen.

<span id="vi.ix.III-p85"></span>A. And I to speak to deaf ears. I will
therefore reply to your argument. Made up of soul and body, we have the
nature of both substances. As the body is said to be healthy if it is
troubled with no weakness, so the soul is free from fault if it is
unshaken and undisturbed. And yet, although the body may be healthy,
sound, and active, with all the faculties in their full vigour, yet it
suffers much from infirmities at more or less frequent intervals, and,
however strong it may be, is sometimes distressed by various humours; so
the soul, bearing the onset of thoughts and agitations, even though it
escape shipwreck, does not sail without danger, and remembering its
weakness, is always anxious about death, according as it is
written, <span id="fr_5322"></span>[5323](#fn_5322) “What man is he that
shall live and not see death?”—death, which threatens all mortal men,
not through the decay of nature, but through the death of sin, according
to the prophet’s words, <span id="fr_5323"></span>[5324](#fn_5323) “The
soul that sinneth, it shall die.” Besides, we know that Enoch and Elias
have not yet seen this death which is common to man and the brutes. Show
me a body which is never sick, or which after sickness is ever safe and
sound, and I will <span id="page_478">p. 478</span> <span
id="vi.ix.III-Page_478"></span>show you a soul which never sinned, and
after acquiring virtues will never again sin. The thing is impossible,
and all the more when we remember that vice borders on virtue, and that,
if you deviate ever so little, you will either go astray or fall over a
precipice. How small is the interval between obstinacy and perseverance,
miserliness and frugality, liberality and extravagance, wisdom and
craft, intrepidity and rashness, caution and timidity! some of which are
classed as good, others as bad. And the same applies to bodies. If you
take precautions against biliousness, the phlegm increases. If you dry
up the humours too quickly, the blood becomes heated and vitiated with
bile, and a sallow hue spreads over the countenance. Without question,
however much we may exercise all the care of the physician, and regulate
our diet, and be free from indigestion and whatever fosters disease, the
causes of which are in some cases hidden from us and known to God alone,
we shiver with cold, or burn with fever, or howl with colic, and implore
the help of the true physician, our Saviour, and <span
id="fr_5324"></span>[5325](#fn_5324) say with the Apostles, “Master,
save us, we perish.”

<span id="vi.ix.III-p89"></span>12. C. Granted that no one could avoid
all sin in boyhood, youth, and early manhood; can you deny that very
many righteous and holy men, after falling into vice, have heartily
devoted themselves to the acquisition of virtue and through these have
escaped sin?

<span id="vi.ix.III-p90"></span>A. This is what I told you at the
beginning—that it rests with ourselves either to sin or not to sin, and
to put the hand either to good or evil; and thus free will is preserved,
but according to circumstances, time, and the state of human frailty; we
maintain, however, that perpetual freedom from sin is reserved for God
only, and for Him Who being the Word was made flesh without incurring
the defects and the sins of the flesh. And, because I am able to avoid
sin for a short time, you cannot logically infer that I am able to do so
continually. Can I fast, watch, walk, sing, sit, sleep perpetually?

<span id="vi.ix.III-p91"></span>C. Why then in Holy Scripture are we
stimulated to aim at perfect righteousness? For example: <span
id="fr_5325"></span>[5326](#fn_5325) “Blessed are the pure in heart, for
they shall see God,” and <span id="fr_5326"></span>[5327](#fn_5326)
“Blessed are the undefiled in the way, who walk in the law of the Lord.”
And God says to Abraham, <span id="fr_5327"></span>[5328](#fn_5327) “I
am thy God, be thou pleasing in My sight, and be thou without spot, or
blame, and I will make My covenant between Me and thee, and will
multiply thee exceedingly.” If that is impossible which Scripture
testifies, it was useless to command it to be done.

<span id="vi.ix.III-p95"></span>A. You play upon Scripture until you
wear a question threadbare, and remind me of the platform tricks of a
conjurer who assumes a variety of characters, and is now Mars, next
moment Venus; so that he who was at first all sternness and ferocity is
dissolved into feminine softness. For the objection you now raise with
an air of novelty—“Blessed are the pure in heart,” “Blessed are the
undefiled in the way,” and “Be without spot,” and so forth—is refuted
when the Apostle replies, <span id="fr_5328"></span>[5329](#fn_5328) “We
know in part, and we prophesy in part,” and, “Now we see through a
mirror darkly, but when that which is perfect is come, that which is in
part shall be done away.” And therefore we have but the shadow and
likeness of the pure heart, which hereafter is destined to see God, and,
free from spot or stain, to live with Abraham. However great the
patriarch, prophet, or Apostle may be, it is <span
id="fr_5329"></span>[5330](#fn_5329) said to them, in the words of our
Lord and Saviour, “If ye being evil, know how to give good gifts unto
your children, how much more shall your Father Which is in heaven give
good things to them which ask Him?” Then again even Abraham, to whom it
was said, <span id="fr_5330"></span>[5331](#fn_5330) “Be thou without
spot and blame,” in the consciousness of his frailty fell upon his face
to the earth. And when God had spoken to Him, saying, “Thy wife Sarai
shall no longer be called Sarai, but Sara shall her name be, and I will
give thee a son by her, and I will bless him and he shall become a great
nation, and kings of nations shall spring from him,” the narrative at
once proceeds to say, “Abraham fell upon his face, and laughed, and said
in his heart, Shall a child be born unto him that is an hundred years
old? and shall Sarah, that is ninety years old, bear?” And Abraham said
unto God, “Oh, that Ishmael might live before thee!” And God said, “Nay,
but Sarah thy wife shall bear thee a son, and thou shalt call his name
Isaac,” and so on. He certainly had heard the words of God, “I am thy
God, be thou pleasing in My sight, and without spot”; why then did he
not believe what God promised, and why did he laugh in his heart,
thinking that he escaped the notice of God, and not daring to laugh
openly? Moreover he gives the reasons for his unbelief, and says, “How
is it possible for a man that is an hundred years old to beget a son of
a wife that is ninety years old?” “Oh, that Ishmael might live before
thee,” he says. “Ishmael whom thou once gavest me. I do not ask a hard
thing, I am content with the blessing I have received.” God convinced
<span id="page_479">p. 479</span> <span
id="vi.ix.III-Page_479"></span>him by a mysterious reply. He said,
“Yea.” The meaning is, that shall come to pass which you think shall not
be. Your wife Sara shall bear you a son, and before she conceives,
before he is born, I will give the boy a name. For, from your error in
secretly laughing, your son shall be called Isaac, that is *laughter.*
But if you think that God is seen by those who are pure in heart in this
world, why did Moses, who had previously said, “I have seen the Lord
face to face, and my life is preserved,” afterwards entreat that he
might see him distinctly? And because he said that he had seen God, the
Lord told him, <span id="fr_5331"></span>[5332](#fn_5331) “Thou canst
not see My face. For man shall not see My face, and live.” Wherefore
also the Apostle <span id="fr_5332"></span>[5333](#fn_5332) calls Him
the only invisible God, Who dwells in light unapproachable, and Whom no
man hath seen, nor can see. And the Evangelist John in holy accents
testifies, saying, <span id="fr_5333"></span>[5334](#fn_5333) “No man
hath at any time seen God. The only begotten Son Who is in the bosom of
the Father, He hath declared Him.” He Who sees, also declares, not how
great He is Who is seen, nor how much He knows Who declares; but as much
as the capacity of mortals can receive.

<span id="vi.ix.III-p102"></span>13. And whereas you think he is blessed
who is undefiled in the way, and walks in His law, you must interpret
the former clause by the latter. From the many proofs I have adduced you
have learnt that no one has been able to fulfil the law. And if the
Apostle, in comparison with the grace of Christ, reckoned those things
as filth which formerly, under the law, he counted gain, so that he
might win Christ, how much more certain ought we to be that the reason
why the grace of Christ and of the Gospel has been added is that, under
the law, no one could be justified? Now if, under the law, no one is
justified, how is he perfectly undefiled in the way who is still walking
and hastening to reach the goal? Surely, he who is in the course, and
who is advancing on the road, is inferior to him who has reached his
journey’s end. If, then, he is undefiled and perfect who is still
walking in the way and advancing in the law, what more shall he have who
has arrived at the end of life and of the law? Hence the Apostle,
speaking of our Lord, says that, at the end of the world, when all
virtues shall receive their consummation, He will present His holy
Church to Himself without spot or wrinkle, and yet you think that Church
perfect, while yet in the flesh, which is subject to death and decay.
You deserve to be told, with the Corinthians, <span
id="fr_5334"></span>[5335](#fn_5334) “Ye are already perfect, ye are
already made rich: ye reign without us, and I would that ye did reign,
that we might also reign with you”—since true and stainless perfection
belongs to the inhabitants of heaven, and is reserved for that day when
the bridegroom shall say to the bride, <span
id="fr_5335"></span>[5336](#fn_5335) “Thou art all fair, my love; and
there is no spot in thee.” And in this sense we must understand the
words: <span id="fr_5336"></span>[5337](#fn_5336) “That ye may be
blameless and harmless, as children of God, without blemish”; for He did
not say *ye are,* but *may be.* He is contemplating the future, not
stating a case pertaining to the present; so that here is toil and
effort, in that other world the rewards of labour and of virtue. Lastly,
John writes: <span id="fr_5337"></span>[5338](#fn_5337) “Beloved, we are
sons of God, and it is not yet made manifest what we shall be. We know
that when He shall be manifested, we shall be like Him: for we shall see
Him even as He is.” Although, then, we are sons of God, yet likeness to
God, and the true contemplation of God, is promised us then, when He
shall appear in His majesty.

<span id="vi.ix.III-p107"></span>14. From this swelling pride springs
the audacity in prayer which marks the directions in your letter to
a <span id="fr_5338"></span>[5339](#fn_5338) certain widow as to how the
saints ought to pray. “He,” you say, <span
id="fr_5339"></span>[5340](#fn_5339) “rightly lifts up his hands to God;
he pours out supplications with a good conscience who can say, ‘Thou
knowest, Lord, how holy, how innocent, how pure from all deceit, wrong,
and robbery are the hands which I spread out unto Thee; how righteous,
how spotless, and free from all falsehood are the lips with which I pour
forth my prayers unto Thee, that Thou mayest pity me.’” Is this the
prayer of a Christian, or of a proud Pharisee like him who <span
id="fr_5340"></span>[5341](#fn_5340) says in the Gospel, “God, I thank
Thee that I am not as other men are, robbers, unjust, adulterers, or
even as this publican: I fast twice in the week, I give tithes of all
that I possess.” Yet he merely thanks God because, by His mercy, he is
not as other men: he execrates sin, and does not claim his righteousness
as his own. But you say, “Now Thou knowest how holy, how innocent, how
pure from all deceit, wrong, and robbery are the hands which I spread
out before Thee.” He says that he fasts twice in the week, that he may
afflict his vicious and wanton flesh, and he gives tithes <span
id="page_480">p. 480</span> <span id="vi.ix.III-Page_480"></span>of all
his substance. For <span id="fr_5341"></span>[5342](#fn_5341) “the
ransom of a man’s life is his riches.” You join the devil in
boasting, <span id="fr_5342"></span>[5343](#fn_5342) “I will ascend
above the stars, I will place my throne in heaven, and I will be like
the Most High.” David says, <span id="fr_5343"></span>[5344](#fn_5343)
“My loins are filled with illusions”; and <span
id="fr_5344"></span>[5345](#fn_5344) “My wounds stink and are corrupt
because of my foolishness”; and <span
id="fr_5345"></span>[5346](#fn_5345) “Enter not into judgment with Thy
servant”; and <span id="fr_5346"></span>[5347](#fn_5346) “In Thy sight
no man living shall be justified.” You boast that you are holy,
innocent, and pure, and spread out clean hands unto God. And you are not
satisfied with glorying in all your works, unless you say that you are
pure from all sins of speech; and you tell us how righteous, how
spotless, how free from all falsehood your lips are. The Psalmist
sings, <span id="fr_5347"></span>[5348](#fn_5347) “Every man is a liar”;
and this is supported by apostolical authority: “That God may be true,”
says St. Paul, <span id="fr_5348"></span>[5349](#fn_5348) “and every man
a liar”; and yet you have lips righteous, spotless, and free from all
falsehood. Isaiah laments, saying, <span
id="fr_5349"></span>[5350](#fn_5349) “Woe is me! for I am undone,
because I am a man of unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of a people
of unclean lips”; and afterwards one of the seraphim brings a hot coal,
taken with the tongs, to purify the prophet’s lips, for he was not,
according to the tenor of your words, arrogant, but he confessed his own
faults. Just as we read in the Psalms, <span
id="fr_5350"></span>[5351](#fn_5350) “What shall be due unto thee, and
what shall be done more unto thee in respect of a deceitful tongue?
Sharp arrows of the mighty, with coals that make desolate.” And after
all this swelling with pride, and boastfulness in prayer, and confidence
in your holiness, like one fool trying to persuade another, you finish
with the words “These lips with which I pour out my supplication that
Thou mayest have pity on me.” If you are holy, if you are innocent, if
you are cleansed from all defilement, if you have sinned neither in word
nor deed—although James says, <span id="fr_5351"></span>[5352](#fn_5351)
“He who offends not in word is a perfect man,” and “No one can curb his
tongue”—how is it that you sue for mercy? so that, forsooth, you bewail
yourself, and pour out prayers because you are holy, pure, and innocent,
a man of stainless lips, free from all falsehood, and endowed with a
power like that of God. Christ prayed thus on the cross: <span
id="fr_5352"></span>[5353](#fn_5352) “My God, my God, why hast Thou
forsaken Me? Why art Thou so far from helping Me?” And, again, <span
id="fr_5353"></span>[5354](#fn_5353) “Father, into Thy hands I commend
My spirit,” and <span id="fr_5354"></span>[5355](#fn_5354) “Father,
forgive them, for they know not what they do.” And this is He, who,
returning thanks for us, had said, <span
id="fr_5355"></span>[5356](#fn_5355) “I confess to Thee, O Father, Lord
of heaven and earth.”

<span id="vi.ix.III-p126"></span>15. Our Lord so instructed His Apostles
that, daily at the sacrifice of His body, believers make bold to say,
“Our Father, Which art in Heaven, hallowed be Thy name”; they earnestly
desire the name of God, which in itself is holy, to be hallowed in
themselves; you say, “Thou knowest, Lord, how holy, how innocent, and
how pure are my hands.” Then they say: “Thy Kingdom come,” anticipating
the hope of the future kingdom, so that, when Christ reigns, sin may by
no means reign in their mortal body, and to this they couple the words,
“Thy will be done in earth as it is in Heaven”; so that human weakness
may imitate the angels, and the will of our Lord may be fulfilled on
earth; you say, “A man can, if he chooses, be free from all sin.” The
Apostles prayed for the daily bread, or the bread better than all food,
which was to come, so that they might be worthy to receive the body of
Christ; and you are led by your excess of holiness and well established
righteousness to boldly claim the heavenly gifts. Next comes, “Forgive
us our debts, as we also forgive our debtors.” No sooner do they rise
from the baptismal font, and by being born again and incorporated into
our Lord and Saviour thus fulfil what is written of them, <span
id="fr_5356"></span>[5357](#fn_5356) “Blessed are they whose iniquities
are forgiven and whose sins are covered,” than at the first communion of
the body of Christ they say, “Forgive us our debts,” though these debts
had been forgiven them at their confession of Christ; but you in your
arrogant pride boast of the cleanness of your holy hands and of the
purity of your speech. However thorough the conversion of a man may be,
and however perfect his possession of virtue after a time of sins and
failings, can such persons be as free from fault as they who are just
leaving the font of Christ? And yet these latter are commanded to say,
“Forgive us our debts, as we also forgive our debtors”; not in the
spirit of a false humility, but because they are afraid of human frailty
and dread their own conscience. They say, “Lead us not into temptation”;
you and Jovinian unite in saying that those who with a full faith have
been baptized cannot be further tempted or sin. Lastly, they add, “But
deliver us from the evil one.” Why do they beg from the Lord what they
have already by the power of free will? Oh, man, now thou hast been made
clean in the laver, and of thee it is said, “Who is this that cometh up
<span id="page_481">p. 481</span> <span
id="vi.ix.III-Page_481"></span>all white, leaning upon her beloved?” The
bride, therefore, is washed, yet she cannot keep her purity, unless she
be supported by the Lord. How is it that you long to be set free by the
mercy of God, you who but a little while ago were released from your
sins? The only explanation is the principle by which we maintain that,
when we have done all, we must confess we are unprofitable.

<span id="vi.ix.III-p128"></span>16. So then your prayer outdoes the
pride of the Pharisee, and you are condemned when compared with the
Publican. He, standing afar off, did not dare to lift up his eyes unto
Heaven, but smote upon his breast, saying, <span
id="fr_5357"></span>[5358](#fn_5357) “God be merciful unto me a sinner.”
And on this is based our Lord’s declaration, “I say unto you this man
went down to his house justified rather than the other. For every one
that exalteth himself shall be abased, and he that humbleth himself
shall be exalted.” The Apostles are humbled that they may be exalted.
Your disciples are lifted up that they may fall. In your flattery of the
widow previously mentioned you are not ashamed to say that piety such as
is found on earth, and truth which is everywhere a stranger, had made
their home with her in preference to all others. You do not recollect
the familiar words, <span id="fr_5358"></span>[5359](#fn_5358) “O my
people, they which call thee blessed cause thee to err, and destroy the
paths of thy feet”; and you expressly praise her and say, “Happy beyond
all thought are you! how blessed! if righteousness, which is believed to
be now nowhere but in Heaven, is found with you alone on earth.” Is this
teaching or slaying? Is it raising from earth, or casting down from
heaven, to attribute that to a poor creature of a woman, which angels
would not dare arrogate to themselves? If piety, truth, and
righteousness are found on earth nowhere but in one woman, where shall
we find your righteous followers, who, you boast, are sinless on earth?
These two chapters on prayer and praise you and your disciples are wont
to swear are none of yours, and yet your brilliant style is so clearly
seen in them, and the elegance of your Ciceronian diction is so marked
that, although you strut about with the slow pace of a tortoise, you
have not the courage to acknowledge what you teach in private and expose
for sale. Happy man! whose books no one writes out but your own
disciples, so that whatever appears to be unacceptable, you may contend
is not your own but some one else’s work. And where is the man with
ability enough to imitate the charm of your language?

<span id="vi.ix.III-p131"></span>17. C. I can put it off no longer; my
patience is completely overcome by your iniquitous words. Tell me, pray,
what sin have little infants committed. Neither the consciousness of
wrong nor ignorance can be imputed to those who, according to the
prophet Jonah, know not their right hand from their left. They cannot
sin, and they can perish; their knees are too weak to walk, they utter
inarticulate cries; we laugh at their attempts to speak; and, all the
while, poor unfortunates! the torments of eternal misery are prepared
for them.

<span id="vi.ix.III-p132"></span>A. Ah! now that your disciples have
turned masters you begin to be fluent, not to say eloquent.
Antony, <span id="fr_5359"></span>[5360](#fn_5359) an excellent orator,
whose praises Tully loudly proclaims, says that he had seen many fluent
men, but so far never an eloquent speaker; so don’t amuse me with
flowers of oratory which have not grown in your own garden, and with
which the ears of inexperience and of boyhood are wont to be tickled,
but plainly tell me what you think.

<span id="vi.ix.III-p134"></span>C. What I say is this—you must at least
allow that they have no sin who cannot sin.

<span id="vi.ix.III-p135"></span>A. I will allow it, if they have been
baptized into Christ; and if you will not then immediately bind me to
agree with your opinion that a man can be without sin if he chooses; for
they neither have the power nor the will; but they are free from all sin
through the grace of God, which they received in their baptism.

<span id="vi.ix.III-p136"></span>C. You force me to make an invidious
remark and ask, Why, what sin have they committed? that you may
immediately have me stoned in some popular tumult. You have not the
power to kill me, but you certainly have the will.

<span id="vi.ix.III-p137"></span>A. He slays a heretic who allows him to
be a heretic. But when we rebuke him we give him life; you may die to
your heresy, and live to the Catholic faith.

<span id="vi.ix.III-p138"></span>C. If you know us to be heretics, why
do you not accuse us?

<span id="vi.ix.III-p139"></span>A. Because the <span
id="fr_5360"></span>[5361](#fn_5360) Apostle teaches me to avoid a
heretic after the first and second admonition, not to accuse him. The
Apostle knew that such an one is perverse and self-condemned. Besides,
it would be the height of folly to make my faith depend on another man’s
judgment. For supposing some one were to call you a Catholic, am I to
immediately give assent? Whoever defends you, and says that you rightly
hold your perverse opinions, does not succeed in rescuing you from
infamy, but charges himself with perfidy. Your numerous supporters will
never prove you to be a Catholic, but will <span id="page_482">p.
482</span> <span id="vi.ix.III-Page_482"></span>show that you are a
heretic. But I would have such opinions as these suppressed by
ecclesiastical authority; otherwise we shall be in the case of those who
show some dreadful picture to a crying child. May the fear of God grant
us this—to despise all other fears. Therefore, either defend your
opinions, or abandon what you are unable to defend. Whoever may be
called in to defend you must be enrolled as a partisan, not as a patron.

<span id="vi.ix.III-p141"></span>18. C. Tell me, pray, and rid me of all
doubts, why little children are baptized.

<span id="vi.ix.III-p142"></span>A. That their sins may be forgiven them
in baptism.

<span id="vi.ix.III-p143"></span>C. What sin are they guilty of? How can
any one be set free who is not bound?

<span id="vi.ix.III-p144"></span>A. You ask me! The Gospel trumpet will
reply, the teacher of the Gentiles, the golden vessel shining throughout
the world: <span id="fr_5361"></span>[5362](#fn_5361) “Death reigned
from Adam even unto Moses: even over those who did not sin after the
likeness of the transgression of Adam, who is a figure of Him that was
to come.” And if you object that some are spoken of who did not sin, you
must understand that they did not sin in the same way as Adam did by
transgressing God’s command in Paradise. But all men are held liable
either on account of their ancient forefather Adam, or on their own
account. He that is an infant is released in baptism from the chain
which bound his father. He who is old enough to have discernment is set
free from the chain of his own or another’s sin by the blood of Christ.
You must not think me a heretic because I take this view, for the
blessed martyr Cyprian, whose rival you boast of being in the
classification of Scripture proofs, in the <span
id="fr_5362"></span>[5363](#fn_5362) epistle addressed to Bishop Fidus
on the Baptism of Infants speaks thus: “Moreover, if even the worst
offenders, and those who previous to baptism sin much against God, once
they believe have the gift of remission of sins, and no one is kept from
baptism and from grace, how much more ought not an infant to be kept
from baptism seeing that, being only just born, he has committed no sin?
He has only, being born according to the flesh among Adam’s sons,
incurred the taint of ancient death by his first birth. And he is the
more easily admitted to remission of sins because of the very fact that
not his own sins but those of another are remitted to him. And so,
dearest brother, it was our decision in council that no one ought to be
kept by us from baptism and from the grace of God, Who is merciful to
all, and kind, and good. And whereas this rule ought to be observed and
kept with reference to all, bear in mind that it ought so much the more
to be observed with regard to infants themselves and those just born,
for they have the greater claims on our assistance in order to obtain
Divine mercy, because their cries and tears from the very birth are one
perpetual prayer.”

<span id="vi.ix.III-p147"></span>19. That holy man and eloquent bishop
Augustin not long ago wrote to <span
id="fr_5363"></span>[5364](#fn_5363) Marcellinus (the same that was
afterwards, though innocent, put to death by heretics on the pretext of
his taking part in the tyranny of Heraclian <span
id="fr_5364"></span>[5365](#fn_5364) ) two treatises on infant baptism,
in opposition to your heresy which maintains that infants are baptized
not for remission of sins, but for admission to the kingdom of heaven,
according as it is written in the Gospel, <span
id="fr_5365"></span>[5366](#fn_5365) “Except a man be born again of
water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven.” He
addressed a <span id="fr_5366"></span>[5367](#fn_5366) third, moreover,
to the same Marcellinus, against those who say as do you, that a man can
be free from sin, if he chooses, without the help of God. And, recently,
a <span id="fr_5367"></span>[5368](#fn_5367) fourth to Hilary against
this doctrine of yours, which is full of perversity. And he is said to
have others on the anvil with special regard to you, which have not yet
come to hand. Wherefore, I think I must abandon my task, for fear
Horace’s words may be thrown at me, <span
id="fr_5368"></span>[5369](#fn_5368) “Don’t carry firewood into a
forest.” For we must either say the same as he does, and that would be
superfluous; or, if we wished to say something fresh, we should <span
id="fr_5369"></span>[5370](#fn_5369) find our best points anticipated by
that splendid genius. One thing I will say and so end my discourse, that
you ought either to give us a new creed, so that, after baptizing
children into the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, you may
baptize them into the kingdom of heaven; or, if you have one baptism
both for infants and for persons of mature age, it follows that infants
also should be baptized for the remission of sins after the likeness of
the transgression of Adam. But if you think the remission of <span
id="page_483">p. 483</span> <span
id="vi.ix.III-Page_483"></span>another’s sins implies injustice, and
that he has no need of it who could not sin, cross over to Origen, your
special favourite, who says that ancient offences <span
id="fr_5370"></span>[5371](#fn_5370) committed long before in the
heavens are loosed in baptism. You will then be not only led by his
authority in other matters, but will be following his error in this
also.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5281"></span>[472:5282](2060177.htm#fr_5281) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p3"></span> [Prov. x.
19](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#019)<span id="vi.ix.III-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5282"></span>[472:5283](2060177.htm#fr_5282) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p5"></span> By a Synod under Siricius in <span
class="c17"><span id="vi.ix.III-p5.1"></span>a.d.</span> 390.

<span id="fn_5283"></span>[472:5284](2060177.htm#fr_5283) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p6"></span> The allusion is to the African Synod,
held <span class="c17"><span id="vi.ix.III-p6.1"></span>a.d.</span> 412,
at which Celestius was condemned and excommunicated.

<span id="fn_5284"></span>[472:5285](2060177.htm#fr_5284) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p7"></span> [Ps. cxxvii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#001)<span id="vi.ix.III-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5285"></span>[472:5286](2060177.htm#fr_5285) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p7.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p8"></span> [1 Cor. ix.
24](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#024)<span id="vi.ix.III-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5286"></span>[472:5287](2060177.htm#fr_5286) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p9"></span> [Psa.
5.12](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#012)<span id="vi.ix.III-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5287"></span>[472:5288](2060177.htm#fr_5287) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p10"></span> [John v.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#014)<span id="vi.ix.III-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5288"></span>[472:5289](2060177.htm#fr_5288) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p10.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p11"></span> [1 Cor.
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#017)<span id="vi.ix.III-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5289"></span>[472:5290](2060177.htm#fr_5289) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p11.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p12"></span> [2 Chron. xv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#002)<span id="vi.ix.III-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5290"></span>[472:5291](2060177.htm#fr_5290) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p14"></span> The words are those of S. Barnabas.
Possibly in Jerome’s copy the passage may have been attributed to
Ignatius.

<span id="fn_5291"></span>[472:5292](2060177.htm#fr_5291) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p15"></span> [Ps. xvi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#004)<span id="vi.ix.III-p15.1"></span>.
Sept. and Vulgate.

<span id="fn_5292"></span>[473:5293](2060177.htm#fr_5292) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p25.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p26"></span> [Acts
13:32](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#032), [Ps.
88:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#021)<span
id="vi.ix.III-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5293"></span>[473:5294](2060177.htm#fr_5293) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p26.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p27"></span> [2 Tim. iv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#013)<span id="vi.ix.III-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5294"></span>[474:5295](2060177.htm#fr_5294) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p27.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p28"></span> [Acts xxiii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#002)<span id="vi.ix.III-p28.1"></span>
sq.

<span id="fn_5295"></span>[474:5296](2060177.htm#fr_5295) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p28.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p29"></span> S. [John xviii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#023)<span id="vi.ix.III-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5296"></span>[474:5297](2060177.htm#fr_5296) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p29.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p30"></span> [2 Tim. iv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#014)<span id="vi.ix.III-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5297"></span>[475:5298](2060177.htm#fr_5297) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p44.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p45"></span> S. [John vi.
70](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#070)<span id="vi.ix.III-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5298"></span>[475:5299](2060177.htm#fr_5298) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p45.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p46"></span> [Rom.
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#005)<span id="vi.ix.III-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5299"></span>[475:5300](2060177.htm#fr_5299) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p46.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p47"></span> [Jonah
3.4](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#004)<span id="vi.ix.III-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5300"></span>[475:5301](2060177.htm#fr_5300) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p47.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p48"></span> [Jer.
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#008)<span id="vi.ix.III-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5301"></span>[475:5302](2060177.htm#fr_5301) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p48.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p49"></span> [Jonah
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/jon004.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/jon004.htm#011)<span id="vi.ix.III-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5302"></span>[475:5303](2060177.htm#fr_5302) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p52.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p53"></span> [1 Cor. xi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#006)<span id="vi.ix.III-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5303"></span>[476:5304](2060177.htm#fr_5303) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p56.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p57"></span> [Gen. xxviii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#020)<span id="vi.ix.III-p57.1"></span>
sq.

<span id="fn_5304"></span>[476:5305](2060177.htm#fr_5304) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p57.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p58"></span> [Gen. xxxii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#002)<span id="vi.ix.III-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5305"></span>[476:5306](2060177.htm#fr_5305) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p58.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p59"></span> [Gen. xxxii.
31](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#031)<span id="vi.ix.III-p59.1"></span>.
L. R.V. Penuel. Comp. [Mt. xix. 4](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#004)<span
id="vi.ix.III-p59.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_5306"></span>[476:5307](2060177.htm#fr_5306) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p59.3"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p60"></span> [Gen.
32.30](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#030)<span
id="vi.ix.III-p60.1"></span>. The words are Jacob’s, but they are
attributed to Moses as author.

<span id="fn_5307"></span>[476:5308](2060177.htm#fr_5307) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p60.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p61"></span> [Gen. xxxix.
23](../../../bib/kjv/gen039.htm#023)<span id="vi.ix.III-p61.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5308"></span>[476:5309](2060177.htm#fr_5308) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p61.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p62"></span> [Gen.
46:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#004)<span id="vi.ix.III-p62.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5309"></span>[476:5310](2060177.htm#fr_5309) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p62.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p63"></span> [Exod.
11:0](../../../bib/kjv/exo011.htm#000), [Exod.
12:0](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#000)<span
id="vi.ix.III-p63.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5310"></span>[476:5311](2060177.htm#fr_5310) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p63.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p64"></span> [Prov.
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#006)<span id="vi.ix.III-p64.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5311"></span>[476:5312](2060177.htm#fr_5311) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p64.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p65"></span> [Ps. v.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#008)<span id="vi.ix.III-p65.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5312"></span>[476:5313](2060177.htm#fr_5312) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p65.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p66"></span> [Prov. xvi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#003)<span id="vi.ix.III-p66.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5313"></span>[476:5314](2060177.htm#fr_5313) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p67.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p68"></span> [2 Cor. ii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#016)<span id="vi.ix.III-p68.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5314"></span>[476:5315](2060177.htm#fr_5314) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p68.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p69"></span> [2 Cor. iii.
4-6](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#004)<span id="vi.ix.III-p69.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5315"></span>[476:5316](2060177.htm#fr_5315) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p69.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p70"></span> [2 Cor. iv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#007)<span id="vi.ix.III-p70.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5316"></span>[476:5317](2060177.htm#fr_5316) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p70.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p71"></span> [2 Cor.
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#018)<span id="vi.ix.III-p71.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5317"></span>[476:5318](2060177.htm#fr_5317) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p71.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p72"></span> [2 Cor. xii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#011)<span id="vi.ix.III-p72.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5318"></span>[477:5319](2060177.htm#fr_5318) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p72.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p73"></span> S. [Luke v.
8](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#008)<span id="vi.ix.III-p73.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5319"></span>[477:5320](2060177.htm#fr_5319) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p73.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p74"></span> S. [John xv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#005)<span id="vi.ix.III-p74.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5320"></span>[477:5321](2060177.htm#fr_5320) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p74.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p75"></span> S. [John vi.
44](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#044)<span id="vi.ix.III-p75.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5321"></span>[477:5322](2060177.htm#fr_5321) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p76.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p77"></span> [Esther vi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#001)<span id="vi.ix.III-p77.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5322"></span>[477:5323](2060177.htm#fr_5322) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p85.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p86"></span> [Ps. lxxxix.
48](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#048)<span id="vi.ix.III-p86.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5323"></span>[477:5324](2060177.htm#fr_5323) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p86.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p87"></span> [Ezek. xviii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#004)<span id="vi.ix.III-p87.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5324"></span>[478:5325](2060177.htm#fr_5324) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p87.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p88"></span> S. [Matt. viii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#025)<span id="vi.ix.III-p88.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5325"></span>[478:5326](2060177.htm#fr_5325) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p91.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p92"></span> S. [Matt. v.
8](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#008)<span id="vi.ix.III-p92.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5326"></span>[478:5327](2060177.htm#fr_5326) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p92.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p93"></span> [Ps. cxix.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#001)<span id="vi.ix.III-p93.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5327"></span>[478:5328](2060177.htm#fr_5327) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p93.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p94"></span> [Gen.
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#002)<span id="vi.ix.III-p94.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5328"></span>[478:5329](2060177.htm#fr_5328) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p95.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p96"></span> [1 Cor.
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#010)<span id="vi.ix.III-p96.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5329"></span>[478:5330](2060177.htm#fr_5329) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p96.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p97"></span> S. [Matt. vii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#011)<span id="vi.ix.III-p97.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5330"></span>[478:5331](2060177.htm#fr_5330) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p97.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p98"></span> [Gen. xvii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#001)<span id="vi.ix.III-p98.1"></span>
sq.

<span id="fn_5331"></span>[479:5332](2060177.htm#fr_5331) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p98.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p99"></span> [Ex. xxxiii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#020)<span id="vi.ix.III-p99.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5332"></span>[479:5333](2060177.htm#fr_5332) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p99.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p100"></span> [1 Tim.
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#017), [1 Tim.
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#016)<span
id="vi.ix.III-p100.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5333"></span>[479:5334](2060177.htm#fr_5333) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p100.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p101"></span> [John
1.18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018)<span
id="vi.ix.III-p101.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5334"></span>[479:5335](2060177.htm#fr_5334) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p102.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p103"></span> [1 Cor. iv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#008)<span id="vi.ix.III-p103.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5335"></span>[479:5336](2060177.htm#fr_5335) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p103.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p104"></span> [Song of Sol.
4.7](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#007)<span
id="vi.ix.III-p104.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5336"></span>[479:5337](2060177.htm#fr_5336) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p104.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p105"></span> [Phil. ii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#015)<span id="vi.ix.III-p105.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5337"></span>[479:5338](2060177.htm#fr_5337) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p105.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p106"></span> [1 John iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#002)<span id="vi.ix.III-p106.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5338"></span>[479:5339](2060177.htm#fr_5338) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p107.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p108"></span> See S. Aug. De Gest. Pelag. § 16. The
widow was Juliana, mother to Demetrias (to whom Jerome addressed his
Letter CXXX. “On the keeping of Virginity”). Pelagius’ letter to
Demetrias is found in Jerome’s works (Ed. Vall.), vol. xi. col. 15.

<span id="fn_5339"></span>[479:5340](2060177.htm#fr_5339) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p108.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p109"></span> The whole passage, as quoted by
Augustin, runs as follows: “May piety find with thee a place which it
has never found elsewhere. May truth, which no one now knows, be thy
household friend; and the law of God, which is despised by almost all
men, be honoured by thee alone.” “How happy, how blessed art thou, if
that justice which we are to believe exists only in heaven is found with
thee alone upon earth.” Then follow the words quoted above.

<span id="fn_5340"></span>[479:5341](2060177.htm#fr_5340) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p109.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p110"></span> S. [Luke xviii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#011)<span id="vi.ix.III-p110.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5341"></span>[480:5342](2060177.htm#fr_5341) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p110.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p111"></span> [Prov. xiii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#008)<span id="vi.ix.III-p111.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5342"></span>[480:5343](2060177.htm#fr_5342) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p111.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p112"></span> [Isa.
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#014)<span
id="vi.ix.III-p112.1"></span>. Spoken of the King of Babylon.

<span id="fn_5343"></span>[480:5344](2060177.htm#fr_5343) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p112.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p113"></span> [Ps. xxxviii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#007)<span id="vi.ix.III-p113.1"></span>.
Vulg.

<span id="fn_5344"></span>[480:5345](2060177.htm#fr_5344) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p113.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p114"></span> [Psa.
38.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#005)<span
id="vi.ix.III-p114.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5345"></span>[480:5346](2060177.htm#fr_5345) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p114.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p115"></span> [Ps. cxliii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#002)<span id="vi.ix.III-p115.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5346"></span>[480:5347](2060177.htm#fr_5346) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p115.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p116"></span> [Psa.
143.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa143.htm#004)<span
id="vi.ix.III-p116.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5347"></span>[480:5348](2060177.htm#fr_5347) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p116.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p117"></span> [Ps. cxvi.
11](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#011)<span id="vi.ix.III-p117.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5348"></span>[480:5349](2060177.htm#fr_5348) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p117.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p118"></span> [Rom. iii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#004)<span id="vi.ix.III-p118.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5349"></span>[480:5350](2060177.htm#fr_5349) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p118.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p119"></span> [Is. vi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#005)<span id="vi.ix.III-p119.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5350"></span>[480:5351](2060177.htm#fr_5350) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p119.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p120"></span> [Ps. cxx.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#003)<span id="vi.ix.III-p120.1"></span>.
Vulg.

<span id="fn_5351"></span>[480:5352](2060177.htm#fr_5351) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p120.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p121"></span> [James iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#002)<span id="vi.ix.III-p121.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5352"></span>[480:5353](2060177.htm#fr_5352) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p121.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p122"></span> [Ps. xxii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#002)<span id="vi.ix.III-p122.1"></span>;
Sept. and Vulgate. S. [Matt xxvii.
46](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#046)<span id="vi.ix.III-p122.2"></span>,
R.V., “and from the words of my roaring.”

<span id="fn_5353"></span>[480:5354](2060177.htm#fr_5353) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p122.3"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p123"></span> S. [Luke xxiii.
46](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#046)<span id="vi.ix.III-p123.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5354"></span>[480:5355](2060177.htm#fr_5354) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p123.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p124"></span> S. [Luke xxiii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#034)<span id="vi.ix.III-p124.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5355"></span>[480:5356](2060177.htm#fr_5355) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p124.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p125"></span> S. [Matt. xi.
25](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#025)<span id="vi.ix.III-p125.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5356"></span>[480:5357](2060177.htm#fr_5356) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p126.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p127"></span> [Ps. xxi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#001)<span id="vi.ix.III-p127.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5357"></span>[481:5358](2060177.htm#fr_5357) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p128.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p129"></span> S. [Luke xviii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#013)<span id="vi.ix.III-p129.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5358"></span>[481:5359](2060177.htm#fr_5358) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p129.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p130"></span> [Is. iii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#012)<span id="vi.ix.III-p130.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5359"></span>[481:5360](2060177.htm#fr_5359) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p132.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p133"></span> The grandfather of the Triumvir, born
<span class="c17"><span id="vi.ix.III-p133.1"></span>b.c.</span> 142,
died in the civil conflict excited by Marius, <span class="c17"><span
id="vi.ix.III-p133.2"></span>b.c.</span> 87.

<span id="fn_5360"></span>[481:5361](2060177.htm#fr_5360) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p139.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p140"></span> [Tit. iii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#010)<span id="vi.ix.III-p140.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5361"></span>[482:5362](2060177.htm#fr_5361) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p144.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p145"></span> [Rom. v.
14](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#014)<span id="vi.ix.III-p145.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5362"></span>[482:5363](2060177.htm#fr_5362) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p145.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p146"></span> Cyp. Ep. 64<span
id="vi.ix.III-p146.1"></span> (al. 59). S. Augustine preaching at
Carthage on June 27, 413, quoted the same letter, which was a Synodical
letter of <span class="c17"><span
id="vi.ix.III-p146.2"></span>a.d.</span> 253. See Bright’s Anti-Pelagian
Treatises, Introduction, p. xxi.

<span id="fn_5363"></span>[482:5364](2060177.htm#fr_5363) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p147.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p148"></span> Marcellinus was the lay imperial
commissioner appointed to superintend the discussion between the
Catholics and Donatists at the Council of Carthage, <span
class="c17"><span id="vi.ix.III-p148.1"></span>a.d.</span> 411. In 413
Heraclian, governor of Africa, revolted against Honorius, the Emperor,
and invaded Italy. The enterprise failed, and on his return to Africa
the promoter of it was put to death. The Donatists, called by Jerome
“heretics,” are supposed to have accused Marcellinus of taking part in
the rebellion. He was executed in 414.

<span id="fn_5364"></span>[482:5365](2060177.htm#fr_5364) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p148.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p149"></span> “On the Deserts and Remission of Sins,
and the Baptism of Infants,” in three books, the earliest of S.
Augustin’s Anti-Pelagian treatises. It was composed in reply to a letter
from his friend Marcellinus, who was harassed by Pelagianising
disputants. See S. Aug. “De Gest. Pel.” § 25.

<span id="fn_5365"></span>[482:5366](2060177.htm#fr_5365) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p149.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p150"></span> S. [John iii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#003)<span id="vi.ix.III-p150.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5366"></span>[482:5367](2060177.htm#fr_5366) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p150.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p151"></span> The “De Spiritu et Littera.”
Marcellinus found a difficulty in Augustin’s view of the question of
sinlessness. See Bright’s Anti-Pelagian Treatises, Introduction, p. xix.

<span id="fn_5367"></span>[482:5368](2060177.htm#fr_5367) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p151.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p152"></span> Whether he who was made Bishop of
Arles, in 429, is disputed. The treatise was the “De Natura et Gratia,”
written early in 415.

<span id="fn_5368"></span>[482:5369](2060177.htm#fr_5368) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p152.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p153"></span> Sat. i. 10.

<span id="fn_5369"></span>[482:5370](2060177.htm#fr_5369) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p153.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p154"></span> *Or,* better positions have been
occupied.

<span id="fn_5370"></span>[483:5371](2060177.htm#fr_5370) <span
id="vi.ix.III-p154.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ix.III-p155"></span> Origen held the pre-existence of
souls, endowed with free will, and supposed their condition in this
world to be the result of their conduct in their previous state of
probation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Prefaces.](2060178)
