[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2060008)  [Next](2060010) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.VI"></span>

<span id="iv.VI-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="iv.VI-p1.1"></span>VI.—<span class="c17"><span
id="iv.VI-p1.2"></span>Character and Influence of Jerome.</span></span>

<span id="iv.VI-p2"></span>This Introduction must be concluded with a
few words on the character and influence of Jerome, which are taken from
the article upon him in the *Dictionary of Christian Biography*. He was
vain and unable to bear rivals, extremely sensitive as to the estimation
in which he was held by his contemporaries, and especially by the
Bishops; passionate and resentful, but at times becoming suddenly
placable; scornful and violent in controversy; kind to the weak and the
poor; respectful in his dealings with women; entirely without avarice;
extraordinarily diligent in work, and nobly tenacious of the main
objects to which he devoted his life. There was, however, something of
monkish cowardice in his asceticism, and his influence was not felt by
the strong.

<span id="iv.VI-p3"></span>His influence grew through his life and
increased after his death. If we may use a scriptural phrase which has
sometimes been applied to such influence, “He lived and reigned for a
thousand years.” His writings contain the whole spirit of the Church of
the Middle Ages, its monasticism, its contrast of sacred things with
profane, its credulity and superstition, its value for relics, its
subjection to hierarchical authority, its dread of heresy, its passion
for pilgrimages. To the society which was thus in a great measure formed
by him, his Bible was the greatest boon which could have been given. But
he founded no school and had no inspiring power; there was no courage or
width of view in his spiritual legacy such as could break through the
fatal circle of bondage to received authority which was closing round
mankind. As Thierry says in the last words of his work on St. Jerome,
“There is no continuation of his work; a few more letters of Augustin
and Paulinus, and night falls over the West.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chronological Tables of the Life and...](2060010)
