[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2060198)  [Next](2060200) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.iii.x"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.x-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vii.iii.x-p1.1"></span>Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and the Song of
Songs.</span>

<span id="vii.iii.x-p2"></span>Dedicated to Chromatius and Heliodorus,
<span class="c17"><span id="vii.iii.x-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 393. The
Preface is important as showing the help given to Jerome by his friends,
the rapidity of his work, and his view of the Apocrypha. We give the two
chief passages.

<span id="vii.iii.x-p3"></span>It is well that my letter should couple
those who are coupled in the episcopate; and that I should not separate
on paper those who are bound in one by the law of Christ. I would have
written the commentaries on Hosea, Amos, Zechariah, and the Kings, which
you ask of me, if I had not been prevented by illness. You give me
comfort by the supplies you send me; you support my secretaries and
copyists, so that the efforts of all my powers may be given to you. And
then all at once comes a thick crowd of people with all sorts of
demands, as if it was just that I should neglect your hunger and work
for others, or as if, in the matter of giving and receiving, I had a
debt to any one but you. And so, though I am broken by a long illness,
yet, not to be altogether silent and dumb amongst you this year, I have
dedicated to you three days’ work, that is to say, the translation of
the three books of Solomon.

<span id="vii.iii.x-p4"></span>After speaking of the books of the Wisdom
of Solomon and Ecclesiasticus, which were sent at the same time, the
Preface continues:

<span id="vii.iii.x-p5"></span>As, then, the Church reads Judith, Tobit,
and the books of Maccabees, but does not admit them among the canonical
Scriptures, so let it read these two volumes for the edification of the
people, not to give authority to doctrines of the Church. If any one is
better pleased with the edition of the Seventy, there it is, long since
corrected by me. For it is not our aim in producing the new to destroy
the old. And yet if our friend reads carefully, he will find that our
version is the more intelligible, for it has not turned sour by being
poured three times over into different vessels, but has been drawn
straight from the press, and stored in a clean jar, and has thus
preserved its own flavour.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah.](2060200)
