[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2060165)  [Next](2060167) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p1"></span> <span id="page_319">p. 319</span> <span
id="vi.iv-Page_319"></span><span class="c14"><span
id="vi.iv-p1.1"></span>The Dialogue Against the Luciferians.</span>

<span id="vi.iv-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="vi.iv-p3"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iv-p3.1"></span>Introduction.</span>

<span id="vi.iv-p4"></span>This Dialogue was written about 379, seven
years after the death of Lucifer, and very soon after Jerome’s return
from his hermit life in the desert of Chalcis. Though he received
ordination from Paulinus, who had been consecrated by Lucifer, he had no
sympathy with Lucifer’s narrower views, as he shows plainly in this
Dialogue. Lucifer, who was bishop of Cagliari in Sardinia, first came
into prominent notice about <span class="c17"><span
id="vi.iv-p4.1"></span>a.d.</span> 354, when great efforts were being
made to procure a condemnation of S. Athanasius by the Western bishops.
He energetically took up the cause of the saint, and at his own request
was sent by Liberius, bishop of Rome, in company with the priest
Pancratius and the deacon Hilarius, on a mission to the Emperor
Constantius. The emperor granted a Council, which met at Milan in <span
class="c17"><span id="vi.iv-p4.2"></span>a.d.</span> 354. Lucifer
distinguished himself by resisting a proposition to condemn Athanasius,
and did not hesitate to oppose the emperor with much violence. In
consequence of this he was sent into exile from <span class="c17"><span
id="vi.iv-p4.3"></span>a.d.</span> 355 to <span class="c17"><span
id="vi.iv-p4.4"></span>a.d.</span> 361, the greater portion of which
time was spent at Eleutheropolis in Palestine, though he afterwards
removed to the Thebaid. It was at this time that his polemical writings
appeared, the tone and temper of which is indicated by the mere titles
*De Regibus Apostaticis* (of Apostate Kings), *De non Conveniendo cum
Hæreticis, etc*. (of not holding communion with heretics). On the death
of Constantius in 361, Julian permitted the exiled bishops to return;
but Lucifer instead of going to Alexandria where a Council was to be
held under the presidency of Athanasius for the healing of a schism in
the Catholic party at Antioch (some of which held to Meletius, while
others followed Eustathius), preferred to go straight to Antioch. There
he ordained Paulinus, the leader of the latter section, as bishop of the
Church. Eusebius of Vercellæ soon arrived with the synodal letters of
the Council of Alexandria, but, finding himself thus anticipated, and
shrinking from a collision with his friend, he retired immediately.
Lucifer stayed, and “declared that he would not hold communion with
Eusebius or any who adopted the moderate policy of the Alexandrian
Council. By this Council it had been determined that actual Arians, if
they renounced their heresy, should be pardoned, but not invested with
ecclesiastical functions; and that those bishops who had merely
consented to Arianism should remain undisturbed. It was this latter
concession which offended Lucifer, and he became henceforth the champion
of the principle that no one who had yielded to any compromise whatever
with Arianism should be allowed to hold an ecclesiastical office.” He
was thus brought into antagonism with Athanasius himself, who, it has
been seen, presided at Alexandria. Eventually he returned to his see in
Sardinia where, according to Jerome’s Chronicle, he died in 371.
Luciferianism became extinct in the beginning of the following century,
if not earlier. It hardly appears to have been formed into a separate
organization, though an appeal was made to the emperor by some
Luciferian presbyters about the year 384, and both Ambrose and Augustine
speak of him as having fallen into the schism.

<span id="vi.iv-p5"></span>The argument of the Dialogue may be thus
stated. It has been pointed out above that Lucifer of Cagliari, who had
been banished from his see in the reign of Constantius because of his
adherence to the cause of Athanasius, had, on the announcement of
toleration at the accession of Julian (361), gone to Antioch and
consecrated Paulinus a bishop. There were then three bishops of Antioch,
Dorotheus the Arian (who had succeeded Euzoius in 376), Meletius who,
though an Athanasian in opinion, had been consecrated by Arians or
Semi-Arians, and Paulinus; besides Vitalis, bishop of a congregation of
Apollinarians. Lucifer, in the earnestness of his anti-Arian opinion,
refused to acknowledge as bishops those who had come over from Arianism,
though he accepted the laymen who had been baptized by Arian bishops.
This opinion led to the Luciferian schism, and forms the subject of the
Dialogue.

<span id="vi.iv-p6"></span>The point urged by Orthodoxus throughout is
that, since the Luciferian accepts as valid the baptism conferred by
Arian bishops, it is inconsistent in him not to acknowledge the bishops
who have repented of their Arian opinions. The Luciferian at first (2)
in his eagerness, declares the Arians to be no better than heathen; but
he sees that he has gone too far, and retracts this opinion. Still it is
one thing, he says, (3) to admit a penitent neophyte, another to admit a
man to be bishop and celebrate the Eucharist. We do not wish, he says
(4) to preclude individuals who have fallen from repentance. And we,
replies Orthodoxus, by admitting the bishops save not them only but
their flocks also. “The salt,” says the Luciferian (5), “which has lost
its savour cannot be salted,” and, “What communion has Christ with
Belial?” But this, it is answered (6), would prove that Arians could not
confer baptism at all. Yes, says the objector, they are like John the
Baptist, whose baptism needed to be followed by that of Christ. But, it
is replied, the bishop gives Christ’s baptism and confers the Holy
Spirit. The confirmation which follows (9) is rather a custom of the
churches than the necessary means of grace.

<span id="vi.iv-p7"></span>The argument is felt to be approaching to a
philosophical logomachy (10, 11), but it is resumed by the Luciferian.
There is a real difference, he says (12), between the man who in his
simplicity accepts baptism from an Arian bishop, and the bishop himself
who understands the heresy. Yet both, it is replied (13), when they are
penitent, should be received.

<span id="vi.iv-p8"></span>At this point (14) the Luciferian yields. But
he wishes to be assured that what Orthodoxus recommends has been really
the practice of the Church. This leads to a valuable chapter of Church
history. Orthodoxus recalls the victories of the Church, which the
Luciferians speak of as corrupt (15). The shame is that, though they
have the true creed, they have too little faith. He then describes (17,
18) how the orthodox bishops were beguiled into accepting the creed of
Ariminum, but afterwards saw their error (19). “The world groaned to
find itself Arian.” They did all that was possible to set things right.
Why should they not be received, as all but the authors of heresy had
been received at Nicæa? (20) Lucifer who was a good shepherd, and Hilary
the Deacon, in separating their own small body into a sect have left the
rest a prey to the wolf (20, 21). The wheat and tares must grow together
(22). This has been the principle of the Church (23), as shown by
Scripture (24) and Apostolic custom, and even Cyprian, when he wished
penitent heretics to be re-baptized (25), could not prevail. Even Hilary
by receiving baptism from the Church which always has re-admitted
heretics in repentance (26, 27) acknowledges this principle. In that
Church and its divisions and practice it is our duty to abide.

<span id="vi.iv-p9"></span><span id="page_320">p. 320</span> <span
id="vi.iv-Page_320"></span>1. It happened not long ago that a follower
of Lucifer had a dispute with a son of the Church. His loquacity was
odious and the language he employed most abusive. For he declared that
the world belonged to the devil, and, as is commonly said by them at the
present day, that the Church was turned into a brothel. His opponent on
the other hand, with reason indeed, but without due regard to time and
place, urged that Christ did not die in vain, and that it was for
something more than a Sardinian cloak of skins <span
id="fr_4048"></span>[4049](#fn_4048) that the Son of God came down from
heaven. To be brief, the dispute was not settled when night interrupted
the debate, and the lighting of the street-lamps gave the signal for the
assembly to disperse. The combatants therefore withdrew, almost spitting
in each other’s faces, an arrangement having been previously made by the
audience for a meeting in a quiet porch at daybreak. Thither,
accordingly, they all came, and it was resolved that the words of both
speakers should be taken down by reporters.

<span id="vi.iv-p11"></span>2. When all were seated, Helladius the
Luciferian said, I want an answer first to my question. Are the Arians
Christians or not?

<span id="vi.iv-p12"></span>Orthodoxus. I answer with another question,
Are all heretics Christians?

<span id="vi.iv-p13"></span>L. If you call a man a heretic you deny that
he is a Christian.

<span id="vi.iv-p14"></span>O. No heretics, then, are Christians.

<span id="vi.iv-p15"></span>L. I told you so before.

<span id="vi.iv-p16"></span>O. If they are not Christ’s, they belong to
the devil.

<span id="vi.iv-p17"></span>L. No one doubts that.

<span id="vi.iv-p18"></span>O. But if they belong to the devil, it makes
no difference whether they are heretics or heathen.

<span id="vi.iv-p19"></span>L. I do not dispute the point.

<span id="vi.iv-p20"></span>O. We are then agreed that we must speak of
a heretic as we would of a heathen.

<span id="vi.iv-p21"></span>L. Just so.

<span id="vi.iv-p22"></span>O. Now it is decided that heretics are
heathen, put any question you please.

<span id="vi.iv-p23"></span>L. What I wanted to elicit by my question
has been expressly stated, namely, that heretics are not Christians. Now
comes the inference. If the Arians are heretics, and all heretics are
heathen, the Arians are heathen too. But if the Arians are heathen and
it is beyond dispute that the church has no communion with the Arians,
that is with the heathen, it is clear that your church which welcomes
bishops from the Arians, that is from the heathen, receives priests of
the Capitol <span id="fr_4049"></span>[4050](#fn_4049) rather than
bishops, and accordingly it ought more correctly to be called the
synagogue of Anti-Christ than the Church of Christ.

<span id="vi.iv-p25"></span>O. Lo! what the prophet said is
fulfilled: <span id="fr_4050"></span>[4051](#fn_4050) “They have digged
a pit before me, they have fallen into the midst thereof themselves.”

<span id="vi.iv-p27"></span>L. How so?

<span id="vi.iv-p28"></span>O. If the Arians are, as you say, heathen,
and the assemblies of the Arians are the devil’s camp, how is it that
you receive a person who has been baptized in the devil’s camp?

<span id="vi.iv-p29"></span>L. I do receive him, but as a penitent.

<span id="vi.iv-p30"></span>O. The fact is you don’t know what you are
saying. Does any one receive a penitent heathen?

<span id="vi.iv-p31"></span>L. In my simplicity I replied when we began
that all heretics are heathen. But the question was a captious one, and
you shall have the full credit of victory in the first point. I will now
proceed to the second and maintain that a layman coming from the Arians
ought to be received if penitent, but not a cleric.

<span id="vi.iv-p32"></span>O. And yet, if you concede me the first
point, the second is mine too.

<span id="vi.iv-p33"></span>L. Show me how it comes to be yours.

<span id="vi.iv-p34"></span>O. Don’t you know that the clergy and laity
have only one Christ, and that there is not one God of converts and
another of bishops? Why then should not he who receives laymen receive
clerics also?

<span id="vi.iv-p35"></span>L. There is a difference between shedding
tears for sin, and handling the body of Christ; there is a difference
between lying prostrate at the feet of the brethren, and from the high
altar administering the Eucharist to the people. It is one thing to
lament over the past, another to abandon sin and live the glorified life
in the Church. You who yesterday impiously declared the Son of God to be
a creature, you who every day, worse than a Jew, were wont to cast the
stones of blasphemy at Christ, you whose hands are full of blood, whose
pen was a soldier’s spear, do you, the convert of a single hour, come
into the Church as an adulterer might come to a virgin? If you repent of
your sin, abandon your priestly functions: if you are shameless in your
sin, remain what you were.

<span id="vi.iv-p36"></span>O. You are quite a rhetorician, and fly from
the thicket of controversy to the open fields of declamation. But, I
entreat you, refrain from common-places, and return to the ground and
the lines marked out; afterwards, if you like, we will take a wider
range.

<span id="vi.iv-p37"></span>L. There is no declamation in the case; my
indignation is more than I can bear. Make what statements you please,
argue as you please, you will never convince me that a penitent bishop
should be treated like a penitent layman.

<span id="vi.iv-p38"></span><span id="page_321">p. 321</span> <span
id="vi.iv-Page_321"></span>O. Since you put the whole thing in a
nutshell and obstinately cling to your position, that the case of the
bishop is different from that of the layman, I will do what you wish,
and I shall not be sorry to avail myself of the opportunity you offer
and come to close quarters. Explain why you receive a layman coming from
the Arians, but do not receive a bishop.

<span id="vi.iv-p39"></span>L. I receive a layman who confesses that he
has erred; and the Lord willeth not the death of a sinner, but rather
that he should repent.

<span id="vi.iv-p40"></span>O. Receive then also a bishop who, as well
as the layman, confesses that he has erred, and it still holds good that
the Lord willeth not the death of a sinner, but rather that he should
repent.

<span id="vi.iv-p41"></span>L. If he confesses his error why does he
continue a bishop? Let him lay aside his <span
id="fr_4051"></span>[4052](#fn_4051) episcopal functions, and I grant
pardon to the penitent.

<span id="vi.iv-p43"></span>O. I will answer you in your own words. If a
layman confesses his error, how is it he continues a layman? Let him lay
aside his lay-priesthood, that is, his baptism, and I grant pardon to
the penitent. For it is written <span
id="fr_4052"></span>[4053](#fn_4052) “He made us to be a kingdom, to be
priests unto his God and Father.” And again, <span
id="fr_4053"></span>[4054](#fn_4053) “A holy nation, a royal priesthood,
an elect race.” Everything which is forbidden to a Christian, is
forbidden to both bishop and layman. He who does penance condemns his
former life. If a penitent bishop may not continue what he was, neither
may a penitent layman remain in that state on account of which he
confesses himself a penitent.

<span id="vi.iv-p46"></span>L. We receive the laity, because no one will
be induced to change, if he knows he must be baptized again. And then,
if they are rejected, we become the cause of their destruction.

<span id="vi.iv-p47"></span>O. By receiving a layman you save a single
soul: and I in receiving a bishop unite to the Church, I will not say
the people of one city, but the whole <span
id="fr_4054"></span>[4055](#fn_4054) province of which he is the head;
if I drive him away, he will drag down many with him to ruin. Wherefore
I beseech you to apply the same reason which you think you have for
receiving the few to the salvation of the whole world. But if you are
not satisfied with this, if you are so hard, or rather so unreasonably
unmerciful as to think him who gave baptism an enemy of Christ, though
you account him who received it a son, we do not so contradict
ourselves: we either receive a bishop as well as the people which is
constituted as a Christian people by him, or if we do not receive a
bishop, we know that we must also reject his people.

<span id="vi.iv-p49"></span>5. L. Pray, have you not read what is said
concerning the bishops, <span id="fr_4055"></span>[4056](#fn_4055) “Ye
are the salt of the earth: but if the salt have lost its savour,
wherewith shall it be salted? It is thenceforth good for nothing, but to
be cast out and trodden under foot of man.” And then there is the fact
that the priest <span id="fr_4056"></span>[4057](#fn_4056) intercedes
with God for the sinful people, while there is no one to entreat for the
priest. Now these two passages of Scripture tend to the same conclusion.
For as salt seasons all food and nothing is so pleasant as to please the
palate without it: so the bishop is the seasoning of the whole world and
of his own Church, and if he lose his savour through the denial of
truth, or through heresy, or lust, or, to comprehend all in one word,
through sin of any kind, by what other can he be seasoned, when he was
the seasoning of all? The priest, we know, offers his oblation for the
layman, lays his hand upon him when submissive, invokes the return of
the Holy Spirit, and thus, after inviting the prayers of the people,
reconciles to the altar him who had been delivered to Satan for the
destruction of the flesh that the spirit might he saved; nor does he
restore one member to health until all the members have wept together
with him. For a father easily pardons his son, when the mother entreats
for her offspring. If then it is by the priestly order that a penitent
layman is restored to the Church, and pardon follows where sorrow has
gone before, it is clear that a priest who has been removed from his
order cannot be restored to the place he has forfeited, because either
he will be a penitent and then he cannot be a priest, or if he continues
to hold office he cannot be brought back to the Church by penitential
discipline. Will you dare to spoil the savour of the Church with the
salt which has lost its savour? Will you replace at the altar the man
who having been cast out ought to lie in the mire and be trodden under
foot by all men? What then will become of the Apostle’s command, <span
id="fr_4057"></span>[4058](#fn_4057) “The bishop must be blameless as
God’s steward”? And again, <span id="fr_4058"></span>[4059](#fn_4058)
“But let a man prove himself, and so let him come.” What becomes of our
Lord’s intimation, <span id="fr_4059"></span>[4060](#fn_4059) “Neither
cast your pearls before the swine”? But if you understand the words as a
general admonition, how much more must care be exercised in the case of
priests when so much precaution is taken where the laity are
concerned? <span id="fr_4060"></span>[4061](#fn_4060) “Depart, I pray
you,” says the Lord by Moses, “from the tents of these wicked men, and
touch nothing of theirs, lest ye be consumed in all their sins.” And
<span id="page_322">p. 322</span> <span id="vi.iv-Page_322"></span>again
in the Minor Prophets, <span id="fr_4061"></span>[4062](#fn_4061) “Their
sacrifices shall be unto them as the bread of mourners; all that eat
thereof shall be polluted.” And in the Gospel the Lord says, <span
id="fr_4062"></span>[4063](#fn_4062) “The lamp of the body is the eye:
if therefore thine eye be single, thy whole body shall be full of
light.” For when the bishop preaches the true faith the darkness is
scattered from the hearts of all. And he gives the reason, <span
id="fr_4063"></span>[4064](#fn_4063) “Neither do men light a lamp, and
put it under the bushel, but on the stand; and it shineth unto all that
are in the house.” That is, God’s motive for lighting the fire of His
knowledge in the bishop is that he may not shine for himself only, but
for the common benefit. And in the next sentence <span
id="fr_4064"></span>[4065](#fn_4064) “If,” says he, “thine eye be evil,
thy whole body shall be full of darkness. If therefore the light that is
in thee be darkness, how great is the darkness!” And rightly; for since
the bishop is appointed in the Church that he may restrain the people
from error, how great will the error of the people be when he himself
who teaches errs. How can he remit sins, who is himself a sinner? How
can an impious man make a man holy? How shall the light enter into me,
when my eye is blind? O misery! Antichrist’s disciple governs the Church
of Christ. And what are we to think of the words, <span
id="fr_4065"></span>[4066](#fn_4065) “No man can serve two masters”? And
that too <span id="fr_4066"></span>[4067](#fn_4066) “What communion hath
light and darkness? And what concord hath Christ with Belial?” In the
old testament we read, <span id="fr_4067"></span>[4068](#fn_4067) “No
man that hath a blemish shall come nigh to offer the offerings of the
Lord.” And again, <span id="fr_4068"></span>[4069](#fn_4068) “Let the
priests who come nigh to the Lord their God be clean, lest haply the
Lord forsake them.” And in the same place, <span
id="fr_4069"></span>[4070](#fn_4069) “And when they draw nigh to
minister in holy things, let them not bring sin upon themselves, lest
they die.” And there are many other passages which it would be an
endless task to detail, and which I omit for the sake of brevity. For it
is not the number of proofs that avails, but their weight. And all this
proves that you with a little leaven have corrupted the whole lump of
the Church, and receive the Eucharist to-day from the hand of one whom
yesterday you loathed like an idol.

<span id="vi.iv-p65"></span>6. O. Your memory has served you, and you
have certainly given us at great length many quotations from the sacred
books: but after going all round the wood, you are caught in my
hunting-nets. Let the case be as you would have it, that an Arian bishop
is the enemy of Christ, let him be the salt that has lost its savour,
let him be a lamp without flame, let him be an eye without a pupil: no
doubt your argument will take you thus far—that he cannot salt another
who himself has no salt: a blind man cannot enlighten others, nor set
them on fire when his own light has gone out. But why, when you swallow
food which he has seasoned, do you reproach the seasoned with being
saltless? Your Church is bright with his flame, and do you accuse his
lamp of being extinguished? He gives you eyes, and are you blind?
Wherefore, I pray you, either give him the power of sacrificing since
you approve his baptism, or reject his baptism if you do not think him a
priest. For it is impossible that he who is holy in baptism should be a
sinner at the altar.

<span id="vi.iv-p66"></span>L. But when I receive a lay penitent, it is
with laying on of hands, and invocation of the Holy Spirit, for I know
that the Holy Spirit cannot be given by heretics.

<span id="vi.iv-p67"></span>O. All the paths of your propositions lead
to the same meeting-point, and it is with you as with the frightened
deer—while you fly from the feathers fluttering in the wind, you become
entangled in the strongest of nets. For seeing that a man, baptized in
the name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost, becomes a temple
of the Lord, and that while the old abode is destroyed a new shrine is
built for the Trinity, how can you say that sins can be remitted among
the Arians without the coming of the Holy Ghost? How is a soul purged
from its former stains which has not the Holy Ghost? For it is not mere
water which washes the soul, but it is itself first purified by the
Spirit that it may be able to spiritually wash the souls of men. <span
id="fr_4070"></span>[4071](#fn_4070) “The Spirit of the Lord,” says
Moses, “moved upon the face of the waters,” from which it appears that
there is no baptism without the Holy Ghost. Bethesda, the pool in Judea,
could not cure the limbs of those who suffered from bodily weakness
without the advent of an angel, <span
id="fr_4071"></span>[4072](#fn_4071) and do you venture to bring me a
soul washed with simple water, as though it had just come from the bath?
Our Lord Jesus Christ Himself, of whom it is less correct to say that He
was cleansed by washing than that by the washing of Himself He cleansed
all waters, no sooner raised His head from the stream than He received
the Holy Ghost. Not that He ever was without the Holy Ghost, inasmuch as
He was born in the flesh through the Holy Ghost; but in order to prove
that to be the true baptism by which the Holy Ghost comes. So then if an
Arian cannot give the Holy Spirit, he cannot even baptize, because there
is no baptism of the Church without the Holy Spirit. And you, when you
receive a person baptized by an <span id="page_323">p. 323</span> <span
id="vi.iv-Page_323"></span>Arian and afterwards invoke the Holy Ghost,
ought either to baptize him, because without the Holy Ghost he could not
be baptized, or, if he was baptized in the Spirit, you must not invoke
the Holy Ghost for your convert who received Him at the time of baptism.

<span id="vi.iv-p70"></span>7. L. Pray tell me, have you not read <span
id="fr_4072"></span>[4073](#fn_4072) in the Acts of the Apostles that
those who had already been baptized by John, on their saying in reply to
the Apostle’s question that they had not even heard what the Holy Ghost
was, afterwards obtained the Holy Ghost? Whence it is clear that it is
possible to be baptized, and yet not to have the Holy Ghost.

<span id="vi.iv-p72"></span>O. I do not think that those who form our
audience are so ignorant of the sacred books that many words are needed
to settle this little question. But before I say anything in support of
my assertion, listen while I point out what confusion, upon your view,
is introduced into Scripture. What do we mean by saying that John in his
baptism could not give the Holy Spirit to others, yet gave him to
Christ? And who is that John? <span id="fr_4073"></span>[4074](#fn_4073)
“The voice of one crying in the wilderness, Make ye ready the way of the
Lord, make his paths straight.” He who used to say, <span
id="fr_4074"></span>[4075](#fn_4074) “Behold the Lamb of God, which
taketh away the sins of the world”: I say too little, he who from his
mother’s womb cried out, <span id="fr_4075"></span>[4076](#fn_4075) “And
whence is this to me that the mother of my Lord should come unto me,”
did he not give the Holy Ghost? And did <span
id="fr_4076"></span>[4077](#fn_4076) Ananias give him to Paul? It
perhaps looks like boldness in me to prefer him to all other men. Hear
then the words of our Lord, <span id="fr_4077"></span>[4078](#fn_4077)
“Among them that are born of women there hath not arisen a greater than
John the Baptist.” For no prophet had the good fortune both to announce
the coming of Christ, and to point Him out with the finger. And what
necessity is there for me to dwell upon the praises of so illustrious a
man when God the Father even calls him an angel? <span
id="fr_4078"></span>[4079](#fn_4078) “Behold, I send my messenger
(angel) before thy face, who shall prepare thy way before thee.” He must
have been an angel who after lodging in his mother’s womb at once began
to frequent the desert wilds, and while still an infant played with
serpents; who, when his eyes had once gazed on Christ thought nothing
else worth looking at; who exercised his voice, worthy of a messenger of
God, in the words of the Lord, which are sweeter than honey and the
honey-comb. And, to delay my question no further, thus it behooved <span
id="fr_4079"></span>[4080](#fn_4079) the Forerunner of the Lord to grow
up. Now is it possible that a man of such character and renown did not
give the Holy Ghost, while Cornelius the centurion received Him before
baptism? Tell me, pray, why could he not give Him? You don’t know? Then
listen to the teaching of Scripture: the baptism of John did not so much
consist in the forgiveness of sins as in being a baptism of repentance
for the remission of sins, that is, for a future remission, which was to
follow through the sanctification of Christ. For it is written, <span
id="fr_4080"></span>[4081](#fn_4080) “John came, who baptized in the
wilderness, and preached the baptism of repentance unto remission of
sins.” And soon after, <span id="fr_4081"></span>[4082](#fn_4081) “And
they were baptized of him in the river Jordan, confessing their sins.”
For as he himself preceded Christ as His forerunner, so also his baptism
was the prelude to the Lord’s baptism. <span
id="fr_4082"></span>[4083](#fn_4082) “He that is of the earth,” he said,
“speaketh of the earth; he that cometh from heaven is above all.” And
again, <span id="fr_4083"></span>[4084](#fn_4083) “I indeed baptize you
with water, he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost.” But if John, as
he himself confessed, did not baptize with the Spirit, it follows that
he did not forgive sins either, for no man has his sins remitted without
the Holy Ghost. Or if you contentiously argue that, because the baptism
of John was from heaven, therefore sins were forgiven by it, show me
what more there is for us to get in Christ’s baptism. Because it
forgives sins, it releases from Gehenna. Because it releases from
Gehenna, it is perfect. But no baptism can be called perfect except that
which depends on the cross and resurrection of Christ. Thus, although
John himself said, <span id="fr_4084"></span>[4085](#fn_4084) “He must
increase, but I must decrease,” in your perverse scrupulosity you give
more than is due to the baptism of the servant, and destroy that of the
master to which you leave no more than to the other. What is the drift
of your assertion? Just this—it does not strike you as strange that
those who had been baptized by John, should afterwards by the laying on
of hands receive the Holy Ghost, although it is evident that they did
not obtain even remission of sins apart from the faith which was to
follow. But you who receive a person baptized by the Arians and allow
him to have perfect baptism, after that admission do you invoke the Holy
Ghost as if this were still some slight defect, whereas there is no
baptism of Christ without the Holy Ghost? But I have wandered too far,
and when I might have met my opponent face to face and repelled his
attack, I have only thrown a few light darts from a distance. The
baptism of John was so far imperfect that it is plain they who had been
baptized by him were afterwards baptized with the baptism of Christ. For
thus the history relates, <span id="fr_4085"></span>[4086](#fn_4085)
“And it came to pass that while <span id="page_324">p. 324</span> <span
id="vi.iv-Page_324"></span>Apollos was at Corinth, Paul having passed
through the upper country came to Ephesus, and found certain disciples:
and he said unto them, Did ye receive the Holy Ghost when ye believed?
And they said unto him, Nay, we did not so much as hear whether the Holy
Ghost was given. And he said, Into what then were ye baptized? And they
said, Into John’s baptism. And Paul said, John baptized with the baptism
of repentance, saying unto the people, that they should believe on Him
which should come after him, that is, on Jesus. And when they heard
this, they were baptized into the name of the Lord Jesus: And when Paul
had laid his hands upon them, immediately the Holy Ghost fell on them.”
If then they were baptized with the true and lawful baptism of the
Church, and thus received the Holy Ghost: do you follow the apostles and
baptize those who have not had Christian baptism, and you will be able
to invoke the Holy Ghost.

<span id="vi.iv-p86"></span>8. L. Thirsty men in their dreams eagerly
gulp down the water of the stream, and the more they drink the thirstier
they are. In the same way you appear to me to have searched everywhere
for arguments against the point I raised, and yet to be as far as ever
from being satisfied. Don’t you know that the laying on of hands after
baptism and then the invocation of the Holy Spirit is a custom of the
Churches? Do you demand Scripture proof? You may find it in the Acts of
the Apostles. And even if it did not rest on the authority of Scripture
the consensus of the whole world in this respect would have the force of
a command. For many other observances of the Churches, which are due to
tradition, have acquired the authority of the written law, as for
instance <span id="fr_4086"></span>[4087](#fn_4086) the practice of
dipping the head three times in the laver, and then, after leaving the
water, of <span id="fr_4087"></span>[4088](#fn_4087) tasting mingled
milk and honey in representation of infancy; <span
id="fr_4088"></span>[4089](#fn_4088) and, again, the practices of
standing up in worship on the Lord’s day, and ceasing from fasting every
Pentecost; and there are many other unwritten practices which have won
their place through reason and custom. So you see we follow the practice
of the Church, although it may be clear that a person was baptized
before the Spirit was invoked.

<span id="vi.iv-p90"></span>9. O. I do not deny that it is the practice
of the Churches in the case of those who living far from the greater
towns have been baptized by presbyters and deacons, for the bishop to
visit them, and by the laying on of hands to invoke the Holy Ghost upon
them. But how shall I describe your habit of applying the laws of the
Church to heretics, and of exposing the virgin entrusted to you in the
brothels of harlots? If a bishop lays his hands on men he lays them on
those who have been baptized in the right faith, and who have believed
that the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are three persons, but one
essence. But an Arian has no faith but this (close your ears, my
hearers, that you may not be defiled by words so grossly impious), that
the Father alone is very God, and that Jesus Christ our Saviour is
a <span id="fr_4089"></span>[4090](#fn_4089) creature, and <span
id="fr_4090"></span>[4091](#fn_4090) the Holy Ghost the Servant of both.
How can he then receive the Holy Ghost from the Church, who has not yet
obtained remission of sins? For the Holy Ghost must have a clean abode:
nor will He become a dweller in that temple which has not for its chief
priest the true faith. But if you now ask how it is that a person
baptized in the Church does not receive the Holy Ghost, Whom we declare
to be given in true baptism, except by the hands of the bishop, let me
tell you that our authority for the rule is the fact that after our
Lord’s ascension the Holy Ghost descended upon the Apostles. And in many
places we find it the practice, more by way of honouring the <span
id="fr_4091"></span>[4092](#fn_4091) episcopate than from any compulsory
law. Otherwise, if the Holy Ghost descends only at the bishop’s prayer,
they are greatly to be pitied who in isolated houses, or in forts, or
retired places, after being baptized by the presbyters and deacons have
fallen asleep before the bishop’s visitation. The well-being of a Church
depends upon the dignity of its chief-priest, and unless some
extraordinary and unique functions be assigned to him, we shall have as
many schisms in the Churches as there are priests. Hence it is that
without ordination and the bishop’s license neither presbyter nor deacon
has the power to baptize. And yet, if necessity so be, we know that even
laymen may, and frequently do, baptize. For as a man receives, so too he
can give; for it will hardly <span id="page_325">p. 325</span> <span
id="vi.iv-Page_325"></span>be said that we must believe that the eunuch
whom Philip <span id="fr_4092"></span>[4093](#fn_4092) baptized lacked
the Holy Spirit. The Scripture thus speaks concerning him, “And they
both went down into the water; and Philip baptized him.” And on leaving
the water, “The Holy Spirit fell upon the eunuch.” You may perhaps think
that we ought to set against this the passage in which we read, “Now
when the apostles which were at Jerusalem heard that Samaria had
received the word of God, they sent unto them Peter and John: who, when
they were come down, prayed for them that they might receive the Holy
Ghost: for as yet he was fallen upon none of them.” But why this was,
the context tells us,—“Only they had been baptized into the name of the
Lord Jesus. Then laid they their hands on them, and they received the
Holy Ghost.” And if you here say that you do the same, because the
heretics have not baptized into the Holy Spirit, I must remind you that
Philip was not separated from the Apostles, but belonged to the same
Church and preached the same Lord Jesus Christ: that he was without
question a deacon of those who afterwards laid their hands on his
converts. But when you say that the Arians have not a Church, but a
synagogue, and that their clergy do not worship God but creatures and
idols, how can you maintain that you ought to act upon the same
principle in cases so totally different?

<span id="vi.iv-p95"></span>L. You repel my attack in front with vigour
and firmness: but you are smitten in the rear and leave your back
exposed to the darts. Let us even grant that the Arians have no baptism,
and therefore that the Holy Ghost cannot be given by them, because they
themselves have not yet received remission of sins; this altogether
makes for victory on my side, and all your argumentative wrestling is
but laborious toil to give me the conqueror’s palm. An Arian has no
baptism; how is it then that he has the episcopate? There is not even a
layman among them, how can there be a bishop? I may not receive a
beggar, do you receive a king? You surrender your camp to the enemy, and
are we to reject one of their deserters?

<span id="vi.iv-p96"></span>11. O. If you remember what has been said
you would know that you have been already answered; but in yielding to
the love of contradiction you have wandered from the subject, like those
persons who are talkative rather than eloquent, and who, when they
cannot argue, still continue to wrangle. On the present occasion it is
not my aim to either accuse or defend the Arians, but rather to get
safely past the turning-post of the race, and to maintain that we
receive a bishop for the same reason that you receive a layman. If you
grant forgiveness to the erring, I too pardon the penitent. If he that
baptizes a person into our belief has had no injurious effect upon the
person baptized, it follows that he who consecrates a bishop in the same
faith causes no defilement to the person consecrated. Heresy is subtle,
and therefore the simple-minded are easily deceived. To be deceived is
the common lot of both layman and bishop. But you say, a bishop could
not have been mistaken. The truth is, men are elected to the episcopate
who come from the bosom of Plato and Aristophanes. How many can you find
among them who are not fully instructed in these writers? Indeed all,
whoever they may be, that are ordained at the present day from among the
literate class make it their study not how to seek out the marrow of
Scripture, but how to tickle the ears of the people with the flowers of
rhetoric. We must further add that the Arian heresy goes hand in hand
with the wisdom of the world, and <span
id="fr_4093"></span>[4094](#fn_4093) borrows its streams of argument
from the fountains of Aristotle. And so we will act like children when
they try to outdo one another—whatever you say I will say: what you
assert, I will assert: whatever you deny, I will deny. We allow that an
Arian may baptize; then he must be a bishop. <span
id="fr_4094"></span>[4095](#fn_4094) If we agree that Arian baptism is
invalid, you must reject the layman, and I must not accept the bishop. I
will follow you wherever you go; we shall either stick in the mud
together, or shall get out together.

<span id="vi.iv-p99"></span>12. L. We pardon a layman because, when he
was baptized, he had a sincere impression that he was joining the
Church. He believed and was baptized in accordance with his faith.

<span id="vi.iv-p100"></span>O. That is something new for a man to be
made a Christian by one who is not a Christian. When he joined the
Arians into what faith was he baptized? Of course into that which the
Arians held. If on the other hand we are to suppose that his own faith
was correct, but that he was knowingly baptized by heretics, he does not
deserve the indulgence we grant to the erring. But it is quite absurd to
imagine that, going as a pupil to the master, he understands his art
before he has been taught. Can you suppose that a man who has just
turned from worshipping idols knows Christ better than his teacher does?
If you <span id="page_326">p. 326</span> <span
id="vi.iv-Page_326"></span>say, he sincerely believed in the Father, and
the Son, and the Holy Ghost, and therefore obtained baptism, what, let
me ask, is the meaning of being sincerely ignorant of what one believes?
He sincerely believed. What did he believe? Surely when he heard the
three names, he believed in three Gods, and was an idolater; or by the
three titles he was led to believe in a God with three names, and so
fell into the <span id="fr_4095"></span>[4096](#fn_4095) Sabellian
heresy. Or he was perhaps trained by the Arians to believe that there is
one true God, the Father, but that the Son and the Holy Spirit are
creatures. What else he may have believed, I know not: for we can hardly
think that a man brought up in the Capitol would have learnt the
doctrine of the co-essential Trinity. He would have known in that case
that the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit are not divided in nature, but in
person. He would have known also that the name of Son was implied in
that of Father and the name of Father in that of Son. It is ridiculous
to assert that any one can dispute concerning the faith before he
believes it; that he understands a mystery before he has been initiated;
that the baptizer and the baptized hold different views respecting God.
Besides, it is the custom at baptism to ask, after the confession of
faith in the Trinity, do you believe in Holy Church? Do you believe in
the remission of sins? What Church do you say he believed in? The Church
of the Arians? But they have no Church. In ours? But the man was not
baptized into it: he could not believe in that whereof he was ignorant.

<span id="vi.iv-p102"></span>L. I see that you can prattle cleverly
about each point that I raise; and when we let fly a dart you elude it
by a harangue which serves you for a shield; I will therefore hurl a
single spear which will be strong enough to pierce your defences and the
hail-storm of your words. I won’t allow strength any longer to be
overcome by artifice. Even a layman baptized without the Church, if he
be baptized according to the faith, is received only as a penitent: but
a bishop either does no penance and remains a bishop, or, if he does
penance he ceases to be a bishop. Wherefore we do right both in
welcoming the penitent layman, and in rejecting the bishop, if he wishes
to continue in his office.

<span id="vi.iv-p103"></span>O. An arrow which is discharged from the
tight-drawn bow is not easy to avoid, for it reaches him at whom it was
aimed before the shield can be raised to stop it. On the other hand your
propositions are pointless and therefore cannot pierce an opponent. The
spear then which you have hurled with all your might and about which you
speak such threatening words, I turn aside, as the saying is, with my
little finger. The point in dispute is not merely whether a bishop is
incapable of penitence and a layman capable, but whether a heretic has
received valid baptism. If he has not (and this follows from your
position), how can he be a penitent, before he is a Christian? Show me
that a layman coming from the Arians has valid baptism, and then I will
not deny him penitence. But if he is not a Christian, if he had no
priest to make him a Christian, how can he do penance when he is not yet
a believer?

<span id="vi.iv-p104"></span>14. L. I beseech you lay aside the methods
of the philosophers and let us talk with Christian simplicity; that is,
if you are willing to follow not the logicians, but the Galilean
fishermen. Does it seem right to you that an Arian should be a bishop?

<span id="vi.iv-p105"></span>O. You prove him a bishop because you
receive those he has baptized. And it is here that you are to blame:—Why
are there walls of separation between us when we are at one in faith and
in receiving Arians?

<span id="vi.iv-p106"></span>L. I asked you before not to talk like a
philosopher, but like a Christian.

<span id="vi.iv-p107"></span>O. Do you wish to learn, or to argue?

<span id="vi.iv-p108"></span>L. Of course I argue because I want to know
the reason for what you do.

<span id="vi.iv-p109"></span>O. If you argue, you have already had an
answer. I receive an Arian bishop for the same reason that you receive a
person who is only baptized. If you wish to learn, come over to my side:
for an opponent must be overcome, it is only a disciple who can be
taught.

<span id="vi.iv-p110"></span>L. Before I can be a disciple, I must hear
one preach whom I feel to be my master.

<span id="vi.iv-p111"></span>O. You are not dealing quite fairly: you
wish me to be your teacher on the terms that you may treat me as an
opponent whenever you please. I will teach you therefore in the same
spirit. We agree in faith, we agree in receiving heretics, let us also
be at one in our terms of communion.

<span id="vi.iv-p112"></span>L. That is not teaching, but arguing.

<span id="vi.iv-p113"></span>O. As you ask for peace with a shield in
your hand, I also must carry my olive branch with a sword grafted in it.

<span id="vi.iv-p114"></span>L. I drop my hands in token of submission.
You are conqueror. But in laying down my arms, I ask the meaning of the
oath you force me to take.

<span id="vi.iv-p115"></span>O. Certainly, but first I congratulate you,
and thank Christ my God for your good dispositions which have made you
turn from the <span id="page_327">p. 327</span> <span
id="vi.iv-Page_327"></span>unsavoury teaching of the <span
id="fr_4096"></span>[4097](#fn_4096) Sardinians to that which the whole
world approves as true; and no longer say as some do, <span
id="fr_4097"></span>[4098](#fn_4097) “Help, Lord; for the godly man
teaseth.” By their impious words they make of none effect the cross of
Christ, subject the Son of God to the devil, and would have us now
understand the Lord’s lamentation over sinners to apply to all
men, <span id="fr_4098"></span>[4099](#fn_4098) “What profit is there in
my blood, when I go down to the pit?” But God forbid that our Lord
should have died in vain. <span id="fr_4099"></span>[4100](#fn_4099) The
strong man is bound, and his goods are spoiled. What the Father says is
fulfilled, <span id="fr_4100"></span>[4101](#fn_4100) “Ask of me, and I
will give thee the nations for thine inheritance, and the uttermost
parts of the earth for thy possession.” <span
id="fr_4101"></span>[4102](#fn_4101) “Then the channels of water
appeared, and the foundations of the world were laid bare.” <span
id="fr_4102"></span>[4103](#fn_4102) “In them hath he set a tabernacle
for the sun, and there is nothing hid from the heat thereof.” The
Psalmist fully possessed by God sings, <span
id="fr_4103"></span>[4104](#fn_4103) “The swords of the enemy are come
to an end, and the cities which thou hast overthrown.”

<span id="vi.iv-p124"></span>15. And what is the position, I should like
to know, of those excessively scrupulous, or rather excessively profane
persons, who assert that there are more synagogues than Churches? How is
it that the devil’s kingdoms have been destroyed, and now at last in the
consummation of the ages, the idols have fallen? If Christ has no
Church, or if he has one only, in Sardinia, he has grown very poor. And
if Satan owns Britain, Gaul, the East, the races of India, barbarous
nations, and the whole world at the same time, how is it that the
trophies of the cross have been collected in a mere corner of the earth?
Christ’s powerful opponent, forsooth, gave over to him the <span
id="fr_4104"></span>[4105](#fn_4104) serpent of Spain: he disdained to
own a poor province and its half-starved inhabitants. If they flatter
themselves that they have on their side that verse of the gospel, <span
id="fr_4105"></span>[4106](#fn_4105) “Howbeit when the Son of man
cometh, shall he find faith on the earth?” let me remind them that the
faith in question is that of which the Lord himself said, <span
id="fr_4106"></span>[4107](#fn_4106) “Thy faith hath made thee whole.”
And elsewhere, of the centurion, <span
id="fr_4107"></span>[4108](#fn_4107) “I have not found so great faith,
no, not in Israel.” And again, to the Apostles, <span
id="fr_4108"></span>[4109](#fn_4108) “Why are ye fearful, O ye of little
faith?” In another place also, <span
id="fr_4109"></span>[4110](#fn_4109) “If ye have faith as a grain of
mustard seed, ye shall say unto this mountain, Remove hence to yonder
place, and it shall remove.” For neither the centurion nor that poor
woman who for twelve years was wasting away with a bloody flux, had
believed in the mysteries of the Trinity, for these were revealed to the
Apostles after the resurrection of Christ; so that the faith of such as
believe in the mystery of the Trinity might have its due preeminence:
but it was her singleness of mind and her devotion to her God that met
with our Lord’s approval: <span id="fr_4110"></span>[4111](#fn_4110)
“For she said within herself, If I do but touch his garment, I shall be
made whole.” This is the faith which our Lord said was seldom found.
This is the faith which even in the case of those who believe aright is
hard to find in perfection. <span id="fr_4111"></span>[4112](#fn_4111)
“According to your faith, be it done unto you,” says God. I do not,
indeed, like the sound of those words. For if it be done unto me
according to my faith, I shall perish. And yet I certainly believe in
God the Father, I believe in God the Son, and I believe in God the Holy
Ghost. I believe in one God; nevertheless, I would not have it done unto
me according to my faith. For the enemy often comes, and sows tares in
the Lord’s harvest. I do not mean to imply that anything is greater than
the purity of heart which believes that mystery; but undoubted faith
towards God it is hard indeed to find. To make my meaning plain, let us
suppose a case:—I stand to pray; I could not pray, if I did not believe;
but if I really believed, I should cleanse that heart of mine with which
God is seen, I should beat my hands upon my breast, the tears would
stream down my cheeks, my body would shudder, my face grow pale, I
should lie at my Lord’s feet, weep over them, and wipe them with my
hair, I should cling to the cross and not let go my hold until I
obtained mercy. But, as it is, frequently in my prayers I am either
walking in the arcades, or calculating my interest, or am carried away
by base thoughts, so as to be occupied with things the mere mention of
which makes me blush. Where is our faith? Are we to suppose that it was
thus that Jonah prayed? or the three youths? or Daniel in the lion’s
den? or the robber on the cross? I have given these illustrations that
you may understand my meaning. But let every one commune with his own
heart, and he will find throughout the whole of life how rare a thing it
is to find a soul so faithful that it does nothing through the love of
glory, nothing on account of the petty gossip of men. For he who fasts
does not as an immediate consequence fast unto God, nor he who holds out
his hand to a poor man, lend to the Lord. <span id="page_328">p.
328</span> <span id="vi.iv-Page_328"></span>Vice is next-door neighbour
to virtue. It is hard to rest content with God alone for judge.

<span id="vi.iv-p133"></span>16. L. I was reserving that passage until
last, and you have anticipated my question about it. Almost all our
party, or rather not mine any more, use it as a sort of controversial
battering ram: as such I am exceedingly glad to see it broken to pieces
and pulverized. But will you be so good as to fully explain to me, not
in the character of an opponent but of a disciple, why it is that the
Church receives those who come from the Arians? The truth is I am unable
to answer you a word, but I do not yet give a hearty assent to what you
say.

<span id="vi.iv-p134"></span>17. O. When Constantius was on the throne
and Eusebius and Hypatius were Consuls, there was composed, under the
pretext of unity and faith, <span id="fr_4112"></span>[4113](#fn_4112)
an unfaithful creed, as it is now acknowledged to have been. For at that
time, nothing seemed so characteristic of piety, nothing so befitting a
servant of God, as to follow after unity, and to shun separation from
communion with the rest of the world. And all the more because the
current profession of faith no longer exhibited on the face of it
anything profane. “We believe,” said they, “in one true God, the Father
Almighty. This we also confess: We believe in the only begotten Son of
God, who, before all worlds, and before all their origins, <span
id="fr_4113"></span>[4114](#fn_4113) was born of God. The only-begotten
Son, moreover, we believe to be born alone of the Father alone, God of
God, like to his Father who begot Him, according to the Scriptures;
whose birth no one knows, but the Father alone who begot Him.” Do we
find any such words inserted here as <span
id="fr_4114"></span>[4115](#fn_4114) “There was a time, when he was
not?” Or, “The Son of God is a creature though not made of things which
exist.” No. This is surely the perfection of faith to say we believe Him
to be God of God. Moreover, they called Him the only begotten, “born
alone of the Father.” What is the meaning of *born?* Surely, *not made*.
His birth removed all suspicion of His being a creature. They added
further, “Who came down from heaven, was conceived of the Holy Ghost,
born of the Virgin Mary, crucified by Pontius Pilate, rose again the
third day from the dead, ascended into heaven, sitteth at the right hand
of the Father, who will come to judge the quick and the dead.” There was
the ring of piety in the words, and no one thought that poison was
mingled with the honey of such a proclamation.

<span id="vi.iv-p138"></span>18. As regards the term <span
id="fr_4115"></span>[4116](#fn_4115) *Usia*, it was not rejected without
a show of reason for so doing. <span
id="fr_4116"></span>[4117](#fn_4116) “Because it is not found in the
Scriptures,” they said, “and its novelty is a stumbling-block to many,
we have thought it best to dispense with it.” The bishops were not
anxious about the name, so long as that which it implied was secured.
Lastly, at the very time when rumour was rife that there had been some
insincerity in the statement of the faith, Valens, bishop of Mursa, who
had drawn it up, in the presence of Taurus the pretorian prefect who
attended the Synod by imperial command, declared that he was not an
Arian, and that he utterly abhorred their blasphemies. However, the
thing had been done in secret, and it had not extinguished the general
feeling. So on another day, when crowds of bishops and laymen came
together in the Church at Ariminum, Muzonius, bishop of the province of
Byzacena, to whom by reason of seniority the first rank was assigned by
all, spoke as follows: “One of our number has been authorized to read to
you, reverend fathers, what reports are being spread and have reached
us, so that the evil opinions which ought to grate upon our ears and be
banished from our hearts may be condemned with one voice by us all.” The
whole body of bishops replied, Agreed. And so when Claudius, bishop of
the province of Picenum, at the request of all present, began to read
the blasphemies attributed to Valens, Valens denied they were his and
cried aloud, “If anyone denies Christ our Lord, the Son of God, begotten
of the Father before the worlds, let him be anathema.” There was a
general chorus of approval, “Let him be anathema.” <span
id="fr_4117"></span>[4118](#fn_4117) “If anyone denies that the Son is
like the Father according to the Scriptures, let him be anathema.” All
replied, “Let him be anathema.” “If anyone does not say that <span
id="page_329">p. 329</span> <span id="vi.iv-Page_329"></span>the Son of
God is co-eternal with the Father, let him be anathema.” There was again
a chorus of approval, “Let him be anathema.” “If anyone says that the
Son of God is a creature, like other creatures, let him be anathema.”
The answer was the same, “Let him be anathema.” “If anyone says that the
Son was of no existing things, yet not of God the Father, let him be
anathema.” All shouted together, “Let him be anathema.” “If anyone says,
There was a time when the Son was not, let him be anathema.” At this
point all the bishops and the whole Church together received the words
of Valens with clapping of hands and stamping of feet. And if anyone
thinks we have invented the story let him examine the public records. At
all events the muniment-boxes of the Churches are full of it, and the
circumstance is fresh in men’s memory. Some of those who took part in
the Synod are still alive, and the Arians themselves (a fact which may
put the truth beyond dispute) do not deny the accuracy of our account.
When, therefore, all extolled Valens to the sky and penitently condemned
themselves for having suspected him, the same Claudius who before had
begun to read, said “There are still a few points which have escaped the
notice of my lord and brother Valens; if it seem good to you, let us, in
order to remove all scruples, pass a general vote of censure upon them.
If anyone says that the Son of God was indeed before all worlds but was
by no means before all time, so that he puts some thing before Him, let
him be anathema.” And many other things which had a suspicious look were
condemned by Valens when Claudius recited them. If anyone wishes to
learn more about them he will find the account in the acts of the Synod
of Ariminum, the source from which I have myself drawn them.

<span id="vi.iv-p142"></span>19. After these proceedings the Council was
dissolved. All returned in gladness to their own provinces. For the
Emperor and all good men had one and the same aim, that the East and
West should be knit together by the bond of fellowship. But wickedness
does not long lie hid, and the sore that is healed superficially before
the bad humour has been worked off breaks out again. Valens and <span
id="fr_4118"></span>[4119](#fn_4118) Ursacius and others associated with
them in their wickedness, eminent Christian bishops of course, began to
wave their palms, and to say they had not denied that He was a creature,
but that He was like other creatures. At that moment the term *Usia* was
abolished: the Nicene Faith stood condemned by acclamation. The whole
world groaned, and was astonished to find itself Arian. Some, therefore,
remained in their own communion, others began to send letters to those
Confessors who as adherents of Athanasius were in exile; several
despairingly bewailed the better relations into which they had entered.
But a few, true to human nature, defended their mistake as an exhibition
of wisdom. The ship of the Apostles was in peril, she was driven by the
wind, her sides beaten with the waves: no hope was now left. But the
Lord awoke and bade the tempest cease; the <span
id="fr_4119"></span>[4120](#fn_4119) beast died, and there was a calm
once again. To speak more plainly, all the bishops who had been banished
from their sees, by the clemency of the new <span
id="fr_4120"></span>[4121](#fn_4120) emperor returned to their Churches.
Then Egypt welcomed the <span id="fr_4121"></span>[4122](#fn_4121)
triumphant Athanasius; then <span id="fr_4122"></span>[4123](#fn_4122)
Hilary returned from the battle to the embrace of the Church of Gaul;
then <span id="fr_4123"></span>[4124](#fn_4123) Eusebius returned and
Italy laid aside her mourning weeds. The bishops who had been caught in
the snare at Ariminum and had unwittingly come to be reported of as
heretics, began to assemble, while they called the Body of our Lord and
all that is holy in the Church to witness that they had not a suspicion
of anything faulty in their own faith. We thought, said they, the words
were to be taken in their natural meaning, and we had no suspicion that
in the Church of God, the very home of simplicity and sincerity in the
confession of truth, one thing could be kept secret in the heart,
another uttered by the lips. We thought too well of bad men and were
deceived. We did not suppose that the bishops of Christ were fighting
against Christ. There was much besides which they said with tears, but I
pass it over for brevity’s sake. They were ready to condemn their <span
id="fr_4124"></span>[4125](#fn_4124) former subscription as well as all
the blasphemies of the Arians. Here I ask our excessively scrupulous
friends what they think ought to have been done with those who made this
Confession? Deprive the old bishops, they will say, and ordain new ones.
The plan was tried. But how many whose conscience does not condemn them
will allow themselves to be deprived. Particularly when all the people
who loved their bishops flocked together, ready to stone and slay those
who attempted to deprive them. The bishops should, it may be said, have
kept to themselves <span id="page_330">p. 330</span> <span
id="vi.iv-Page_330"></span>within their own communion. That is to say,
with senseless cruelty they would have surrendered the whole world to
the devil. Why condemn those who were not Arians? Why rend the Church
when it was continuing in the harmony of the faith? Lastly, were they by
obstinacy to make Arians of orthodox believers? We know that at the
Council of Nicæa, which was assembled on account of the Arian perfidy,
eight Arian bishops were welcomed, and there is not a bishop in the
world at the present day whose ordination is not dependent on that
Council. This being so, how could they act in opposition to it, when
their loyalty to it had cost them the pain of exile?

<span id="vi.iv-p150"></span>20. L. Were Arians really then received
after all? Pray tell me who they were.

<span id="vi.iv-p151"></span>O. <span
id="fr_4125"></span>[4126](#fn_4125) Eusebius, bishop of
Nicomedia, <span id="fr_4126"></span>[4127](#fn_4126) Theognis, bishop
of Nicæa, Saras, at the time presbyter of Libya, <span
id="fr_4127"></span>[4128](#fn_4127) Eusebius, bishop of Cæsarea in
Palestine, and others whom it would be tedious to enumerate; Arius also,
the presbyter, the original source of all the trouble; Euzoius the
deacon, <span id="fr_4128"></span>[4129](#fn_4128) who succeeded
Eudoxius as bishop of Antioch, and Achillas, the reader. These three who
were clerics of the Church of Alexandria were the originators of the
heresy.

<span id="vi.iv-p156"></span>L. Suppose a person were to deny that they
were welcomed back, how is he to be refuted?

<span id="vi.iv-p157"></span>O. There are men still living who took part
in that Council. And if that is not enough, because owing to the time
that has elapsed they are but few, and it is impossible for witnesses to
be everywhere, if we read the acts and names of the bishops of the
Council of Nicæa, we find that those who we saw just now were welcomed
back, did subscribe the *homoousion* along with the rest.

<span id="vi.iv-p158"></span>L. Will you point out how, after the
Council of Nicæa, they relapsed into their unfaithfulness?

<span id="vi.iv-p159"></span>O. A good suggestion, for unbelievers are
in the habit of shutting their eyes and denying that things which they
dislike ever happened. But how could they afterwards do anything but
relapse, when it was owing to them that the Council was convened, and
their letters and impious treatises which were published before the
Council, remain even to the present day? Seeing, therefore, that at that
time three hundred bishops or more welcomed a few men whom they might
have rejected without injury to the Church, I am surprised that certain
persons, who are certainly upholders of the faith of Nicæa, are so harsh
as to think that <span id="fr_4129"></span>[4130](#fn_4129) three
Confessors returning from exile were not bound in the interests of the
world’s salvation to do what so many illustrious men did of their own
accord. But, to go back to our starting point, on the return of the
Confessors it was determined, in a synod afterwards <span
id="fr_4130"></span>[4131](#fn_4130) held at Alexandria, that, the
authors of the heresy excepted (who could not be excused on the ground
of error), penitents should be admitted to communion with the Church:
not that they who had been heretics could be bishops, but because it was
clear that those who were received had not been heretics. The West
assented to this decision, and it was through this conclusion, which the
necessities of the times demanded, that the world was snatched from the
jaws of Satan. I have reached a very difficult subject, where I am
compelled against my wishes and my purpose, to think somewhat otherwise
of that saintly man Lucifer than his merits demand, and my own courtesy
requires. But what am I to do? Truth opens my mouth and urges my
reluctant tongue to utter the thoughts of my heart. At such a crisis of
the Church, when the wolves were wildly raging, he separated off a few
sheep and abandoned the remnant of the flock. He himself was a good
shepherd, but he was leaving a vast spoil to the beasts of prey. I take
no notice of reports originating with certain evil speakers, though
maintained by them to be authenticated facts; such as that he acted thus
through the love of glory, and the desire of handing down his name to
posterity; or again that he was influenced by the grudge he bore against
Eusebius on account of the <span id="fr_4131"></span>[4132](#fn_4131)
quarrel at Antioch. I believe none of these reports in the case of such
a man; and this I will constantly affirm even now—that the difference
between us and him is one of words, not of things, if he really does
receive those who have been baptized by the Arians.

<span id="vi.iv-p163"></span>21. L. The account I used before to hear
given of these things was widely different, and, as I now think, better
calculated to promote error than hope. But I thank Christ my God for
pouring into my heart the light of truth, that I might no longer
profanely call the <span id="page_331">p. 331</span> <span
id="vi.iv-Page_331"></span>Church, which is His Virgin, the harlot of
the devil. There is one other point I should like you to explain. What
are we to say about <span id="fr_4132"></span>[4133](#fn_4132) Hilary
who does not receive even those who have been baptized by the Arians?

<span id="vi.iv-p165"></span>O. Since Hilary when he left the Church was
only a deacon, and since the Church is to him, though to him alone, a
mere worldly multitude, he can neither duly celebrate the Eucharist, for
he has no bishops or priests, nor can he give baptism without the
Eucharist. And since the man is now dead, inasmuch as he was a deacon
and could ordain no one to follow him, his sect died with him. For there
is no such thing as a Church without bishops. But passing over a few
very insignificant persons who are in their own esteem both laymen and
bishops, let me point out to you what views we should hold respecting
the Church at large.

<span id="vi.iv-p166"></span>L. You have settled a great question in
three words, as the saying is, and indeed while you speak, I feel that I
am on your side. But when you stop, some old misgivings arise as to why
we receive those who have been baptized by heretics.

<span id="vi.iv-p167"></span>O. That is just what I had in mind when I
said I would point out what views we ought to hold concerning the Church
at large. For many are exercised by the misgivings you speak of. I shall
perhaps be tedious in my explanation, but it is worth while if the truth
gains.

<span id="vi.iv-p168"></span>22. Noah’s ark was a type of the Church, as
the Apostle Peter says— <span id="fr_4133"></span>[4134](#fn_4133) “In
Noah’s ark few, that is, eight souls, were saved through water: which
also after a true likeness doth now save us, even baptism.” As in the
ark there were all kinds of animals, so also in the Church there are men
of all races and characters. As in the one there was the leopard with
the kids, the wolf with the lambs, so in the other there are found the
righteous and sinners, that is, <span
id="fr_4134"></span>[4135](#fn_4134) vessels of gold and silver with
those of wood and of earth. The ark had its rooms: the Church has many
mansions. Eight souls were saved in Noah’s ark. And <span
id="fr_4135"></span>[4136](#fn_4135) Ecclesiastes bids us “give a
portion to seven yea, even unto eight,” that is to believe both
Testaments. This is why some psalms bear the inscription <span
id="fr_4136"></span>[4137](#fn_4136) *for the octave*, and why the one
hundred and nineteenth psalm is divided into portions of eight verses
each beginning with its own letter for the instruction of the righteous.
The beatitudes which our Lord spoke to his disciples on the mountain,
thereby delineating the Church, are eight. And Ezekiel for the building
of the temple employs the number eight. And you will find many other
things expressed in the same way in the Scriptures. The raven also is
sent forth from the ark but does not return, and afterwards the dove
announces peace to the earth. So also in the Church’s baptism, that most
unclean bird the devil is expelled, and the dove of the Holy Spirit
announces peace to our earth. The construction of the ark was such that
it began with being thirty cubits broad and gradually narrowed to one.
Similarly the Church, consisting of many grades, ends in deacons,
presbyters, and bishops. The ark was in peril in the flood, the Church
is in peril in the world. When Noah left the ark he planted a vineyard,
drank thereof, and was drunken. Christ also, born in the flesh, planted
the Church and suffered. The elder son made sport of his father’s
nakedness, the younger covered it: and the Jews mocked God crucified,
the Gentiles honoured Him. The daylight would fail me if I were to
explain all the mysteries of the ark and compare them with the Church.
Who are the eagles amongst us? Who the doves and lions, who the stags,
who the worms and serpents? So far as our subject requires I will
briefly show you. It is not the sheep only who abide in the Church, nor
do clean birds only fly to and fro there; but amid the grain other seed
is sown, <span id="fr_4137"></span>[4138](#fn_4137) “amidst the neat
corn-fields burrs and caltrops and barren oats lord it in the land.”
What is the husbandman to do? Root up the darnel? In that case the whole
harvest is destroyed along with it. Every day the farmer diligently
drives the birds away with strange noises, or frightens them with
scarecrows: here he cracks a whip, there he spreads out some other
object to terrify them. Nevertheless he suffers from the raids of nimble
roes or the wantonness of the wild asses; here the mice convey the corn
to their garners underground, there the ants crowd thickly in and ravage
the corn-field. Thus the case stands. No one who has land is free from
care. <span id="fr_4138"></span>[4139](#fn_4138) While the householder
slept the enemy sowed tares among the wheat, and when the servants
proposed to go and root them up the master forbade them, reserving for
himself the separation of the chaff and the grain. <span
id="fr_4139"></span>[4140](#fn_4139) There are vessels of wrath and of
mercy which the Apostle speaks of in the house of God. The day then will
come when the storehouses of the Church shall be opened and the Lord
will <span id="page_332">p. 332</span> <span
id="vi.iv-Page_332"></span>bring forth the vessels of wrath; and, as
they depart, the saints will say, <span
id="fr_4140"></span>[4141](#fn_4140) “They went out from us, but they
were not of us; for if they had been of us, they would no doubt have
continued with us.” No one can take to himself the prerogative of
Christ, no one before the day of judgment can pass judgment upon men. If
the Church is already cleansed, what shall we reserve for the
Lord? <span id="fr_4141"></span>[4142](#fn_4141) “There is a way which
seemeth right unto a man, but the end thereof are the ways of death.”
When our judgment is so prone to error, upon whose opinion can we rely?

<span id="vi.iv-p178"></span>23. Cyprian of blessed memory tried to
avoid broken cisterns and not to drink of strange waters: and therefore,
rejecting heretical baptism, he summoned his <span
id="fr_4142"></span>[4143](#fn_4142) African synod in opposition to
Stephen, <span id="fr_4143"></span>[4144](#fn_4143) who was the blessed
Peter’s twenty-second successor in the see of Rome. They met to discuss
this matter; but the attempt failed. At last those very bishops who had
together with him determined that heretics must be re-baptized, reverted
to the old custom and published a fresh decree. Do you ask what course
we must pursue? What we do our forefathers handed down to us as their
forefathers to them. But why speak of later times? When the blood of
Christ was but lately shed and the apostles were still in Judæa, the
Lord’s body was asserted to be a phantom; the Galatians had been led
away to the observance of the law, and the Apostle was a second time in
travail with them; the Corinthians did not believe the resurrection of
the flesh, and he endeavoured by many arguments to bring them back to
the right path. Then came <span id="fr_4144"></span>[4145](#fn_4144)
Simon Magus and his disciple Menander. They asserted themselves to
be <span id="fr_4145"></span>[4146](#fn_4145) powers of God. Then <span
id="fr_4146"></span>[4147](#fn_4146) Basilides invented the most high
god *Abraxas* and the three hundred and sixty-five manifestations of
him. Then <span id="fr_4147"></span>[4148](#fn_4147) Nicolas, one of the
seven Deacons, and one whose lechery knew no rest by night or day,
indulged in his filthy dreams. I say nothing of the Jewish heretics who
before the coming of Christ destroyed the law delivered to them:
of <span id="fr_4148"></span>[4149](#fn_4148) Dositheus, the leader of
the Samaritans who rejected the prophets: of the Sadducees who sprang
from his root and denied even the resurrection of the flesh: of the
Pharisees who separated themselves from the Jews <span
id="fr_4149"></span>[4150](#fn_4149) on account of certain superfluous
observances, and took their name from the fact of their dissent: of the
Herodians who accepted Herod as the Christ. I come to those heretics who
have mangled the Gospels, <span id="fr_4150"></span>[4151](#fn_4150)
Saturninus, and the <span id="fr_4151"></span>[4152](#fn_4151)
Ophites, <span id="fr_4152"></span>[4153](#fn_4152) the Cainites
and <span id="fr_4153"></span>[4154](#fn_4153) Sethites, and <span
id="fr_4154"></span>[4155](#fn_4154) Carpocrates, and <span
id="fr_4155"></span>[4156](#fn_4155) Cerinthus, and his successor <span
id="fr_4156"></span>[4157](#fn_4156) Ebion, and the other pests, the
most of which broke out while the apostle John was still alive, and yet
we do not read that any of these men were re-baptized.

<span id="vi.iv-p194"></span>24. As we have made mention of that
distinguished saint, let us show also from his Apocalypse that
repentance unaccompanied by baptism ought to be allowed valid in the
case of heretics. It is imputed ([Rev. ii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#004)<span id="vi.iv-p194.1"></span>) to
the angel of Ephesus that he has forsaken his first love. In the angel
of the Church of Pergamum the eating of idol-sacrifices is censured
([Rev. ii. 14](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#014)<span
id="vi.iv-p194.2"></span>), and the doctrine of the Nicolaitans ([Rev.
2.15](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#015)<span id="vi.iv-p194.3"></span>).
Likewise the angel of Thyatira is rebuked ([Rev.
2.20](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#020)<span id="vi.iv-p194.4"></span>)
on account of Jezebel the prophetess, and the idol meats, and
fornication. And yet the Lord encourages all these to repent, and adds a
threat, moreover, of future punishment if they do not turn. Now he would
not urge them to repent unless he intended to grant pardon <span
id="page_333">p. 333</span> <span id="vi.iv-Page_333"></span>to the
penitents. Is there any indication of his having said, Let them be
re-baptized who have been baptized in the faith of the Nicolaitans? or
let hands be laid upon those of the people of Pergamum who at that time
believed, having held the doctrine of Balaam? Nay, rather, “Repent
therefore,” <span id="fr_4157"></span>[4158](#fn_4157) he says, “or else
I come to thee quickly, and I will make war against them with the sword
of my mouth.”

<span id="vi.iv-p196"></span>25. If, however, those men who were
ordained by Hilary, and who have lately become sheep without a shepherd,
are disposed to allege Scripture in support of what the blessed
Cyprian <span id="fr_4158"></span>[4159](#fn_4158) left in his letters
advocating the re-baptization of heretics, I beg them to remember that
he did not anathematize those who refused to follow him. At all events,
he remained in communion with such as opposed his views. He was content
with exhorting them, on account of <span
id="fr_4159"></span>[4160](#fn_4159) Novatus and the numerous other
heretics then springing up, to receive no one who did not condemn his
previous error. In fact, he thus concludes the discussion of the subject
with Stephen, the Roman Pontiff: “These things, dearest brother, I have
brought to your knowledge on account of our mutual respect and love
unfeigned, believing, as I do, that from the sincerity of your piety and
your faith you will approve such things as are alike consonant with
piety and true in themselves. But I know that some persons are unwilling
to abandon views which they have once entertained, and are averse to a
change of purpose; they would rather, without breaking the bond of peace
and concord between colleagues, adhere to their own plans, when once
they have been adopted. This is a matter in which we do not force
anyone, or lay down a law for anyone; let each follow his own free
choice in the administration of the Church: let each be ruler in his own
sphere since he must give account of his action to the Lord.” In the
letter also to Jubaianus on the re-baptization of heretics, towards the
end, he says this: “I have written these few remarks, my dearest
brother, to the best of my poor ability, without dictating to anyone, or
prejudicing the case of anyone: I would not hinder a single bishop from
doing what he thinks right with the full exercise of his own judgment.
So far as is possible, we avoid disputes with colleagues and
fellow-bishops about the heretics, and maintain with them a divine
harmony and the Lord’s peace, particularly since the Apostle says: <span
id="fr_4160"></span>[4161](#fn_4160) ‘But if any man seem to be
contentious, we have no such custom, neither the churches of God.’ With
patience and gentleness we preserve charity at heart, the honour of our
order, the bond of faith, the harmony of the episcopate.”

<span id="vi.iv-p200"></span>26. There is another argument which I shall
adduce, and against that not even Hilary, <span
id="fr_4161"></span>[4162](#fn_4161) the modern Deucalion, will venture
to mutter a syllable. If heretics are not baptized and must be
re-baptized because they were not in the Church, Hilary himself also is
not a Christian. For he was baptized in that Church which always allowed
heretical baptism. Before the Synod of Ariminum was held, before Lucifer
went into exile, Hilary when a deacon of the Roman Church welcomed those
who came over from the heretics on account of the baptism which they had
previously received. It can hardly be that Arians are the only heretics,
and that we are to accept all but those whom they have baptized. You
were a deacon, Hilary (the Church may say), and received those whom the
Manichæans had baptized. You were a deacon, and acknowledged Ebion’s
baptism. All at once after Arius arose you began to be quite out of
conceit with yourself. You and your household separated from us, and
opened a new laver of your own. If some angel or apostle has re-baptized
you, I will not disparage your procedure. But since you who raise your
sword against me are the son of my womb, and nourished on the milk of my
breasts, return to me what I gave you, and be, if you can, a Christian
in some other way. Suppose I am a harlot, still I am your mother. You
say, I do not keep the marriage bed undefiled: still what I am now I was
when you were conceived. If I commit adultery with Arius, I did the same
before with Praxias, with Ebion, with Cerinthus, and Novatus. You think
much of them and welcome them, adulterers as they are, to your mother’s
home. I don’t know why one adulterer more than others should offend you.

<span id="vi.iv-p202"></span>27. But if anyone thinks it open to
question whether heretics were always welcomed by our ancestors, let him
read the letters of the blessed Cyprian in which he applies the lash to
Stephen, bishop of Rome, and his errors which had grown inveterate by
usage. <span id="fr_4162"></span>[4163](#fn_4162) Let <span
id="page_334">p. 334</span> <span id="vi.iv-Page_334"></span>him also
read the pamphlets of Hilary on the re-baptization of heretics which he
published against us, and he will there find Hilary himself confessing
that <span id="fr_4163"></span>[4164](#fn_4163) Julius, Marcus,
Sylvester, and the other bishops of old alike welcomed all heretics to
repentance; and, further, to shew that he could not justly claim
possession of the true custom; the Council of Nicæa also, to which we
referred not long ago, welcomed all heretics with the exception of <span
id="fr_4164"></span>[4165](#fn_4164) the disciples of Paul of Samosata.
And, what is more, it allows a Novatian bishop on conversion to have the
rank of presbyter, <span id="fr_4165"></span>[4166](#fn_4165) a decision
which condemns both Lucifer and Hilary, since the same person who is
ordained is also baptized.

<span id="vi.iv-p207"></span>28. I might spend the day in speaking to
the same effect, and dry up all the streams of argument with the single
Sun of the Church. But as we have already had a long discussion and the
protracted controversy has wearied out the attention of our audience, I
will tell you my opinion briefly and without reserve. We ought to remain
in that Church which was founded by the Apostles and continues to this
day. If ever you hear of any that are called Christians taking their
name not from the Lord Jesus Christ, but from some other, for instance,
Marcionites, Valentinians, Men of the mountain or the plain, <span
id="fr_4166"></span>[4167](#fn_4166) you may be sure that you have there
not the Church of Christ, but the synagogue of Antichrist. For the fact
that they took their rise after the foundation of the Church is proof
that they are those whose coming the Apostle foretold. And let them not
flatter themselves if they think they have Scripture authority for their
assertions, since the devil himself quoted Scripture, and the essence of
the Scriptures is not the letter, but the meaning. Otherwise, if we
follow the letter, we too can concoct a new dogma and assert that such
persons as wear shoes and have two coats must not be received into the
Church.

<span id="vi.iv-p209"></span>L. You must not suppose that victory rests
with you only. We are both conquerors, and each of us carries off the
palm,—you are victorious over me, and I over my error. May I always when
I argue be so fortunate as to exchange wrong opinions for better ones. I
must, however, make a confession, because I best know the character of
my party, and own that they are more easily conquered than convinced.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4048"></span>[320:4049](2060166.htm#fr_4048) <span
id="vi.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p10"></span> The Sardinian cloak of skins is contrasted
by Cicero (pro Scauro) with the Royal purple:—Quem purpura regalis non
commovit, eum Sardorum mastruca mutavit. Jerome’s meaning is that Christ
came not to win the lowest place on earth, but the highest. The fact
that Lucifer was Bishop of Cagliari in Sardinia gives point to the
saying.

<span id="fn_4049"></span>[320:4050](2060166.htm#fr_4049) <span
id="vi.iv-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p24"></span> That is, of Jupiter, whose temple was in
the Capitol.

<span id="fn_4050"></span>[320:4051](2060166.htm#fr_4050) <span
id="vi.iv-p25.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p26"></span> [Ps. lvii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#006)<span id="vi.iv-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4051"></span>[321:4052](2060166.htm#fr_4051) <span
id="vi.iv-p41.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p42"></span> Sacerdotium.

<span id="fn_4052"></span>[321:4053](2060166.htm#fr_4052) <span
id="vi.iv-p43.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p44"></span> [Rev.
1.6](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#006)<span id="vi.iv-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4053"></span>[321:4054](2060166.htm#fr_4053) <span
id="vi.iv-p44.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p45"></span> [1 Pet. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#009)<span id="vi.iv-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4054"></span>[321:4055](2060166.htm#fr_4054) <span
id="vi.iv-p47.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p48"></span> That is diocese. The word diocese was in
early times the larger expression, and contained many provinces. See
Canon II of Constantinople, Bright’s edition, and note.

<span id="fn_4055"></span>[321:4056](2060166.htm#fr_4055) <span
id="vi.iv-p49.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p50"></span> [Matt. v.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#013)<span id="vi.iv-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4056"></span>[321:4057](2060166.htm#fr_4056) <span
id="vi.iv-p50.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p51"></span> [Lev. ix.
7](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#007)<span id="vi.iv-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4057"></span>[321:4058](2060166.htm#fr_4057) <span
id="vi.iv-p51.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p52"></span> [Tit. i.
7](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#007)<span id="vi.iv-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4058"></span>[321:4059](2060166.htm#fr_4058) <span
id="vi.iv-p52.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p53"></span> [1 Cor. xi.
28](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#028)<span id="vi.iv-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4059"></span>[321:4060](2060166.htm#fr_4059) <span
id="vi.iv-p53.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p54"></span> [Matt. vii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#006)<span id="vi.iv-p54.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4060"></span>[321:4061](2060166.htm#fr_4060) <span
id="vi.iv-p54.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p55"></span> [Numb. xvi.
26](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#026)<span id="vi.iv-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4061"></span>[322:4062](2060166.htm#fr_4061) <span
id="vi.iv-p55.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p56"></span> [Hos. ix.
4](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#004)<span id="vi.iv-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4062"></span>[322:4063](2060166.htm#fr_4062) <span
id="vi.iv-p56.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p57"></span> [Matt. vii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#022)<span id="vi.iv-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4063"></span>[322:4064](2060166.htm#fr_4063) <span
id="vi.iv-p57.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p58"></span> [Matt. v.
15](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#015)<span id="vi.iv-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4064"></span>[322:4065](2060166.htm#fr_4064) <span
id="vi.iv-p58.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p59"></span> [Matt. vi.
23-24](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#023)<span id="vi.iv-p59.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4065"></span>[322:4066](2060166.htm#fr_4065) <span
id="vi.iv-p59.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p60"></span> [Matt. vi.
23-24](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#023)<span id="vi.iv-p60.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4066"></span>[322:4067](2060166.htm#fr_4066) <span
id="vi.iv-p60.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p61"></span> [2 Cor.
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#015)<span id="vi.iv-p61.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4067"></span>[322:4068](2060166.htm#fr_4067) <span
id="vi.iv-p61.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p62"></span> [Levit. xxi.
17](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#017)<span id="vi.iv-p62.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4068"></span>[322:4069](2060166.htm#fr_4068) <span
id="vi.iv-p62.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p63"></span> Quoted apparently from memory as giving the
general sense of passages in <span id="vi.iv-p63.1"></span>Lev. xxi,
xxii.

<span id="fn_4069"></span>[322:4070](2060166.htm#fr_4069) <span
id="vi.iv-p63.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p64"></span> Quoted apparently from memory as giving the
general sense of passages in <span id="vi.iv-p64.1"></span>Lev. xxi,
xxii.

<span id="fn_4070"></span>[322:4071](2060166.htm#fr_4070) <span
id="vi.iv-p67.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p68"></span> [Gen. i.
2](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#002)<span id="vi.iv-p68.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4071"></span>[322:4072](2060166.htm#fr_4071) <span
id="vi.iv-p68.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p69"></span> [John v.
2](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#002)<span id="vi.iv-p69.1"></span> sq.

<span id="fn_4072"></span>[323:4073](2060166.htm#fr_4072) <span
id="vi.iv-p70.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p71"></span> [Acts
19.2](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#002)<span id="vi.iv-p71.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4073"></span>[323:4074](2060166.htm#fr_4073) <span
id="vi.iv-p72.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p73"></span> [Isa.
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#003), [Matt.
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#003)<span id="vi.iv-p73.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4074"></span>[323:4075](2060166.htm#fr_4074) <span
id="vi.iv-p73.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p74"></span> [John i.
29](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#029)<span id="vi.iv-p74.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4075"></span>[323:4076](2060166.htm#fr_4075) <span
id="vi.iv-p74.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p75"></span> [Luke i.
43](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#043)<span id="vi.iv-p75.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4076"></span>[323:4077](2060166.htm#fr_4076) <span
id="vi.iv-p75.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p76"></span> [Acts ix.
17](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#017)<span id="vi.iv-p76.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4077"></span>[323:4078](2060166.htm#fr_4077) <span
id="vi.iv-p76.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p77"></span> [Matt. xi.
11](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#011)<span id="vi.iv-p77.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4078"></span>[323:4079](2060166.htm#fr_4078) <span
id="vi.iv-p77.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p78"></span> [Matt. xi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#010)<span id="vi.iv-p78.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4079"></span>[323:4080](2060166.htm#fr_4079) <span
id="vi.iv-p78.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p79"></span> We venture to read ‘decebat’ instead of
‘dicebat.’ Otherwise, we may render ‘Thus (the Scripture) said that,’
etc.

<span id="fn_4080"></span>[323:4081](2060166.htm#fr_4080) <span
id="vi.iv-p79.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p80"></span> [Mark i.
4](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#004)<span id="vi.iv-p80.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4081"></span>[323:4082](2060166.htm#fr_4081) <span
id="vi.iv-p80.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p81"></span> [Mark i.
5](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#005)<span id="vi.iv-p81.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4082"></span>[323:4083](2060166.htm#fr_4082) <span
id="vi.iv-p81.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p82"></span> [John iii.
31](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#031)<span id="vi.iv-p82.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4083"></span>[323:4084](2060166.htm#fr_4083) <span
id="vi.iv-p82.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p83"></span> [Matt. iii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#011)<span id="vi.iv-p83.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4084"></span>[323:4085](2060166.htm#fr_4084) <span
id="vi.iv-p83.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p84"></span> [John iii.
30](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#030)<span id="vi.iv-p84.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4085"></span>[323:4086](2060166.htm#fr_4085) <span
id="vi.iv-p84.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p85"></span> [Acts xix.
1](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#001)<span id="vi.iv-p85.1"></span>, sqq.

<span id="fn_4086"></span>[324:4087](2060166.htm#fr_4086) <span
id="vi.iv-p86.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p87"></span> Triple immersion, that is, thrice dipping
the head while standing in the water, was the all but universal rule of
the Church in early times. There is proof of its existence in Africa,
Palestine, Egypt, at Antioch and Constantinople, in Cappadocia and Rome.
See Basil, On the H. Sp. § 66, and Apostolical Canons. Gregory the Great
ruled that either form was allowable, the one symbolizing the Unity of
the Godhead, the other the Trinity of Persons.

<span id="fn_4087"></span>[324:4088](2060166.htm#fr_4087) <span
id="vi.iv-p87.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p88"></span> This ceremony together with the kiss of
peace and white robes probably dated from very early times. In the
fourth century some new ceremonies were introduced, such as the use of
lights and salt, the unction with oil before baptism in addition to that
with chrism which continued to be administered after baptism.

<span id="fn_4088"></span>[324:4089](2060166.htm#fr_4088) <span
id="vi.iv-p88.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p89"></span> At Holy Communion the first prayer of the
faithful was said by all kneeling. During the rest of the liturgy all
stood. At other times of service the rule was for all to kneel in prayer
except on Sundays and between Easter and Whitsuntide.

<span id="fn_4089"></span>[324:4090](2060166.htm#fr_4089) <span
id="vi.iv-p90.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p91"></span> The Arians said He was the creature (made
out of nothing) through whom the Father gave being to all other
creatures.

<span id="fn_4090"></span>[324:4091](2060166.htm#fr_4090) <span
id="vi.iv-p91.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p92"></span> The Macedonians, who became nearly
co-extensive with the Semi-Arians about 360, held that the Spirit not
being ‘very’ God must be a creature and therefore a Servant of God.

<span id="fn_4091"></span>[324:4092](2060166.htm#fr_4091) <span
id="vi.iv-p92.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p93"></span> Sacerdotium—often used by Jerome in a
special sense for the Episcopate. He says of Pammachius and of himself
(Letter xlv., 3) that many people thought them digni sacerdotio, meaning
the Bishopric of Rome.

<span id="fn_4092"></span>[325:4093](2060166.htm#fr_4092) <span
id="vi.iv-p93.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p94"></span> [Acts viii.
26](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#026)<span id="vi.iv-p94.1"></span> sq.

<span id="fn_4093"></span>[325:4094](2060166.htm#fr_4093) <span
id="vi.iv-p96.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p97"></span> “The philosophical relations of Arianism
have been differently stated. Baur, Newman (The Arians, p. 17), and
others, bring it into connection with Aristotle, and Athanasianism with
Plato; Petavius, Ritter, and Voigt, on the contrary, derive the Arian
idea of God from Platonism and Neo-Platonism. The empirical, rational,
logical tendency of Arianism is certainly more Aristotelian than
Platonic, and so far Baur and Newman are right; but all depends on
making either revelation and faith, or philosophy and reason, the
starting point and ruling power of theology.” Doctor Schaff in Dict. of
Chris. Biog.

<span id="fn_4094"></span>[325:4095](2060166.htm#fr_4094) <span
id="vi.iv-p97.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p98"></span> Baptism was at this time, as a rule,
administered by the bishop alone.

<span id="fn_4095"></span>[326:4096](2060166.htm#fr_4095) <span
id="vi.iv-p100.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p101"></span> This was, approximately, the Patripassian
form of the heresy, according to which the person of the Father who is
one with the Son, was incarnate in Christ, and the Father might then be
said to have died upon the cross. The personality of the Holy Ghost
appears to have been denied. With varying shades of opinion and modes of
expression the doctrine was expounded by Praxeas (circ. <span
class="c17"><span id="vi.iv-p101.1"></span>a.d.</span> 200), Noetius
(<span class="c17"><span id="vi.iv-p101.2"></span>a.d.</span> 220),
Sabellius (<span class="c17"><span id="vi.iv-p101.3"></span>a.d.</span>
225), Beryllus and Paul of Samosata (circ. <span class="c17"><span
id="vi.iv-p101.4"></span>a.d.</span> 250).

<span id="fn_4096"></span>[327:4097](2060166.htm#fr_4096) <span
id="vi.iv-p115.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p116"></span> That is the followers of Lucifer, whose
see was in Sardinia.

<span id="fn_4097"></span>[327:4098](2060166.htm#fr_4097) <span
id="vi.iv-p116.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p117"></span> [Ps. xii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#001)<span id="vi.iv-p117.1"></span>. The
Luciferians believed that few or none outside their own sect could be
saved.

<span id="fn_4098"></span>[327:4099](2060166.htm#fr_4098) <span
id="vi.iv-p117.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p118"></span> [Ps. xxx.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#009)<span id="vi.iv-p118.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4099"></span>[327:4100](2060166.htm#fr_4099) <span
id="vi.iv-p118.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p119"></span> [Mark iii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#027)<span id="vi.iv-p119.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4100"></span>[327:4101](2060166.htm#fr_4100) <span
id="vi.iv-p119.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p120"></span> [Ps. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#008)<span id="vi.iv-p120.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4101"></span>[327:4102](2060166.htm#fr_4101) <span
id="vi.iv-p120.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p121"></span> [Ps. xviii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#015)<span id="vi.iv-p121.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4102"></span>[327:4103](2060166.htm#fr_4102) <span
id="vi.iv-p121.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p122"></span> Lit. In the sun hath he placed his
tabernacle, and there is none who can hide himself from the heat
thereof. [Ps. xix. 6](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#006)<span
id="vi.iv-p122.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4103"></span>[327:4104](2060166.htm#fr_4103) <span
id="vi.iv-p122.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p123"></span> [Ps. ix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#006)<span id="vi.iv-p123.1"></span>.
Sept. Vulg. Syr.

<span id="fn_4104"></span>[327:4105](2060166.htm#fr_4104) <span
id="vi.iv-p124.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p125"></span> The allusion is doubtful. It probably
refers to some province of Spain (perhaps that of the Ibera or Ebro), in
which the views of Lucifer prevailed and which his followers considered
almost the sole land of the faithful. The expression, however, is used
in a more general sense by Jerome, Letter VI.

<span id="fn_4105"></span>[327:4106](2060166.htm#fr_4105) <span
id="vi.iv-p125.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p126"></span> [Luke xviii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#008)<span id="vi.iv-p126.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4106"></span>[327:4107](2060166.htm#fr_4106) <span
id="vi.iv-p126.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p127"></span> [Matt. ix.
22](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#022)<span id="vi.iv-p127.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4107"></span>[327:4108](2060166.htm#fr_4107) <span
id="vi.iv-p127.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p128"></span> [Matt. viii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#010)<span id="vi.iv-p128.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4108"></span>[327:4109](2060166.htm#fr_4108) <span
id="vi.iv-p128.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p129"></span> [Matt. viii.
26](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#026)<span id="vi.iv-p129.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4109"></span>[327:4110](2060166.htm#fr_4109) <span
id="vi.iv-p129.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p130"></span> [Matt. xvii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#020)<span id="vi.iv-p130.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4110"></span>[327:4111](2060166.htm#fr_4110) <span
id="vi.iv-p130.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p131"></span> [Matt. ix.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#021)<span id="vi.iv-p131.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4111"></span>[327:4112](2060166.htm#fr_4111) <span
id="vi.iv-p131.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p132"></span> [Matt. ix.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#029)<span id="vi.iv-p132.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4112"></span>[328:4113](2060166.htm#fr_4112) <span
id="vi.iv-p134.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p135"></span> For an account of the “Dated Creed” here
referred to, and of the Councils of Seleucia and Ariminum, <span
class="c17"><span id="vi.iv-p135.1"></span>a.d.</span> 359, see Bright’s
History of the Church, <span class="c17"><span
id="vi.iv-p135.2"></span>a.d.</span> 313–451, fourth edition, pp.
93–100.

<span id="fn_4113"></span>[328:4114](2060166.htm#fr_4113) <span
id="vi.iv-p135.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p136"></span> Principium, the equivalent of the Greek
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p136.1"></span>᾽</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p136.2"></span>Αρχή</span>, which means
beginning, or principle, or power.

<span id="fn_4114"></span>[328:4115](2060166.htm#fr_4114) <span
id="vi.iv-p136.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p137"></span> These two propositions constituted the
essence of the teaching of Arius.

<span id="fn_4115"></span>[328:4116](2060166.htm#fr_4115) <span
id="vi.iv-p138.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p139"></span> Usia (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p139.1"></span>οὐσία</span>) is defined by Cyril of Alexandria
as that which has existence in itself, independent of everything else to
constitute it. A discussion of both it and its companion term
*hypostasis* may be found in Newman’s Arians, Appendix p. 432. Around
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p139.2"></span>οὐσία</span>, or some
compound of the word, the great Arian controversy always raged. In
asserting that the son was *homoousios* with the Father, i.e.,
consubstantial or co-essential, the Church affirmed the Godhead of the
Son. But the formula experienced varying fortunes. It was disowned as
savouring of heterodoxy by the Council of Antioch (264–269) which was
held to decide upon the views of Paulus: was imposed at Nicæa (325):
considered inexpedient by the great body of the episcopate in the next
generation: was most cautiously put forward by Athanasius himself (see
Stanley’s Hist. of Eastern Church, 1883, p. 240): does not occur in the
catecheses of S. Cyril of Jerusalem (347): was momentarily abandoned by
400 bishops at Ariminum who were “tricked and worried” into the act.
“They had not,” says Newman, “yet got it deeply fixed in their minds as
a sort of first principle, that to abandon the formula was to betray the
faith.”

<span id="fn_4116"></span>[328:4117](2060166.htm#fr_4116) <span
id="vi.iv-p139.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p140"></span> The distinguishing principle of the
doctrine of Acacius was adherence to Scriptural phraseology. See
Bright’s Hist., p. 69.

<span id="fn_4117"></span>[328:4118](2060166.htm#fr_4117) <span
id="vi.iv-p140.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p141"></span> The teaching of Ætius and Eunomius, the
Anomœans, who were the extremists of the Arians. See Robertson’s Hist.
of Chris. Ch., fourth edition, pp. 236–237, etc. The other tenets
anathematized are Arian or Semi-Arian.

<span id="fn_4118"></span>[329:4119](2060166.htm#fr_4118) <span
id="vi.iv-p142.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p143"></span> Bishop of Singedunum (Belgrade). “He and
Valens, bishop of Mursa (in Pannonia) appear at every Synod and Council
from 330 till about 370, as leaders of the Arian party, both in the East
and West…They are described by Athanasius as the disciples of Arius.”
Dict. of Chris. Biog.

<span id="fn_4119"></span>[329:4120](2060166.htm#fr_4119) <span
id="vi.iv-p143.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p144"></span> Constantius.

<span id="fn_4120"></span>[329:4121](2060166.htm#fr_4120) <span
id="vi.iv-p144.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p145"></span> Julian.

<span id="fn_4121"></span>[329:4122](2060166.htm#fr_4121) <span
id="vi.iv-p145.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p146"></span> In August 362, “All Egypt seemed to
assemble in the city (Alexandria), which blazed with lights and rang
with acclamations; the air was fragrant with incense burnt in token of
joy; men formed a choir to precede the Archbishop; to hear his voice, to
catch a glimpse of his face, even to see his shadow, was deemed
happiness.” Bright, p. 115.

<span id="fn_4122"></span>[329:4123](2060166.htm#fr_4122) <span
id="vi.iv-p146.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p147"></span> Bishop of Poictiers (<span
class="c17"><span id="vi.iv-p147.1"></span>a.d.</span> 350). Died <span
class="c17"><span id="vi.iv-p147.2"></span>a.d.</span> 368.

<span id="fn_4123"></span>[329:4124](2060166.htm#fr_4123) <span
id="vi.iv-p147.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p148"></span> Bishop of Vercellae in N. Italy. Died
about <span class="c17"><span id="vi.iv-p148.1"></span>a.d. 3</span>70.
Both he and Hilary had been sent into exile by Constantius for their
opposition to Arianism.

<span id="fn_4124"></span>[329:4125](2060166.htm#fr_4124) <span
id="vi.iv-p148.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p149"></span> That is, the creed of Ariminum.

<span id="fn_4125"></span>[330:4126](2060166.htm#fr_4125) <span
id="vi.iv-p151.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p152"></span> Said to have been the “most prominent and
most distinguished man of the entire movement.” Athanasius suggested
that he was the teacher rather than the disciple of Arius. He died <span
class="c17"><span id="vi.iv-p152.1"></span>a.d.</span> 342.

<span id="fn_4126"></span>[330:4127](2060166.htm#fr_4126) <span
id="vi.iv-p152.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p153"></span> Regarded as one of the chief opponents of
Athanasius. He and others it is said saved themselves from exile by
secretly substituting <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p153.1"></span>ὄ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p153.2"></span>μοιούσιος</span> for <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p153.3"></span>ὅ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p153.4"></span>μοούσιος</span> in the sentence of the Council.

<span id="fn_4127"></span>[330:4128](2060166.htm#fr_4127) <span
id="vi.iv-p153.5"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p154"></span> Born probably, about <span
class="c17"><span id="vi.iv-p154.1"></span>a.d.</span> 260. He was made
bishop of Cæsarea about 313 and lived to be eighty. At the time of the
Council he was the most learned man and most famous living writer. He
had great influence with Constantine, and was among the most moderate
Arians.

<span id="fn_4128"></span>[330:4129](2060166.htm#fr_4128) <span
id="vi.iv-p154.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p155"></span> Eudoxius was deposed from the bishopric of
Antioch by the Council of Seleucia, <span class="c17"><span
id="vi.iv-p155.1"></span>a.d.</span> 359; but the immediate predecessor
of Euzoius was Meletius, deposed <span class="c17"><span
id="vi.iv-p155.2"></span>a.d.</span> 361. Baronius describes him as the
worst of all the Arians. Euzoius had been the companion and intimate
friend of Arius from an early age. Athanasius (Hist. Arian. p. 858)
calls him the “Canaanite.”

<span id="fn_4129"></span>[330:4130](2060166.htm#fr_4129) <span
id="vi.iv-p159.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p160"></span> Saints Athanasius, Hilary of Poictiers,
and Eusebius of Vercellae.

<span id="fn_4130"></span>[330:4131](2060166.htm#fr_4130) <span
id="vi.iv-p160.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p161"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="vi.iv-p161.1"></span>a.d.</span> 328, when Athanasius was
consecrated bishop.

<span id="fn_4131"></span>[330:4132](2060166.htm#fr_4131) <span
id="vi.iv-p161.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p162"></span> See introduction.

<span id="fn_4132"></span>[331:4133](2060166.htm#fr_4132) <span
id="vi.iv-p163.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p164"></span> This Hilary was a deacon of Rome, sent by
Liberius the bishop with Lucifer and Pancratius to the Emperor
Constantius. He joined the Luciferians, and wrote in their interest on
the re-baptism of heretics. He appears, however, to have been reconciled
before his death.

<span id="fn_4133"></span>[331:4134](2060166.htm#fr_4133) <span
id="vi.iv-p168.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p169"></span> [1 Pet. iii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#020)<span id="vi.iv-p169.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4134"></span>[331:4135](2060166.htm#fr_4134) <span
id="vi.iv-p169.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p170"></span> [2 Tim. ii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#020)<span id="vi.iv-p170.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4135"></span>[331:4136](2060166.htm#fr_4135) <span
id="vi.iv-p170.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p171"></span> [Ecc. xi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc011.htm#002)<span id="vi.iv-p171.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4136"></span>[331:4137](2060166.htm#fr_4136) <span
id="vi.iv-p171.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p172"></span> Vulg. for <span
id="vi.iv-p172.1"></span>תיִגיִשּׁשְׁ לעַ [Ps.
6:0](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#000), [Ps.
12:0](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#000), [1 Chr.
15:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#021)<span id="vi.iv-p172.2"></span>.
The meaning is probably “in a lower octave,” or, “in the bass.”
According to others, an air, or key in which the psalm was to be sung,
or a musical instrument with eight strings.

<span id="fn_4137"></span>[331:4138](2060166.htm#fr_4137) <span
id="vi.iv-p172.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p173"></span> Virg, Georg. i. 154.

<span id="fn_4138"></span>[331:4139](2060166.htm#fr_4138) <span
id="vi.iv-p173.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p174"></span> S. [Matt. xiii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#024)<span id="vi.iv-p174.1"></span> sq.

<span id="fn_4139"></span>[331:4140](2060166.htm#fr_4139) <span
id="vi.iv-p174.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p175"></span> [Rom.
9:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#022),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#023), [2 Tim.
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#021)<span id="vi.iv-p175.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4140"></span>[332:4141](2060166.htm#fr_4140) <span
id="vi.iv-p175.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p176"></span> [1 John ii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#019)<span id="vi.iv-p176.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4141"></span>[332:4142](2060166.htm#fr_4141) <span
id="vi.iv-p176.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p177"></span> [Prov. xiv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#012)<span id="vi.iv-p177.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4142"></span>[332:4143](2060166.htm#fr_4142) <span
id="vi.iv-p178.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p179"></span> Stephen was willing to admit all heretical
baptism, even that by Marcionites and Ophites; Cyprian would admit none.
The Council was held at Carthage <span class="c17"><span
id="vi.iv-p179.1"></span>a.d.</span> 255, and was followed by two in the
next year.

<span id="fn_4143"></span>[332:4144](2060166.htm#fr_4143) <span
id="vi.iv-p179.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p180"></span> Bishop of Rome from May 12, <span
class="c17"><span id="vi.iv-p180.1"></span>a.d.</span> 254, to Aug. 2,
<span class="c17"><span id="vi.iv-p180.2"></span>a.d.</span> 257. See
note on ch. 25.

<span id="fn_4144"></span>[332:4145](2060166.htm#fr_4144) <span
id="vi.iv-p180.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p181"></span> The words of [1 John iv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#003)<span id="vi.iv-p181.1"></span> would
appear to support Jerome’s remark.

<span id="fn_4145"></span>[332:4146](2060166.htm#fr_4145) <span
id="vi.iv-p181.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p182"></span> [Acts viii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#010)<span id="vi.iv-p182.1"></span>. In
the Clementine Homilies and Recognitions Simon is the constant opponent
of St. Peter.

<span id="fn_4146"></span>[332:4147](2060166.htm#fr_4146) <span
id="vi.iv-p182.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p183"></span> Commonly regarded as the chief among the
Egyptian Gnostics. The Basilidian system is described by Irenaeus
(101f).

<span id="fn_4147"></span>[332:4148](2060166.htm#fr_4147) <span
id="vi.iv-p183.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p184"></span> [Acts
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#005), [Rev.
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#006),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#015)<span id="vi.iv-p184.1"></span>. As
to how far Jerome’s estimate of the character of Nicolas is correct, the
article *Nicolas* in Smith’s Dict. of Bible may be consulted.

<span id="fn_4148"></span>[332:4149](2060166.htm#fr_4148) <span
id="vi.iv-p184.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p185"></span> Jerome here reproduces almost exactly the
remark of Pseudo-Tertullian. The Dositheans were probably a Jewish or
Samaritan ascetic sect, something akin to the Essenes.

<span id="fn_4149"></span>[332:4150](2060166.htm#fr_4149) <span
id="vi.iv-p185.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p186"></span> The name Pharisee implies separation, but
in the sense of dedication to God.

<span id="fn_4150"></span>[332:4151](2060166.htm#fr_4150) <span
id="vi.iv-p186.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p187"></span> Of Antioch. One of the earliest of the
Gnostics (second century).

<span id="fn_4151"></span>[332:4152](2060166.htm#fr_4151) <span
id="vi.iv-p187.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p188"></span> The Ophites, whose name is derived from
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p188.1"></span>ὄ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p188.2"></span>φις</span>, a serpent, were
a sect which lasted from the second century to the sixth. Some of them
believed that the serpent of [Gen.
iii.](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#000)<span id="vi.iv-p188.3"></span>
was either the Divine Wisdom, or the Christ himself, come to enlighten
mankind. Their errors may in great measure, like those of the Cainites,
be traced to the belief, common to all systems of Gnosticism, that the
Creator of the world, who was the God of the Jews, was not the same as
the Supreme Being, but was in antagonism to Him. They supposed that the
Scriptures were written in the interest of the Demiurge or Creator, and
that a false colouring being given to the story, the real worthies were
those who are reprobated in the sacred writings.

<span id="fn_4152"></span>[332:4153](2060166.htm#fr_4152) <span
id="vi.iv-p188.4"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p189"></span> The Cainites regarded as saints, Cain,
Korah, Dathan, the Sodomites, and even the traitor Judas.

<span id="fn_4153"></span>[332:4154](2060166.htm#fr_4153) <span
id="vi.iv-p189.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p190"></span> The Sethites are said to have looked upon
Seth as the same person as Christ.

<span id="fn_4154"></span>[332:4155](2060166.htm#fr_4154) <span
id="vi.iv-p190.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p191"></span> Carpocrates, another Gnostic, held that
our Lord was the son of Joseph and Mary, and was distinguished from
other men by nothing except moral superiority. He also taught the
indifference of actions in themselves, and maintained that they take
their quality from opinion or from legislation; he advocated community
of goods and of wives, basing his views on the doctrine of natural
rights. See Mosheim, Cent. ii.

<span id="fn_4155"></span>[332:4156](2060166.htm#fr_4155) <span
id="vi.iv-p191.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p192"></span> Cerinthus was a native of Judæa, and after
having studied at Alexandria established himself as a teacher in his own
country. He afterwards removed to Ephesus, and there became prominent.
He held that Jesus and the Christ were not the same person; Jesus was,
he said, a real man, the son of Joseph and Mary; the Christ was an
emanation which descended upon Jesus at his baptism to reveal the Most
High, but which forsook him before the Passion. S. John in his Gospel
and Epistles combats this error. See Westcott’s Introduction to 1 John,
p. xxxiv. (second ed.) etc. Cerinthus is said to have been the heretic
with whom S. John refused to be under the same roof at the bath. To him
as author is also referred the doctrine of the Millennium.

<span id="fn_4156"></span>[332:4157](2060166.htm#fr_4156) <span
id="vi.iv-p192.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p193"></span> The Ebionites were mere humanitarians.
Whether Ebion ever existed, or whether the sect took its name from the
*beggarliness* of their doctrine, or their vow of *poverty,* or the
*poorness of spirit* which they professed, is disputed.

<span id="fn_4157"></span>[333:4158](2060166.htm#fr_4157) <span
id="vi.iv-p194.5"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p195"></span> [Rev. ii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#016)<span id="vi.iv-p195.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4158"></span>[333:4159](2060166.htm#fr_4158) <span
id="vi.iv-p196.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p197"></span> Cyprian’s opinion as stated in his reply
to the Numidian and Mauritanian bishops (Ep. 71<span
id="vi.iv-p197.1"></span>) was that converts must be baptized, unless
they had received the regular baptism of the Church before falling into
heresy or schism, in which case imposition of hands would suffice. The
question was afterwards decided against Cyprian’s views by the Council
of Arles (<span class="c17"><span id="vi.iv-p197.2"></span>a.d.</span>
314), which ordered that if the baptism had been administered in the
name of the Trinity, converts should be admitted to the Church by
imposition of hands.

<span id="fn_4159"></span>[333:4160](2060166.htm#fr_4159) <span
id="vi.iv-p197.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p198"></span> For Novatus and an account of the dispute
between Cyprian and Stephen, see Robertson’s “Hist. of Christian
Church,” fourth ed., vol. i. pp. 120–127.

<span id="fn_4160"></span>[333:4161](2060166.htm#fr_4160) <span
id="vi.iv-p198.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p199"></span> [1 Cor. xi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#016)<span id="vi.iv-p199.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4161"></span>[333:4162](2060166.htm#fr_4161) <span
id="vi.iv-p200.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p201"></span> As Deucalion was left alone after the
flood, so, Jerome implies, Hilary imagined himself the sole survivor
after the flood of Arianism.

<span id="fn_4162"></span>[333:4163](2060166.htm#fr_4162) <span
id="vi.iv-p202.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p203"></span> The advocates on each side could plead
immemorial local usage. If imposition of hands was the rule at Rome,
synods held at Iconium and at Synnada had established the rule of
re-baptism nearly throughout Asia Minor. In Africa the same practice had
been sanctioned early in the third century, but it seems to have fallen
into disuse long before Cyprian’s time.

<span id="fn_4163"></span>[334:4164](2060166.htm#fr_4163) <span
id="vi.iv-p203.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p204"></span> Bishops of Rome—Julius 337–352; Mark Jan.
18–Oct. 7, 336; Sylvester 314–335.

<span id="fn_4164"></span>[334:4165](2060166.htm#fr_4164) <span
id="vi.iv-p204.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p205"></span> Canon 19.

<span id="fn_4165"></span>[334:4166](2060166.htm#fr_4165) <span
id="vi.iv-p205.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p206"></span> Canon 8. The bishop might give him the
nominal honour of a bishop.

<span id="fn_4166"></span>[334:4167](2060166.htm#fr_4166) <span
id="vi.iv-p207.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p208"></span> By the “men of the mountain or the plain,”
Jerome appears to contemptuously designate the Circumcellions who were
an extreme section of the Donatists. They roamed about the country in
bands of both sexes, and struck terror into the peaceable inhabitants.
They were guilty of the grossest excesses, and no Catholic was safe
except in the towns. Robertson’s “Hist. of the Church,” vol. i. fourth
ed. pp. 200, 419, and the original authorities there referred to.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Perpetual Virginity of Blessed Mary.](2060167)
