[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2060136)  [Next](2060138) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.CXXVI"></span>

<span id="v.CXXVI-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="v.CXXVI-p1.1"></span>Letter CXXVI. To Marcellinus and
Anapsychia.</span>

<span id="v.CXXVI-p2"></span>Marcellinus, a Roman official of high rank,
and Anapsychia his wife had written to Jerome from Africa to ask him his
opinion on the vexed question of the origin of the soul. Jerome in his
reply briefly enumerates the several views that have been held on the
subject. For fuller information he refers his questioners to his
treatise against Rufinus and also to their bishop Augustin who will, he
says, explain the matter to them by word of mouth. Although it hardly
appears in this letter Jerome is a decided creationist (see his Comm. on
[Eccles. xii. 7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#007)<span
id="v.CXXVI-p2.1"></span>). But, though he vehemently condemns Rufinus
([Ap. ii. 10](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#010)<span
id="v.CXXVI-p2.2"></span>) for professing ignorance on the subject, he
assents (Letter CXXXIV.) to Augustin (Letter CXXXI.) who similarly
professes ignorance but seems to lean to traducianism. The date of
writing is <span class="c17"><span id="v.CXXVI-p2.3"></span>a.d.</span>
412.

<span id="v.CXXVI-p3"></span>To his truly holy lord and lady, his
children worthy of the highest respect and affection, Marcellinus and
Anapsychia, Jerome sends greeting.

<span id="v.CXXVI-p4"></span>1. I have at last received from Africa your
joint letter and no longer regret the effrontery which led me, in spite
of your silence to ply you both with so many missives. I hoped, indeed,
by so doing to gain a reply and to learn of your welfare not indirectly
from others but directly from yourselves. I well remember your little
problem about the nature of the soul; although I ought not to call it
little, seeing that it is one of the greatest with which the church has
to deal. You ask whether it has fallen from heaven, as Pythagoras, all
Platonists, and Origen suppose; or whether it is part of God’s essence
as the Stoics, Manes, and the Spanish Priscillianists hint. Whether
souls created long since are kept in God’s storehouse as some
ecclesiastical writers <span id="fr_3512"></span>[3513](#fn_3512)
foolishly imagine; or whether they are formed by God and introduced into
bodies day by day according to that saying in the Gospel: “my Father
worketh hitherto and I work;” <span id="fr_3513"></span>[3514](#fn_3513)
or whether, lastly, they are transmitted by propagation. This is the
view of Tertullian, Apollinaris, and most western writers who hold that
soul is derived from soul as body is from body and that the conditions
of life are the same for men and brutes. I have given my opinion on the
matter in my reply to the treatise which Rufinus presented to
Anastasius, bishop of Rome, of holy memory. He strives in this by an
evasive and crafty but sufficiently foolish confession to play with the
simplicity of his hearers, but only succeeds in playing with his own
faith or rather want of it. My book, <span
id="fr_3514"></span>[3515](#fn_3514) which has been published a good
while, contains an answer to the calumnies which in his various writings
Rufinus has directed against me. Your reverend father Oceanus <span
id="fr_3515"></span>[3516](#fn_3515) has, I think, a copy of it. But if
you cannot procure it your bishop Augustine is both learned and holy. He
will teach you by word of mouth and will give you his opinion, or rather
mine, in his own words.

<span id="v.CXXVI-p9"></span>2. I have long wished to attack the
prophecies of Ezekiel and to make good the promises which I have so
often given to curious readers. When, however, I began to dictate I was
so confounded by the havoc wrought in the West and above all by the sack
of Rome that, as the common saying has it, I forgot even my own name.
Long did I remain silent knowing that it was a time to weep. <span
id="fr_3516"></span>[3517](#fn_3516) This year I began again and had
written three books of commentary when a sudden incursion of those
barbarians of whom your Virgil speaks <span
id="fr_3517"></span>[3518](#fn_3517) as the “far-wandering men of Barce”
(and to whom may be applied what holy scripture says of Ishmael: “he
shall dwell over against all his brethren” <span
id="fr_3518"></span>[3519](#fn_3518) ) overran the borders of Egypt,
Palestine, Phenicia, and Syria, and like a raging torrent carried
everything before them. It was with difficulty and only through Christ’s
mercy that we were able to escape from their hands. But if, as the great
orator says, “amid the clash of arms law ceases to be heard;” <span
id="fr_3519"></span>[3520](#fn_3519) how much more truly may it be said
that war puts an end to the study of holy scripture. For this requires
plenty of books and silence and careful copyists and above all freedom
from alarm and a sense of security. I have accordingly only been able to
complete two books and these I have sent to my daughter, Fabiola, <span
id="fr_3520"></span>[3521](#fn_3520) from <span id="page_253">p.
253</span> <span id="v.CXXVI-Page_253"></span>whom you can if you like
borrow them. For want of time I have not been able as yet to transcribe
the rest. But when you have read these you will have seen the
ante-chamber and will easily form from this a notion of the whole
edifice. I trust in God’s mercy and believe that, as he has helped me in
the difficult opening chapters of the prophecy, so he will help me in
the chapters towards the close. These describe the wars of Gog and
Magog, and set forth the mode of building, the plan, and the dimensions
of the holy and mysterious temple.

<span id="v.CXXVI-p15"></span>3. Our reverend brother Oceanus to whom
you desire an introduction is a great and good man and so learned in the
law of the Lord that no words of mine are needed to make him able and
willing to instruct you both and to explain to you in conformity with
the rules which govern our common studies, my opinion and his on all
questions arising out of the scriptures. In conclusion, my truly holy
lord and lady, may Christ our God by his almighty power have you in his
safekeeping and cause you to live long and happily.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3512"></span>[252:3513](2060137.htm#fr_3512) <span
id="v.CXXVI-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXVI-p5"></span> The allusion is probably to Clement of
Alexandria.

<span id="fn_3513"></span>[252:3514](2060137.htm#fr_3513) <span
id="v.CXXVI-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXVI-p6"></span> [John v.
17](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#017)<span id="v.CXXVI-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3514"></span>[252:3515](2060137.htm#fr_3514) <span
id="v.CXXVI-p6.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXVI-p7"></span> *Against Rufinus,* ii. §§ 8–10; iii. §30;
in neither place, however, does Jerome clearly state his own view.

<span id="fn_3515"></span>[252:3516](2060137.htm#fr_3515) <span
id="v.CXXVI-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXVI-p8"></span> See Letter LXIX, introduction. It is
doubtful whether Oceanus was in holy orders although the title ‘father’
seems to imply it.

<span id="fn_3516"></span>[252:3517](2060137.htm#fr_3516) <span
id="v.CXXVI-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXVI-p10"></span> [Eccl. iii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#004)<span id="v.CXXVI-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3517"></span>[252:3518](2060137.htm#fr_3517) <span
id="v.CXXVI-p10.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXVI-p11"></span> Virg., A. iv. 43. It does not appear who
these barbarians were. Barce is near Cyrene in Africa.

<span id="fn_3518"></span>[252:3519](2060137.htm#fr_3518) <span
id="v.CXXVI-p11.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXVI-p12"></span> [Gen. xvi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#012)<span id="v.CXXVI-p12.1"></span>.
R.V. marg.

<span id="fn_3519"></span>[252:3520](2060137.htm#fr_3519) <span
id="v.CXXVI-p12.2"></span>

<span id="v.CXXVI-p13"></span> Cicero, pro Milon. 4.

<span id="fn_3520"></span>[252:3521](2060137.htm#fr_3520) <span
id="v.CXXVI-p13.1"></span>

<span id="v.CXXVI-p14"></span> This Fabiola (who must be carefully
distinguished from the lady so often mentioned by Jerome) is probably
the person to whom Augustine addressed a letter on communion with the
spiritual world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter CXXVII](2060138)
