[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2060174)  [Next](2060176) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="I_1"></span>

<span id="I_1-p1"></span> <span id="page_450">p. 450</span> <span
id="I_1-Page_450"></span><span class="c14"><span
id="I_1-p1.1"></span>Book I.</span>

<span id="I_1-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="I_1-p3"></span>1. Atticus. I hear, Critobulus, that you have
written that man can be without sin, if he chooses; and that the
commandments of God are easy. Tell me, is it true?

<span id="I_1-p4"></span>Critobulus. It is true, Atticus; but our rivals
do not take the words in the sense I attached to them.

<span id="I_1-p5"></span>A. Are they then so ambiguous as to give rise
to a difference as to their meaning? I do not ask for an answer to two
questions at once. You laid down two propositions; the one, that <span
id="fr_5142"></span>[5143](#fn_5142) man can be without sin, if he
chooses: the other, that God’s commandments are easy. Although,
therefore, they were uttered together, let them be discussed separately,
so that, while our faith appears to be one, no strife may arise through
our misunderstanding each other.

<span id="I_1-p7"></span>C. I said, Atticus, that man can be without
sin, if he chooses; not, as some maliciously make us say, without the
grace of God (the very thought is impiety), but simply that he can, if
he chooses; the aid of the grace of God being presupposed.

<span id="I_1-p8"></span>A. Is God, then, the author of your evil works?

<span id="I_1-p9"></span>C. By no means. But if there is any good in me,
it is brought to perfection through His impulse and assistance.

<span id="I_1-p10"></span>A. My question does not refer to natural
constitution, but to action. For who doubts that God is the Creator of
all things? I wish you would tell me this: the good you do, is it your’s
or God’s?

<span id="I_1-p11"></span>C. It is mine and God’s: I work and He
assists.

<span id="I_1-p12"></span>A. How is it then that everybody thinks you do
away with the grace of God, and maintain that all our actions proceed
from our own will?

<span id="I_1-p13"></span>C. I am surprised, Atticus, at your asking me
for the why and wherefore of other people’s mistakes, and wanting to
know what I did not write, when what I did write is perfectly clear. I
said that man can be without sin, if he chooses. Did I add, *without the
grace of God?*

<span id="I_1-p14"></span>A. No; but the fact that you added nothing
implies your denial of the need of grace.

<span id="I_1-p15"></span>C. Nay, rather, the fact that I have not
denied grace should be regarded as tantamount to an assertion of it. It
is unjust to suppose we deny whatever we do not assert.

<span id="I_1-p16"></span>A. You admit then that man can be sinless, if
he chooses, but with the grace of God.

<span id="I_1-p17"></span>C. I not only admit it, but freely proclaim
it.

<span id="I_1-p18"></span>A. So then he who does away with the grace of
God is in error.

<span id="I_1-p19"></span>C. Just so. Or rather, he ought to be thought
impious, seeing that all things are governed by the pleasure of God, and
that we owe our existence and the faculty of individual choice and
desire to the goodness of God, the Creator. For that we have free will,
and according to our own choice incline to good or evil, is part of His
grace who made us what we are, in His own image and likeness.

<span id="I_1-p20"></span>2. A. No one doubts, Critobulus, that all
things depend on the judgment of Him Who is Creator of all, and that
whatever we have ought to be attributed to His goodness. But I should
like to know respecting this faculty, which you attribute to the grace
of God, whether you reckon it as part of the gift bestowed in our
creation, or suppose it energetic in our separate actions, so that we
avail ourselves of its assistance continually; or is it the case that,
having been once for all created and endowed with free will, we do what
we choose by our own choice or strength? For I know that very many of
your party refer all things to the grace of God in such a sense that
they understand the power of the will to be a gift not of a particular,
but of a general character, that is to say, one which is bestowed not at
each separate moment, but once for all at creation.

<span id="I_1-p21"></span>C. It is not as you affirm; but I maintain
both positions, that it is by the grace of God we were created such as
we are, and also that in our several actions we are supported by His
aid.

<span id="I_1-p22"></span>A. We are agreed, then, that in good works,
besides our own power of choice, we lean on the help of God; in evil
works we are prompted by the devil.

<span id="I_1-p23"></span>C. Quite so; there is no difference of opinion
on that point.

<span id="I_1-p24"></span>A. They are wrong, then, who strip us of the
help of God in our separate actions. The Psalmist sings: <span
id="fr_5143"></span>[5144](#fn_5143) “Except the Lord build the house,
they labour in vain who build it. Except the Lord keep the city, the
watchman waketh but in vain;” and there are similar passages. But these
men endeavour by perverse, or rather ridiculous interpretations, to
twist his words to a different meaning.

<span id="I_1-p26"></span>3. C. Am I bound to contradict others when you
have my own answer?

<span id="I_1-p27"></span><span id="page_451">p. 451</span> <span
id="I_1-Page_451"></span>A. Your answer to what effect? That they are
right, or wrong?

<span id="I_1-p28"></span>C. What necessity compels me to set my opinion
against other men’s?

<span id="I_1-p29"></span>A. You are bound by the rules of discussion,
and by respect for truth. Do you not know that every assertion either
affirms, or denies, and that what is affirmed or denied ought to be
reckoned among good or bad things? You must, therefore, admit, and no
thanks to you, that the statement to which my question relates is either
a good thing or a bad.

<span id="I_1-p30"></span>C. If in particular actions we must have the
help of God, does it follow that we are unable to make a pen, <span
id="fr_5144"></span>[5145](#fn_5144) or mend it when it is made? Can we
not fashion the letters, be silent or speak, sit, stand, walk or run,
eat or fast, weep or laugh, and so on, without God’s assistance?

<span id="I_1-p32"></span>A. From my point of view it is clearly
impossible.

<span id="I_1-p33"></span>C. How then have we free will, and how can we
guard the grace of God towards us, if we cannot do even these things
without God?

<span id="I_1-p34"></span>4. A. The bestowal of the grace of free will
is not such as to do away with the support of God in particular actions.

<span id="I_1-p35"></span>C. The help of God is not made of no account;
inasmuch as creatures are preserved through the grace of free will once
for all given to them. For if without God, and except He assist me in
every action, I can do nothing. He can neither with justice crown me for
my good deeds, nor punish me for my evil ones, but in each case He will
either receive His own or will condemn the assistants He gave.

<span id="I_1-p36"></span>A. Tell me, then, plainly, why you do away
with the grace of God. For whatever you destroy in the parts you must of
necessity deny in the whole.

<span id="I_1-p37"></span>C. I do not deny grace when I assert that I
was so created by God, that by the grace of God it was put within the
power of my choice either to do a thing or not to do it.

<span id="I_1-p38"></span>A. So God falls asleep over our good actions,
when once the faculty of free will has been given; and we need not pray
to Him to assist us in our separate actions, since it depends upon our
own choice and will either to do a thing if we choose, or not to do it
if we do not choose.

<span id="I_1-p39"></span>5. C. As in the case of other creatures, the
conditions of elicit creation are observed; so, when once the power of
free will was granted, everything was left to our own choice.

<span id="I_1-p40"></span>A. It follows, as I said, that I ought not to
beg the assistance of God in the details of conduct, because I consider
it was given once for all.

<span id="I_1-p41"></span>C. If He co-operates with me in everything the
result is no longer mine, but His Who assists, or rather works in and
with me; and all the more because I can do nothing without Him.

<span id="I_1-p42"></span>A. Have you not read, pray, <span
id="fr_5145"></span>[5146](#fn_5145) “that it is not of him that
willeth, nor of him that runneth, but of God that showeth mercy!” From
this we understand that to will and to run is ours, but the carrying
into effect our willing and running pertains to the mercy of God, and is
so effected that on the one hand in willing and running free will is
preserved; and on the other, in consummating our willing and running,
everything is left to the power of God. Of course, I ought now to adduce
the frequent testimony of Scripture to show that in the details of
conduct the saints intreat the help of God, and in their several actions
desire to have Him for their helper and protector. Read through the
Psalter, and all the utterances of the saints, and you will find their
actions never unaccompanied by prayer to God. And this is a clear proof
that you either deny the grace which you banish from the parts of life;
or if you concede its presence in the parts, a concession plainly much
against your will, you must have come over to the views of us who
preserve free will for man, but so limit it that we do not deny the
assistance of God in each action.

<span id="I_1-p44"></span>6. C. That is a sophistical conclusion and a
mere display of logical skill. No one can strip me of the power of free
will; otherwise, if God were really my helper in what I do, the reward
would not be due to me, but to Him who wrought in me.

<span id="I_1-p45"></span>A. Make the most of your free will; arm your
tongue against God, and therein prove yourself free, if you will, to
blaspheme. But to go a step farther, there is no doubt as to your
sentiments, and the delusions of your profession have become as clear as
day. Now, let us turn back to the starting-point of our discussion. You
said just now that, granted God’s assistance, man may be sinless if he
chooses. Tell me, please, for how long? For ever, or only for a short
time?

<span id="I_1-p46"></span>C. Your question is unnecessary. If I say for
a short time, for ever will none the less be implied. For whatever you
allow for a short time, you will admit may last for ever.

<span id="I_1-p47"></span>A. I do not quite understand your meaning.

<span id="I_1-p48"></span>C. Are you so senseless that you do not
recognize plain facts?

<span id="I_1-p49"></span>7. A. I am not ashamed of my ignorance. <span
id="page_452">p. 452</span> <span id="I_1-Page_452"></span>And both
sides ought to be well agreed on a definition of the subject of dispute.

<span id="I_1-p50"></span>C. I maintain this: he who can keep himself
from sin one day, may do so another day: if he can on two, he may on
three; if on three, on thirty: and so on for three hundred, or three
thousand, or as long as ever he chooses to do so.

<span id="I_1-p51"></span>A. Say then at once that a man may be without
sin for ever, if he chooses. Can we do anything we like?

<span id="I_1-p52"></span>C. Certainly not, for I cannot do all I should
like; but all I say is this, that a man can be without sin, if he
chooses.

<span id="I_1-p53"></span>A. Be so good as to tell me this: do you think
I am a man or a beast?

<span id="I_1-p54"></span>C. If I had any doubt as to whether you were a
man, or a beast, I should confess myself to be the latter.

<span id="I_1-p55"></span>A. If then, as you say, I am a man, how is it
that when I wish and earnestly desire not to sin, I do transgress?

<span id="I_1-p56"></span>C. Because your choice is imperfect. If you
really wished not to sin, you really would not.

<span id="I_1-p57"></span>A. Well then, you who accuse me of not having
a real desire, are you free from sin because you have a real desire?

<span id="I_1-p58"></span>C. As though I were talking of myself whom I
admit to be a sinner, and not of the few exceptional ones, if any, who
have resolved not to sin.

<span id="I_1-p59"></span>8. A. Still, I who question, and you who
answer, both consider ourselves sinners.

<span id="I_1-p60"></span>C. But we are capable of not being so, if we
please.

<span id="I_1-p61"></span>A. I said I did not wish to sin, and no doubt
your feeling is the same. How is it then that what we both wish we can
neither do?

<span id="I_1-p62"></span>C. Because we do not wish perfectly.

<span id="I_1-p63"></span>A. Show me any of our ancestors who had a
perfect will and the power in perfection.

<span id="I_1-p64"></span>C. That is not easy. And when I say that a man
may be without sin if he chooses, I do not contend that there ever have
been such; I only maintain the abstract possibility—if he chooses. For
*possibility of being* is one thing, and is expressed in Greek by <span
class="Greek"><span id="I_1-p64.1"></span>τῇ δυνάμει</span>
(possibility); *being* is another, the equivalent for which is <span
class="Greek"><span id="I_1-p64.2"></span>τῇ ἐνεργεί& 139·</span>
(actuality). I can be a physician; but meanwhile I am not. I can be an
artisan; but I have not yet learnt a trade. So, whatever I am able to
be, though I am not that yet, I shall be if I choose.

<span id="I_1-p65"></span>9. A. Art is one thing, that which is <span
id="fr_5146"></span>[5147](#fn_5146) above art is another. Medical
skill, craftsmanship, and so on, are found in many persons; but to be
always without sin is a characteristic of the Divine power only.
Therefore, either give me an instance of those who were for ever without
sin; or, if you cannot find one, confess your impotence, lay aside
bombast, and do not mock the ears of fools with this *being* and
*possibility of being* of yours. For who will grant that a man can do
what no man was ever able to do? You have not learnt even the rudiments
of logic. For if a man is able, he is no longer unable. Either grant
that some one was able to do what you maintain was possible to be done;
or if no one has had this power, you must, though against your will, be
held to this position, that no one is able to effect what yet you
profess to be possible. That was the point at issue between the powerful
logicians, <span id="fr_5147"></span>[5148](#fn_5147) Diodorus and <span
id="fr_5148"></span>[5149](#fn_5148) Chrysippus, in their discussion of
possibility. Diodorus says that alone can possibly happen which is
either true or will be true. And whatever will be, that, he says, must
of necessity happen. But whatever will not be, that cannot possibly
happen. Chrysippus, however, says that things which will not be might
happen; for instance, this pearl might be broken, even though it never
will. They, therefore, who say that a man can be without sin if he
chooses, will not be able to prove the truth of the assertion, unless
they show that it will come to pass. But whereas the whole future is
uncertain, and especially such things as have never occurred, it is
clear that they say something will be which will not be. And
Ecclesiastes supports this decision: “All that shall be, has already
been in former ages.”

<span id="I_1-p69"></span>10. C. Pray answer this question: has God
given possible or impossible commands?

<span id="I_1-p70"></span>A. I see your drift. But I must discuss it
later on, that we may not, by confusing different questions, leave our
audience in a fog. I admit that God has given possible commands, for
otherwise He would Himself be the author of injustice, were He to demand
the doing of what cannot possibly be done. Reserving this until later,
finish your argument that a man can be without sin, if he chooses. You
will either give instances of such ability, or, if no one has had the
power, you will clearly confess that a man cannot avoid sin always.

<span id="I_1-p71"></span>C. Since you press me to give what I am not
bound to give, consider what our Lord says, <span
id="fr_5149"></span>[5150](#fn_5149) “That it is easier for a camel to
go <span id="page_453">p. 453</span> <span
id="I_1-Page_453"></span>through a needle’s eye, than for a rich man to
enter into the kingdom of heaven.” And yet he said a thing might
possibly happen, which never has happened. For no camel has ever gone
through a needle’s eye.

<span id="I_1-p73"></span>A. I am surprised at a prudent man submitting
evidence which goes against himself. For the passage in question does
not speak of a possibility, but one impossibility is compared with
another. As a camel cannot go through a needle’s eye, so neither will a
rich man enter the kingdom of heaven. Or, if you should be able to show
that a rich man does enter the kingdom of heaven, it follows, also, that
a camel goes through a needle’s eye. You must not instance Abraham and
other rich men, about whom we read in the Old Testament, who, although
they were rich, entered the kingdom of heaven; for, by spending their
riches on good works, they ceased to be rich; nay, rather, inasmuch as
they were rich, not for themselves, but for others, they ought to be
called God’s stewards rather than rich men. But we must seek evangelical
perfection, according to which there is the command, <span
id="fr_5150"></span>[5151](#fn_5150) “If thou wilt be perfect, go and
sell all that thou hast, and give to the poor, and come, follow Me.”

<span id="I_1-p75"></span>11. C. You are caught unawares in your own
snare.

<span id="I_1-p76"></span>A. How so?

<span id="I_1-p77"></span>C. You quote our Lord’s utterance to the
effect that a man can be perfect. For when He says, “If thou wilt be
perfect, sell all that thou hast, and give to the poor, and come, follow
Me,” He shows that a man, if he chooses, and if he does what is
commanded, can be perfect?

<span id="I_1-p78"></span>A. You have given me such a terrible blow that
I am almost dazed. But yet the very words you quote, “If thou wilt be
perfect,” were spoken to one who could not, or rather would not, and,
therefore, could not; show me now, as you promised, some one who would
and could.

<span id="I_1-p79"></span>C. Why am I compelled to produce instances of
perfection, when it is clear from what the Saviour said to one, and
through one to all, “If thou wilt be perfect” that it is possible for
men to be perfect?

<span id="I_1-p80"></span>A. That is a mere shuffle. You still stick
fast in the mire. For, either, if a thing is possible, it has occurred
at some time or other; or, if it never has happened, grant that it is
impossible.

<span id="I_1-p81"></span>12. C. Why do I any longer delay? You must be
vanquished by the authority or Scripture. To pass over other passages,
you must be silenced by the two in which we read the praises of Job, and
of Zacharias and Elizabeth. For, unless I am deceived, it is thus
written in the book of Job: <span id="fr_5151"></span>[5152](#fn_5151)
“There was a man in the land of Uz, whose name was Job; and that man was
perfect and upright, a true worshipper of God, and one who kept himself
from every evil thing.” And again: <span
id="fr_5152"></span>[5153](#fn_5152) “Who is he that reproveth one that
is righteous and free from sin, and speaketh words without knowledge?”
Also, in the Gospel according to Luke, we read: <span
id="fr_5153"></span>[5154](#fn_5153) “There was in the days of Herod,
king of Judæa, a certain priest named Zacharias, of the course of
Abijah: and he had a wife of the daughters of Aaron, and her name was
Elizabeth. And they were both righteous before God, walking in all the
commandments and ordinances of the Lord blameless.” If a true worshipper
of God is also without spot and without offence, and if those who walked
in all the ordinances of the Lord are righteous before God, I suppose
they are free from sin, and lack nothing that pertains to righteousness.

<span id="I_1-p85"></span>A. You have cited passages which have been
detached not only from the rest of Scripture, but from the books in
which they occur. For even Job, after he was stricken with the plague,
is convicted of having spoken many things against the ruling of God, and
to have summoned Him to the bar: <span
id="fr_5154"></span>[5155](#fn_5154) “Would that a man stood with God in
the judgment as a son of man stands with his fellow.” And again: <span
id="fr_5155"></span>[5156](#fn_5155) “Oh that I had one to hear me! that
the Almighty might hear my desire, and that the judge would himself
write a book!” And again: <span id="fr_5156"></span>[5157](#fn_5156)
“Though I be righteous, mine own mouth shall condemn me: though I be
perfect, it shall prove me perverse. If I wash myself with snow-water,
and make my hands never so clean, Thou hast dyed me again and again with
filth. Mine own clothes have abhorred me.” And of Zacharias it is
written, that when the angel promised the birth of a son, he said: <span
id="fr_5157"></span>[5158](#fn_5157) “Whereby shall I know this? for I
am an old man, and my wife well stricken in years.” For which answer he
was at once condemned to silence: <span
id="fr_5158"></span>[5159](#fn_5158) “Thou shalt be silent, and not able
to speak, until the day that these things shall come to pass, because
thou believest not my words, which shall be fulfilled in their season.”
From this it is clear that men are called righteous, and said to be
without fault; but that, if negligence comes over <span id="page_454">p.
454</span> <span id="I_1-Page_454"></span>them, they may fall; and that
a man always occupies a middle place, so that he may slip from the
height of virtue into vice, or may rise from vice to virtue; and that he
is never safe, but must dread shipwreck even in fair weather; and,
therefore, that a man cannot be without sin. Solomon says, <span
id="fr_5159"></span>[5160](#fn_5159) “There is not a righteous man upon
earth that doeth good and sinneth not”; and likewise in the book of
Kings: <span id="fr_5160"></span>[5161](#fn_5160) “There is no man that
sinneth not.” So, also, the blessed David says: <span
id="fr_5161"></span>[5162](#fn_5161) “Who can understand his errors?
Cleanse Thou me from hidden faults, and keep back Thy servant from
presumptuous sins.” And again: <span
id="fr_5162"></span>[5163](#fn_5162) “Enter not into judgment with Thy
servant, for in Thy sight shall no man living be justified.” Holy
Scripture is full of passages to the same effect.

<span id="I_1-p95"></span>13. C. But what answer will you give to the
famous declaration of John the Evangelist: <span
id="fr_5163"></span>[5164](#fn_5163) “We know that whosoever is begotten
of God sinneth not; but the begetting of God keepeth him, and the evil
one toucheth him not. We know that we are of God, and the whole world
lieth in the evil one?”

<span id="I_1-p97"></span>A. I will requite like with like, and will
show that, according to you, the little epistle of the Evangelist
contradicts itself. For, if whosoever is begotten of God sinneth not
because His seed abideth in him, and he cannot sin, because he is born
of God, how is it that the writer says in the same place: <span
id="fr_5164"></span>[5165](#fn_5164) “If we say that we have no sin, we
deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us?” You cannot explain. You
hesitate and are confused. Listen to the same Evangelist telling us
that <span id="fr_5165"></span>[5166](#fn_5165) “If we confess our sins,
he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from
all unrighteousness.” We are then righteous when we confess that we are
sinners, and our righteousness depends not upon our own merits, but on
the mercy of God, as the Holy Scripture says, <span
id="fr_5166"></span>[5167](#fn_5166) “The righteous man accuseth himself
when he beginneth to speak,” and elsewhere, <span
id="fr_5167"></span>[5168](#fn_5167) “Tell thy sins that thou mayest be
justified.” <span id="fr_5168"></span>[5169](#fn_5168) “God hath shut up
all under sin, that He may have mercy upon all.” And the highest
righteousness of man is this—whatever virtue he may be able to acquire,
not to think it his own, but the gift of God. He then who is born of God
does not sin, so long as the seed of God remains in him, and he cannot
sin, because he is born of God. But seeing that, while the householder
slept, an enemy sowed tares, and that when we know not, a sower by night
scatters in the Lord’s field darnel and wild oats among the good corn,
this parable of the householder in the Gospel should excite our fears.
He cleanses his floor, and gathers the wheat into his garner, but leaves
the chaff to be scattered by the winds, or burned by the fire. And so we
read in Jeremiah, <span id="fr_5169"></span>[5170](#fn_5169) “What is
the chaff to the wheat? saith the Lord.” The chaff, moreover, is
separated from the wheat at the end of the world, a proof that, while we
are in the mortal body, chaff is mixed with the wheat. But if you
object, and ask why did the Apostle say “and he cannot sin, because he
is born of God,” I reply by asking you what becomes of the reward of his
choice? For if a man does not sin because he cannot sin, free will is
destroyed, and goodness cannot possibly be due to his efforts, but must
be part of a nature unreceptive of evil.

<span id="I_1-p104"></span>14. C. The task I set you just now was an
easy one by way of practice for something more difficult. What have you
to say to my next argument? Clever as you are, all your skill will not
avail to overthrow it. I shall first quote from the Old Testament, then
from the New. Moses is the chief figure in the Old Testament, our Lord
and Saviour in the New. Moses says to the people, <span
id="fr_5170"></span>[5171](#fn_5170) “Be perfect in the sight of the
Lord your God.” And the Saviour bids the Apostles <span
id="fr_5171"></span>[5172](#fn_5171) “Be perfect as your heavenly Father
is perfect.” Now it was either possible for the hearers to do what Moses
and the Lord commanded, or, if it be impossible, the fault does not lie
with them who cannot obey, but with Him who gave impossible commands.

<span id="I_1-p107"></span>A. This passage to the ignorant, and to those
who are unaccustomed to meditate on Holy Scripture, and who neither know
nor use it, does appear at first sight to favour your opinion. But when
you look into it, the difficulty soon disappears. And when you compare
passages of Scripture with others, that the Holy Spirit may not seem to
contradict Himself with changing place and time, according to what is
written, <span id="fr_5172"></span>[5173](#fn_5172) “Deep calleth unto
deep at the noise of thy water spouts,” the truth will show itself, that
is, that Christ did give a possible command when He said: “Be ye perfect
as your heavenly Father is perfect,” and yet that the Apostles were not
perfect.

<span id="I_1-p109"></span>C. I am not talking of what the Apostles did,
but of what Christ commanded. And the fault does not lie with the giver
of the command, but with the hearers of it, because we cannot admit the
justice of him who commands without conceding the possibility of doing
what is commanded.

<span id="I_1-p110"></span>A. Good! Don’t tell me then that a man <span
id="page_455">p. 455</span> <span id="I_1-Page_455"></span>can be
without sin if he chooses, but that a man can be what the Apostles were
not.

<span id="I_1-p111"></span>C. Do you think me fool enough to dare say
such a thing?

<span id="I_1-p112"></span>A. Although you do not say it in so many
words, however reluctant you may be to admit the fact, it follows by
natural sequence from your proposition. For if a man can be without sin,
and it is clear the Apostles were not without sin, a man can be higher
than the Apostles: to say nothing of patriarchs and prophets whose
righteousness under the law was not perfect, as the Apostle says, <span
id="fr_5173"></span>[5174](#fn_5173) “For all have sinned, and fall
short of the glory of God: being justified freely by His grace through
the redemption that is in Christ Jesus: whom God set forth to be a
propitiator.”

<span id="I_1-p114"></span>14a. C. This way of arguing is intricate and
brings the simplicity which becomes the Church into the tangled thickets
of philosophy. What has Paul to do with Aristotle? or Peter with Plato?
For as the latter was the prince of philosophers, so was the former
chief of the Apostles: on him the Lord’s Church was firmly founded, and
neither rushing flood nor storm can shake it.

<span id="I_1-p115"></span>A. Now you are rhetorical, and while you
taunt me with philosophy, you yourself cross over to the camp of the
orators. But listen to what your same favourite orator says: <span
id="fr_5174"></span>[5175](#fn_5174) “Let us have no more commonplaces:
we get them at home.”

<span id="I_1-p117"></span>C. There is no eloquence in this, no bombast
like that of the orators, who might be defined as persons whose object
is to persuade, and who frame their language accordingly. We are seeking
unadulterated truth, and use unsophisticated language. Either the Lord
did not give impossible commands, so that they are to blame who did not
do what was possible; or, if what is commanded cannot be done, then not
they who do not things impossible are convicted of unrighteousness, but
He Who commanded things impossible, and that is an impious statement.

<span id="I_1-p118"></span>A. I see you are much more disturbed than is
your wont; so I will not ply you with arguments. But let me briefly ask
what you think of the well-known passage of the Apostle when he wrote to
the Philippians: <span id="fr_5175"></span>[5176](#fn_5175) “Not that I
have already obtained, or am already made perfect: but I press on, if so
be that I may apprehend that for which also I was apprehended by Christ
Jesus. Brethren, I count not myself to have yet apprehended: but one
thing I do; forgetting the things which are behind, and stretching
forward to the things which are before, I press on towards the goal unto
the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. Let us, therefore,
as many as be perfect, be thus minded: and if in anything ye are
otherwise minded, even this shall God reveal unto you,” and so on; no
doubt you know the rest, which, in my desire to be brief, I omit. He
says that he had not yet apprehended, and was by no means perfect; but,
like an archer, aimed his arrows at the mark set up (more expressively
called <span id="fr_5176"></span>[5177](#fn_5176) <span
class="Greek"><span id="I_1-p120.2"></span>σκοπός</span> in Greek), lest
the shaft, turning to one side or the other, might show the
unskilfulness of the archer. He further declares that he always forgot
the past, and ever stretched forward to the things in front, thus
teaching that no heed should be paid to the past, but the future
earnestly desired; so that what to-day he thought perfect, while he was
stretching forward to better things and things in front, to-morrow
proves to have been imperfect. And thus at every step, never standing
still, but always running, he shows that to be imperfect which we men
thought perfect, and teaches that our only perfection and true
righteousness is that which is measured by the excellence of God. “I
press on towards the goal,” he says, “unto the prize of the high calling
of God in Christ Jesus.” Oh, blessed Apostle Paul, pardon me, a poor
creature who confess my faults, if I venture to ask a question. You say
that you had not yet obtained, nor yet apprehended, nor were yet
perfect, and that you always forgot the things behind, and stretched
forward to the things in front, if by any means you might have part in
the resurrection of the dead, and win the prize of your high calling.
How, then, is it that you immediately add, “As many therefore as are
perfect are thus minded”? (or, let us be thus minded, for the copies
vary). And what mind is it that we have, or are to have? that we are
perfect? that we have apprehended that which we have not apprehended,
received what we have not received, are perfect who are not yet perfect?
What mind then have we, or rather what mind ought we to have who are not
perfect? To confess that we are imperfect, and have not yet apprehended,
nor yet obtained, this is true wisdom in man: know thyself to be
imperfect; and, if I may so speak, the perfection of all who are
righteous, so long as they are in the flesh, is imperfect. Hence we read
in Proverbs: <span id="fr_5177"></span>[5178](#fn_5177) “To understand
true righteousness.” For if there were not also a false righteousness,
the righteousness of God would never be called true. The Apostle
continues: “and if ye are otherwise minded, God will also reveal that to
you.” This sounds strange <span id="page_456">p. 456</span> <span
id="I_1-Page_456"></span>to my ears. He who but just now said, “Not that
I have already obtained, or am already perfect”; the chosen vessel, who
was so confident of Christ’s dwelling in him that he dared to say “Do ye
seek a proof of Christ that speaketh in me? ”and yet plainly confessed
that he was not perfect; he now gives to the multitude what he denied to
himself in particular, he unites himself with the rest and says, “As
many of us as are perfect, let us be thus minded.” But why he said this,
he explains presently. Let us, he means, who wish to be perfect
according to the poor measure of human frailty, think this, that we have
not yet obtained, nor yet apprehended, nor are yet perfect, and inasmuch
as we are not yet perfect, and, perhaps, think otherwise than true and
perfect perfection requires, if we are minded otherwise than is dictated
by the full knowledge of God, God will also reveal this to us, so that
we may pray with David and say, <span
id="fr_5178"></span>[5179](#fn_5178) “Open Thou mine eyes that I may
behold wondrous things out of Thy law.”

<span id="I_1-p123"></span>15. All this makes it clear that in Holy
Scripture there are two sorts of perfection, two of righteousness, and
two of fear. The first is that perfection, and incomparable truth, and
perfect righteousness <span id="fr_5179"></span>[5180](#fn_5179) and
fear, which is the beginning of wisdom, and which we must measure by the
excellence of God; the second, which is within the range not only of
men, but of every creature, and is not inconsistent with our frailty, as
we read in the Psalms: <span id="fr_5180"></span>[5181](#fn_5180) “In
Thy sight shall no man living be justified,” is that righteousness which
is said to be perfect, not in comparison with God, but as recognized by
God. Job, and Zacharias, and Elizabeth, were called righteous, in
respect of that righteousness which might some day turn to
unrighteousness, and not in respect of that which is incapable of
change, concerning which it is said, <span
id="fr_5181"></span>[5182](#fn_5181) “I am God, and change not.” And
this is that which the Apostle elsewhere writes: <span
id="fr_5182"></span>[5183](#fn_5182) “That which hath been made glorious
hath not been made glorious in this respect, by reason of the glory that
surpasseth”; because, that is, the righteousness of the law, in
comparison of the grace of the Gospel, does not seem to be righteousness
at all. <span id="fr_5183"></span>[5184](#fn_5183) “For if,” he says,
that which passeth away was with glory, much more that which remaineth
is in glory. <span id="fr_5184"></span>[5185](#fn_5184) And again, “We
know in part, and we prophesy in part; but when that which is perfect is
come, that which is in part shall be done away.” And, <span
id="fr_5185"></span>[5186](#fn_5185) “For now we see in a mirror,
darkly; but then face to face: now I know in part; but then shall I know
even as also I have been known.” And in the Psalms, <span
id="fr_5186"></span>[5187](#fn_5186) “Such knowledge is too wonderful
for me; it is high, I cannot attain unto it.” And again, <span
id="fr_5187"></span>[5188](#fn_5187) “When I thought how I might know
this, it was too painful for me; until I went into the sanctuary of God,
and considered their latter end.” And in the same place, <span
id="fr_5188"></span>[5189](#fn_5188) “I was as a beast before thee:
nevertheless I am continually with thee.” And Jeremiah says, <span
id="fr_5189"></span>[5190](#fn_5189) “Every man is become brutish and
without knowledge.” And to return to the Apostle Paul, <span
id="fr_5190"></span>[5191](#fn_5190) “The foolishness of God is wiser
than men.” And much besides, which I omit for brevity’s sake.

<span id="I_1-p136"></span>16. C. My dear Atticus, your speech is really
a clever feat of memory. But the labour you have spent in mustering this
host of authorities is to my advantage. For I do not any more than you
compare man with God, but with other men, in comparison with whom he who
takes the trouble can be perfect. And so, when we say that man, if he
chooses, can be without sin, the standard is the measure of man, not the
majesty of God, in comparison with Whom no creature can be perfect.

<span id="I_1-p137"></span>A. Critobulus, I am obliged to you for
reminding me of the fact. For it is just my own view that no creature
can be perfect in respect of true and finished righteousness. But that
one differs from another, and that one man’s righteousness is not the
same as another’s, no one doubts; nor again that one may be greater or
less than another, and yet that, relatively to their own status and
capacity, men may be called righteous who are not righteous when
compared with others. For instance, the Apostle Paul, the chosen vessel
who laboured more than all the Apostles, was, I suppose, righteous when
he wrote to Timothy, <span id="fr_5191"></span>[5192](#fn_5191) “I have
fought the good fight, I have finished the course, I have kept the
faith: henceforth there is laid up for me the crown of righteousness,
which the Lord, the righteous judge, shall give to me at that day: and
not only to me, but also to all them that love His appearing.” Timothy,
his disciple and imitator, whom he taught the rules of action and the
limits of virtue, was also righteous. Are we to think there was one and
the same righteousness in them both, and that he had not more merit who
laboured more than all? “In my Father’s house are many mansions.” I
suppose there are also different degrees of merit. “One star differeth
from another star in glory,” and in the one body of the Church there are
different members. The sun has its own splendour, the moon <span
id="page_457">p. 457</span> <span id="I_1-Page_457"></span>tempers the
darkness of the night; and the five heavenly bodies which are called
planets traverse the sky in different tracks and with different degrees
of luminousness. There are countless other stars whose movements we
trace in the firmament. Each has its own brightness, and though each in
respect of its own is perfect, yet, in comparison with one of greater
magnitude, it lacks perfection. In the body also with its different
members, the eye has one function, the hand another, the foot another.
Whence the Apostle says, <span id="fr_5192"></span>[5193](#fn_5192) “The
eye cannot say to the hand, I have no need of thee: or again the head to
the feet, I have no need of you. Are all Apostles? are all prophets? are
all teachers? are all workers of miracles? have all gifts of healing? do
all speak with tongues? do all interpret? But desire earnestly the
greater gifts. But all these worketh the one and the same Spirit,
dividing to each one severally even as He will.” And here mark carefully
that he does not say, as each member desires, but as the Spirit Himself
will. For the vessel cannot say to him that makes it, <span
id="fr_5193"></span>[5194](#fn_5193) “Why dost thou make me thus or
thus? Hath not the potter a right over the clay, from the same lump to
make one part a vessel unto honour, and another unto dishonour?” And so
in close sequence he added, “Desire earnestly the greater gifts,” so
that, by the exercise of faith and diligence, we may win something in
addition to other gifts, and may be superior to those who, compared with
us, are in the second or third class. In a great house there are
different vessels, some of gold, some of silver, brass, iron, wood. And
yet while in its kind a vessel of brass is perfect, in comparison with
one of silver it is called imperfect, and again one of silver, compared
with one of gold, is inferior. And thus, when compared with one another,
all things are imperfect and perfect. In a field of good soil, and from
one sowing, there springs a crop thirty-fold, sixty-fold, or a
hundred-fold. The very numbers show that there is disparity in the parts
of the produce, and yet in its own kind each is perfect. Elizabeth and
Zacharias, whom you adduce and with whom you cover yourself as with an
impenetrable shield, may teach us how far they are beneath the holiness
of blessed Mary, the Lord’s Mother, who, conscious that God was dwelling
in her, proclaims without reserve, <span
id="fr_5194"></span>[5195](#fn_5194) “Behold, from henceforth all
generations shall call me blessed. For He that is mighty hath done to me
great things; and holy is His name. And His mercy is unto generations
and generations of them that fear Him: He hath showed strength with His
arm.” Where, observe, she says she is blessed not by her own merit and
virtue, but by the mercy of God dwelling in her. And John himself, a
greater than whom has not arisen among the sons of men, is better than
his parents. For not only does our Lord compare him with men, but with
angels also. And yet he, who was greater on earth than all other men, is
said to be less than the least in the kingdom of heaven.

<span id="I_1-p142"></span>17. Need we be surprised that, when saints
are compared, some are better, some worse, since the same holds good in
the comparison of sins? To Jerusalem, pierced and wounded with many
sins, it is said, <span id="fr_5195"></span>[5196](#fn_5195) “Sodom is
justified by thee.” It is not because Sodom, which has sunk for ever
into ashes, is just in herself, that it is said by Ezekiel, <span
id="fr_5196"></span>[5197](#fn_5196) “Sodom shall be restored to her
former estate”; but that, in comparison with the more accursed
Jerusalem, she appears just. For Jerusalem killed the Son of God; Sodom
through fulness of bread and excessive luxury carried her lust beyond
all bounds. The publican in the Gospel who smote upon his breast as
though it were a magazine of the worst thoughts, and, conscious of his
offences, dared not lift up his eyes, is justified rather than the proud
Pharisee. And Thamar in the guise of a harlot deceived Judah, and in the
estimation of this man himself who was deceived, was worthy of the
words, <span id="fr_5197"></span>[5198](#fn_5197) “Thamar is more
righteous than I.” All this goes to prove that not only in comparison
with Divine majesty are men far from perfection, but also when compared
with angels, and other men who have climbed the heights of virtue. You
may be superior to some one whom you have shown to be imperfect, and yet
be outstripped by another; and consequently may not have true
perfection, which, if it be perfect, is absolute.

<span id="I_1-p146"></span>18. C. How is it then, Atticus, that the
Divine Word urges us to perfection?

<span id="I_1-p147"></span>A. I have already explained that in
proportion to our strength each one, with all his power, must stretch
forward, if by any means he may attain to, and apprehend the reward of
his high calling. In short Almighty God, to whom, as the Apostle
teaches, the Son must in accordance with the dispensation of the
Incarnation be subjected, that <span
id="fr_5198"></span>[5199](#fn_5198) “God may be all in all,” clearly
shows that all things are by no means subject to Himself. Hence the
prophet anticipates his own final subjection, saying, <span
id="fr_5199"></span>[5200](#fn_5199) “Shall not my soul be subject to
God alone? for of Him cometh my salvation.” And because in the body of
the Church Christ is the head, and some of the members <span
id="page_458">p. 458</span> <span id="I_1-Page_458"></span>still resist,
the body does not appear to be subject even to the head. For if one
member suffer, all the members suffer with it, and the whole body is
tortured by the pain in one member. My meaning may be more clearly
expressed thus. So long as we have the treasure in earthen vessels, and
are clothed with frail flesh, or rather with mortal and corruptible
flesh, we think ourselves fortunate if, in single virtues and separate
portions of virtue, we are subject to God. But when this mortal shall
have put on immortality, and this corruptible shall have put on
incorruption, and death shall be swallowed up in the victory of Christ,
then will God be all in all: and so there will not be merely wisdom in
Solomon, sweetness in David, zeal in Elias and Phinees, faith in
Abraham, perfect love in Peter, to whom it was said, <span
id="fr_5200"></span>[5201](#fn_5200) “Simon, son of John, lovest thou
me?” zeal for preaching in the chosen vessel, and two or three virtues
each in others, but God will be wholly in all, and the company of the
saints will rejoice in the whole band of virtues, and God will be all in
all.

<span id="I_1-p151"></span>19. C. Do I understand you to say that no
saint, so long as he is in this poor body, can have all virtues?

<span id="I_1-p152"></span>A. Just so, because now we prophesy in part,
and know in part. It is impossible for all things to be in all men, for
no son of man is immortal.

<span id="I_1-p153"></span>C. How is it, then, that we read that he who
has one virtue appears to have all?

<span id="I_1-p154"></span>A. By partaking of them, not possessing them,
for individuals must excel in particular virtues. But I confess I don’t
know where to find what you say you have read.

<span id="I_1-p155"></span>C. Are you not aware that the philosophers
take that view?

<span id="I_1-p156"></span>A. The philosophers may, but the Apostles do
not. I heed not what Aristotle, but what Paul, teaches.

<span id="I_1-p157"></span>C. Pray does not James the Apostle <span
id="fr_5201"></span>[5202](#fn_5201) write that he who stumbles in one
point is guilty of all?

<span id="I_1-p159"></span>A. The passage is its own interpreter. James
did not say, as a starting-point for the discussion, he who prefers a
rich man to a poor man in honour is guilty of adultery or murder. That
is a delusion of the Stoics who maintain the equality of sins. But he
proceeds thus: “He who said, Thou shalt not commit adultery, said also,
Thou shalt not kill: but although thou dost not kill, yet, if thou
commit adultery, thou art become a transgressor of the law.” Light
offences are compared with light ones, and heavy offences with heavy
ones. A fault that deserves the rod must not be avenged with the sword;
nor must a crime worthy of the sword, be checked with the rod.

<span id="I_1-p160"></span>C. Suppose it true that no saint has all the
virtues: you will surely grant that within the range of his ability, if
a man do what he can, he is perfect.

<span id="I_1-p161"></span>A. Do you not remember what I said before?

<span id="I_1-p162"></span>C. What was it?

<span id="I_1-p163"></span>A. That a man is perfect in respect of what
he has done, imperfect in respect of what he could not do.

<span id="I_1-p164"></span>C. But as he is perfect in respect of what he
has done, because he willed to do it, so in respect of that which
constitutes him imperfect, because he has not done it, he might have
been perfect, had he willed to do it.

<span id="I_1-p165"></span>A. Who does not wish to do what is perfect?
Or who does not long to grow vigorously in all virtue? If you look for
all virtues in each individual, you do away with the distinctions of
things, and the difference of graces, and the variety of the work of the
Creator, whose prophet cries aloud in the sacred song: <span
id="fr_5202"></span>[5203](#fn_5202) “In wisdom hast thou made them
all.” Lucifer may be indignant because he has not the brightness of the
moon. The moon may dispute over her eclipses and ceaseless toil, and ask
why she must traverse every month the yearly orbit of the sun. The sun
may complain and want to know what he has done that he travels more
slowly than the moon. And we poor creatures may demand to know why it is
that we were made men and not angels; although your teacher, <span
id="fr_5203"></span>[5204](#fn_5203) *the Ancient*, the fountain from
which these streams flow, asserts that all rational creatures were
created equal and started fairly, like charioteers, either to succumb
halfway, or to pass on rapidly and reach the wished-for goal. Elephants,
with their huge bulk, and griffins, might discuss their ponderous frames
and ask why they must go on four feet, while flies, midges, and other
creatures like them have six feet under their tiny wings, and there are
some creeping things which have such an abundance of feet that the
keenest vision cannot follow their countless and simultaneous movements.
Marcion and all the heretics who denied the Creator’s works might speak
thus. Your principle goes so far that while its adherents attack
particular points, they are laying hands on God; they are asking why He
only is God, why He envies the creatures, and why they are not all
endowed with the same power and impor<span id="page_459">p. 459</span>
<span id="I_1-Page_459"></span>tance. You would not say so much (for you
are not mad enough to openly fight against God), yet this is your
meaning in other words, when you give man an attribute of God, and make
him to be without sin like God Himself. Hence the Apostle, with his
voice of thunder, says, concerning different graces: <span
id="fr_5204"></span>[5205](#fn_5204) “There are diversities of gifts,
but the same spirit; and differences of ministrations, but the same
Lord; and there are diversities of workings, but the same God, Who
worketh all things in all.”

<span id="I_1-p169"></span>20. C. You push this one particular point too
far in seeking to convince me that a man cannot have all excellences at
the same time. As though God were guilty of envy, or unable to bestow
upon His image and likeness a correspondence in all things to his
Creator.

<span id="I_1-p170"></span>A. Is it I or you who go too far? You revive
questions already settled, and do not understand that likeness is one
thing, equality another; that the former is a painting, the latter,
reality. A real horse courses over the plains; the painted one with his
chariot does not leave the wall. The Arians do not allow to the Son of
God what you give to every man. Some do not dare to confess the perfect
humanity of Christ, lest they should be compelled to accept the belief
that He had the sins of a man as though the Creator were unequal to the
act of creating, and the title Son of Man were co-extensive with the
title Son of God. So either set me something else to answer, or lay
aside pride and give glory to God.

<span id="I_1-p171"></span>C. You forget a former answer of yours, and
have been so busy forging your chain of argument, and careering through
the wide fields of Scripture, like a horse that has slipped its bridle,
that you have not said a single word about the main point. Your
forgetfulness is a pretext for escaping the necessity of a reply. It was
foolish in me to concede to you for the nonce what you asked, and to
suppose that you would voluntarily give up what you had received, and
would not need a reminder to make you pay what you owed.

<span id="I_1-p172"></span>A. If I mistake not, it was the question of
possible commands of which I deferred the answer. Pray proceed as you
think best.

<span id="I_1-p173"></span>21. C. The commands which God has given are
either possible or impossible. If possible, it is in our power to do
them, if we choose. If impossible, we cannot be held guilty for omitting
duties which it is not given us to fulfill. Hence it results that,
whether God has given possible or impossible commands, a man can be
without sin if he chooses.

<span id="I_1-p174"></span>A. I beg your patient attention, for what we
seek is not victory over an opponent, but the triumph of truth over
falsehood. God has put within the power of mankind all arts, for we see
that a vast number of men have mastered them. To pass over those which
the Greeks call <span id="fr_5205"></span>[5206](#fn_5205) <span
class="Greek"><span id="I_1-p175.1"></span>βάναυσοι</span>, as we may
say, the manual arts, I will instance grammar, rhetoric, the three sorts
of philosophy—physics, ethics, logic—geometry also, and astronomy,
astrology, arithmetic, music, which are also parts of philosophy;
medicine, too, in its threefold division—theory, investigation,
practice; a knowledge of law in general and of particular enactments.
Which of us, however clever he may be, will be able to understand them
all, when the most eloquent of orators, discussing rhetoric and
jurisprudence, said: “A few may excel in one, in both no one can.” You
see, then, that God has commanded what is possible, and yet, that no one
can by nature attain to what is possible. Similarly he has given
different rules and various virtues, all of which we cannot possess at
the same time. Hence it happens that a virtue which in one person takes
the chief place, or is found in perfection, in another is but partial;
and yet, he is not to blame who has not all excellence, nor is he
condemned for lacking that which he has not; but he is justified through
what he does possess. The Apostle described the character of a bishop
when he wrote to Timothy, <span id="fr_5206"></span>[5207](#fn_5206)
“The bishop, therefore, must be without reproach, the husband of one
wife, temperate, modest, orderly, given to hospitality, apt to teach; no
brawler, no striker; but gentle, not contentious, no lover of money; one
that ruleth well his own house, having his children in subjection with
all modesty.” And again, “Not a novice, lest, being puffed up, he fall
into the condemnation of the devil. Moreover, he must have good
testimony from them that are without, lest he fall into reproach and the
snare of the devil.” Writing also to his disciple Titus, he briefly
points out what sort of bishops he ought to ordain: <span
id="fr_5207"></span>[5208](#fn_5207) “For this cause left I thee in
Crete, that thou shouldest set in order the things that were wanting,
and appoint elders in every city, as I gave thee charge; if any man is
blameless, the husband of one wife, having children that believe, who
are not accused of riot or unruly. For the bishop must be blameless (or
free from accusation, for so much is conveyed by the original) as God’s
steward; not self-willed, not soon angry, no brawler, no striker, not
greedy of filthy lucre; but given to hospitality, kind, modest, just,
<span id="page_460">p. 460</span> <span id="I_1-Page_460"></span>holy,
temperate; holding to the faithful word which is according to the
teaching, that he may be able both to exhort in the sound doctrine, and
to convict the gainsayers.” I will not now say anything of the various
rules relating to different persons, but will confine myself to the
commands connected with the bishop.

<span id="I_1-p178"></span>22. God certainly wishes bishops or priests
to be such as the chosen vessel teaches they should be. As to the first
qualification it is seldom or never that one is found *without
reproach;* for who is it that has not some fault, like a mole or a wart
on a lovely body? If the Apostle himself says of Peter that he did not
tread a straight path in the truth of the Gospel, and was so far to
blame that even Barnabas was led away into the same dissimulation, who
will be indignant if that is denied to him which the chief of the
Apostles had not? Then, supposing you find one, “the husband of one
wife, sober-minded, orderly, given to hospitality,” the next
attribute—<span class="Greek"><span
id="I_1-p178.1"></span>διδακτικόν</span> , *apt to teach*, not merely as
the Latin renders the word, *apt to be taught*—you will hardly find in
company with the other virtues. A bishop or priest that is a brawler, or
a striker, or a lover of money, the Apostle rejects, and in his stead
would have one gentle, not contentious, free from avarice, one that
rules well his own house, and what is very hard, one who has his
children in subjection with all modesty, whether they be children of the
flesh or children of the faith. “With all modesty,” he says. It is not
enough for him to have his own modesty unless it be enhanced by the
modesty of his children, companions, and servants, as David says, <span
id="fr_5208"></span>[5209](#fn_5208) “He that walketh in a perfect way,
he shall minister unto me.” Let us consider, also, the emphasis laid on
modesty by the addition of the words “having his children in subjection
with all modesty.” Not only in deed but in word and gesture must he hold
aloof from immodesty, lest perchance the experience of Eli be his. Eli
certainly rebuked his sons, saying, <span
id="fr_5209"></span>[5210](#fn_5209) “Nay, my sons, nay; it is not a
good report which I hear of you.” He chided them, and yet was punished,
because he should not have chided, but cast them off. What will he do
who rejoices at vice or lacks the courage to correct it? Who fears his
own conscience, and therefore pretends to be ignorant of what is in
everybody’s mouth? The next point is that the bishop must be free from
accusation, that he have a good report from them who are without, that
no reproaches of opponents be levelled at him, and that they who dislike
his doctrine may be pleased with his life. I suppose it would not be
easy to find all this, and particularly one “able to resist the
gain-sayers,” to check and overcome erroneous opinions. He wishes no
novice to be ordained bishop, and yet in our time we see the youthful
novice sought after as though he represented the highest righteousness.
If baptism immediately made a man righteous, and full of all
righteousness, it was of course idle for the Apostle to repel a novice;
but baptism annuls old sins, does not bestow new virtues; it looses from
prison, and promises rewards to the released if he will work. Seldom or
never, I say, is there a man who has all the virtues which a bishop
should have. And yet if a bishop lacked one or two of the virtues in the
list, it does not follow that he can no longer be called righteous, nor
will he be condemned for his deficiencies, but will be crowned for what
he has. For to have all and lack nothing is the virtue of Him <span
id="fr_5210"></span>[5211](#fn_5210) “Who did no sin; neither was guile
found in His mouth; Who, when He was reviled, reviled not again;” Who,
confident in the consciousness of virtue, said, <span
id="fr_5211"></span>[5212](#fn_5211) “Behold the prince of this world
cometh, and findeth nothing in me;” <span
id="fr_5212"></span>[5213](#fn_5212) “Who, being in the form of God,
thought it not robbery to be on an equality with God, but emptied
Himself, taking the form of a servant, and became obedient unto death,
even the death of the cross. Wherefore God gave Him the name which is
above every name, that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of
things in heaven, and things on earth, and things under the earth.” If,
then, in the person of a single bishop you will either not find at all,
or with difficulty, even a few of the things commanded, how will you
deal with the mass of men in general who are bound to fulfil all the
commandments?

<span id="I_1-p184"></span>23. Let us reason from things bodily to
things spiritual. One man is swift-footed, but not strong-handed. That
man’s movements are slow, but he stands firm in battle. This man has a
fine face, but a harsh voice: another is repulsive to look at, but sings
sweetly and melodiously. There we see a man of great ability, but
equally poor memory; here is another whose memory serves him, but whose
wits are slow. In the very discussions with which when we were boys we
amused ourselves, all the disputants are not on a level, either in
introducing a subject, or in narrative, or in digressions, or wealth of
illustration, and charm of peroration, but their various oratorical
efforts exhibit different degrees of merit. Of churchmen I will say
more. Many discourse well upon <span id="page_461">p. 461</span> <span
id="I_1-Page_461"></span>the Gospels, but in explaining an Apostle’s
meaning are unequal to themselves. Others, although most acute in the
New Testament are dumb in the Psalms and the Old Testament. I quite
agree with Virgil—*Non omnia possumus omnes;* and seldom or never is the
rich man found who in the abundance of his wealth has everything in
equal proportions. That God has given possible commands, I admit no less
than you. But it is not for each one of us to make all these possible
virtues our own, not because our nature is weak, for that is a slander
upon God, but because our hearts and minds grow weary and cannot keep
all virtues simultaneously and perpetually. And if you blame the Creator
for having made you subject to weariness and failure, I shall reply,
your censure would be still more severe if you thought proper to accuse
Him of not having made you God. But you will say, if I have not the
power, no sin attaches to me. You have sinned because you have not done
what another could do. And again, he in comparison with whom you are
inferior will be a sinner in respect of some other virtue, relatively to
you or to another person; and thus it happens that whoever is thought to
be first, is inferior to him who is his superior in some other
particular.

<span id="I_1-p185"></span>24. C. If it is impossible for man to be
without sin, what does the Apostle Jude mean by writing, <span
id="fr_5213"></span>[5214](#fn_5213) “Now unto Him that is able to keep
you without sin, and to set you before the presence of His glory without
blemish”? This is clear proof that it is possible to keep a man without
sin and without blemish.

<span id="I_1-p187"></span>A. You do not understand the passage. We are
not told that a man can be without sin, which is your view, but that
God, if He chooses, can keep a man free from sin, and of His mercy guard
him so that he may be without blemish. And I say that all things are
possible with God; but that everything which a man desires is not
possible to him, and especially, an attribute which belongs to no
created thing you ever read of.

<span id="I_1-p188"></span>C. I do not say that a man is without sin,
which, perhaps, appears to you to be possible; but that he may be, if he
chooses. For actuality is one thing, possibility another. In the actual
we look for an instance; possibility implies that our power to act is
real.

<span id="I_1-p189"></span>A. You are trifling, and forget the proverb,
“Don’t do what is done.” You keep turning in the same mire, <span
id="fr_5214"></span>[5215](#fn_5214) and only make more dirt. I shall,
therefore, tell you, what is clear to all, that you are trying to
establish a thing that is not, never was, and, perhaps, never will be.
To employ your own words, and show the folly and inconsistency of your
argument, I say that you are maintaining an impossible possibility. For
your proposition, that a man can be without sin if he chooses, is either
true or false. If it be true, show me who the man is; if it be false,
whatever is false can never happen. But let us have no more of these
notions. Hissed off the stage, and no longer daring to appear in public,
they should stay on the book shelves, and not let themselves be heard.

<span id="I_1-p191"></span>25. Let us proceed to other matters. And here
I must speak uninterruptedly, so far, at least, as is consistent with
giving you an opportunity of refuting me, or asking any question you
think fit.

<span id="I_1-p192"></span>C. I will listen patiently, though I cannot
say gladly. The ability of your reasoning will strike me all the more,
while I am amazed at its falsity.

<span id="I_1-p193"></span>A. Whether what I am going to say is true or
false, you will be able to judge when you have heard it.

<span id="I_1-p194"></span>C. Follow your own method. I am resolved, if
I am unable to answer, to hold my tongue rather than assent to a lie.

<span id="I_1-p195"></span>A. What difference does it make whether I
defeat you speaking or silent, and, as it is in the <span
id="fr_5215"></span>[5216](#fn_5215) story of Proteus, catch you asleep
or awake?

<span id="I_1-p197"></span>C. When you have said what you like, you
shall hear what you will certainly not like. For though truth may be put
to hard shifts it cannot be subdued.

<span id="I_1-p198"></span>A. I want to sift your opinions a little,
that your followers may know what an inspired genius you are. You say,
“It is impossible for any but those who have the knowledge of the law to
be without sin”; and you, consequently, shut out from righteousness a
large number of Christians, and, preacher of sinlessness though you are,
declare nearly all to be sinners. For how many Christians have that
knowledge of the law which you can find but seldom, or hardly at all, in
many doctors of the Church? But your liberality is so great that, in
order to stand well with your Amazons, you have elsewhere written, “Even
women ought to have a knowledge of the law,” although the Apostle
preaches that women ought to keep silence in the churches, and if they
want to know anything consult their husbands at home. And you are not
content with having given your cohort a knowledge of Scripture, but you
must delight yourself with their songs and canticles, for <span
id="page_462">p. 462</span> <span id="I_1-Page_462"></span>you have a
heading to the effect that “Women also should sing unto God.” Who does
not know that women should sing in the privacy of their own rooms, away
from the company of men and the crowded congregation? But you allow what
is not lawful, and the consequence is, that, with the support of their
master, they make an open show of that which should be done with
modesty, and with no eye to witness.

<span id="I_1-p199"></span>26. You go on to say, “The servant of God
should utter from his lips no bitterness, but ever that which is sweet
and pleasant”; and as though a servant of God were one thing, a doctor
and priest of the Church another, forgetting what was previously laid
down, you say in another heading, “A priest or doctor ought to watch the
actions of all, and confidently rebuke sinners, lest he be responsible
for them and their blood be required at his hands.” And, not satisfied
with saying it once, you repeat it, and inculcate that, “A priest or
doctor should flatter no one, but boldly rebuke all, lest he destroy
both himself and those who hear him.” Is there so little harmony in one
and the same work that you do not know what you have previously said?
For if the servant of God ought to utter no bitterness from his mouth,
but always that which is sweet and pleasant, it follows either that a
priest and doctor will not be servants of God who ought to confidently
rebuke sinners, and flatter no one, but boldly reprove all: or, if a
priest and a doctor are not only servants of God, but have the chief
place among His servants, it is idle to reserve smooth and pleasant
speeches for the servants of God, for these are characteristic of
heretics and of them who wish to deceive; as the Apostle says, <span
id="fr_5216"></span>[5217](#fn_5216) “They that are such serve not our
Lord Christ but their own belly, and by their smooth and fair speech
they beguile the hearts of the innocent.” Flattery is always insidious,
crafty, and smooth. And the flatterer is well described by the
philosophers as “*a pleasant enemy*.” Truth is bitter, of gloomy visage
and wrinkled brow, and distasteful to those who are rebuked. Hence the
Apostle says, <span id="fr_5217"></span>[5218](#fn_5217) “Am I become
your enemy, because I tell you the truth?” And the comic poet tells us
that “Obsequiousness is the mother of friendship, truth of enmity.”
Wherefore we also eat the Passover with bitter herbs, and the chosen
vessel teaches that the Passover should be kept with truth and
sincerity. Let truth in our case be plain speaking, and bitterness will
instantly follow.

<span id="I_1-p202"></span>27. In another place you maintain that “All
are governed by their own free choice.” What Christian can bear to hear
this? For if not one, nor a few, nor many, but all of us are governed by
our own free choice, what becomes of the help of God? And how do you
explain the text, <span id="fr_5218"></span>[5219](#fn_5218) “A man’s
goings are ordered by the Lord”? And <span
id="fr_5219"></span>[5220](#fn_5219) “A man’s way is not in himself”;
and <span id="fr_5220"></span>[5221](#fn_5220) “No one can receive
anything, unless it be given him from above”; and elsewhere, <span
id="fr_5221"></span>[5222](#fn_5221) “What hast thou which thou didst
not receive? But if thou didst receive it, why dost thou glory as if
thou hadst not received it?” Our Lord and Saviour says: <span
id="fr_5222"></span>[5223](#fn_5222) “I am come down from heaven not to
do Mine own will, but the will of the Father who sent Me.” And in
another place, <span id="fr_5223"></span>[5224](#fn_5223) “Father, if it
be possible, let this cup pass from Me; nevertheless not My will, but
Thine be done.” And in the Lord’s prayer, <span
id="fr_5224"></span>[5225](#fn_5224) “Thy will be done as in heaven, so
on earth.” How is it that you are so rash as to do away with all God’s
help? Elsewhere, you make a vain attempt to append the words “not
without the grace of God”; but in what sense you would have them
understood is clear from this passage, for you do not admit His grace in
separate actions, but connect it with our creation, the gift of the law,
and the power of free will.

<span id="I_1-p210"></span>28. The argument of the next section is, “In
the day of judgment, no mercy will be shown to the unjust and to
sinners, but they must be consumed in eternal fire.” Who can bear this,
and suffer you to prohibit the mercy of God, and to sit in judgment on
the sentence of the Judge before the day of judgment, so that, if He
wished to show mercy to the unjust and the sinners, He must not, because
you have given your veto? For you say it is written in the one hundred
and fourth Psalm, <span id="fr_5225"></span>[5226](#fn_5225) “Let
sinners cease to be in the earth, and the wicked be no more.” And in
Isaiah, <span id="fr_5226"></span>[5227](#fn_5226) “The wicked and
sinners shall be burned up together, and they who forsake God shall be
consumed.” Do you not know that mercy is sometimes blended with the
threatenings of God? He does not say that they must be burnt with
eternal fires, but let them cease to be in the earth, and the wicked be
no more. For it is one thing for them to desist from sin and wickedness,
another for them to perish for ever and be burnt in eternal fire. And as
for the passage which you quote from Isaiah, “Sinners and the wicked
shall be burned up together,” he does not add for ever. “And they who
forsake God shall be consumed.” This properly refers to heretics, who
leave the straight path of the faith, and shall be consumed if they will
not return to the Lord <span id="page_463">p. 463</span> <span
id="I_1-Page_463"></span>whom they have forsaken. And the same sentence
is ready for you if you neglect to turn to better things. Again, is it
not marvellous temerity to couple the wicked and sinners with the
impious, for the distinction between them is great? Every impious person
is wicked and a sinner; but we cannot conversely say every sinner and
wicked person is also impious, for impiety properly belongs to those who
have not the knowledge of God, or, if they have once had it, lose it by
transgression. But the wounds of sin and wickedness, like faults in
general, admit of healing. Hence, it is written, <span
id="fr_5227"></span>[5228](#fn_5227) “Many are the scourges of the
sinner”; it is not said that he is eternally destroyed. And through all
the scourging and torture the faults of Israel are corrected, <span
id="fr_5228"></span>[5229](#fn_5228) “For whom the Lord loveth He
chasteneth, and scourgeth every son whom He receiveth.” It is one thing
to smite with the affection of a teacher and a parent; another to be
madly cruel towards adversaries. Wherefore, we sing in the first
Psalm, <span id="fr_5229"></span>[5230](#fn_5229) “The impious do not
rise in the judgment,” for they are already sentenced to destruction;
“nor sinners in the counsel of the just.” To lose the glory of the
resurrection is a different thing from perishing for ever. “The hour
cometh,” he says, <span id="fr_5230"></span>[5231](#fn_5230) “In which
all that are in the tombs shall hear His voice, and shall come forth:
they that have done good unto the resurrection of life, and they that
have done ill unto the resurrection of judgment.” And so the Apostle, in
the same sense, because in the same Spirit, says to the Romans, <span
id="fr_5231"></span>[5232](#fn_5231) “As many as have sinned without law
shall also perish without law; and as many as have sinned under law,
shall be judged by law.” The man without law is the unbeliever who will
perish for ever. Under the law is the sinner who believes in God, and
who will be judged by the law, and will not perish. If the wicked and
sinners are to be burned with everlasting fire, are you not afraid of
the sentence you pass on yourself, seeing that you admit you are wicked
and a sinner, while still you argue that a man is not without sin, but
that he may be. It follows that the only person who can be saved is an
individual who never existed, does not exist, and perhaps never will,
and that all our predecessors of whom we read must perish. Take your own
case. You are puffed up with all the pride of Cato, and have <span
id="fr_5232"></span>[5233](#fn_5232) Milo’s giant shoulders; but is it
not amazing temerity for you, who are a sinner, to take the name of a
teacher? If you are righteous, and, with a false humility, say you are a
sinner, we may be surprised, but we shall rejoice at having so unique a
treasure, and at reckoning amongst our friends a personage unknown to
patriarch, prophet, and Apostle. And if Origen does maintain that no
rational creatures ought to be lost, and allows repentance to the devil,
what is that to us, who say that the devil and his attendants, and all
impious persons and transgressors, perish eternally, and that <span
id="fr_5233"></span>[5234](#fn_5233) Christians, if they be overtaken by
sin, must be saved after they have been punished?

<span id="I_1-p220"></span>29. <span
id="fr_5234"></span>[5235](#fn_5234) Besides all this you add two
chapters which contradict one another, and which, if true, would
effectually close your mouth. “Except a man have learned, he cannot be
acquainted with wisdom and understand the Scriptures.” And again, “He
that has not been taught, ought not to assume that he knows the law.”
You must, then, either produce the master from whom you learned, if you
are lawfully to claim the knowledge of the law; or, if your master is a
person who never learned from any one else, and taught you what he did
nor know himself, it follows that you are not acting rightly in claiming
a knowledge of Scripture, when you have not been taught, and in starting
as a master before you have been a disciple. And yet, perhaps, with your
customary humility, you make your boast that the Lord Himself, Who
teaches all knowledge, was your master, and that, like Moses in the
cloud and darkness, face to face, you hear the words of God, and so,
with the <span id="fr_5235"></span>[5236](#fn_5235) halo round your
head, take the lead of us. And even this is not enough, but all at once
you turn Stoic, and thunder in our ears Zeno’s proud maxims. “A
Christian ought to be so patient that if any one wished to take his
property he would let it go with joy.” Is it not enough for us patiently
to lose what we have, without returning thanks to him who ill-treats and
plunders us, and sending after him all blessings? The Gospel teaches
that to him who would go to law with us, and by strife and litigation
take away our coat, we must give our cloak also. It does not enjoin the
giving of thanks and joy at the loss of our property. What I say is
this, not that there is any enormity in your view, but that everywhere
you are prone to exaggeration, and indulge in ambitious flights. This is
why you add that “The bravery of dress and ornament is an enemy of God.”
What enmity, I should like to know, is there to<span id="page_464">p.
464</span> <span id="I_1-Page_464"></span>wards God if my tunic is
cleaner than usual, or if the bishop, priest, or deacon, or any other
ecclesiastics, at the offering of the sacrifices walk in white? Beware,
ye clergy; beware, ye monks; widows and virgins, you are in peril unless
the people see you begrimed with dirt, and clad in rags. I say nothing
of lay-men, who proclaim open war and enmity against God if they wear
costly and elegant apparel.

<span id="I_1-p223"></span>30. Let us hear the rest. “We must love our
enemies as we do our neighbours”; and immediately, falling into a deep
slumber, you lay down this proposition: “We must never believe an
enemy.” Not a word is needed from me to show the contradiction here. You
will say that both propositions are found in Scripture, but you do not
observe the particular connection in which the passages occur. I am told
to love my enemies and pray for my persecutors. Am I bidden to love them
as though they were my neighbours, kindred, and friends, and to make no
difference between a rival and a relative? If I love my enemies as my
neighbours, what more affection can I show to my friends? If you had
maintained this position, you ought to have taken care not to contradict
yourself by saying that we must never believe an enemy. But even the law
teaches us how an enemy should be loved. <span
id="fr_5236"></span>[5237](#fn_5236) If an enemy’s beast be fallen, we
must raise it up. And the Apostle tells us, <span
id="fr_5237"></span>[5238](#fn_5237) “If thine enemy hunger, feed him;
if he thirst, give him drink. For by so doing thou shalt heap coals of
fire upon his head,” not by way of curse and condemnation, as most
people think, but to chasten and bring him to repentance, so that,
overcome by kindness, and melted by the warmth of love, he may no longer
be an enemy.

<span id="I_1-p226"></span>31. Your next point is that “the kingdom of
heaven is promised even in the Old Testament,” and you adduce evidence
from the Apocrypha, although it is clear that the kingdom of heaven was
first preached under the Gospel by John the Baptist, and our Lord and
Saviour, and the Apostles. Read the Gospels. John the Baptist cries in
the desert, <span id="fr_5238"></span>[5239](#fn_5238) “Repent, for the
kingdom of heaven is at hand”; and concerning the Saviour it is
written, <span id="fr_5239"></span>[5240](#fn_5239) “From that time He
began to preach and to say, Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at
hand.” And again, <span id="fr_5240"></span>[5241](#fn_5240) “Jesus went
round about the towns and villages, teaching in their synagogues, and
preaching the kingdom of God.” And He commanded His Apostles to <span
id="fr_5241"></span>[5242](#fn_5241) “go and preach, saying, the kingdom
of heaven is at hand.” But you call us Manichæans because we prefer the
Gospel to the law, and say that in the latter we have the shadow, in the
former, the substance, and you do not see that your foolishness goes
hand in hand with impudence. It is one thing to condemn the law, as
Manichæus did; it is another to prefer the Gospel to the law, for this
is in accordance with apostolic teaching. In the law the servants of the
Lord speak, in the Gospel the Lord Himself; in the former are the
promises, in the latter their fulfilment; there are the beginnings, here
is perfection; in the law the foundations of works are laid; in the
Gospel the edifice is crowned with the top-stone of faith and grace. I
have mentioned this to show the character of the teaching given by our
distinguished professor.

<span id="I_1-p231"></span>32. The hundredth heading runs thus: “A man
can be without sin, and easily keep the commandments of God if he
chooses,” as to which enough has already been said. And although he
professes to imitate, or rather complete the work of the blessed martyr
Cyprian in the treatise which the latter wrote to <span
id="fr_5242"></span>[5243](#fn_5242) Quirinus, he does not perceive that
he has said just the opposite in the work under discussion. Cyprian, in
the fifty-fourth heading of the third book, lays it down that no one is
free from stain and without sin, and he immediately gives proofs, among
them the passage in Job, <span id="fr_5243"></span>[5244](#fn_5243) “Who
is cleansed from uncleanness? Not he who has lived but one day upon the
earth.” <span id="fr_5244"></span>[5245](#fn_5244) And in the
fifty-first Psalm, “Behold I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my
mother conceive me.” And in the Epistle of John, <span
id="fr_5245"></span>[5246](#fn_5245) “If we say that we have no sin, we
deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us.” You, on the other hand,
maintain that “A man can be without sin,” and that you may give your
words the semblance of truth, you immediately add, “And easily keep the
commandments of God, if he chooses,” and yet they have been seldom or
never kept by any one. Now, if they were easy, they ought to have been
kept by all. But if, to concede you a point, at rare intervals some one
may be found able to keep them, it is clear that what is rare is
difficult. And by way of supplementing this and displaying the greatness
of your own virtues (we are to believe, forsooth, that you bring forth
the sentiment out of the treasure of a good conscience), you have a
heading to the effect that: “We ought not to commit even light
offences.” And for fear some one might think you had not explained in
the work the meaning of *light,* you add that, “We must not even think
an evil thought,” forgetting the words, <span
id="fr_5246"></span>[5247](#fn_5246) “Who <span id="page_465">p.
465</span> <span id="I_1-Page_465"></span>understands his offences?
Clear thou me from hidden faults, and keep back thy servant from
presumptuous sins, O Lord.” You should have known that the Church admits
even failures through ignorance and sins of mere thought to be offences;
so much so that she bids sacrifices be offered for errors, and the high
priest who makes intercession for the whole people previously offers
victims for himself. Now, if he were not himself righteous, he would
never be commanded to offer for others. Nor, again, would he offer for
himself if he were free from sins of ignorance. If I were to attempt to
show that error and ignorance is sin, I must roam at large over the wide
fields of Scripture.

<span id="I_1-p237"></span>33. C. Pray have you not read that <span
id="fr_5247"></span>[5248](#fn_5247) “He who looks upon a woman to lust
after her hath committed adultery with her already in his heart?” It
seems that not only are the look and the allurements to vice reckoned as
sin, but whatever it be to which we give assent. For either we can avoid
an evil thought, and consequently may be free from sin; or, if we cannot
avoid it, that is not reckoned as sin which cannot be avoided.

<span id="I_1-p239"></span>A. Your argument is ingenious, but you do not
see that it goes against Holy Scripture, which declares that even
ignorance is not without sin. Hence it was that Job offered sacrifices
for his sons, lest, perchance, they had unwittingly sinned in thought.
And if, when one is cutting wood, the axe-head flies from the handle and
kills a man, the owner is <span id="fr_5248"></span>[5249](#fn_5248)
commanded to go to one of the cities of refuge and stay there until the
high priest dies; that is to say, until he is redeemed by the Saviour’s
blood, either in the baptistery, or in penitence which is a copy of the
grace of baptism, through the ineffable mercy of the Saviour, who <span
id="fr_5249"></span>[5250](#fn_5249) would not have any one perish, nor
delights in the death of sinners, but would rather that they should be
converted and live.

<span id="I_1-p242"></span>C. It is surely strange justice to hold me
guilty of a sin of error of which my conscience does not accuse itself.
I am not aware that I have sinned, and am I to pay the penalty for an
offence of which I am ignorant? What more can I do, if I sin
voluntarily?

<span id="I_1-p243"></span>A. Do you expect me to explain the purposes
and plans of God? The Book of Wisdom gives an answer to your foolish
question: <span id="fr_5250"></span>[5251](#fn_5250) “Look not into
things above thee, and search not things too mighty for thee.” And
elsewhere, <span id="fr_5251"></span>[5252](#fn_5251) “Make not thyself
overwise, and argue not more than is fitting.” And in the same place,
“In wisdom and simplicity of heart seek God.” You will perhaps deny the
authority of this book; listen then to the Apostle blowing the Gospel
trumpet: <span id="fr_5252"></span>[5253](#fn_5252) “O the depth of the
riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearchable are His
judgments, and His ways past tracing out! For who hath known the mind of
the Lord? or who hath been His counsellor?” Your questions are such as
he elsewhere describes: <span id="fr_5253"></span>[5254](#fn_5253) “But
foolish and ignorant questioning avoid, knowing that they gender
strifes.” And in Ecclesiastes (a book concerning which there can be no
doubt) we read, <span id="fr_5254"></span>[5255](#fn_5254) “I said, I
will be wise, but it was far from me. That which is exceeding deep, who
can find it out?” You ask me to tell you why the potter makes one vessel
to honour, another to dishonour, and will not be satisfied with Paul,
who replies on behalf of his Lord, <span
id="fr_5255"></span>[5256](#fn_5255) “O man, who art thou that repliest
against God?”

<span id="I_1-p250"></span>The remainder of this book is occupied by a
series of quotations from the Old Testament, designed to show that it is
not only the outer and conscious act which is reckoned sinful, but the
opposition to the Divine will, which is often implicit and
half-conscious. Occasionally, also, the speaker shows how the texts
quoted enforce the argument which he has before used, that men may be
spoken of as righteous in a general sense, yet by no means free from
sins of thought or desire, if not of act.

<span id="I_1-p251"></span>The passages quoted are:

<span id="I_1-p252"></span>[Gen. viii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#021)<span id="I_1-p252.1"></span>. I
will not curse the ground….for the mind of man is set on evil from his
youth.

<span id="I_1-p253"></span>[Gen.
17:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#017), [Gen.
18:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#012)<span id="I_1-p253.1"></span>.
Abraham and Sarah laughing at the promise.

<span id="I_1-p254"></span>[Gen.
37.35](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#035)<span id="I_1-p254.1"></span>.
Jacob’s excessive grief.

<span id="I_1-p255"></span>[Exod.
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#013)<span id="I_1-p255.1"></span>. The
guilt of one who slays another unawares.

<span id="I_1-p256"></span>[Lev. 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#002),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#027)<span id="I_1-p256.1"></span>.
Offerings for sins of ignorance.

<span id="I_1-p257"></span>[Lev.
5.3](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#003)<span id="I_1-p257.1"></span>.
Offerings for ceremonial uncleanness.

<span id="I_1-p258"></span>[Lev.
9.1](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#001)<span id="I_1-p258.1"></span>.
Offerings for Aaron at his consecration.

<span id="I_1-p259"></span>[Lev.
12.6](../../../bib/kjv/lev012.htm#006)<span id="I_1-p259.1"></span>.
Offerings for women after childbirth.

<span id="I_1-p260"></span>[Lev. 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#001),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#006), [Lev.
16:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#006), [Lev.
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev012.htm#007)<span id="I_1-p260.1"></span>.
Offerings for the leper.

<span id="I_1-p261"></span>[Lev.
15:31](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#031), [Lev.
16:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#002),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#005)<span id="I_1-p261.1"></span>.
Offerings for the people on the day of atonement.

<span id="I_1-p262"></span>[Lev.
22.14](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#014)<span id="I_1-p262.1"></span>.
Eating the hallowed things ignorantly; compared with [1 Cor.
11:27](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#027),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#028)<span id="I_1-p262.2"></span>, of
careless participation in Sacrament.

<span id="I_1-p263"></span>[Numbers vi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#001)<span id="I_1-p263.1"></span>.
Offerings for the Nazarite.

<span id="I_1-p264"></span>[Num. 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#007),
[Num. 7:28](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#028),
[29](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#029)<span id="I_1-p264.1"></span>.
Offerings for imploring God’s Mercy.

<span id="I_1-p265"></span>[Num.
28:15](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#015),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#022), [Num.
29:5](../../../bib/kjv/num029.htm#005), [Num.
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#011),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#017)<span id="I_1-p265.1"></span>.
Offerings at the feast.

<span id="I_1-p266"></span><span id="page_466">p. 466</span> <span
id="I_1-Page_466"></span>[Numbers xxxv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#013)<span id="I_1-p266.1"></span>. The
cities of refuge provided for manslayers.

<span id="I_1-p267"></span>[Deut. 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#006),
[Deut. 18:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#013)<span
id="I_1-p267.1"></span>. Israel warned not to boast of righteousness.

<span id="I_1-p268"></span>[Deut.
18:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#009), [Deut.
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#015)<span id="I_1-p268.1"></span>.
Perfection used only of avoiding idolatry.

<span id="I_1-p269"></span>[Deut.
22.8](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#008)<span id="I_1-p269.1"></span>. The
housetop without a parapet makes a man guilty.

<span id="I_1-p270"></span>[Deut
23.2](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#002)<span id="I_1-p270.1"></span>.
Defilement from unconscious personal acts.

<span id="I_1-p271"></span>[Josh. vii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#012)<span id="I_1-p271.1"></span>. The
people made guilty by the sin of Achan.

<span id="I_1-p272"></span>[Josh.
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#019),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#020)<span id="I_1-p272.1"></span>. The
racial guilt of the Canaanites.

<span id="I_1-p273"></span>[1 Sam. xiv.
27](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#027)<span id="I_1-p273.1"></span>.
Jonathan made guilty by tasting the honey.

<span id="I_1-p274"></span>[1 Sam.
16.6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#006)<span id="I_1-p274.1"></span>. The
Lord sees the heart, not the outward appearance.

<span id="I_1-p275"></span>[2 Sam. iv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2004.htm#011)<span id="I_1-p275.1"></span>.
Ishbosheth spoken of as righteous.

<span id="I_1-p276"></span>[2 Sam.
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#008)<span id="I_1-p276.1"></span>. Uzzah
smitten for carelessness.

<span id="I_1-p277"></span>[2 Sam. xxiv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#010)<span id="I_1-p277.1"></span>.
David’s numbering the people.

<span id="I_1-p278"></span>[1 Kings viii.
46](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#046)<span id="I_1-p278.1"></span>.
Solomon’s Prayer—There is none that sinneth not.

<span id="I_1-p279"></span>[1 Kings
14.5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#005)<span id="I_1-p279.1"></span>. The
prophet detecting the motive of Jeroboam’s wife.

<span id="I_1-p280"></span>[2 Kings iv.
27](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#027)<span id="I_1-p280.1"></span>.
Elijah seeing the Shunamite’s heart.

<span id="I_1-p281"></span>[1 Chron. ii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#032)<span id="I_1-p281.1"></span>. Sept.
Half-prophets.

<span id="I_1-p282"></span>[Habakkuk iii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#001)<span id="I_1-p282.1"></span>.
Vulgate. A prayer “for sins of ignorance” (“upon Shigionoth”), supposed
to be in recognition of over-boldness in [Hab.
1.2-4](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#002)<span id="I_1-p282.2"></span>.

<span id="I_1-p283"></span>[Ezek. xlvi.
20](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#020)<span id="I_1-p283.1"></span>. The
sacrifice of Ezekiel’s restored temple.

<span id="I_1-p284"></span>[Jer. x.
23](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#023)<span id="I_1-p284.1"></span>. The
way of man not in himself.

<span id="I_1-p285"></span>[Jer.
17.9](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#009)<span id="I_1-p285.1"></span>. The
heart deceitful.

<span id="I_1-p286"></span>[Prov. xiv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#012)<span id="I_1-p286.1"></span>. A way
that seemeth right to a man.

<span id="I_1-p287"></span>[Prov.
19.21](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#021)<span id="I_1-p287.1"></span>.
Many devices in a man’s heart.

<span id="I_1-p288"></span>[Prov.
20.9](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#009)<span id="I_1-p288.1"></span>. Who
can say, I have a clean heart?

<span id="I_1-p289"></span>[Prov.
20.17](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#017)<span id="I_1-p289.1"></span>.
Who will boast that he is clean?

<span id="I_1-p290"></span>[Eccl. vii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#016)<span id="I_1-p290.1"></span>. The
heart of a man is full of wickedness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5142"></span>[450:5143](2060175.htm#fr_5142) <span
id="I_1-p5.1"></span>

<span id="I_1-p6"></span> See S. Aug. De Sp. et Lit., c. i.

<span id="fn_5143"></span>[450:5144](2060175.htm#fr_5143) <span
id="I_1-p24.1"></span>

<span id="I_1-p25"></span> [Ps. cxxvii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#001)<span id="I_1-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5144"></span>[451:5145](2060175.htm#fr_5144) <span
id="I_1-p30.1"></span>

<span id="I_1-p31"></span> *Pumice terere.*

<span id="fn_5145"></span>[451:5146](2060175.htm#fr_5145) <span
id="I_1-p42.1"></span>

<span id="I_1-p43"></span> [Rom. ix.
16](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#016)<span id="I_1-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5146"></span>[452:5147](2060175.htm#fr_5146) <span
id="I_1-p65.1"></span>

<span id="I_1-p66"></span> Reading *quod super artes est.*

<span id="fn_5147"></span>[452:5148](2060175.htm#fr_5147) <span
id="I_1-p66.1"></span>

<span id="I_1-p67"></span> That is, Diodorous, surnamed Cronus, who
lived at Alexandria in the reign of Ptolemy Soter (<span
class="c17"><span id="I_1-p67.1"></span>b.c.</span> 323–285). He was the
teacher of Philo. For his discussions *On the Possible,* Zeller’s
“Socrates and the Socratic Schools,” Reichel’s translation, pp. 272,
273, and authorities there cited, may be consulted.

<span id="fn_5148"></span>[452:5149](2060175.htm#fr_5148) <span
id="I_1-p67.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p68"></span> Died <span class="c17"><span
id="I_1-p68.1"></span>b.c.</span> 207, aged 73. He was the first to base
the Stoic doctrine on something like systematic reasoning.

<span id="fn_5149"></span>[452:5150](2060175.htm#fr_5149) <span
id="I_1-p71.1"></span>

<span id="I_1-p72"></span> S. [Matt. xix.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#024)<span id="I_1-p72.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5150"></span>[453:5151](2060175.htm#fr_5150) <span
id="I_1-p73.1"></span>

<span id="I_1-p74"></span> S. [Matt. xix.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#021)<span id="I_1-p74.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5151"></span>[453:5152](2060175.htm#fr_5151) <span
id="I_1-p81.1"></span>

<span id="I_1-p82"></span> [Job i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001)<span id="I_1-p82.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5152"></span>[453:5153](2060175.htm#fr_5152) <span
id="I_1-p82.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p83"></span> This appears to be an inaccurate quotation
made from memory.

<span id="fn_5153"></span>[453:5154](2060175.htm#fr_5153) <span
id="I_1-p83.1"></span>

<span id="I_1-p84"></span> S. [Luke i.
5](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#005)<span id="I_1-p84.1"></span> sqq.

<span id="fn_5154"></span>[453:5155](2060175.htm#fr_5154) <span
id="I_1-p85.1"></span>

<span id="I_1-p86"></span> [Job xvi.
21](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#021)<span id="I_1-p86.1"></span>. Vulg.
R.V. Margin—“That one might plead for a man with God as a son of man
pleadeth for his neighbour.”

<span id="fn_5155"></span>[453:5156](2060175.htm#fr_5155) <span
id="I_1-p86.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p87"></span> [Job xxxi.
35](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#035)<span id="I_1-p87.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5156"></span>[453:5157](2060175.htm#fr_5156) <span
id="I_1-p87.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p88"></span> [Job 9:20](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#020),
[30](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#030),
[31](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#031)<span id="I_1-p88.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5157"></span>[453:5158](2060175.htm#fr_5157) <span
id="I_1-p88.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p89"></span> S. [Luke i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#018)<span id="I_1-p89.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5158"></span>[453:5159](2060175.htm#fr_5158) <span
id="I_1-p89.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p90"></span> [Luke
1.20](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#020)<span id="I_1-p90.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5159"></span>[454:5160](2060175.htm#fr_5159) <span
id="I_1-p90.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p91"></span> [Eccles. vii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#021)<span id="I_1-p91.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5160"></span>[454:5161](2060175.htm#fr_5160) <span
id="I_1-p91.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p92"></span> [2 Chron vi.
36](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#036)<span id="I_1-p92.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5161"></span>[454:5162](2060175.htm#fr_5161) <span
id="I_1-p92.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p93"></span> [Ps. 19:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#013)<span id="I_1-p93.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5162"></span>[454:5163](2060175.htm#fr_5162) <span
id="I_1-p93.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p94"></span> [Ps. cxliii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#002)<span id="I_1-p94.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5163"></span>[454:5164](2060175.htm#fr_5163) <span
id="I_1-p95.1"></span>

<span id="I_1-p96"></span> [1 John
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#018),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#019)<span id="I_1-p96.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5164"></span>[454:5165](2060175.htm#fr_5164) <span
id="I_1-p97.1"></span>

<span id="I_1-p98"></span> [1 John i.
8](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#008)<span id="I_1-p98.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5165"></span>[454:5166](2060175.htm#fr_5165) <span
id="I_1-p98.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p99"></span> [1 John i.
9](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#009)<span id="I_1-p99.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5166"></span>[454:5167](2060175.htm#fr_5166) <span
id="I_1-p99.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p100"></span> [Prov. xviii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#017)<span id="I_1-p100.1"></span>, Vulg.
nearly.

<span id="fn_5167"></span>[454:5168](2060175.htm#fr_5167) <span
id="I_1-p100.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p101"></span> [Is. xliii.
26](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#026)<span id="I_1-p101.1"></span>, Sept.

<span id="fn_5168"></span>[454:5169](2060175.htm#fr_5168) <span
id="I_1-p101.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p102"></span> [Rom. xi.
32](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#032)<span id="I_1-p102.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5169"></span>[454:5170](2060175.htm#fr_5169) <span
id="I_1-p102.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p103"></span> [Jer. xxiii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#028)<span id="I_1-p103.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5170"></span>[454:5171](2060175.htm#fr_5170) <span
id="I_1-p104.1"></span>

<span id="I_1-p105"></span> [Deut. xviii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#013)<span id="I_1-p105.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5171"></span>[454:5172](2060175.htm#fr_5171) <span
id="I_1-p105.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p106"></span> S. [Matt. v.
48](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#048)<span id="I_1-p106.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5172"></span>[454:5173](2060175.htm#fr_5172) <span
id="I_1-p107.1"></span>

<span id="I_1-p108"></span> [Ps. xli.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#007)<span id="I_1-p108.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5173"></span>[455:5174](2060175.htm#fr_5173) <span
id="I_1-p112.1"></span>

<span id="I_1-p113"></span> [Rom.
3:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#023),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#024)<span id="I_1-p113.1"></span>. So
R.V. Margin—“To be propitiatory.”

<span id="fn_5174"></span>[455:5175](2060175.htm#fr_5174) <span
id="I_1-p115.1"></span>

<span id="I_1-p116"></span> Cic. Lib. iv. Acad. Quæst.

<span id="fn_5175"></span>[455:5176](2060175.htm#fr_5175) <span
id="I_1-p118.1"></span>

<span id="I_1-p119"></span> [Phil. iii.
12-16](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#012)<span id="I_1-p119.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5176"></span>[455:5177](2060175.htm#fr_5176) <span
id="I_1-p119.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p120"></span> From <span class="Greek"><span
id="I_1-p120.1"></span>σχέπτομαι</span> , to keep watch.

<span id="fn_5177"></span>[455:5178](2060175.htm#fr_5177) <span
id="I_1-p120.3"></span>

<span id="I_1-p121"></span> [Prov. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#003)<span id="I_1-p121.1"></span>, Sept.

<span id="fn_5178"></span>[456:5179](2060175.htm#fr_5178) <span
id="I_1-p121.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p122"></span> [Ps. cxix.
18](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#018)<span id="I_1-p122.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5179"></span>[456:5180](2060175.htm#fr_5179) <span
id="I_1-p123.1"></span>

<span id="I_1-p124"></span> The reading is much disputed.

<span id="fn_5180"></span>[456:5181](2060175.htm#fr_5180) <span
id="I_1-p124.1"></span>

<span id="I_1-p125"></span> [Ps. cxliii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#002)<span id="I_1-p125.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5181"></span>[456:5182](2060175.htm#fr_5181) <span
id="I_1-p125.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p126"></span> [Malach. iii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#006)<span id="I_1-p126.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5182"></span>[456:5183](2060175.htm#fr_5182) <span
id="I_1-p126.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p127"></span> [2 Cor. iii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#010)<span id="I_1-p127.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5183"></span>[456:5184](2060175.htm#fr_5183) <span
id="I_1-p127.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p128"></span> [2 Cor.
3.11](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#011)<span id="I_1-p128.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5184"></span>[456:5185](2060175.htm#fr_5184) <span
id="I_1-p128.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p129"></span> [1 Cor.
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#010)<span id="I_1-p129.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5185"></span>[456:5186](2060175.htm#fr_5185) <span
id="I_1-p129.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p130"></span> [1 Cor. xiii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#012)<span id="I_1-p130.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5186"></span>[456:5187](2060175.htm#fr_5186) <span
id="I_1-p130.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p131"></span> [Psa.
139.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#006)<span id="I_1-p131.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5187"></span>[456:5188](2060175.htm#fr_5187) <span
id="I_1-p131.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p132"></span> [Ps.
73:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#017)<span id="I_1-p132.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5188"></span>[456:5189](2060175.htm#fr_5188) <span
id="I_1-p132.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p133"></span> [Ps.
73:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#022),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#023)<span id="I_1-p133.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5189"></span>[456:5190](2060175.htm#fr_5189) <span
id="I_1-p133.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p134"></span> [Jer. x.
14](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#014)<span id="I_1-p134.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5190"></span>[456:5191](2060175.htm#fr_5190) <span
id="I_1-p134.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p135"></span> [1 Cor. i.
25](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#025)<span id="I_1-p135.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5191"></span>[456:5192](2060175.htm#fr_5191) <span
id="I_1-p137.1"></span>

<span id="I_1-p138"></span> [2 Tim.
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#008)<span id="I_1-p138.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5192"></span>[457:5193](2060175.htm#fr_5192) <span
id="I_1-p138.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p139"></span> [1 Cor.
12:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#021),
[29](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#029),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#011)<span id="I_1-p139.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5193"></span>[457:5194](2060175.htm#fr_5193) <span
id="I_1-p139.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p140"></span> [Rom. ix.
21](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#021)<span id="I_1-p140.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5194"></span>[457:5195](2060175.htm#fr_5194) <span
id="I_1-p140.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p141"></span> S. [Luke i.
48](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#048)<span id="I_1-p141.1"></span> sq.

<span id="fn_5195"></span>[457:5196](2060175.htm#fr_5195) <span
id="I_1-p142.1"></span>

<span id="I_1-p143"></span> [Lam. iv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#006)<span id="I_1-p143.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5196"></span>[457:5197](2060175.htm#fr_5196) <span
id="I_1-p143.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p144"></span> [Ezek. xvi.
55](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#055)<span id="I_1-p144.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5197"></span>[457:5198](2060175.htm#fr_5197) <span
id="I_1-p144.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p145"></span> [Gen. xxxviii.
26](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#026)<span id="I_1-p145.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5198"></span>[457:5199](2060175.htm#fr_5198) <span
id="I_1-p147.1"></span>

<span id="I_1-p148"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
28](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#028)<span id="I_1-p148.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5199"></span>[457:5200](2060175.htm#fr_5199) <span
id="I_1-p148.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p149"></span> [Ps. lxii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#002)<span id="I_1-p149.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5200"></span>[458:5201](2060175.htm#fr_5200) <span
id="I_1-p149.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p150"></span> S. [John xxi.
15-17](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#015)<span id="I_1-p150.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5201"></span>[458:5202](2060175.htm#fr_5201) <span
id="I_1-p157.1"></span>

<span id="I_1-p158"></span> [James ii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#010)<span id="I_1-p158.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5202"></span>[458:5203](2060175.htm#fr_5202) <span
id="I_1-p165.1"></span>

<span id="I_1-p166"></span> [Ps. civ.
24](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#024)<span id="I_1-p166.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5203"></span>[458:5204](2060175.htm#fr_5203) <span
id="I_1-p166.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p167"></span> According to some, Plato: more probably,
Origen, the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="I_1-p167.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="I_1-p167.2"></span>ρχαῖος</span> being an allusion to the title of
his chief work, <span class="Greek"><span id="I_1-p167.3"></span>Περὶ
᾽Αρχῶν</span>.

<span id="fn_5204"></span>[459:5205](2060175.htm#fr_5204) <span
id="I_1-p167.4"></span>

<span id="I_1-p168"></span> [1 Cor.
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#005)<span id="I_1-p168.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5205"></span>[459:5206](2060175.htm#fr_5205) <span
id="I_1-p174.1"></span>

<span id="I_1-p175"></span> That is, mean.

<span id="fn_5206"></span>[459:5207](2060175.htm#fr_5206) <span
id="I_1-p175.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p176"></span> [1 Tim. iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#002)<span id="I_1-p176.1"></span> sq.

<span id="fn_5207"></span>[459:5208](2060175.htm#fr_5207) <span
id="I_1-p176.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p177"></span> [Titus i.
5](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#005)<span id="I_1-p177.1"></span> sq.

<span id="fn_5208"></span>[460:5209](2060175.htm#fr_5208) <span
id="I_1-p178.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p179"></span> [Ps. ci.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#006)<span id="I_1-p179.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5209"></span>[460:5210](2060175.htm#fr_5209) <span
id="I_1-p179.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p180"></span> [1 Sam. ii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#024)<span id="I_1-p180.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5210"></span>[460:5211](2060175.htm#fr_5210) <span
id="I_1-p180.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p181"></span> [1 Pet. ii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#022)<span id="I_1-p181.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5211"></span>[460:5212](2060175.htm#fr_5211) <span
id="I_1-p181.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p182"></span> S. [John xiv.
30](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#030)<span id="I_1-p182.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5212"></span>[460:5213](2060175.htm#fr_5212) <span
id="I_1-p182.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p183"></span> [Phil. ii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#006)<span id="I_1-p183.1"></span> sq.

<span id="fn_5213"></span>[461:5214](2060175.htm#fr_5213) <span
id="I_1-p185.1"></span>

<span id="I_1-p186"></span> [Jude
24](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#024)<span id="I_1-p186.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5214"></span>[461:5215](2060175.htm#fr_5214) <span
id="I_1-p189.1"></span>

<span id="I_1-p190"></span> Literally, wash a brick (that has not been
burnt). Hence (1) labour in vain, or (2) make bad worse. The latter
appears to be the meaning here.

<span id="fn_5215"></span>[461:5216](2060175.htm#fr_5215) <span
id="I_1-p195.1"></span>

<span id="I_1-p196"></span> Virg. Georg., iv.

<span id="fn_5216"></span>[462:5217](2060175.htm#fr_5216) <span
id="I_1-p199.1"></span>

<span id="I_1-p200"></span> [Rom. xvi.
18](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#018)<span id="I_1-p200.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5217"></span>[462:5218](2060175.htm#fr_5217) <span
id="I_1-p200.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p201"></span> [Gal. iv.
16](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#016)<span id="I_1-p201.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5218"></span>[462:5219](2060175.htm#fr_5218) <span
id="I_1-p202.1"></span>

<span id="I_1-p203"></span> [Prov. xx.
24](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#024)<span id="I_1-p203.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5219"></span>[462:5220](2060175.htm#fr_5219) <span
id="I_1-p203.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p204"></span> [Jer. x.
23](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#023)<span id="I_1-p204.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5220"></span>[462:5221](2060175.htm#fr_5220) <span
id="I_1-p204.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p205"></span> S. [John xx.
11](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#011)<span id="I_1-p205.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5221"></span>[462:5222](2060175.htm#fr_5221) <span
id="I_1-p205.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p206"></span> [1 Cor. iv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#007)<span id="I_1-p206.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5222"></span>[462:5223](2060175.htm#fr_5222) <span
id="I_1-p206.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p207"></span> S. [John vi.
38](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#038)<span id="I_1-p207.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5223"></span>[462:5224](2060175.htm#fr_5223) <span
id="I_1-p207.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p208"></span> S. [Luke xxii.
42](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#042)<span id="I_1-p208.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5224"></span>[462:5225](2060175.htm#fr_5224) <span
id="I_1-p208.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p209"></span> S. [Matt. vi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#010)<span id="I_1-p209.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5225"></span>[462:5226](2060175.htm#fr_5225) <span
id="I_1-p210.1"></span>

<span id="I_1-p211"></span> [Ps. civ.
35](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#035)<span id="I_1-p211.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5226"></span>[462:5227](2060175.htm#fr_5226) <span
id="I_1-p211.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p212"></span> [Is. i.
28](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#028)<span id="I_1-p212.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5227"></span>[463:5228](2060175.htm#fr_5227) <span
id="I_1-p212.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p213"></span> [Ps. xxxii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#010)<span id="I_1-p213.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5228"></span>[463:5229](2060175.htm#fr_5228) <span
id="I_1-p213.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p214"></span> [Heb. xii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#006)<span id="I_1-p214.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5229"></span>[463:5230](2060175.htm#fr_5229) <span
id="I_1-p214.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p215"></span> [Psa.
1.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#005)<span id="I_1-p215.1"></span>.
Sept.

<span id="fn_5230"></span>[463:5231](2060175.htm#fr_5230) <span
id="I_1-p215.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p216"></span> S. [John
5:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#028),
[29](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#029)<span id="I_1-p216.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5231"></span>[463:5232](2060175.htm#fr_5231) <span
id="I_1-p216.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p217"></span> [Rom. ii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#012)<span id="I_1-p217.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5232"></span>[463:5233](2060175.htm#fr_5232) <span
id="I_1-p217.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p218"></span> The reference is to the stature of Pelagius.

<span id="fn_5233"></span>[463:5234](2060175.htm#fr_5233) <span
id="I_1-p218.1"></span>

<span id="I_1-p219"></span> The sense of this passage is much disputed.
St. Jerome was, possibly, speaking of persons who upon the whole are
sincere and not merely covenanted Christians.

<span id="fn_5234"></span>[463:5235](2060175.htm#fr_5234) <span
id="I_1-p220.1"></span>

<span id="I_1-p221"></span> Jerome seems here to speak in his own person
and to address Pelagius directly.

<span id="fn_5235"></span>[463:5236](2060175.htm#fr_5235) <span
id="I_1-p221.1"></span>

<span id="I_1-p222"></span> *Cornuta fronte.* Literally, “with horned
brow.” The allusion is to the rays of light which beamed from the face
of Moses, the Hebrew word bearing both meanings, *ray* and *horn.* Hence
the portraiture of him with horns.

<span id="fn_5236"></span>[464:5237](2060175.htm#fr_5236) <span
id="I_1-p223.1"></span>

<span id="I_1-p224"></span> [Deut. xxii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#004)<span id="I_1-p224.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5237"></span>[464:5238](2060175.htm#fr_5237) <span
id="I_1-p224.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p225"></span> [Rom. xii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#020)<span id="I_1-p225.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5238"></span>[464:5239](2060175.htm#fr_5238) <span
id="I_1-p226.1"></span>

<span id="I_1-p227"></span> S. [Matt. iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#002)<span id="I_1-p227.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5239"></span>[464:5240](2060175.htm#fr_5239) <span
id="I_1-p227.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p228"></span> [Matt.
4.17](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#017)<span id="I_1-p228.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5240"></span>[464:5241](2060175.htm#fr_5240) <span
id="I_1-p228.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p229"></span> [Matt.
4.23](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#023)<span id="I_1-p229.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5241"></span>[464:5242](2060175.htm#fr_5241) <span
id="I_1-p229.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p230"></span> [Matt.
10.7](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#007)<span id="I_1-p230.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5242"></span>[464:5243](2060175.htm#fr_5242) <span
id="I_1-p231.1"></span>

<span id="I_1-p232"></span> A Christian of Carthage who, together with
Cyprian, sent relief to the bishops and martyrs in the Mines of Sigus,
in Numidia, and elsewhere (<span class="c17"><span
id="I_1-p232.1"></span>a.d.</span> 257).

<span id="fn_5243"></span>[464:5244](2060175.htm#fr_5243) <span
id="I_1-p232.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p233"></span> [Job xiv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#004)<span id="I_1-p233.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5244"></span>[464:5245](2060175.htm#fr_5244) <span
id="I_1-p233.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p234"></span> [Ps. li.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#005)<span id="I_1-p234.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5245"></span>[464:5246](2060175.htm#fr_5245) <span
id="I_1-p234.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p235"></span> [1 John i.
8](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#008)<span id="I_1-p235.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5246"></span>[464:5247](2060175.htm#fr_5246) <span
id="I_1-p235.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p236"></span> [Ps.
19:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#013)<span id="I_1-p236.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5247"></span>[465:5248](2060175.htm#fr_5247) <span
id="I_1-p237.1"></span>

<span id="I_1-p238"></span> S. [Matt. v.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#028)<span id="I_1-p238.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5248"></span>[465:5249](2060175.htm#fr_5248) <span
id="I_1-p239.1"></span>

<span id="I_1-p240"></span> [Numb. xxxv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#006)<span id="I_1-p240.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5249"></span>[465:5250](2060175.htm#fr_5249) <span
id="I_1-p240.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p241"></span> [Ezek. xviii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#023)<span id="I_1-p241.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5250"></span>[465:5251](2060175.htm#fr_5250) <span
id="I_1-p243.1"></span>

<span id="I_1-p244"></span> [Wisdom
3.21](../../../bib/apo/wis003.htm#021)<span id="I_1-p244.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5251"></span>[465:5252](2060175.htm#fr_5251) <span
id="I_1-p244.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p245"></span> [Eccles. vii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#016)<span id="I_1-p245.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5252"></span>[465:5253](2060175.htm#fr_5252) <span
id="I_1-p245.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p246"></span> [Rom.
11:33](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#033),
[34](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#034)<span id="I_1-p246.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5253"></span>[465:5254](2060175.htm#fr_5253) <span
id="I_1-p246.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p247"></span> [2 Tim. ii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#023)<span id="I_1-p247.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5254"></span>[465:5255](2060175.htm#fr_5254) <span
id="I_1-p247.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p248"></span> [Eccl.
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#024),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#025)<span id="I_1-p248.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5255"></span>[465:5256](2060175.htm#fr_5255) <span
id="I_1-p248.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p249"></span> [Rom. ix.
20](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#020)<span id="I_1-p249.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book II](2060176)
