[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2060217)  [Next](2060219) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.iv.viii"></span>

<span id="vii.iv.viii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vii.iv.viii-p1.1"></span>Isaiah.</span>

<span id="vii.iv.viii-p2"></span>The Commentary in eighteen books, each
with its Preface. It was written in the years 404–410, and addressed to
Eustochium alone, her mother Paula having died in 404.

<span id="vii.iv.viii-p3"></span>The Preface to Book i. touches
generally upon the character and contents of Isaiah, asserting that many
of the prophecies are directly applicable to Christ, and that the
nations who are dealt with have a spiritual meaning. Those to the
following books mostly give a short statement of the contents of the
chapters commented on, and entreat the prayers of Eustochium for the
work. The Fifth Book (or chapters xiii. to xxiii.) had been published
before by itself, at the instance of a bishop named Amabilis, but he
says he must add the metaphorical and spiritual meaning of the Visions
of the various nations, which is done in Books vi. and vii. The Preface
to Book x. contains a bitter allusion to Rufinus, “the Scorpion, a dumb
and poisonous brute, still grumbling over my former reply,” and speaks
of Pammachius as joining in the request for the continuation of the
Commentaries.

<span id="vii.iv.viii-p4"></span>*The Preface to Book xi. intimates that
his commentary upon Daniel, which expounded the statue with feet of iron
and clay as the Roman Empire, and announced its fall, had been known at
the court and resented by Stilicho, but that all danger from that source
had been removed by the judgment of God, that is, through the death of
Stilicho by the command of his son in-law Honorius.* <span
id="page_499">p. 499</span> <span id="vii.iv.viii-Page_499"></span>*The
Preface to Book xiii. records a severe illness which had stopped his
work, though he was restored to health suddenly; and that to Book xiv.
thanks Eustochium for her kind offices during this illness. The
remaining Prefaces, though they have occasionally some interest in the
history of the interpretation of Scripture, need not delay us.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah.](2060219)
