[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2060169)  [Next](2060171) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.vi.II"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p1"></span> <span id="page_387">p. 387</span> <span
id="vi.vi.II-Page_387"></span><span class="c14"><span
id="vi.vi.II-p1.1"></span>Book II.</span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p2"></span>Jerome answers the second, third, and
fourth propositions of Jovinianus.

<span id="vi.vi.II-p3"></span>I. (c. 1–4). That those who have become
regenerate cannot be overthrown by the devil, Jerome (c. 1) puts it that
they cannot be *tempted* by the devil. He quotes <span
id="vi.vi.II-p3.1"></span>1 John i. 8–ii. 2, as shewing that faithful
men can be tempted and sin and need an advocate. The expressions (3) in
[Heb. vi](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#000)<span
id="vi.vi.II-p3.2"></span>. as to those who crucify the Son of God
afresh do not apply to ordinary sins after baptism, as supposed by
Montanus and Novatus. The epistles to the Seven Churches show that the
lapsed may return. The Angels, and even our Lord Himself, (4) could be
tempted.

<span id="vi.vi.II-p4"></span>II. (c. 5–17). That there is no difference
(morally) between one who fasts and one who takes food with
thanksgiving. Jovinian has quoted (5) many texts of Scripture to show
that God has made animals for men’s food. But (6) there are many other
uses of animals besides food. And there are many warnings like [1 Cor.
vi. 13](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#013)<span
id="vi.vi.II-p4.1"></span>, as to the danger arising from food. There
are among the heathen (7) many instances of abstinence. They recognize
(8) the evil of sensual allurements, and often, like Crates the Theban,
(9) have cast away what would tempt them; the senses, they teach, (10)
should be subject to reason; and, that (11) except for athletes
(Christians do not want to be like Milo of Crotona) bread and water
suffice. Horace (12), Xenophon and other eminent Greeks (13), the
Essenes and the Brahmans (14), as well as philosophers like Diogenes,
testify to the value of abstinence. The Old Testament stories (15) of
Esau’s pottage, of the lusting of Israel for the flesh-pots of Egypt,
and those in the New Testament of Anna, Cornelius, &c., commend
abstinence. If some heretics inculcate fasting (16) in such a way as to
despise the gifts of God, and weak Christians are not to be judged for
their use of flesh, those who seek the higher life (17) will find a help
in abstinence.

<span id="vi.vi.II-p5"></span>III. (c. 18–34). The fourth proposition of
Jovinianus, that all who are saved will have equal reward, is refuted
(19) by the various yields of thirty, sixty, and a hundred fold in the
parable of the sower, by (20) the “stars differing in glory” of [1 Cor.
xv. 41](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#041)<span
id="vi.vi.II-p5.1"></span>. It is strange (21) to find the advocate of
self-indulgence now claiming equality to the saints. But (22) as there
were differences in Ezekiel between cattle and cattle, so in St. Paul
between those who built gold or stubble on the one foundation. The
differences of gifts (23), of punishments (24), of guilt (25), as in
Pilate and the Chief Priests, of the produce of the good seed (26), of
the mansions promised in heaven (27–29), of the judgment upon sins both
in the church and in Scripture (30–31), of those called at different
times to the vineyard (32) are arguments for the diversity of rewards.
The parable of the talents (33) holds out as rewards differences of
station, and so does the church (34) in its different orders.

<span id="vi.vi.II-p6"></span>Jerome now recapitulates (35) and appeals
(36)against the licentious views of Jovinianus, which have already
induced many virgins to break their vows; and which, as the new Roman
heresy (37), he calls upon the Imperial City (38) to reject.

<span id="vi.vi.II-p7"></span>1. The second proposition of Jovinianus is
that the baptized cannot be tempted <span
id="fr_4651"></span>[4652](#fn_4651) by the devil. And to escape the
imputation of folly in saying this, he adds: “But if any are tempted, it
only shows that they were baptized with water, not with the Spirit, as
we read was the case with Simon Magus.” Hence it is that John
says, <span id="fr_4652"></span>[4653](#fn_4652) “Whosoever is begotten
of God doeth no sin, because his seed abideth in him: and he cannot sin,
because he is begotten of God. In this the children of God are manifest,
and the children of the Devil.” And at the end of the Epistle, <span
id="fr_4653"></span>[4654](#fn_4653) “Whosoever is begotten of God
sinneth not; but his being begotten of God keepeth him, and the evil one
toucheth him not.”

<span id="vi.vi.II-p11"></span>2. This would be a real difficulty and
one for ever incapable of solution were it not solved by the witness of
John himself, who immediately goes on to say, <span
id="fr_4654"></span>[4655](#fn_4654) “My little children, guard
yourselves from idols.” If everyone that is born of God sinneth not, and
cannot be tempted by the devil, how is it that he bids them beware of
temptation? Again in the same Epistle we read: <span
id="fr_4655"></span>[4656](#fn_4655) “If we say that we have no sins, we
deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us. If we confess our sins,
he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from
all unrighteousness. If we say that we have not sinned, we make him a
liar, and his word is not in us.” I suppose that John was baptized and
was writing to the baptized: I imagine too that all sin is of the devil.
Now John confesses himself a sinner, and hopes for forgiveness of sins
after baptism. My friend Jovinianus says, <span
id="fr_4656"></span>[4657](#fn_4656) “Touch me not, for I am clean.”
What then? Does the Apostle contradict himself? By no means. In the same
passage he gives his reason for thus speaking: <span
id="fr_4657"></span>[4658](#fn_4657) “My little children, these things
write I unto you, that ye may not sin. But if any man sin, we have an
advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous: and he is the
propitiation for our sins; and not for ours only, but also for the whole
world. And hereby know we that we know him, if we keep his commandments.
He that saith, I know him, and keepeth not his commandments, is a liar,
and the truth is not in him. But whoso keepeth his word, in him verily
hath the love of God been perfected. Hereby know we that we are in him:
he that saith he abideth in him ought himself also to walk even as he
walked.” My reason for telling you, little children, that everyone who
is born of God sinneth not, is that you may not sin, and <span
id="page_388">p. 388</span> <span id="vi.vi.II-Page_388"></span>that you
may know that so long as you sin not you abide in the birth which God
has given you. Yea, they who abide in that birth cannot sin. <span
id="fr_4658"></span>[4659](#fn_4658) “For what communion hath light with
darkness? Or Christ with Belial?” As day is distinct from night, so
righteousness and unrighteousness, sin and good works, Christ and
Antichrist cannot blend. If we give Christ a lodging-place in our
hearts, we banish the devil from thence. If we sin and the devil enter
through the gate of sin, Christ will immediately withdraw. Hence David
after sinning says: <span id="fr_4659"></span>[4660](#fn_4659) “Restore
unto me the joy of thy salvation,” that is, the joy which he had lost by
sinning. <span id="fr_4660"></span>[4661](#fn_4660) “He who saith, I
know him, and keepeth not his commandments, is a liar, and the truth is
not in him.” Christ is called the truth: <span
id="fr_4661"></span>[4662](#fn_4661) “I am the way, the truth, and the
life.” In vain do we make our boast in him whose commandments we keep
not. To him that knoweth what is good, and doeth it not, it is
sin. <span id="fr_4662"></span>[4663](#fn_4662) “As the body apart from
the spirit is dead, even so faith apart from works is dead.” And we must
not think it a great matter to know the only God, when even devils
believe and tremble. “He that saith he abideth in him ought himself also
to walk even as he walked.” Our opponent may choose whichever of the two
he likes; we give him his choice. Does he abide in Christ, or not? If he
abide, let him then walk as Christ walked. But if there is <span
id="fr_4663"></span>[4664](#fn_4663) rashness in professing to copy the
virtues of our Lord, he does not abide in Christ, for he does not walk
as did Christ. <span id="fr_4664"></span>[4665](#fn_4664) “He did not
sin, neither was guile found in his mouth: when he was reviled, he
reviled not again, and as a lamb is dumb before its shearer, so opened
he not his mouth.” To Him came the prince of this world, and found
nothing in Him: although He had done no sin, God made Him sin for us.
But we, according to the Epistle of James, <span
id="fr_4665"></span>[4666](#fn_4665) “all stumble in many things,”
and <span id="fr_4666"></span>[4667](#fn_4666) “no one is pure from sin,
no not if his life be but a day long.” <span
id="fr_4667"></span>[4668](#fn_4667) For who will boast “that he has a
clean heart? or who will be sure that he is pure from sin?” And we are
held guilty after the similitude of Adam’s transgression. Hence David
says, <span id="fr_4668"></span>[4669](#fn_4668) “Behold, I was shapen
in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me.” And the blessed
Job, <span id="fr_4669"></span>[4670](#fn_4669) “Though I be righteous
my mouth will speak wickedness, and though I be perfect, I shall be
found perverse. If I wash myself with snow water and make my hands never
so clean, yet wilt thou plunge me in the ditch and mine own clothes
shall abhor me.” But that we may not utterly despair and think that if
we sin after baptism we cannot be saved, he immediately checks the
tendency: <span id="fr_4670"></span>[4671](#fn_4670) “And if any man
sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous,
and he is the propitiation for our sins. And not for ours only, but also
for the whole world.” He addresses this to baptized believers, and he
promises them the Lord as an advocate for their offences. He does not
say: If you fall into sin, you have an advocate with the Father, Christ,
and He is the propitiation for your sins: you might then say that he was
addressing those whose baptism had been destitute of the true faith: but
what he says is this, “We have an advocate with the Father, Jesus
Christ, and he is the propitiation for our sins.” And not only for the
sins of John and his contemporaries, but for those of the whole world.
Now in “the whole world” are included apostles and all the faithful, and
a clear proof is established that sin after baptism is possible. It is
useless for us to have an advocate Jesus Christ, if sin be impossible.

<span id="vi.vi.II-p29"></span>3. The apostle Peter, to whom it was
said, <span id="fr_4671"></span>[4672](#fn_4671) “He that is bathed
needeth not to wash again,” and <span
id="fr_4672"></span>[4673](#fn_4672) “Thou art Peter, and upon this rock
I will build my Church,” through fear of a maid-servant denied Him. Our
Lord himself says, <span id="fr_4673"></span>[4674](#fn_4673) “Simon,
Simon, behold Satan asked to have you, that he might sift you as wheat.
But I made supplication for thee, that thy faith fail not.” And in the
same place, “Watch and pray, that ye enter not into temptation: the
spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak.” If you reply that this
was said before the Passion, we certainly say after the Passion, in the
Lord’s prayer, <span id="fr_4674"></span>[4675](#fn_4674) “Forgive us
our debts, as we also forgive our debtors; and lead us not into
temptation, but deliver us from the evil one.” If we do not sin after
baptism, why do we ask that we may be forgiven our sins, which were
already forgiven in baptism? Why do we pray that we may not enter into
temptation, and that we may be delivered from the evil one, if the devil
cannot tempt those who are baptized? The case is different if this
prayer belongs to the Catechumens, and is not adapted to faithful
Christians. Paul, the chosen vessel, <span
id="fr_4675"></span>[4676](#fn_4675) chastised his body, and brought it
into subjection, lest after preaching to others he himself should be
found a reprobate, and <span id="fr_4676"></span>[4677](#fn_4676) he
tells that there was given to him “a thorn in the flesh, a messenger of
<span id="page_389">p. 389</span> <span
id="vi.vi.II-Page_389"></span>Satan to buffet” him. And to the
Corinthians he writes: <span id="fr_4677"></span>[4678](#fn_4677) “I
fear, lest by any means, as the serpent beguiled Eve in his craftiness,
your minds should be corrupted from the simplicity that is toward
Christ.” And elsewhere: <span id="fr_4678"></span>[4679](#fn_4678) “But
to whom ye forgive anything, I forgive also: for what I also have
forgiven, if I have forgiven anything, for your sakes have I forgiven it
in the person of Christ: that no advantage may be gained over us by
Satan: for we are not ignorant of his devices.” And again: <span
id="fr_4679"></span>[4680](#fn_4679) “There hath no temptation taken
you, but such as man can bear; but God is faithful, who will not suffer
you to be tempted above that ye are able; but will with the temptation
make also the way of escape, that ye may be able to endure it.”
And, <span id="fr_4680"></span>[4681](#fn_4680) “Let him that thinketh
he standeth, take heed lest he fall.” And to the Galatians: <span
id="fr_4681"></span>[4682](#fn_4681) “Ye were running well; who did
hinder you that ye should not obey the truth?” And elsewhere: <span
id="fr_4682"></span>[4683](#fn_4682) “We would fain have come unto you,
I Paul once and again; and Satan hindered us.” And to the married he
says: <span id="fr_4683"></span>[4684](#fn_4683) “Be together again,
that Satan tempt you not because of your incontinency.” And again: <span
id="fr_4684"></span>[4685](#fn_4684) “But I say, walk by the Spirit and
ye shall not fulfil the lust of the flesh. For the flesh lusteth against
the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh; for these are contrary the
one to the other: that ye may not do the things that ye would.” We are a
compound of the two, and must endure the strife of the two substances.
And to the Ephesians: <span id="fr_4685"></span>[4686](#fn_4685) “Our
wrestling is not against flesh and blood, but against the
principalities, against the powers, against the world-rulers of this
darkness, against the spiritual hosts of wickedness in the heavenly
places.” Does any one think that we are safe, and that it is right to
fall asleep when once we have been baptized? And so, too, in the epistle
to the Hebrews: <span id="fr_4686"></span>[4687](#fn_4686) “For as
touching those who were once enlightened and tasted of the heavenly
gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost, and tasted the good
word of God, and the powers of the age to come, and then fell away, it
is impossible to renew them again unto repentance; seeing they crucify
to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open shame.”
Surely we cannot deny that they have been baptized who have been
illuminated, and have tasted the heavenly gift, and have been made
partakers of the Holy Spirit, and have tasted the good word of God. But
if the baptized cannot sin, how is it now that the Apostle says, “And
have fallen away”? <span id="fr_4687"></span>[4688](#fn_4687) Montanus
and <span id="fr_4688"></span>[4689](#fn_4688) Novatus would smile at
this, for they contend that it is impossible to renew again through
repentance those who have crucified to themselves the Son of God, and
put Him to an open shame. He therefore corrects this mistake by
saying: <span id="fr_4689"></span>[4690](#fn_4689) “But, beloved, we are
persuaded better things of you, and things that accompany salvation,
though we thus speak; for God is not unrighteous to forget your work and
the love which ye shewed towards his name, in that ye ministered unto
the Saints, and still do minister.” And truly the unrighteousness of God
would be great, if He merely punished sin, and did not welcome good
works. I have so spoken, says the Apostle, to withdraw you from your
sins, and to make you more careful through fear of despair. But,
beloved, I am persuaded better things of you, and things that accompany
salvation. For it is not accordant with the righteousness of God to
forget good works, and the fact that you have ministered and do minister
to the Saints for His name’s sake, and to remember sins only. The
Apostle James also, knowing that the baptized can be tempted, and fall
of their own free choice, says: <span
id="fr_4690"></span>[4691](#fn_4690) “Blessed is the man that endureth
temptation: for when he hath been approved, he shall receive the crown
of life, which the Lord promised to them that love him.” And that we may
not think that we are tempted by God, as we read in Genesis Abraham was,
he adds: “Let no man say when he is tempted, I am tempted of God: for
God cannot be tempted with evil, and He Himself tempteth no man. But
each man is tempted when he is drawn away by his own lust and enticed.
Then the lust, when it hath conceived, beareth sin: and the sin, when it
is full grown, bringeth forth death.” God created us with free will, and
we are not forced by necessity either to virtue or to vice. Otherwise,
if there be necessity, there is no crown. As in good works it is God who
brings them to perfection, for it is not of him that willeth, <span
id="page_390">p. 390</span> <span id="vi.vi.II-Page_390"></span>nor of
him that runneth, but of God that pitieth and gives us help that we may
be able to reach the goal: so in things wicked and sinful, the seeds
within us give the impulse, and these are brought to maturity by the
devil. When he sees that we are building upon the foundation of Christ,
hay, wood, stubble, then he applies the match. Let us then build gold,
silver, costly stones, and he will not venture to tempt us: although
even thus there is not sure and safe possession. For the lion lurks in
ambush to slay the innocent. <span id="fr_4691"></span>[4692](#fn_4691)
“Potters’ vessels are proved by the furnace, and just men by the trial
of tribulation.” And in another place it is written: <span
id="fr_4692"></span>[4693](#fn_4692) “My son, when thou comest to serve
the Lord, prepare thyself for temptation.” Again, the same James
says: <span id="fr_4693"></span>[4694](#fn_4693) “Be ye doers of the
word, and not hearers only. For if any one is a hearer of the word, and
not a doer, he is like unto a man beholding his natural face in a
mirror: for he beholdeth himself, and goeth away, and straightway
forgetteth what manner of man he was.” It was useless to warn them to
add works to faith, if they could not sin after baptism. He tells us
that <span id="fr_4694"></span>[4695](#fn_4694) “whosoever shall keep
the whole law, and yet stumble in one point, he is become guilty of
all.” Which of us is without sin? <span
id="fr_4695"></span>[4696](#fn_4695) “God hath shut up all unto
disobedience, that he might have mercy upon all.” Peter also says: <span
id="fr_4696"></span>[4697](#fn_4696) “The Lord knows how to deliver the
godly out of temptation.” And concerning false teachers: <span
id="fr_4697"></span>[4698](#fn_4697) “These are springs without water,
and mists driven by a storm; for whom the blackness of darkness hath
been reserved. For, uttering proud words of vanity, they entice in the
lusts of the flesh, by lasciviousness, those who had just escaped, and
have turned back to error.” Does not the Apostle in these words seem to
you to have depicted the new party of ignorance? For, as it were, they
open the fountains of knowledge and yet have no water: they promise a
shower of doctrine like prophetic clouds which have been visited by the
truth of God, and are driven by the storms of devils and vices. They
speak great things, and their talk is nothing but pride: <span
id="fr_4698"></span>[4699](#fn_4698) “But every one is unclean with God
who is lifted up in his own heart.” Like those who had just escaped from
their sins, they *return* to their own error, and persuade men to
luxury, and to the delights of eating and the gratification of the
flesh. For who is not glad to hear them say: “Let us eat and drink, and
reign for ever”? The wise and prudent they call corrupt, but pay more
attention to the honey-tongued. John the apostle, or rather the Saviour
in the person of John, writes thus to the angel of the Church of
Ephesus: <span id="fr_4699"></span>[4700](#fn_4699) “I know thy works
and thy toil and patience, and that thou didst bear for my name’s sake,
and hast not grown weary. But I have this against thee, that thou didst
leave thy first love. Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen,
and repent, and do the first works; or else I will come to thee, and
will move thy candlestick out of its place, except thou repent.”
Similarly He urges the other churches, Smyrna, Pergamos, Thyatira,
Sardis, Philadelphia, Laodicea, to repentance, and threatens them unless
they return to the former works. And in Sardis He says He has a few who
have not defiled their garments, and they shall walk with Him in white,
for they are worthy. But they to whom He says: “Remember from whence
thou art fallen”; and, “Behold the devil is about to cast some of you
into prison, that ye may be tried”; and, “I know where thou dwellest,
even where Satan’s throne is”; and, “Remember how thou hast received,
and didst hear, and keep it, and repent,” and so on, were of course
believers, and baptized, who once stood, but fell through sin.

<span id="vi.vi.II-p59"></span>4. I delayed for a little while the
production of proofs from the Old Testament, because, wherever the Old
Testament is against them they are accustomed to cry out that <span
id="fr_4700"></span>[4701](#fn_4700) the Law and the Prophets were until
John. But who does not know that under the other dispensation of God all
the saints of past times were of equal merit with Christians at the
present day? As Abraham in days gone by pleased God in wedlock, so
virgins now please him in perpetual virginity. He served the Law and his
own times; let us now serve the Gospel and our times, <span
id="fr_4701"></span>[4702](#fn_4701) upon whom the ends of the ages have
come. David the chosen one, the man after God’s own heart, who had
performed all His pleasure, and who in a certain psalm had said, <span
id="fr_4702"></span>[4703](#fn_4702) “Judge me, O Lord, for I have
walked in mine integrity: I have trusted also in the Lord and shall not
slide. Examine me, O Lord, and prove me; try my reins and my heart,”
even he was afterwards tempted by the devil; and repenting of his sin
said, <span id="fr_4703"></span>[4704](#fn_4703) “Have mercy upon me, O
God, according to thy loving-kindness.” He would have a great sin
blotted out by great loving-kindness. Solomon, beloved of the Lord, and
to whom God had twice revealed Himself, because he loved women forsook
the love of God. It is related in the <span
id="fr_4704"></span>[4705](#fn_4704) Book of Days that Manasses the
wicked king was restored after the Babylonish captivity to his former
rank. And <span id="page_391">p. 391</span> <span
id="vi.vi.II-Page_391"></span>Josiah, a holy man, <span
id="fr_4705"></span>[4706](#fn_4705) was slain by the king of Egypt on
the plain of Megiddo. <span id="fr_4706"></span>[4707](#fn_4706) Joshua
also, the son of Josedech and high-priest, although he was a type of our
Saviour Who bore our sins, and united to Himself a church of alien birth
from among the Gentiles, is nevertheless, according to the letter of
Scripture, represented in filthy garments after he attained to the
priesthood, and with the devil standing at his right hand; and white
raiment is afterwards restored to him. It is needless to tell how Moses
and Aaron <span id="fr_4707"></span>[4708](#fn_4707) offended God at the
water of strife, and did not enter the land of promise. For the blessed
Job relates that even the angels and every creature can sin. <span
id="fr_4708"></span>[4709](#fn_4708) “Shall mortal man,” he says, “be
just before God? Shall a man be spotless in his works? If he putteth no
trust in his servants, and chargeth his angels with folly, how much more
them that dwell in houses of clay,” amongst whom are we, and made of the
same clay too. <span id="fr_4709"></span>[4710](#fn_4709) “The life of
man is a warfare upon earth.” <span id="fr_4710"></span>[4711](#fn_4710)
Lucifer fell who was sending to all nations, and he who was nurtured in
a paradise of delight as one of the twelve precious stones, was wounded
and went down to hell from the mount of God. Hence the Saviour says in
the Gospel: <span id="fr_4711"></span>[4712](#fn_4711) “I beheld Satan
falling as lightning from heaven.” If he fell who stood on so sublime a
height, who may not fall? If there are falls in heaven, how much more on
earth! And yet though Lucifer be fallen (the old serpent after his
fall), <span id="fr_4712"></span>[4713](#fn_4712) “his strength is in
his loins, and his force is in the muscles of his belly. The great trees
are overshadowed by him, and he sleepeth beside the reed, the rush, and
the sedge.” <span id="fr_4713"></span>[4714](#fn_4713) He is king over
all things that are in the waters—that is to say in the seat of pleasure
and luxury, of propagation of children, and of the fertilisation of the
marriage bed. <span id="fr_4714"></span>[4715](#fn_4714) “For who can
strip off his outer garment? Who can open the doors of his face? Nations
fatten upon him, and the tribes of Phenicia divide him.” And lest haply
the reader in his secret thought might imagine that those tribes of
Phenicia and peoples of Ethiopia only are meant by those to whom the
dragon was given for food, we immediately find a reference to those who
are crossing the sea of this world, and are hastening to reach the haven
of salvation: <span id="fr_4715"></span>[4716](#fn_4715) “His head
stands in the ships of the fishermen like an anvil that cannot be
wearied: <span id="fr_4716"></span>[4717](#fn_4716) he counteth iron as
straw, and brass as rotten wood. And all the gold of the sea under him
is as mire. He maketh the deep to boil like a pot: he values the sea
like a pot of ointment, and the blackness of the deep as a captive. He
beholdeth everything that is high.” And my friend Jovinianus thinks he
can gain an easy mastery over him. Why speak of holy men and angels,
who, being creatures of God, are of course capable of sin? He dared to
tempt the Son of God, and though smitten through and through with our
Lord’s first and second answer, nevertheless raised his head, and when
thrice wounded, withdrew only for a time, and deferred rather than
removed the temptation. And we flatter ourselves on the ground of our
baptism, which though it put away the sins of the past, cannot keep us
for the time to come, unless the baptized keep their hearts with all
diligence.

<span id="vi.vi.II-p77"></span>5. At length we have arrived at the
question of food, and are confronted by our third difficulty. “All
things were created to serve for the use of mortal men.” And as man, a
rational animal, in a sense the owner and tenant of the world, is
subject to God, and worships his Creator, so all things living were
created either for the food of men, or for clothing, or for tilling the
earth, or conveying the fruits thereof, or to be the companions of man,
and hence, because they are man’s <span
id="fr_4717"></span>[4718](#fn_4717) helpers, they have their name
*jumenta*. <span id="fr_4718"></span>[4719](#fn_4718) ‘What is man,’
says David, ‘that thou art mindful of him? And the son of man, that thou
visitest him? For thou hast made him but little lower than the angels,
and crownest him with glory and honour. Thou madest him to have dominion
over the works of thine hands; thou hast put all things under his feet:
all sheep and oxen, yea, and the beasts of the field: the fowl of the
air, and the fish of the sea, whatsoever passeth through the paths of
the seas.’ Granted, he says, that the ox was created for ploughing, the
horse for riding, the dog for watching, goats for their milk, sheep for
their fleeces. What is the use of swine if we may not eat their flesh?
of roes, stags, fallow-deer, boars, hares, and such like game? of geese,
wild and tame? of wild ducks and <span
id="fr_4719"></span>[4720](#fn_4719) fig-peckers? of woodcocks? of
coots? of thrushes? Why do hens run about our houses? If they are not
eaten, all these creatures were created by <span id="page_392">p.
392</span> <span id="vi.vi.II-Page_392"></span>God for nothing. But what
need is there of argument when Scripture clearly teaches that every
moving creature, like herbs and vegetables, were given to us for food,
and the Apostle cries aloud <span id="fr_4720"></span>[4721](#fn_4720)
‘All things are clean to the clean, and nothing is to be rejected, if it
be received with thanksgiving,’ and <span
id="fr_4721"></span>[4722](#fn_4721) tells us that men will come in the
last days, forbidding to marry, and to eat meats, which God created for
use? The Lord himself was called by the Pharisees a wine-bibber and a
glutton, the friend of publicans and sinners, because he did not decline
the invitation of Zacchæus to dinner, and went to the marriage-feast.
But it is a different matter if, as you may foolishly contend, he went
to the dinner intending to fast, and after the manner of deceivers said,
I eat this, not that; I do not drink the wine which I created out of
water. He did not make water, but wine, the type of his blood. After the
resurrection he ate a fish and part of a honey-comb, not sesame nuts and
service-berries. The apostle, Peter, did not wait like a Jew for the
stars to peep, but went upon the house-top to dine at the sixth hour.
Paul in the ship broke bread, not dried figs. When Timothy’s stomach was
out of order, he advised him to drink wine, not perry. In abstaining
from meats they please their own fancy: as though superstitious Gentiles
did not observe the <span id="fr_4722"></span>[4723](#fn_4722) rites of
abstinence connected with the Mother of the Gods and with Isis.”

<span id="vi.vi.II-p84"></span>6. I will follow in detail the views now
expounded, and before I come to Scripture and show by it that fasting is
pleasing to God, and chastity accepted by him, I will meet philosophic
argument with argument, and will prove that we are not followers of
Empedocles and Pythagoras, who on account of their doctrine of the
transmigration of souls think nothing which lives and moves should be
eaten, and look upon him who fells a fir-tree or an oak as equally
guilty with the parricide or the poisoner: but that we worship our
Creator Who made all things for the use of man. And as the ox was
created for ploughing, the horse for riding, dogs for watching, goats
for milk, sheep for their wool: so it was with swine and stags, and roes
and hares, and other animals: but the immediate purpose of their
creation was not that they might serve for food, but for other uses of
men. For if everything that moves and lives was made for food, and
prepared for the stomach, let my opponents tell me why elephants, lions,
leopards, and wolves were created; why vipers, scorpions, bugs, lice,
and fleas; why the vulture, the eagle, the crow, the hawk; why whales,
dolphins, seals, and small snails were created. Which of us ever eats
the flesh of a lion, a viper, a vulture, a stork, a kite, or the worms
that crawl upon our shores? As then these have their proper uses, so may
we say that other beasts, fishes, birds, were created not for eating,
but for medicine. In short, to how many uses the flesh of vipers, from
which we make our antidotes against poison, may be applied, physicians
know well. Ivory dust is an ingredient in many remedies. Hyena’s gall
restores brightness to the eyes, and its dung and that of dogs cures
gangrenous wounds. And (it may seem strange to the reader) Galen asserts
in his treatise on Simples, that human dung is of service in a multitude
of cases. Naturalists say that snake-skin, boiled in oil, gives
wonderful relief in ear-ache. What to the uninitiated seems so useless
as a bug? Yet, suppose a leech to have fastened on the throat, as soon
as the odour of a bug is inhaled the leech is vomited out, and
difficulty in urinating is relieved by the same application. As for the
fat of pigs, geese, fowls, and pheasants, how useful they are is told in
all medical works, and if you read these books you will see there that
the vulture has as many curative properties as it has limbs. Peacock’s
dung allays the inflammation of gout. Cranes, storks, eagle’s gall,
hawk’s blood, the ostrich, frogs, chameleons, swallow’s dung and
flesh—in what diseases these are suitable remedies, I could tell if it
were my purpose to discuss bodily ailments and their cure. If you think
proper you may read Aristotle and <span
id="fr_4723"></span>[4724](#fn_4723) Theophrastus in prose, or <span
id="fr_4724"></span>[4725](#fn_4724) Marcellus of Side, and our <span
id="fr_4725"></span>[4726](#fn_4725) Flavius, who discourse on these
subjects in hexameter verse; the <span
id="fr_4726"></span>[4727](#fn_4726) second Pliny also, and <span
id="fr_4727"></span>[4728](#fn_4727) Dioscorides, and others, both
naturalists and physicians, who assign to every herb, every stone, every
animal whether reptile, bird, or fish, its own use in the art of which
they treat. So then when you ask me why the pig was created, I
immediately reply, as if two boys were disputing, by asking you why were
vipers and scorpions? You must not judge that anything from the hand of
God is superfluous, because <span id="page_393">p. 393</span> <span
id="vi.vi.II-Page_393"></span>there are many beasts and birds which your
palate rejects. But this may perhaps look more like contentiousness and
pugnacity than truth. Let me tell you therefore that pigs and
wild-boars, and stags, and the rest of living creatures were created,
that soldiers, athletes, sailors, rhetoricians, miners, and other slaves
of hard toil, who need physical strength, might have food: and also
those who carry arms and provisions, who wear themselves out with the
work of hand or foot, who ply the oar, who need good lungs to shout and
speak, who level mountains and sleep out rain or fair. But our religion
does not train boxers, athletes, sailors, soldiers, or ditchers, but
followers of wisdom, who devote themselves to the worship of God, and
know why they were created and are in the world from which they are
impatient to depart. Hence also the Apostle says: <span
id="fr_4728"></span>[4729](#fn_4728) “When I am weak, then am I strong.”
And <span id="fr_4729"></span>[4730](#fn_4729) “Though our outward man
is decaying, yet our inward man is renewed day by day.” And <span
id="fr_4730"></span>[4731](#fn_4730) “I have the desire to depart and be
with Christ.” And, <span id="fr_4731"></span>[4732](#fn_4731) “Make not
provision for the flesh to fulfil the lusts thereof.” Are all
commanded <span id="fr_4732"></span>[4733](#fn_4732) not to have two
coats, nor food in their scrip, money in their purse, a staff in the
hand, shoes on the feet? or to sell all they possess and give to the
poor, and follow Jesus? Of course not: but the command is for those who
wish to be perfect. On the contrary John the Baptist lays down one rule
for the soldiers, another for the publicans. But the Lord says in the
Gospel to him who had boasted of having kept the whole law: <span
id="fr_4733"></span>[4734](#fn_4733) “If thou wilt be perfect, go and
sell all that thou hast, and give to the poor, and come, follow me.”
That He might not seem to lay a heavy burden on unwilling shoulders, He
sent His hearer away with full power to please himself, saying “If thou
wilt be perfect.” And so I too say to you: If you wish to be perfect, it
is good not to drink wine, and eat flesh. If you wish to be perfect, it
is better to enrich the mind than to stuff the body. But if you are an
infant and fond of the cooks and their preparations, no one will snatch
the dainties out of your mouth. Eat and drink, and, if you like, with
Israel rise up and play, and sing <span
id="fr_4734"></span>[4735](#fn_4734) “Let us eat and drink, for
to-morrow we shall die.” Let him eat and drink, who looks for death when
he has feasted, and who says with Epicurus, “There is nothing after
death, and death itself is nothing.” We believe Paul when he says in
tones of thunder: <span id="fr_4735"></span>[4736](#fn_4735) “Meats for
the belly, and the belly for meats. But God will destroy both them and
it.”

<span id="vi.vi.II-p98"></span>7. I have quoted these few passages of
Scripture to show that we are at one with the philosophers. But who does
not know that no universal law of nature regulates the food of all
nations, and that each eats those things of which it has abundance? For
instance, the Arabians and Saracens, and all the wild tribes of the
desert live on camel’s milk and flesh: for the camel, to suit the
climate and barren soil of those regions, is easily bred and reared.
They think it wicked to eat the flesh of swine. Why? Because pigs which
fatten on acorns, chestnuts, roots of ferns, and barley, are seldom or
never found among them: and if they were found, they would not afford
the nourishment of which we spoke just now. The exact opposite is the
case with the northern peoples. If you were to force them to eat the
flesh of asses and camels, they would think it the same as though they
were compelled to devour a wolf or a crow. In Pontus and Phrygia a
pater-familias pays a good price for fat white worms with blackish
heads, which breed in decayed wood. And as with us the woodcock and
fig-pecker, the mullet and scar, are reputed delicacies, so with them it
is a luxury to eat the <span id="fr_4736"></span>[4737](#fn_4736)
xylophagus. Again, because throughout the glowing wastes of the desert
clouds of locusts are found, it is customary with the peoples of the
East and of Libya to feed on locusts. John the Baptist proves the truth
of this. Compel a Phrygian or a native of Pontus to eat a locust, and he
will think it scandalous. Force a Syrian, an African, or Arabian to
swallow worms, he will have the same contempt for them as for flies,
millepedes, and lizards, although the Syrians are accustomed to eat
land-crocodiles, and the Africans even green lizards. In Egypt and
Palestine, owing to the scarcity of cattle no one eats beef, or makes
the flesh of bulls or oxen, or calves, a portion of their food.
Moreover, in my province <span id="fr_4737"></span>[4738](#fn_4737) it
is considered a crime to eat veal. Accordingly the Emperor Valens
recently promulgated a law throughout the East, prohibiting the killing
and eating of calves. He had in view the interests of agriculture, and
wished to check the bad practice of the commoner sort of the people who
imitated the Jews in devouring the flesh of calves, instead of fowls and
sucking pigs. The Nomad tribes, and the <span
id="fr_4738"></span>[4739](#fn_4738) Troglodytes, and Scythians, and the
barbarous <span id="fr_4739"></span>[4740](#fn_4739) Huns with whom we
have recently become acquainted, <span id="page_394">p. 394</span> <span
id="vi.vi.II-Page_394"></span>eat flesh half raw. Moreover the
Icthyophagi, a wandering race on the shores of the Red Sea, broil fish
on the stones made hot by the sun, and subsist on this poor food.
The <span id="fr_4740"></span>[4741](#fn_4740) Sarmatians, the <span
id="fr_4741"></span>[4742](#fn_4741) Chuadi, the <span
id="fr_4742"></span>[4743](#fn_4742) Vandals, and countless other races,
delight in the flesh of horses and wolves. Why should I speak of other
nations when I myself, a youth on a visit to Gaul, heard that the
Atticoti, a British tribe, eat human flesh, and that although they find
herds of swine, and droves of large or small cattle in the woods, it is
their custom to cut off the buttocks of the shepherds and the breasts of
their women, and to regard them as the greatest delicacies? The Scots
have no wives of their own; as though they read Plato’s Republic and
took Cato for their leader, no man among them has his own wife, but like
beasts they indulge their lust to their hearts’ content. The Persians,
Medes, Indians, and Ethiopians, peoples on a par with Rome itself, have
intercourse with mothers and grandmothers, with daughters and
granddaughters. The <span id="fr_4743"></span>[4744](#fn_4743) Massagetæ
and <span id="fr_4744"></span>[4745](#fn_4744) Derbices think those
persons most unhappy who die of sickness—and when parents, kindred, or
friends reach old age, they are murdered and devoured. It is thought
better that they should be eaten by the people themselves than by the
worms. The <span id="fr_4745"></span>[4746](#fn_4745) Tibareni crucify
those whom they have loved before when they have grown old. The <span
id="fr_4746"></span>[4747](#fn_4746) Hyrcani throw them out half alive
to the birds and dogs: the Caspians leave them dead for the same beasts.
The Scythians bury alive with the remains of the dead those who were
beloved of the deceased. The Bactrians throw their old men to dogs which
they rear for the very purpose, and when Stasanor, Alexander’s general,
wished to correct the practice, he almost lost his province. Force an
Egyptian to drink sheep’s milk: drive, if you can, a Pelusiote to eat an
onion. Almost every city in Egypt venerates its own beasts and monsters,
and whatever be the object of worship, that they think inviolable and
sacred. Hence it is that their towns also are named after animals
Leonto, Cyno, Lyco, Busyris, Thmuis, which is, being interpreted, a
*he-goat*. And to make us understand what sort of gods Egypt always
welcomed, one of their cities was recently called <span
id="fr_4747"></span>[4748](#fn_4747) Antinous after Hadrian’s favourite.
You see clearly then that not only in eating, but also in burial, in
wedlock, and in every department of life, each race follows its own
practice and peculiar usages, and takes that for the law of nature which
is most familiar to it. But suppose all nations alike ate flesh, and let
that be everywhere lawful which the place produces. How does it concern
us whose conversation is in heaven? who, as well as Pythagoras and
Empedocles and all lovers of wisdom, are not bound to the circumstances
of our birth, but of our new birth: who by abstinence subjugate our
refractory flesh, eager to follow the allurements of lust? The eating of
flesh, and drinking of wine, and fulness of stomach, is the seed-plot of
lust. And so the comic poet says, <span
id="fr_4748"></span>[4749](#fn_4748) “Venus shivers unless Ceres and
Bacchus be with her.”

<span id="vi.vi.II-p112"></span>8. Through the five senses, as through
open windows, vice has access to the soul. The metropolis and citadel of
the mind cannot be taken unless the enemy have previously entered by its
doors. The soul is distressed by the disorder they produce, and is led
captive by sight, hearing, smell, taste, and touch. If any one delights
in the sports of the circus, or the struggles of athletes, the
versatility of actors, the figure of women, in splendid jewels, dress,
silver and gold, and other things of the kind, the liberty of the soul
is lost through the windows of the eyes, and the prophet’s words are
fulfilled: <span id="fr_4749"></span>[4750](#fn_4749) “Death is come up
into our windows.” Again, our sense of hearing is flattered by the tones
of various instruments and the modulations of the voice; and whatever
enters the ear by the songs of poets and comedians, by the pleasantries
and verses of pantomimic actors, weakens the manly fibre of the mind.
Then, again, no one but a profligate denies that the profligate and
licentious find a delight in sweet odours, different sorts of incense,
fragrant balsam, <span id="fr_4750"></span>[4751](#fn_4750) kuphi, <span
id="fr_4751"></span>[4752](#fn_4751) œnanthe, and musk, which is nothing
but the skin of a foreign rat. And who does not know that gluttony is
the mother of avarice, and, as it were, fetters the heart and keeps it
pressed down upon the earth? For the sake of a temporary gratification
of the appetite, land and sea are ransacked, and we toil and sweat our
lives through, that we may send down our throats honey-wine and costly
food. The desire to handle other men’s persons, and the burning lust for
women, is a passion bordering on <span id="page_395">p. 395</span> <span
id="vi.vi.II-Page_395"></span>insanity. To gratify this sense we
languish, grow angry, throw ourselves about with joy, indulge envy,
engage in rivalry, are filled with anxiety, and when we have terminated
the pleasure with more or less repentance, we once more take fire, and
want to do that which we again regret doing. Where, then, that which we
may call the thin edge of disturbance, has entered the citadel of the
mind through these doors, what will become of its liberty, its
endurance, its thought of God, particularly since the sense of touch can
picture to itself even bygone pleasures, and through the recollection of
vice forces the soul to take part in them, and after a manner to
practice what it does not actually commit?

<span id="vi.vi.II-p116"></span>9. At the call of reasoning such as
this, many philosophers have forsaken the crowded cities, and their
pleasure gardens in the suburbs with well-watered grounds, shady trees,
twittering birds, crystal fountains, murmuring brooks, and many charms
for eye and ear, lest through luxury and abundance of riches, the
firmness of the mind should be enfeebled, and its purity debauched. For
there is no good in frequently seeing objects which may one day lead to
your captivity, or in making trial of things which you would find it
hard to do without. Even the Pythagoreans shunned company of this kind
and were wont to dwell in solitary places in the desert. The Platonists
also and Stoics lived in the groves and porticos of temples, that,
admonished by the sanctity of their restricted abode, they might think
of nothing but virtue. Plato, moreover, himself, when <span
id="fr_4752"></span>[4753](#fn_4752) Diogenes trampled on his couches
with muddy feet (he being a rich man), chose a house called <span
id="fr_4753"></span>[4754](#fn_4753) *Academia* at some distance from
the city, in a spot not only lonely but unhealthy, so that he might have
leisure for philosophy. His object was that by constant anxiety about
sickness the assaults of lust might be defeated, and that his disciples
might experience no pleasure but that afforded by the things they
learned. We have read of some who took out their own eyes lest through
sight they might lose the contemplation of philosophy. Hence it was
that <span id="fr_4754"></span>[4755](#fn_4754) Crates the famous
Theban, after throwing into the sea a considerable weight of gold,
exclaimed, “Go to the bottom, ye evil lusts: I will drown you that you
may not drown me.” But if anyone thinks to enjoy keenly meat and drink
in excess, and at the same time to devote himself to philosophy, that is
to say, to live in luxury and yet not to be hampered by the vices
attendant on luxury, he deceives himself. For if it be the case that
even when far distant from them we are frequently caught in the snares
of nature, and are compelled to desire those things of which we have a
scant supply: what folly it is to think we are free when we are
surrounded by the nets of pleasure! We think of what we see, hear,
smell, taste, handle, and are led to desire the thing which affords us
pleasure. That the mind sees and hears, and that we can neither hear nor
see anything unless our senses are fixed upon the objects of sight and
hearing, is an old saw. It is difficult, or rather impossible, when we
are swimming in luxury and pleasure not to think of what we are doing:
and it is an idle pretence which some men put forward <span
id="fr_4755"></span>[4756](#fn_4755) that they can take their fill of
pleasure with their faith and purity and mental uprightness unimpaired.
It is a violation of nature to revel in pleasure, and the Apostle gives
a caution against this very thing when he says, <span
id="fr_4756"></span>[4757](#fn_4756) “She that giveth herself to
pleasure is dead while she liveth.”

<span id="vi.vi.II-p122"></span>10. The bodily senses are like horses
madly racing, but the soul like a charioteer holds the reins. And as
horses without a driver go at break-neck speed, so the body if it be not
governed by the reasonable soul rushes to its own destruction. The
philosophers make use of another illustration of the relations between
soul and body; <span id="fr_4757"></span>[4758](#fn_4757) they say the
body is a boy, the soul his tutor. Hence the <span
id="fr_4758"></span>[4759](#fn_4758) historian tells us “that our soul
directs, our body serves. The one we have in common with the gods, the
other with the beasts.” So then unless the vices of youth and boyhood
are regulated by the wisdom of the tutor, every effort and every impulse
sets strongly in the direction of wantonness. We might lose four of the
senses and yet live,—that is we could do without sight, hearing, smell,
and the pleasures of touch. But a human being cannot subsist without
tasting food. It follows that reason must be present, that we may take
food of such a kind and in such quantities as will not burden the body,
or hinder the free movement of the soul: for it is the way with us that
we eat, and walk, and sleep, and digest our food, and afterwards in the
fulness of blood have to bear the spur of lust. <span
id="fr_4759"></span>[4760](#fn_4759) “Wine is a mocker, strong drink a
brawler.” Whosoever has much to do with these is not wise. <span
id="page_396">p. 396</span> <span id="vi.vi.II-Page_396"></span>And we
should not take such food as is difficult of digestion, or such as when
eaten will give us reason to complain that we got it and lost it with
much effort. The preparation of vegetables, fruit, and pulse is easy,
and does not require the skill of expensive cooks: our bodies are
nourished by them with little trouble on our part; and, if taken in
moderation, such food is easier to digest, and at less cost, because it
does not stimulate the appetite, and therefore is not devoured with
avidity. No one has his stomach inflated or overloaded if he eats only
one or two dishes, and those inexpensive ones: such a condition comes of
pampering the taste with a variety of meats. The smells of the kitchen
may induce us to eat, but when hunger is satisfied, they make us their
slaves. Hence gorging gives rise to disease: and many persons find
relief for the discomfort of gluttony in emetics,—what they disgraced
themselves by putting in, they with still greater disgrace put out.

<span id="vi.vi.II-p126"></span>11. <span
id="fr_4760"></span>[4761](#fn_4760) Hippocrates in his Aphorisms
teaches that stout persons of a coarse habit of body, when once they
have attained their full growth, unless the plethora be quickly relieved
by blood-letting, develop tendencies to paralysis and the worst forms of
disease: they must therefore be bled, that there may be room for fresh
growth. For it is not the nature of our bodies to continue in one stay,
but go on either to increase or decrease, and no animal can live which
is incapable of growth. Whence <span
id="fr_4761"></span>[4762](#fn_4761) Galen, a very learned man and the
commentator on Hippocrates, says in his exhortation to the practice of
medicine that athletes whose whole life and art consists in stuffing
cannot live long, nor be healthy: and that their souls enveloped with
superfluous blood and fat, and as it were covered with mud, have no
refined or heavenly thoughts, but are always intent upon gluttonous and
voracious feasting. Diogenes maintains that tyrants do not bring about
revolutions in cities, and foment wars civil or foreign for the sake of
a simple diet of vegetables and fruits, but for costly meats and the
delicacies of the table. And, strange to say, Epicurus, the defender of
pleasure, in all his books speaks of nothing but vegetables and fruits;
and he says that we ought to live on cheap food because the preparation
of sumptuous banquets of flesh involves great care and suffering, and
greater pains attend the search for such delicacies than pleasures the
consumption of them. Our bodies need only something to eat and drink.
Where there is bread and water, and the like, nature is satisfied.
Whatever more there may be does not go to meet the wants of life, but
are ministers to vicious pleasure. Eating and drinking does not quench
the longing for luxuries, but appeases hunger and thirst. Persons who
feed on flesh want also gratifications not found in flesh. But they who
adopt a simple diet do not look for flesh. Further, we cannot devote
ourselves to wisdom if our thoughts are running on a well-laden table,
the supply of which requires an excess of work and anxiety. The wants of
nature are soon satisfied: cold and hunger can be banished with simple
food and clothing. Hence the Apostle says: “Having food and clothing let
us be therewith content.” Delicacies and the various dishes of the feast
are the nurses of avarice. The soul greatly exults when you are content
with little: you have the world beneath your feet, and can exchange all
its power, its feasts, and its lusts, the objects for which men rake
money together, for common food, and make up for them all with a
sack-cloth shirt. Take away the luxurious feasting and the gratification
of lust, and no one will want riches to be used either in the belly, or
beneath it. The invalid only regains his health by diminishing and
carefully selecting his food, *i.e.*, in medical phrase, by adopting a
“slender diet.” The same food that recovers health, can preserve it, for
no one can imagine vegetables to be the cause of disease. And if
vegetables do not give the strength of Milo of Crotona—a strength
supplied and nourished by meat—what need has a wise man and a Christian
philosopher of such strength as is required by athletes and soldiers,
and which, if he had it, would only stimulate to vice? Let those persons
deem meat accordant with health who wish to gratify their lust, and who,
sunk in filthy pleasure, are always at heat. What a Christian wants is
health, but not superfluous strength. And it ought not to disturb us if
we find but few supporters; for the pure and temperate are as rare as
good and faithful friends, and virtue is always scarce. Study the
temperance of <span id="fr_4762"></span>[4763](#fn_4762) Fabricius, or
the poverty of <span id="fr_4763"></span>[4764](#fn_4763) Curius, and in
a great city you will find few worthy of your imitation. You need not
fear that if you do not eat flesh, fowlers and hunters will have learnt
their craft in vain.

<span id="vi.vi.II-p131"></span><span id="page_397">p. 397</span> <span
id="vi.vi.II-Page_397"></span>12. We have read that some who suffered
with disease of the joints and with gouty humours recovered their health
by proscribing delicacies, and coming down to a simple board and mean
food. For they were then free from the worry of managing a house and
from unlimited feasting. Horace <span
id="fr_4764"></span>[4765](#fn_4764) makes fun of the longing for food
which when eaten leaves nothing but regret.

<span id="vi.vi.II-p133"></span>“Scorn pleasure; she but hurts when
bought with pain.”

<span id="vi.vi.II-p134"></span>And when, in the delightful retirement
of the country, by way of satirizing voluptuous men, he described
himself as plump and fat, his sportive verse ran thus:

<span id="vi.vi.II-p135"></span>“Pay me a visit if you want to laugh,

<span id="vi.vi.II-p136"></span>You’ll find me fat and sleek with
well-dress’d hide,

<span id="vi.vi.II-p137"></span>Like any pig from Epicurus’ sty.”

<span id="vi.vi.II-p138"></span>But even if our food be the commonest,
we must avoid repletion. For nothing is so destructive to the mind as a
full belly, fermenting like a wine vat and giving forth its gases on all
sides. What sort of fasting is it, or what refreshment is there after
fasting, when we are blown out with yesterday’s dinner, and our <span
id="fr_4765"></span>[4766](#fn_4765) stomach is made a factory for the
closet? We wish to get credit for protracted abstinence, and all the
while we devour so much that a day and a night can scarcely digest it.
The proper name to give it is not fasting, but rather debauch and rank
indigestion.

<span id="vi.vi.II-p140"></span>13. <span
id="fr_4766"></span>[4767](#fn_4766) Dicæarchus in his book of
Antiquities, describing Greece, relates that under Saturn, that is in
the Golden Age, when the ground brought forth all things abundantly, no
one ate flesh, but every one lived on field produce and fruits which the
earth bore of itself. Xenophon in eight books narrates the life of
Cyrus, King of the Persians, and asserts that they supported life on
barley, cress, salt, and black bread. Both the aforesaid Xenophon,
Theophrastus, and almost all the Greek writers testify to the frugal
diet of the Spartans. <span id="fr_4767"></span>[4768](#fn_4767)
Chæremon the Stoic, a man of great eloquence, has a treatise on the life
of the ancient priests of Egypt, who, he says, laid aside all worldly
business and cares, and were ever in the temple, studying nature and the
regulating causes of the heavenly bodies; they never had intercourse
with women; they never from the time they began to devote themselves to
the divine service set eyes on their kindred and relations, nor even saw
their children; they always abstained from flesh and wine, on account of
the light-headedness and dizziness which a small quantity of food
caused, and especially to avoid the stimulation of the lustful appetite
engendered by this meat and drink. They seldom ate bread, that they
might not load the stomach. And whenever they ate it, they mixed pounded
hyssop with all that they took, so that the action of its warmth might
diminish the weight of the heavier food. They used no oil except with
vegetables, and then only in small quantities, to mitigate the
unpalatable taste. What need, he says, to speak of birds, when they
avoided even eggs and milk as flesh. The one, they said, was liquid
flesh, the other was blood with the colour changed? Their bed was made
of palm-leaves, called by them *baiæ*: a sloping footstool laid upon the
ground served for a pillow, and they could go without food for two or
three days. The humours of the body which arise from sedentary habits
were dried up by reducing their diet to an extreme point.

<span id="vi.vi.II-p143"></span>14. <span
id="fr_4768"></span>[4769](#fn_4768) Josephus in the second book of the
history of the Jewish captivity, and in the eighteenth book of the
Antiquities, and the two treatises against Apion, describes three sects
of the Jews, the Pharisees, Sadducees, and Essenes. On the last of these
he bestows wondrous praise because they practised perpetual abstinence
from wives, wine, and flesh, and made a second nature of their daily
fast. <span id="fr_4769"></span>[4770](#fn_4769) Philo, too, a man of
great learning, published a treatise of his own on their mode of
life. <span id="fr_4770"></span>[4771](#fn_4770) Neanthes of Cizycus,
and <span id="fr_4771"></span>[4772](#fn_4771) Asclepiades of Cyprus, at
the time when Pygmalion ruled over the East, relate that the eating of
flesh was unknown. Eubulus, also, who wrote the history of <span
id="fr_4772"></span>[4773](#fn_4772) Mithras in many volumes, relates
that among the Persians there are three kinds of Magi, the first of
whom, those of greatest learning and eloquence, take no food except meal
and vegetables. At Eleusis it is customary to abstain from fowls and
fish and certain fruits. <span id="fr_4773"></span>[4774](#fn_4773)
Bardesanes, a Babylonian, divides the Gymnosophists of India into two
classes, the one called Brahmans, the other Samaneans, who are so
rigidly self-restrained <span id="page_398">p. 398</span> <span
id="vi.vi.II-Page_398"></span>that they support themselves either with
the fruit of trees which grow on the banks of the Ganges, or with common
food of rice or flour, and when the king visits them, he is wont to
adore them, and thinks the peace of his country depends upon their
prayers. Euripides relates that the prophets of Jupiter in Crete
abstained not only from flesh, but also from cooked food. <span
id="fr_4774"></span>[4775](#fn_4774) Xenocrates the philosopher writes
that at Athens out of all the laws of <span
id="fr_4775"></span>[4776](#fn_4775) Triptolemus only three precepts
remain in the temple of Ceres: respect to parents, reverence for the
gods, and abstinence from flesh. <span
id="fr_4776"></span>[4777](#fn_4776) Orpheus in his song utterly
denounces the eating of flesh. I might speak of the frugality of
Pythagoras, Socrates, and <span id="fr_4777"></span>[4778](#fn_4777)
Antisthenes to our confusion: but it would be tedious, and would require
a work to itself. At all events this is the Antisthenes who, after
teaching rhetoric with renown, on hearing Socrates, is related to have
said to his disciples, “Go, and seek a master, for I have now found
one.” He immediately, sold what he had, divided the proceeds among the
people, and kept nothing for himself but a small cloak. Of his poverty
and toil Xenophon in the Symposium is a witness, and so are his
countless treatises, some philosophical, some rhetorical. His most
famous follower was the great Diogenes, who was mightier than King
Alexander in that he conquered human nature. For Antisthenes would not
take a single pupil, and when he could not get rid of the persistent
Diogenes he threatened him with a stick if he did not depart. The latter
is said to have laid down his head and said, “No stick will be hard
enough to prevent me from following you.” <span
id="fr_4778"></span>[4779](#fn_4778) Satyrus, the biographer of
illustrious men, relates that Diogenes to guard himself against the
cold, folded his cloak double: his scrip was his pantry: and when aged
he carried a stick to support his feeble frame, and was commonly called
“Old Hand-to-mouth,” because to that very hour he begged and received
food from any one. His home was the gateways and city arcades. And when
he wriggled into his tub, he would joke about his movable house that
adapted itself to the seasons. For when the weather was cold he used to
turn the mouth of the tub towards the south: in summer towards the
north; and whatever the direction of the sun might be, that way the
palace of Diogenes was turned. He had a wooden dish for drinking; but on
one occasion seeing a boy drinking with the hollow of his hand he is
related to have dashed the cup to the ground, saying that he did not
know nature provided a cup. His virtue and self-restraint were proved
even by his death. It is said that, now an old man, he was on his way to
the Olympic games, which used to be attended by a great concourse of
people from all parts of Greece, when he was overtaken by fever and lay
down upon the bank by the road-side. And when his friends wished to
place him on a beast or in a conveyance, he did not assent, but crossing
to the shade of a tree said, “Go your way, I pray you, and see the
games: this night will prove me either conquered or conqueror. If I
conquer the fever, I shall go to the games: if the fever conquers me, I
shall enter the unseen world.” There through the night he lay gasping
for breath and did not, as we are told, so much die as banish the fever
by death. I have cited the example of only one philosopher, so that our
fine, erect, muscular athletes, who hardly make a shadow of a footmark
in their swift passage, whose words are in their fists and their
reasoning in their heels, who either know nothing of apostolic poverty
and the hardness of the cross, or despise it, may at least imitate
Gentile moderation.

<span id="vi.vi.II-p155"></span>15. So far I have dealt with the
arguments and examples of philosophers. Now I will pass on to the
beginning of the human race, that is, to the sphere which belongs to us.
I will first point out that Adam received a command in paradise to
abstain from one tree though he might eat the other fruit. The
blessedness of paradise could not be consecrated without abstinence from
food. So long as he fasted, he remained in paradise; he ate, and was
cast out; he was no sooner cast out than he married a wife. While he
fasted in paradise he continued a virgin: when he filled himself with
food in the earth, he bound himself with the tie of marriage. And yet
though cast out he did not immediately receive permission to eat flesh;
but only the fruits of trees and the produce of the crops, and herbs and
vegetables were given him for food, that even when an exile from
paradise he might feed not upon flesh which was not to be found in
paradise, but upon grain and fruit like that of paradise. But afterwards
when <span id="fr_4779"></span>[4780](#fn_4779) God saw that the heart
of man from his youth was set on wickedness continually, and that His
Spirit could not remain in them because they were <span id="page_399">p.
399</span> <span id="vi.vi.II-Page_399"></span>flesh, He by the deluge
passed sentence on the works of the flesh, and, taking note of the
extreme greediness of men, <span id="fr_4780"></span>[4781](#fn_4780)
gave them liberty to eat flesh: so that while understanding that all
things were lawful for them, they might not greatly desire that which
was allowed, lest they should turn a commandment into a cause of
transgression. And yet even then, fasting was in part commanded. For,
seeing that some animals are called clean, some unclean, and the unclean
animals were taken into Noah’s ark by pairs, the clean in uneven numbers
(and of course the eating of the unclean was forbidden, otherwise the
term unclean would be unmeaning), fasting was in part consecrated:
restraint in the use of all was taught by the prohibition of some. Why
did Esau lose his birthright? Was it not on account of food? and he
could not atone with tears for the impatience of his appetite. The
people of Israel cast out from Egypt and on their way to the land of
promise, the land flowing with milk and honey, longed for the flesh of
Egypt, and the melons and garlic, saying: <span
id="fr_4781"></span>[4782](#fn_4781) “Would that we had died by the hand
of the Lord in the land of Egypt, when we sat by the flesh pots.” And
again, <span id="fr_4782"></span>[4783](#fn_4782) “Who shall give us
flesh to eat? We remember the fish which we did eat in Egypt for nought;
the cucumbers, and the melons, and the leeks, and the onions, and the
garlic: but now our soul is dried away: we have nought save this manna
to look to.”

<span id="vi.vi.II-p160"></span>They despised angels’ food, and sighed
for the flesh of Egypt. Moses for forty days and forty nights fasted on
Mount Sinai, and showed even then that man does not live on bread alone,
but on every word of God. He says to the Lord, “the people is full and
maketh idols.” Moses with empty stomach received the law written with
the finger of God. The people that ate and drank and rose up to play
fashioned a golden calf, and preferred an Egyptian ox to the majesty of
the Lord. The toil of so many days perished through the fulness of a
single hour. Moses boldly broke the tables: for he knew that drunkards
cannot hear the word of God. <span id="fr_4783"></span>[4784](#fn_4783)
“The beloved grew thick, waxed fat, and became sleek: he kicked and
forsook the Lord which made him, and departed from the God of his
salvation.” Hence also it is enjoined in the same Book of
Deuteronomy: <span id="fr_4784"></span>[4785](#fn_4784) “Beware, lest
when thou hast eaten and drunk, and hast built goodly houses, and when
thy herds and thy flocks multiply, and thy silver and gold is
multiplied, then thine heart be lifted up, and thou forget the Lord thy
God.” In short the people ate and their heart grew thick, lest they
should see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand
with their heart: so the people well fed and fat-fleshed could not bear
the countenance of Moses who fasted, for, to correctly render the
Hebrew, it was <span id="fr_4785"></span>[4786](#fn_4785) furnished with
horns through his converse with God. And it was not, as some think, to
show that there is no difference between virginity and marriage, but to
assert his sympathy with severe fasting, that our Lord and Saviour when
he was transfigured on the Mount revealed Moses and Elias with Himself
in glory. Although Moses and Elias were properly types of the Law and
the Prophets, as is clearly witnessed by the Gospel: <span
id="fr_4786"></span>[4787](#fn_4786) “They spake of his departure which
he was about to accomplish at Jerusalem.” For the passion of our Lord is
declared not by virginity or marriage, but by the Law and the Prophets.
If, however, any persons contentiously maintain that by Moses is
signified marriage, by Elias virginity, let me tell them briefly that
Moses died and was buried, but Elias was carried off in a chariot of
fire and entered on immortality before he approached death. But the
second writing of the tables could not be effected without fasting. What
was lost by drunkenness was regained by abstinence, a proof that by
fasting we can return to paradise, whence, though fulness, we have been
expelled. In <span id="fr_4787"></span>[4788](#fn_4787) Exodus we read
that the battle was fought against Amalek while Moses prayed, and the
whole people fasted until the evening. <span
id="fr_4788"></span>[4789](#fn_4788) Joshua, the son of Nun, bade sun
and moon stand still, and the victorious army prolonged its fast for
more than a day. <span id="fr_4789"></span>[4790](#fn_4789) Saul, as it
is written in the first book of Kings, pronounced a curse on him who ate
bread before the evening, and until he had avenged himself upon his
enemies. So none of his people tasted any food. And all they of the land
took food. And so binding was a solemn fast once it was proclaimed to
the Lord, that Jonathan, to whom the victory was due, was taken by lot,
and <span id="fr_4790"></span>[4791](#fn_4790) could not escape the
charge of sinning in ignorance, and his father’s hand was raised against
him, and the prayers of the people scarce availed to save him. <span
id="fr_4791"></span>[4792](#fn_4791) Elijah after the preparation of a
forty days fast saw God on Mount Horeb, and heard from Him <span
id="page_400">p. 400</span> <span id="vi.vi.II-Page_400"></span>the
words, “What doest thou here, Elijah?” There is much more familiarity in
this than in the “Where art thou, Adam?” of Genesis. The latter was
intended to excite the fears of one who had fed and was lost; the former
was affectionately addressed to a fasting servant. <span
id="fr_4792"></span>[4793](#fn_4792) When the people were assembled in
Mizpeh, Samuel proclaimed a fast, and so strengthened them, and thus
made them prevail against the enemy. <span
id="fr_4793"></span>[4794](#fn_4793) The attack of the Assyrians was
repulsed, and the might of Sennacherib utterly crushed, by the tears and
sackcloth of King Hezekiah, and by his humbling himself with fasting. So
also the city of Nineveh by fasting excited compassion and turned aside
the threatening wrath of the Lord. And <span
id="fr_4794"></span>[4795](#fn_4794) Sodom and Gomorrha might have
appeased it, had they been willing to repent, and through the aid of
fasting gain for themselves tears of repentance. <span
id="fr_4795"></span>[4796](#fn_4795) Ahab, the most impious of kings, by
fasting and wearing sackcloth, succeeded in escaping the sentence of
God, and in deferring the overthrow of his house to the days of his
posterity. <span id="fr_4796"></span>[4797](#fn_4796) Hannah, the wife
of Elkanah, by fasting won the gift of a son. <span
id="fr_4797"></span>[4798](#fn_4797) At Babylon the magicians came into
peril, every interpreter of dreams, soothsayer, and diviner was slain.
Daniel and the three youths gained a good report by fasting, and
although they were fed on pulse, they were fairer and wiser than they
who ate the flesh from the king’s table. Then it is written that Daniel
fasted for three weeks; he ate no pleasant bread; flesh and wine entered
not his mouth; he was not anointed with oil; and the angel came to him
saying, <span id="fr_4798"></span>[4799](#fn_4798) “Daniel, thou art
worthy of compassion.” He who in the eyes of God was worthy of
compassion, afterwards was an object of terror to the lions in their
den. How fair a thing is that which propitiates God, tames lions,
terrifies demons! Habakkuk (although we do not find this in the Hebrew
Scriptures <span id="fr_4799"></span>[4800](#fn_4799) ) was sent to him
with the reaper’s meal, for by a week’s abstinence he had merited so
distinguished a server. David, when his son was in danger after his
adultery, made confession in ashes and with fasting. <span
id="fr_4800"></span>[4801](#fn_4800) He tells us that he ate ashes like
bread, and mingled his drink with weeping. <span
id="fr_4801"></span>[4802](#fn_4801) And that his knees became weak
through fasting. Yet he had certainly heard from Nathan the words, <span
id="fr_4802"></span>[4803](#fn_4802) “The Lord also hath put away thy
sin.” Samson and Samuel drank neither wine nor strong drink, for they
were children of promise, and conceived in abstinence and fasting. <span
id="fr_4803"></span>[4804](#fn_4803) Aaron and the other priests when
about to enter the temple, refrained from all intoxicating drink for
fear they should die. Whence we learn that they die who minister in the
Church without sobriety. And hence it is a reproach against
Israel: <span id="fr_4804"></span>[4805](#fn_4804) “Ye gave my Nazarites
wine to drink.” Jonadab, the son of Rechab, commanded his sons to drink
no wine for ever. And when Jeremiah offered them wine to drink, and they
of their own accord refused it, the Lord spake by the prophet,
saying: <span id="fr_4805"></span>[4806](#fn_4805) “Because ye have
obeyed the commandment of Jonadab your father, Jonadab the son of Rechab
shall not want a man to stand before me for ever.” On the <span
id="fr_4806"></span>[4807](#fn_4806) threshold of the Gospel appears
Anna, the daughter of Phanuel, the wife of one husband, and a woman who
was always fasting. Long-continued chastity and persistent fasting
welcomed a Virgin Lord. His forerunner and herald, John, fed on locusts
and wild honey, not on flesh; and the hermits of the desert and the
monks in their cells, at first used the same sustenance. But the Lord
Himself consecrated His baptism by a forty days’ fast, and He taught us
that the more violent devils <span id="fr_4807"></span>[4808](#fn_4807)
cannot be overcome, except by prayer and fasting. <span
id="fr_4808"></span>[4809](#fn_4808) Cornelius the centurion was found
worthy through alms-giving and frequent fasts to receive the gift of the
Holy Spirit before baptism. <span id="fr_4809"></span>[4810](#fn_4809)
The Apostle Paul, after speaking of hunger and thirst, and his other
labours, perils from robbers, shipwrecks, loneliness, enumerates
frequent fasts. And he <span id="fr_4810"></span>[4811](#fn_4810)
advises his disciple Timothy, who had a weak stomach, and was subject to
many infirmities, to drink wine in moderation: “Drink no longer water,”
he says. The fact that he bids him *no longer* drink water shows that he
had previously drunk water. The apostle would not have allowed this had
not frequent infirmities and bodily pain demanded the concession.

<span id="vi.vi.II-p189"></span>16. The Apostle does indeed <span
id="fr_4811"></span>[4812](#fn_4811) blame those who forbade marriage,
and commanded to abstain from food, which God created for use with
thanksgiving. But he has in view Marcion, and Tatian, and other
heretics, who inculcate perpetual abstinence, to destroy, and express
their hatred and contempt for, the works of the Creator. But we praise
every creature of God, and yet prefer leanness to corpulence, abstinence
to luxury, fasting to fulness. <span
id="fr_4812"></span>[4813](#fn_4812) “He that laboureth laboureth for
<span id="page_401">p. 401</span> <span
id="vi.vi.II-Page_401"></span>himself, and he is eager to his own
destruction.” And, <span id="fr_4813"></span>[4814](#fn_4813) “From the
days of John the Baptist (who fasted and was a virgin) until now the
kingdom of heaven suffereth violence, and men of violence take it by
force.” For we are afraid lest at the coming of the eternal judge we be
caught, as in the days of the flood, and at the overthrow of Sodom and
Gomorrha, eating and drinking, and marrying, and giving in marriage. For
both the flood and the fire from heaven found fulness as well as
marriage ready for destruction. Nor need we wonder if the Apostle
commands that everything sold in the market be bought and eaten, since
with idolaters, and with those who still ate in the temples of the idols
meats offered to idols as such, it passed for the highest abstinence to
abstain only from food eaten by the Gentiles. And if he says to the
Romans: <span id="fr_4814"></span>[4815](#fn_4814) “Let not him that
eateth set at nought him that eateth not: and let not him that eateth
not judge him that eateth,” he does not make fasting and fulness of
equal merit, but he is speaking against those believers in Christ who
were still judaizing: and he warns Gentile believers, not to offend
those by their food who were still too weak in faith. In brief this is
clear enough in the sequel: <span id="fr_4815"></span>[4816](#fn_4815)
“I know and am persuaded in the Lord Jesus, that nothing is unclean of
itself: save that to him who accounteth anything to be unclean, to him
it is unclean. For if because of meat thy brother is grieved, thou
walkest no longer in love. Destroy not with thy meat him for whom Christ
died. Let not then your good be evil spoken of: for the Kingdom of God
is not eating and drinking.” And that no one may suppose he is referring
to fasting and not to Jewish superstition, he immediately
explains, <span id="fr_4816"></span>[4817](#fn_4816) “One man hath faith
to eat all things: but he that is weak eateth herbs.” And again, <span
id="fr_4817"></span>[4818](#fn_4817) “One man esteemeth one day above
another: another esteemeth every day alike. Let each man be fully
assured in his own mind. He that regardeth the day, regardeth it unto
the Lord: and he that eateth, eateth unto the Lord, for he giveth God
thanks; and he that eateth not, unto the Lord he eateth not, and giveth
God thanks.” For they who were still weak in faith and thought some
meats clean, some unclean: and supposed there was a difference between
one day and another, for example, that the Sabbath, and the New Moons,
and the Feast of Tabernacles were holier than other days, were commanded
to eat herbs which are indifferently partaken of by all. But such as
were of stronger faith believed all meats and all days to be alike.

<span id="vi.vi.II-p197"></span>17. My opponent has dared to maintain
that our Lord was called by the Pharisees a wine-bibber and a glutton:
and from the fact of His going to marriage feasts and from His not
despising the banquets of sinners, I am to infer His wishes respecting
ourselves. That Lord, so you suppose, is a glutton who fasted forty days
to hallow Christian fasting; <span id="fr_4818"></span>[4819](#fn_4818)
who calls them blessed that hunger and thirst; <span
id="fr_4819"></span>[4820](#fn_4819) who says that He has food, not that
which the disciples surmised, but such as would not perish for
ever; <span id="fr_4820"></span>[4821](#fn_4820) who forbids us to think
of the morrow; who, though He is said to have hungered and thirsted, and
to have gone frequently to various meals, except in celebrating the
mystery whereby He represented His passion, or <span
id="fr_4821"></span>[4822](#fn_4821) in proving the reality of His body
is nowhere described as ministering to His appetite; <span
id="fr_4822"></span>[4823](#fn_4822) who tells of purple-clad Dives in
hell for his feasting, and says that poor Lazarus for his abstinence was
in Abraham’s bosom; who, when we fast, <span
id="fr_4823"></span>[4824](#fn_4823) bids us anoint our head and wash
our face, that we fast not to gain glory from men, but praise from the
Lord; who did indeed <span id="fr_4824"></span>[4825](#fn_4824) after
His resurrection eat part of a broiled fish and of a honey-comb, not to
allay hunger and to gratify His palate, but to show the reality of His
own body. For whenever He raised anyone from the dead He <span
id="fr_4825"></span>[4826](#fn_4825) ordered that food should be given
him to eat, lest the resurrection should be thought a delusion. And this
is why Lazarus after his resurrection is <span
id="fr_4826"></span>[4827](#fn_4826) described as being at the feast
with our Lord. We do not deny that fish and other kinds of flesh, if we
choose, may be taken as food; but as we prefer virginity to marriage, so
do we esteem fasting and spirituality above meats and full-bloodedness.
And if Peter <span id="fr_4827"></span>[4828](#fn_4827) before dinner
went to the supper chamber at the sixth hour, a chance fit of hunger
does not prejudice fasting. For, if this were so, because our Lord <span
id="fr_4828"></span>[4829](#fn_4828) at the sixth hour sat weary on the
well of Samaria and wished to drink, all must of necessity, whether they
so desire or not, drink at that time. Possibly it was the Sabbath, or
the Lord’s day, and he hungered at the sixth hour after two or three
days’ fasting; for I could never believe that the Apostle, if he had
eaten a dinner only one day previous and had been blown out with a great
meal, would have been hungry by noon next day. But if he did dine the
day pre<span id="page_402">p. 402</span> <span
id="vi.vi.II-Page_402"></span>vious, and was hungry next day before
luncheon, I do not think that a man who was so soon hungry ate until he
was satisfied. Again, God by the mouth of Isaiah says what fast He did
not choose: <span id="fr_4829"></span>[4830](#fn_4829) “In the day of
your fast ye find pleasure, and afflict the lowly: ye fast for strife
and debate, and to smite with the fist of wickedness. It is not such a
fast that I have chosen, saith the Lord.” What kind He has chosen He
thus teaches: “Deal thy bread to the hungry, and bring the houseless
poor into thy house. When thou seest the naked cover him, and hide not
thyself from thine own flesh.” He did not therefore reject fasting, but
showed what He would have it to be: for that bodily hunger is not
pleasing to God which is made null and void by strife, and plunder, and
lust. If God does not desire fasting, how is it that in <span
id="fr_4830"></span>[4831](#fn_4830) Leviticus He commands the whole
people in the seventh month, on the tenth day of the month, to fast
until the evening, and threatens that he who does not afflict his soul
shall die and be cut off from his people? How is it that the <span
id="fr_4831"></span>[4832](#fn_4831) graves of lust where the people
fell in their devotion to flesh remain even to this day in the
wilderness? Do we not read that the stupid people gorged themselves with
quails until the wrath of God came upon them? Why was the man of God at
whose prophecy the hand of King Jeroboam withered, and who ate contrary
to the command of God, <span id="fr_4832"></span>[4833](#fn_4832)
immediately smitten? Strange that the lion which left the ass safe and
sound should not spare the prophet just risen from his meal! He who,
while he was fasting, had wrought miracles, no sooner ate a meal than he
paid the penalty for the gratification. Joel also cries aloud: <span
id="fr_4833"></span>[4834](#fn_4833) “Sanctify a fast, proclaim a time
of healing,” that it might appear that a fast is sanctified by other
works, and that a holy fast avails for the cure of sin. Moreover, just
as true virginity is not prejudiced by the counterfeit professions of
the virgins of the devil, so neither is true fasting by the periodic
fast and perpetual abstinence from certain kinds of food on the part of
the worshippers of Isis and Cybele, particularly when a fast from bread
is made up for by feasting on flesh. And just as the signs of Moses were
imitated by the signs of the Egyptians which were in reality no signs at
all, for the rod of Moses swallowed up the rods of the magicians: so
when the devil tries to be the rival of God this does not prove that our
religion is superstitious, but that we are negligent, since we refuse to
do what even men of the world see clearly to be good.

<span id="vi.vi.II-p214"></span>18. His fourth and last contention is
that there are two classes, the sheep and the goats, the just and the
unjust: that the just stand on the right hand, the other on the left:
and that to the just the words are spoken: <span
id="fr_4834"></span>[4835](#fn_4834) “Come, ye blessed of my Father, and
inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world.”
But that sinners are thus addressed: <span
id="fr_4835"></span>[4836](#fn_4835) “Depart from me, ye cursed, into
the eternal fire which is prepared for the devil and his angels.” That a
good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, nor an evil tree good fruit.
Hence it is that the Saviour says to the Jews: <span
id="fr_4836"></span>[4837](#fn_4836) “Ye are of your father the devil,
and the lusts of your father it is your will to do.” He quotes the
parable of the ten virgins, the wise and the foolish, and shows that the
five who had no oil remained outside, but that the other five who had
gotten for themselves the light of good works went into the marriage
with the bridegroom. He goes back to the flood, and tells us that they
who were righteous like Noah were saved, but that the sinners perished
all together. We are informed that among the men of Sodom and Gomorrha
no difference is made except between the two classes of the good and the
bad. The righteous are delivered, the sinners are consumed by the same
fire. There is one salvation for those who are released, one destruction
for those who stay behind. Lot’s wife is a clear warning that we must
not deviate a hair’s breadth from right. If, however, he says, you
object and ask me why the righteous toils in time of peace, or in the
midst of persecution, if he is to gain nothing nor have a greater
reward, I would assert that he does this, not that he may gain a further
reward but that he may not lose what he has already received. In Egypt
also the ten plagues fell with equal violence upon all that sinned, and
the same darkness hung over master and slave, noble and ignoble, the
king and the people. Again at the Red Sea the righteous all passed over,
the sinners were all overwhelmed. Six hundred thousand men, besides
those who were unfit for war through age or sex, all alike fell in the
desert, and two who were alike in righteousness are alike delivered. For
forty years all Israel toiled and died alike. As regards food, an homer
of manna was the measure for all ages: the clothes of all alike did not
wear out: the hair of all alike did not grow, nor the beard increase:
the shoes of all lasted the same time. Their feet grew not hard: the
<span id="page_403">p. 403</span> <span
id="vi.vi.II-Page_403"></span>food in the mouths of all had the same
taste. They went on their way to one resting place with equal toil and
equal reward. All Hebrews had the same Passover, the same Feast of
Tabernacles, the same Sabbath, the same New Moons. In the seventh, the
Sabbatical Year, all prisoners were released without distinction of
persons, and in the year of Jubilee all debts were forgiven to all
debtors, and he who had sold land returned to the inheritance of his
fathers.

<span id="vi.vi.II-p218"></span>19. Then, again, as regards the parable
of the sower in the Gospel, we read that the good ground brought forth
fruit, some a hundred fold, some sixty fold, and some thirty fold; and,
on the other hand, that the bad ground admitted of three degrees of
sterility: but Jovinianus makes only two classes, the good soil and the
bad. <span id="fr_4837"></span>[4838](#fn_4837) And as in one Gospel our
Lord promises the Apostles a hundred fold, in another seven fold, for
leaving children and wives, and in the world to come life eternal; and
the seven and the hundred mean the same thing: so, too, in the passage
before us, the numbers describing the fertility of the soil need not
create any difficulty, particularly when the Evangelist Mark gives the
inverse order, thirty, sixty, and a hundred. The Lord says, <span
id="fr_4838"></span>[4839](#fn_4838) “He that eateth my flesh and
drinketh my blood abideth in me, and I in him.” As, then, there are not
varying degrees of Christ’s presence in us, so neither are there degrees
of our abiding in Christ. <span id="fr_4839"></span>[4840](#fn_4839)
“Every one that loveth me will keep my word: and my Father will love
him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode with him.” He that is
righteous, loves Christ: and if a man thus loves, the Father and the Son
come to him, and make their abode with him. Now I suppose that when the
guest is such as this the host cannot possibly lack anything. And if our
Lord says, <span id="fr_4840"></span>[4841](#fn_4840) “In my Father’s
house are many mansions,” His meaning is not that there are different
mansions in the kingdom of heaven, but He indicates the number of
Churches in the whole world, for though the Church be seven-fold she is
but one. “I go,” He says, “to prepare *a place* for you,” not *places*.
If this promise is peculiar to the twelve apostles, then Paul is shut
out from that place, and the chosen vessel will be thought superfluous
and unworthy. John and James, because they asked more than the others,
did not obtain it; and yet their dignity is not diminished, because they
were equal to the rest of the apostles. <span
id="fr_4841"></span>[4842](#fn_4841) “Know ye not that your bodies are a
temple of the Holy Ghost?” A *temple*, He says, not *temples*, in order
to show that God dwells in all alike. <span
id="fr_4842"></span>[4843](#fn_4842) “Neither for these only do I pray,
but for them also that believe on me through their word; as thou,
Father, in me, and I in thee, are one, so they may be all one in us. And
the glory which thou hast given me I have given unto them. I have loved
them, as thou hast loved me. And as we are Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
one God, so may they be one people in themselves, that is, like dear
children, partakers of the divine nature.” Call the Church what you
will, bride, sister, mother, her assembly is but one and never lacks
husband, brother, or son. Her faith is one, and she is not defiled by
variety of doctrine, nor divided by heresies. She continues a virgin.
Whithersoever the Lamb goeth, she follows Him: she alone knows the Song
of Christ.

<span id="vi.vi.II-p225"></span>20. “If you tell me,” says he, “that one
star differeth from another star in glory, I reply, that one star does
differ from another star; that is, spiritual persons differ from carnal.
We love all the members alike, and do not prefer the eye to the finger,
nor the finger to the ear: but the loss of any one is attended by the
sorrow of all the rest. We all alike come into this world, and we all
alike depart from it. There is one Adam of the earth, and another from
heaven. The earthly Adam is on the left hand, and will perish: the
heavenly Adam is on the right hand, and will be saved. He who says to
his brother, ‘*thou fool*,’ and ‘*raca*,’ will be in danger of Gehenna.
And the murderer and the adulterer will likewise be sent into Gehenna.
In times of persecution some are burnt, some strangled, some beheaded,
some flee, or die within the walls of a prison: the struggle varies in
kind, but the victors’ crown is one. No difference was made between the
son who had never left his father, and his brother who was welcomed as a
returning penitent. To the labourers of the first hour, the third, the
sixth, the ninth, and the eleventh, the same reward of a penny was
given, and what may perhaps seem still more strange to you, the first to
receive the reward were they who had toiled least in the vineyard.”

<span id="vi.vi.II-p226"></span>21. Who is there even of God’s elect
that would not be disturbed at these and similar passages of Holy
Scripture which our crafty opponent, with a perverse ingenuity, twists
to the support of his own views? The Apostle John says that many
Antichrists had come, and to make no difference between John himself and
the lowest penitent is the preaching of a real Antichrist. At the same
time, I am amazed at the portentous forms which Jovi<span
id="page_404">p. 404</span> <span id="vi.vi.II-Page_404"></span>nianus,
as slippery as a snake and like another Proteus, so rapidly assumes. In
sexual intercourse and full feeding he is an Epicurean; in the
distribution of rewards and punishments he all at once becomes a Stoic,
He exchanges Jerusalem for <span id="fr_4843"></span>[4844](#fn_4843)
Citium, Judæa for Cyprus, Christ for Zeno. If we may not depart a hair’s
breadth from virtue, and all sins are equal, and a man who in a fit of
hunger steals a piece of bread is no less guilty than he who slays a
man: you must, in your turn, be held guilty of the greatest crimes. The
case is different if you say that you have no sin, not even the least,
and if, although all apostles and prophets and all the saints (as I have
maintained in dealing with <span id="fr_4844"></span>[4845](#fn_4844)
his second proposition) bewail their sinfulness, you alone boast of your
righteousness. But a minute ago you were barefooted: now you not only
wear shoes, but decorated ones. Just now you wore a rough coat and a
dirty shirt, you were grimy, and haggard, and your hand was horny with
toil: now you are clad in linen and silks, and strut like an exquisite
in the fashions of the Atrebates and the Laodiceans. Your cheeks are
ruddy, your skin sleek, your hair smoothed down in front and behind,
your belly protrudes, your shoulders are little mountains, your neck
full and so loaded with fat that the half-smothered words can scarce
make their escape. Surely in such extremes of dress and mode of life
there must be sin on the one side or the other. I will not assert that
the sin lies in the food or clothing, but that such fickleness and
changing for the worse is almost censurable in itself. And what we
censure, is far removed from virtue; and what is far from virtue becomes
the property of vice; and what is proved to be vicious is one with sin.
Now sin, according to you, is placed on the left hand, and corresponds
to the goats. You must, therefore, return to your old habits if you are
to be a sheep on the right hand; or, if you perversely repent of your
former views and change them for others, whether you like it or not, and
although you shave off your beard, you will be reckoned among the goats.

<span id="vi.vi.II-p229"></span>22. But what is the good of calling
a <span id="fr_4845"></span>[4846](#fn_4845) one-eyed man Old One-eye,
and of showing the inconsistency of an assailant, when we have to refute
a whole series of statements? That the sheep and the goats on the right
hand and on the left are the two classes of the righteous and the
wicked, I do not deny. That a good tree does not bring forth evil fruit,
nor an evil one good fruit, no one doubts. The ten virgins also, wise
and foolish, we divide into good and bad. We are not ignorant that at
the deluge the righteous were delivered, and sinners overwhelmed with
the waters. That at Sodom and Gomorrha the just man was rescued, while
the sinners were consumed by fire, is clear to everyone. We are also
aware that Egypt was stricken with the ten plagues, and that Israel was
saved. Even little children in our schools sing how the righteous passed
through the Red Sea, and Pharaoh with his host was drowned. That six
hundred thousand fell in the desert because they were unbelieving, and
that two only entered the land of promise, is taught by Scripture; and
so is the rest of your description of the two classes, good and bad,
down to the labourers in the vineyard. But what are we to think of your
assertion, that because there is a division into good and bad, the good,
or the bad it may be, are not distinguished one from another, and that
it makes no difference whether one is a ram in the flock or a poor
little sheep? whether the sheep have the first or the second fleece?
whether the flock is diseased and covered with the scab, or full of life
and vigour? <span id="fr_4846"></span>[4847](#fn_4846) especially when
by the authoritative utterances of His own prophet Ezekiel God clearly
points out the difference between flock and flock of His rational sheep,
saying, “Behold I judge between cattle and cattle, and between the rams
and the he-goats, and between the fat cattle and the lean. Because ye
have thrust with side and with shoulder, and pushed all the diseased
with your horns, until they were scattered abroad.” And that we might
know what the cattle were, He immediately added: <span
id="fr_4847"></span>[4848](#fn_4847) “Ye my flock, the flock of my
pasture, are men.” Will Paul and that penitent who had lain with his
father’s wife be on an equality, because the latter repented and was
received into the Church: and shall the offender because he is with him
on the right hand shine with the same glory as the Apostle? How is it
then that tares and wheat grow side by side in the same field until the
harvest, that is the end of the world? What is the significance of good
and bad fish being contained in the Gospel net? Why, in Noah’s ark, the
type of the Church, are there different animals with different abodes
according to their rank? Why standeth the queen upon the Lord’s right
hand, in raiment of wrought gold, in a vesture of gold? Why had Joseph,
representing Christ, a coat of many colours? Why does the Apostle say to
the Romans: <span id="fr_4848"></span>[4849](#fn_4848) “According as God
had dealt to each man a measure of faith. For even as we have <span
id="page_405">p. 405</span> <span id="vi.vi.II-Page_405"></span>many
members in one body, and all the members have not the same office: so
we, who are many, are one body in Christ, and severally members one of
another. And having gifts differing according to the grace that was
given to us, whether prophecy, let us prophesy according to the
proportion of our faith; or ministry, let us give ourselves to our
ministry; or he that teacheth, to his teaching; or he that exhorteth, to
his exhorting: he that giveth, let him do it with liberality; he that
ruleth, with diligence,” and so on. And elsewhere: <span
id="fr_4849"></span>[4850](#fn_4849) “One man esteemeth one day above
another: another esteemeth every day alike. Let every man be fully
persuaded in his own mind.” To the Corinthians he says: <span
id="fr_4850"></span>[4851](#fn_4850) “I have planted, Apollos watered:
but God gave the increase. So then, neither is he that planteth any
thing, neither he that watereth: but God that giveth the increase. Now
he that planteth and he that watereth are one: and every man shall
receive his own reward according to his own labour. For we are labourers
together with God, ye are God’s husbandry, ye are God’s building.” And
again elsewhere: <span id="fr_4851"></span>[4852](#fn_4851) “According
to the grace of God which is given unto me, as a wise master-builder I
laid a foundation, and another buildeth thereon. But let each man take
heed how he buildeth thereupon. For other foundation can no man lay,
than that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ. But if any man buildeth
on the foundation, gold, silver, costly stones, wood, hay, stubble: each
man’s work shall be made manifest: for the day shall reveal it, because
it is revealed in fire: and the fire itself shall prove each man’s work
of what sort it is. If any man’s work shall abide which he built
thereon, he shall receive a reward. If any man’s work shall be burned,
he shall suffer loss: but he himself shall be saved; yet so as through
fire.” If the man whose work is burnt and is to suffer the loss of his
labour, while he himself is saved, yet not without proof of fire: it
follows that if a man’s work remains which he has built upon the
foundation, he will be saved without probation by fire, and consequently
a difference is established between one degree of salvation and another.
Again in another place he says: <span
id="fr_4852"></span>[4853](#fn_4852) “Let a man so account of us, as of
ministers of Christ, and stewards of the mysteries of God. Here,
moreover, it is required in stewards, that a man be found faithful.”
Would you be assured that between one steward and another there is a
great difference (I am not speaking of bad and good, but of the good
themselves who stand on the right hand)? then listen to the
sequel: <span id="fr_4853"></span>[4854](#fn_4853) “Know ye not that
they which minister about the sacrifices, eat of the sacrifices, and
they which wait upon the altar have their portion with the altar? Even
so did the Lord ordain that they which proclaim the gospel should live
of the gospel. But I have used none of these things: and I wrote not
these things that it may be so done in my case: for it were good for me
rather to die, than that any man should make my glorying void. For if I
preach the gospel, I have nothing to glory of; for necessity is laid
upon me; for woe is unto me if I preach not the gospel. For if I do this
of mine own will, I have a reward: but if not of mine own will, I have a
steward-ship intrusted to me. What then is my reward? That, when I
preach the gospel, I may make the gospel without charge, so as not to
use to the full my right in the gospel. For though I was free from all
men, I brought myself under bondage to all, that I might gain the more.”
You surely cannot say that men commit sin by living by the Gospel, and
partaking of the sacrifices. Of course not. The Lord himself made the
rule that they who preach the Gospel, should live by the Gospel. But an
Apostle who does not abuse this freedom, but labours with his hands that
he may not be a burden to anyone, and toils night and day and ministers
to his companions of course does this, that for his greater toil he may
receive a greater reward.

<span id="vi.vi.II-p239"></span>23. Let us hasten to what remains. <span
id="fr_4854"></span>[4855](#fn_4854) “There are diversities of gifts,
but the same Spirit. And there are diversities of ministrations, and the
same Lord. And there are diversities of operations, but the same God who
worketh all things in all. But to each one is given the manifestation of
the Spirit to profit withal.” And again: <span
id="fr_4855"></span>[4856](#fn_4855) “As the body is one, and hath many
members, and all the members of the body, being many, are one body: so
also is Christ.” But he precludes you from saying that the different
members of the one body have the same rank; for he immediately describes
the orders of the Church, and says: <span
id="fr_4856"></span>[4857](#fn_4856) “And God hath set some in the
Church, first, apostles; secondly, prophets; thirdly, teachers; then
miracles, then gifts of healings, helps, governments, divers kinds of
tongues. Are all apostles? are all prophets? are all teachers? are all
workers of miracles? have all gifts of healings? do all speak with
tongues? do all interpret? But desire earnestly the greater gifts. And a
still more excellent way shew I unto you.” And after discoursing more in
detail of the graces of <span id="page_406">p. 406</span> <span
id="vi.vi.II-Page_406"></span>charity, he added: <span
id="fr_4857"></span>[4858](#fn_4857) “Whether there be prophecies, they
shall be done away; whether there be tongues, they shall cease; whether
there be knowledge, it shall be done away. For we know in part, and we
prophesy in part: but when that which is perfect is come, then that
which is in part shall be done away.” And afterwards we read: <span
id="fr_4858"></span>[4859](#fn_4858) “But now abideth faith, hope, love,
these three; and the greatest of these is love. Follow after love; yet
desire earnestly spiritual gifts, but rather that ye may prophesy.” And
again: <span id="fr_4859"></span>[4860](#fn_4859) “I would have you all
speak with tongues, but rather that ye should prophesy: and greater is
he that prophesieth than he that speaketh with tongues.” And
again: <span id="fr_4860"></span>[4861](#fn_4860) “I thank God, I speak
with tongues more than you all.” Where there are different gifts, and
one man is greater, another less, and all are called spiritual, they are
all certainly sheep, and they stand on the right hand; but there is a
difference between one sheep and another. It is humility that leads the
Apostle Paul to say: <span id="fr_4861"></span>[4862](#fn_4861) “I am
the least of the apostles, that am not meet to be called an apostle,
because I persecuted the church of God. But by the grace of God I am
what I am: and his grace which was bestowed upon me was not found vain:
but I laboured more abundantly than they all: yet not I, but the grace
of God which was with me.” But the very fact of his thus humbling
himself shows the possibility of there being apostles of higher or lower
rank, and God is not unjust that He will forget the work of him who is
called the chosen vessel of election, and who laboured more abundantly
than they all, or assign equal rewards to unequal deserts. Afterwards we
read, <span id="fr_4862"></span>[4863](#fn_4862) “As in Adam all die, so
also in Christ shall all be now alive. But each in his own order.” If
each is to rise in his own order, it follows that those who rise are of
different degrees of merit. <span id="fr_4863"></span>[4864](#fn_4863)
“All flesh is not the same flesh; but there is one flesh of men, and
another flesh of beasts, and another flesh of birds, and another of
fishes. There are also celestial bodies, and bodies terrestrial: but the
glory of the celestial is one, and the glory of the terrestrial is
another. There is one glory of the sun, and another glory of the moon,
and another glory of the stars; for one star differeth from another star
in glory. So also is the resurrection of the dead.” Like a learned
commentator, you have explained this passage by saying that the
spiritual differ from the carnal. It follows that in heaven there will
be both spiritual and carnal persons, and not only will the sheep climb
thither, but your goats also. “One star,” he says, “differeth from
another star in glory”: this is not the distinction of sheep and goat,
but of sheep and sheep, star and star. Lastly, he says, “there is one
glory of the sun, and another glory of the moon.” But for this, you
might maintain that the phrase *one star from another star* covers the
whole human race; but he introduces the sun and moon, and you cannot
possibly reckon them among the goats. “So,” says he, “is also the
resurrection of the dead”—the just will shine with the brightness of the
sun, and those of the next rank will glow with the splendour of the
moon, so that one will be a Lucifer, another an Arcturus, a third an
Orion, another Mazzaroth, or some other of the stars whose names are
hollowed in the book of Job. <span id="fr_4864"></span>[4865](#fn_4864)
 <span id="fr_4865"></span>[4866](#fn_4865) “For we all,” he says, “must
be made manifest before the judgment-seat of Christ; that each one may
receive the things done in the body, according to what he hath done,
whether it be good or bad.” And you cannot say that the mode of our
manifestation before the judgment-seat of Christ is such that the good
receive good things, the bad evil things; for he <span
id="fr_4866"></span>[4867](#fn_4866) teaches us in the same epistle that
he who soweth sparingly shall reap also sparingly, and he that soweth
bountifully shall reap also bountifully. Surely he who sows more and he
who sows less are both on the right side. And although they belong to
the same class, that of the sower, yet they differ in respect of measure
and number. The same Paul, writing to the Ephesians, says: <span
id="fr_4867"></span>[4868](#fn_4867) “to the intent that now unto the
principalities and the powers in the heavenly places might be made known
through the church the manifold wisdom of God.” You observe that it is a
varied and manifold wisdom of God which is spoken of as existing in the
different ranks of the church. And in the same epistle we read, <span
id="fr_4868"></span>[4869](#fn_4868) “Unto each one of us was the grace
given according to the measure of the grace of Christ”: not that
Christ’s measure varies, but only that so much of His grace is poured
out as we can receive.

<span id="vi.vi.II-p255"></span>24. In vain, therefore, do you multiply
instances of sheep and goats, of the five wise and five foolish virgins,
of Egyptians and Israelites, and so forth, because retribution is not in
the present, but will be in the future. Hence we find that the day of
judgment is promised at the end of all things, because the judgment is
not now. For it would be absurd to call the last day the day of
judgment, if God were judging at the present time. Now we sail the ship,
wrestle, and fight, that at last <span id="page_407">p. 407</span> <span
id="vi.vi.II-Page_407"></span>we may reach the haven, be crowned, and
triumph. But you, with no less adroitness than perversity, make the life
of this world illustrate that of the world to come, although we know
full well that here unrighteousness prevails, there,
righteousness: <span id="fr_4869"></span>[4870](#fn_4869) “until we go
into the sanctuary of God, and understand the end of those men.” The
saint does not die one way, the sinner another. Those who sail the same
sea have the same calm and storm. A violent death is not one thing to
the robber, another to the martyr. Children are not born one way of
adultery and prostitution, in another of pure marriage. Certainly our
Lord and the robbers incurred the same penalty of crucifixion. If the
judgment of this world and of that which is to come be the same, it
follows that they who were here crucified side by side, will also be
esteemed of equal rank hereafter. Paul and they who bound him, sailed
together, endured the same storm, escaped together to the shore when the
ship was broken with the waves. You cannot deny that the prisoner and
the keepers were of unequal merit. And what were the circumstances of
that same shipwreck of the Apostle and the soldiers? The Apostle Paul
afterwards <span id="fr_4870"></span>[4871](#fn_4870) related a vision,
and said that they who were with him in the ship had been given to him
by the Lord. Are we to suppose that he to whom they were given, and they
who were given to him, were of one degree of merit? Ten righteous men
can save a sinful city. Lot together with his daughters was delivered
from the fire: his sons-in-law would also have been saved, had they been
willing to leave the city. Now there was surely a great difference
between Lot and his sons-in-law. One city out of the five, <span
id="fr_4871"></span>[4872](#fn_4871) Zoar, was saved, and a place which
lay under the same sentence as Sodom, Gomorrha, Admah, and Zeboiim, was
preserved by the prayers of a holy man. Lot and Zoar were of different
merit, but both of them escaped the fire. <span
id="fr_4872"></span>[4873](#fn_4872) The robbers who in the absence of
David had laid waste Ziklag, and made a prey of the wives and children
of the inhabitants were slain on the third day in the plain, but forty
men mounted on camels fled. Will you maintain that there was some
difference between those who were slain and those who made good their
escape? We read in the <span id="fr_4873"></span>[4874](#fn_4873) Gospel
that the tower of Siloam fell upon eighteen men who perished in the
ruins. Certainly our Saviour did not regard them as the only sinners:
but they were punished to terrify the rest: it was like scourging a
pestilent fellow to teach fools wisdom. If all sinners are punished
alike, it is unjust for one to be slain while another is admonished by
his comrade’s death.

<span id="vi.vi.II-p261"></span>25. You raise the objection that all
Israelites had the same measure of manna, an homer, and were alike in
respect of dress, and hair, and beard, and shoes; as though we did not
all alike partake of the body of Christ. In the Christian mysteries
there is one means of sanctification for the master and the servant, the
noble and the low-born, for the king and his soldiers, and yet, that
which is one varies according to the merits of those who receive
it. <span id="fr_4874"></span>[4875](#fn_4874) “Whosoever shall eat or
drink unworthily shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord.”
Does it follow that because Judas drank of the same cup as the rest of
the apostles, that he and they are of equal merit? But suppose that we
do not choose to receive the sacrament, at all events we all have the
same life, breathe the same air, have the same blood in our veins, are
fed on the same food. Moreover, if our viands are improved by culinary
skill and are made more palatable for the consumer, food of this kind
does not satisfy nature, but tickles the appetite. We are all alike
subject to hunger, all alike suffer with cold: we alike are shrivelled
with the frost, or melted with the broiling heat. The sun and the moon,
and all the company of the stars, the showers, the whole world run their
course for us all alike, and, as the Gospel tells us, the same
refreshing rain falls upon all, good and bad, just and unjust. If the
present is a picture of the future, then the Sun of Righteousness will
rise upon sinners as well as upon the righteous, upon the wicked and the
holy, upon the heathen as well as upon Jews and Christians, though the
Scripture says, <span id="fr_4875"></span>[4876](#fn_4875) “Unto you
that fear the Lord shall the Sun of Righteousness arise.” If He will
rise to those that fear, He will set to the despisers and the false
prophets. The sheep which stand on the right hand will be brought into
the kingdom of heaven, the goats will be thrust down to hell. The
parable does not contrast the sheep one with another, or on the other
hand the goats, but merely makes a difference between sheep and goats.
The whole truth is not taught in a single passage: we must always bear
in mind the exact point of an illustration. For instance, the ten
virgins are not examples of the whole human race, but of the careful and
the slothful: the former are ever anticipating the advent of our Lord,
the latter abandon themselves to idle slumber without a thought of
future judgment. And so at the end of the parable it is said, <span
id="fr_4876"></span>[4877](#fn_4876) “Watch, for ye know not the <span
id="page_408">p. 408</span> <span id="vi.vi.II-Page_408"></span>day, nor
the hour.” If at the deluge Noah was delivered, and the whole world
perished, all men were flesh, and therefore were destroyed. You must
either say that the sons of Noah and Noah for whose sake they were
delivered were of unequal merit, or you must place the accursed Ham in
the same rank as his father because he was delivered with him from the
flood. At the passion of Christ all wavered, all were unprofitable
together: there was none that did good, no not one. Will you therefore
dare to say that Peter and the rest of the Apostles who fled denied the
Saviour in the same sense as Caiaphas and the Pharisees and the people
who cried out, <span id="fr_4877"></span>[4878](#fn_4877) “Crucify him,
crucify him”? And, to say no more about the Apostles, do you think Annas
and Caiaphas, and Judas the traitor guilty of no greater crime than
Pilate who was compelled against his will to give sentence against our
Lord? The guilt of Judas is proportioned to his former merit, and the
greater the guilt, the greater the penalty too. <span
id="fr_4878"></span>[4879](#fn_4878) “For the *mighty* shall mightily
suffer torment.” An evil tree does not bear good fruit, nor a good tree
evil fruit. If this be so, tell me how it was that Paul though he was an
evil tree and persecuted the Church of Christ, afterwards bore good
fruit? And Judas, though he was a good tree and wrought miracles like
the other Apostles, afterwards turned traitor and brought forth evil
fruit? The truth is that a good tree does not bear evil fruit, nor an
evil tree good fruit, so long as they continue in their goodness, or
badness. And if we read that every Hebrew keeps the same Passover, and
that in <span id="fr_4879"></span>[4880](#fn_4879) the seventh year
every prisoner is set free, and that at Jubilee, that is the fiftieth
year, <span id="fr_4880"></span>[4881](#fn_4880) every possession
returns to its owner, all this refers not to the present, but to the
future; for being in bondage during the six days of this world, on the
seventh day, the true and eternal Sabbath, we shall be free, at any rate
if we wish to be free while still in bondage in the world. If, however,
we do not desire it, our ear will be bored in token of our disobedience,
and together with our wives and children, whom we preferred to liberty,
that is, with the flesh and its works, we shall be in perpetual slavery.

<span id="vi.vi.II-p269"></span>26. As for the parable of the sower
which makes both good and bad ground bear a triple crop, and the passage
from the apostle in which upon Christ as the foundation one man builds
gold, silver, costly stones, another wood, hay, stubble, the meaning is
perfectly clear. We know that in a great house there are different
vessels, and to wish to contradict so plain a truth would be sheer
impudence. Yet that Jovinianus may not triumph in a lie and quote the
instance of the apostles by way of discrediting the hundred fold, sixty
fold, and thirty fold, let me inform him that in <span
id="fr_4881"></span>[4882](#fn_4881) Matthew and Mark a hundred fold is
promised to the apostles who had left all. And I would tell him further,
that in the Gospel of Luke we find *much more*, that is <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi.II-p270.2"></span>πολύ πλείονα</span>, and
that there is absolutely no instance in the Gospels of a *hundred*
standing for *seven*; and that he is convicted either of forgery, or of
ignorance; and that our cause is not prejudiced by the fact that in one
Gospel the enumeration begins at a hundred, in another at thirty, since
it is a rule with all Scripture, and especially with the older writings,
to put the lowest number first and so ascend by degrees to the higher.
For instance, suppose one to say that so-and-so lived five and seventy
and a hundred years, it does not follow that five and seventy are more
than a hundred because they were first mentioned. If you do not on the
side of good admit the difference between a hundred, sixty, and thirty,
neither will you do so on the side of evil, and the seed which fell by
the wayside, upon the rock, and among thorns, will be equally faulty.
But if the former three, or the latter three, on the side of good, or on
the side of evil respectively, are one and the same, it was foolish
instead of speaking of two things to enumerate six kinds, and all the
more because according to the account of the parable in Matthew, Mark,
and Luke, the Saviour always added: “He that hath ears to hear, let him
hear.” Where there is no deep inner meaning, it is useless to draw our
attention to the mystic sense.

<span id="vi.vi.II-p271"></span>27. You give it as your opinion that,
since the Father and the Son make their abode with the faithful, and
since Christ is their guest, nothing is lacking. I suppose, however,
that Christ’s abiding with the Corinthians was one thing, with the
Ephesians another: it was one thing, I say, for Him to abide with those
whom Paul blamed for many sins, another for Him to dwell with those to
whom the apostle revealed mysteries hidden from the beginning of the
world; one thing for Him to be in Titus and Timothy, another in Paul.
Certainly amongst them that have been born of women, there has not
arisen a greater than John the Baptist. But the term greater implies
others who are less. And <span id="fr_4882"></span>[4883](#fn_4882) “he
who is least in the kingdom of heaven is greater than he.” You see then
that in heaven one is greatest and another is least, and that among the
angels and the <span id="page_409">p. 409</span> <span
id="vi.vi.II-Page_409"></span>invisible creation there is a manifold and
infinite diversity. Why do the apostles say: <span
id="fr_4883"></span>[4884](#fn_4883) “Lord, increase our faith,” if
there is one measure for all? And why did our Lord rebuke His disciple,
saying: <span id="fr_4884"></span>[4885](#fn_4884) “O thou of little
faith, wherefore didst thou doubt?” In Jeremiah also we read concerning
the future kingdom: <span id="fr_4885"></span>[4886](#fn_4885) “Behold,
the days come, saith the Lord, that I will make a new covenant with the
house of Israel, and with the house of Judah not according to the
covenant that I made with their fathers.” And so on after: <span
id="fr_4886"></span>[4887](#fn_4886) “I will put my law in their inward
parts, and in their heart will I write it; and I will be their God and
they shall be my people: and they shall teach no more every man his
neighbour, and every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord: for they
shall all know me, from the least of them unto the greatest of them.”
The context of this passage clearly shows that the prophet is describing
the future kingdom, and how can there possibly be in it a least or
greatest, if all are to be equal? The secret is disclosed in the
Gospel: <span id="fr_4887"></span>[4888](#fn_4887) “Whosoever shall do
and teach, he shall be called great in the kingdom of heaven: but
whosoever shall teach, and not do, shall be least.” <span
id="fr_4888"></span>[4889](#fn_4888) The Saviour taught us at a feast to
take the lowest place, lest, when one greater than us came, we should be
thrust with disgrace from the higher place. If we cannot fall, but only
raise ourselves by penitence, what is the meaning of the ladder at
Bethel, on which the angels come from heaven to earth and descend as
well as ascend? Surely while on that ladder they are reckoned among the
sheep and stand on the right hand. There are angels who descend from
heaven; but Jovinianus is sure that they retain their inheritance.

<span id="vi.vi.II-p279"></span>28. But when Jovinianus supposes that
the many mansions in our Father’s house are churches scattered
throughout the world, who can refrain from laughing; since Scripture
plainly teaches in John’s Gospel that our Lord was discoursing not of
the number of the churches, but of the heavenly mansions, and the
eternal tabernacles for which the prophet longed? <span
id="fr_4889"></span>[4890](#fn_4889) “In my Father’s house,” He says,
“are many mansions: if it were not so, I would have told you; for I go
to prepare a place for you. And if I go and prepare a place for you I
will come again, and will receive you unto myself, that where I am,
there ye may be also.” The place and the mansions which Christ says He
would prepare for the apostles are of course in the Father’s house, that
is, in the kingdom of heaven, not on earth, where for the present He was
leading the apostles. And at the same time regard must be had to the
sense of Scripture: “I might tell you,” He says, “that I go to prepare a
place for you, if there were not many mansions in my Father’s house,
that is to say, if each individual did not prepare for himself a mansion
through his own works rather than receive it through the bounty of God.
The preparation is therefore not mine, but yours.” This view is
supported by the fact that it profited Judas nothing to have a place
prepared, since he lost it by his own fault. And we must interpret in
the same way what our Lord says to the sons of Zebedee, one of whom
wished to sit on His left hand, the other on His right: <span
id="fr_4890"></span>[4891](#fn_4890) “My cup indeed ye shall drink: but
to sit on my right hand, and on my left hand, is not mine to give, but
it is for them for whom it hath been prepared of my Father.” It is not
the Son’s to give; how then is it the Father’s to prepare? There are, He
says, prepared in heaven, many different mansions, destined for many
different virtues, and they will be awarded not to persons, but to
persons’ works. In vain therefore do you ask of me what rests with
yourselves, a reward which my Father has prepared for those whose
virtues will entitle them to rise to such dignity. Again when He
says: <span id="fr_4891"></span>[4892](#fn_4891) “I will come again, and
will receive you unto myself: that where I am, there ye may be also,” He
is speaking especially to the apostles, concerning whom it is elsewhere
written, “That as I and thou, Father, are one, so they also may be one
in us,” inasmuch as they have believed, have been perfected, and can
say, <span id="fr_4892"></span>[4893](#fn_4892) “the Lord is my
portion.” If, however, there are *not* many mansions, how is it taught
in the Old Testament correspondingly with the New, that the chief priest
has one rank, the priests another, the Levites another, the door-keepers
another, the sacristans another? How is it that in the <span
id="fr_4893"></span>[4894](#fn_4893) book of Ezekiel, where a
description is given of the future Church and of the heavenly Jerusalem,
the priests who have sinned are degraded to the rank of sacristans and
doorkeepers, and although they are in the temple of God, that is on the
right hand, they are not among the rams, but among the poorest of the
sheep? How again is it that in the river which flows from the temple,
and replenishes the salt sea, and gives new life to everything, we read
there are many kinds of fish? Why do we read that in the kingdom of
heaven there are Archangels, Angels, Thrones, Dominions, Powers,
Cherubim and Seraphim, and every name which is named, not only in this
present world, but also that which is to come? A difference of <span
id="page_410">p. 410</span> <span id="vi.vi.II-Page_410"></span>name is
meaningless where there is not a difference of rank. An Archangel is of
course an Archangel to other inferior angels, and Powers, and Dominions
have other spheres over which they exercise authority. This is what we
find in heaven and in the administration of God. You must not therefore
smile and sneer at us, as is your wont, for making a graduated series of
emperors, præfects and counts, tribunes and centurions, companies, and
all the other steps in the service.

<span id="vi.vi.II-p285"></span>29. It is mere trifling to quote the
passage: <span id="fr_4894"></span>[4895](#fn_4894) “Know ye not that
your bodies are a temple of the Holy Ghost,” for it is customary in Holy
Scripture to speak of a single object as though it were many, and of
many as though they were one. And Jovinianus himself should know that
even in a temple there are many divisions—the outer and the inner
courts, the vestibules, the holy place, and the Holy of Holies. There
are also in a temple kitchens, pantries, oil-cellars, and cupboards for
the vessels. And so in the temple of our body there are different
degrees of merit. God does not dwell in all alike, nor does He impart
Himself to all in the same degree. A portion of the spirit of Moses was
taken and given to the seventy elders. I suppose there is a difference
between the abundance of the river, and that of the rivulets. <span
id="fr_4895"></span>[4896](#fn_4895) Elijah’s spirit was given in double
measure to Elisha, and thus double grace wrought greater miracles.
Elijah while living restored a dead man to life; Elisha after death did
the same. Elijah invoked famine on the people; Elisha in a single day
put the enemy’s forces in the power of the city which they besieged. No
doubt the words, “Know ye not that your bodies are a temple of the Holy
Ghost,” refer to the whole assembly of the faithful, who, joined
together, make up the one body of Christ. But the question now is, who
in the body is worthy to be the feet of Christ, and who the head? who is
His eye, and who His hand?—a distinction indicated by the <span
id="fr_4896"></span>[4897](#fn_4896) two women in the Gospel, the
penitent and the holy woman, one of whom held His feet, the other His
head. Some authorities, however, think there was only one woman, and
that she who began at His feet gradually advanced to His head.
Jovinianus further urges against us our Lord’s words, <span
id="fr_4897"></span>[4898](#fn_4897) “I pray not for these only, but
also for those who shall believe on me through their word: that as I,
Father, in thee and thou in me are one, so they all may be one in us,”
and reminds us that the whole Christian people is one in God, and, as
His well-beloved sons, are <span id="fr_4898"></span>[4899](#fn_4898)
“partakers of the divine nature.” We have already said, and the truth
must now be inculcated more in detail, that we are not one in the Father
and the Son according to nature, but according to grace. For the essence
of the human soul and the essence of God are not the same, as the
Manichæans constantly assert. But, says our Lord: <span
id="fr_4899"></span>[4900](#fn_4899) “Thou hast loved them as thou hast
loved me.” You see, then, that we are privileged to partake of His
essence, not in the realm of nature, but of grace, and the reason why we
are beloved of the Father is that He has loved the Son; and the members
are loved, those namely of the body. <span
id="fr_4900"></span>[4901](#fn_4900) “For as many as received Christ, to
them gave He power to become sons of God, even to them that believe on
His name: which were born not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh,
nor of the will of man, but of God.” The Word was made flesh that we
might pass from the flesh into the Word. The Word did not cease to be
what He had been; nor did the human nature lose that which it was by
birth. The glory was increased, the nature was not changed. Do you ask
how we are made one body with Christ? Your creator shall be your
instructor: <span id="fr_4901"></span>[4902](#fn_4901) “He that eateth
my flesh and drinketh my blood abideth in me, and I in him. As the
living Father sent me, and I live because of the Father, so he that
eateth me, he also shall live because of me. This is the bread which
came down out of heaven.” But the Evangelist John, who had drunk in
wisdom from the breast of Christ, agrees herewith, and says: <span
id="fr_4902"></span>[4903](#fn_4902) “Hereby know we that we abide in
him, and he in us, because he hath given us of his Spirit. Whosoever
shall confess that Jesus is the Son of God, God abideth in him, and he
in God.” If you believe in Christ, as the apostles believed, you shall
be made one body with them in Christ. But, if it is rash for you to
claim for yourself a faith and works like theirs when you have not the
same faith and works, you cannot have the same place.

<span id="vi.vi.II-p295"></span>30. You repeat the words bride, sister,
mother, and affirm that all these are titles of the one Church and names
applied to all believers. The fact goes against you. For if the Church
admits but one rank, and has not many members in one body, what
necessity is there for calling her bride, sister, mother? It must be
that she is the bride of some, the sister of others, the mother of
others. All indeed stand on the right hand, but one stands as a
bridegroom, another as a brother, a third as a son. <span
id="fr_4903"></span>[4904](#fn_4903) “My little children” says the
Apostle, “of whom I am again in travail <span id="page_411">p.
411</span> <span id="vi.vi.II-Page_411"></span>until Christ be formed in
you.” Do you think that the children who are being born and the apostle
who is in travail are of equal rank? And the folly of your contention
that we love all the members alike, and do not prefer the eye to the
finger, nor the hand to the ear, but that if one be lost all mourn, is
proved by the lesson which the apostle teaches the Corinthians: <span
id="fr_4904"></span>[4905](#fn_4904) “Some members are more honourable,
others excite the sense of shame: and those parts to which shame
attaches are clothed with more abundant honour; whereas our comely parts
have no need of our care.” Do you think that the mouth and the belly,
the eyes and the outlets of the body are to be classed together as of
equal merit? <span id="fr_4905"></span>[4906](#fn_4905) “The lamp of thy
body,” he says, “is thine eye. If thine eye be blinded, thy whole body
is in darkness.” If you cut off a finger, or the tip of the ear, there
is indeed pain, but the loss is not so great, nor is the disfigurement
attended by so much pain as it would be were you to take out the eyes,
mutilate the nose, or saw through a bone. Some members we can dispense
with and yet live: without others life is an impossibility. Some
offences are light, some heavy. It is one thing to owe ten thousand
talents, another to owe a farthing. We shall have to give account of the
idle word no less than of adultery; but it is not the same thing to be
put to the blush, and to be put upon the rack, to grow red in the face
and to ensure lasting torment. Do you think I am merely expressing my
own views? Hear what the Apostle John says: <span
id="fr_4906"></span>[4907](#fn_4906) “He who knows that his brother
sinneth a sin not unto death, let him ask, and he shall give him life,
even to him that sinneth not unto death. But he that hath sinned unto
death, who shall pray for him?” You observe that if we entreat for
smaller offences, we obtain pardon: if for greater ones, it is difficult
to obtain our request: and that there is a great difference between
sins. And so with respect to the people of Israel who had sinned a sin
unto death, it is said to Jeremiah: <span
id="fr_4907"></span>[4908](#fn_4907) “Pray not thou for this people,
neither entreat for them, and do not withstand me, for I will not hear
thee.” Moreover, if it be true that we all alike enter the world and all
alike leave it, and this is a precedent for the world to come, it
follows that whether righteous or sinners we shall all be equally
esteemed by God, because the conditions of our birth and death are now
the same. And if you contend that there are two Adams, the one of the
earth, the other from heaven; and that they who were in the earthly Adam
stand on the left hand, those who were in the heavenly are on the right
hand, before we go further, let me ask you a question concerning two
brothers: Was Esau in the earthly Adam, or in the heavenly? No one
doubts that you will reply, he was in the earthly. In which was Jacob?
Without hesitation you will say, in the heavenly. How then was he in the
heavenly when Christ had not yet come in the flesh—Christ who is called
the second Adam from heaven? You must either reckon all before the
incarnation of Christ in the old Adam, and even the just in the man from
the earth, and then they will be on the left among your goats; or, if it
be impious to give Isaac the same place as Ishmael, Jacob as Esau, the
saints as sinners, the last Adam will date from the time when Christ was
born of a Virgin, and your argument from the two Adams will not benefit
your sheep and goats, because we have proved that in the first Adam
there were both sheep and goats, and that of those who were in one and
the same man, some stood on the right hand of God, others on the
left: <span id="fr_4908"></span>[4909](#fn_4908) “For from Adam even
until Moses death reigned over all, even over them that had not sinned
after the likeness of Adam’s transgression.”

<span id="vi.vi.II-p302"></span>31. As regards your attempt to show that
railing and murder, the use of the expression *raca* and adultery, the
idle word and godlessness, are rewarded with the same punishment, I have
already given you my reply, and will now briefly repeat it. You must
either deny that you are a sinner if you are not to be in danger of
Gehenna: or, if you are a sinner you will be sent to hell for even a
light offence: <span id="fr_4909"></span>[4910](#fn_4909) “The mouth
that lieth,” says one, “kills the soul.” I suspect that you, like other
men, have occasionally told a lie: <span
id="fr_4910"></span>[4911](#fn_4910) for all men are liars, that God
alone may be true, <span id="fr_4911"></span>[4912](#fn_4911) and that
He may be justified in His words, and may prevail when He judges. It
follows either that you will not be a man lest you be found a liar: or
if you are a man and are consequently a liar, you will be punished with
parricides and adulterers. For you admit no difference between sins, and
the gratitude of those whom you raise from the mire and set on high will
not equal the rage against you of those whom for the trifling offences
of daily life you have thrust into utter darkness. And if it be so that
in a persecution one is stifled, another beheaded, another flees, or the
fourth dies within the walls of a prison, and one crown of victory
awaits various kinds of struggle, the fact tells in our favour. For in
martyrdom it is the will, which gives occasion to the death, that is
crowned. My duty is to <span id="page_412">p. 412</span> <span
id="vi.vi.II-Page_412"></span>resist the frenzy of the heathen, and not
deny the Lord. It rests with them either to behead, or to burn, or to
shut up in prison, or enforce various other penalties. But if I escape,
and die in solitude, there will not at my death be the same crown for me
as for them, because the confession of Christ will not have been to me
as to them the cause of death. As for your remark that absolutely no
difference was made between the brother who had always been with his
father, and him who was afterwards welcomed as a penitent, I am willing
to add, if you like, that the one drachma which was lost and was found
was put with the others, and that the one sheep which the good shepherd,
leaving the ninety and nine, sought and brought back, made up the full
tale of a hundred. But it is one thing to be a penitent, and with tears
sue for pardon, another to be always with the father. And so both the
shepherd and the father say by the mouth of Ezekiel to the sheep that
was carried back, and to the son that was lost, <span
id="fr_4912"></span>[4913](#fn_4912) “And I will establish my covenant
with thee; and thou shalt know that I am the Lord: that thou mayest
remember, and be confounded, and never open thy mouth ever more, because
of thy shame, when I have forgiven thee all that thou hast done.” That
penitents may have their due it is enough for them to feel shame instead
of all other punishment. Hence in another place it is said to
them, <span id="fr_4913"></span>[4914](#fn_4913) “Then shall ye remember
your evil ways, and all the crimes wherewith ye were defiled, and ye
shall loathe yourselves in your own sight for all the wickedness that ye
have done; and ye shall know that I am the Lord, when I shall have done
you good for my name’s sake, and not according to your evil ways, nor
according to your evil doings.” The son, moreover, was reproved by his
father for envying his brother’s deliverance, and for being tormented by
jealousy while the angels in heaven were rejoicing. The parallel,
however, is not to be drawn between the merits of the two sons (one of
whom was temperate, the other a prodigal) and those of the whole human
race, but the characters depicted are either Jews and Christians, or
saints and penitents. In the lifetime of Bishop Damasus I dedicated to
him a small treatise upon this parable. <span
id="fr_4914"></span>[4915](#fn_4914)

<span id="vi.vi.II-p309"></span>32. And if a penny was given to all the
labourers, those of the first, the third, the sixth, the ninth, and the
eleventh hours, and they came first for the reward who were the last to
work in the vineyard, even here the persons described do not belong to
one time or one age, but from the beginning of the world to the end of
it there are different calls and a special meaning attaches to each.
Abel and Seth were called at the first hour: Enoch and Noah at the
third: Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob at the sixth: Moses and the prophets at
the ninth: at the eleventh the Gentiles, to whom the recompense was
first given because they believed on the crucified Lord, and inasmuch as
it was hard for them to believe they earned a great reward. Many kings
and prophets have desired to see the things that we see, and have not
seen them. But the one penny does not represent one reward, but one
life, and one deliverance from Gehenna. And as by the favour of the
sovereign those guilty of various crimes are released from prison, and
each one, according to his toil and exertions, is in this or that
condition of life, so too the penny, as it were by the favour of our
Sovereign, is the discharge from prison of us all by baptism. Now our
work is, according to our different virtues, to prepare for ourselves a
different future.

<span id="vi.vi.II-p310"></span>33. So far I have replied to the
separate portions of his argument; I shall now address myself to the
general question. Our Lord says to his disciples, <span
id="fr_4915"></span>[4916](#fn_4915) “Whosoever would become great among
you, let him be least of all.” If we are all to be equal in heaven, in
vain do we humble ourselves here that we may be greater there. Of the
two debtors who owed, one five hundred pence, the other fifty, he to
whom most was forgiven loved most. And so the Saviour says, <span
id="fr_4916"></span>[4917](#fn_4916) “I say to you, her sins which are
many are forgiven her, for she hath loved much. But to whom little is
forgiven, the same loveth little.” He who loves little, and has little
forgiven, he will of course be of inferior rank. <span
id="fr_4917"></span>[4918](#fn_4917) The householder when he set out
delivered to his servants his goods, to one five talents, to another
two, to another one, to each according to his ability. Just as in
another Gospel it is written that a nobleman setting out for a far
country to receive for himself a kingdom and return, called the
servants, and gave them each a sum of money, with which one gained ten
pounds, another five, and they, each according to his ability and the
gain he had made, received ten or five cities. But one who had received
a talent, or a pound, buried it in the ground, or tied it up in a
napkin, and kept it until his master’s return. Our first thought is that
if, according to the modern Zeno, the righteous do not toil in hope of
reward, but to avoid the loss of what they already have, he who buried
his pound or talent that he might not lose it, did no wrong, <span
id="page_413">p. 413</span> <span id="vi.vi.II-Page_413"></span>and the
caution of him who kept his money is worthy of more praise than the
fruitless toil of those who wore themselves out and yet received no
reward for their labour. Then observe that the very talent which was
taken from the timid or negligent servant, was not given to him who had
the smaller profit, but to him who had gained the most, that is, to him
who had been placed over ten cities. If difference of rank is not
constituted by the difference in number, why did our Lord say, “He gave
to everyone according to his ability”? If the gain of five talents and
ten talents is the same, why were not ten cities given to him who gained
the least, and five to him who gained the most? But that our Lord is not
satisfied with what we have, but always desires more, He himself shows
by saying, “Wherefore didst thou not give my money to the
money-changers, that so when I came I might have received it with
usury?” The Apostle Paul understood this, and <span
id="fr_4918"></span>[4919](#fn_4918) forgetting those things which were
behind, reached forward to those things which were in front, that is, he
made daily progress, and did not keep the grace given to him carefully
wrapped up in a napkin, but his spirit, like the capital of a keen man
of business, was renewed from day to day, and if he were not always
growing larger, he thought himself growing less. Six cities of refuge
are mentioned in the law, provided for fugitives who were involuntary
homicides, and the cities themselves belonged to the priests. I should
like to ask whether you would put those fugitives among your goats, or
among our sheep. If they were goats, they would be slain like other
homicides, and would not enter the cities of God’s ministers. If you say
they were sheep, they will not possibly be such sheep as can enjoy full
liberty and feed without fear of wolves. And it will be plain to you
that sheep indeed they are, but wandering sheep: that they are on the
right hand, but do not stand there: they flee until the High Priest dies
and descending into hell liberates their souls. The Gibeonites met the
children of Israel, and although other nations were slaughtered, they
were kept <span id="fr_4919"></span>[4920](#fn_4919) for hewers of wood
and drawers of water. <span id="fr_4920"></span>[4921](#fn_4920) And of
such value were they in God’s eyes, that the family of Saul was
destroyed for the wrong done to them. Where would you put them? Among
the goats? But they were not slain, and they were avenged by the
determination of God. Among the sheep? But holy Scripture says they were
not of the same merit as the Israelites. You see then that they do
indeed stand on the right hand, but are of a far inferior grade.
Jonathan came between David, the holy man, and Saul, the worst of kings,
and we can neither place him among the kids because he was worthy of a
prophet’s love, nor amongst the rams lest we make him equal to David,
and particularly when we know that he was slain. He will, therefore, be
among the sheep, but low down. And just as in the case of David and
Jonathan, you will be bound to recognize differences between sheep and
sheep. <span id="fr_4921"></span>[4922](#fn_4921) “That servant, which
knew his lord’s will, and made not ready, nor did according to his will,
shall be beaten with many stripes; but he that knew not, and did things
worthy of stripes, shall be beaten with few stripes. And to whomsoever
much is given, of him shall much be required: and to whom they commit
much, of him will they ask the more.” Lo! more or less is committed to
different servants, and according to the nature of the trust, as well as
of the sin, is the number of stripes inflicted.

<span id="vi.vi.II-p318"></span>34. The whole account of the land of
Judah and of the tribes is typical of the church in heaven. Let us read
Joshua the son of Nun, or the concluding portions of Ezekiel, and we
shall see that the historical division of the land as related by the one
finds a counterpart in the spiritual and heavenly promises of the other.
What is the meaning of the seven and eight steps in the description of
the temple? or again, what significance attaches to the fact that in the
Psalter, after being taught the mystic alphabet by the <span
id="fr_4922"></span>[4923](#fn_4922) one hundred and eighteenth psalm we
arrive by fifteen steps at the point where we can sing: <span
id="fr_4923"></span>[4924](#fn_4923) “Behold, now bless the Lord, all ye
servants of the Lord: ye who stand in the house of the Lord, in the
courts of the house of our God.” Why did <span
id="fr_4924"></span>[4925](#fn_4924) two tribes and a half dwell on the
other side of Jordan, a district abounding in cattle, while the
remaining nine tribes and a half either drove out the old inhabitants
from their possessions, or dwelt with them? Why did the tribe of
Levi <span id="fr_4925"></span>[4926](#fn_4925) receive no portion in
the land, but have the Lord for their portion? And how is it that of the
priests and Levites, themselves, the <span
id="fr_4926"></span>[4927](#fn_4926) high priest alone entered the Holy
of Holies where were the cherubim and the mercy-seat? Why did the other
priests wear <span id="fr_4927"></span>[4928](#fn_4927) linen raiment
only, and not have their clothing of <span id="page_414">p. 414</span>
<span id="vi.vi.II-Page_414"></span>wrought gold, blue, scarlet, purple,
and fine cloth? The priests and <span
id="fr_4928"></span>[4929](#fn_4928) Levites of the lower order took
care of the oxen and wains: those of the higher order carried the ark of
the Lord on their shoulders. If you do away with the gradations of the
tabernacle, the temple, the Church, if, to use a common military phrase,
all upon the right hand are to be “up to the same standard,” bishops are
to no purpose, priests in vain, deacons useless. Why do virgins
persevere? widows toil? Why do married women practise continence? Let us
all sin, and when once we have repented, we shall be on the same footing
as the apostles.

<span id="vi.vi.II-p326"></span>35. But now we have just sighted land:
the foaming billows have been rolling mountain-high: our ship has been
borne aloft, or has rushed headlong into the depths beneath: little by
little the haven opens to the view of the weary and exhausted sailors.
We have discussed the married, widows, and virgins. We have preferred
virginity to widowhood, widowhood to marriage. The passage of the
apostle, in which he treats questions of this kind, has been expounded,
and particular objections have been met. We also took a survey of
secular literature, and inquired what was thought of virgins, and what
of those who had one husband; and by way of contrast we pointed out the
cares which sometimes attend wedlock. Then we passed to the second
division, in which our opponent denies the possibility of sinning to
those who have been baptized with complete faith. And we showed that God
alone is faultless, and every creature is at fault, not because all have
sinned, but because all may sin, and those who stand have cause to fear
when they see the fall of men like themselves. In the third place we
came to fasting, and inasmuch as our opponent’s argument fell under two
heads, and he appealed either to philosophy, or to Holy Scripture, we
also furnished a several reply. In the fourth, that is the last section,
the sheep and goats on the right hand and the left, the righteous and
the wicked, were distributed into two classes, the intention being to
show that there is no difference between one just man and another, or
between one sinner and another. To prove the point Jovinianus had
accumulated countless instances from Scripture which apparently favoured
his view, and this contention we rebutted both by arguments and
illustrations from Scripture, and pulverized Zeno’s old opinion no less
with common sense than with the words of inspiration.

<span id="vi.vi.II-p327"></span>36. I must in conclusion say a few words
to our modern Epicurus wantoning in his gardens with his favourites of
both sexes. On your side are the fat and the sleek in their festal
attire. If I may mock like Socrates, add if you please, all swine and
dogs, and, since you like flesh so well, vultures too, eagles, hawks,
and owls. We shall never be afraid of the host of <span
id="fr_4929"></span>[4930](#fn_4929) Aristippus. If ever I see a fine
fellow, or a man who is no stranger to the curling-irons, with his hair
nicely done and his cheeks all aglow, he belongs to your herd, or rather
grunts in concert with your pigs. To our flock belong the sad, the pale,
the meanly clad, who, like strangers in this world, though their tongues
are silent, yet speak by their dress and bearing. <span
id="fr_4930"></span>[4931](#fn_4930) “Woe is me,” say they, “that my
sojourning is prolonged! that I dwell among the tents of Kedar!” that is
to say, in the darkness of this world, for the light shineth in the
darkness, and the darkness comprehended it not. Boast not of having many
disciples. The Son of God taught in Judæa, and only twelve apostles
followed Him. <span id="fr_4931"></span>[4932](#fn_4931) “I have trodden
the wine-press alone,” He says, “and of the peoples there was no man
with me.” At the passion He was left alone, and even Peter’s fidelity to
Him wavered: on the other hand all the people applauded the doctrine of
the Pharisees, saying, <span id="fr_4932"></span>[4933](#fn_4932)
“Crucify him, crucify him. We have no king but Cæsar,” that is in
effect, we follow vice, not virtue; Epicurus, not Christ; Jovinianus,
not the Apostle Paul. If many assent to your views, that only indicates
voluptuousness; for they do not so much approve your utterances, as
favour their own vices. In our crowded thoroughfares a false prophet may
be seen any day stick in hand belabouring the fools about him, and
knocking out the teeth of those who offend him, and yet he never lacks
constant followers. And do you regard it as a mark of great wisdom if
you have a following of many pigs, whom you are feeding to make pork for
hell? Since you published your views, and set the mark of your approval
on baths in which the sexes bathe together, the impatience which once
threw over burning lust the semblance of a robe of modesty has been laid
bare and exposed. What was once hidden is now open to the gaze of all.
You have revealed your disciples, such as they are, not made them. One
result of your teaching is that sin is no longer even repented of. Your
virgins whom, with a depth of wisdom never found before in speech or
writing, you have taught the apostle’s maxim that it is better to marry
than to burn, have turned secret adulterers into acknowledged <span
id="page_415">p. 415</span> <span
id="vi.vi.II-Page_415"></span>husbands. <span
id="fr_4933"></span>[4934](#fn_4933) It was not the apostle, the chosen
vessel, who gave this advice; it was Virgil’s widow:

<span id="vi.vi.II-p333"></span> <span
id="fr_4934"></span>[4935](#fn_4934) “She calls it wedlock; thus she
veils her fault.”

<span id="vi.vi.II-p335"></span>37. About four hundred years have passed
since the preaching of Christ flashed upon the world, and during that
time in which His robe has been torn by countless heresies, almost the
whole body of error has been derived from the Chaldæan, Syriac, and
Greek languages. Basilides, the master of licentiousness and the
grossest sensuality, after the lapse of so many years, and like a
second <span id="fr_4935"></span>[4936](#fn_4935) Euphorbus, was changed
by transmigration into Jovinian, so that the Latin tongue might have a
heresy of its own. Was there no other province in the whole world to
receive the gospel of pleasure, and into which the serpent might
insinuate itself, except that which was founded by the teaching of
Peter, upon the rock Christ? Idol temples had fallen before the standard
of the Cross and the severity of the Gospel: now on the contrary lust
and gluttony endeavour to overthrow the solid structure of the Cross.
And so God says by Isaiah, <span id="fr_4936"></span>[4937](#fn_4936) “O
my people, they which bless you cause you to err, and trouble the paths
of your feet.” Also by Jeremiah, <span
id="fr_4937"></span>[4938](#fn_4937) “Flee out of the midst of Babylon,
and save every man his life, and believe not the false prophets which
say, Peace, peace, and there is no peace;” who are always
repeating, <span id="fr_4938"></span>[4939](#fn_4938) “The temple of the
Lord, the temple of the Lord.” “Thy prophets have seen for thee false
and foolish things; they have not laid bare thine iniquity that they
might call thee to repentance: who devour God’s people like bread: they
have not called upon God.” Jeremiah announced the captivity and was
stoned by the people. <span id="fr_4939"></span>[4940](#fn_4939)
Hananiah, the son of Azzur, broke the bars of wood for the present, but
was preparing bars of iron for the future. False prophets always promise
pleasant things, and please for a time. Truth is bitter, and they who
preach it are filled with bitterness. For with the unleavened bread of
sincerity and truth the Lord’s passover is kept, and it is eaten with
bitter herbs. Admirable are your utterances and worthy of the ears of
the bride of Christ standing in the midst of her virgins, and widows,
and celibates! (their very name is <span
id="fr_4940"></span>[4941](#fn_4940) derived from the fact that they who
abstain from intercourse are fit for heaven). This is what you say:
“Fast seldom, marry often. You cannot do the work of marriage unless you
take mead, and flesh, and *solid food*. For lust strength is required.
Flesh is soon spent and enervated. You need not be afraid of
fornication. He who has been once baptized into Christ cannot fall, for
he has the consolation of marriage to slake his lust. And if you do
fall, repentance will restore you, and you who were hypocrites at
baptism may have a firm faith in your repentance. Be not disturbed by
the thought of a difference between the righteous and the penitent, and
do not imagine that pardon even gives a lower place; rather believe that
it takes away your crown. For there is one reward: he who stands on the
right hand shall enter into the kingdom of heaven.” Through counsels
such as these your swine-herds are richer than our shepherds, and the
he-goats draw after them many of the other sex: <span
id="fr_4941"></span>[4942](#fn_4941) “They were as fed horses: they were
mad after women”: they no sooner see a woman than they neigh after her,
and, shame to say! find scriptural authority for the consolation of
their incontinence. But the very women, unhappy creatures! though they
deserve no pity, who chant the words of their instructor (for what does
God require of them but to become mothers?), have lost not only their
chastity, but all sense of shame, and defend their licentious practices
with an access of impudence. You have, moreover, in your army many
subalterns, you have your guardsmen and your skirmishers at the
outposts, the round-bellied, the well-dressed, the exquisites, and noisy
orators, to defend you with tooth and nail. The noble make way for you,
the wealthy print kisses on your face. For unless you had come, the
drunkard and the glutton could not have entered paradise. All honor to
your virtue, or rather to your vices! You have in your camp, even
amazons with uncovered breasts, bare arms and knees, who challenge the
men who come against them to a battle of lust. Your household is a large
one, and so in your aviaries not only turtle-doves, but hoopoes are fed,
which may wing their flight over the whole field of rank debauchery.
Pull me to pieces and scatter me to the winds: tax me with what offences
you please: accuse me of luxurious and delicate living: you would like
me better if I were guilty, for I should belong to your herd.

<span id="vi.vi.II-p343"></span>38. But I will now address myself to
you, great Rome, who with the confession of Christ have blotted out the
blasphemy written on your forehead. Mighty city, mistress-city of the
world, city of the Apostle’s praises, shew the meaning of your name.
*Rome* is either *strength* in Greek, or *height* in Hebrew. Lose <span
id="page_416">p. 416</span> <span id="vi.vi.II-Page_416"></span>not the
excellence your name implies: let virtue lift you up on high, let not
voluptuousness bring you low. By repentance, as the history of Nineveh
proves, you may escape the curse wherewith the Saviour threatened you in
the Apocalypse. Beware of the name of Jovinianus. It is derived from
that of an idol. <span id="fr_4942"></span>[4943](#fn_4942) The Capitol
is in ruins: the temples of Jove with their ceremonies have perished.
Why should his name and vices flourish now in the midst of you, when
even in the time of Numa Pompilius, even under the sway of kings, your
ancestors gave a heartier welcome to the self-restraint of Pythagoras
than they did under the consuls to the debauchery of Epicurus?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4651"></span>[387:4652](2060170.htm#fr_4651) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p8"></span> This, according to i. 3, is “cannot be
overthrown.”

<span id="fn_4652"></span>[387:4653](2060170.htm#fr_4652) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p9"></span> [1 John
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#010)<span id="vi.vi.II-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4653"></span>[387:4654](2060170.htm#fr_4653) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p10"></span> [1 John v.
18](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#018)<span id="vi.vi.II-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4654"></span>[387:4655](2060170.htm#fr_4654) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p12"></span> [1 John v.
21](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#021)<span id="vi.vi.II-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4655"></span>[387:4656](2060170.htm#fr_4655) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p12.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p13"></span> [1 John i.
8](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#008)<span id="vi.vi.II-p13.1"></span> sq.

<span id="fn_4656"></span>[387:4657](2060170.htm#fr_4656) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p13.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p14"></span> [Is. lxv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#005)<span id="vi.vi.II-p14.1"></span>.
Quoted from memory. The LXX and Vulg. have like A.V. and Rev., “Come not
near me.”

<span id="fn_4657"></span>[387:4658](2060170.htm#fr_4657) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p14.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p15"></span> [1 John ii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#001)<span id="vi.vi.II-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4658"></span>[388:4659](2060170.htm#fr_4658) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p15.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p16"></span> [2 Cor.
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#015)<span id="vi.vi.II-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4659"></span>[388:4660](2060170.htm#fr_4659) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p16.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p17"></span> [Ps. li.
12](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#012)<span id="vi.vi.II-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4660"></span>[388:4661](2060170.htm#fr_4660) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p17.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p18"></span> [1 John ii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#004)<span id="vi.vi.II-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4661"></span>[388:4662](2060170.htm#fr_4661) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p18.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p19"></span> 1 John xiv. 6<span
id="vi.vi.II-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4662"></span>[388:4663](2060170.htm#fr_4662) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p19.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p20"></span> [James ii.
26](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#026)<span id="vi.vi.II-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4663"></span>[388:4664](2060170.htm#fr_4663) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p20.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p21"></span> Jerome is perhaps hinting at the
opinions of Jovinianus, that there was no other distinction between men
than the grand division into righteous and wicked, and drawing from this
the inference that whoever had been truly baptized had nothing further
to gain by progress in the Christian life.

<span id="fn_4664"></span>[388:4665](2060170.htm#fr_4664) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p22"></span> [1 Peter ii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#022)<span id="vi.vi.II-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4665"></span>[388:4666](2060170.htm#fr_4665) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p22.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p23"></span> [James iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#002)<span id="vi.vi.II-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4666"></span>[388:4667](2060170.htm#fr_4666) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p23.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p24"></span> [Job
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#005)<span id="vi.vi.II-p24.1"></span>,
Sept.

<span id="fn_4667"></span>[388:4668](2060170.htm#fr_4667) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p24.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p25"></span> [Prov. xx.
9](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#009)<span id="vi.vi.II-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4668"></span>[388:4669](2060170.htm#fr_4668) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p25.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p26"></span> [Ps. li.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#005)<span id="vi.vi.II-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4669"></span>[388:4670](2060170.htm#fr_4669) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p26.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p27"></span> [Job
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#020),
[30](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#030)<span id="vi.vi.II-p27.1"></span>.
Sept.

<span id="fn_4670"></span>[388:4671](2060170.htm#fr_4670) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p27.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p28"></span> [1 John
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#002)<span id="vi.vi.II-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4671"></span>[388:4672](2060170.htm#fr_4671) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p29.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p30"></span> S. [John xiii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#010)<span id="vi.vi.II-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4672"></span>[388:4673](2060170.htm#fr_4672) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p30.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p31"></span> S. [Matt. xvi.
18](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#018)<span id="vi.vi.II-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4673"></span>[388:4674](2060170.htm#fr_4673) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p31.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p32"></span> S. [Luke xxi.
31](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#031)<span id="vi.vi.II-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4674"></span>[388:4675](2060170.htm#fr_4674) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p32.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p33"></span> S. [Matt. vi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#012)<span id="vi.vi.II-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4675"></span>[388:4676](2060170.htm#fr_4675) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p33.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p34"></span> [1 Cor. ix.
27](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#027)<span id="vi.vi.II-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4676"></span>[388:4677](2060170.htm#fr_4676) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p34.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p35"></span> [2 Cor. xii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#007)<span id="vi.vi.II-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4677"></span>[389:4678](2060170.htm#fr_4677) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p35.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p36"></span> [2 Cor. xi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#003)<span id="vi.vi.II-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4678"></span>[389:4679](2060170.htm#fr_4678) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p36.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p37"></span> [2 Cor.
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#011)<span id="vi.vi.II-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4679"></span>[389:4680](2060170.htm#fr_4679) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p37.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p38"></span> [1 Cor. x.
13](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#013)<span id="vi.vi.II-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4680"></span>[389:4681](2060170.htm#fr_4680) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p38.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p39"></span> [1 Cor. x.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#012)<span id="vi.vi.II-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4681"></span>[389:4682](2060170.htm#fr_4681) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p39.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p40"></span> [Gal. v.
7](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#007)<span id="vi.vi.II-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4682"></span>[389:4683](2060170.htm#fr_4682) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p40.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p41"></span> [1 Thess. ii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#018)<span id="vi.vi.II-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4683"></span>[389:4684](2060170.htm#fr_4683) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p41.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p42"></span> [1 Cor. vii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#005)<span id="vi.vi.II-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4684"></span>[389:4685](2060170.htm#fr_4684) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p42.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p43"></span> [Gal.
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#017)<span id="vi.vi.II-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4685"></span>[389:4686](2060170.htm#fr_4685) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p43.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p44"></span> [Eph. vi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#012)<span id="vi.vi.II-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4686"></span>[389:4687](2060170.htm#fr_4686) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p44.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p45"></span> [Heb. vi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#004)<span id="vi.vi.II-p45.1"></span> sq.

<span id="fn_4687"></span>[389:4688](2060170.htm#fr_4687) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p45.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p46"></span> Various dates, ranging between <span
class="c17"><span id="vi.vi.II-p46.1"></span>a.d.</span> 126 and <span
class="c17"><span id="vi.vi.II-p46.2"></span>a.d.</span> 173, are
assigned to the origin of Montanism. In addition to the tenet, that the
church has no power to remit sin after baptism (though the power was
claimed for the Montanistic prophets) and that some sins exclude for
ever from the communion of the saints on earth, although the mercy of
God may be extended to them hereafter, Montanus held second marriages to
be no better than adultery, proscribed military service and secular life
in general, denounced profane learning and amusements of every kind,
advocated extreme simplicity of female dress, practised frequent and
severe fasting, and inculcated the most rigorous asceticism. The sect
produced a great effect on the church and lasted until the sixth
century. As is well known, Tertullian in middle life lapsed into
Montanism, and he was the most distinguished of its champions. Montanism
has been described as an anticipation of the mediaeval system of Rome.

<span id="fn_4688"></span>[389:4689](2060170.htm#fr_4688) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p46.3"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p47"></span> The *founder* of the schism which
afterwards bore the name of Novatian was Novatus, a presbyter of
Carthage who went to Rome (about <span class="c17"><span
id="vi.vi.II-p47.1"></span>a.d.</span> 250) and there co-operated with
Novatianus, one of the most distinguished of the clergy of that city.
The Novatianists, whose doctrines were near akin in many respects to
those of Montanists, assumed the name of *Cathari,* or *Puritans.*

<span id="fn_4689"></span>[389:4690](2060170.htm#fr_4689) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p47.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p48"></span> [Heb. vi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#009)<span id="vi.vi.II-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4690"></span>[389:4691](2060170.htm#fr_4690) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p48.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p49"></span> [James i.
12](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#012)<span id="vi.vi.II-p49.1"></span>
sq.

<span id="fn_4691"></span>[390:4692](2060170.htm#fr_4691) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p49.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p50"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
27.5](../../../bib/apo/sir027.htm#005)<span id="vi.vi.II-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4692"></span>[390:4693](2060170.htm#fr_4692) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p50.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p51"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
2.1](../../../bib/apo/sir002.htm#001)<span id="vi.vi.II-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4693"></span>[390:4694](2060170.htm#fr_4693) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p51.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p52"></span> [James i.
22](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#022)<span id="vi.vi.II-p52.1"></span>
sq.

<span id="fn_4694"></span>[390:4695](2060170.htm#fr_4694) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p52.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p53"></span> [James ii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#010)<span id="vi.vi.II-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4695"></span>[390:4696](2060170.htm#fr_4695) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p53.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p54"></span> [Rom. xi.
32](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#032)<span id="vi.vi.II-p54.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4696"></span>[390:4697](2060170.htm#fr_4696) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p54.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p55"></span> [2 Pet. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#009)<span id="vi.vi.II-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4697"></span>[390:4698](2060170.htm#fr_4697) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p55.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p56"></span> [2 Pet.
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#018)<span id="vi.vi.II-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4698"></span>[390:4699](2060170.htm#fr_4698) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p56.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p57"></span> [Prov. xvi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#005)<span id="vi.vi.II-p57.1"></span>.
Sept.

<span id="fn_4699"></span>[390:4700](2060170.htm#fr_4699) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p57.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p58"></span> [Rev.
2.2](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#002)<span id="vi.vi.II-p58.1"></span>
sq.

<span id="fn_4700"></span>[390:4701](2060170.htm#fr_4700) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p59.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p60"></span> [Matt. xi.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#013)<span id="vi.vi.II-p60.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4701"></span>[390:4702](2060170.htm#fr_4701) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p60.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p61"></span> [1 Cor. x.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#011)<span id="vi.vi.II-p61.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4702"></span>[390:4703](2060170.htm#fr_4702) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p61.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p62"></span> [Ps.
26:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#002)<span id="vi.vi.II-p62.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4703"></span>[390:4704](2060170.htm#fr_4703) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p62.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p63"></span> [Ps. li.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#001)<span id="vi.vi.II-p63.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4704"></span>[390:4705](2060170.htm#fr_4704) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p63.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p64"></span> [2 Chr.
33:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#013)<span id="vi.vi.II-p64.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4705"></span>[391:4706](2060170.htm#fr_4705) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p64.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p65"></span> [2 Kings
23:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#029), [2 Chr.
35:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#020)<span id="vi.vi.II-p65.1"></span>
sq.

<span id="fn_4706"></span>[391:4707](2060170.htm#fr_4706) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p65.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p66"></span> [Zech. iii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#001)<span id="vi.vi.II-p66.1"></span> sq.

<span id="fn_4707"></span>[391:4708](2060170.htm#fr_4707) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p66.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p67"></span> [Num.
20:13](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#013), [Ps.
6:32](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#032)<span id="vi.vi.II-p67.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4708"></span>[391:4709](2060170.htm#fr_4708) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p67.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p68"></span> [Job v.
17](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#017)<span id="vi.vi.II-p68.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4709"></span>[391:4710](2060170.htm#fr_4709) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p68.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p69"></span> [Job vii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#001)<span id="vi.vi.II-p69.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4710"></span>[391:4711](2060170.htm#fr_4710) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p69.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p70"></span> Jerome blends two passages, [Is. xiv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#012)<span id="vi.vi.II-p70.1"></span>
(in which the Sept. reading is “that sendest to;” R.V. “didst lay low”)
and [Ezek. xxviii. 13](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#013)<span
id="vi.vi.II-p70.2"></span> sq. In the passage from Isaiah the king of
Babylon is compared to Lucifer, *i.e.* the shining one, the morning
star, whose movements the Babylonians had been the first to record. See
Sayce, *Fresh Light from the Ancient Monuments,* p. 178, and Cheyne’s
*Isaiah*. The subject of Ezekiel’s prophecy is the Prince of Tyre.

<span id="fn_4711"></span>[391:4712](2060170.htm#fr_4711) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p70.3"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p71"></span> S. [Luke x.
18](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#018)<span id="vi.vi.II-p71.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4712"></span>[391:4713](2060170.htm#fr_4712) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p71.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p72"></span> [Job
40:16](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#016),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#021)<span id="vi.vi.II-p72.1"></span>.
R.V. “He lieth under the lotus trees, in the covert of the reed and the
fen.”

<span id="fn_4713"></span>[391:4714](2060170.htm#fr_4713) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p72.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p73"></span> [Job xli.
34](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#034)<span id="vi.vi.II-p73.1"></span>.
Sept. R.V. “King over the sons of pride.”

<span id="fn_4714"></span>[391:4715](2060170.htm#fr_4714) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p73.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p74"></span> [Job xli.
13](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#013)<span id="vi.vi.II-p74.1"></span>
sq. R.V. for the latter part of the verse has “Round about his teeth is
terror, his strong scales are his pride.” Jerome’s words are not found
in the existing Septuagint.

<span id="fn_4715"></span>[391:4716](2060170.htm#fr_4715) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p74.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p75"></span> The Septuagint omits much in this
portion of the Book of Job.

<span id="fn_4716"></span>[391:4717](2060170.htm#fr_4716) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p75.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p76"></span> [Job
41.27](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#027)<span
id="vi.vi.II-p76.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4717"></span>[391:4718](2060170.htm#fr_4717) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p77.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p78"></span> That is, deriving *jumenta* from *juvo.*
The derivation, however, is from *jungo.*

<span id="fn_4718"></span>[391:4719](2060170.htm#fr_4718) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p78.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p79"></span> [Ps. viii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#005)<span id="vi.vi.II-p79.1"></span> sq.

<span id="fn_4719"></span>[391:4720](2060170.htm#fr_4719) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p79.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p80"></span> The Italian beccafico.

<span id="fn_4720"></span>[392:4721](2060170.htm#fr_4720) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p80.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p81"></span> [Rom.
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#020), [1 Tim.
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#005)<span id="vi.vi.II-p81.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4721"></span>[392:4722](2060170.htm#fr_4721) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p81.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p82"></span> [1 Tim. iv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#003)<span id="vi.vi.II-p82.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4722"></span>[392:4723](2060170.htm#fr_4722) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p82.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p83"></span> Castum. Another reading is *Cossum i.e.
wood-worms,* which were considered a delicacy in Pontus and Phrygia. The
reading *Castum* is supported by Tert., De Iejun. cap. 16: In nostris
xerophagiis blasphemias ingerens. Casto Isidis et Cybeles eos adæquas.
Compare Arnob. Bk. V., and Jerome’s Letter cvii. ad Lætam c. 10, and
below c. 7.

<span id="fn_4723"></span>[392:4724](2060170.htm#fr_4723) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p84.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p85"></span> See note on p. 383.

<span id="fn_4724"></span>[392:4725](2060170.htm#fr_4724) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p85.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p86"></span> That is, of Side in Pamphylia. He lived
in the reigns of Hadrian and Antoninus Pius, <span class="c17"><span
id="vi.vi.II-p86.1"></span>a.d.</span> 117–161. Only two fragments
remain of his Greek poem in forty-two books.

<span id="fn_4725"></span>[392:4726](2060170.htm#fr_4725) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p86.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p87"></span> He appears to be Flavius the Grammarian
to whom reference is made in the *Book on Illustrious Men,* chap.
80:—Firmianus, qui et Lactantius, Arnobii discipulus, sub Diocletiano
principe accitus cum Flavio grammatico, cujus de Medicinalibus versu
compositi exstant libri, etc.

<span id="fn_4726"></span>[392:4727](2060170.htm#fr_4726) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p87.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p88"></span> Born <span class="c17"><span
id="vi.vi.II-p88.1"></span>a.d.</span> 23. His *Historia Naturalis*
embraces astronomy, meteorology, geography, mineralogy, zoölogy, and
botany, and comprises according to the author’s own account 20,000
matters of importance drawn from 2,000 volumes.

<span id="fn_4727"></span>[392:4728](2060170.htm#fr_4727) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p88.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p89"></span> A native of Cilicia, who probably lived
in the second century of the Christian era. He was a Greek physician and
wrote a treatise on *Materia Medica,* in 5 books, which is still extant.

<span id="fn_4728"></span>[393:4729](2060170.htm#fr_4728) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p89.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p90"></span> [2 Cor. xii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#014)<span id="vi.vi.II-p90.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4729"></span>[393:4730](2060170.htm#fr_4729) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p90.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p91"></span> [2 Cor. iv.
16](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#016)<span id="vi.vi.II-p91.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4730"></span>[393:4731](2060170.htm#fr_4730) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p91.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p92"></span> [Phil. i.
23](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#023)<span id="vi.vi.II-p92.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4731"></span>[393:4732](2060170.htm#fr_4731) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p92.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p93"></span> [Rom. xiii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#014)<span id="vi.vi.II-p93.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4732"></span>[393:4733](2060170.htm#fr_4732) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p93.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p94"></span> [Matt.
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#009), [Matt.
19:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#021), [Mark
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#008)<span id="vi.vi.II-p94.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4733"></span>[393:4734](2060170.htm#fr_4733) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p94.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p95"></span> [Matt. xix.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#021)<span id="vi.vi.II-p95.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4734"></span>[393:4735](2060170.htm#fr_4734) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p95.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p96"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
85](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#085)<span id="vi.vi.II-p96.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4735"></span>[393:4736](2060170.htm#fr_4735) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p96.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p97"></span> [1 Cor. vi.
13](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#013)<span id="vi.vi.II-p97.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4736"></span>[393:4737](2060170.htm#fr_4736) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p98.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p99"></span> That is, the wood-worm just referred to.

<span id="fn_4737"></span>[393:4738](2060170.htm#fr_4737) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p99.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p100"></span> Pannonia, of which Valens also was a
native.

<span id="fn_4738"></span>[393:4739](2060170.htm#fr_4738) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p100.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p101"></span> This name, which signifies *dwellers in
caves,* was applied by Greek geographers to various peoples, but
especially to the uncivilized inhabitants of the west coast of the Red
Sea, along the shores of Upper Egypt and Æthiopia. The whole coast was
called *Troglodytice.*

<span id="fn_4739"></span>[393:4740](2060170.htm#fr_4739) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p101.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p102"></span> In 376 the Goths were driven out of
their country by the Huns. They were allowed by Valens to cross the
Danube, but war soon broke out and the emperor was defeated with great
slaughter on Aug. 9, 378.

<span id="fn_4740"></span>[394:4741](2060170.htm#fr_4740) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p102.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p103"></span> The Sarmatians dwelt on the N. E. of
the Sea of Azov, E. of the river Don.

<span id="fn_4741"></span>[394:4742](2060170.htm#fr_4741) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p103.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p104"></span> They were located in the S. E. of
Germany.

<span id="fn_4742"></span>[394:4743](2060170.htm#fr_4742) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p104.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p105"></span> The name given to the great confederacy
of German peoples who in <span class="c17"><span
id="vi.vi.II-p105.1"></span>a.d.</span> 409 traversed Germany and Gaul,
and invaded Spain. In 429 they conquered all the Roman dominions in
Africa, and in 455 they plundered Rome. Their kingdom was destroyed by
Belisarius in 535.

<span id="fn_4743"></span>[394:4744](2060170.htm#fr_4743) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p105.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p106"></span> A people of Central Asia. Cyrus the
Great was slain in an expedition against them.

<span id="fn_4744"></span>[394:4745](2060170.htm#fr_4744) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p106.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p107"></span> On the Oxus near its entrance into the
Caspian Sea.

<span id="fn_4745"></span>[394:4746](2060170.htm#fr_4745) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p107.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p108"></span> An agricultural people on the W. coast
of Pontus.

<span id="fn_4746"></span>[394:4747](2060170.htm#fr_4746) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p108.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p109"></span> Hyrcania was a province of the Persian
Empire, on the S. and S. E. shores of the Caspian or Hyrcanian Sea.
Jerome draws many of these details from the treatise of Porphyry <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi.II-p109.1"></span>Περὶ ἀποχῆς
ἐμψύχιων</span>.

<span id="fn_4747"></span>[394:4748](2060170.htm#fr_4747) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p109.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p110"></span> Antinous was drowned in the Nile. <span
class="c17"><span id="vi.vi.II-p110.1"></span>a.d.</span> 122. The
emperor’s grief was so great that he enrolled his favourite amongst the
gods, caused a temple to be erected to his honour at Mantinea, and
founded the city of Antinoopolis.

<span id="fn_4748"></span>[394:4749](2060170.htm#fr_4748) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p110.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p111"></span> Ter. Eunuch. iv. 5, 6.

<span id="fn_4749"></span>[394:4750](2060170.htm#fr_4749) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p112.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p113"></span> [Jer. ix.
21](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#021)<span id="vi.vi.II-p113.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4750"></span>[394:4751](2060170.htm#fr_4750) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p113.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p114"></span> An Egyptian perfuming powder.

<span id="fn_4751"></span>[394:4752](2060170.htm#fr_4751) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p114.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p115"></span> Probably an ointment made from the
grape of the wild vine.

<span id="fn_4752"></span>[395:4753](2060170.htm#fr_4752) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p116.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p117"></span> The celebrated Cynic philosopher. He
died at Corinth, at the age of nearly 90, <span class="c17"><span
id="vi.vi.II-p117.1"></span>b.c.</span> 323.

<span id="fn_4753"></span>[395:4754](2060170.htm#fr_4753) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p117.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p118"></span> *Academia* was a piece of land on the
Cephisus about three-quarters of a mile from Athens, originally
belonging to the hero Academus. Here was a Gymnasium with plane and
olive plantations, etc. Plato had a piece of land in the neighbourhood;
here he taught, and after him his followers, who were hence called
*Academici.* Cicero called his villa Academia.

<span id="fn_4754"></span>[395:4755](2060170.htm#fr_4754) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p118.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p119"></span> Flourished about <span
class="c17"><span id="vi.vi.II-p119.1"></span>b.c.</span> 320. Though
heir to a large fortune he renounced it all, and lived and died as a
true Cynic. He was called the “door-opener,” because it was his practice
to visit every house at Athens and rebuke its inmates.

<span id="fn_4755"></span>[395:4756](2060170.htm#fr_4755) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p119.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p120"></span> A common form of Gnostic error revived
many centuries afterwards by the Anabaptists.

<span id="fn_4756"></span>[395:4757](2060170.htm#fr_4756) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p120.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p121"></span> [1 Tim. v.
6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#006)<span id="vi.vi.II-p121.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4757"></span>[395:4758](2060170.htm#fr_4757) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p122.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p123"></span> See Cicero, Repub. Bk. III.

<span id="fn_4758"></span>[395:4759](2060170.htm#fr_4758) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p123.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p124"></span> Sallust. *In Cat.* ch. 1.

<span id="fn_4759"></span>[395:4760](2060170.htm#fr_4759) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p124.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p125"></span> [Prov. xx.
1](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#001)<span id="vi.vi.II-p125.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4760"></span>[396:4761](2060170.htm#fr_4760) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p126.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p127"></span> The most celebrated physician of
antiquity. Born about <span class="c17"><span
id="vi.vi.II-p127.1"></span>b.c.</span> 460, died about 357.

<span id="fn_4761"></span>[396:4762](2060170.htm#fr_4761) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p127.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p128"></span> Born at Pergamum <span
class="c17"><span id="vi.vi.II-p128.1"></span>a.d.</span> 130, died
probably in the year 200. His writings are considered to have had a more
extensive influence on medical science than even those of Hippocrates.

<span id="fn_4762"></span>[396:4763](2060170.htm#fr_4762) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p128.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p129"></span> Fabricius was censor in <span
class="c17"><span id="vi.vi.II-p129.1"></span>b.c.</span> 275, and
devoted himself to repressing the prevalent taste for luxury. The story
of his expelling from the Senate P. Cornelius Rufinus because he
possessed ten pounds’ weight of silver-plate is well-known.

<span id="fn_4763"></span>[396:4764](2060170.htm#fr_4763) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p129.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p130"></span> Curius Dentatus, Consul <span
class="c17"><span id="vi.vi.II-p130.1"></span>b.c.</span> 290 with P.
Cornelius Rufinus to whom allusion has just been made, was no less
distinguished for simplicity of life than was Fabricius. He was censor
<span class="c17"><span id="vi.vi.II-p130.2"></span>b.c.</span> 272.

<span id="fn_4764"></span>[397:4765](2060170.htm#fr_4764) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p131.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p132"></span> Ep. Lib. I. ep. 2.

<span id="fn_4765"></span>[397:4766](2060170.htm#fr_4765) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p138.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p139"></span> Or, “an ante-room to the
closet”—*Meditatorium.* Comp. Tertullian, Treatise on Fasting, ch. 6.

<span id="fn_4766"></span>[397:4767](2060170.htm#fr_4766) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p140.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p141"></span> The Peripatetic philosopher,
geographer, and historian, a disciple of Aristotle and the friend of
Theophrastus.

<span id="fn_4767"></span>[397:4768](2060170.htm#fr_4767) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p141.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p142"></span> Chæremon was chief librarian of the
Alexandrian library. He afterwards became one of Nero’s tutors.

<span id="fn_4768"></span>[397:4769](2060170.htm#fr_4768) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p143.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p144"></span> Wars, Book II., ch. viii. 2 sq.;
Antiquities, Bk. xviii. I. 2 sq. Josephus nowhere says that the Essenes
abstained from flesh and wine, or fasted daily. Philo commends them for
so doing. Jerome here, as above, borrows from Porphyry. The “Wars of the
Jews or History of the Destruction of Jerusalem,” are here called the
“History of the Jewish Captivity.”

<span id="fn_4769"></span>[397:4770](2060170.htm#fr_4769) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p144.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p145"></span> Philo the Jew. His exact date cannot be
given; but he was advanced in years when he went to Rome (<span
class="c17"><span id="vi.vi.II-p145.1"></span>a.d.</span> 40) on his
famous embassy in behalf of his countrymen.

<span id="fn_4770"></span>[397:4771](2060170.htm#fr_4770) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p145.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p146"></span> Neanthes lived about <span
class="c17"><span id="vi.vi.II-p146.1"></span>b.c.</span> 241. He was a
voluminous writer, chiefly on historical subjects.

<span id="fn_4771"></span>[397:4772](2060170.htm#fr_4771) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p146.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p147"></span> There were many physicians of this
name.

<span id="fn_4772"></span>[397:4773](2060170.htm#fr_4772) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p147.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p148"></span> The sun-god of the Persians.

<span id="fn_4773"></span>[397:4774](2060170.htm#fr_4773) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p148.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p149"></span> Supposed to be the same as the
Bardesanes born at Edessa in Mesopotamia, who flourished in the latter
half of the second century. Jerome again refers to him in the book on
Illustrious Men, c. 33.

<span id="fn_4774"></span>[398:4775](2060170.htm#fr_4774) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p149.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p150"></span> Xenocrates was born <span
class="c17"><span id="vi.vi.II-p150.1"></span>b.c.</span> 396, died
<span class="c17"><span id="vi.vi.II-p150.2"></span>b.c.</span> 314.

<span id="fn_4775"></span>[398:4776](2060170.htm#fr_4775) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p150.3"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p151"></span> Triptolemus was the legendary inventor
of the plough and of agriculture.

<span id="fn_4776"></span>[398:4777](2060170.htm#fr_4776) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p151.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p152"></span> Poems ascribed to the mythical Orpheus
are quoted by Plato. The extant poems which bear his name are forgeries
of Christian grammarians and philosophers of the Alexandrine school; but
some fragments of the old Orphic poetry are said to be remaining.

<span id="fn_4777"></span>[398:4778](2060170.htm#fr_4777) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p152.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p153"></span> Antisthenes was the founder of the
Cynic philosophy. He was a devoted disciple of Socrates and flourished
about <span class="c17"><span id="vi.vi.II-p153.1"></span>b.c.</span>
366.

<span id="fn_4778"></span>[398:4779](2060170.htm#fr_4778) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p153.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p154"></span> The distinguished Peripatetic
philosopher and historian. He lived, probably, about the time of Ptolemy
Philopator (<span class="c17"><span
id="vi.vi.II-p154.1"></span>b.c.</span> 222–205).

<span id="fn_4779"></span>[398:4780](2060170.htm#fr_4779) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p155.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p156"></span> [Gen.
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#003),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#005)<span id="vi.vi.II-p156.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4780"></span>[399:4781](2060170.htm#fr_4780) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p156.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p157"></span> [Gen.
8:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#021), [Gen.
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#003)<span id="vi.vi.II-p157.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4781"></span>[399:4782](2060170.htm#fr_4781) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p157.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p158"></span> [Ex. xvi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#003)<span id="vi.vi.II-p158.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4782"></span>[399:4783](2060170.htm#fr_4782) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p158.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p159"></span> [Numb. xi.
4-6](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#004)<span id="vi.vi.II-p159.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4783"></span>[399:4784](2060170.htm#fr_4783) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p160.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p161"></span> [Deut. xxxii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#015)<span id="vi.vi.II-p161.1"></span>.
“Beloved” (dilectus). Correctly Jeshurun, that is, the Upright, a name
of Israel.

<span id="fn_4784"></span>[399:4785](2060170.htm#fr_4784) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p161.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p162"></span> [Deut. viii.
12-14](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#012)<span
id="vi.vi.II-p162.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4785"></span>[399:4786](2060170.htm#fr_4785) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p162.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p163"></span> The curious custom of representing
Moses with horns arose from a mistake in the Vulgate rendering. The
Hebrew verb <span id="vi.vi.II-p163.1"></span>לוקּ, to emit rays, is
derived from a word which, meaning mostly a *horn,* has in the dual the
signification *rays of light.* See [Hab. iii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#004)<span id="vi.vi.II-p163.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_4786"></span>[399:4787](2060170.htm#fr_4786) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p163.3"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p164"></span> [Luke ix.
31](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#031)<span id="vi.vi.II-p164.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4787"></span>[399:4788](2060170.htm#fr_4787) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p164.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p165"></span> [Ex. xvii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#008)<span id="vi.vi.II-p165.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4788"></span>[399:4789](2060170.htm#fr_4788) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p165.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p166"></span> [Josh. x.
13](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#013)<span id="vi.vi.II-p166.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4789"></span>[399:4790](2060170.htm#fr_4789) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p166.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p167"></span> [1 Sam. xiv.
24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#024)<span id="vi.vi.II-p167.1"></span>.
Heb. “entered into the wood.” The English version follows the Hebrew.
The Sept. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi.II-p167.2"></span>ἠ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi.II-p167.3"></span>ρἱστα</span> (Jerome’s prandebat) is perhaps
only a repetition of the preceding thought. Another rendering inserts
the negative, <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi.II-p167.4"></span>οὐκ
ἠρίστα</span>.

<span id="fn_4790"></span>[399:4791](2060170.htm#fr_4790) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p167.5"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p168"></span> [1 Sam. xiv.
24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#024)<span id="vi.vi.II-p168.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4791"></span>[399:4792](2060170.htm#fr_4791) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p168.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p169"></span> [1 Kings xix.
8-11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#008)<span
id="vi.vi.II-p169.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4792"></span>[400:4793](2060170.htm#fr_4792) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p169.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p170"></span> [1 Sam. vii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#007)<span id="vi.vi.II-p170.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4793"></span>[400:4794](2060170.htm#fr_4793) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p170.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p171"></span> [2 Kings
xviii](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#000)<span
id="vi.vi.II-p171.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4794"></span>[400:4795](2060170.htm#fr_4794) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p171.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p172"></span> [Gen. xviii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#023)<span id="vi.vi.II-p172.1"></span>
sq.

<span id="fn_4795"></span>[400:4796](2060170.htm#fr_4795) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p172.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p173"></span> [1 Kings xxi.
27-29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#027)<span
id="vi.vi.II-p173.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4796"></span>[400:4797](2060170.htm#fr_4796) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p173.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p174"></span> [1 Sam.
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#015),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#017)<span id="vi.vi.II-p174.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4797"></span>[400:4798](2060170.htm#fr_4797) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p174.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p175"></span> [Dan.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#000), [Dan.
2:0](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#000)<span id="vi.vi.II-p175.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4798"></span>[400:4799](2060170.htm#fr_4798) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p175.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p176"></span> [Dan. ix.
23](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#023)<span id="vi.vi.II-p176.1"></span>.
Heb. A man of desires. A.V. greatly beloved.

<span id="fn_4799"></span>[400:4800](2060170.htm#fr_4799) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p176.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p177"></span> The story is in the apocryphal part of
the book of Daniel.

<span id="fn_4800"></span>[400:4801](2060170.htm#fr_4800) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p177.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p178"></span> [Ps. cii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#009)<span id="vi.vi.II-p178.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4801"></span>[400:4802](2060170.htm#fr_4801) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p178.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p179"></span> [Ps. cix.
24](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#024)<span id="vi.vi.II-p179.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4802"></span>[400:4803](2060170.htm#fr_4802) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p179.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p180"></span> [2 Sam. xii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#013)<span id="vi.vi.II-p180.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4803"></span>[400:4804](2060170.htm#fr_4803) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p180.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p181"></span> [Lev. x.
9](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#009)<span id="vi.vi.II-p181.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4804"></span>[400:4805](2060170.htm#fr_4804) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p181.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p182"></span> [Amos ii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#012)<span id="vi.vi.II-p182.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4805"></span>[400:4806](2060170.htm#fr_4805) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p182.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p183"></span> [Jer. xxxv.
18](../../../bib/kjv/jer035.htm#018)<span id="vi.vi.II-p183.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4806"></span>[400:4807](2060170.htm#fr_4806) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p183.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p184"></span> S. [Luke ii.
36](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#036)<span id="vi.vi.II-p184.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4807"></span>[400:4808](2060170.htm#fr_4807) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p184.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p185"></span> S. Jerome is in accord with the
Vulgate, Peshito, and certain manuscripts, but the R.V. omits S. [Matt.
xvii. 21](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#021)<span
id="vi.vi.II-p185.1"></span> (Howbeit this kind goeth not out but by
prayer and fasting) and in S. [Mark ix.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#029)<span id="vi.vi.II-p185.2"></span>
omits the words respecting fasting. S. Luke does not refer to our Lord’s
supposed remark.

<span id="fn_4808"></span>[400:4809](2060170.htm#fr_4808) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p185.3"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p186"></span> [Acts x.
4](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#004)<span id="vi.vi.II-p186.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4809"></span>[400:4810](2060170.htm#fr_4809) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p186.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p187"></span> [2 Cor. xi.
27](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#027)<span id="vi.vi.II-p187.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4810"></span>[400:4811](2060170.htm#fr_4810) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p187.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p188"></span> [1 Tim. v.
23](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#023)<span id="vi.vi.II-p188.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4811"></span>[400:4812](2060170.htm#fr_4811) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p189.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p190"></span> [1 Tim. iv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#003)<span id="vi.vi.II-p190.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4812"></span>[400:4813](2060170.htm#fr_4812) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p190.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p191"></span> [Prov. xvi.
26](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#026)<span id="vi.vi.II-p191.1"></span>.
Sept.

<span id="fn_4813"></span>[401:4814](2060170.htm#fr_4813) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p191.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p192"></span> S. [Matt. xi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#012)<span id="vi.vi.II-p192.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4814"></span>[401:4815](2060170.htm#fr_4814) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p192.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p193"></span> [Rom. xiv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#003)<span id="vi.vi.II-p193.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4815"></span>[401:4816](2060170.htm#fr_4815) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p193.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p194"></span> [Rom. xiv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#014)<span id="vi.vi.II-p194.1"></span>
sq.

<span id="fn_4816"></span>[401:4817](2060170.htm#fr_4816) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p194.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p195"></span> [Rom. xiv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#002)<span id="vi.vi.II-p195.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4817"></span>[401:4818](2060170.htm#fr_4817) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p195.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p196"></span> [Rom. xiv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#005)<span id="vi.vi.II-p196.1"></span>
sq.

<span id="fn_4818"></span>[401:4819](2060170.htm#fr_4818) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p197.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p198"></span> S. [Matt. v.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#006)<span id="vi.vi.II-p198.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4819"></span>[401:4820](2060170.htm#fr_4819) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p198.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p199"></span> S. [John iv.
32](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#032)<span id="vi.vi.II-p199.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4820"></span>[401:4821](2060170.htm#fr_4820) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p199.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p200"></span> S. [Matt. v.
34](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#034)<span id="vi.vi.II-p200.1"></span>.
(Rather, not to be *anxious* about it.)

<span id="fn_4821"></span>[401:4822](2060170.htm#fr_4821) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p200.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p201"></span> [Luke
24:42](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#042), [John
21:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#013)<span
id="vi.vi.II-p201.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4822"></span>[401:4823](2060170.htm#fr_4822) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p201.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p202"></span> S. [Luke xv.
19-31](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#019)<span
id="vi.vi.II-p202.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4823"></span>[401:4824](2060170.htm#fr_4823) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p202.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p203"></span> S. [Matt.
16:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#018)<span id="vi.vi.II-p203.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4824"></span>[401:4825](2060170.htm#fr_4824) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p203.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p204"></span> See above.

<span id="fn_4825"></span>[401:4826](2060170.htm#fr_4825) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p204.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p205"></span> [Mark
5:43](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#043), [Luke
8:55](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#055)<span
id="vi.vi.II-p205.1"></span>. Our Lord is not related to have given the
command in the case of the son of the widow of Nain, or in that of
Lazarus.

<span id="fn_4826"></span>[401:4827](2060170.htm#fr_4826) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p205.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p206"></span> S. [John xii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#002)<span id="vi.vi.II-p206.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4827"></span>[401:4828](2060170.htm#fr_4827) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p206.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p207"></span> [Acts x.
10](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#010)<span id="vi.vi.II-p207.1"></span>.
In our version “the housetop.”

<span id="fn_4828"></span>[401:4829](2060170.htm#fr_4828) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p207.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p208"></span> S. [John iv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#006)<span id="vi.vi.II-p208.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4829"></span>[402:4830](2060170.htm#fr_4829) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p208.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p209"></span> [Isa. lviii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#005)<span id="vi.vi.II-p209.1"></span>
sq.

<span id="fn_4830"></span>[402:4831](2060170.htm#fr_4830) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p209.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p210"></span> [Lev.
16.29](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#029)<span
id="vi.vi.II-p210.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4831"></span>[402:4832](2060170.htm#fr_4831) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p210.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p211"></span> [Numb. xi.
34](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#034)<span id="vi.vi.II-p211.1"></span>.
Tertullian also speaks of the graves remaining.

<span id="fn_4832"></span>[402:4833](2060170.htm#fr_4832) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p211.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p212"></span> [1 Kings xiii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#024)<span id="vi.vi.II-p212.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4833"></span>[402:4834](2060170.htm#fr_4833) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p212.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p213"></span> [Joel
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#014), [Joel
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#015)<span
id="vi.vi.II-p213.1"></span>. Jerome agrees with the Sept. <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi.II-p213.2"></span>Θεραπέια</span>. The
Heb. root signifies to *close* or *bind;* hence the meaning *healing.*
But others translate <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi.II-p213.3"></span>Θεραπέια</span> by *worship,* or *service.*
The correct rendering appears to be a *solemn assembly* as in A.V.

<span id="fn_4834"></span>[402:4835](2060170.htm#fr_4834) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p214.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p215"></span> S. [Matt. xxv.
34](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#034)<span id="vi.vi.II-p215.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4835"></span>[402:4836](2060170.htm#fr_4835) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p215.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p216"></span> S. [Matt. xxv.
41](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#041)<span id="vi.vi.II-p216.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4836"></span>[402:4837](2060170.htm#fr_4836) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p216.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p217"></span> S. [John viii.
44](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#044)<span id="vi.vi.II-p217.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4837"></span>[403:4838](2060170.htm#fr_4837) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p218.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p219"></span> [Matt.
19:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#029), [Mark
10:29](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#029),
[30](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#030), [Luke
18:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#029),
[30](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#030)<span id="vi.vi.II-p219.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4838"></span>[403:4839](2060170.htm#fr_4838) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p219.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p220"></span> S. [John vi.
56](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#056)<span id="vi.vi.II-p220.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4839"></span>[403:4840](2060170.htm#fr_4839) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p220.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p221"></span> S. [John xiv.
23](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#023)<span id="vi.vi.II-p221.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4840"></span>[403:4841](2060170.htm#fr_4840) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p221.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p222"></span> S. [John xiv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#002)<span id="vi.vi.II-p222.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4841"></span>[403:4842](2060170.htm#fr_4841) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p222.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p223"></span> [1 Cor.
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#016), [1 Cor.
6:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#019)<span
id="vi.vi.II-p223.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4842"></span>[403:4843](2060170.htm#fr_4842) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p223.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p224"></span> S. [John xvii.
20-23](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#020)<span
id="vi.vi.II-p224.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4843"></span>[404:4844](2060170.htm#fr_4843) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p226.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p227"></span> In Cyprus, where Zeno the founder of
the Stoic school was born.

<span id="fn_4844"></span>[404:4845](2060170.htm#fr_4844) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p227.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p228"></span> i.e., Jovinianus. Jerome for the moment
addresses the reader.

<span id="fn_4845"></span>[404:4846](2060170.htm#fr_4845) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p229.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p230"></span> Persius I. 128, Conington’s
translation.

<span id="fn_4846"></span>[404:4847](2060170.htm#fr_4846) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p230.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p231"></span> [Ezek.
34:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#017),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#021)<span id="vi.vi.II-p231.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4847"></span>[404:4848](2060170.htm#fr_4847) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p231.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p232"></span> [Ezek. xxxiv.
31](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#031)<span id="vi.vi.II-p232.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4848"></span>[404:4849](2060170.htm#fr_4848) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p232.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p233"></span> [Rom. xii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#003)<span id="vi.vi.II-p233.1"></span>
sq.

<span id="fn_4849"></span>[405:4850](2060170.htm#fr_4849) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p233.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p234"></span> [Rom. xiv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#005)<span id="vi.vi.II-p234.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4850"></span>[405:4851](2060170.htm#fr_4850) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p234.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p235"></span> [1 Cor. iii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#006)<span id="vi.vi.II-p235.1"></span>
sq.

<span id="fn_4851"></span>[405:4852](2060170.htm#fr_4851) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p235.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p236"></span> [1 Cor. iii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#010)<span id="vi.vi.II-p236.1"></span>
sq.

<span id="fn_4852"></span>[405:4853](2060170.htm#fr_4852) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p236.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p237"></span> [1 Cor.
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#002)<span id="vi.vi.II-p237.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4853"></span>[405:4854](2060170.htm#fr_4853) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p237.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p238"></span> [1 Cor. ix.
13](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#013)<span id="vi.vi.II-p238.1"></span>
sq.

<span id="fn_4854"></span>[405:4855](2060170.htm#fr_4854) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p239.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p240"></span> [1 Cor. xii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#004)<span id="vi.vi.II-p240.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4855"></span>[405:4856](2060170.htm#fr_4855) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p240.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p241"></span> [1 Cor. xii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#012)<span id="vi.vi.II-p241.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4856"></span>[405:4857](2060170.htm#fr_4856) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p241.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p242"></span> [1 Cor. xii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#028)<span id="vi.vi.II-p242.1"></span>
sq.

<span id="fn_4857"></span>[406:4858](2060170.htm#fr_4857) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p242.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p243"></span> [1 Cor.
13:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#010)<span id="vi.vi.II-p243.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4858"></span>[406:4859](2060170.htm#fr_4858) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p243.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p244"></span> [1 Cor.
13:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#018), [1 Cor.
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#001)<span
id="vi.vi.II-p244.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4859"></span>[406:4860](2060170.htm#fr_4859) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p244.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p245"></span> [1 Cor. xiv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#005)<span id="vi.vi.II-p245.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4860"></span>[406:4861](2060170.htm#fr_4860) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p245.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p246"></span> [1 Cor. xiv.
18](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#018)<span id="vi.vi.II-p246.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4861"></span>[406:4862](2060170.htm#fr_4861) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p246.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p247"></span> [1 Cor.
15:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#010)<span id="vi.vi.II-p247.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4862"></span>[406:4863](2060170.htm#fr_4862) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p247.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p248"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
22](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#022)<span id="vi.vi.II-p248.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4863"></span>[406:4864](2060170.htm#fr_4863) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p248.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p249"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
39](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#039)<span id="vi.vi.II-p249.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4864"></span>[406:4865](2060170.htm#fr_4864) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p249.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p250"></span> [Job
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#009), [Job
38:32](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#032)<span
id="vi.vi.II-p250.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4865"></span>[406:4866](2060170.htm#fr_4865) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p250.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p251"></span> [2 Cor. v.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#010)<span id="vi.vi.II-p251.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4866"></span>[406:4867](2060170.htm#fr_4866) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p251.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p252"></span> [2 Cor. ix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#006)<span id="vi.vi.II-p252.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4867"></span>[406:4868](2060170.htm#fr_4867) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p252.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p253"></span> [Eph. iii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#010)<span id="vi.vi.II-p253.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4868"></span>[406:4869](2060170.htm#fr_4868) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p253.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p254"></span> [Eph. iv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#007)<span id="vi.vi.II-p254.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4869"></span>[407:4870](2060170.htm#fr_4869) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p255.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p256"></span> [Ps. lxxiii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#017)<span id="vi.vi.II-p256.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4870"></span>[407:4871](2060170.htm#fr_4870) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p256.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p257"></span> See [Acts xxvii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#023)<span id="vi.vi.II-p257.1"></span>
and the context.

<span id="fn_4871"></span>[407:4872](2060170.htm#fr_4871) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p257.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p258"></span> [Gen. xix.
18-21](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#018)<span
id="vi.vi.II-p258.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4872"></span>[407:4873](2060170.htm#fr_4872) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p258.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p259"></span> [1 Sam. xxx.
1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#001)<span id="vi.vi.II-p259.1"></span>
sq.

<span id="fn_4873"></span>[407:4874](2060170.htm#fr_4873) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p259.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p260"></span> S. [Luke xiii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#004)<span id="vi.vi.II-p260.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4874"></span>[407:4875](2060170.htm#fr_4874) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p261.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p262"></span> [1 Cor. xi.
27](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#027)<span id="vi.vi.II-p262.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4875"></span>[407:4876](2060170.htm#fr_4875) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p262.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p263"></span> [Mal. iv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#002)<span id="vi.vi.II-p263.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4876"></span>[407:4877](2060170.htm#fr_4876) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p263.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p264"></span> S. [Matt. xxv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#013)<span id="vi.vi.II-p264.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4877"></span>[408:4878](2060170.htm#fr_4877) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p264.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p265"></span> S. [John xix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#006)<span id="vi.vi.II-p265.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4878"></span>[408:4879](2060170.htm#fr_4878) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p265.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p266"></span> [Wisd. vi.
7](../../../bib/apo/wis006.htm#007)<span id="vi.vi.II-p266.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4879"></span>[408:4880](2060170.htm#fr_4879) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p266.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p267"></span> [Ex. xxi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#002)<span id="vi.vi.II-p267.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4880"></span>[408:4881](2060170.htm#fr_4880) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p267.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p268"></span> [Lev. xxv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#013)<span id="vi.vi.II-p268.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4881"></span>[408:4882](2060170.htm#fr_4881) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p269.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p270"></span> [Matt.
19:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#029), [Mark
10:30](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#030), [Luke
18:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#030)<span
id="vi.vi.II-p270.1"></span>. In S. Matthew some authorities agree with
S. Luke in reading “*manifold.*”

<span id="fn_4882"></span>[408:4883](2060170.htm#fr_4882) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p271.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p272"></span> [Matt. xi.
11](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#011)<span id="vi.vi.II-p272.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4883"></span>[409:4884](2060170.htm#fr_4883) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p272.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p273"></span> S. [Luke xvii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#005)<span id="vi.vi.II-p273.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4884"></span>[409:4885](2060170.htm#fr_4884) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p273.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p274"></span> [Matt. xiv.
31](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#031)<span id="vi.vi.II-p274.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4885"></span>[409:4886](2060170.htm#fr_4885) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p274.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p275"></span> [Jer. xxxi.
31](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#031)<span id="vi.vi.II-p275.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4886"></span>[409:4887](2060170.htm#fr_4886) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p275.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p276"></span> [Jer.
31:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#033),
[34](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#034)<span id="vi.vi.II-p276.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4887"></span>[409:4888](2060170.htm#fr_4887) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p276.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p277"></span> S. [Matt. v.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#019)<span id="vi.vi.II-p277.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4888"></span>[409:4889](2060170.htm#fr_4888) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p277.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p278"></span> S. [Luke xiv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#009)<span id="vi.vi.II-p278.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4889"></span>[409:4890](2060170.htm#fr_4889) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p279.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p280"></span> S. [John
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#003)<span id="vi.vi.II-p280.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4890"></span>[409:4891](2060170.htm#fr_4890) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p280.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p281"></span> S. [Matt. xx.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#023)<span id="vi.vi.II-p281.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4891"></span>[409:4892](2060170.htm#fr_4891) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p281.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p282"></span> S. [John xiv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#003)<span id="vi.vi.II-p282.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4892"></span>[409:4893](2060170.htm#fr_4892) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p282.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p283"></span> [Ps. lxxiii.
26](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#026)<span id="vi.vi.II-p283.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4893"></span>[409:4894](2060170.htm#fr_4893) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p283.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p284"></span> [Ez. xliv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#010)<span id="vi.vi.II-p284.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4894"></span>[410:4895](2060170.htm#fr_4894) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p285.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p286"></span> [1 Cor. vi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#019)<span id="vi.vi.II-p286.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4895"></span>[410:4896](2060170.htm#fr_4895) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p286.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p287"></span> Correctly, a portion of two, *i.e.,*
the portion of a first-born. [Deut. xxi.
17](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#017)<span id="vi.vi.II-p287.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4896"></span>[410:4897](2060170.htm#fr_4896) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p287.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p288"></span>[Luke
7:0](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#000), [Matt.
26:0](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#000), [Mark
14:0](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#000), [John
12:0](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#000)<span
id="vi.vi.II-p288.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4897"></span>[410:4898](2060170.htm#fr_4897) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p288.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p289"></span> S. [John
17:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#021)<span id="vi.vi.II-p289.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4898"></span>[410:4899](2060170.htm#fr_4898) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p289.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p290"></span> [2 Pet. i.
4](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#004)<span id="vi.vi.II-p290.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4899"></span>[410:4900](2060170.htm#fr_4899) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p290.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p291"></span> S. [John xvii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#023)<span id="vi.vi.II-p291.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4900"></span>[410:4901](2060170.htm#fr_4900) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p291.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p292"></span> S. [John
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#013)<span id="vi.vi.II-p292.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4901"></span>[410:4902](2060170.htm#fr_4901) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p292.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p293"></span> S. [John vi.
57](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#057)<span id="vi.vi.II-p293.1"></span>
sq.

<span id="fn_4902"></span>[410:4903](2060170.htm#fr_4902) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p293.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p294"></span> [1 John
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#013),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#015)<span id="vi.vi.II-p294.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4903"></span>[410:4904](2060170.htm#fr_4903) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p295.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p296"></span> [Gal. iv.
19](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#019)<span id="vi.vi.II-p296.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4904"></span>[411:4905](2060170.htm#fr_4904) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p296.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p297"></span> [1 Cor. xii.
22-24](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#022)<span
id="vi.vi.II-p297.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4905"></span>[411:4906](2060170.htm#fr_4905) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p297.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p298"></span> S. [Luke xi.
34](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#034)<span id="vi.vi.II-p298.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4906"></span>[411:4907](2060170.htm#fr_4906) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p298.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p299"></span> [1 John v.
16](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#016)<span id="vi.vi.II-p299.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4907"></span>[411:4908](2060170.htm#fr_4907) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p299.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p300"></span> [Jer. vii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#016)<span id="vi.vi.II-p300.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4908"></span>[411:4909](2060170.htm#fr_4908) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p300.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p301"></span> [Rom. v.
14](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#014)<span id="vi.vi.II-p301.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4909"></span>[411:4910](2060170.htm#fr_4909) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p302.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p303"></span> [Wisd. i.
11](../../../bib/apo/wis001.htm#011)<span id="vi.vi.II-p303.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4910"></span>[411:4911](2060170.htm#fr_4910) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p303.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p304"></span> [Ps.
16:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#011), [Rom.
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#004)<span id="vi.vi.II-p304.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4911"></span>[411:4912](2060170.htm#fr_4911) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p304.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p305"></span> [Ps. li.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#004)<span id="vi.vi.II-p305.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4912"></span>[412:4913](2060170.htm#fr_4912) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p305.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p306"></span> [Ezek.
16:62](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#062),
[63](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#063)<span id="vi.vi.II-p306.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4913"></span>[412:4914](2060170.htm#fr_4913) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p306.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p307"></span> [Ezek.
36:31](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#031),
[32](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#032)<span id="vi.vi.II-p307.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4914"></span>[412:4915](2060170.htm#fr_4914) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p307.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p308"></span> Letter XXI.

<span id="fn_4915"></span>[412:4916](2060170.htm#fr_4915) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p310.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p311"></span> S. [Matt. xx.
26](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#026)<span id="vi.vi.II-p311.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4916"></span>[412:4917](2060170.htm#fr_4916) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p311.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p312"></span> S. [Luke vii.
47](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#047)<span id="vi.vi.II-p312.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4917"></span>[412:4918](2060170.htm#fr_4917) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p312.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p313"></span> S. [Matt. xxv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#015)<span id="vi.vi.II-p313.1"></span>
sq.

<span id="fn_4918"></span>[413:4919](2060170.htm#fr_4918) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p313.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p314"></span> [Phil. iii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#013)<span id="vi.vi.II-p314.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4919"></span>[413:4920](2060170.htm#fr_4919) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p314.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p315"></span> [Josh. ix.
27](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#027)<span id="vi.vi.II-p315.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4920"></span>[413:4921](2060170.htm#fr_4920) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p315.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p316"></span> [2 Sam. xxi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#001)<span id="vi.vi.II-p316.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4921"></span>[413:4922](2060170.htm#fr_4921) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p316.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p317"></span> S. [Luke
12:47](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#047),
[48](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#048)<span id="vi.vi.II-p317.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4922"></span>[413:4923](2060170.htm#fr_4922) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p318.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p319"></span> [Ps.
cxix](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#000)<span
id="vi.vi.II-p319.1"></span>. in our arrangement of the Psalter. The
psalm is divided into twenty-two portions, which begin with the
successive letters of the Hebrew alphabet. The following fifteen psalms
are called in our Authorized Version, Songs of Degrees (Vulgate,
graduum, steps). For the origin of the title, Wordsworth, or Neal and
Littledale on [Ps. cxx.](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#000)<span
id="vi.vi.II-p319.2"></span> may be consulted.

<span id="fn_4923"></span>[413:4924](2060170.htm#fr_4923) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p319.3"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p320"></span> [Ps. cxxxiv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#001)<span id="vi.vi.II-p320.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4924"></span>[413:4925](2060170.htm#fr_4924) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p320.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p321"></span> [Num.
34:15](../../../bib/kjv/num034.htm#015), [Josh.
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#003)<span
id="vi.vi.II-p321.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4925"></span>[413:4926](2060170.htm#fr_4925) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p321.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p322"></span> [Numb. xviii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#020)<span id="vi.vi.II-p322.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4926"></span>[413:4927](2060170.htm#fr_4926) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p322.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p323"></span> [Lev.
16:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#002), [Heb.
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#007)<span id="vi.vi.II-p323.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4927"></span>[413:4928](2060170.htm#fr_4927) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p323.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p324"></span> [Ex.
xxviii](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#000)<span
id="vi.vi.II-p324.1"></span>. etc.

<span id="fn_4928"></span>[414:4929](2060170.htm#fr_4928) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p324.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p325"></span> [Numb. vii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#005)<span id="vi.vi.II-p325.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4929"></span>[414:4930](2060170.htm#fr_4929) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p327.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p328"></span> Aristippus though the disciple of
Socrates, taught that pleasure was the highest good.

<span id="fn_4930"></span>[414:4931](2060170.htm#fr_4930) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p328.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p329"></span> [Ps. cxx.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#005)<span id="vi.vi.II-p329.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4931"></span>[414:4932](2060170.htm#fr_4931) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p329.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p330"></span> [Is. lxiii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#003)<span id="vi.vi.II-p330.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4932"></span>[414:4933](2060170.htm#fr_4932) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p330.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p331"></span> S. [John
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#006),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#015)<span id="vi.vi.II-p331.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4933"></span>[415:4934](2060170.htm#fr_4933) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p331.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p332"></span> Jovinianus’s doctrine is said to have
influenced some who had taken a vow of virginity, to marry.

<span id="fn_4934"></span>[415:4935](2060170.htm#fr_4934) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p333.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p334"></span> Virgil Æn. iv. 172.

<span id="fn_4935"></span>[415:4936](2060170.htm#fr_4935) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p335.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p336"></span> Pythagoras asserted that he had once
been the Trojan Euphorbus.

<span id="fn_4936"></span>[415:4937](2060170.htm#fr_4936) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p336.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p337"></span> [Is. iii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#016)<span id="vi.vi.II-p337.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4937"></span>[415:4938](2060170.htm#fr_4937) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p337.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p338"></span> [Jer.
51:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#006), [Jer.
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#014)<span
id="vi.vi.II-p338.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4938"></span>[415:4939](2060170.htm#fr_4938) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p338.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p339"></span> [Jer.
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#004), [Ps.
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#004), [Ps.
53:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa053.htm#004)<span
id="vi.vi.II-p339.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4939"></span>[415:4940](2060170.htm#fr_4939) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p339.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p340"></span> [Jer. xxviii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/jer028.htm#013)<span id="vi.vi.II-p340.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4940"></span>[415:4941](2060170.htm#fr_4940) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p340.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p341"></span> That is, *cælebs* from *cælum.*

<span id="fn_4941"></span>[415:4942](2060170.htm#fr_4941) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p341.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p342"></span> [Jer. v.
8](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#008)<span id="vi.vi.II-p342.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4942"></span>[416:4943](2060170.htm#fr_4942) <span
id="vi.vi.II-p343.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.II-p344"></span> That is, Jove.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Against Vigilantius.](2060171)
