[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2060206)  [Next](2060208) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.iii.xviii"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.xviii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vii.iii.xviii-p1.1"></span>The Psalms.</span>

<span id="vii.iii.xviii-p2"></span>Jerome first undertook a revision of
the Psalter with the help of the Septuagint about the year 383, when
living at Rome. This revision, which obtained the name of the Roman
Psalter “probably because it was made for the use of the Roman Church at
the request of Damasus,” was retained until the pontificate of Pius V.
(<span class="c17"><span id="vii.iii.xviii-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span>
1566). Before long “the old error prevailed over the new correction,”
the faults of the old version crept in again through the negligence of
copyists; and at the request of Paula and Eustochium, Jerome commenced a
new and more thorough revision. The exact date is not known; the work
was in all probability done at Bethlehem in the years 387 and 388. This
edition, which soon became popular, was introduced by Gregory of Tours
into the services of the Church of France, and thus obtained the name of
the Gallican Psalter. In 1566 it superseded the Roman in all churches
except those of the Vatican, Milan, and St. Mark’s, Venice.

<span id="vii.iii.xviii-p3"></span>Long ago, when I was living at Rome,
I revised the Psalter, and corrected it in a great measure, though but
cursorily, in accordance with the Septuagint version. You now find it,
Paula and Eustochium, again corrupted through the fault of copyists, and
realise the fact that ancient error is more powerful than modern
correction; and you therefore urge me, as it were, to cross-plough the
land which has already been broken up, and, by means of the transverse
furrows, to root out the thorns which are beginning to spring again; it
is only right, you say, that rank and noxious growths should be cut down
as often as they appear. And so I issue my customary admonition by way
of preface both to you, for whom it happens that I am undertaking the
labour, and to those persons who desire to have copies such as I
describe. Pray see that what I have carefully revised be transcribed
with similar painstaking care. Every reader can observe for himself
where there is placed either a horizontal line or mark issuing from the
centre, that is, either an obelus (†) or an asterisk (\*). And wherever
he sees the former, he is to understand that between this mark and the
two stops (:) which I have introduced, the Septuagint translation
contains superfluous matter. But where he sees the asterisk (\*), an
addition to the Hebrew books is indicated, which also goes as far as the
two stops.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Books of Solomon.](2060208)
