[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sbc04)  [Next](sbc06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Survivals in Belief Among the Celts*, by George Henderson, \[1911\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

### II.

### THE WANDERINGS OF PSYCHE.

IT is a primitive idea that the soul can leave the body. As separable
soul <span id="fr_105"></span>[1](#fn_105) it may take manifold forms. A
Breton tale tells of a giant's life as being in an egg, in a dove, in a
hare, in a wolf, which lives in a coffer at the bottom of the sea. On
Gadhelic ground we meet with it in the young king of Easaidh Ruadh,
where the giant's soul is spoken of as, first, in the Bonnach stone,
then in the threshold. "There is a flagstone under the threshold. There
is a wether under the flag. There is a duck in the wether's belly, and
an egg in the belly of the duck, and it is in the egg that my soul is."
The king in his pursuit of his lady-love, taken captive by the giant,
had the assistance of a dog, a falcon, and an otter. The dog pulled out
the wether; the falcon caught the duck as it flew away; and the otter
recovered the egg from the ocean into which it had rolled. Thereafter he
had but to crush the egg and end the giant's life. Parallel to this is
the case of the sea-beast who captures the king's daughter in Campbell's
tale of 'The Sea-Maiden':

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

the soul of the beast is in an egg, in a trout, in a hoodie, in a hind,
which lives in an island in a loch.

Next, the external-soul may be regarded as present in an object
intimately associated with a man, as, for instance, the
[ancestral](errata.htm#0) sword.

The Highland oath upon the dirk is referred to in the legends of
Strathisla, <span id="fr_106"></span>[1](#fn_106) the Strathylefe <span
id="fr_107"></span>[2](#fn_107) of the charter of King William of
Scotland. The 'Sick-Bed of Cuchulainn,' an ancient Gadhelic tale, says
expressly that, of old, demons were wont to speak to men from out of
their weapons: the consequence was that, if men swore false oaths, their
swords became turned, or turned themselves against them. <span
id="fr_108"></span>[3](#fn_108) The Gadhelic asseveration <span
id="fr_109"></span>[4](#fn_109)—by thy father's hand and by thy
grandfather's hand and by thine own two hands supporting them—has
reference ultimately to the sword. The custom is parallel to that in
Aeschylus, who makes a hero swear by his sword. <span
id="fr_110"></span>[5](#fn_110) One recalls the familiar spirit which
Paracelsus kept imprisoned in the pummel of his sword as in the portrait
of Lumley Castle, and of which Butler in *Hudibras* speaks:

Bombastus kept a devil's bird  
Shut in the plummel of his sword,  
That taught him all the cunning pranks  
Of past and future mountebanks.

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

In the modern Scottish oath with uplifted hand both judge and witness
appeal to the Deity, as did the Greeks when they lifted up their hand at
sacrifice, as did Aaron when he lifted up his hand towards the people.
But the Gadhelic tradition leads back to an earlier world, and recurs
likewise in the word for oath, <span id="fr_111"></span>[1](#fn_111)
which was originally taken in presence of the relics. Keating (vol. iii.
53) tells of one whose head fell off at the fair of Taillte for having
sworn falsely by the hand of Ciaran. And Spenser for his time says: "The
Irish use now to sweare by their lord's hand, and to forsweare it they
hold it more criminal than to sweare by God." <span
id="fr_112"></span>[2](#fn_112)

The external-soul may meet us as a little spectre (*fuatharlan*) or
moth. This I have heard spoken of as a soul-form. And for the more
general belief let me adduce what Pennant states:

"The belief in spectres still exists; of which I had a remarkable proof
while I was in the county of Breadalbane. A poor visionary, who had been
working in his cabbage garden, imagined that he was raised suddenly into
the air, and conveyed over a wall into an adjacent corn-field: that he
found himself surrounded by a crowd of men and women, many of whom he
knew to have been dead some years, and who appeared to him skimming over
the tops of the unbended corn, and mingling together like bees going to
hive: that they spoke an unknown language and with a hollow sound: that

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

they very roughly pushed him to and fro; but on his uttering the name of
God, all vanished but a female sprite, who, seizing him by the shoulder,
obliged him to premise an assignation, at that very hour, that day
sevennight: that he then found that his hair was all tied in double
knots, and that he had almost lost the use of his speech: that he kept
his word with the spectre, whom he soon saw come floating through the
air towards him: that he spoke to her, but she told him at that time she
was in too much haste to attend to him, but bid him go away, and no harm
should befall him; and so the affair rested when I left the
country." <span id="fr_113"></span>[1](#fn_113)

An authentic instance given by a friend is that of M. A., a solicitor in
Edinburgh, about seventy years ago; he saw a moth flitting round the
table suddenly wing its flight to a neighbouring room. Where is it gone?
he called, and added that it was a soul-spirit haunting the place, and a
sign of death.

This, is but another case of the soul taking a form somewhat analogous
to that of the butterfly-soul. In Wales aged people used to say that
white moths were the souls of the dead who in this form were allowed to
take farewell of the earth. When any kind of moth fluttered around a
candle, people said somebody was dying, and the soul was passing
(Trevelyan, 307).

The soul is at times thought to assume the form of a butterfly,
*dearbadan Dé, tarmachan Dé* being the Highland names; they are in part
god-names. The Irish *féiliocán* the Manx *follican*, 'butterfly,' do
not show the god-soul in the name, but there is an

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Irish legend as to
a priest who came to disbelieve that men had souls. "Who ever saw a
soul?" he would say. "If you can show me one I will believe." All the
king's sons were on his side, but at last a mysterious child comes on
the scene and shows him that if we have life though we cannot see it, we
may also have a soul though it is invisible. He had met at last one who
believed, and having told the child his story he bade him watch, "for a
living thing will soar up from my body as I die, and you will then know
that my soul has ascended into the presence of God." This was to be a
sign that his previous teaching was a lie. His death is then described,
and when his agony seemed to cease, the child, who was watching, "saw a
beautiful living creature, with four snow-white wings, mount from the
dead man's body into the air, and go fluttering round his head. So he
ran to bring the scholars; and when they all knew it was the soul of
their master, they watched with wonder and awe. until it passed from
sight into the clouds. And this was the first butterfly that was ever
seen in Ireland; and now all men know that the butterflies are the souls
of the dead waiting for the moment when they may enter Purgatory, and so
pass through torture to purification and peace." But the schools of
Ireland were quite deserted after that time, for people said, what is
the use of going so far to learn when the wisest man in all Ireland did
not know if he had a soul till he was near losing it; and was only saved
at last through the simple belief of a little child? <span
id="fr_114"></span>[1](#fn_114)

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

In Brittany souls are frequently thought of as in butterfly form; but
there the soul, on leaving the body, is often held to take the form of a
fly, sometimes that of a raven. <span id="fr_115"></span>[1](#fn_115)
There is here, and in what is said of the moth, much that reminds of
what Ralston (*Songs of the Russian People*, 118) tells of the Slays:
"The butterfly seems to have been universally accepted by the Slavonians
as an emblem of the soul. In the Government of Yaroslav one of its names
is *dushichka*, a caressing diminutive of *dusha*, the soul. In that of
Kherson it is believed that if the usual alms are not distributed at a
funeral, the dead man's soul will reveal itself to his relatives in the
form of a moth flying about the flame of a candle. The day after
receiving such a warning visit, they call together the poor and
distribute food among them. In Bohemia tradition says that if the first
butterfly a man sees in the spring is a white one, he is destined to die
within the year. The Servians believe that the soul of a witch often
leaves her body while she is asleep and flies abroad in the shape of a
butterfly. If during its absence her body be turned round, so that her
feet are placed where her head was before, the soul-butterfly will not
be able to find her mouth, and so she will be shut out, from her body.
Thereupon the witch will die."

With this one might compare the belief in the Cotswolds in the Death's
Head Moth as an

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

harbinger of death, while in the Midlands the bat is regarded with
awe,—both possibly old British.

The idea of the soul as in bee-form is familiar; for this reason the
habit prevailed in some places of veiling the hive in crape, as if to
notify them of a death in the household. I remember the case of I. B.,
who, when his brother died, put the bees into mourning. <span
id="fr_116"></span>[1](#fn_116) The late Rev. Dr. Forsyth, minister of
Abernethy, recorded the following tradition in his earlier days when
minister at Dornoch,—a legend which illustrates also the ideas of the
soul-bridge and of the tree as taken to witness: "Once upon a time there
were two men travelling together on foot along Speyside. The elder one
of the two grew weary, and they sat down to rest under a tree, having
drunk of a little stream that ran below them. The wearied man soon fell
asleep, and his companion sat watching the larks singing above the
furze-bushes and the dimpling and purling of the burn. He heard his
fellow-traveller groaning and muttering in a restless sleep, and he soon
after saw creep out of his mouth an insect like a bee, only wanting its
wings. This bee crawled along the man's clothes and down on the sod till
it came to the brook, which it could neither fly over nor swim. It aye
turned back and back, and aye tried it again, till the waking man,
letting it creep on his sword, helped it across. It then went on two
hundred yards or more and disappeared in a small cairn. Presently the
sleeper came to himself and told his

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

friend that he had a strange dream: a 'wee wee crayterie no bigger nor a
bee' had told him of a hidden treasure, and had promised to show it to
him. It had seemed to him as if the creature came out of his mouth, had
crossed the burn by his comrade's help, and had gone out of sight in a
cairn. The watcher (who had had time to follow the bee to the cairn just
hid by a rising ground, and not more than two hundred yards off) laughed
at the story, but the elder man said that it must be true, and declared
his mind to seek the cairn and its contents. High words followed, and
the younger, drawing his sword, slew the man who had dreamt the dream of
gold. The victim with his last breath upbraided the other with
treachery, and took the tree, under which he had slept and now lay, to
witness that he had been foully murdered. The murderer dug out the cairn
and found the treasure, gold and silver and silver arm-pieces, and
became a gay rich man, but 'aye where he went men saw a tree abuve him
and behind him, aye walking where he walked, and staying where he
stayed. An’ for all his gear he neuer got a friend to bide wi’ him, nor
a lass to mary him. At last he was ouer weary of it all, and went to the
priest and telled him the way of it, and made a restitution to the dead
man's folk, and that was good to him whatever; but he didna live lang
syne.'" <span id="fr_117"></span>[1](#fn_117)

Hugh Miller, in *My Schools and Schoolmasters* (ch. vi.), records a
story told him by his cousin at Gruids, Sutherland. He communicated to
me, says Miller, a tradition illustrative of the Celtic theory of

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

dreaming, of which I have since often thought. "Two young men had been
spending the early portion of a warm summer day in exactly such a scene
as that in which he communicated the anecdote. There was an ancient ruin
beside them, separated, however, from the mossy bank on which they sat,
by a slender runnel, across which there lay, immediately over a
miniature cascade, a few withered grass stalks. Overcome by the heat of
the day, one of the young men fell asleep; his companion watched
drowsily beside him; when all at once the watcher was aroused to
attention by seeing a little indistinct form, scarce larger than a
humble-bee, issue from the mouth of the sleeping man, and, leaping upon
the moss, move downwards to the runnel, which it crossed along the
withered grass stalks, and then disappeared amid the interstices of the
ruin. Alarmed by what he saw, the watcher hastily shook his companion by
the shoulder, and awoke him; though, with all his haste, the little
cloud-like creature, still more rapid in its movements, issued from the
interstice into which it had gone, and, flying across the runnel,
instead of creeping along the grass stalks and over the sward, as
before, it re-entered the mouth of the sleeper, just as he was in the
act of awakening. 'What is the matter with you?' said the watcher,
greatly alarmed,—'What ails you?' 'Nothing ails me,' replied the other;
'but you have robbed me of a most delightful dream. I dreamed I was
walking through a fine rich country, and came at length to the shores of
a noble river; and, just where the clear water went thundering down a
precipice, there was a bridge all of silver, which I crossed; and then,
entering a noble palace, on the

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

opposite side, I saw great heaps of gold and jewels, and I was just
going to load myself with treasure, when you rudely awoke me, and I lost
all.' I know not what the asserters of the clairvoyant faculty may think
of the story; but I rather believe I have occasionally seen them make
use of anecdotes that did not rest on evidence a great deal more solid
than the Highland legend, and that illustrated not much more clearly the
philosophy of the phenomena with which they profess to deal."

This is exactly the story in *King Gunthram's Dream*; it portrays an
aspect of the external soul:

These Highland stories have a strange similarity to that in the Latin of
Paul the Deacon (720-790 A.D.). "It befell one day that Gunthram, King
of the Franks, went hunting in a forest, and, as often happens, his
companions were scattered, and he himself left alone with one loyal
attendant. He was overcome with sleep, and slept with his head resting
on his retainer's knees. As the king slept, the other in whose lap he
lay, saw a small creature like a lizard come out of his mouth and look
for some way to cross a slender stream of water that was running near.
He drew his sword from the sheath and laid it across the water, and the
little reptile went over it to the other side, and disappeared in a hole
in the hill. It returned not long after, and came back over the sword
and into the king's mouth. When Gunthram awoke he described a wonderful
vision. It seemed in his dream that he had crossed a river on an iron
bridge and entered a mountain where he found a great treasure of gold.
Then the squire told him what he had seen while the king was asleep.

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Search was made in
the place, and great heaps of ancient gold discovered there. Of this the
king had a paten made of great size and weight adorned with precious
stones which he intended to have sent to the Holy Sepulchre in
Jerusalem, but he was prevented, and placed it on the shrine of St.
Marcellus at Chalons, the capital of his kingdom, where it is to this
day."

Ere passing from this, I may add another curious story from the same
source as illustrating a parallel belief as well as transformation.
Cunincpert, King of the Lombards, was standing at the window of the
palace in Pavia, consulting with his marshal (*marhyaiz*, *i.e.* the
groom who bits and bridles the horse) how to remove his enemies Aldo and
Grauso. A large fly settled on the window sill before him; the king made
a blow at it with his dagger, but only cut off a leg. Meantime, Aldo and
Grauso were coming to the palace, ignorant of the king's designs against
them. When they were at the church of St. Romanus near the palace, there
met them a one-legged man, who said to them that if they went to
Cunincpert he would kill them. They were filled with terror at this, and
took refuge behind the altar in the church: this was told to the king.
Then C. blamed his marshal for publishing his intention. But the marshal
answered: "My lord king, thou knowest that since this was spoken of in
counsel I have not departed from thy presence; and how could I tell it
to any one?" Then the king sent to Aldo and Grauso asking why they had
fled to sanctuary. They answered: "Because it was declared to us that
our Lord the king would have put

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

us to death." Again the king sent to ask them who had given them these
tidings, affirming that unless they told they should never have grace.
Then they sent to the king to say that a lame man had met them, wanting
a foot, and with a wooden leg, who had warned them of destruction. Then
the king saw that the fly whose foot he had cut off was an evil spirit,
and had discovered his secret. He brought away Aldo and Grauso from
their refuge, and forgave them, and took them into his favour.

The nearest parallel is in a Breton story where the soul is seen as an
insect. Pezr Nicol was a man, and he died. His friend, Yvon Peuker, saw
a fly come out of the dying man's mouth, a shadowy fly,—with gauzy
wings, something like the ephemeral insects that hover over streams at
eventide. It dipped its feet in a basin of milk, flew round the room and
vanished. When it re-appeared it settled on the corpse, and there
remained, allowing itself to be shut in the coffin with the dead man.
Peuker saw it again when they reached the churchyard, and understood
then that it must be the soul of Pezr Nicol. The insect soon flew to a
marsh not far from the farm on which Pezr Nicol dwelt during his life.
Then it perched upon a thorn-bush.

"Poor little fly! what do you do here?" asked the good Peuker.

"You can see me, then?"

"I see you certainly since I am speaking to you. Tell me, are you not
the soul of the departed Pezr Nicol, who was my best friend on earth?"

"Yes. This is the place where God wills me to be for my expiation, and I
have to remain here five

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

hundred years. God must regard you with great favour, having permitted
you to recognise my soul under this form."

The soul then explains the dipping of the feet in milk as an act of
cleansing ere appearing before the Judge, and explains his flitting
about as a bidding farewell to the farm-implements and animals, and his
being shut in the coffin as an obligation to remain with the body until
God gave sentence. <span id="fr_118"></span>[1](#fn_118)

The belief in the bird-soul was well known in the Highlands. To
illustrate: A farmer was coming home from Inverness to Buntait when at a
weird part of the way his mare got uncontrollable and ran up with him to
where was a waterfall (*eas*). Whereupon he swooned and fell off. On
recovering he found his way home and was amazed at finding his mare tied
in the stable, not knowing how it happened, for nobody confessed to
having tied her. Soon after he hurt himself in moving a heavy box of
oats at the farm of Shewglie; a plough or two broke thereafter at the
spring-work, always a bad omen. Getting more unwell, he said to his wife
the night before his death: "What a beautiful bird I heard singing by my
bedside to-night." "I well believe it," she replied. To which he
answered: "It was my ghost; I cannot live long." He it was who composed
the song containing the verse:

Chan è do ghug ūg tha air m’aire  
ach m’uireasbhuidh mór tha mi ’gearain  
’S mu’n tig thu-sa rithist, a bhròineag  
bidh mise an ciste-bhòrd nan tarrung.

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

*i.e.* '‘Tis not thy "guck-ook" (or sad cry) that I heed; ’tis my deep
need that is my plaint; ere thou comest again, O sad one! I shall be
a-nailed in the coffin.'

In St. Kilda the cuckoo is a bird of ill omen (cf. Glasgow Herald, June
10, 1910). A common bye-name for it over the Highlands is *bradag*,
'rascal,' from its neglect of its young: to express contempt or ill-luck
there is the phrase: 'chac a chuthag air' = 'the cuckoo "dropped" on
him.' It is a bird of augury: 'chuala mi chuthag gun bhiadh am bhroinn
. . . s dh’aithnich mi féin nach rachadh a bhliadhna leam' = 'I heard
the cuckoo while fasting (ere I took breakfast *i.e.*) . . . and I knew
that the year would not go well with me.' It is unlucky in the Highlands
to hear the first cuckoo of the season ere one has broken one's fast. In
Mid-Wales there seems to be a trace of a belief that the cuckoo was once
a beautiful lady who wept over her brother's death until she was changed
into a bird (Trevelyan, 109). With this last falls to be compared the
Slavic belief that the cuckoo is a transformed girl who mourned too much
for her lost lover.

It is curious that in Anglo-Saxon lyrics of the eighth century the
cuckoo is a bird of sorrow, filling the heart with care—which may be due
to Celtic influence, as it is an idea alien to Germanic literature,
though I cannot prove this by citing old references as yet. The Breton
fishers near St. Malo not so long ago spoke of it as 'parent,' and
thought of it as a good augury for fishing: at St. Jacut the first boat
that hears the cuckoo casts out

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

a ray-fish as offering: the sailors of St. Cast, if they hear it sing
when embarking, light a pipe in its honour. In Friesland, Lithuania, and
south-east of the Urals there are dances in honour of the cuckoo, which
have been regarded as remnants of a totem-dance in Europe. <span
id="fr_119"></span>[1](#fn_119) The Highland song by Dr. Maclachlan of
Rahoy speaks of the cuckoo as dispelling sorrow—*’s to thogadh bròn om
chridhe*, *i.e.* '’tis thou wouldst raise grief from mine heart'—but
this is quite modern, and the whole song reproduces loosely the feeling
of a poem in English which speaks of the bird thus:

Thou hast no sorrow in thy song  
Nor winter in thy year!

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> In some of the
Celtic areas of old the feeling would have been the reverse.

I take the following from Miss Dempster of Skibo's collection in a
document among the Campbell of Islay Manuscripts in the Advocates’
Library: "Some days before the death of Dr. Bethune, sometime minister
of the parish of Dornoch (1816), a large cormorant was observed sitting
on the steeple of the parish church—the whole town took this as a sign
that the incumbent was not long for this world. One of the same birds
was seen flying and lighting on parts of the building in 185? the vulgar
predicted from this a similar result, and the event justified the
saying, for the then clergyman sickened and died after a short illness.

A common proverb associates the magpie with death, but if two come to a
house it portends a

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

wedding. <span id="fr_120"></span>[1](#fn_120) The raven is equally a
bird of omen, raven-knowledge <span id="fr_121"></span>[2](#fn_121) or
wisdom being proverbial; I find it referred to in a poem in the
'Massacre of the Rosses,' and quite recently in a poem in memory of
Louisa MacDougall of MacDougall by the clan bard to whom the raven is
symbolic of the prowess and valour of the descendants of Conn and
Somerled:

Cumha Cholla is Chuinn  
’S cumha Shomhairle mhōir chruinn  
Bu tric fitheach air luing ’s air bord.

The Isle of Man has similar beliefs. As to the magpie they say:

One for sorrow, two for death,  
Three for a wedding and four for a birth.

Ravens, too, are uncanny, because they were originally Odin's
messengers, suggests Mr. Moore, but perhaps the parallel Norse belief is
only a coincidence.

In Wales the eagle was of old a bird of divination. "The descendants of
a person who had eaten eagles’ flesh to the ninth generation possessed
the gift of second sight." The eagles of Snowdon were regarded as
oracles; chained eagles were supposed to guard the resting-place of King
Arthur. When high winds prevailed the saying was, "the eagles are
breeding whirlwinds on Snowdon" (Trevelyan, 81-82). One recalls the
Roman service of the *consecratio* (Herodian, iv. 2), where the eagle
that

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

rose from the pyre symbolised the soul of the Emperor, the eagle-god.
The eagle of the legions was a fetich to the common soldier, who
anointed it and prepared a *sacellum* for it in the camp (Pliny, *Hist.
Nat*. xiii. 23). The fire-stealer Prometheus is an eagle-god; from a
divine eagle some royal families of old fabled their descent (*v*.
Reinach, *Cultes, Mythes et Religions*, iii. p. 78). The witches
(*doiteagan*) of Mull in legend are said to assume raven form, and in
this guise raise a tempest and croak maledictions on the Lochlin
princess associated in Mull story with the disaster <span
id="fr_122"></span>[1](#fn_122) to a vessel from Spain.

The soul in swan form is best evidenced by the *Fate of the Children of
Lir*, a tragic story of great pathos wherein human beings are
transformed into swans at the bidding of a cruel stepmother. It is
easily accessible in Joyce's *Old Gaelic Romances*. The metamorphoses of
the three daughters of Lir, the sea-god, is but a return to their
primitive estate. In its basic idea one may compare Zeus and his wooing
of Leda, a legend which goes back to an early age when some Greek tribe
had for goddess a swan which they thought of as of near kin to mortals.
With the rise of thought such gods in animal form give place to gods in
human form.

In St. Kilda (Gaelic, 'Hirt, Hiort') this phase of belief appears as
'the ghost-bird.' The last British specimen of the Great Auk was
captured there on Stac-an-Armuinn between 1830 and 1835. "It was
described as being about the size of a year-old lamb,

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

with a head like a razor-bill, and short wings, so that it could not
fly. The men caught the bird, tied a rope to its leg, and kept it for
two or three days. The extraordinary appearance of the bird impressed
the men so much that they thought it was a ghost, and looked upon it as
the cause of the bad weather they were experiencing. They, therefore,
killed the poor bird, and threw it at the back of the house, covering it
with stones. It has ever since gone by the name of the
'ghost-bird.'" <span id="fr_123"></span>[1](#fn_123)

The sapient islanders of the Hebrides would thus seem to have been at
the same level of belief with those Greeks who believed that the soul
left the body in the form of a bird. <span
id="fr_124"></span>[2](#fn_124)

Here, I think, one should place Cuchulainn's bird-of-valour, which
symbolises not merely the hero's fury, but the transmission of the
ancestral god-soul, symbolised among other peoples by the eagle-tipped
sceptre, handed down from king to king, as well as by the eagle
portrayed on standards, which goes back on the belief that the soul of a
monarch once upon a time appeared as an eagle, and in this form watched
over the fortunes of empire. The standard transmits the virtue of the
ancestral hero; the soul of the slain king is magically

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

transmitted to his successor. It springs from Manism, or the worship of
manes or spirits, comprehensive of all forms of totemism to which there
are early references in Gadhelic saga. Thus the mother of Conaire Mōr
learns that her son must not kill birds. Once he saw great
white-speckled birds of unusual size and beauty coming towards him. He
pursues them until his horses were tired. The birds would go a
spear-cast before him, and would not go any further. He pursued them out
to sea and overcame them. The birds quit their bird-skins and turn upon
him with spears and swords. One of them protects him and says: "I am
Némglan, king of thy father's birds, and thou hast been forbidden to
cast at birds, for here there is no one that should not be dear to thee
because of his father and mother." <span id="fr_125"></span>[1](#fn_125)
The violation of this Tabu led to Conaire's death. In the Cuchulainn
saga there is the case of Dechtere and her attendant troop of
bird-maidens.

In the traditions of the Cymry birds appear as instruments of divination
to diagnose royal blood. The bird-soul is here the ancestral-soul.
According to Giraldus Cambrensis it happened that in the time of Henry
I. Gruffydd ap Rhys ap Tudor, who, although he only held of the king one
commote, namely, a fourth part of the cantref of Caio, yet was reputed
as lord in Deheubarth, was returning from court by way of Llangorse
Lake, in Brecknockshire, with Milo, Earl of Hereford, and Lord of
Brecknock, and Payn Fitz John, who then held Ewyas, two of the king's
secretaries and privy councillors. It was winter, and the lake was
covered

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

with water-fowl of various kinds. Seeing them, Milo, partly in joke,
said to Gruffydd: "It is an old saying in Wales that if the natural
prince of Wales, coming to this lake, command the birds upon it to sing,
they will all immediately sing." Gruffydd replied: "Do you, therefore,
who now bear sway in this country, command them first." Both Milo and
Payn having made the attempt in vain, Gruffydd dismounted from his
horse, fell on his knees with his face to the east, and after devout
prayers to God, stood up, and making the sign of the Cross on his
forehead and face, cried aloud: "Almighty and all-knowing God, Lord
Jesus Christ, show forth here to-day thy power! If thou hast made me
lineally to descend from the natural princes of Wales I command these
birds in thy name to declare it." Forthwith all the birds, according to
their kind, beating the air with outstretched wings, began altogether to
sing and proclaim it. No wonder that all who were present were amazed
and confounded, and that Milo and Payn reported it to the king, who is
said to have taken it philosophically enough. "By the death of Christ"
(his customary oath), he replied, "it is not so much to be wondered at.
For although by our great power we may impose injustice and violence
upon these people, yet they are nevertheless known to have the
hereditary right to the country." <span id="fr_126"></span>[1](#fn_126)

In Scotland there was a saying that the robin "had a drop of God's blood
in its veins, and that therefore to kill or hurt it was a sin, and that
some evil would befall any one who did so; and, conversely, any kindness
done to poor robin would be

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

repaid in some fashion. Boys did not dare to harry a robin's nest." The
yellow-hammer and the swallow were said, each, "to have a drop of the
Devil's blood in its veins; so the yellow-hammer was 'remorselessly
harried,' and the swallow 'was feared and therefore let alone.'" <span
id="fr_127"></span>[1](#fn_127) Here is an illustration of the blood of
the gods communicated to earthly organisms.

One may infer from many references that the Druids practised augury from
the cries of birds. In an ancient poem ascribed to St. Columba, he says,
alluding to the omens of the Druids:

I reverence not the voices of birds,  
Nor sneezing, nor any charm in the wide world.  
My Druid is Christ the Son of God.

A Latin Life of St. Moling has it that the wren is a bird of augury:
*magus avium, eo quod aliquibus praebet augurium*; the *Pseudo-Cormac
Glossary* explains it as *drui-en*, a druid bird. In Gaelic *dreathan*
(donn) is used for 'wren'; Stokes <span id="fr_128"></span>[2](#fn_128)
gives *dreoan*, from \**dreo* = W. *dryw*, 'wren; also druid,
soothsayer,' from proto-Celtic \**drevo*, cognate with German *treu*, E.
*true*. It seems to me that this derivation has much to support it in
the folk-lore concerning it as a bird of soothsaying; the druid of
birds.

O’Curry says the Druids divined from the chirping of tame wrens.

The wren has a drop of God's blood, in the folk-belief of some Highland
districts. He is king of birds, a dignity attained to according to West

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Highland tradition
by his having secreted himself above the eagle that soared high above
all other birds, whereupon the wren flew a little upwards and cried:
"Birds, behold your king." He was accordingly elected king in the
assembly of birds. Yet the Manx custom of 'hunting the wren' shows that
once a year it was ceremoniously slain, and its feathers distributed so
as to communicate divine virtue. Without a dead wren to protect them the
Manx fishermen would not once upon a time go to sea. It was a 'fairy' of
uncommon beauty, says Bullock in his *History of the Isle of Man*, that
used to unduly entice the men to sea, where they perished, and on being
hunted down by a knight-errant she was only able to escape by assuming
the form of a wren. A spell brought it to pass that every New Year the
wicked 'fairy' had to take wren-form, and ultimately perish by a human
hand. The feathers of the killed wren were preserved with religious care
as an effectual preservation from shipwreck for one year; every person
met with had to purchase a feather and to wear it in their hats for the
day. Formerly the naked body was interred with great solemnity in a
secluded corner of the churchyard, and the evening concluded with all
manner of sports.

Possibly it was but a coincidence that the stoning of the wren took
place on St. Stephen's Day, for Waldron, speaking of an earlier time,
says "On the 24th of December, towards evening, all the servants in
general have a holiday; they go not to bed all night, but ramble about
till the bells ring in all the churches, which is at 12 o'clock; prayer
being over,

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

they go to hunt the wren, and after having found one of these poor
birds, they kill her and lay her on a bier with the utmost solemnity,
bringing her to the parish church, and burying her with a whimsical kind
of solemnity, singing dirges over her in the Manx language, which they
call her knell, after which Xmas begins." <span
id="fr_129"></span>[1](#fn_129) The divinity of the wren as protecting
spirit is here indicated; the slaughter is a rite of sacrifice to attain
communion with the divine, here held to be a malific power.

In West Sutherland I ascertained that some of the fishermen formerly
held it was unlucky to kill a gull, for gulls were the souls of the
deceased. Perhaps the idea of the isle or paradise of birds, as in the
legend of St. Brendan, was founded on the belief of the soul in
bird-form. Nothing has taken firmer hold of the Gadhelic mind than the
*Fate of the Children of Lir*, who were turned into swans at the
instance of their cruel stepmother, but they retained their souls, as is
witnessed by their having ascribed to them the knowledge of their own
Gadhelic music and their Gadhelic speech. Further, in the Highlands it
used to be said that the earth placed over spots where a murder had been
committed was wont to be disturbed by birds at night, which recalls to
one the old Arab belief that the blood of a murdered man turned into an
accusing bird till vengeance was taken for the dead. An Irish tradition
in Keating <span id="fr_130"></span>[2](#fn_130) tells of a queen and
her handmaid who were turned into two herons at the word of Columcille.
Another

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

tells of Aoife in the form of a crane that belonged to the sea-god,
Manannán. <span id="fr_131"></span>[1](#fn_131)

Birds are credited with a speech of their own. Such was the lapwing's
cry: *Mhurchaidh bhig! na creach mo nid* (*sic*), *i.e.* 'little
Murdoch, harry not my nest.' All such ascriptions of speech to birds are
attempts to give renderings in human language of the cries of the
various birds. Though many and varied they need not here detain us.

For parallels where this belief has assumed a developed form one may
point to the Dove Cult of primitive Greece, where sacred doves are
associated with a sepulchral cult. It was the favourite shape in which
the spirit of the departed was imagined to haunt its last resting-place.
An early Indian code requires that upon the occasion of a sacrifice a
fragment of the offering to the departed spirits should also be thrown
to the birds, "because we are taught that our fathers glide along,
taking the form of birds." <span id="fr_132"></span>[2](#fn_132)

Here comes the transition to the Language of Animals.

(*a*) The last words said by the cow were: *Na buail do bhas orm* = 'do
not smite me with your palm.' It was not right that the blessed
creature, the cow, should be struck by 'the flesh of the sinner.' If one
had only a stick three inches long he should use it in driving the cow
instead of striking her with his hand. Can this be a survival of a
religious precept? Cf. the sacred cow of the Hindoos.

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

(*b*) The last words spoken by the horse were:

Na greas le bruthach mi  
Na buail an aghaidh leothaid mi  
Nuair a gheibh thu air an réidhleach mi na caomhain mi  
Biadhaidh gu math mi nuair a théid mi dhachaidh.

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> i. e. 'Hurry me
not down a brae, nor force (lit. strike) me up an incline; on the level
do not spare me; feed me well on going home!'

(*c*) When sheep had language, as all animals once had, it is said that
the last thing spoken by a sheep was a request that its bones should
never be burned. Since that time it is not considered right to throw a
bone of a sheep into the fire, and any person doing so is checked. One
may infer that in pre-Christian rites the sheep was burnt in sacrifice.
Cf. the sacrifices to Crom Cruach.

Cattle are so deeply loved that in the Highlands certain names run in
the breed from generation to generation; cattle-names may be very old,
as also cattle calls, *e.g*. *pruch*, a call to cows only, with meaning
'come here'; to calves the call is, *pruicidh*; also *pru-dhé*,
*pru-dhé*, *pru-dhé*.

Numerous traces of animal worship existed among the Gauls. The tribal
names Taurisci, Brannovices, Eburones point respectively to a veneration
of the Bull, the Raven, the Boar, among peoples who probably once traced
their descent from them. Place-names like Tarvisium, 'Bulltown (?)';
Lugudunum, 'Raven-Fort'; personal names like Deiotarus, 'the divine bull
'; Artogenos, 'the descendant of the bear,' point in the same direction.
The boar was also sacred, as may be inferred from emblems on

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

coins. The mare-goddess Epona had its parallel in the male horse-god
Rudiobus, of which an image in bronze, showing no rider, has been found
near Orleans, along with figures of boars and of a stag. <span
id="fr_133"></span>[1](#fn_133)

So closely was the association between man and cattle felt in former
times that we come across cases of 'animal-fasting,' like as we meet
with the equally archaic though different idea of 'fasting on a person'
in the Brehon Laws. The fasting of cattle as well as of human beings is
spoken of in Adamnan's *Second Vision*, translated by Stokes from the
*Lebar Breac*. He notes: "That calves were sometimes made to fast in
Ireland after a chieftain's death appears from a poem in the *Cogadh
Gaedel re Gallaibh* (ed. Todd, p. 100), two lines of which mean: 'Though
calves are not suffered to go to the cows in lamentation for noble
Mahon.' The practice may possibly, Dr. Todd suggests, have been
suggested by Jonah iii. 7. But it rather seems a result of the belief in
the souls of animals, and of the tendency to treat them as human, which
are found in every race at a certain stage of its culture." <span
id="fr_134"></span>[2](#fn_134) In Ireland the local saints were
believed to guard the lives of certain kinds of animals. St. Colman's
teal could neither be killed nor injured; St. Brendan provided an asylum
for stags, wild boars and hares; St. Beanus protected his cranes and the
grouse which bred upon the Ulster mountains. <span
id="fr_135"></span>[3](#fn_135)

The local saints often took the place of the old gods. Caesar's
statement <span id="fr_136"></span>[4](#fn_136) shows us that to the
ancient Britons hare, goose and domestic fowl were

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

taboo. Giraldus gives a story of the loathing shown by the Irish
chieftains on being offered a dish of roasted crane. <span
id="fr_137"></span>[1](#fn_137) The hare often figures in folk-belief.
Thus Boudicca, the queen-heroine of the ancient Britons, loosed a hare
from her robe, observed its movements as a kind of omen, and when it
turned propitiously the whole multitude rejoiced and shouted. <span
id="fr_138"></span>[2](#fn_138) In Western Brittany not many years ago
the peasantry could hardly endure its name; <span
id="fr_139"></span>[3](#fn_139) such is the case in parts of Russia. The
oldest Welsh laws allude to the magical character of the hare, which was
thought to change its sex every month or year, and to be the companion
of the witches who were believed to assume its shape. In one part of
Wales the hares are called St. Monacella's lambs, and it is said that up
to very recent times no one in the district would kill one. "When a hare
was pursued by dogs it was believed that if any one cried 'God and St.
Monacella be with thee!' it was sure to escape." <span
id="fr_140"></span>[4](#fn_140)

To be fed on the hares of Naas was one of the prerogatives of the kings
of Tara, <span id="fr_141"></span>[5](#fn_141) which means that to
others it was forbidden. Shape-shifting or transformation into hare-form
may fitly lead to the consideration of the theriomorphic soul or the
soul in animal form.

(*a*) *Transformation into hare-form*.—This deeply-rooted belief has
been current for ages, and is not yet extinct. Wherever witchcraft
obtains any hold

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

this belief is met with. I have personally heard of and known many women
who were regarded as having the power of shifting themselves into
hare-shape. It was most uncanny to see a hare pacing a thatched cottage
in the gloaming, still more to see several of them capering at
cross-roads. The belief is exemplified in many folk-tales, as in 'The
Leeching of O’Céin's Leg,' where the *gearraidh*, 'hare,' is spoken of,
the nearest Scottish form to the Irish *geirrfhiadh*, 'short-deer.' As a
rule *geārr* is used for 'hare,' but *maigheach* also occurs from
*magh*, 'plain,' *i.e.* 'campestris.' There are numerous stories in the
Highlands of hares having been shot at with a gun having a 'silver
six-pence,' the creature shot being reputed to be some local witch
afterwards found suffering of secret wounds. The transformation of
witches into hare-form is the chief Highland characteristic, which
tallies with the Isle of Man account. <span
id="fr_142"></span>[1](#fn_142) It enters into Welsh folk-lore, but it
is rather the idea of augury that is emphasised. <span
id="fr_143"></span>[2](#fn_143) In Brittany at Lannion <span
id="fr_144"></span>[3](#fn_144) souls take the form of hares. Everywhere
in Celtdom it is a creature of omen for expectant mothers who have their
old rites to avert hare-lip. Its lore dates from British times, and is
met with widely in England; a writer in the *Oxford Times* (2nd January,
1909) refers to the Phantom Hare thus: "In the Cotswold country the
rustics declare that every seventh child of a seventh child possesses
'second sight,' and that the 'wraith,' or, as they call it, the 'bogy,'
of a person about to die is always visible to such persons. An old woman
told

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

me here that he who should deceive a maid, or lead her astray, would be
ever afterwards haunted by her 'bogy' in the shape of a hare. This, she
declared, was invisible to all except the haunted one, and in the end
the hare, by some means or other, caused the deceiver to die."

A memorandum made by Bishop White-Kennett about the hare, which we may
regard as a token from what Caesar says regarding the hare, the cock and
the goose, is here in point: "When one keepes a hare alive and feedeth
him till he have occasion to eat him, if he telles before he kills him
that he will do so, the hare will thereupon be found dead, having killed
himself." Mr. Gomme points out that this respect is carried further at
Biddenham, where, on the 22nd September, a little procession of
villagers carried a white rabbit (a substitute for hare) decorated with
scarlet ribbons through the village, singing a hymn in honour of St.
Agatha. All the young unmarried women who chanced to meet the procession
extended the first two fingers of the left hand pointing towards the
rabbit, at the same time repeating the following doggerel:

Gustin, Gustin, lacks a bier,  
Maidens, maidens, bury him here.

This ancient custom had for its object the reverential burying of a
rabbit or hare.

Gregorson Campbell in his *Witchcraft and Second-Sight in the Highlands
and Isles of Scotland*, gives tales wherein witches are credited with
the power of appearing in the guise of sheep, hares, cats, rats, gulls,
cormorants, whales. By far the most common belief is that of witches in
hare-form; of this class.

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

of story the saying holds: though not to be believed, it may be told
(ged nach gabh e creidsinn, gabhaidh e innseadh). In this category is to
be placed the tale of the Sutherland worthy as recently re-told in the
*Northern Chronicle*, from the old man's experience by Mr. D. M. Rose.
The narrative is characteristic of its class. Mr. Rose says:

"Donald told me the story himself, and swore it was 'true as gospel.' Of
course I was bound to believe him, and did not hurt the poor man's
feelings by telling him that such yarns were common in half a dozen
northern counties. In the days of his youth Donald had been sent to cut
peaty away in hills at a spot far distant from any human habitation.
About mid-day Donald sat down on the peat-bank to rest, but was startled
at hearing weird sounds in his neighbourhood. He sprang to his feet and
looked eagerly in every direction without discovering anything to
account for the strange noise. He was about to resume his seat, when
presently there came into view, over a small hillock, a monster hare
with two black hounds in pursuit. As the beast was making straight for
the spot where he stood, Donald grasped his 'spadarel,' and raising it
aloft he brought it down on poor puss's back, severing her into two as
she passed. Just fancy the horror of Donald when he gazed at the severed
fragments. One part of puss was gradually transforming itself into the
face and features of a neighbour's wife who had an uncanny reputation,
while the other portion remained 'a hare.' Donald had such a 'sair fleg'
that he bolted. After running a few paces he thought it prudent to
recover his

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 'spadarel,' and
was exceedingly astonished to find not the least trace of the dead bit
of woman, hare or hounds! Donald was so thoroughly alarmed that he
rushed homewards. His wife, who was absent, came hurrying in with the
startling news that the neighbour's wife had been killed about the
middle of the day, and that she had been at the house to see the body
laid out. Donald at once sprang to his feet, although he felt as 'waik
as a child,' a cold shiver ran down his back although there were 'big
drops of swate' falling from his brow. At last Donald managed to ask his
wife if the 'woman was in bittocks,' *i.e.* in pieces. 'What do you
mean,' said his wife, 'the poor craitur went to the byre to milk the
coos, and as she passed one of the shelties draive his two hind heels
into the poor woman's side, and she didna live an hoor after that.'
'Thank the Lord,' says Donald, with a fervent sigh of relief, but he
kept the story of his own 'experiences in memory for many a year'—not
even revealing his tale to the wife of his bosom. Of course he had seen
the soul of the witch trying to escape from the black hounds of Hades!"

A totem animal is a characteristic omen. Boudicca, the Queen of the
Iceni, is said to have taken a hare from out her bosom, and to have
drawn an augury therefrom as to the course of her attack upon the Roman
army. In Northamptonshire if a hare run along a street it portends fire
to some house near by. In 1648 Sir Thomas Browne says it was deemed
unlucky when a hare crossed one's path: there were few over three-score
that were not perplexed by it. In parts of Scotland the unluck due to
meeting a

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

hare did not extend after the next meal was taken. In north-east
Scotland the name of the hare must not be pronounced at sea. One cannot
but agree with Mr. Gomme's conclusion that a classification of the
beliefs and customs connected with the hare takes us to every phase of
totemistic belief, and that it is impossible to reject such a mass of
cumulative evidence. <span id="fr_145"></span>[1](#fn_145)

Shape-shifting (*dol ann an riochd*) does not as such raise the question
of re-incarnation of the soul. Soul and body are not nicely
differentiated at that stage. The good folks I have known who were held
to assume the form of hares at will were thought of as doing so as
complete natures: on regaining human-form, if wounded in their
hare-form, they had the self-same wounds on the corresponding part of
the body. Parallel is the Welsh case of Llew Llawgyffes who, on being
wounded, assumed eagle-form, and was afterwards found in bird-form with
the flesh putrefying from his wound. The eagle-form is not quite a case
of the bird-soul: it belongs to the category of shape-shifting, and to a
stage of thought which looks at body and soul as one. His wound is the
cause of his death, just as the wounds got by certain hares are held to
be the cause of a certain witch's death.

(*b*) *Transformation into cat-form*.—An Hebridean tale tells how there
was once a wedding; and the folks went to it all but one young man. He
was asked to the wedding too, but somehow he didn't go, but his mother
went. He stretched himself in bed and lay awake. Three cats came in by a

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

window. When they got in, seeing nobody in they changed into three
girls. The young man saw them and knew them. They drank up his mother's
milk. He looked at them and they noticed him looking. They besought him
not to tell, and threatened that if he ever told it would be all the
worse for him. They then left. His mother came back from the wedding and
he at once told her what he saw. Some time after his mother and their
mother had a quarrel, and his mother cast up to the other the shapes her
daughters had taken. Not long after this when the young man was on an
errand he was late of returning. A search was made for him, and he was
found dead on the way.

With this compare the strange big cats in the *Fled Bricrend*, <span
id="fr_146"></span>[1](#fn_146) an early Irish tale of the Cuchulainn
saga. One night as their portion was assigned the heroes, three cats
from the cave of Cruachan were let loose to attack them, *i.e.* three
beasts of magic. Conall and Loigaire made for the rafters, having left
their food with the beasts. In that wise they slept till the morrow.
Cuchulainn fled not from his place from the beast which attacked him.
But when it stretched its neck out for eating, Cuchulainn gave a blow
with his sword on the beast's head, but the blade glided off as ’twere
from stone. Then the cat set itself down. In the circumstances
Cuchulainn neither ate nor slept. As soon as it was early morning the
cats were gone.

Clearly these cats are representative of another-world power: and are
thought of as one of the disguises under which the other-world magician

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

tests the hero, one of a series of tests through which Curoi, such is
the magician's name, awards the palm for bravery to Cuchulainn.

Early Irish is *catt*, Welsh *cath*, Gaulish, *cattos*: the tribal name
in Clan *Chattan* (the Mackintoshes, with Cattanachs, Shaws, Davidsons,
and other septs) and in *Cataibh*, *Cataobh*, 'Sutherland'; *Diuc
Chatt*, Duke of Sutherland; the root survives in *Caith*ness (*Cait*ness
being heard with old people), all pointing to a belief in animal
kinship, as witnessed to by the idea of transformation.

(*c*) *Transformation of a human being into mare-form*,—"the horse being
a blessed animal since our Saviour was born in a manger." Dornoch is
noted in the annals of witchcraft in Scotland as the place where the
last execution for that supposed crime took place. Witchcraft ceased to
be a capital offence by Act of Parliament in 1736. The execution at
Dornoch occurred in 1722. The victim was a woman, who, according to
popular belief, *turned her daughter into a pony* by her magical arts
and got the devil to shoe it. This belief was more than an unconscious
reminiscence of the horse's shoe in the burgh crest. The traditional
site of the execution is the part of Dornoch known as Littleton, where,
in one of the gardens, a stone with 1722 deeply incised upon it marks
the spot.

For illustration I translate a modern narrative from Tiree which
exemplifies fairly recent belief:

"Once upon a time there were two young lads who had engaged to serve in
the house of a great man. They had the same food and the same work, yet,
in spite of all, one of them was strong, seemly and

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

stout, while the other was daily declining,—and, what was exceeding
strange, every morning he was very tired as if he were not getting half
enough of food. This was causing great astonishment to every one, and
especially to the lads themselves. They knew not what it meant nor what
they should do. Thereupon the lad who was seemly and stout said: 'When
we go to bed to-night you will take my place by the wall and I will go
on the side where you are lying.' Thus they did. They went to bed, and
he who was by the wall slept at once, but though the other went to bed
he slept not; he kept awake to see what should happen. While he thus
reflected, who should enter but his mistress with a horse-bridle in her
hand. As soon as she came in she shook the bridle to his face, which she
no sooner did than he sprang into horse-form (became a horse). She then
took him out and put a saddle on him, and sprang on his back and rode
off. At no length of time they reached a big house, and she sprang to
the ground and opened a stable-door where were many horses besides. She
tied him there and went off. Though he was in horse-form he had human
consciousness, inasmuch as he was awake at the time she shook the bridle
at him. Accordingly, when she went away he began to try whether he could
take the bridle off with his fore-feet. At last he succeeded, which he
no sooner did than he was a man as formerly. Then he caught the bridle
and bethought him of contesting with his mistress when ever she
returned.

"Shortly thereafter she came with many more women like unto her. When he
saw his mistress

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

he shook the bridle at her, as she had done to him, which he no sooner
did than she all at once became a big beautiful mare. Then he took her
out and saddled her, but instead of going home, what did he do but go to
a smithy and roused the smith. He requested the smith to put four shoes
on her. The smith replied that he would not at all do so, it was too
late to do such a work. The lad said that he would give him anything,
even a 'white' note (a pound sterling), provided he could have her shod.
On hearing this the smith came out and kindled the fire, and in a short
time the house-wife was shod. Then he made for home. On arriving he took
the bridle off her and she was a woman as formerly. Thereupon he went to
sleep. On the morrow great sorrow fell on the household, for the
mistress was ill. And, what made everybody wonder, no one was allowed
into her chamber to see her. As things were in such a case the lad came
where his master was and requested to be permitted to see her. The
master said no, that nobody was allowed to enter. The lad said that he
must needs go. What with everything he did the lad got in where she was.
As soon as she saw him she scowled at him. He enquired how she was. She
was not willing to answer, but he said to her: 'Stretch out your *plut*
(paw, hand),' which she would not do. He seized hold of her, pulled out
her hand, and what was it but that she had a horse-shoe thereon, and on
the other hand as well, likewise a horse-shoe on each foot. He looked at
her and said: 'Well you know what this means and the dreadful work you
were at. Now give me your troth that I shall never either see or

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

hear of your being at this disgraceful work, and I will take off the
shoes.' She pledged to him her word, and he removed the shoes, and all
was well thereafter. In a short time the lean lanky fellow grew stout
and strong, and everybody about the place had peace. Such, for you, is
the tale of the famous witches."

The original, which I owe to the kindness of a Tiree man, the Rev. J.
MacCallum, Manse of Assynt, is as follows:

“Bha aon uair ann dà ghille òg a bha air fasdadh ann an tigh duine
mhóir. Bha iad air an aon bhiadh agus air an aon obair, ach an deidh
gach nì bha fear dhiubh gu làidir, coltach, reamhar, agus bha fear eile
dol air ais gach latha, agus nì bha glé iongantach bha e anabharrach
sgìth a h-uile maduinn mar nach biodh e faighinn leth gu leòr do chadal.
Bha so a’ cur mòran iongantais air gach h-aon agus gu sònruichte orra
féin. Cha robh fios aca dé bu chiall do no dé a dheanadh iad. An sin
thubhairt esan a bha gu coltach, reamhar: '’Nuair a théid sinn a luighe
nochd théid thu-sa ann am àite-sa ris a bhalla agus théid mi-se air an
taobh air a bheil thu-sa.' Rinn iad mar sin. Chaidh iad do’n leabaidh
agus chaidil e-san a chaidh ris a’ bhalla anns a mhionaid ach ged a
chaidh a feur eile luighe cha do chaidil e. Dh’fhan e ’na dhùsgadh fiach
dé thachradh. ’Nuair a bha e a’ smuaintinn air na nithean so cò thàinig
a steach ach a bhan-mhaighstir agus srian eich aice ’na làimh. Cho luath
’sa thainig i ’steach chrath i an t-srian m’a choinneamh agus cha bu
luatha rinn i so na leum e-san ’na each. An sin thug i mach e agus chuir
i diollaid air a dhruim. An sin leum i ga mharcachd

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

agus dh’fhalbh i leis. Ann an ceann úine nach robh fada ràinig iad tigh
mór agus thàinig i-se air làr agus dh’fhosgail i dorus stàbuill far an
robh móran each eile. Cheangail i ann an sin e agus dh’fhalbh i. Ged a
bha e-san ’na each bha fathast mothachadh duine aige a chionn gun robh e
’na dhùsgadh an uair a chrath i an t-srian ris. Mar sin ’nuair a
dh’fhalbh i-se thòisich e-san air fiachuinn am b’urrainn dha an t-srian
a thoirt dheth le ’chasan toisich. Mu dheireadh chaidh aige air so a
dheanamh. Agus cho luatha ’s a thachair so bha e ’na dhuine mar bha e
roimhe. An sin rug e air an t-srian agus thubhairt e ris féin gum
fiachadh e i ri a bhan-mhaighstir ’nuair a thigeadh i air a h-ais.

“Tachdan beag na dheidh sin thainig i féin agus móran de mhnathan eile a
bha coltach rithe féin. ’Nuair chunnaic e-san a bhan-mhaighstir chrath e
an t-srian rithe mar a rinn i-se rise-san agus cho luath ’s a rinn e so
leum i-se ’na cabal mór briagha. An sin thug e mach i agus chuir e oirre
an dìollaid ach an àite dol dhachaigh ’s e rinn e dol gu tigh gobhainn
agus a chur air a chois. Dh’iarr e air a ghobhainn ceithir chruidhean a
chur oirre. Thubhairt an gobhainn nach cuireadh gu dearbh, gu robh e ro
an-moch air-son dol a dheanamh a leithid so de dh’obair. Thubhairt an
gille gun tugadh e nì sam bith, eadhon *not* gheal ach na cruidhean
fhaotainn oirre. ’Nuair a chual an gobhainn so thàinig e mach agus
bheothaich e an teine agus ann an ùine bhig bha bean a’ bhaile air a
cruidheadh agus an sin ghabh e dhachaigh. ’Nuair a ráinig e an tigh thug
e dhith an t-srian agus bhà i ’na bean mar a bha i roimhe. ’Na dheidh
sin chaidh

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

e-san a chadal. Air an là màireach bha bròn mór air an tigh sin oir bha
bean an tighe <span id="fr_147"></span>[1](#fn_147) gu tinn. Agus ni a
bha ’cur iongantais air gach h-aon cha robh neach sam bith air a ligeil
a steach ga faicinn. ’Nuair a bha so mar so thàinig e-san, an gille, far
an robh a mhaighstir agus thubhairt e e-san a ligeil a steach ga
faicinn. Thubhairt am maighstir nach leigeadh, nach robh neach sam bith
ri dol a steach ach thubhairt an gille gu feumadh e-san dol a steach.
Leis a h-uile rud a bh’ann fhuair e steach far an robh i. Cho luath ’s a
chunnaic i e chas i sgreang oirre.

“Dh’fhoighneac e dhìth ciamar a bha i. Cha robh i air-son freagairt a
thoirt dha ach thubhairt e-san rithe: Sin a mach do phluit. <span
id="fr_148"></span>[2](#fn_148) Cha deanadh i so agus rug e oirre is
thug e mach a làmh agus de a bha ann ach gun robh cruidh eich oirre agus
air an laimh eile cuideachd, agus air gach cois. Sheall e oirre agus
thubhairt e rithe: 'Tha fios agad gu math de is ciall da so agus de an
obair uamhasach a bha thu ’deanamh. A nis thoir dhomh-sa t’fhacal nach
faic agus nach cluinn mi iomradh ort gu bràth tuilleadh ris an obair
mhaslach so agus bheir mi dhiot na cruidhean.' Thug i dhà a facal agus
thug e-san dhìth na cruidhean agus bha gach nì gu math tuilleadh. Ann an
úine bhig dh’fhàs an gille bha caol truagh gu leathan làidir agus bha
sith aig gach neach mu’n tigh.

"Sin agaibh naigheachd nam buitsichean móra!"

It is to be remarked that a variant of this Tiree tale exists in
Ireland, where it has quite recently

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

been printed: *Lúb Na Caillighe*, narrated by Michael Mhag Ruaidhri, and
edited with vocabulary by Mr. J. Lloyd. <span
id="fr_149"></span>[1](#fn_149) The story is located at The Loop, a tiny
hamlet in Ballymulligan townland, five miles to the east of Moneymore,
Co. Derry. The location has been motived in part by the word *Lúb*,
usually meaning 'a bend,' 'a curve,' having the secondary sense of
'quirk, trick.' Hence 'Lúb na Caillighe' means also 'the Hag's Trick,'
'the Old Wife's Trickery.' The Irish version is located in Ulster, the
province which most abounded with wizardry and the black art, according
to the Irish folk-tale. This may be a remnant of old tradition referring
to some relics of primitive rites among the Picts of Ulidia of old. The
secret was revealed to the lad by an old woman who lived with her
daughter not far off from the farm where he was employed. The details
further differ in that the Tiree version ascribes human reason to the
lad while in horse-form, inasmuch as the bridle was shaken over him
while awake. But the Ulster version has it: "If thou be asleep when the
hag comes in, she will shake the bridle above thy head in bed, and
through the might of her druidism thou wilt arise up towards her, and
she will put the bridle on thee." This done, the Hag rides him during
the night throughout the length and breadth of the land, which causes
his feeling quite exhausted as he awakes from sleep in the morning. The
plan advised by the wise woman friend in the Ulster version is that the
lad is to keep awake by tightening a waxed flaxen cord around his big
toe, so as

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

to ward off all sleep. The Hag comes to his bed thrice, but finds him
awake: the third time she goes off in high dudgeon, as it was near
midnight; hence "it was no time for her to delay about it." Apparently,
unless her bridle had worked its magic by that hour, she was left
powerless, for the Hag retired to her bed where the lad, who went
thither at cock-crow, found her fast [asleep](errata.htm#1),—"her
snoring would fetch deaf kine from the woods." He shook the bridle,
which was at the head of the bed, over her, and the Hag became a mare.
At daybreak, as he was returning, he came upon a smithy. He asks the
smith to shoe the mare. The smith was in great haste, for he took them
for fairy-folk from the hills, and he was not long about his work. On
reaching the house he took her into her room, took off the bridle, when
she resumed her woman-shape as before, save that she had shoes on her
feet and hands, and she as dead as a herring, her blood being well-nigh
shed through the steel nails in the shoes. He left her in that shape,
and went to sleep himself. Her husband was good and just, and saw that
her wizardry won her the deserts she merited. We do not hear that the
shoes were taken off her as in the Tiree version. The Irish version adds
that the lad finally married the daughter of her who instructed him how
to cope with the Hag's wiles.

The only magic-bridle in living Highland folklore is that attributed to
the Willox family: it has the gift of calling up in the water-pail for
the purpose the apparition of the worker of the evil-magic; it makes the
figure of the absent one present. The bridle or bit thereof was said to
have been got

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

from the water-horse. It is a relic of the bridle of Manannan's steed,
the horse of the lord of ocean.

The Clan Leod are thought of as having a close connection with the
horse. It is mentioned in the rhyme:

Siol nan Leòdach  
Siol a’ chapuill  
Bhacaich spògaich  
Bheathaicheadh air  
Moll is fòlach  
Air dubhadan dubh  
Is gulm eòrna.

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *i.e.* the progeny
of Leod, the progeny of the horse, lame and awkward, fed on chaff and
rank grass, on the black "beard of dried oats," and singed barley-straw.
This curious rhyme points to the horse as held once in special esteem
among this clan whose name is of Norwegian origin. The horse may have
been to them an object of imitation, and in some ways a sort of ideal. A
modern philosopher remarks on the English: "they have forgotten that
they are horses though the fact remains. Do they not still worship their
totem at their chief festivals, abstain from eating it, and pay more
attention to its breeding than to their own." <span
id="fr_150"></span>[1](#fn_150) The mythic Hengist and Horsa contain
some such reference.

Gregorson Campbell states: <span id="fr_151"></span>[2](#fn_151) In the
Hebrides a horse is supposed to have reference to the Clan Mac Leod. The
surname of horses is Mac Leod, as the Coll bard said to the Skye bard:

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

  Often rode I with my bridle  
  The race which you and your wife belong to.

= Is tric a mharcaich mi le m’ shréin  
  An dream g’am bheil thu fhéin ’s do bhean.

Under this phase of the theriomorphic soul I may include *Morc Na
Maighe* of Lochaber tradition. Although I find O’Brien's *Irish
Dictionary* gives *morc* as 'hog or swine,' it seems but a variant of
*marc*, 'horse' (whence *marcach*, 'rider'), the word which gives his
name to King Mark of Cornwall, who is fabled to have had horse's ears.
The legend associates *Morc Na Maighe* with Caoilte, but belongs to a
much more primitive strata of myth than the Féinn Cycle. She is credited
with being on foot as swift as the lightning; Caoilte and the Morc have
the speed of the venomous winter wind, but the Morc is swifter than
Caoilte, the fleetest of the Féinn. In their contest she outran him. As
the glens were filling and foretelling of the storms and the clouds were
lowering Caoilte had recourse to the device of springing aloft and
seizing hold of her by the mane, nor did she ever perceive he was
hanging to her. At long last, as sun was setting, Morc Na Maighe lay
down by the foot of an oak tree, worn out by the heat, and her breath
visible as vapour or mist. Caoilte standing by her side taunts her with
her speed being the slower because of her weariness. The impudent reply
to her query if he is really there is that Caoilte is the better for
that race-before-a-leap. He will now proceed and bids her fare-well.

"It is age that has sufficed for me," she said. "But I have had my own
day and I hope now to

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

go home (literally, I am not of a hope that I will not now go home)."
There we have the death-sigh of an old order of mythic beings. "Happy
wilt thou be, thou shaggy hairy ugly thing, if thy four feet keep pace
with what thy two eyes see," said Caoilte on meeting her. In this legend
we have to do with more than a mere personification of cloud shapes,
with an aspect really of the theriomorphic soul. It belongs to an early
stage of the process of belief which led to the forming of deities named
Tarvos (the bull), Moccos (the pig), Epŏna (the goddess of horses),
Damŏna (the goddess of cattle), Mullo (the ass), among the Gauls and to
the ancient Britons having held the hen, the goose and the hare as
taboo, as not to be killed or eaten.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_105"></span>[76:1](sbc05.htm#fr_105) J. A. MacCulloch, *The
Childhood of Fiction*, 134-5.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[77:1](sbc05.htm#fr_106) *Legends of
Strathisla, Inverness-shire, and Strathbogie*, Elgin, 1862, p. 10.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[77:2](sbc05.htm#fr_107) *Ib*. p. 105.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[77:3](sbc05.htm#fr_108) § 2 of 'Serglige
Chonchulaind' in Windisch's *Irische Texte*; cf. "I swear by my shield
and by my spear" (*Ériu*, iv. 99).

<span id="fn_109"></span>[77:4](sbc05.htm#fr_109) "Air laimh t’ athar ’s
do sheanar is air do dhā laimh fhéin ga saoradh sin"-*v*. Barra version
of 'Deirdire and the Sons of Usnech.'

<span id="fn_110"></span>[77:5](sbc05.htm#fr_110) Usener's
*Götternamen*, 1896, p. 280.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[78:1](sbc05.htm#fr_111) Mionn; E. Ir. *mind*,
oath, diadem, the swearing relics of a saint, cognate with O. Welsh
*minn*, sertum.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[78:2](sbc05.htm#fr_112) Spenser's *View of the
State of Ireland*, 82, 99.

<span id="fn_113"></span>[79:1](sbc05.htm#fr_113) Pennant's *Tour*, i.
96.

<span id="fn_114"></span>[80:1](sbc05.htm#fr_114) Lady Wilde's *Anc.
Legends*, i. 66-67.

<span id="fn_115"></span>[81:1](sbc05.htm#fr_115) Sébillot, p. 342.

With the priest's thought compare the Indeterminates or questions barred
by Buddha: whether the Soul is the same as the body or different from
it: *v*. Rhys Davids, *Dialogues of the Buddha*, vol. i. 186 fol.

<span id="fn_116"></span>[82:1](sbc05.htm#fr_116) Chuir Iain Bān aodach
dubh air na seilleanan nuair chaochail a bhrathair = John Bayne placed
black clothing on the bees when his brother died. Cf. telling the bees
of the death of the owner (a custom widely spread in England).

<span id="fn_117"></span>[83:1](sbc05.htm#fr_117) Rev. W. Forsyth,
Dornoch, Folk-Lore Journal, vi. 171.

<span id="fn_118"></span>[88:1](sbc05.htm#fr_118) Condensed from Le
Braz's *La Legende de la Mort en Basse Bretagne*.

<span id="fn_119"></span>[90:1](sbc05.htm#fr_119) Sébillot, 339.

<span id="fn_120"></span>[91:1](sbc05.htm#fr_120) *Pigheid bās ’s a dhā
banais*. Seemingly old British; cf. the belief in the Cotswolds that to
have a magpie cross one's path in the morning means that a death will
follow.

<span id="fn_121"></span>[91:2](sbc05.htm#fr_121) Fios fithich.

<span id="fn_122"></span>[92:1](sbc05.htm#fr_122) *v*. 'The Tobermory
Treasure Ship in Fact and Legend,' by Rev. D. McGillivray, in *Northern
Chronicle*, January or February 16, 1910.

<span id="fn_123"></span>[93:1](sbc05.htm#fr_123) *St. Kilda and its
Birds*, by J. Wiglesworth, M.D., F.R.C.P., Liverpool, 1903, p. 37; cf.
A. B. Cook, in *Folk-Lore* for 1904, p. 387 n.

<span id="fn_124"></span>[93:2](sbc05.htm#fr_124) The literary evidence
for which is seen in the myths of Caeneus (Ovid's *Metam*. 12, 514 ff.)
and Ctesylla (*Ant. Lib*. i.); the monumental evidence in works like G.
Weicker's *Der Seelenvogel* and J. E. Harrison's *Prolegomena to the
Study of Greek Religion* (p. 197 In Egypt the king's soul is referred to
as a hawk under the twelfth and nineteenth dynasties (Flinders Petrie,
*Religion and Conscience in Ancient Egypt*, p. 30).

<span id="fn_125"></span>[94:1](sbc05.htm#fr_125) *Orgain Brudne Da
Dergae*, ed. Stokes, § 7, 13.

<span id="fn_126"></span>[95:1](sbc05.htm#fr_126) Girald. Cambr.,
*Itinerarium Cambriae*, l. i. c. 2.

<span id="fn_127"></span>[96:1](sbc05.htm#fr_127) Napier's *Folk-Lore of
the West of Scotland*, p. 111.

<span id="fn_128"></span>[96:2](sbc05.htm#fr_128) *Indogerm.
Forschungen*, 1910, 2nd pt. p. 143.

<span id="fn_129"></span>[98:1](sbc05.htm#fr_129) A. W. Moore, *The
Folk-Lore of the Isle of Man*, pp. 133, 144, where the various accounts
are quoted, also the music of 'Hunt the Wren.'

<span id="fn_130"></span>[98:2](sbc05.htm#fr_130) Keating's *History of
Ireland*, vol. iii. p. 91 (Irish Texts Society ed.).

<span id="fn_131"></span>[99:1](sbc05.htm#fr_131) *Duanaire Fhinn*., pt.
i. p. 119.

<span id="fn_132"></span>[99:2](sbc05.htm#fr_132) Bertholet, *The
Transmigration of Souls*, 64.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[101:1](sbc05.htm#fr_133) Reinach's *Orpheus*
(French ed.), p. 168.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[101:2](sbc05.htm#fr_134) *Rev. Celtique*, 12,
p. 441.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[101:3](sbc05.htm#fr_135) Elton's *Origins of
English History*, 287.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[101:4](sbc05.htm#fr_136) *De Bello Gallico*,
V. 12.

<span id="fn_137"></span>[102:1](sbc05.htm#fr_137) *Conqu. Hibern*. i.
31.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[102:2](sbc05.htm#fr_138) Dion. Cass. lxii. 3.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[102:3](sbc05.htm#fr_139) Cf. Figuier, *Prim.
Man* (Tylor), 268.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[102:4](sbc05.htm#fr_140) Pennant's *Tour
Through Montgomeryshire* and Sikes's *British Goblins*, 162.

<span id="fn_141"></span>[102:5](sbc05.htm#fr_141) O’Curry's *Man. and
Cus*. ii. 141.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[103:1](sbc05.htm#fr_142) *The Folk-Lore of the
Isle of Man*, by A. W. Moore, p. 147.

<span id="fn_143"></span>[103:2](sbc05.htm#fr_143) Trevelyan, p. 77.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[103:3](sbc05.htm#fr_144) Sébillot, 196.

<span id="fn_145"></span>[107:1](sbc05.htm#fr_145) *Folklore as an
Historical Science*, 287-288.

<span id="fn_146"></span>[108:1](sbc05.htm#fr_146) *v*. my trans. in
Irish Texts Society ed.

<span id="fn_147"></span>[114:1](sbc05.htm#fr_147) Ta’a—Tiree dialect.

<span id="fn_148"></span>[114:2](sbc05.htm#fr_148) Sort of slang for
'paw, hand.'

<span id="fn_149"></span>[115:1](sbc05.htm#fr_149) *Atha Cliath,
Connradh na Gaedhilge*, 1910.

<span id="fn_150"></span>[117:1](sbc05.htm#fr_150) Craveth Read,
*Natural and Social Morals*, p. 85.

<span id="fn_151"></span>[117:2](sbc05.htm#fr_151) *Superstitions of the
Scottish Highlands*, p. 269.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II. The Wanderings of Psyche (part 2)](sbc06)
