[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](sbc03)  [Next](sbc05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Survivals in Belief Among the Celts*, by George Henderson, \[1911\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

I. The Finding of the Soul (part 2)

Among certain savages the strip cut off at circumcision is bound on the
arm; and in the Jewish ritual some of the blood mingled with wine is
quaffed by the operating priest. What is tasted by man is a
covenant-sign for deity. Clay Trumbull <span
id="fr_58"></span>[1](#fn_58.md) says: "Even down to modern times, the rite
of circumcision has included a recognition, however unconscious, of the
primitive blood-friendship rite, by the custom of the ecclesiastical
operator, as God's representative, receiving into his mouth, and thereby
being made a partaker of, the blood mingled with wine, according to the
method described among the Orientals, in the rite of blood-friendship,
from the earliest days of history."

In Ireland of long ago, I have read somewhere that a usual gift from a
woman to her betrothed husband was a pair of bracelets made of her own
hair, as if a portion of her very self entered into

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

the covenant rite. The blood especially was the very self. It is this
belief that explains the idea that the corpse of a murdered man bleeds
in the presence of, especially at the touch of the slayer. There are
references throughout the literature of the Middle Ages to the
bleeding-corpse or *cruentatio*. It occurs in the *Nibelungenlied*. And
in the *Ivain* of Chretien de Troies, there occurs a scene where the
corpse is brought into the hall where Ivain is, and then begins to
bleed, whereupon the men feel confident that the murderer must be hidden
there, and they renew their search. The soul is regarded as speaking
through or by the blood. In the Highlands <span
id="fr_59"></span>[1](#fn_59.md) I feel confident that there are remnants
of such a belief, pointing back to a belief similar to the thought of
the Hebrews when they held that "the blood is the life" (Deuteronomy
xii. 23). To be remembered, too, are Homer's expressions: "The blood ran
down the wound" (*Iliad*, xvii. 86); "the life (ψυχή) ran down the
wound" (*Iliad*, xiv. 518). A Greek, quoted by Aristotle (*De Anima*, i.
2, 19), declared that the soul was the blood. The Arabs say "the soul
flows" (from the wound), *i.e.* he dies.

When associated with crime the stains of blood are regarded in folklore
as indelible. Let me give

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

a piece of Inverness-shire folklore from my notes of 2nd May, 1887. It
illustrates other points as well:

“There lived an hotelkeeper at B------ with his wife and three children.
Having made him drunk with brandy and taken his head off with the axe,
she buried him among the brackens, and put his clothes on the banks of
Loch X------. A search was instituted, but the body could not be found.
There lived a godly minister not far away, and he dreamed a dream, in
which he saw the body among the brackens. When the report was spreading
among the people, the wife had the body removed. The people, however,
were suspicious of her, and their suspicions were confirmed by marks of
blood at the top of the stair; however often the boards were cleaned, or
even renewed, the stains of blood would appear. A letter-carrier was
passing by one evening at the inn. He put up there at her request, as
she wanted him to kill a goat in the morning. She sent him to bed along
with her two boys. He slept; but the boys awoke, and their scream
startled him out of sleep. They said that they saw something. But he
slept off again. This was repeated, and on the second occasion he went
down to the kitchen, where he found the woman sitting by the firelight.
She told him that she had never gone to bed since her husband was lost.
He then twigged that the *tathaich*, or revenant of the dead, was in the
house, and he went off.

“Now, the godly minister referred to owned a white or grey horse; its
saddle was always kept beside the entrance door, to which the horse
would

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

come of its own accord, and as often as he did so the minister accepted
it as a beckoning from God to go and make known His ways to men.

"The minister mounted on this occasion, and followed to where the horse
led, and he arrived at the church of B-------. This church was a barn,
which had a gable of matted willow twigs in which there was a breach.
The woman referred to sat outside this breach, with a shawl on her head
and with her back to the man of God. In course of his sermon the
minister stopped: 'I cannot proceed any further,' he said, 'I have
something else to say; there is a murderess in the congregation; and she
is troubling me.' He repeated himself, and threatened to name her,—but
the woman, being outside, quietly left, as was afterwards found out. On
her deathbed she confessed the whole, and related that one day as she
was out herding she saw a number of small men playing around her, the
husband among the number; he came up to her and gave her a blow, which
left on her a blue mark, of which she died. The mark was visible after
death."

 

On the occasion of witnessing an execution there was a special rite to
prevent dreams of the dead: to dream of the dead was the next step to
their coming back as revenants. When Alex. Mackintosh of Borlum was
executed at Muirfield (for an assault on one M‘Rory, a Beauly
cattle-dealer who was suspected of having wrongly identified his
assailant, and who afterwards was an outcast in Beauly, where he took
his own life), we learn how "with mingled

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

feelings of sorrow and horror the multitude slowly and silently
dispersed, many, if not most of the company, placing a small piece of
bread under a stone, which, according to a superstitious tradition,
would prevent after-dreams of the unfortunate Alexander
Mackintosh." <span id="fr_60"></span>[1](#fn_60.md)

Blood innocently shed might readily call out for vengeance; for the soul
was in the blood.

In the etiquette of paying one's parting respects to the dead, before
the corpse is buried, no custom is more tenacious in the Highlands than
that of touching the body with the finger. To neglect doing so is
thought to expose a person to dreaming of the deceased, and by
consequence to the danger of being visited by the dead, and of being
open to the dread haunting of the ghost. This is the relic of the old
ordeal upon the corpse of the murdered—a custom not confined to present
Gaeldom, but current in a wider area. For instance, the minister of
Pitsligo testifies: "The opinion prevailed till not very long ago, and
even yet lingers, that in case of murder, if the murderer touches the
corpse, blood flows from the wounds." <span
id="fr_61"></span>[2](#fn_61.md) To touch the body is therefore a sort of
folk-ritual to signify that one is at peace with the deceased. In a case
of murder, there is a noted instance on record in the Highlands. Let me
quote:

“A singular providence, under presidency of the minister, Mr. James
Fraser, for the discovery of

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

the murderer of Donald Mackwilliam Chui (*i.e.* Dhuibh): <span
id="fr_62"></span>[1](#fn_62.md)

“The signal providence that appeared in this matter was, that though the
dead body had layn upon the sod within the flood mark, and the sea ebbed
and flowed six times during its being there, yet not taken away. Upon
the 3rd day the herdsmen bringing up their cattle discovered the dead
man, hasted in to the place, found it was their neighbour, Donald
Mackwilliam Chui, murthered. . . . All the people presently flockt to
the place, and perceiving that he had been three days missed, and his
corps lying upon a flat piece of the bank within the flood, wondered
that the sea ebbing did not drive him away, the wind being southerly all
the time. But the hand of God was in it to discover the murther of the
innocent. The corps is carried to the churchyard, and laid in the common
reer with the chapel, and a despatch sent express to the Shirref Deput,
Alexander Chisholm, living in Bunchrive, who peremptorly convenes the
whole parish, causes strip naked the corps, and lay it exposed upon a
broad plank at the entry of the chappel, and chairs set round; and all
the gentlemen of the 3 parishes present, concluding that this murder was
an act of malice and revenge, and not of gain or lucre, the poor young
man being but a servant and had no great trust. The list of the
parishioners being read, every one as he was called touched the bare
body, laying his hand on it, non of quhat degree soever excepted, men
and women to the

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

number of 6 or 700. At length, the murtherer, John Mackeanvore, laid his
hand most confidently upon the bare breast, and I narrowly observed
(sitting at the head of the coffin) that the greatest wound opened and a
drop of blood gushed out. I desired he should lay on his hand again,
which he did, and men observed a drop of blood issue from the nose. He
is suddenly seized and fettered, brought in to the church, and after
serious prayer for the discovery of this horrid work of darkness, he is
examined and a torture threatened; but no confession. His *mittimus*
signed, and sent in to the vault of Inverness, and secured. Not one man
or woman within my parish of Wardlaw, after reading the catalogue, was
missed but John Mackeanire, who was seen to go hastily through Kingily
and over the burn, as the people were convening for trial, and so
escaped. He was seen and known at the Bridge end of Inverness, buying
ground tobacco in papers, and so away through Strathnairn, and over the
bridge of Dulce in to Strathspey; and no account of him for two years.

"John Mackeanvore, the capital murtherer, being in the pit at Inverness,
laid fast in the stocks, continued there but about a fortnight, and both
his feet down from the ancles dropt off as if by amputation. When he is
brought forth he had a foot in every hand like a shoe last, cursing and
imprecating, and praying God to revenge his cruel usage; so that many
condemned the judge as too severe, and seemed to vindicate this villain,
who is carried away in a sledge through the streets and over the bridge
home to his own house in Finask, where his wife

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

and friends attend him; falling in a fever is every Sabbath prayed for
as for death, and that God w<sup>d</sup> discover this murther. . . . In
fine, I myself out of charity, cured this John Mackeanvore's wounds,
untill at last his stumps were as strong as men's fists, without feet;
and a contribution made for buying him a horse, and goes up and down the
country confidently as an innocent, begging, and no account of John
M‘Keanire, who is reputed by all men to be the murtherer, having run for
it as guilty; and we are in suspense for two years; the land of Finask
(interim patitur justus) blasted upon, neither crop nor cattle thrive:
Innocuus clamat sanguis; (innocent) blood cries." <span
id="fr_63"></span>[1](#fn_63.md)

In the Isle of Man it is unlucky to let blood, especially that of a king
or person of high rank, fall on the ground. Moore <span
id="fr_64"></span>[2](#fn_64.md) states: "It is remembered to this day that
when *Iliam Dhone*, William Christian, was shot at Hango Hill in 1662,
blankets were spread where he stood, so that not one drop of his blood
should touch the earth." It is thought that this may have some
sacrificial meaning; the intent of the act springs from the idea of the
soul in the blood.

For the wide-spread character of this belief elsewhere, the reader need
only turn to Scott's *Fair Maid of Perth* (c. 23) with his note on the
case which came before the High Court of Justiciary at

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Edinburgh in 1688;
to the *Lay of the Niblungs*, where by this ordeal Kriemhild fastened
upon Hagan the guilt of murdering her husband Siegfried; <span
id="fr_65"></span>[1](#fn_65.md) in the sixteenth century Christian II. of
Denmark, by commanding those present to place their right hand on the
breast of the slain, brought about the detection and confession of the
murderer, who was at once beheaded. <span id="fr_66"></span>[2](#fn_66.md)

An analogous practice is that of swearing on the skull, of which a case
is reported at a recent criminal trial in Germany. <span
id="fr_67"></span>[3](#fn_67.md)

Alongside of the blood or body-essence observation falls to be directed
to the breath, likewise an essence. The soul is held to be especially in
the breath. Breath has long ago been supposed to be the only part of man
which will survive him. <span id="fr_68"></span>[4](#fn_68.md) Breathing
accompanies life. An old Highland expression I have heard used by one
lamenting a mother's death signifies: 'her breath is not before
me'; <span id="fr_69"></span>[5](#fn_69.md) at death I have heard it said
that the soul left the body in the form of a white vapour or
smoke, <span id="fr_70"></span>[6](#fn_70.md)—expressions paralleled
elsewhere, as among the Slavs. <span id="fr_71"></span>[7](#fn_71.md) The
regular Highland expression for

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 'yielding the
ghost, giving up the breath in death' is: 'thug e suas an deò.' <span
id="fr_72"></span>[1](#fn_72.md) The Indo-European root of *deò* signifies
'to breathe': we may perhaps infer from the connotation of the various
cognates that the transition of meanings would have been in the
following series: breath, soul, soul of the dead, daimon, god. From the
same root is the Gaulish *dusios*, 'daemon immundus, incubus;
nightmare'; these Gaulish *dusii* were impure demons believed to have
commerce with mortals, and are referred to by St. Augustine. We see thus
that the root in one case yields a word restricted in meaning to the
personal breath or soul, whereas in other tongues it connotes a demon,
or, as with the Greeks, the god-soul, in its final sense God. When the
Highlanders speak of the 'double,' the word is *samhl*, *samhla*, a word
of like origin with G. *samhuil*, 'likeness, like,' cognate with Latin
*similis*, English *same*: the 'double ' is vaguely described as a
semi-transparency in which the chief features of one dying or dead are
recognisable by the eye: physiologists might regard the 'double' as due
to optical illusion. As a fact it is firmly believed that a ghost may be
seen; I recollect

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

a case where a woman went out one moonlit night to draw water from the
well: on looking behind her she saw her own image or ghost (*samhl*)
covered by a winding sheet, with the face veiled. This may be read by
physiologists under the idea of the soul-image, or memory-image
personified.

Any collection of instances of Second-Sight will give numerous cases
where an apparition (*taibhse*) or vision has been thought to have been
seen, and to the imagination these phantoms are real. They are, as the
root of *taibhse* implies, things which 'show or speak,' with the
folk-belief reservation that such ghosts cannot speak until they are
first spoken to. As regards speech, the control remains with man.
Through touch, however, they reveal themselves as dangerous; when
parting with one they may leave a blue mark on the body, and as a
precaution when travelling at night one must keep to the side and away
from the middle of the highway so as not to obstruct their path. There
may, according to folk-thought, be even a procession of ghosts as in
phantom funerals. The ear no less than the eye is appealed to; it is a
firm belief, or was in my childhood, that the shrieking of ghosts may be
heard: when the ghost crossed over water it shrieked, or gave a yell,
resounding through the rocks and woods, which was termed *sgal*, a word
akin to the German *schallen*, 'to sound.' I heard it said of a ghost's
yell on the way to a cemetery: *bha a sgal a toirt fuaim air na creigean
's e 'tighinn sīos Āilean-an-Uchd*, *i.e.* its shriek was resounding
through the rocks as it was coming down Āilean-an-Uchd (the Mead or
Green of the Brae, Brae-field). Another

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

phrase is: *ghoir an tāsc* <span id="fr_73"></span>[1](#fn_73.md) = the
ghost yelled. Besides *deō*, <span id="fr_74"></span>[2](#fn_74.md) which
is the more spiritual aspect of the breath, or the breath as conjoined
to the soul, there is another word *anail*, breath, Old Irish *anāl*,
Welsh *anadl*, *anal*, from a root *an*, to breathe; Gothic *anan*, to
breathe; Sanskrit *anila*, wind. Differentiated therefrom is G. *anam*,
soul; Old Irish *anim* (dative *anmin*), Cornish *enef*, Breton *ene*,
plural *anaoun*, 'the souls, the dead'; cognate with Latin *animus*,
*anima*, Greek ἄνεμος, 'wind.' Thus, by abstraction from the actual
visible warm breath (*deō*) and the agent of the breath (*anail*), one
attains to the idea *anam* (or *soul*), which we attain to consciousness
of through the body.

It is the essence of man that he came to think of self as something
different from the body: how man came first to think and speak of
himself as something different from the body is an improper question to
put. From the side of body our being is mortal: hence fitly spoken of in
Gadhelic as *duine*, 'man,' a word cognate with Greek θνητός, 'mortal';
English *dwine*. As sentient, percipient, thinking agent, he is *anam*,
'soul,' the energy which discovers itself in the breath, the vital
motion, *the inner impulse which in our consciousness is given us in
breath*. Here it is of interest to compare with L. *anima*, G. *anam*,
Gr. *anemos*, 'wind,' the force of the Sanskrit *ásu*, 'the breath of
life in men and animals,' cognate with Norse *anses*, souls of ancestors
worshipped as gods, meeting us in the

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Asen*, the
highest Norse gods, and in the Anglo-Saxon *ése*, the lower spiritual
beings, the elves. Parallel in concept, though from a different root, is
the meaning discoverable in English soul; German *Seele*, Gothic
*saiwala*, which Persson <span id="fr_75"></span>[1](#fn_75.md) equates
with Old Bulgarian *si-la*, force, power; Lithuanian *sy-là*, force,
power; Prussian *sei-lin*, zeal, industry, exertion, effort; plural
*sei-lins*, mind; *seilisku*, devotion; *no-sei-lis*, spirit: even were
the Lithuanian and Prussian loaned from Slavonic, the roots *sei̯*,
*sai̯*, *si*, convey the idea 'set in motion, let go.' When the energy,
the inner impulse in the breath had departed, people could not but feel
that all had gone, and thus the breath, the soul-in-the-breath, the
inner-impulse-in-the-breath supplied the material which thought came to
examine further in course of time. The soul was named from *a* something
which it possesses, as an attribute in common with a function of the
body. When death ensues one of the phrases is: *shiubhail e*, 'he went
off,' the word *siubhal* being used usually for 'walking,' and cognate
with Welsh *chwyfu*, 'move, stir,' thus amounting to 'he moved off, he
stirred,' and in keeping with the parallel phrase *chaochail e*, 'he
changed,' *i.e.* = he died, a current Highland expression.

The transition from breath-impulse to the divine through the idea of
breath, soul, soul of the dead, daimon, God, may be made by a different
path of thought. Just as soul is always given us with

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

consciousness of the body, and is thus descriptively the idea of the
body, so is also the world-body, and especially are the shining heavens
prominent as a part thereof: thus is the Gadhelic *Dia*, 'God,' cognate
with Latin *Deus* (met with also in *Ju*-piter), Norse *Tiw*, 'the
war-god,' *tívar*, 'gods'; Sanskrit *devá*, Greek δῖος, 'divine'; Zeus,
who in Greek has various epithets, as at Dodona, where the official
title was Ζεύσ Νάϊος, 'the stream god'; at Sidon θαλάσσιος, according to
Hesychius, whence it follows that he was there a sea-god; Pausanias
states that Aeschylus, son of Euphorion, applies the name of Zeus also
to the god who dwells in the sea,—all which illustrate local transitions
to sea-god from the original sky-god, the bright shining heavens. The
Germanic races which, as we have seen, use a different root to express
'soul ' from that used in Celtic,—although the concept in both seems to
embrace the common element of 'motion,'—have also a different root to
express that of God, German *Gott*. According to the late W. Thomsen, of
Copenhagen, the name means 'He to whom sacrifice is made, He who is
worshipped'; Professor Höffding <span id="fr_76"></span>[1](#fn_76.md)
thinks of a relationship between the root in God and that in *giessen*,
'to pour,' with Greek χέειν whose root χυ is taken as cognate with
Sanskrit *hu*, whence *huta*, 'sacrificed,' also 'he to whom sacrifices
are made.' A proto-Indo-European form for God, \**ghutom*, Schrader has
defined as 'the divine element called forth by a charm from the deified
phenomena,' and this word is taken as cognate with Sanskrit, *hutá*,
'called,' Avesta *zavaiti*,

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 'he curses ';
Lithuanian *zawėti*, 'to charm.' <span id="fr_77"></span>[1](#fn_77.md)
This would harmonise with the derivation of *religio*, 'religion,' from
L. *religare*, 'to bind,' in the sense of what a man binds on the deity
acknowleged by him.

Both paths are animistic, *i.e.* they read phenomena in terms of the
soul. Both acknowledge the worship of spirits: the Latins worshipped the
*mânes*, a word cognate with the Old Latin *mânus*, 'good,' hence 'the
good spirits' of ancestors; the Celts worshipped the *sīde*, <span
id="fr_78"></span>[2](#fn_78.md) known also as *na daoine maith*, 'the good
people'—all vaguely subordinated to the ancestral spirit, God. All that
is the work of and under the protection of so exalted a power is to the
Celt holy or *naomh*; Early Irish *nóem*, *nóeb*, which includes perhaps
the idea of what is beautiful, whether the word be cognate with Old
Persian *naiba*, 'beautiful,' or as Bezzenberger less probably suggests,
with Lettic *naigs*, 'quite beautiful.'

It will be sufficient provisionally to describe the chief forms of
soul-cult, not forgetting the existence of various modifications and
transitions, as:

1\. Primitive Animism, which includes most primitive phases. Here
account is taken of all phases of the body-soul and of the shadow-soul.
The recognition of 'soul' as in the various bodily parts has been
treated of above; the shadow-soul has to be added. The shadow
(*faileas*) is at this stage in intimate association with the soul. As a
development of this thought is the danger of allowing one's likeness to
be taken: I have known old people who

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

had great aversion to having their likeness taken: it felt to them as if
their souls were being abstracted, and any harm done to the likeness
might result in harm to the person. On a par are all practices founded
on the belief in evil influences from the magic of the living
(witchcraft). The sorcerer, in Manx termed by the native designation
*fear obaidh*, has soul-powers ascribed to him whereby he is held to
cause illness, madness, death. Rites such as those connected with the
'clay-body' (*corp criadh*) and with turning of the heart in lead, and
spells of all kinds are in vogue; the 'word' is all-powerful; rites such
as touching the corpse and placing of water on the hearth after a death
(as was done in Tiree, according to my authority, about 60 years ago),
and perhaps the belief in the grave-guardian or literally the
'churchyard watch' (*an fhaire chlaidh*), indicate that religious cult
was concerned chiefly with means of protection against the souls of the
dead who could 'come back' (*tathaich*) and as revenants work their evil
will. Under this idea, and the cult to be inferred, one might subsume
the rites connected with the 'sin-eater' in Wales, springing out of that
of eating in common with the deceased; more widely, all forms of
communion, the earliest forms of sacrifice.

2\. Animalism and Manism, of which Totemism is but a definite grade
arising out of sympathetic association. The beliefs centre in the idea
of the external soul; these will be treated of in the next chapter. So
far as rites arise, at the outset the animal is in the foreground. The
animal is on a par, though as a rule above man. Animal descent

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

is inferable from certain personal and tribal names. The favour or
displeasure of the animal is kept before the thought, and thus arises
the cult of various particular animals, which may figure as protecting
spirits. Of the Totemistic system, which is widely traceable among the
tribes of Australia, Africa and America, we could hardly expect to find
clear survivals among the Aryan family. For the Aryans I am prepared to
discard Totemism altogether. Mr. Frazer has lately inclined to deduce
that system from a savage theory of conception, which is too abstract.
Its essence lies in sympathetic association, which allows of a tribe
having regard to some mutual help and protection it may have come to
believe as real between itself and some animal. Thus in the Highlands a
serpent was thought of as incapable of doing harm to a true member of
the clan Iver,—parallel to the immunity from snakes claimed by a snake
clan (Ophiogenes) in Cyprus. As animal kinship is the essence of
Totemism, and not its later social organisation, I submit in dealing
with the Aryans that Animalism shading into Manism represents a phase of
social belief. The feeling of a tribe's kinship with certain animals
need not have been arrived at among all races in the same way.

The serpent, the deer, the horse, the wolf, are all in this category;
*e.g*. a Welsh belief seems to have been that all lizards were formerly
women; <span id="fr_79"></span>[1](#fn_79.md) every farmhouse had two
snakes: "They never appeared, until just before the death of the master
or mistress of the house; then the snake died." Here may be

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

recalled the rite of pounding the embers from a peat fire in one's
stocking at the threshold, on the outer door-step, on St. Bride's
day, <span id="fr_80"></span>[1](#fn_80.md)—the operant finally saying, "I
shall not injure the serpent nor shall the serpent injure me." The old
Lochaber hunter, Domhnull Mac Fhionnlaidh, was buried at his request in
the skin of the last deer slain by him. <span
id="fr_81"></span>[2](#fn_81.md) And quite lately, in a Highland Deer
Forest, a case came to my notice of a workman who, when engaged on
repairing a cottage, sat down to take his meal outside at mid-day when a
hind passed by, narrowly scanned him, and having entered the house went
up the stair and refused to be ejected, with the result that the man
took fright and came out for aid, expressing himself to the effect that
it was the spirit of a former occupant, now deceased, that had come back
in deer guise.

This was no totemistic death ceremony, but it shows a subtle sympathy
with the deer; the stag has always been a symbol of delight and of
enjoyment. It is thus far parallel to the Black Shoulder (Buffalo) clan
of the Omahas wrapping a dying clansman in a buffalo robe with the hair
out, his face painted with the clan mark, and thus addressed by friends:
"You are going to the animals (the buffaloes). You are going to rejoin
your ancestors."

That instance of belief in transmigration occurred last year. At this
stage of thought certain tribes may have one animal which they tacitly
own as ancestral spirit. By the use of any animal name as

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

an emblem of kinship, the individual would indicate to what tribal
community he belonged; tribal names such as that of the Ossorians in
Ireland allow us to infer the former existence of such a belief among
the Celts: "The descendants of the wolf are in Ossory." The treatment
must be left for the following chapter.

The second phase of this stage of thought would be a cult of human
ancestors, specially of tribal chiefs and clan-heroes: this is Manism or
Ancestor Worship proper, culminating in hero worship. It is a subject
for future investigation; it is to be noted that the characteristics
pertaining to a particular clan or tribal community, which mark ancestor
worship, will have fallen very much to the background if they can be at
all inferred among the Celts; the relations emphasised will be found
pertaining to mythologic concepts and to the Nature-Myth. For, as
modifications and transitions in behalf are constant, ancestor worship
gets partly transcended. But in Manism the guardian spirit has its
specific influence on the tribal consciousness. I recollect Aoibhell of
Craig Liath, the guardian spirit of the Dal Caiss, mentioned in the
narrative concerning Brian Boru in the Wars of the Gaedhel and the Gall;
there is also Mag Molach or Hairy Hand, and Bodach An Dūin of
Rothiemurchus, as well as the more familiar belief in the Brownie which
renders offices of help in some houses,—a feeble survival of early
phases of cult. The central thought is that of Guardian Spirit and comes
out in Macrimmon's Lament:

Dh’iath ceō nan stūc mu aodann Chuilinn  
Is sheinn a bhean-shīdh’ a torman mulaid.

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *i.e.* "The mist
has enfolded the peaks of the Coolin

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

and the Banshee has sounded her wail of sorrow." In the Highlands of old
the ghosts flitted about if the *coronach* or funeral threnody were
unsung; the other side is, when the banshee calls she sings the spirit
home. In some houses still a soft low music is heard at death.

3\. Daimonism. Here daimonic influences are recognised wherein there is
individual consciousness connecting the thought of guardian spirit with
localities. From the rites followed at Loch Mo-Nāir, <span
id="fr_82"></span>[1](#fn_82.md) Strathnaver, one may infer a former belief
in a guardian spirit presiding over healing; generally at sacred wells
the later Christian saints have succeeded to, and supplanted the
memories of, the pre-Christian guardian spirits. There are spirits of
localities, and among the Celts of Gaul we find traces of such as
daimons protecting and avenging thermal springs, agriculture and
commerce. Irish mythology has instances to show, *e.g*. Dian Cecht, as
to whom compare Rhŷs's Hibbert Lectures on Celtic Heathendom. Primitive
soul-concepts begin to be lost sight of and the qualities of the demons
or daimons correspond to those of individual souls: the result is that
Water-, Wind-, Vegetation- or Local Spirits, as met with in the
*Dindshenchus* or stories of Place-Names, all border on the Nature Myth,
and personify some aspect of Nature as such. For example, the Highland
stories of Cailleach Bhearra, the Old Woman of Beare, of whom later.

To return now: with the idea of what is tabu or

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

prohibited, or bound under 'restrictions' (*fo gheasa*), there is
connected fear, the fear of breaking the magic word, fear also before
the working of demonic powers. In the totem-animals, which a universal
survey of comparative human beliefs leads us to subsume as a phase of
Manism, primitive man saw the souls of persons, of ancestors migrated.
Rites wherein survivals of this exist may be expected to issue in a code
which puts the individual on his guard against angering the spirits. My
forest friend inferred a 'spirit' in the hind, and felt he was forbidden
from repairing the old house for the successor. To another individual's
consciousness the spirit might have been in a tree or bird, or even
house. It is the sympathetic association of the moment that counts.

One of my acquaintances was suddenly seized by great hunger after
passing a certain house: he came up to an old woman, who remarked on his
pallid looks: "You have passed a house where people sat and partook of
food without having asked a blessing." The individual confessed having
passed such and such a house; then his old friend gave him a small piece
of bread which she blessed; he partook, and the ravenous craving
disappeared.

Or take the case of a boy who goes to an evening's entertainment in
Highland hamlets, where he hears lots of ghost stories; he stays until
it is late and very dark; if he must come home alone and have to pass
lonely roads and places shadowed with trees, or streams where he has
heard it said at the *céilidh* that dogs were seen which tore such and
such folks in former times to death, the chances are that he will see
more than is good for him: sympathetic

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

association renders this inevitable, and the conditions being favourable
most lads will experience a presence that is uncanny, a feeling of the
eerie. How much more in earlier ages when every birth revealed a
'return'; if raising of the name (*togail an ainm*) be still reckoned as
of import, as I know it to be, much more is the reality of life itself:
the child is seen to resemble not its immediate parents but some
grand-parents or other relative or ancestor: how account for this?
Nature is believed as full of spirits: it is not death that needs
accounting for, it is life itself: the mother forms her own inferences
wherever she may chance to experience the feeling of quickening, and
readily forms a sympathetic association with some object or other at the
place and time. A spirit part of some ancestor, she believes, has
entered her: a soul has become incarnate.

This would in early ages have been the explanation on the male side of
what now exists but in faint survival. I have known an instance, and I
have heard of two more, all far apart, where at the birth of a baby the
husband was believed to suffer the pains of childbed. In one case the
husband was known to turn ill. I believe that such a psychical
peculiarity, though very rare, and of great difficulty to verify, is
traceable to the idea of a spirit-part (or man-soul) leaving the parent
and being thought of as found in the child; the latter's gain was the
father's loss. I am absolutely sure of this belief having been known in
the Highlands within my own knowledge; it was explained from a power
ascribed to certain wise mid-wives of transferring the mother's pains to
the father. I rather think it is

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

parallel to a belief concerning the first-born in the Punjab: if a son,
his father is said to be born again in him, and he is supposed to die at
the child's birth; in certain Khatri sections his funeral rites are
actually performed in the fifth month of the mother's pregnancy. Rites
now connected with male childbed are known as the couvade. Only dim
reflections thereof are met with among the Celts. For parts of Ireland
it is on record that a woman before childbirth *occasionally* wears the
coat of the father of the expected child with the idea that the father
should then share in the pains of birth. The physician who reports it
notes that the father is carefully kept out of the way on these
occasions, and that "women in childbirth often wear the trousers of the
father of the child round the neck, the effect of which is supposed to
be the lightening of the pains of labour. I have myself seen a case of
this in Dublin, about two years ago." <span
id="fr_83"></span>[1](#fn_83.md)

In Man a wife must keep her husband's trousers beside her in bed to
prevent her infant being carried off by the fairies (Moore, 157). There
are only very faint survivals apparently in Britain so far as known. But
Dr. Norris F. Davey reports in the *British Medical Journal* for 26th
Sept., 1891, p. 725, thus: ". . . There was a doubt as to the date of
conception, but the husband confidently confirmed the date of quickening
because 'he felt so bad himself

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

at that time.' He was very much hurt when I ridiculed such an idea, and
said, 'You may laugh, doctor, but I always feel bad when that happens
without my wife saying anything about it; and why shouldn't I, as I am
the father?' This civilised savage (who, I think, came from Wiltshire)
was evidently a firm believer in the occult link, but it is not an Essex
belief, as I never met with any similar fancy during the thirty-eight
years’ experience in that county."

Attempts to shift the pains of childbirth from the mother to the father
have been instanced by Mr. Frazer <span id="fr_84"></span>[1](#fn_84.md)
from Ireland, Scotland, France, Germany and Esthonia. For resorting to
such enchantments Eufame Macalyne was burned alive on the Castle-hill at
Edinburgh in 1591. When James VI. was born, a lady of rank, Lady
Reirres, complained "that she was never so troubled with no bairn that
ever she bare, for the Lady Athole had cast all the pain of her
child-birth upon her." At Langholm, in Dumfriesshire, in 1772, Pennant
found a belief that "the midwives had power of transferring part of the
primeval curse bestowed on our great first mother, from the good wife to
her husband. I saw the reputed offspring of such a labour; who kindly
came into the world without giving her mother the least uneasiness,
while the poor husband was roaring with agony in his uncouth and
unnatural pains."

Ling Roth quotes from a 'well-known Professor of Philosophy,' who wrote
to *Timehri*, ii. p. 160: "If ever you make out the couvade, I suspect
you

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

will find that its first origin was a real sympathy between husband and
wife. I could tell you (if I had space) one or two very odd stories,
where, during pregnancy, the husband, *at a distance*, was invariably
affected by sickness—vomiting in one case. Such things are laughed at by
the scientific, but if testimony goes for anything (and perhaps it does
not), they are well established." The then editor of *Timehri*, iii. p.
149, speaking of this supposed real physico-sympathetic connection
between a man and his wife, extracts the following from the *Academy*:
"In Mr. York-Powell's interesting and able review of Grimm's *Teutonic
Mythology* (*Academy*, Feb. 23), reference is made to the universal
belief among our English and Irish peasantry 'that a man will suffer
from such ills as are wont to accompany pregnancy, nausea, neuralgia,
and the like, if his wife be lucky enough to escape them.' Just to show
that folklore is in many cases but a too free and illogical argument
based on facts, I may perhaps be allowed to say that I am to-day
acquainted with three persons, one living in Sussex, one in London, and
one in Northants, who invariably suffer from neuralgia or vomiting when
their wives are *enceinte*, the ladies themselves having a very happy
time of it."

The folk-belief in question is not, however, due to a too hasty
generalisation from those coincident ills York-Powell specifies. It is
an aberrant form of reasoning, but for the idea which grounds the belief
one can adduce parallels: the Central Australian tribes believe that
birth is a re-incarnation of a spirit-part—that conception results from
the

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

entrance of a spirit-part. <span id="fr_85"></span>[1](#fn_85.md) The Irish
survival of wearing the trousers of the father can surely be only a
relic of an earlier rite, wherein the father was credited with having
birth-pains, and may be paralleled among non-Aryans from S. India.

In southern India, where Telugu is spoken, the wandering Erukala-vandhu
observe the custom. The Rev. John Cain writes in the *Indian Antiquary*
for May, 1874 (p. 151): "Directly the woman feels the birth-pangs she
informs her husband, who immediately takes some of her clothes, puts
them on, places on his forehead the mark which the women usually place
on theirs, retires into a dark room, where there is only a very dim
lamp, and lies down on the bed, covering himself with a long cloth. When
the child is born, it is washed and placed on the cot beside the father;
assafoetida, jaggery, and other articles are then given, not to the
mother, but to the father. During the days of ceremonial uncleanness the
man is treated as the other Hindus treat their women on such occasions.
He is not allowed to leave his bed, but has everything needful brought
to him."

Tylor <span id="fr_86"></span>[2](#fn_86.md) shows that it exists among the
Dravidians, though not known as an Aryan Hindoo practice: a man at the
birth of his first-born son or daughter by the chief wife, or for any
son afterwards, will retire to bed for a lunar month, living principally
on a rice diet, abstaining from exciting food and from smoking; at the
end of the month he bathes,

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

puts on a fresh dress, and gives his friends a feast. Accompanying the
couvade, we find restrictions as to occupation, as to diet (even
fasting), up to the time the navel string falls off, or longer. The rite
implies religious scruple from the outset; there is more even than
sympathetic association with the feebleness of child-life; so far it
implies affection and self-sacrifice for the young life, and
acknowledges succession through the father, and tends towards conjugal
fidelity, though not strictly restricted to monogamy. Far from being a
farce as such, it implicates some postulates of civilisation, and from
the first it implies a religious theory embodied in rite. When it arises
it is never felt as fiction or symbolic pretence: it is as a survival,
not merely a sign and record of the change from maternal to paternal
society, but a dim foreshadowing of future science, the knowledge of the
real actuality of fatherhood. Couvade is a rite or custom that
implicates some explanation of the introduction of life into the world.
It implies sympathetic magic, as when a father diets himself from
instinctive physical sympathy with the new-born infant; or by simulating
child-birth it relieves the real mother by magical transference of
pain. <span id="fr_87"></span>[1](#fn_87.md)

A digression may be allowed here. If there be a rite to implicate some
theory of the introduction of life, such as that when you are born you
are a spirit-part of some ancestor, would not a rite be

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

necessitated to show that death, or the extinction of life, is due to
the spirit or spirit-part of an ancestor having assumed another form? Is
an ancestor thought of as being in the last dead, and is the last dead
thought of as being called to defend his people at the place of burial
until the next death? Is not what was ancestral spirit-part at birth not
likely to be an ancestral spirit-part at death; and is not the last
buried the guardian spirit, perhaps awaiting re-incorporation? Would not
the conception of *An Fhaire Chlaidh*, the belief that the soul of the
last buried keeps watch until the next funeral comes to the churchyard
and is grave-guardian, fall in with such a view? Instances from the
Highlands will be given in the fourth chapter (cf. [p.
35](sbc03.htm#page_35) as to 'sitting with the dead'.md).

The belief that even the bones of the dead could be a source of
paternity is traceable in the Highlands. Sir Walter Scott, in his
notes <span id="fr_88"></span>[1](#fn_88.md) to Canto III. of the *Lady of
the Lake*, states that it was the account in the Laird of Macfarlane's
Manuscript that suggested to him the idea of Brian the Hermit, 'bred
between the living and the dead'; and the late Rev. A. Clerk, LL.D.,
minister of Kilmallie, who speaks of the tale as "the above probable
story (!) of his (*i.e.* the child's) paternity," states that "this
account of him is still preserved in the traditions of the place," that
"the tradition still preserved in the country agrees exactly with the
account given by the old Laird, representing the Gille Dubh (Black Lad)
as an able and devout

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

man, totally different from the savage seer depicted in the poem." <span
id="fr_89"></span>[1](#fn_89.md) Dr. Clerk writes the name as *Gille Dubh
mac ’Ille Chnàmhlaich*, or the Black Child, Son of the Bones, "for such,
unpronounceable as it appears, is the true designation; and though the
story may be familiar to many, we give the substance of it here as
connected with the locality." I rather think cnàmhlach conveys the sense
of mouldering embers of fire, as in the phrase *cnàmhlach theine*, but
in either case the paternity is attributed to the dead. To this child in
later life was attributed the building of the first church at Kilmallie,
which simply means that the spot was sacred ere the introduction of
Christianity. There are large beech trees near now; in 1746 the ash tree
burnt down at Kilmallie was the largest and most remarkable in Scotland,
being no less than 58 feet in circumference. This gives additional
presumption of ancient sanctity.

Dr. Clerk tells how the young people of Corpach and of Annat (*i.e.*
mother-church)—two neighbouring farms—were watching the cattle in the
fold. "The place was a small hill a little to the west of the present
church, close to the public road, and conspicuous from a clump of Scotch
fir covering its summit. It shews some faint traces of its having been
fortified as a stronghold, and its name, *Cnocna-Faobh*, or the Hill of
Spoils, tells of its having been the scene of strife and of bloodshed.
At the period in question it was strewn with the bones of

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

the slain, left there to bleach under summer's sun and winter's snow,
which proves that the conflict was between parties animated by the
deadliest hate toward each other; for rarely indeed was such dishonour
shewn to the dead in the Highlands." From this point I crave leave to
quote the Laird of Macfarlane's <span id="fr_90"></span>[1](#fn_90.md)
words: "The people report of a battell focht in old tymes, hard by thar
Church, and how long after, hirds feeding ther cattell in that place, in
a cold season, made a fyre of dead men's bones ther scattered, who being
all removed except one mayd who took up her cloaths and uncovered
hirself sum part here, a sudden whirlwind threw sum of the ashes in her
privie member. Whereupon she conceaved and bore a sone called Gillie
dowmak Chravolick, that is to say the black chyld sone to the bones, who
after becam learned and relligious and built this Churche which now
standeth in Kilmaillie."

The figure of Brian, whose story illustrates Parthenogenesis or Virgin
Birth, goes back on Celtic tradition, wherein he figures as a demi-god.
He is a being to whom entreaty is made; he is referred to by a Badenoch
poet, Lachlan Macpherson of Strathmashie, who was born about 1723. In a
poem humorously descriptive of a certain old gentleman's wedding, he
says:

When all had assembled,  
They of Brian entreated  
That all might survive till their locks  
Were grey as the bridegroom's.

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

The original of which is:

Nuair a thainig iad a nīos  
Rinn iad achanaich ri Brīan  
Iad a bhi uile cho līath  
Ri cīabhag fhir na bainnse.  
    (Mackenzie's *Sar-Obair Nam Bard*, p. 263.)

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Another song of
about the reign of James VI., and composed by his stepmother to Domhull
Gorm Macdonald, speaks of Brian in terms which put him alongside of
Cuchulainn, Ossian, Oscar; and in a context, where the strength of sea
and sun are invoked, so much so that Miss Tolmie notes Brian as
signifying 'Divine Power.' <span id="fr_91"></span>[1](#fn_91.md)

A Highland sleep-blessing is to the following effect:

I lie down to-night with mild Mary and her son,  
With Michael the bright-white, and with Bride beneath her mantle.  
I lie down with God, and may God lie down with me;  
I shall not lie down with Briain, and Briain shall not lie down with
me. <span id="fr_92"></span>[2](#fn_92.md)

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Though similar
sleep-blessings are current in Ireland, Dr. Douglas Hyde <span
id="fr_93"></span>[3](#fn_93.md) remarks that he has never elsewhere heard
or seen 'this very curious expression,'

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> —*Briain*, which
now-a-days connotes something similar to Satan. Though apparently
forgotten in Ireland, it is not yet extinct in the Isles. It there bears
the force of "angel, archangel, god, divinity, hence god of evil; a term
of exclamation. *A bhriain* = thou god; *a bhriain Mhìcheil* = thou god
Michael." <span id="fr_94"></span>[1](#fn_94.md) The name Brian is met with
in a poem where St. Michael, as the Gaelic Neptune and patron of the
sea, is spoken of as Brian Michael; in other words, St. Michael,
venerated among the Celts, has taken the place of the deity Brian.

Thou wert the warrior of courage  
Going on the journey of prophecy;  
Thou wouldst not travel on a cripple,  
Thou didst take the steed of Brian Michael,  
He was without bit in his mouth,  
Thou didst ride him on the wing,  
Thou didst leap over the knowledge of Nature. <span
id="fr_95"></span>[2](#fn_95.md)

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Brian seems to
have been in part a sea-god, whose place was latterly taken by St.
Michael, Michael of the white steeds, who subdued the dragon. But
perhaps he was not always thought of in this aspect any more than the
Hellenic Zeus, who is a stream-god (Náïos) at Dodona and a water-god
with the epithet θαλάσσιος at Sidon, instead of his usual place as a
sky-god.

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

The whole figure of Brian—the Michael of pre-Christian times—is rooted
in Old Celtic thought; <span id="fr_96"></span>[1](#fn_96.md) he with his
two brothers Iuchar and Uar belong to the Tuatha De Danaan as gods of
knowledge, of art and of poetry. Brian, Iuchar (or, in its longer form,
Iucharba) and Uar are three aspects of the same deity,—a feature that is
common in many countries where a deity is typified as a triad arising
from psychic conditions of thought. Together, according to the *Dialogue
of the Two Sages*, they beget an only son, whose name *Ecne* means
knowledge, letters, poetry. Dana, elsewhere called Brigit, is the mother
of these three gods or aspects of god-life, and she was wife of Bress,
king of the Fornorians, but by birth she belonged to the divine race,
her father being the Dagda. The *Book of the Invasions* speaks of Donand
as their mother: "Donand, daughter of the same Delbaeth, that is to say,
the mother of the three last, to wit: Brian, Iucharba and Iuchair."
These were the three gods of *danu*, of fate, or, if we render it
otherwise, of literature and art. Just as the cult of the goddess
Brigit, a name in root cognate with the Continental name Burgundy, was
in large measure transferred to the Christian St. Brigit, on whose altar
at Kildare there burned perpetual fire, so the cult of Brian, the god,
was transferred to St. Michael; just as Brigit was both goddess and
female *file*, 'poet or seer,' so Brian and his brothers Iuchar and Uar
are gods of knowledge, art and poetry. Brian, accordingly, is a seer.
Brian is a son of Tuireann by Brigit; both

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

mother and son are eminent in knowledge: Brian and his brothers have one
son in common, viz. Ecna, *i.e.* knowledge. The same mythic idea is
attempted to be expressed by three synonyms. The older form seems to
have been Brión, as in the *Wooing of Emer* (Tochmarc Émire), a form
made into Brian in the Fate of the *Children of Tuirenn*. <span
id="fr_97"></span>[1](#fn_97.md) The root idea may be seen in *brī*,
dignity, esteem, worth, ideas expressing a sense of what is exalted,
hence 'born from on high.' At times he figures as Fortune, if not as
Providence. Ossian in a lullaby to his mother is made to say:

If thou art my mother, and thou a deer  
Arise ere sun arise on thee;  
      .       .       .       .       .       .       .       .       .  
May Fortune (Providence) preserve thee from
hoarseness-of-breathing <span id="fr_98"></span>[2](#fn_98.md)  
Ere thy voice thy sweetheart hear. <span id="fr_99"></span>[3](#fn_99.md)

Mr. Campbell's variant is rendered by him thus:

"If Brian would take from me his murmuring, before my sweetheart will
hear my voice." But the force of the first clause is: "O that Brian
would check the *srannan* (hoarse breathing) of me," *i.e.* "may B.
restrain from me the murmuring," being a wish that Brian, the fairy god,
would keep her from making any noise by which her presence would become
known to Fionn. Ossian's advice to his

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

mother, in her animal-form of deer, that she should get up before
sunrise, implies that otherwise she was liable to be shot by hunters; to
be up ere sunrise was a sort of taboo comparable to some of the
restrictions of the Early Irish kings in the *Book of Rights*.

*Srannan a’ bhāis*, 'the rattle of death,' is not so strong a phrase as
*an cloicheir*, the expression for the death-rattle. Since Brian figures
as Fortune, we need not be surprised at meeting him as the author of
good counsel. Gillies's *Collection of Gadhelic Poetry* (Perth, 1786)
gives *The Wise Man's Advice to his Son*, maxims largely proverbial in
the Highlands and partly current in Ireland, as we see from the lines
given at the end of Nicolson's edition of the *Proverbs*, as well as
from Bourke's *Irish Grammar*. The lines have wisdom, good humour and
pithiness in the original, and I may give a literal rendering of some,
which are in keeping with his character as a god of wisdom:

Counsel Brian did give to me  
Self-minded not to be;  
Nor go into fray nor fight  
Unless, I thought, I would come back in life.

Another counsel he gave  
Which, methinks, was none behind:  
  Though mine were the world's wealth  
  Not to set it against mine honour.

Of frequenting the Temple be mindful,  
Fix not thy purpose on evil:  
Let not this world's pelf  
Cause thee to perjure thy soul. <span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

If of a weakling thou hast a foolish report  
Put not thine <span id="fr_100"></span>[1](#fn_100.md) thereto;  
Be not surety in a lie—  
Let that tale pass bye.

Affable and kind be to thy friend,  
With a stranger shun a quarrel;  
Say not thou wilt refuse the right  
Nor seek nor refuse honour.

In thy palms squeeze not the thorn,  
To thy foe thy distress make not known.  
A beast of venom never willingly waken,  
—A knife's edge in thy flesh.

Be not over fiery nor fierce,  
Without a staff frequent not the stream;  
Let aught not escape thy lips  
That will earn thee reproach.

The fierceness of fellow despise not;  
Of boiling fluid sip not a drop,  
A clean sharp-edgèd razor-blade  
When thou see’st, tread softly by.

Haughty-minded be not; nor self disparage,  
Spend not on trifles thy goods.  
For folly's sake stir not strife  
Nor refuse to fight when it needs be.

Of a trifling flaw be not over-watchful;  
Oppress not the poor;  
Nor praise nor dispraise the worthless  
Until the faultless sage is found.

Dear one, for thy youth sufficeth,  
Threap not in a matter disputed;  
Thy character to coarse jest expose not  
Nor groundless prefer thy complaint.

The latter-day reports indicate clearly that Brian's birth is one of
parthenogenesis: possibly an earlier

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

age may not have distinguished this from the action of the Dusii, the
incubi which were thought of as consorting with mortals. <span
id="fr_101"></span>[1](#fn_101.md) A parallel belief is met with among the
Bretons. My reference is in Keightley (p. 441), who quotes W. Grimm: "In
the ruins of Tresmalonen dwell the Courils. They are of a malignant
disposition, but great lovers of dancing. At night they sport among the
druidical monuments. The unfortunate shepherd that approaches them must
dance their rounds with them till cock-crow; and the instances are not
few of persons thus ensnared who have been found next morning dead with
exhaustion and fatigue. Woe also to the ill-fated maiden who draws near
the Couril dance! nine months after the family counts one more. Yet so
great is the power and cunning of the Dwarfs that the young stranger
bears no resemblance to them, but they impart to it the features of some
lad of the village."

But the Kilmaillie story is the more primitive one, as it points to
belief in the Virgin Birth. We recall Hera who conceived Hephaistos
simply by inhaling the wind; the maiden Wenonah of Longfellow's poem who
was quickened by the west wind and bore Michabo (*i.e.* Hiawatha); the
virgin Ilmatar fructified by the east wind gave birth to the Finnish

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Väinämöinen.
Mohammedan tradition spoke of a preadamite race of women who conceived
daughters by the wind; the Arunta tribes of Australia hold that a storm
from the west brings child-germs. These are only partial parallels, for
in the Highland story it is the wind, but the wind reinforced by the
bones of the dead. In short, there is ancestral virtue in Brian's birth
quite as much as was associated with the birth of Servius Tullius at
Rome, where the father was deemed to have been the household Lar. From
Irish literature instances of supernatural birth have been given in
Meyer and Nutt's *Voyage of Bran the Son of Febail*, and I must not
further enter on the theme here. Even a star is sometimes conceived as
fructifying: St. Aidan or Maedoc was born of a star which fell into his
mother's mouth as she slept. <span id="fr_102"></span>[1](#fn_102.md)
Commonly at this stage of thought fructification is regarded as due to
the swallowing of a worm: the births of Conchobar and of Cuchulainn were
accounted for by their mothers having swallowed worms in the draught.
Most closely associated is the idea of the Birth-Token. In the Breton
story of the King of the Fishes we meet with a poor and childless
fisherman who spares the life of a fish with scales of gold, which his
wife desires to eat. When re-caught, the fish asks that its head be
given her, and the scales buried in the garden: the fish promises that
to the wife would be born three children with beautiful stars on their
foreheads, while from the scales would grow three rose-trees, one of
which was to belong to each of the boys and be his life-token, and when
the boy

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

was in danger of death his tree should wither. Variants assign parts of
the fish to the fisherman's mare and bitch, which bring forth young to
the number of the children. <span id="fr_103"></span>[1](#fn_103.md) In the
Highlands we meet with the same story: here the fish tells the fisher:
"Thou shalt let no man split me, but do it thyself. Thou shalt put into
the pot but a morsel of my liver and a bit of my heart to boil for
thyself, and for thy wife, and for thy mare, and for thy dog to eat.
Three bones thou wilt find at the side of my head. Go out and bury them
in the garden. Thy wife will bear three sons. Thy mare will cast three
foals. Thy dog will litter three whelps. When they are born dig up my
bones and keep them. Three trees will sprout where the bones are buried,
and they will be in leaf and budding, in sap and growing, summer and
winter, spring and autumn, every day for ever, so long as the clan shall
live. They will droop or wither or die as they do." <span
id="fr_104"></span>[2](#fn_104.md)

With these life-tokens thought has already made the transition to the
idea of the external soul.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_58"></span>[37:1](sbc04.htm#fr_58.md) *The Blood Covenant*, p.
219, quoting Buxtorf's *Synagoga Judaica*, c. ii.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[38:1](sbc04.htm#fr_59.md) For other references,
cf. Strack, *Blutaberglaube*, 1892, p. 125; Christensen, *Baareprøven*,
Copenhagen, 1900, investigates 'bier-proof'; cf. Wood-Martin, *Elder
Faiths*, i. 323. Herodotus (iii. 18) speaks of the drinking of blood as
the highest sanction of a treaty, and alludes to it as an Arabian
custom. Mohammed had to forbid it as one of the heavy sins (Kremer,
*Studien zur verg. Kultur Geschichte*, p. 35). Stanley, the African
traveller, speaks of exchanging blood through marks on each other's
arms, after which there was a treaty of peace, as firm as any made in
Europe, he thought.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[41:1](sbc04.htm#fr_60.md) Quoted from *Celtic
Monthly* in Inverness *Northern Chronicle*, 16th August, 1905.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[41:2](sbc04.htm#fr_61.md) Rev. Walter Gregor's
*Folk Lore of North-East of Scotland*, 1881, p. 208.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[42:1](sbc04.htm#fr_62.md) *Wardlaw MS*. pp.
516-521 of Scottish Texts Society, edited by William Mackay, p. 517.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[44:1](sbc04.htm#fr_63.md) The minister quotes
Genesis 9:6 Numbers 35:3 to show that only blood can atone for blood.
John M‘Keanire at the end of two years was discovered; he confesses; he
was compelled to the deed by John Mackeanvore,—both were hung near the
parish church of Wardlaw, the present Kirkhill, Clunes, Inverness.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[44:2](sbc04.htm#fr_64.md) *Folk-Lore of the Isle
of Man*, p. 145.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[45:1](sbc04.htm#fr_65.md) Lettsom's translation,
p. 183.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[45:2](sbc04.htm#fr_66.md) Benson's *Remarkable
Trials*, p. 94<sup>n</sup>.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[45:3](sbc04.htm#fr_67.md) Scotsman, March 8, 1907.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[45:4](sbc04.htm#fr_68.md) Sola ex omnibus
superfutura, Pliny's *Nat. Hist.* lib. II, c. 53.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[45:5](sbc04.htm#fr_69.md) Chan eil a h-anail
romham.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[45:6](sbc04.htm#fr_70.md) Mar cheo no mar thoit
gheal.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[45:7](sbc04.htm#fr_71.md) Ralston, *Songs of the
Russian People*, p. 116; for soul thought of as breath, wind, vapour,
cf. Skr. *atmán* cognate with O.H.G. *âtum*, breath, soul; Irish
*athach*, breath. Modern Greeks speak of the soul at death escaping
through the mouth, 'with the soul between one's teeth,' while ψυχή at
times denotes 'stomach '--Abbott's *Greek Folk-Lore*, 193<sup>n</sup>.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[46:1](sbc04.htm#fr_72.md) Cognate with G. *deò*,
breath, are Lithuanian *dwesuì dwẽsti*, to breathe; *dwãse*, breath,
spirit; *dùsas*, vapour. Schrader connects Latin *Fêralia*, from a
proto-Italic \**dhvêsâlia*, a festival in honour of the dead, also
probably L. *fêriae* for \**dhvêsiae*, *feralis*, belonging to the dead
or underworld, and *festus*. Certain is the connection with Lithuanian
*daũsos*, in plural meaning 'the air'; Lettic, *dwascha*, breathe,
breath; Greek, θεός, god, from θϝεσός (Brugmann). From a long form of
the root, \**dhu̯ēs*, comes the Middle High German *ge-twās*, ghost;
Lettic *dvêsele*, soul, life, breath (with which Walde would connect the
Latin *bestia*). From \**dhū̆*, another form of the root, come Lithuanian
*dustù*, *dusau*, 'aufkeuchen'; *dùsas*, sigh; *dūsiù*, to gasp; Lettic
*dusu*, *dust*, 'aufkeuchen.'

<span id="fn_73"></span>[48:1](sbc04.htm#fr_73.md) Here *tannasg*,
apparition, is either shortened or confused with Ir. *tásc*, report,
etc.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[48:2](sbc04.htm#fr_74.md) *Spiorad*, 'spirit,' is
a loan from L. *spiritus*.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[49:1](sbc04.htm#fr_75.md) *Bezz. Beiträge*, 19,
276; cf. *ib*. 21, 212, where Mikkola equates Gothic *saiwala* with O.
Bulg. *sila*, force, energy, power; Prussian *seilin*, exertion, effort,
zeal, from \**seilā*, *sei̯(u̯)l*,—the primary root in Servian *do-sin-uti
se*, 'potiri' from \**seii̯u̯-n-*.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[50:1](sbc04.htm#fr_76.md) Phil. of Religion, p.
396.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[51:1](sbc04.htm#fr_77.md) *v*. Schrader's article
on Aryan Religion in Hastings, *Ency. of Religion and Ethics*.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[51:2](sbc04.htm#fr_78.md) 'Tuatha adortais
síde'—Old Irish Hymn ascribed to Fiacc.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[53:1](sbc04.htm#fr_79.md) Trevelyan, *Folk-Lore
and Folk-Stories of Wales*, p. 165; cf. the veneration for snakes in
Lithuania.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[54:1](sbc04.htm#fr_80.md) Cf. Dr. Carmichael's
*Carmina Gadelica*.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[54:2](sbc04.htm#fr_81.md) *The Gael*, vol. v. 330
= *Dh’òrduich e a thiodhlaiceadh am bian an fhéidh sin*.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[56:1](sbc04.htm#fr_82.md) The stress is on *Nāir*,
not on the preceding *Mo*, which is a suffix of endearment. The accent
is quite different from that in *Loch Monar* in Ross-shire, which has
the stress on the first syllable.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[59:1](sbc04.htm#fr_83.md) *Folk-Lore*, Sept. 1893,
pp. 357, 359, 'The Women's War-of-Words in the Feast of Bricriu' alludes
to the couvade. The Irish tale *Cess Noinden Ulad*, 'the Nine Days’
Debility (?) of the Ulidians,' may reflect this practice among the
Cruithne or Irish Picts, possibly conjoined with the old custom of
racing for a bride. Cf. Frazer's *Kingship*, 261.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[60:1](sbc04.htm#fr_84.md) *Totemism and Exogamy*,
iv. 252.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[62:1](sbc04.htm#fr_85.md) Crawley's *Tree of
Life*, p. 211; *v*. Spencer and Gillen's *Native Tribes of Central
Australia*.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[62:2](sbc04.htm#fr_86.md) *Researches*, 2nd ed. p.
301.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[63:1](sbc04.htm#fr_87.md) The Highland phrase is:
*chuir i na piantan air an duine* = 'she put the pains on the husband.'
This transference is understood as being due to the wife or else to the
wise-woman who first attended her.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[64:1](sbc04.htm#fr_88.md) *v*. *Scott's Poetical
Works*. Edin. MDCCCLI. Robert Cadell, St. Andrew Square. Not all
editions give this note in full.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[65:1](sbc04.htm#fr_89.md) A. Clerk, *Memoir of
Colonel John Cameron, Fassifearn*, 2nd ed. 1858. Appendix, Note A.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[66:1](sbc04.htm#fr_90.md) Macfarlane's
*Geographical Collection*, vol. ii. p. 520 (Scot. Texts Soc.), 3907, ed.
by Sir Arthur Mitchell.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[67:1](sbc04.htm#fr_91.md) Miss F. Tolmie's
'Highland Folk Songs'; it is given also in *The Gael*. The significant
lines are: Gun robh neart Chonchulainn leat \| Agus neart na Féinne \|
Neart Oisein bhig agus Osgair threuna \| Neart an daimh duinn as àirde
leumas\] Neart na fairge thruime threubhaich \| Gun robh neart na
cruinne leat\| Agus neart na gréine \| Gun robh Brian dhuit mar tha mise
dhuit \| Gu bheil mise mar dhearbh phiuthar dhuit \| S mur h-eil ni ’s
mó tha ’cheart uibhir \|.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[67:2](sbc04.htm#fr_92.md)

Luighim sìos le Dia is luigheadh Dia lium  
Cha luigh mi sìos le Briain ’s cha luigh Briain lium.  
                         (Carmichael's *Carmina Gadelica*.)

<span id="fn_93"></span>[67:3](sbc04.htm#fr_93.md) *Religious Songs of
Connacht*, vol. 2, p. 409.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[68:1](sbc04.htm#fr_94.md) *Carm. Gad*. ii. 232.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[68:2](sbc04.htm#fr_95.md)

Bu to gaisgeach na misnich  
Dol air astar na fiosachd  
Is tu nach siubhladh air criplich  
Ghabh thu steud Briain Mhìcheil,  
E gun chabstar ’na shliopan,  
Thu ’ga mharcachd air iteig  
Leum thu thairis air fìosrachadh Naduir.  
                    (Quoted in *Carm. Gad*. i. p. 200.)

<span id="fn_96"></span>[69:1](sbc04.htm#fr_96.md) *v*. D’Arbois de
Jubainville's *Irish Mythological Cycle*, Best's trans. p. 82.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[70:1](sbc04.htm#fr_97.md) *v*. Kuno Meyer in
*Eriu*, iv. 69.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[70:2](sbc04.htm#fr_98.md) *Srannan*, hoarseness,
murmuring in sleep, snorting of cattle, rattling in the throat; *srannan
a bhàis* = death rattle.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[70:3](sbc04.htm#fr_99.md) Original in Campbell's
*Leabhar Na Féinne*, p. 200; a variant where Brian is used instead of
*an Sealbh* in *Waifs and Strays of Celtic Tradition*, iv. 79.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[72:1](sbc04.htm#fr_100.md) Lit. thine half-hand.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[73:1](sbc04.htm#fr_101.md) Quosdam daemones quos
Dusios Galli nuncupant, hanc assidue immunditiam et tentare et efficere
plures talesque asseverant.—Augustine, *De Civ. Dei*, xxiii.; cf. Breton
*Duz*; E. *Deuce*? The Manx hairy satyr, Phynnodderree,—'its hair or fur
is its covering,' says Craigeen (*Dicty*. 130),—is parallel: story
pictures him as an Elfin Knight who fell in love with a Manx maiden
(Moore, p. 53). He is the 'Dun Haired One,' and parallel to the *Mag
Molach* (Hairy Paw or Hand) of the Highlands, where it is a synonym for
the Devil.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[74:1](sbc04.htm#fr_102.md) *Rev. Celt*. V. 275.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[75:1](sbc04.htm#fr_103.md) Hartland, *Primitive
Paternity*, i. 8, quoting Sébillot's *Contes Pop*. i. 124 (Story No.
18).

<span id="fn_104"></span>[75:2](sbc04.htm#fr_104.md) See *The Celtic Dragon
Myth*, p. 37, where Campbell of Islay's retelling is given (Edinburgh,
J. Grant).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II. The Wanderings of Psyche](sbc05.md)
