[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](sbc07)  [Next](sbc09.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Survivals in Belief Among the Celts*, by George Henderson, \[1911\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

### CHAPTER III.

### THE EARTHLY JOURNEY.

EVERY journey has its stages, and for the purposes of these pages
account is to be taken of the following:

1\. *Lustration*, or lustral rites, whether by fire, by water, by milk
or by blood.

2\. *Illumination*, under which come premonitions, omens, divination,
inclusive of second-sight. Here mysticism is recognised from the outset:
it is so far a testimony to the fact that all human knowledge is in
part.

3\. *Healing*, passing in spiritual religion to salvation, wherein all
healing culminates. It has its preshadowings in

(*a*) The rites that unite. Here fall the ceremonies relating to
espousals and marriage, and some forms of pagan eucharists.

(*b*) The rites that avert. Here account is taken of the evil workings
of envy; the effects of the evil eye; the belief that an issue of blood
may be magically stopped; some phases of magic and of sacrifice.

(*c*) Faith-healing under psychic suggestion.

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> This is a constant
element in human life, but it assumes lower and higher forms. Account is
here taken of old elementary rites only, such as that at Loch Mo Nāir;
those at Holy Wells, such as Holywell; a special instance is the
pilgrimage to Lough Derg (St. Patrick's Purgatory).

(*d*) Folk-medicine.

We treat in order:

1\. *Lustration—the rites appertaining to the progress of the pilgrim
range from the cradle to the grave*.—In folk-practice probably only a
few of the more significant have survived until within recent memory.
Midwives, according to Pennant's account (18th cent.) gave new-born
babes a small spoonful of earth and whisky as the first-food. In the
Isle of Man salt was put in the baby's mouth as soon as possible after
birth. If the child had once partaken of any food it could not be
exposed. <span id="fr_251"></span>[1](#fn_250.md) Among the old midwives it
was a sacred practice to roast the omphalos after it fell off, about the
ninth day, and give it to the child to drink, powdered and mixed with
water (Inverness-shire). This was, as it were, the child's first
eucharist. In Man, from the birth of a child until after it was
baptised, it was customary to keep in the room a *peck* or wooden hoop
covered with sheep's skin, which was filled with oaten cakes and cheese
for visitors, and small pieces of cheese and bread called *blithe meat*
were scattered in and about the house for the fairies. <span
id="fr_252"></span>[2](#fn_251.md) In the Highlands fire-lustration was
resorted to, as Martin testifies; and Pennant, who was a diligent
inquirer, says, "It has

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

happened that, after baptism, the father has placed a basket, filled
with bread and cheese, on the pothook that impended over the fire in the
middle of the room, which the company sit around; and the child is
thrice handed across the fire, with the design to frustrate all attempts
of evil spirits or evil eyes. This originally seems to have been
designed as a purification. . . ." This is parallel with the old
Scottish practice of whirling a fir-candle three times round the bed on
which the mother and newly-born child lay. <span
id="fr_253"></span>[1](#fn_252.md) The Bible was put under the mother's
pillow, with a piece of silk from her marriage dress, and fire or light
was carried thrice round the bed after a birth; this was done at Loch
Eck 40 years ago as a protection against the Fairies. Martin in his
*Western Isles* records that fire was also carried morning and evening
round the mother till she was churched, and round the child till it was
christened. May one here compare the Persian practice of lighting a fire
on the roof of a house where any one is ill? The purpose is to ward off
any further evil, not as Mr. Frazer thinks when he suggests 'the
intention possibly being to interpose a barrier of fire to prevent the
escape of the soul.' <span id="fr_254"></span>[2](#fn_253.md) In the
Highlands there existed the rite of the *Leigheas Cuairte*, passing
children through a hoop of fire, described by the late Rev. Dr. A.
Stewart, Nether Lochaber, in *Proceedings of the Society of Antiquaries
of Scotland*. <span id="fr_255"></span>[3](#fn_254.md)

In the account of the *Leigheas Cuairte* five women were seen: "Two of
them were standing opposite

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

each other, were holding a hoop vertically between them, and the hoop
all around, except where they held it in the middle, was wrapped in
something that was burning briskly, emitting small jets of flame and a
good deal of smoke. Opposite each other, on either side of the opening
of the hoop, stood other two engaged in handing backwards and forwards
to each other, through the centre of the hoop of fire, a child, whose
age, as I afterwards learned, was eighteen months. The fifth woman, who
was the mother of the child, stood a little aside, earnestly looking on.
They did not notice me, and I stood quietly viewing the scene until the
child, having been several times passed and returned again through the
fiery circle, was handed to its mother; and then the burning hoop was
carried by the two women that held it to a pool of the burn, into which
it was thrown. . . . The child was a weakling, constantly clamouring for
food, which it ate voraciously, and yet it did not thrive . . . the
child was under the influence of an evil eye of great power; and nothing
but that it should be subjected to the rite I had witnessed (called in
Gaelic *Beannachd Na Cuairte*, 'the Blessing of the Round or of the
Circle') could avail to counteract the evil influence . . . an old
woman's evil eye had put the wasting into the child (*a chuir an
t-seacadh san leanabh*), at the same time put the hunger into it (*a
chuir an t-acras ann*). . . . The child's mother and four of the
neighbouring women having been duly initiated into the mysteries of the
Beannachd Chuairte, an iron hoop that had once encircled the rim of a
big washing-tub was got hold of, and a straw rope

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (*siaman*) wound
round it. Here and there along the windings of the *siaman* a little oil
was dropped to make it burn the brighter when it should be set on fire."
The child had to be passed and repassed eighteen times, once for each of
the eighteen moons that represented the child's age. A bunch of
bog-myrtle was put above its bed, and not touched nor taken down until
the next crescent moon ('nuair thainig a cheud fhàs soluis mu’n cuairt')
(*Proceed. Soc. Antiq. Scot*. March 10, 1890).

A parallel rite is testified to from Wigtownshire, while the late Rev.
Dr. Scott of St. George's, Edinburgh, testifies to his remembrance of
new-born children having been passed through the fire in Lanarkshire.
Another correspondent quotes a Gaelic verse:

Mo nighean bhōidheach an fhuilt réidh  
Gur spéiseil leam a ghluaiseas tu;  
Ged a robh mi tinn gu bàs  
Do ghràdh bu leigheas cuairt’ dhomh e.

Beautiful maiden of smoothest hair,  
Delightful to me thine every movement;  
Even if I were sick unto death,  
Thy love would be as the healing of the circle to me.

One of the commonest sayings in the Highlands still is: *cha tig olc a
teine*, *i.e.* 'no evil comes from fire.' It is believed that getting
the hearth-fire enables a witch to spirit away all family blessing. It
is taboo to go between an epileptic and the hearth-fire on pain of the
spirit of epilepsy getting hold of one; by violating this prohibition
one easily caught the disease. The rite of smooring the fire ere going
to bed was reverently performed and

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

accompanied with prayer full of Christian associations: "I am smooring
the fire, O God, as the Son of Mary would smoor it." Swellings and
sprains were alleviated by making the sign of the cross in soot by aid
of the chimney-pot chain, or by soot taken from the chimney
'hanging-stick, *maidecrochaidh*, or 'cross-beam.' Embers of smouldering
fire (*āine* *theine*) were put into a pot and carried in circuit
sun-wise around the house at bed-time to ward off evil. *Ortha nam
Buadh* <span id="fr_256"></span>[1](#fn_255.md) speaks of the laving of the
palms in lustral low or fire (*ann an liù nan lasair*). The sacredness
of fire is evidenced in the perpetual fires kept formerly at the
monasteries of Seirkieran, Kilmainham, Inishmurray. <span
id="fr_257"></span>[2](#fn_256.md) Brigit was a fire-goddess whose festival
may have been the precursor of that of the Christian St. Brigit on the
day before Candlemas. She was a goddess of the crops as well as of
fire. <span id="fr_258"></span>[3](#fn_257.md) Perpetual fires were kept up
at Kildare (*Cill-dara*), 'the church of the oak.' The holy fires of the
Aryans were commonly kindled and fed with oak wood, with some
exceptions. <span id="fr_259"></span>[4](#fn_258.md) Flint was in all
likelihood used in kindling the 'paschal' fires which were formerly lit
about Eastertide. But the purifying fire known as *teine éiginn*,
usually construed as 'fire of necessity,' through a mistaken fancy that
*need* in 'need-fire' means 'necessity,' whereas it properly means
'friction,' hence 'friction-fire,' was properly produced by friction
from oak

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

beams. As the Gadhelic *teine-éignn* is a name unknown apparently in
Ireland, I am led to think that it may be founded on the Norse *eikinn*,
'oaken,' *eik* being of old the 'oak,' though now in Icelandic it has
come to mean 'tree of any kind.'

The need-fire was made in Mull by turning an *oaken* wheel over nine
oaken spindles from east to west. <span id="fr_260"></span>[1](#fn_259.md)
In houses between the two nearest running streams all other fires had to
be extinguished. Ramsay of Ochtertyre's account of the *Teine Éiginn* is
one of the oldest and the best: "The night before, all the fires in the
country were carefully extinguished, and next morning the materials for
exciting the sacred fires were prepared. The most primitive method seems
to be that which was used in the islands of Skye, Mull and Tiree. A
well-seasoned plank of *oak* was procured, in the midst of which a hole
was bored. A wimble of the *same timber* was then applied, the end of
which they fitted to the hole. But in some parts of the mainland the
machinery was different. They used a frame of greenwood of a square
form, in the centre of which was an axle-tree. In some places three
times three persons, in others three times nine, were required for
turning round by turns the axle-tree or wimble. If any of them had been
guilty of murder, adultery, theft or other atrocious crime, it was
imagined either that the fire would not kindle, or that it would be
devoid of its usual virtue. So soon as any sparks were emitted by means
of violent friction, they applied a species of agaric which grows on
birch trees, and is very combustible. This fire

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

had the appearance of being immediately derived from heaven, and
manifold were the virtues ascribed to it. They esteemed it a
preservative against witchcraft and a sovereign remedy against malignant
diseases, both *in the human species* and in cattle; and by it the
strongest poisons were supposed to have their nature changed."

Fire-lustration is a very ancient rite. According to Caesar the Druids
held that fire and water would in the end prevail. In the *Book of
Armagh* a name for the day of judgement is *erdáthe*: "usque ad diem
*erdathe* apud magos, id est, iudicii diem domini," <span
id="fr_261"></span>[1](#fn_260.md) and it may possibly reflect a similar
belief. Parallel rites occur elsewhere; for illustration I adduce a
Greek rite, the Ἀμφιδρόμια; "A ritual at which the new-born child was
solemnly carried round the hearth-fire and named in the presence of the
kinsmen. . . . Charondas speaks of certain δαίμονες ἑστιοῦχοι, powers of
the sacred hearth. Sometimes a hero or daimon might protect the gateway
of the house or city or the city-walls or the entrance to the temple, as
we hear of a ἥρως πρὸ πυλῶν in Thrace, of an ἐπιτέγιος ἥρως and
τειχοφύλαξ at Athens, the guardian of roof and wall of κλαϊκοφόρος, the
'holder of the temple keys,' at Epidauros." <span
id="fr_262"></span>[2](#fn_261.md)

Parallel conceptions may be traced in the following: "In Sonnenberg a
light must be kept constantly burning after the birth or the witches
will carry off the child. Amongst the Albanians a fire is kept

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

constantly burning in the room for forty days after the birth; the
mother is not allowed to leave the house all this time, and at night she
may not leave the room; and any one during this time who enters the
house by night is obliged to leap over a burning brand. In the Cyclades
no one is allowed to enter the house after sunset for many days after a
birth, and in modern Greece generally the woman may not enter the church
for forty days after the birth, just as in ancient Greece she might not
enter a temple during the same period." <span
id="fr_263"></span>[1](#fn_262.md)

"The mother never sets about any work till she has been *kirked*. In the
Church of Scotland there is no ceremony on the occasion; but the woman,
attended by some of her neighbours, goes into the church, sometimes in
service time, but oftener when it is empty; goes out again, surrounds
it, refreshes herself at some public-house, and then returns home.
Before this ceremony she is looked on as unclean, never is permitted to
eat with the family; nor will any one eat of the victuals she has
dressed" (*Pennant's Tour*). Within my own recollection the idea of
'uncleanness' before the 'kirking' was retained.

The Manx term for the churching of women, *lostey-chainley*, lit.
'candle-burning,' points to the old custom of keeping a consecrated
candle burning in the room where a birth took place, and
'candle-burning' in religious rites of later times has its roots in
primitive fire-lustration.

Next comes lustration by water or baptism. Some might be inclined to
think that Irish *baithis*,

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 'baptism,' is a
native word; or would hold by a verb *baitsim*, 'I sprinkle.' But even
if Gaelic *baist*, 'baptise,' be taken as through Latin *baptiso*, 'I
baptise,' the lustral rite itself, there can be no question, was known
in pre-Christian times. The *Cogadh Gaedhel re Gallaibh* refers to the
'pagan baptism' as well as other Gadhelic texts. It occurs to me in
passing that the rite (with which I have been long familiar as practised
by the old 'knee-women' or midwives) of roasting the *imleag* or
omphalos and, when ground to a powder, giving it mixed with water to the
infant to drink about the eighth or ninth day, was a concomitant of a
form of pagan baptismal rites. Maurer, who has written on the old
heathen baptism of the Teutons, suggests that baptism was a recognition
of the child on the part of the father whereby the infant was made an
heir; he shows that on the eighth day, or within the ninth day, the rite
was to be performed, from evidence in the old laws of the Visi-Goths and
Anglo-Saxons; the Romans, too, named a female infant on the eighth and a
male on the ninth day; the Greeks celebrated the seventh day after birth
with rites of cleansing, gifts, sacrifices and feasts. <span
id="fr_264"></span>[1](#fn_263.md)

Most of the old rites have left few traces. In Pennant's time he was
able to state that after baptism the first meat that the company tastes
is *crowdie*, a mixture of meal and water, or meal and ale thoroughly
mixed. 'Of this every person takes three spoonfuls.' In many parts still
it is a rule to have at least partial baptism administered, it being

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

held to be unlucky for the child to pass unchristened; when the infant
can be brought to church the rite is further proceeded with by the
priest. In the early nineteenth century it was customary to carry the
bread or bairn's piece in the procession on the way to church, and
custom prescribed that the 'piece' was to be offered to the first
person, whether high or low, who met the child, and it was considered
unlucky 'to decline the present.' <span id="fr_265"></span>[1](#fn_264.md)
One who was not a cleric could 'sprinkle' the child.

At Rome baptism was restricted to the period of Easter, the vigil of
Easter-tide to Pentecost, while in Africa and in Ireland Epiphany was a
baptismal festival. <span id="fr_266"></span>[2](#fn_265.md) A relic of
this still exists in those parts of the Highlands, *e.g*. Strathglass,
where the Epiphany is called *Féille Fairc*, the latter word having
dialectally *r* for *l* in this word, hence *Féille Failc*, 'festival of
laving.' The importance of water-lustration is clear from Gadhelic
having a special word, *taran*, for 'the ghost of an unbaptised infant,'
which was thought of as going about wailing in distress, though in some
districts unbaptised infants were thought of as being dipped in water at
the feet of Christ in the world unseen,—a thought charitable and sweet.
The importance of water itself is strongly evident in the Isle of Gigha
belief: "Here is a strange superstition for you. A parishioner told me
that he was in a house in the island after the children had gone

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

to bed; one of the children was restless in his sleep and often sitting
up, as if startled. The father ordered the boy to be quiet, with graphic
maledictions, and added: 'After all, I should not speak like that to the
boy, but reserve my bad language for the minister, who put far too
little water on the boy at baptism.' He assured this parishioner—an
*Ileach* (Islay-man)—that this was always the result of using little
water." <span id="fr_267"></span>[1](#fn_266.md)

In the *Proceedings of the Synod of Cashel*, A. D. 1172, Benedict of
Peterborough mentions for Ireland the following curious facts, which
show that the father, in accordance with old custom, could immerse the
child thrice in water immediately after birth, or, in the case of a rich
man's child, thrice in milk. Thus we could perhaps speak of a rite of
milk-baptism: "In illo autem concilio statuerunt, et auctoritate summi
pontificis praeceperunt, pueros in ecclesia baptizari, *In nomine*
Patris et Filii et Spiritus Sancti, et hoc a sacerdotibus fieri
praeceperunt. Mos enim prius erat per diversa loca Hiberniae, quod
statim cum puer nasceretur, pater ipsius vel quilibet alius eum ter
mergeret in aqua. Et si divitis filius esset, ter mergeret in
lacte." <span id="fr_268"></span>[2](#fn_267.md)

The mention of the milk reminds of the rite after Christian baptism at
Rome on Easter eve in the ninth century: "For the newly-baptised the
chalice is filled, not with wine but with milk and honey, that they may
understand . . . that they have entered already upon the promised land.
And there was

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

one more symbolical rite in that early Easter Sacrament, the mention of
which is often suppressed,—a lamb was offered on the altar, afterwards
cakes in the shape of a lamb. It was simply the ritual which we have
seen in the mysteries." <span id="fr_269"></span>[1](#fn_268.md)

Of ceremonies connected with weaning, the following is of interest. At
Carrickfergus it was formerly the custom for mothers, when giving their
child the breast for the last time, to put an egg in its hand and sit on
the threshold of the altar door with a leg on each side; this ceremony
was usually done on Sunday.

In the Highlands (Uist) it is held that no person should sleep in a
house without water in it, and least of all should a house where there
is a little child be without water. In a house of this kind the slender
one of the green coat was seen washing the child in a basin of
milk. <span id="fr_270"></span>[2](#fn_269.md) And water is efficacious
against the fairies. In a folk-tale the fairies are pictured as calling
at the door on a 'cake' to come out to them: the inmates threw water on
the cake, and it replied: 'I can't go, I am undone.' <span
id="fr_271"></span>[3](#fn_270.md) In Tiree, Gregorson Campbell says <span
id="fr_272"></span>[4](#fn_271.md) it was customary in many places to place
a drink of water beside the corpse previous to the funeral, in case the
dead should return.

Baptism is one of the most universal forms of

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

lustration: 'the pagan baptism,' referred to in the eleventh century
text of the *Wars of the Gaedhil and the Gall*, need not surprise us.

Blood forms the transition between water-lustration and sacrifice. Its
use in the cure of epilepsy may suffice here. I take it from the Rev. K.
Macdonald's *Social and Religious Life in the Highlands* (pp. 29 ff.):
"If an epileptic patient had been so fortunate as to be observed the
first time he had a fit, he might be cured by the sacrifice of a black
cock. This mode of healing is still resorted to. The cock is to be
caught at once and split down in the middle. Then it is wrapped in its
*warm blood* on the patient's head. When it cools it is removed and
buried, and the affliction is supposed to be buried along with it. In
the case of herpes or skin diseases of that class, the blood of a black
cock without a white feather, or a white cock without a black feather,
is recommended as a remedy. The blood of a black cat is used to check
erysipelas." In Ireland also the blood of a black cat is used as a cure
for the same complaint (*teine-dhiadh*). <span
id="fr_273"></span>[1](#fn_272.md) In Nest Ross the blood of a black cock
or of a black cat, or the blood of a male Munro, is a recognised cure
for *teine-Dé*, St. Anthony's Fire or 'shingles.' <span
id="fr_274"></span>[2](#fn_273.md) Blood taken from the patient's own leg
and given him to drink was a part of the cure quite recently in
Lewis. <span id="fr_275"></span>[3](#fn_274.md)

2\. *Illumination*.—It embraces every form of vision and of magic
knowledge. From being adepts in the magic arts, the wise man of old
received the name

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

of Druid, *i.e.* \**dru-vid*, 'very knowing, very wise.' <span
id="fr_276"></span>[1](#fn_275.md) This species of attempted knowledge
ranges from the premonition (*meanmuin*) to various kinds of omens
(*manadh*, *tuar*, *glaim*) and the arts of divination (fiosachid,
fàistneachd, tairngireachd, fàth-fìth). The terms *fàth-fìth* or
*fìth-fàth* was "applied to the occult power which rendered a person
invisible to mortal eyes and which transformed one object into
another." <span id="fr_277"></span>[2](#fn_276.md) Dr. Joyce <span
id="fr_278"></span>[3](#fn_277.md) has equated this with the *fáed-fíada*
associated with St. Patrick when he and his companions were transformed
into deer on their way to Tara.

Vision in folk-belief may embrace the seeing of the semblance or form
(*riochd*) of the departed by one who cannot recognise them, not having
known them when alive. One of the instances in point is connected with
the old manse of Lairg. That this house was haunted was long believed by
the people in the parish to my own knowledge; nor is the belief yet
dead. The Rev. Thomas Mackay, minister of Lairg, died in 1803. A son of
a successor, the late Rev. A. G. MacGillivray, a most excellent man whom
I warmly remember, tells the story in a lecture appended to William
Mackay's *Narrative of the Shipwreck of the* '*Juno*,' <span
id="fr_279"></span>[4](#fn_278.md) of which Byron says it is one of the
narratives in which poetry must be content

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

to yield the palm to prose. MacGillivray, with whose father's <span
id="fr_280"></span>[1](#fn_279.md) family the incident is connected, writes
". . . it was firmly believed in our parish that Mr. Thomas Mackay was
once seen, twenty-three years after his death, in the old manse. Of
course the story must have some satisfactory explanation, but it was not
explained in my time. On a fine summer day, in 1826, two young girls
were sitting in the manse dining-room; they heard a step advancing to
the door, the door opened, and there stood a thin venerable old man,
dressed in black, with knee breeches and buckles, black silk stockings,
and shoes with buckles. He looked closely all round the room, at them,
and then walked out. One of the girls ran upstairs and told the minister
then in the manse that a very old minister had come in and was looking
for him. The minister hurried down and looked for his visitor, but in
vain; he could nowhere be found. The manse is so placed that every
object can be seen for a quarter of a mile around, but not a trace of
the visitor was visible. The old people who heard the girls describe the
old man they had seen, declared that they recognised Mr. Thomas Mackay
from their description. Ten or twelve years thereafter granddaughters of
Mr. Mackay came to reside in the parish. One of the young girls, by that
time grown a woman, said to one of these ladies, 'Oh! how like you are
to your grandfather['](errata.htm#3.md); to which the other replied, 'So
the old people tell me, but how can you know that, for he died before
you were born?' The other coloured and got confused, and could give no
reply. She had recognised the lady's resemblance

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

to the old minister who had appeared to her in the manse.

I cannot say how the truth may be,  
I say the tale as ’twas told to me."

When it is the evil eye that has fallen on a creature, the person who
makes the *snàithlean*, or magic 'thread,' for its cure is seized with a
fit of yawning. It is by the *frìth* that those who cure the evil eye
tell whether it be the eye of a male or female that has done the
harm <span id="fr_281"></span>[1](#fn_280) (Benbecula.md). The longer the
evil eye has lain on a creature unobserved, the longer it takes to be
cured, and the sicker the person, becomes who makes the *snàithlein*.

In making the *frìth* some enjoin the reciting of the formula *through
the hand loosely closed*. A formula used in Benbecula is:

*Mise dol a mach orra* (= air do) *shlighe-sa, Dhé! Dia romham, Dia ’m
dheaghaidh ’s Dia ’m luirg! An t-eolas rinn Moire dha ’mac, shéid Brighd
’romh băs* (*glaic*). *Fios fìrinne gun fhios bréige; mar a fhuair ise
gum faic mise samlaladh air an rud a tha mi fhéin ag ìarraidh*, *i.e.*
'I am going out on thy path, O God! God be before me, God be behind me,
God be in my footsteps. The charm which Mary (the Virgin) made for her
Son, Brigit blew through her palms,—knowledge of truth and no lie. As
she found, may I see the likeness of what I myself am seeking.' The use
of the *frìth* or horoscope is not at all extinct, as declared by a
young woman who was present, and who actually asked the *frìth* to be
made so that information might be got as to

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

the state of health of a person at some distance who was ill. The woman
who made the *frìth* said after making it that she would rather say the
woman was dead. The woman was actually dead at the time, so my authority
was informed.

It is not right for a woman to try and kindle the fire by fanning it
with the skirt of her dress. The reason is that when Our Lord was going
to be nailed to the Cross, and the nails were being got ready, that the
smith's bellows refused to work, and the smith's daughter fanned the
fire with her skirt.

The Omen (*Manadh*) forms the transition to what it is felt proper to
do, and is thus the initial and rudimentary stage of illumination. It is
a subjective sort of oracle. Early Irish *mama*, 'omen,' is cognate with
Latin *moneo*, Old English *manian*, 'warn.' Examples are: "When one
hears piping in the ears it is recommended to say a prayer for the
dead." Others say: "May it be well for us and our friends; if thou it be
who didst hear it, it will not be thou who wilt weep." <span
id="fr_282"></span>[1](#fn_281.md) For this piping is a sign of somebody
dying at the time.

It was an omen of ill-luck to hear the cuckoo on its first return
without having broken one's fast, <span id="fr_283"></span>[2](#fn_282.md)
or to see a lamb with its back towards one if it were seen for the first
time for the season.

If a cat mewed for flesh meat it was an omen of the death of a cow, and
to avert the prediction one said: "With your wanting (the meat of an
animal), misfortune take thee! May it be thine

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

own hide that will be the first hide to go on the roof-spar." <span
id="fr_284"></span>[1](#fn_283.md)

In the rite of 'averting,' water is taken from a boundary stream, and
put into a vessel in which is a silver coin. The water is thrown over
the beast. If the coin adheres to the bottom of the vessel it is taken
as an omen that the evil eye was at work.

Another word for omen is *tuar*, used in that sense by Keating, and
surviving in the Highland proverb: *Cha do chuir gual chuige nach do
chuir tuar thairis*, *i.e.* none ever set shoulder to that did not
overcome foreboding. It is thus specially something foreboding of evil.
Among such may be put the cry of a cuckoo heard from a house-top or
chimney, as a presage of death to one of the inmates within the year.
Mr. Forbes notes for some district in Ireland that a cuckoo always
appears to a certain family before a death in that family. He quotes the
late Rev. Dr. Stewart of Nether Lochaber as to a euphemistic way of
speaking of the cuckoo as the 'grey bird of May-tide' (*ian glas a
Chéitein*), it being discreet not to speak of it by its proper name. "In
the popular imagination so connected with fairyland was the cuckoo that
the very name was in a sense taboo." <span
id="fr_285"></span>[2](#fn_284.md) The howling of the house dog at night is
usually held to be an omen of a funeral that will soon pass by. In
Breadalbane a moving ball of fire or a moving light (*gealbhan*) is a
precursor of a funeral. <span id="fr_286"></span>[3](#fn_285.md)

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> This corresponds
to the *dreag*, *driug* of other parts. In Lochbroom a cat washing its
face is an omen of its soon getting either fish or flesh: as there is a
danger of its fulfilment being brought about through the death by mishap
of cattle or sheep, the cat is given a cuff to stop it and avert the
evil. <span id="fr_287"></span>[1](#fn_286.md) To be suddenly seized by
peculiar sensations of horror at certain places may be an omen of one
having drowned one's self there. <span id="fr_288"></span>[2](#fn_287.md) A
white bird flapping its wings towards a burying ground is a precursor of
a corpse and an omen of death. <span id="fr_289"></span>[3](#fn_288.md) An
omen of calamity is known as *glaim*, <span
id="fr_290"></span>[4](#fn_289.md) a peculiar sound in the ear, a howling;
it has been taken as cognate with the German *klagen*, 'weep, complain'
the root idea is 'make moan.'

If a particle of food get into the wind-pipe it is polite to say:
*Deiseal*, *i.e.* 'sun-ways or right! it is not grudging it that I am to
thee.' <span id="fr_291"></span>[5](#fn_290.md)

When going from home with a mare at early morning it is a good omen if
one put the right foot over and around the beast's head in name of the
Father, and then make the sign of the Cross on one's self, which ensures
that no witch or evil spirit can come nigh. It was said of a country
carrier who did so: R. M. never went from home without putting his left
foot over his mare's head in the name of the Father, and making the sign
of the Cross of Christ on himself, and then no wizard nor any evil
spirit could come nigh him. <span id="fr_292"></span>[6](#fn_291.md)

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

Prognostications were made from the 'first-foot': <span
id="fr_293"></span>[1](#fn_292.md) to meet a woman with red hair was
unlucky; a beast, man or thing unexpectedly encountered on stepping out
of doors or on setting out on a journey betokened weal or woe. On
entering a new abode it was unlucky to find a dead crow before one on
the hearthstone. Out of ill-will it has been known to have been put in
the pulpit of a vacant parish.

Some stones or crystals have associations with curative magical
agencies: such are the Ardvoirlich Charm, Barbreck's Stone, the Loch Mo
Nāir Stone, and the varieties of 'witch' stones one has known of; others
are associated with clairvoyance and divination, such as Cinneach
Odhar's Stone; a few may be specially remarkable as having been *omens*
of success: the merits imputed to such have influenced human lives, and
their story belongs to local history. An instance of a stone of good
omen is that of *Clach Na Brataich*, *i.e.* the Banner Stone of the Clan
Robertson. Its story as told by Mr. D. Robertson <span
id="fr_294"></span>[2](#fn_293.md) is as follows:

“In joining the muster of St. Ninians under King Robert Bruce, previous
to the Battle of Bannockburn, Donnachadh Reamhar encamped with his men
on their march to the rendezvous. On pulling up the standard pole out of
the ground one morning before marching off, the chief observed something
glittering in a clod of earth which adhered to the end of the staff. He
immediately plucked it out,

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

and there being something apparently fateful in such an incident
occurring under such circumstances, he retained it in his own possession
after holding it up to his followers, as a happy omen of success in the
fortunes of their expedition.

“It became associated with the glorious victory of Bannockburn, and
thenceforth was accepted by the clan as its Stone of Destiny or
Palladium. It has always been carried by the chief on his person when
the clan mustered for war or foray, and its various changes of hue were
consulted as to the result of the coming strife.

“It was carried by 'The Tutor' when in command of Clan Donnachaidh under
the great Montrose, and the Poet Chief carried it gallantly at the head
of 500 of his men at Sheriffmuir. On this occasion he, as his ancestors
had done before him, consulted the oracle, and observed for the first
time an extensive flaw or crack in it. This was accepted as an adverse
omen, inasmuch as the Stuart cause was for the time crushed, and from
this time, it has been held, dates the decline of the power and
influence of the clan.

“But besides being regarded merely as a warlike emblem, the 'Clach na
Brataich' was also employed as a charm-stone against sickness. It was,
after a short preliminary prayer, dipped in water by the chief, who then
with his own hands distributed the water thus qualified to the
applicants for it. In this connection it was used by the grandfather of
the present chief, in whose possession it now of course remains. For a
time it was deposited by him in the museum of the Society of Antiquaries
of Scotland

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

for the inspection of the public, but serious warnings were addressed to
him as to the fatality which might result.

"In form it is a ball of clear rock crystal, in appearance like glass,
two inches in diameter, and has been supposed to be a Druidical beryl.
It may, however, quite as probably be one of those crystal balls which
have from time to time been unearthed from ancient graves in the
country, and which are said to be the abodes of good or evil spirits, or
amulets against sickness or the sword. These symbols were usually
carried on the person of the chief, attached to his girdle or suspended
from his helmet."

The ancient rite of divination by dream was once regarded as in the last
resort a reasonable and proper method of ascertaining the person
appropriate to be king. We read in the *Sick-Bed of Cuchulainn* of a
'bull-feast' being made the occasion of superinducing such a dream. "It
is thus that the bull-feast was wont to be made, viz., a white bull was
killed and a man partook to his full of its flesh and juice, and slept
under that satiety while a spell of truth was chaunted over him by four
druids, and in vision there would be divined by him the semblance of the
man who would be made king there from his form and description and the
manner of work which was performed. The man woke up from his sleep and
related his vision. . . ." <span id="fr_295"></span>[1](#fn_294.md) Lugaidh
of the Red Stripes, the pupil of Cuchulainn, who was then lying ill, was
so recognised and proclaimed monarch of Ireland.

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

In the *Sack of Da Derga's Hostel* <span id="fr_296"></span>[1](#fn_295.md)
we read that Conaire was thus elected. Though really begotten by a
supernatural bird-man, he was regarded as the son of his predecessor
Eterscéle. But this does not seem to have given him any title to
succeed. A bull-feast was accordingly given; and the bull-feaster in his
sleep at the end of the night beheld a man stark-naked passing along the
road of Tara with a stone in his sling. Warned and counselled by his
bird relatives, Conaire fulfilled these requirements. He found three
kings (doubtless from among the under-kings of Ireland) awaiting him
with royal raiment to clothe his nakedness, and a chariot to convey him
to Tara. It was a disappointment to the folk of Tara to find that their
bull-feast and their spell of truth chanted over the feaster had
resulted in the selection of a beardless lad. But he convinced them that
he was the true successor, and was admitted to the kingship.

Divination in later times takes various forms, chief of which of old was
(*slinneineachd*) the reading of omens in shoulder-blades. About 40
years ago the shoulder-blade of a bear (*math-ghamhuin*) took in belief
a foremost place, but as this could not be got, that of a fox or sheep
might be used. X. Y., the wife of L. C. Z., who was credited with the
gift of stopping blood by a spell, lost one of her young boys. He was
missed, and though searched for, he could not be found. G. P., a man
notable in the line of finding any dead bodies, failed. She then betook
her to a wise man who could divine by reading

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

the omens on the shoulder-blades of a bear. <span
id="fr_297"></span>[1](#fn_296.md) He divined and told her to walk to a
certain part of the hill which stretched away from her house; he
described certain stones near to which the body was to be found. She
went thither; found her boy as a heap of bones; she carried them home
and had them buried. This falls under the *scapulimantia* of
Grimm, <span id="fr_298"></span>[2](#fn_297.md) and is met with among many
races. A kindred rite survives in the reading of one's fate as to
marriage in the 'merry thought' or breast-bone of a fowl. One's vision
of the future was widened by prognostications of all sorts by the seeing
of wraiths and the barking of dogs before funerals, by the phenomena of
second-sight and of phantom-funerals and death-lights. Special honour
was accorded to any traces of the presence of St. Brigit on Candlemas
Eve. This belief was until recently held in Arisaig. It existed, as we
learn from Moore, in the Isle of Man, and Martin <span
id="fr_299"></span>[3](#fn_298.md) writes: "The mistress and servants of
each family take a sheaf of oats and dress it up in woman's apparel, put
it in a large basket and lay a wooden club by it, and this they call
Briid's bed, and then the mistress and servants cry three times: 'Briid
is come, Briid is welcome.' This they do just before going to bed, and
when they rise in the morning, they look among the ashes expecting to
see the impression of Briid's club there, which if they do they reckon
it a true presage of a good crop and a prosperous year, and the contrary
they take as an ill omen."

Gregorson Campbell has a section dealing with

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Premonitions and
Divination (*Fiosachd*): for his instances suffice it to refer to his
book. <span id="fr_300"></span>[1](#fn_299.md) He gives prophecies
attributed to the Lady of Lawers and to Coinneach Odhar, 'whose name is
hardly known in Argyllshire.' Consequently he only devotes a page to
him, in which we learn that Kenneth acquired his prophetic gift from a
stone found in a raven's nest. The variants of Kenneth's legend are
instructive.

The Inverness-shire tradition of Coinneach Odhar takes us back to the
birth of the seer. Here we have a story with so strong a resemblance to
that of Brian as to show that the tale belongs to a remote period. If I
take the Skye tradition there is evidence of interest. "*We* in
Bracadale, Duirinish, never heard that Coinneach Odhar was a Mackenzie,
or that his death took place at so recent a date as the seventeenth
century, That could not have been. We never heard of the manner of his
death. The historian Mackenzie mixed the legend of the original
Coinneach with the true fact as to the cruel death of a certain Kenneth
who was possessed of clairvoyant faculties and who was buried below the
town of Fortrose." So states Miss Fanny Tolmie, a lady of rare talent
and exceptional knowledge of Skye and its traditions. Miss Tolmie's
account is as follows:

"On a Hallowe’en the people of Boisdale in South Uist were assembling,
according to long-established. custom, to spend some hours together in
mirth and dance. There was a cattle-fold in the neighbourhood which was
always watched by night, and on this occasion the duty of guarding it
devolved on two young women, who were vexed that they should

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

thus be excluded from participating in the general enjoyment. Casting in
their minds how they might find a substitute, they bethought them of an
elderly maid who lived in a cottage at no distance from the fold, which
in the remote past had been a burying-ground, and probably was of
pre-Christian date. The woman acceded kindly to their request, and
repaired to her watching station with her distaff in her hand, where she
sat beside a fire for a while,—spinning peacefully. There were some
graves close to where she was sitting, and about midnight she was
astonished and awe-stricken to see them moving and heaving and forms
emerging from them and passing out of sight in all directions, north,
south, east and west. Venturing to approach one of these open graves
which seemed larger than the rest, she laid her distaff across the
opening, waiting to see the result of this action. Before long the
spectres began to return one by one, and every one lay down in his own
place while the sod became firm and green over the grave as it had been
before.

"Last of all arrived the occupant of the largest grave, who seemed to
have had a longer way to go, and who, seeing the distaff, exclaimed to
the woman: 'Why dost thou hinder me from lying down in peace?' 'First
tell me,' she replied, 'who thou art, where thou hast been, and what is
to be my fate, and then I will allow thee return once more to thy
resting-place.' He answered: 'I was a warrior from Lochlinn and, after
having been wrecked and drowned, my body was washed ashore in Boisdale.
The corpse of one of my companions, whose name was Til, was found on the
west coast of Skye, at a

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

place which has been named after him, Poll’ til. It is permitted to us
on Hallowe’en to visit our native lands, and I have just been to
Lochlinn for an hour. This is what in the fulness of time shall happen
to thee: though no longer young, thou shalt bear a son who will be a
prophet.' Then raising the distaff, the warrior lay down, and the grave
closed over him. When the elderly woman gave birth to a son, there was
great wonder in the land. She named him Coinneach, in addition to which
name, because of his sallow complexion, he received the surname of
*Odhar*. Coinneach Odhar's name is still well known all over the
Highlands and Hebridean Isles, and several districts claim to have given
him birth. He received the blue stone of prophecy from the *Maighdeann
Shīdhe* or Banshee, with the injunction that he was never to give it to
any one. H e was once pursued by a wicked person, who wished to wrest
from him the precious stone, as he was walking near Loch Ness. Fearful
of being overcome, he flung the stone into the lake, crying that a pike
(*geadas*) would swallow it, and that in after times it would be found
again by a man who would have four and twenty fingers and toes, and two
navels,—who would also with it receive the prophetic power.

"Some prophecies attributed to him in Skye are:

"Tribesmen will cross over linns and will leave this isle a black isle
of foreigners.

"The folks of the white coats, and those of the red-coats in Rome will
meet in Baileshear.

"Six oarsmen will bring every Macleod in the country around
Gob-an-t-snoid, beyond Dunvegan Head.

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

"In the battle the ravens will drink their fill from the stone of Ard
Ūige, and from a stone in Glendale.

"St. Columba's stone in Snizort churchyard will turn right about."

In Ireland, Brian of the saga appears in *Red Brian Carabine's
Prophecy*, which gives the title to a collection of much merit we owe to
Mr. Michael O Tiománaidhe. <span id="fr_301"></span>[1](#fn_300.md) He is
there pictured as having had his abode at Fál Ruadh, a village in Erris,
by the seaside; a decent man who at first did not possess the prophetic
gift which was bestowed on him about 1648. At a rent collection he had
gone surety for a poor widow and paid on her behalf, whereby he received
the divine favour,—the woman having taken God to witness that she would
pay on such and such a day. "I like to have another (to give surety) in
company with God," said the lord of the land. Crossing a hill on his way
home, what should happen but that Brian fell asleep for he knew not how
long. He had a dream, and it was told him in vision that what he would
find in the right sleeve of his coat he was to carefully put by, without
letting wife nor child nor any one have a sight of it save himself
alone. It was a sparkling jewel, which clearly revealed to him the
future, both good and evil; a magic stone of prophecy which shone with
resplendent lustre. Numerous are the prophecies ascribed him; they are
of a nature parallel to those of the Highland Coinneach Odhar, Dun
Kenneth. At last his wife's curiosity was aroused, and one day,

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

as she saw him gazing at the magic stone, she came behind him, and what
portion of the crystal her eye fell on became black as coal and shone no
more. He has the faculty of foreseeing the approach of death in his own
case and in that of others. One day, while dictating his visions to his
son, a poor woman entered, and she was scornfully rebuked by the busy
scribe. "List to her," quoth Brian, "for some of thine own bodily
members will perish seven years before thyself." And true this proved to
be, for the son lost a finger which was buried in earth. But when this
fore-warning was foretold to Brian's son, he angrily cast the prophetic
record into the fire. The first portion, had already been thrown into a
pool, and thus the written prophecies of Brian perished. Naturally, what
survives has come down by word of mouth, and forms the subject of
fireside entertainments in West Ireland, in the discourses of William
Fleming in Leth-ardan; of Seamus Mac Enri, Inish Bigil; of Seaghan O
Conway, Dubh-Thuma; all of which is duly recorded in Michael Timony's
narrative. The story of the loss of the written prophecy is similar to a
tale told me at Loch Arkaig of how Ossian's works and the history of the
Féinne have for the most part perished, having been cast into the fire
in his anger by St. Patrick. He found them to be mostly lies; but his
daughter rescued some!

The legend of Brian the wizard-hermit much resembles in essentials what
is told in Highland legend of Coinneach Odhar (Sallow or Dun Kenneth),
whose legend does not all fit in with so modern a date as that of the
Kenneth on whom Lady Seaforth

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

wreaked her vengeance for his prophecies. It seems to have been taken as
fact that a certain unfortunate crystal gazer, possessed of what were
held to be clairvoyant faculties, suffered at the hands of the Lady
Mackenzie of Seaforth, who is associated with the sad fate of Coinneach
Odhar, the Brahan seer, whose prophecies were published in a second
edition at Inverness in 1878 by the late Mr. Alexander Mackenzie, and
re-printed some years ago with a preface by Mr. Andrew Lang. The
material, however, was collected by the late Mr. A. B. MacLennan <span
id="fr_302"></span>[1](#fn_301.md) and forwarded to the editor of the
*Celtic Magazine* for insertion. This gives the Ross-shire version. When
the old legend got mixed up with a later personality on the Mackenzie of
Seaforth's estates, it was natural that his birth should be located at
Baile-na-Cille, Uig, Lewis. While his mother one evening was tending
cattle in a summer shieling on a ridge called Cnoc-eothail, overlooking
the burying ground of Baile-na-Cille (*i.e.* Kirk-ton), she saw, says
the legend, about the still hour of midnight, the whole of the graves in
the churchyard opening and a vast multitude of people of every age, from
the newly-born babe to the gray-haired sage, rising from their graves,
and going away in every conceivable direction. In an hour they began to
return, and were all soon after back in their graves, which closed upon
them as before. But, on scanning the burying-ground more closely,
Kenneth's mother observed one grave, near the side, still open. Being a
courageous woman, she determined to ascertain the

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

cause of this singular circumstance, so hastening to the grave, and
placing her *cuigeal* or 'distaff' athwart its mouth (for she had heard
it said that the spirit could not enter the grave again while that
instrument was upon it), she watched the result. She had not to wait
long, for in a minute or two she noticed a fair lady coming in the
direction of the churchyard, rushing through the air from the north. On
her arrival, the fair one addressed her thus—"Lift thy distaff from off
my grave, and let me enter my dwelling of the dead." "I shall do so,"
answered the other, "when you explain to me what detained you so long
after your neighbours." "That you shall soon hear," the ghost replied;
"my journey was much longer than theirs—I had to go all the way to
Norway." She then addressed her: "I am a daughter of the King of Norway,
I was drowned while bathing in that country; my body was found on the
beach close to where we now stand, and I was interred in this grave. In
remembrance of me, and as a small reward for your intrepidity and
courage, I shall possess you of a valuable secret—go and find in yonder
lake a small round blue stone, which give to your son, Kenneth, who by
it shall reveal future events." She did as requested, found the stone,
and gave it to her son, Kenneth. No sooner had he thus received the gift
of divination than his fame spread far and wide. Being born on the lands
of Seaforth, he was more associated with that family than with any other
in the country, and he latterly removed to the neighbourhood of Loch
Ussie, on the Brahan estate. <span id="fr_303"></span>[1](#fn_302.md)

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

Tradition associated this Loch with his death. For having at a gathering
at Brahan Castle, legend says, given expression to some remarks
displeasing to Lady Seaforth and others, his punishment was determined
on. Having no way of escape, he applied his magic white stone to his
eye, uttered the well-known prophetic curse: "I see into the far future,
and I read the doom of the race of my oppressor. The long descended line
of Seaforth will, ere many generations have passed, end in extinction
and in sorrow. I see a chief, the last of his house, both deaf and dumb.
He will be the father of four fair sons, all of whom he will follow to
the tomb. He will live care-worn and die mourning, knowing that the
honours of his line are to be extinguished for ever, and that no future
chief of the Mackenzies shall bear rule at Brahan or in Kintail. After
lamenting over the last and most promising of his sons, he himself shall
sink into the grave, and the remnant of his possessions shall be
inherited by a white-coifed (or white-hooded) lassie from the East, and
she is to kill her sister. And as a sign by which it may be known that
these things are coming to pass, there shall be four great lairds in the
days of the last deaf and dumb Seaforth—Gairloch, Chisholm, Grant, and
Raasay,—of whom one shall be bucktoothed, another hair-lipped, another
half-witted, and the fourth a stammerer. Chiefs distinguished by these
personal marks shall be the allies and neighbours of the last Seaforth;
and when he looks round and sees them, he may know that his sons are
doomed to death, that his broad lands shall pass away to the stranger,
and that his race shall come to an end."

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

The prediction ended, he threw the white stone into the loch, declaring
that the finder thereof would be similarly gifted. Another version has
it that he then threw the stone into a cow's foot-mark, which was full
of water, declaring that a child would be born with two navels, or, as
some say, with four thumbs and six toes, who would in course of time
discover it inside a pike, and who would then be gifted with the seer's
power. "As it was the purpose of his pursuers to obtain possession of
this wonderful stone, as well as of the prophet's person, search was
eagerly made for it in the muddy waters in the footprint, when, to! it
was found that more water was copiously oozing from the boggy ground
around, and rapidly forming a considerable lake, that effectually
concealed the much-coveted stone. The waters steadily increased, and the
result, as the story goes, was the formation of Loch Ussie. The poor
prophet was then taken to Chanonry Point, where the stern arm of
ecclesiastical authority, with unrelenting severity, burnt him to death
in a tar-barrel for witchcraft." <span id="fr_304"></span>[1](#fn_303.md)

His attainment of the seer's gift is invariably connected with this
stone. He got it, says one version, as he was out on the hill cutting
peats. His mistress, a farmer's wife, greatly annoyed at his
seeing-gift, determined to poison the food which was to be sent to him.
It was somewhat late in arriving, and, exhausted, it is said that "he
lay down on the heath and fell into a heavy slumber. In this position he
was suddenly awakened by feeling something cold in his breast, which on
examination he

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

found to be a small white stone, with a hole through the centre. He
looked through it, when a vision appeared to him, which revealed the
treachery and diabolical intention of his mistress. To test the truth of
the vision, he gave the dinner intended for himself to his faithful
collie; the poor brute writhed and died soon after in the greatest
agony." <span id="fr_305"></span>[1](#fn_304.md)

Another variant is that, resting his head upon a little knoll, he waited
the arrival of his wife with his dinner, whereupon he fell asleep. On
awaking he felt something hard under his head, and, examining the cause
of the uneasiness, discovered a small round stone with a hole through
the middle. He picked it up, and looking through it he saw, by the aid
of this prophetic stone, that his wife was coming to him with a dinner
consisting of sowans and milk, polluted though, unknown to her, in a
manner which, as well as several other particulars connected with it, we
forbear to mention. But Coinneach found that, though this stone was the
means by which a supernatural power had been conferred upon him, it had,
as its very first application, deprived him of the sight of that eye
with which he looked through it, and he continued ever afterwards *cam*,
or blind of an eye. <span id="fr_306"></span>[2](#fn_305.md) Kenneth's
prophecies vary in different parts of the Highlands; some of them may
have touches in common with those credited to Thomas the Rhymer, whose
legend, however, has elements that go back on native folk belief of the
pre-mediaeval age. This finds confirmation in that the death of the
Kenneth said to have been burnt at Chanonry is placed under the third
Earl of Seaforth,

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

who was born in 1635. But Mr. W. M. Mackenzie has found in a Commission
against witchcraft, issued in Ross-shire in 1577, a reference to
Coinneach Odhar as the head of a school of witchcraft even then.

Coinneach's legend is essentially the sane as the Irish one of Red Brian
Carabine, but it is in continuous development. In a modern Lewis poem of
seventy quatrains, which is in Mr. J. N. Macleod's still unpublished
collection, there is a different version of the getting of the stone.
Coinneach is depicted as on the strand, when a lady appears in the form
of a light, and tells her story. After the light turns into a maiden,
she declares herself as Gràdhag, daughter of King Swaran of the North.
Arna, priest of Odin, was a keen seer, and possessed of a Stone of
Virtues, prepared by Odin himself. The king having ordered the priest to
be shot with an arrow, the maiden Gràdhag (Dear One) intervened, and
saved the priest's life, for which she got the prophetic stone. Then she
is pictured as having seen Diarmuid and the Fianna in vision, and seized
by a desire to come to Alba, whereupon Swaran determines on invading
Eire and on conquering Finn. The lady was shipwrecked on the way, and
the stone hidden in the sand at a spot which her wraith points out.
Whereupon she changes her human form to a gleam of light, which twinkled
thrice, and then vanished. Kenneth dug at the spot and found the jewel,
which gold could not buy; such were its virtues.

But Illumination has its widest popular development apart from Stones of
Virtue, and under the

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

category of second-sight (*an dà shealladh*, *i.e.* the two sights),
which has a literature of its own. <span id="fr_307"></span>[1](#fn_306.md)
Under peculiar psychic conditions the reproductive imagination, working
upon memory images, transforms what might remain as 'conjecture' into
vision. It takes on the aspect of 'first sight' proper, as when one has
a vision of a person absolutely strange to one, and with such vividness
that one recognises what answers to all the foreseen details in actual
life afterwards. Parallel to this is the case of the coming of strangers
being interpreted from a premonition or warning (*tàrmachduinn*), such
as sounds from the opening of presses, or other articles; as also the
seeing of forms, which one recognises afterwards on the arrival of
strangers whose 'doubles,' it is thought, must have manifested
themselves beforehand. This is the so-called phenomenon of apparent
double presence. The following incident, of which the scene is in
Sutherland, will suffice to illustrate this phantasy or vision proper:

"One evening a crofter was sitting outside his cottage door, when he saw
a stranger coming along the high road towards the house. He watched the
man for some minutes till, leaving the main road, the traveller took a
branch path leading to the crofter's door. The crofter then stepped
inside for a moment to inform his wife of the approach of a visitor. On
going out again he was more than puzzled to find that the stranger had
in the brief interval completely vanished. The house stood, and still
stands, on a slight eminence from which an unobstructed view

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

can be had of the immediate neighbourhood. But though the astonished
crofter looked on all sides, he could see nothing further of the
stranger. None of the villagers whose houses he must have passed had
observed him. It is important to note that the crofter there and then
gave a full description of the man to his wife and to a brother. In a
short time the incident, uncanny though it was, was forgotten. Some
months later a child of the same crofter was suddenly taken ill. The
doctor, a young practitioner who had but recently come into the
district, was sent for, and in the course of the day the father was
standing at the door of his cottage waiting impatiently for the doctor's
arrival, when, at a bend of the road, appeared the mysterious stranger
of several months before. He turned out to be the expected doctor; but
in features, dress, and appearance generally he was the exact
counterpart of the individual who had formerly presented himself. On
inquiry it was ascertained that the doctor had never before been in the
neighbourhood, and on the particular day in question had been in the
south of Scotland. The crofter, his wife, and brother, most respectable
and estimable people, are still hale and hearty, and fond of describing
this remarkable incident" (*Chambers's Journa*l).

Yet man in his essence is one. Hence Healing embraces the means that are
moments in realising his unity; and such moments include the rites that
unite

(*α*) the human with the human,

(*β*) the human with the divine.

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The former has its
physical correspondence: on its

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

psychical side it embraces Love alike towards the human and the divine.
Man on one side may be seen as, to a certain extent, finding realisation
through such things as nuptial rites, covenants and betrothal (*réite*,
*i.e.* 'concord'). Here may be found the 'agreement-whisky'
(*uisge-beatha na réite*), known as 'the knitting or covenant-cup' <span
id="fr_308"></span>[1](#fn_307.md) elsewhere. The Highland betrothal was
sometimes spoken of as 'the booking or contracting' (*an
leabhrachduinn*), and in some places there was in vogue the ceremony of
the feet-washing, which may fitly form the transition to the marriage
ritual. I know this existed in Inverness-shire, where *Oidhche Ghlanadh
nan Cas*, 'the night of the feet-washing,' was a preliminary of
importance, and afforded the friends of both contracting parties the
opportunity of using at times an abundance of soot along with the water.
As connected with the hearth and with the fire, soot had a magical
influence. It seemed, too, to have been the correct etiquette in that
district for the Highland women to wash the feet of friends and
acquaintances travelling from the neighbouring parts. It may now have
passed away, but it reminds of the old church rite referred to by
Duchesne: *Ego tibi lavo pedes, sicut dominus noster Jesus Christus
fecit discipulis suis, ut tu facias hospitibus et peregrinis, ut
habeas* 

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

*vitam aeternam*—As Christ washed the feet of His disciples, so others
were to do the same towards guests and strangers, in order to inheriting
eternal life. The ceremony of the feet-washing was observed in
Ireland, <span id="fr_309"></span>[1](#fn_308.md) in Southern Gaul and in
Northern Italy. The ecclesiastical rite may have influenced
folk-practice. On the eve of marriage, however, the lustration of the
feet was to neutralise the mutual dangers of contact; compare the custom
in the South Celebes, where before the wedding the bridegroom bathes in
holy water. The soul, in short, was thought to be in danger of flying
away, although after all it may not be unconnected with a speculation
put in the words of Plato: human nature was originally one, and the
desire and pursuit of the whole is called Love. And Aristophanes seems
to preserve a folk-belief when he says earliest man was a bisexual
hermaphrodite, to humble him he was cut in two by Zeus. At any rate, the
wedding-bath as a solemn pre-nuptial ablution was part of the
preparation for wedlock in Greece, where it also formed part of the
Mysteries. <span id="fr_310"></span>[2](#fn_309.md)

A curious side-light upon nuptial covenants is reflected from a
folk-saying current alike in parts of the Highlands and in Ireland: "If
you wish to be blamed, marry; if you wish to be praised, die." <span
id="fr_311"></span>[3](#fn_310.md) One of the preliminaries to marriage was
the *faoighdhe*, <span id="fr_312"></span>[4](#fn_311.md) a sort of genteel
asking of aid to set

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

up house, or as token of good-will. It was the part of the bride's duty
to seek for these gifts, which were also supplemented by the
presents <span id="fr_313"></span>[1](#fn_312.md) forwarded by those
attending the wedding. Such wedding-presents were a matter of course,
for the festivities formerly lasted over a week. It was held proper for
a woman to be married in a dress borrowed from a married woman: this was
a token of luck, as were likewise the shots fired as the wedding-party
set out. Persons met with casually on the way were offered a dram, and
the 'healths' proper to the occasion were honoured. One of the most
significant archaic customs, found surviving at Little Lochbroom, West
Ross, has been regarded by the Rev. C. Robertson as pointing to the
primitive institution of marriage by capture. Owing to distance, a
trysting place is arranged, where the bride's party meets the clerical
celebrant. "The bridegroom's house is a little further away than the
bride's home from the trysting place. While the bride's party is at
breakfast on the morning of the wedding day, a scout is sent out every
few minutes to see what is doing at the bridegroom's house, and to guard
against surprise by him and his party. The bridegroom's party in the
same way are watching the bride's home. When the bride and her party set
out, there immediately arises an appearance of great stir and bustle
about the bridegroom's house. Presently he and his party are seen to
come out, and, as though they were in hot haste to overtake the bride's
party, they take a straight line through fields and over streams and

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

fences. They do not overtake the party in front, however, but keep about
two hundred yards behind. When the bride's party sits down to partake of
a refreshment by the way, the pursuers still keep at the same respectful
distance, and sit down to take their refreshments by themselves. While
waiting for the minister at the trysting place, the two parties keep at
a distance the one from the other, and even when they are obliged to
approach for the performance of the ceremony, they still keep distinct.
Immediately on the conclusion of the ceremony by which bride and
bridegroom are made one, the two parties mingle together and are
associated throughout the remainder of the day's proceedings." <span
id="fr_314"></span>[1](#fn_313.md)

The late Dr. Wilde <span id="fr_315"></span>[2](#fn_314.md) records that at
the Midsummer Eve bonfires many of the old people circumambulated the
fire, repeating certain prayers: "If a man was about to perform a long
journey, he leaped backwards and forwards three times through the fire,
to give him success in his undertaking. If about to wed, he did it to
purify himself for the marriage state." Lady Wilde likewise alludes to
the feigning of force in carrying off a bride, who was placed on a swift
horse before the bridegroom, while all her kindred started in pursuit
with shouts and cries. <span id="fr_316"></span>[3](#fn_315.md)

An eighteenth century visitor <span id="fr_317"></span>[4](#fn_316.md) to
the North recorded: "Soon after the wedding-day, the new-married woman
sets herself about spinning her

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

winding sheet, and a husband that should sell or pawn it is esteemed
among all men, one the most profligate." The editor of Burt, viz. R.
Jamieson, notes that when a woman of the lower class in Scotland,
however poor, and whether married or single, commences housekeeping, her
*first* care, after what is absolutely necessary for the time, is to
provide death-linen for herself, and those who look to her for that
office. <span id="fr_318"></span>[1](#fn_317.md) And I have heard of cases
where the new wedding-dress was set aside awaiting the time of decease,
when a matron donned it as her best now that she hourly expected to join
her predeceased spouse. Mrs. Macdonald of Kingsburgh was wrapped at
death in the sheets wherein Prince Charlie slept. Sympathy was thus
expressed by contact with an object: this idea leads to substitution,
and that very readily to identity. New cradles were not esteemed; every
endeavour was made to preserve the old family cradle, which was
especially lucky if a boy had been nursed therein before. To part with
the old cradle was to give away the family luck.

The Marriage Customs in Pennant's account are of interest here: "The
courtship of the Highlander has these remarkable circumstances attending
it: after privately obtaining the consent of the Fair, he formally
demands her of the father. The Lover and his friends assemble on a hill
allotted for that purpose in every parish, and one of them is dispatched
to obtain permission to wait on the daughter; if he is successful, he is
again sent to invite the father

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

and his friends to ascend the hill and partake of a whisky cask, which
is never forgot: the Lover advances, takes his future Father-in-law by
the hand, and then plights his troth, and the Fair-one is surrendered up
to him. During the marriage ceremony, great care is taken that dogs do
not pass between them, and particular attention is paid to the leaving
the Bridegroom's left shoe without buckle or latchet, to prevent
witches <span id="fr_319"></span>[1](#fn_318.md) from depriving him, on the
nuptial night, of the power of loosening the virgin zone. As a test, not
many years ago, a singular custom prevailed in the *Western* Highlands
the morning after a wedding: a Basket was fastened with a cord round the
neck of the Bridegroom by the female part of the company, who
immediately filled it with stones, till the poor man was in great danger
of being strangled, if his Bride did not take compassion on him, and cut
the cord with a knife given her to use at discretion. But such was the
tenderness of the Caledonian spouses, that never was an instance of
their neglecting an immediate relief of their good man." <span
id="fr_320"></span>[2](#fn_319.md)

At Logierait, 18 miles from Kenmore, as recently as 1811, the custom
was: "After arriving at the church, and just immediately before the
celebration of the marriage ceremony, every knot about the

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

dress of both bride and bridegroom, such as garters, shoe-strings,
strings of petticoats, etc., was carefully loosened. After leaving the
church the whole company walk round it, keeping the church wall always
on the right hand. The bridegroom first, however, turned aside with a
friend to tie the strings of his dress, while the bride retired with her
friends to adjust the disorder of hers." <span
id="fr_321"></span>[1](#fn_320.md) Pennant observes thereanent that "the
precaution of loosening every knot about the newly-joined pair is
strictly observed, for fear of the penalty denounced in the former
volumes. It must be remarked that the custom is observed even in France,
*nouer l’aiguillette* being a common phrase for disappointments of this
nature. Matrimony is avoided in the month of January, which is called in
Erse the cold month, but what is more singular, the ceremony is avoided
even in the enlivening month of May."

The Rev. L. Shaw, Historian of Moray, adds in *Pennant's Tour* that "at
marriages and baptisms they make a procession around the church,
*Deasoil*, *i.e.* sunways, because the sun was the immediate object of
the Druids’ worship."

I have myself seen the wedding-bannock (*bonnach bainnse*), baked by a
wise matron, broken by her upon the head of the bride as she entered the
house on the return from church, in the year 1875. It is parallel to the
*confarreatio* of the Romans in some ways.

And the same rite is met with in Ireland: Lady Wilde <span
id="fr_322"></span>[2](#fn_321.md) states: "On arriving at her future home,

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

the bride was met on the threshold by the bridegroom's mother, who broke
an oaten cake over her head as a good augury of plenty in the future."

After marriage the snood of the maid was exchanged for the kerch
(*bréid*) of the spouse, a custom referred to in a marriage ode
beginning: "a thousand blessings to thee in thy kerch." <span
id="fr_323"></span>[1](#fn_322.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_250"></span>[208:1](sbc08.htm#fr_251.md) Moore, *Folklore*,
etc. 157.

<span id="fn_251"></span>[208:2](sbc08.htm#fr_252.md) *Ibid*. 156.

<span id="fn_252"></span>[209:1](sbc08.htm#fr_253.md) Rogers, *Social Life
in Scotland*, i. 135.

<span id="fn_253"></span>[209:2](sbc08.htm#fr_254.md) Frazer, *On Certain
Burial Customs*, p. 84.

<span id="fn_254"></span>[209:3](sbc08.htm#fr_255.md) Year 1889-90.

<span id="fn_255"></span>[212:1](sbc08.htm#fr_256.md) A. Carmichael,
*Carmina Gadelica*.

<span id="fn_256"></span>[212:2](sbc08.htm#fr_257.md) Joyce's *Soc. Hist*.
i. 335; *Silva Gadelica*, trans. by O’Grady, pp. 15, 16, 41.

<span id="fn_257"></span>[212:3](sbc08.htm#fr_258.md) Cf. J. G. Campbell's
*Witchcraft*, p. 247; Train's *Hist. and Stat. Acct. of Isle of Man*
(Douglas, 1845), ii. 116; Solinus, xxii. 10.

<span id="fn_258"></span>[212:4](sbc08.htm#fr_259.md) Frazer, *G. Bough*,
iii. 347-9; *On the Kingship*, p. 281.

<span id="fn_259"></span>[213:1](sbc08.htm#fr_260.md) Grimm, *Deutsche
Mythologie*<sup>4</sup>, i. 506.

<span id="fn_260"></span>[214:1](sbc08.htm#fr_261.md) Stokes and Strachan,
*Thesaurus Palaeo-Hib*. ii. 45.

<span id="fn_261"></span>[214:2](sbc08.htm#fr_262.md) *Anthropological
Essays*, presented to E. B. Tylor, Oxford 1907, p. 82. With the
daimon-protector compare idea in the *Faire-Chlaidh*, 'the kirk-yard
watch,' q.v.

<span id="fn_262"></span>[215:1](sbc08.htm#fr_263.md) Frazer, On Certain
Burial Customs, p. 85<sup>n</sup>.

<span id="fn_263"></span>[216:1](sbc08.htm#fr_264.md) K. Maurer, 'Ueber die
Wasserweihe des Germanishen Heidenthumes,' *Bavarian Acad. of Sciences*
for 1880.

<span id="fn_264"></span>[217:1](sbc08.htm#fr_265.md) Cf. the whisky and
cheese carried in processions to church by a marriage party and offered
to those met on the way; this was etiquette in 1875 to my knowledge, and
later.

<span id="fn_265"></span>[217:2](sbc08.htm#fr_266.md) Hatch, *Influences of
Greek Ideas and Usages upon the Christian Church*, p. 299 (where he
quotes Mabillon).

<span id="fn_266"></span>[218:1](sbc08.htm#fr_267.md) Letter from Rev. D.
Macfarlane, the present minister.

<span id="fn_267"></span>[218:2](sbc08.htm#fr_268.md) Quoted in Warren's
Liturgy and Ritual of the Celtic Church, p. 67.

<span id="fn_268"></span>[219:1](sbc08.htm#fr_269.md) Duchesne's *Origins*,
quoting *Synodus Patricii*, ii. 19; Victor Vitensis, *Hist. Persec.
Vandal*. ii. 47.

<span id="fn_269"></span>[219:2](sbc08.htm#fr_270.md) Té chaol a’ chòt
uaine a’ nigheadh a phàisde ann am miosar bhainne.

<span id="fn_270"></span>[219:3](sbc08.htm#fr_271.md) Chan urrainn domh;
tha mi air mo mhiapadh.

<span id="fn_271"></span>[219:4](sbc08.htm#fr_272.md) *Witchcraft and
Second-Sight*, p. 173.

<span id="fn_272"></span>[220:1](sbc08.htm#fr_273.md) *An Lóchrann*,
Tralee, 1910, Bk. iii. No. 7.

<span id="fn_273"></span>[220:2](sbc08.htm#fr_274.md) *Trans. Gael. Soc.
Inv*. 26, 284.

<span id="fn_274"></span>[220:3](sbc08.htm#fr_275.md) *v*. Appendix to my
*Norse Influence on Celtic Scotland*.

<span id="fn_275"></span>[221:1](sbc08.htm#fr_276.md) This derivation by
Thurneysen may be upheld, but the name may have been extended also to
the 'wise men' of the pre-Celtic peoples who brought over their own
rites when the incorporation of the various races took place.

<span id="fn_276"></span>[221:2](sbc08.htm#fr_277.md) *Carmina Gadelica*,
ii. p. 22, where a specimen of this incantation is given.

<span id="fn_277"></span>[221:3](sbc08.htm#fr_278.md) *Social History of
Ireland*, i. 386.

<span id="fn_278"></span>[221:4](sbc08.htm#fr_279.md) *Reprint for the Clan
Mackay Society*, 1892, p. 88.

<span id="fn_279"></span>[222:1](sbc08.htm#fr_280.md) The Rev. Duncan
MacGillivray succeeded in 1817.

<span id="fn_280"></span>[223:1](sbc08.htm#fr_281.md) There is a rite of
blessing oneself when making the *frìth* if a woman be seen,—she being
the omen of some untoward event or other.

<span id="fn_281"></span>[224:1](sbc08.htm#fr_282.md)

Gum bu slàn sin oirn-ne is air ar daoine!  
Mas to chuala cha to chaoineas.

<span id="fn_282"></span>[224:2](sbc08.htm#fr_283.md) See under
*Bird-Soul*.

<span id="fn_283"></span>[225:1](sbc08.htm#fr_284.md)

Le d’ iarraidh, dosgadh ort!  
Gur e do sheice fhéin a chiad sheic a théid air an sparr.

<span id="fn_284"></span>[225:2](sbc08.htm#fr_285.md) Forbes, *Gaelic Names
of Beasts, Birds, Fishes, Insects and Reptiles*, p. 263.

<span id="fn_285"></span>[225:3](sbc08.htm#fr_286.md) *Gaelic Soc. Inv.
Trans*. 26, 126 and 42.

<span id="fn_286"></span>[226:1](sbc08.htm#fr_287.md) *Gall. Soc. Inv.
Trans*. 265.

<span id="fn_287"></span>[226:2](sbc08.htm#fr_288.md) *Ib*. 292-3.

<span id="fn_288"></span>[226:3](sbc08.htm#fr_289.md) *Ib*. 25, 127.

<span id="fn_289"></span>[226:4](sbc08.htm#fr_290.md) *Ib*. 25, 130.

<span id="fn_290"></span>[226:5](sbc08.htm#fr_291.md) Chan ann ga
mhaoidheadh ort atá mi.

<span id="fn_291"></span>[226:6](sbc08.htm#fr_292.md) Cha deach’ R------
M------ riamh o’n tigh leis an làir aige, gun a chas dheas chur
timchioll a ceann an ainm an Athar is crois Chriosda chur <span
id="page_227">p. 227</span> air; ’s cha robh buitseach no droch spiorad
sam bith a b’urrainn thighinn ’na chòir.

<span id="fn_292"></span>[227:1](sbc08.htm#fr_293.md) Comh-dhalaiche;
German, *An-gang*; L. primitiae.

<span id="fn_293"></span>[227:2](sbc08.htm#fr_294.md) *A Brief Account of
the Clan Donnachie, with Notes on its History and Traditions*.

<span id="fn_294"></span>[229:1](sbc08.htm#fr_295.md) For the original see
Windisch's *Irische Texte*, i. 213.

<span id="fn_295"></span>[230:1](sbc08.htm#fr_296.md) *Orgain Brudne Da
Dergae*, a text of about the end of the eighth century.

<span id="fn_296"></span>[231:1](sbc08.htm#fr_297.md) Duine còir a leughadh
slinneagan a’ mhathghamhna.

<span id="fn_297"></span>[231:2](sbc08.htm#fr_298.md) *Teut. Myth.* ed.
Stallybrass, 1113.

<span id="fn_298"></span>[231:3](sbc08.htm#fr_299.md) *Western Isles*, 119.

<span id="fn_299"></span>[232:1](sbc08.htm#fr_300.md) *Superstitions of the
Scottish Highlands*, p. 258.

<span id="fn_300"></span>[235:1](sbc08.htm#fr_301.md) *Targaireacht Bhriain
Ruaidh Ui Chearbháin*. Dublin: Gill & Son, 1906.

<span id="fn_301"></span>[237:1](sbc08.htm#fr_302.md) His name is
[referred](errata.htm#4.md) to on pages 9, 13, 19, 45, 55, 80 of the 1878
edition; at the foot of page 3, a whole passage is omitted.

<span id="fn_302"></span>[238:1](sbc08.htm#fr_303.md) Prophecies of the
Brahan Seer, pp. 4-5; cf. 1878 ed.

<span id="fn_303"></span>[240:1](sbc08.htm#fr_304.md) *Prophecies*, pp.
78-79.

<span id="fn_304"></span>[241:1](sbc08.htm#fr_305.md) *Prophecies*, p. 6.

<span id="fn_305"></span>[241:2](sbc08.htm#fr_306.md) *Ib*. p. 7.

<span id="fn_306"></span>[243:1](sbc08.htm#fr_307.md) *Highland
Second-Sight*, ed. by N. Macrae, with Introductory Study by Rev. Wm.
Morrison. Dingwall: George Souter.

<span id="fn_307"></span>[245:1](sbc08.htm#fr_308.md) The shedding of the
blood of a cock is inferred by Clay Trumbull (The Blood Covenant, p.
199) for Lowland Scotland from the *Uowing of Jok and Jynny*; he quotes
the lines:

Jok tuk Jynny be the hand  
And cryd ane feist and slew ane cok.

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> If a trace of the
Blood Covenant can be inferred here, I can only say that I do not
recollect any blood rite associated with Highland betrothals.

<span id="fn_308"></span>[246:1](sbc08.htm#fr_309.md) *v*. Stowe Missal in
*Warren's* ed. p. 217.

<span id="fn_309"></span>[246:2](sbc08.htm#fr_310.md) J. C. Lawson, *Modern
Greek Folk Lore and Ancient Greek Religion*, 592, 594.

<span id="fn_310"></span>[246:3](sbc08.htm#fr_311.md)

Mas maith leat do cháineadh, pós;  
Mas maith leat do mholadh, faigh bás.

<span id="fn_311"></span>[246:4](sbc08.htm#fr_312.md) O. Irish *foigde*,
from *fo* and *guidhe*, 'beg,' 'entreat.'

<span id="fn_312"></span>[247:1](sbc08.htm#fr_313.md) *Eàiric* (according
to my pronunciation); cf. O. Ir. *airec* (2) in Windisch's *Wb*. Root in
O. Ir. *tairciud* 'oblation.'

<span id="fn_313"></span>[248:1](sbc08.htm#fr_314.md) *Transactions, Gaelic
Soc. Inverness*, 26, 298.

<span id="fn_314"></span>[248:2](sbc08.htm#fr_315.md) *Irish Popular
Superstitions*, p. 49.

<span id="fn_315"></span>[248:3](sbc08.htm#fr_316.md) Lady Wilde, *Ancient
Legends of Ireland*, vol. i. p. 219.

<span id="fn_316"></span>[248:4](sbc08.htm#fr_317.md) *Burt's Letters*,
vol. ii. p. 106.

<span id="fn_317"></span>[249:1](sbc08.htm#fr_318.md) Was this connected
with the custom in South Scotland of the bride presenting a marriage
shirt to the bridegroom?

<span id="fn_318"></span>[250:1](sbc08.htm#fr_319.md) An old opinion.
Gesner says that the witches made use of toads as a charm, 'Ut vim
coeundi, ni fallor, in viris tollerent,' Gesner, *de quad. ovi*, p. 72.

<span id="fn_319"></span>[250:2](sbc08.htm#fr_320.md) *Pennant's Tour*, i.
187. 'Cutting the creel' is a rite known to the fishermen of the
Berwickshire coast. (E. B. Simpson's *Folk Lore in Lowland Scotland*, p.
209.) A knife is given to the newly made wife who relieves her husband
of the load, emblematic of the assistance that a help-mate renders.

<span id="fn_320"></span>[251:1](sbc08.htm#fr_321.md) *Celtic Magazine*, x.
542.

<span id="fn_321"></span>[251:2](sbc08.htm#fr_322.md) *Ancient Legends of
Ireland*, i. 219, where one elaborate account of an old Kerry wedding is
quoted and of interest otherwise.

<span id="fn_322"></span>[252:1](sbc08.htm#fr_323.md) *Mìle beannachd
dhuit-s’ fo d’ bhréid*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III. The Earthly Journey (part 2)](sbc09.md)
