[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](sbc05)  [Next](sbc07.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Survivals in Belief Among the Celts*, by George Henderson, \[1911\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

II\. The Wanderings of Psyche (part 2)

The foregoing brief summary, sufficient for my present purpose, is from
living tradition. I give now the original Gaelic, which I owe to Mr.
Kenneth Macleod, who kindly wrote down for me such incidents as he
remembers, and states that he is not quite certain whether the *Morc*
was an *each-uisge* or an *each-coilleadh* or a combination of both.

Rhys inclines to take the Irish *Morc*, corresponding to the Welsh
*March ab Meirchion*, *i.e.* 'Steed son of Steeding,' as a sort of Irish
Pluto. In the *Book of Leinster* (fol. 160<sup>a</sup>) *Morc* (Margg,
Marg) figures as steward of the King of the Fomori. Marc is the name of
one of the foes killed by Cuchulainn on the *tain* (*Book of Dun Cow*,
70<sup>b</sup>). Morc appears as (*a*) having horse's ears, (*b*) a
king, (*c*) captain of a great fleet: he is horse-man, a monster sharing
the qualities of both. <span id="fr_152"></span>[1](#fn_152.md)

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

The original runs:

"*Morc Na Maighe*.—Latha do Chaoilte ’na aonar anns a’ Chreig ghuanaich,
cluinnear farum-fad-as na fadhaide anns a’ choillidh ghruamaich, agus
gabhar a mach air a h-ionnsaidh. Cò thachair ris ach gum b’ e Morc Na
Maighe, agus i ’ga deisearadh fein an sùil na greine. 'Gum bu
sheatha <span id="fr_153"></span>[1](#fn_153.md) duit fein, a Chaoilte,'
ars’ ise, ’ma bhrathas <span id="fr_154"></span>[2](#fn_154.md) tu air an
Fheinn mus beir an cuan siar an nochd air a’ ghrein.' '’S gum bu sheatha
duit fein, a phiullagaich pheallagaich ghrainnde,' arsa Caoilte, 'ma
chumas do cheithir chasan ris na chi do dhà shùil.' Bha sid air a cois
le clise dhealan ’s le fuaim thorrunn, agus thugar a’ ghrian de
Chaoilte. 'Tha Mactalla,' ars’ ise, 'air luirg na fadhaide, agus
bitheamaid-ne a nis air a luirg-san.' Mach a ghabh iad le cheile mar
ghaoith ghuinich gheamhraidh, ’s bha an ceum-toisich aig Caoilte. Bha na
glinn a’ lionadh ’s bha na mill a’ sìneadh, ’s bha an ceum-toisich a nis
aice-se. 'Is mòr do luathas, a mhuirc,' arsa Caoilte. 'Cha mhoillid e
sin, a Chaoilte,' ars’ ise, agus i toirt spreadhaidh eile aisde.
'Feuchaidh sinn ealaidh eile a nis,' arsa Caoilte ris fhein; ’s thugar
duibhleum as, ’s beirear air mhuing oirre, agus cha tug ise an aire
riamh gun robh e nis an crochadh rith. Mu dheireadh ’s mu dhiu, aig dol
fodha na gréine, laigh Morc Na Maighe aig bonn craoibh-dharraich, ’s an
teas ’ga ruighinn ’s a h-anail ruith ’na ceo. 'Is moillid do luathas an
sgìos, a mhuirc,' arsa Caoilte,

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> ’s e seasamh air a
beulaibh. 'A bheil thu sin, a bheadagain?' ars’ ise. 'Tha,' ars’ esan;
'is fheairrde mi an roid ud—theid mi nis gu h-astar—slàn leat.' 'Is i an
aois a dh’ fhoghainn domh,' arsa Morc Na Maighe; 'ach bha mo latha fein
agam—cha’n ’eil mi ’n dùil nach teid mi dhachaidh a nis.'"

(*d*) As regards fowl, I can only find few apposite references: Conaire
the Great, who was held to be descended from a fowl, was interdicted
from eating its flesh. <span id="fr_155"></span>[1](#fn_155.md) At 'Goose
Fair' at Great Crosby, Lancashire, the goose was held as too sacred to
eat. In parts of Scotland, too, there was a prejudice against eating the
goose, <span id="fr_156"></span>[2](#fn_156.md) it being too sacred.

Another prejudice existed against white cows. Dalyell in his *Darker
Superstitions of Scotland* mentions the existence of a prejudice against
white cows,—which seem to have been held as consecrated animals. And I
knew a man in the Highlands who could on no account eat pork: he would
turn quite ill on being told that such was given him disguised in any
form. I can but remind the reader of the sacredness and potency of
swine's blood to cure warts, and of the story of Diarmud, whose life
depended on that of the venomous boar. This last might admit of an
explanation different from the preceding.

(*e*) *The soul in deer-form*.—In the earliest documents of the Ossianic
cycle it is Finn and not Ossian who plays the role of poet. Yet, in the
prose tales, dialogues and lyrical monologues are

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

interspersed, and these verses are put in the mouth of the persons
concerned just as if they were the poetical composers of the same.
Windisch (*Ir. Texte*, i. 63) supposes that in this wise Ossian has
developed into a poetic figure. The poems which, in the saga, were put
into his mouth, came to be regarded as his work till they became
gradually typical of a whole species of literature. In support of his
hypotheses Windisch points out that the headings of the poems in point
are to the effect: Ossīn or Finn *cecinit*,—a heading corresponding to
the formula of the Cuchulainn cycle when poetical pieces are by way of
dialogue and quasi-dramatically incorporated in the prose-tale, to wit:
'*Conid and ro chāchain Conchobur inso*' = 'Here Conchobair *sung* as
follows.' From this to *Auctor hujus Ossīn*, the formula of the *Book of
Lismore*, is but a small step. No one, too, who was not versed in poetic
art could be admitted into the Fēinn, as Keating reports, but I have
little doubt this was the invention of those poets of mediaeval times
who wanted to glorify their office. I would in particular point out that
the mediaeval craving after an etymology for the name Ossian came to
strengthen the tendency just referred to. In modern times it is
traditionally narrated that he had *colg an fheidh*, 'deer's hair' (fur,
pile), upon his temple, and that in virtue of having this on a *corner*
(oisinn) of his brow he was called 'Corner,' *i.e.* Oisein. Further, in
the *Book of the Fēinn* one reads the tradition of 1870. "When Oisein
was born in the mountains, it was so that if his mother licked him as
deer licked their calves, he was to be a deer like his mother.

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> If not he was to
be a man like Fionn his father. She had so much of the deer's nature in
her that she began to lick the child, and she gave one sweep of her
tongue to his temple. The deer's hair (*colg an fheidh*) grew on the
corner of his brow at once. When his mother saw that, she had so much of
the woman's nature left that she wished her son to be a man, she stopped
licking him, and he grew up to be a man, and they called him Oisein
(*i.e.* Angle or corner). He was the best bard in the world" (*L. na F.*
p. 198).

In the above version Ossian is Cuchulainn's nephew, for his mother is
the sister of Cuchulainn mac an Dualtaich, under spells (*geasan*).
Fionn had been under a taboo that he would marry any female creature he
might chance to meet. He fell in with a deer, and by putting his finger
under his wisdom-tooth he knew the deer was an enchanted woman. Here we
have the animal parentage of Ossian, of which account the above is but
the afterglow. On the *margin* of the *Book of Leinster* (1160) there is
the following reference to the mother of Ossian:

māthair Diarmata o’n Dāil  
ingen churraig meic Chathāir  
is blai derg de’n Bhanbai bhrais  
māthair Ossine amnais  
ticedh \[sī\] iricht eilte  
i comdāil na dibeirge  
codernad Ossine de  
ri Blai ndeirg irricht eilte.  
                              LL. 164 marg. supp.

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *i.e.* 'The mother
of Diarmad, from Dāil, daughter of Currag mac Cathar; and Blai Derg,
from the rushing

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Banba, the mother
of the formidable Ossian. In a doe's shape she used to come and join the
outlawed band, and thus it was that Ossian was begotten upon Blai Derg
disguised as a doe' (cf. *Sil. Gad*. 522).

According to a Barra version Fionn's first wife Grainne, enchanted in
the form of a hind, was mother to Ossian. It was a fairy sweetheart that
put her under spells. The fairy sweethearts used always to be at that
kind of work. It was on a pretty little green island which is called
Eilean Sandraigh (or otherwise on a sea-rock in Loch-nan-Ceall, in
Arasaig) that Ossian was born (*Leabhar na Feinne*, p. 199).

The soul in deer-form is met with in another story connected with
*Forsair Choir’ an t-Sīdhe*, 'The Forester of Fairy Corry.' I give it as
told by the late Alexander Macpherson of Kingussie.

“*The White Hind*.—Somewhere in this Garden of Sleep (Kingussie
Cemetery) hallowed by St. Columba, although no trace can now be found of
the actual grave, there rests the dust of the celebrated forester of the
Fairy Corry, a native of Cowal in Argyllshire. This hero was of a branch
of the MacLeods of Raasay, and being fair-haired his descendants were
called Clann Mhic-ille bhain—that is, children of the fair (literally
white) haired man, who now call themselves by the surname of Whyte. The
forester was universally believed to have had a Leannan-Sith (a fairy
sweetheart), who followed him wherever he went.

"Mr. Duncan Whyte, of Glasgow, one of the eighth generation in direct
descent from the forester, communicated to me in Gaelic sundry very
interesting

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

traditions which have come down regarding his famous ancestor. In the
year 1644 the Earl of Montrose was in the field with an army on behalf
of King Charles I.; while the Earl of Argyll had the chief command of
the Covenanters’ forces. Montrose was burning and pillaging in the north
when Argyll received instructions to go in pursuit of him. The forester
was in Argyll's army, and the fairy sweetheart, in the shape of a white
hind, followed the troops wherever they went. While they were resting in
the neighbourhood of Ruthven Castle, in Badenoch, some of the officers
began to mock Argyll for allowing the hind to be always following the
army. Their ridicule roused his wrath, and he commanded his men to fire
at the hind. This was done without a particle of lead piercing her hair.
Some observed that the forester was not firing, although pointing his
gun at the hind like the rest, and he was accused to Argyll. He then
received strict orders to fire at the hind. 'I will fire at your
command, Argyll,' said the forester, 'but it will be the last shot that
I shall ever fire,' and it happened as he said. Scarcely was the charge
out of his gun when he fell dead on the field, The fairy gave a terrific
scream and rose like a cloud of mist up the shoulder of the neighbouring
mountain, and from that time was never seen following the army. It has
been believed by every generation since that the fairy left a charm with
the descendants of the forester, which shall stick to them to the
twentieth generation." <span id="fr_157"></span>[1](#fn_157.md)

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

From Irish tradition I take the following example. It is the story of
*Oisin Born of A Doe in Cremlin* (West Mayo):

“One fine sunny day the seven heavy battalions of Fionn encamped at the
foot of Murrn, in the land of lakes; the son of Devvra sat on the top of
a hill, looking over rocks and cliffs where there were only wild wolves
and badgers: near him was Gaul, son of Morni. Fifty strong men had
charge of the hounds in leash: the hounds running at liberty were put
under care of the hunters of Leinster and of Munster.

“A hawk was making melodious sounds for the children of Ruanan who were
led by Caoilte: the baying of the hounds in the woods drove the deer and
wild beasts into the darkest shades and caves of the glens.

“A young doe rose up in the chase: Fionn, the active white-handed hero,
saw her beauty; he gave vehement chase and took her to be his
wife. <span id="fr_158"></span>[1](#fn_158.md)

“This lovely doe he shielded from attack of hounds: he let her escape:
his eye followed her as she bounded from bush to bush, till she reached
Cremlin of the woody thickets.

“There the doe remained till I was born amidst the branches, instead of
a kid: by her side I ran like a kid, sucking my mother's milk till I was
seven

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

years old: wild in the woods I ran till I was three times seven years
old. Boomin, the tuneful foster mother of Fionn, came into the woods to
pluck berries: she ran to Fionn and told him that in the thickets she
had seen an animal like a red, wild man.

“All the Fenii gathered together to find out the truth of the story
which ran from man to man.

“To prevent my escape they placed two hounds in Aughavilla, two in
Aughavalla, two in Auchagower, two in Ogoul near the sea, two on the
ridge of Lenane, two on the dizzy heights of Achil, two in Cuirrsloova,
two swift hounds on the hill of Tarramud, and at the foot of Binna they
placed the son of Boovil, with his two swift dogs straining at the
leash. The melodious voices of the hounds roused the stately stags of
Barraglauna, does, badgers, and boars of the glens stole away. At
evening's hour they raised the spear to stop the chase: they rested
their hunting spears on their shoulders: they slept in Thauver of much
people.

“At sunrise next day Fionn, in his hunting dress, followed his melodious
hounds through the woody glens: they started me and the doe my mother:
all day they chased us: when the sun went down I was tired: the hound
Sheeve came up and caught me by the hair of my head: the doe left me,
alone. Then came Shrocco in strong running, and took a sufficient hold
of my back: Guntaugh seized me by the left side, and Creautagh by the
right: Fuiltaugh held me by the loin, and the hound Verran by the leg.
Bran came running up, she was only nine months old and not yet strong in
chase: when she came up

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

she began to lick my wounds, she was kind and gentle, she treated me
well.

“Caoilte was the first hunter who came to me; after him all the Fenii;
they led me by the hand to Fionn. When the son of Cumhal felt the
strength of the bones of my arms he said, 'These arms and hands are like
those of the children of Baoisgne.'

"Then the Fenii came round in friendship: they brought shears: they
sheared me from head to foot: they washed me and put clothing upon me in
place of the coarse hair which covered me before. Fionn and all the
Fenii taught me to speak. Thus was I born in Gremlin of the shady
thickets." <span id="fr_159"></span>[1](#fn_159.md)

The counsel given by Ossian to his mother, Highland legend expresses
thus: <span id="fr_160"></span>[2](#fn_160.md)

  Mas tu mo mhathair ’s gur fiadh thu  
  Éirich mu’n éirich a’ ghrīan ort.

= Mother mine, if deer thou be  
  Arise ere sun arise on thee.

This counsel was given, according to Miss Tolmie, in order that the
deer, *i.e.* his mother, might break the spell which bound her before
Ossian was born.

The name Ossian, Irish *Oisín*, *i.e.* little deer or *os*, is a
diminutive from Gadhelic *os*, deer, cognate with Cymric *uch*, English
*ox*; not from the Saxon *’Oswine*, as Dr. Zimmer imagined, which in
Gadhelic would yield a long initial vowel, whereas it is short.

In addition to that of Ossian, which denotes 'little deer,' there are
many other names of animal parentage

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

in Gadhelic: Mac Echern, MacLellan, MacKichan, MacMahon, MacCulloch,
derive from the names for horse, wolf, bear, boar; Shaw seemingly is
from Sithech 'wolf,' as is also M‘Keith; the Prince of Teffia, The
O’Caharny, had as his official title 'The Wolf.' Malcolm, through the
Gaelic Maol-Coluim, derives ultimately from Columba, 'dove.' Adamnán
gives the older diminutive form Oisseneus, from Gaelic Oisséne, and
there is the female form Ossnat, as well as the tribal name Ossraighe,
whence Ossory. Nicknames are still given to persons in the Highlands,
and such names as 'the lion,' 'the jackdaw,' 'the little horse,' 'the
rat,' 'the eagle' were current a few years ago. Analogy thus strengthens
the conception as to the name Ossín being given from his deer parentage.

The Ossraighe have been held to be a pre-Milesian race. Rhys derived
*os* here from Basque *otso*, 'a wolf.' But compare Gamhanraighe, 'the
calf-tribe'; Conraighe, 'the hound tribe'; Soghraighe, the bitch-tribe?'
as Mr. MacNeill renders the names in the *New Ireland Review*. <span
id="fr_161"></span>[1](#fn_161.md)

The same idea occurs in another old tale of the transformation of Tuan
mac Cairill, who tells the story to St. Finnian of Moville. "As I was
asleep one night I saw myself passing into the shape of a stag (*dul i
richt oiss allaid*). . . . After this, from the time that I was in the
shape of a stag, I was the leader of the herds of Ireland, and wherever
I went there was a large herd of stags about me (bói alma mór do ossaib
alta immum). This Tuan afterwards

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

passes into the shape of a boar, then into that of a. hawk, then into
that of a salmon, which on being eaten by Cairell's wife, he was reborn
as human. He was of great age when Patrick came to Ireland and was
baptized, and he 'alone believed in the king of all things with his
elements.' Every pedigree that is in Ireland, ’tis from Tuan, son of
Cairell, the origin of that history is. For he had conversed with the
ages and was known as Tuan, the son of Starn, the brother of Partholon
(whence Mac Pharlane, -Farlane), the first man who came to Ireland. One
hundred years was he in man's shape, eighty as a stag, twenty as a boar,
a hundred as an eagle, twenty as a salmon, so that three hundred and
twenty years elapsed until he was reborn a man."

The *Colloquy* tells us that Ossian went to the *síd* of ucht Cleitigh
(síd octa Cleitig), where was his mother Blái, daughter of Derc surnamed
*dianscothach*, *i.e.* 'of the forcible language.' <span
id="fr_162"></span>[1](#fn_162.md) In another part of the Colloquy we read
of Ubhalroiscc, from the Síd Ochta Cleitig in the plain of Bregia. <span
id="fr_163"></span>[2](#fn_163.md) This passage enumerates the chiefs and
territorial lords of the Tuatha de Danann, and it follows that the deer
parentage of Ossian connects him with the *Tuatha dé*.

Again, in the Highlands we meet with the deer as sacred, as possessing
the theriomorphic soul. In the Island of Rum it was thought that if one
of the family of Lachlin shot a deer in the mountain of Finchra that he
would die suddenly or contract a distemper which would soon prove fatal.
Probably the life of the Lachlins was bound up with the deer

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

on Finchra as the life of the Hays was bound up with the mistletoe on
Errol's oak. <span id="fr_164"></span>[1](#fn_164.md) One recollects that
the Gauls are referred to as sacrificing to Artemis or Diana (v. Grimm's
*Teutonic Mythology*, iv. 1592).

The deer is thus clearly a phase of the theriomorphic soul, and thus we
can account for the survival of stag-ceremonies connected with church
worship in Britain. Thus, Camden says as to the site of St. Paul's,
London: "Some have imagined that a temple of Diana formerly stood here,
and when I was a boy I have seen a stag's head fixed upon a spear
(agreeably enough to the sacrifice of Diana) and conveyed about within
the church with great solemnity and sound of horns. And I have heard
that the stag which the family of Bawd in Essex were bound to pay for
certain lands used to be received at the steps of the church by the
priests in their sacerdotal robes, and with garlands of flowers on their
heads. Certain it is this ceremony savours more of the worship of Diana
and of Gentile errours than of the Christian religion." <span
id="fr_165"></span>[2](#fn_165.md) Statues and stone-altars to Diana have
been found in the neighbourhood. <span id="fr_166"></span>[3](#fn_166.md)
The 'playing of the stag,' referred to in penitential books and
homilies, points in the same direction. Men on New Year's Day clothed
themselves in the skin of a stag, with its horns upon their heads, and
were accompanied by other men dressed in woman's clothing. In this
costume with licentious songs and drinking, they proceeded to the doors
of the churches,

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

where they danced and sung with extraordinary antics. Tacitus, in his
Germania, tells us of a priest clothed as a woman, and when men first
usurped the office of priestess there is little doubt that they clothed
as women. Hence the men dressed as women who occur in so many Twelfth
Day, May Day and Midsummer Day celebrations are, I think, fossils of the
old priestesses, often occurring as fossils of the old sacrificial
animal. The 'playing of the stag' at the church door seems to me,
therefore, another relic of the old religious rites accompanied by
choral dance and licentious song. <span id="fr_167"></span>[1](#fn_167.md)
And I may refer to the stags' horns which I have seen four years ago in
the church of Abbots Bromley, Staffs., which are carried by the mummers
who annually enact the 'Hobby Horse.'

With the deer-mother of Ossian, one may compare the story of the Deer
Park in Benares, where Buddha first caused the wheel of the good to
revolve. The story tells of a king who was one of the former
incarnations of Bodhisattva Shâkyamuni.

Moved by the entreaty of a mother-doe to save its offspring, the
Deer-Bodhisattva approached the king on her behalf. The king said:
". . . I am a deer in man's form. Though you are in appearance a lower
animal, you are in heart a human being. . . . If endowed with a loving
heart, though a bear in form, one is human. . . ." <span
id="fr_168"></span>[2](#fn_168.md)

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

(*f*) *Transformation and Incarnation into Bull-form. The Divine Bull*
(*Tarbh*) *of the Epos and of Legend*.—It may seem a strange thing to
give a great tale in which the leading incidents turn on the possession
of a bull the title of Táin Bó Cúalnge, the Foray (or Driving) of the
*Kine* of Cualnge. But all *Tána* according to the old Gadhelic
categories fall under the title of Táin Bó; and besides, the Bull sought
is of super-animal origin; it is the seventh form assumed by the
swine-herd of the gods, for the Donn Cualnge had (1) a human form, (2)
the form of a raven, (3) that of a seal, sea-dog, (4) that of an eminent
warrior, (5) the form of a phantom, (6) that of a worm or moth, (7) that
of a bull. It is distinctly stated in the Táin that the Donn of Cúalnge
had human reason: 'atchuala Dond Cualngi anní sein acus bae cíall
dunetta aice' <span id="fr_169"></span>[1](#fn_169.md) = 'the Dond of C.
heard this, for it had human understanding.' The two bulls were
incarnations of rival swine-herds from the Síd. <span
id="fr_170"></span>[2](#fn_170.md) 'The Begetting of the Two Swine-herds '
forms a tale in the *Book of Leinster*; <span
id="fr_171"></span>[3](#fn_171.md) Friuch and Riucht were their names, "and
there was also friendship between them, viz., both possessed the lore of
paganism, and used to shape themselves into any shape, as did Mongan the
son of Fiachna." They underwent various transformations:

. . . they were two stags. . .

They were two champions wounding each other.

They were two spectres, either of them terrifying the other.

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

They were two dragons, either of them beating (?) the snow on the land
of the other. They dropped down from the air and were two worms. One of
them went into the well of Glass Cruind in Cualnge, where a cow of Dáre
mac Fiachnai drunk it up; and the other went into the well of Garad in
Connaught, where a cow of Medb and Ailill's drank it, so that from them
sprang the two bulls, the Whitehorn Ai and the Donn of Cualnge.

I suggest that we have here to do with the *Tarbh Boibhre* <span
id="fr_172"></span>[1](#fn_172.md) of living Highland tradition. *Boibre*
is given in O’Davoren's glossary and explained as from *boabartach
abairt amail in mboin*, *i.e.* 'cow-behaviour, behaving like the cow.'
It was conceived as a sort of hermaphrodite lusting to graze at a loch
side along with cows. From recent tradition I know of the Tarbh Boibhre
having been spoken of; the description given pointed to some mythic
animal often emerging from deep inland lochs—for instance, Loch Bruiach
in Inverness-shire--and capable of assuming the form of a bull or of a
cow at pleasure, and of emitting a peculiar cry like to that of powerful
birds in the night time. I have come across a fuller description in the
Campbell of

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Islay MSS., which
I reproduce. It is entitled *The Boobrie*, and is thus described in its
three-fold manifestations or imaginary emanations.

(*a*) *The Boobrie as Bird*.—“This species of animal which within the
last century was by no means rare in the districts of Upper Lochaber and
Argyll, has for many years been totally extinct, the assigned cause
being the extent to which heather burning has been practised in those
districts for so many years past. Very long heather was the natural
resting place and shelter of the Boobrie. According to the most
authentic reports the animal was endowed with the power of assuming at
pleasure the forms of three different animals, viz., those of a most
enormous and ferocious water-bird (when he was designated the Boobrie),
of a water-horse or *each-uisg*, and of a water-bull or *tarbh-uisg*.
The first of these was the one which he preferred assuming. I intend
giving a short description of him in these three various forms—first as
the Boobrie from the report of an eye-witness, who not only saw him but
waded up to his shoulders into a very large muir loch on a very cold
morning in February in the hope of getting a shot at him, but when he
had reached within eighty-five yards of him the animal dived, and my
informant after waiting for three quarters of an hour where he was,
returned on shore to watch for his reappearance, which, though my
informant remained in his uncomfortable position for more than five
hours and a half on the bank, did not take place. Although this man was
not so fortunate as to get a shot at him, he was near enough to have
been enabled to furnish

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

me with a most satisfactory account of the animal's appearance and
dimensions. In form and colour the Boobrie strongly resembles the Great
Northern Diver, with the exception of the white on the neck and breast;
the wings of both, bearing about the same proportion to the size of
their bodies, appear to have been given them by nature more for the
purpose of assisting them in swimming under water, than flying. In size
of body he is larger than seventeen of the biggest eagles put together.
His neck is two feet eleven inches long, and twenty-three inches in
circumference, his bill is about seventeen inches long, black in colour,
measuring round the root about eleven inches; for the first twelve
inches the bill is straight, but after that assumes the shape of an
eagle's, and of proportionate strength. His legs are remarkably short
for his size, black in colour, but tremendously powerful, the feet are
webbed till within five inches of the toes, which then terminate in
immense claws of most destructive nature. The print of his foot on the
mud at the east end of the lake (as accurately measured by an authority)
covers the space generally contained within the span of a large
wide-spreading pair of red deer's horns. The sound he utters resembles
that of a large bull in his most angry humours, but much superior in
strength. The favourite food of the Boobrie is the flesh of calves;
failing them he feeds upon sheep or lambs, as suits him, or seizing his
prey he carries it off to the largest neighbouring muir loch, swims out
to the deepest part, where he dives, carrying his victim along with him,
and

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

there feeds, returning on shore at pleasure. He is also particularly
fond of otters, which he swallows in great numbers, and with
considerable avidity.

“It is a notorious fact that about sixty years ago a Boobrie frequented
a loch named Loch Leathan, *anglice* 'the Broad Loch,' in the West of
Argyllshire, and caused great consternation in the district.

"The clergyman of this parish was a remarkable man, not only for the
assiduity with which he followed his calling, but for his talents and
accomplishments. Whenever it was known that he was to preach, a large
congregation was certain. On one occasion the parson had agreed to
preach for a neighbouring clergyman who was absent on duty, and all the
neighbouring gentry made a point of attending. As distances were great
the heritors ordered dinner. \[Here story tells of their chance of
falling in with the Boobrie. . . . the minister and his servant fell
over one another in a burn. Each thought the other was the Boobrie.
Sandy, the servant, always thought they had been glamoured by the
Boobrie!\]"

(*b*) *The Boobrie as Water-horse* (*Each-Uisge*)." On the banks of Loch
Freisa, a fresh-water loch on the property of Lochadashenaig, in the
island of Mull, the tenant was ploughing some land that was so hard and
strong that he was compelled to use four horses. Early one day one of
the horses cast a shoe, they were nine miles from a smithy, and the
nature of the ground prevented any possibility of the horse ploughing
without one. 'Here's the best

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

part of our day's work gone,' said the tenant to his son, who was
leading the foremost horses. 'I am not sure,' replied the son. 'I see a
horse feeding beside the loch, we'll take a lend of him, as we don't
know who he belongs to.' The father approved of the proposal. The son
went down and fetched up the horse, which appeared to have been quite
used to ploughing, drawing first up bill, then down, perfectly steadily
until they reached the end of the furrow, close to the loch. On an
attempt to turn the horses this borrowed one became rather restive,
which brought the whip into use, though lightly; no sooner had the thong
touched him than he instantly assumed the form of a most enormous
Boobrie, and uttering a shout which appeared to shake the earth, plunged
into the loch, carrying with him the three horses and plough. <span
id="fr_173"></span>[1](#fn_173.md) The tenant and his son had both the
sense to let go their respective holds. The Boobrie swam out with his
victims to the middle of the loch, where he dived, carrying them along
with him to the bottom, where he apparently took his pleasure of them.
The tenant and his son got a most awful fright (as well may be
imagined), but remained hid behind a large stone for seven hours in the
earnest hope of perhaps even one of their horses coming ashore. But no."

(*c*) Boobrie as *Tarbh-Uisge*.—"In the two preceding anecdotes we have
described the Boobrie merely as a rapacious and predatory animal,
causing general dismay from his frightful appearance and voracious
appetite, but the following anecdote seems to give colour to the now
generally received belief that this

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

form in its different shapes was the abode of a spirit, condemned to
such penance by way of expiation for the violation of certain ordinances
of the superior spirits, and was in many instances friendly, if not
beneficent to mankind."

The following abstract will explain the subsequent story:

\[*Scene in winter on west coast of Argyll, on west Lank of Loch nan
Dobhran, where one Eachann suddenly came upon a large black bull which
was lying down, apparently dying and groaning piteously: Eachann feeds
him. Eachann's sweetheart Phemie had a rejected suitor, Murdoch
MacPherson: Scene changes to summer, at the shieling beside Loch nan
Dobhran*.\]

"Once or twice Phemie had been startled by the momentary vision of a
shadow on the lake, one which made her shudder, for the fleeting outline
reminded her of the rejected suitor. . . . One evening as she sat at
some distance from the shieling and thought of Eachann, the shadow again
crossed her, but this time when she looked around Murdoch himself was
there. Before she could scream he threw his plaid over her head, bound
down her hands. . . . Help came to her in a most unexpected form. The
Tarbh Uisg came tearing along, and rushing at Murdoch, seemed to crush
him to the earth before he had any time to make any resistance. . . .
The Tarbh Uisg approached Phemie, and kneeled down, as if to invite her
to mount upon his back, which she did. He immediately sped off, and with
the quickness of thought she found herself safely deposited at her
mother's door. The

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Tarbh Uisg was
gone in a moment, but a voice was heard in the air calling out loudly:

*Chaidh comhnadh rium le ògair caomh  
S ri òigh rinn mise bàigh;  
Deigh tri cheud bliadhna do dhaorsa chruaidh  
  Thoir fuasgladh dhomh gun dàil*,

which may be thus translated:

I was assisted by a young man  
And I aided a maid in distress;  
Then after three hundred years of bondage  
  Relieve me quickly.

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Since then the
Tarbh Uisg has not been seen."

 

The above reveals the persistence in folk-belief of the idea of
transformation, the Boobrie being the abode of a spirit, just as the
Donn Cualnge had human reason. Sometimes the *tarbh boidhbhre* has been
thought of as asexual, and the phrase has been rendered 'the bull of
lust.' Calves with any peculiarities were once upon a time held to be
from this stock, and corresponded to the Manx idea of the *far-lheiy*,
which Cregeen's *Dictionary* defines as "a false conception of a calf,
said to be generated between a cow and what is called a
*tarroo-ushtey*." In parts of Inverness-shire it has been defined to me
a <span id="fr_174"></span>[1](#fn_174.md)s a serpent-bull, further defined
as a great fly, or as a big striped brown *gobhlachan* or 'ear-wig,' as
long as one's little finger, with a crave for sucking horse-blood. It
was thought to be very rare, to appear only in great heat in August and
September, and to have lots of tentacles or

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

feelers (*tha gràinne spògan air*). In the same district the water-horse
was thought of as at times like unto a man, similar to a carle in
ribbons and rags; every one will not see it: to see it is an omen of
drowning. <span id="fr_175"></span>[1](#fn_175.md)

The water-horse (*in t-ech usci*) is spoken of in the *Life of St.
Féchin of Fore*: "It came to them and was harnessed to the chariot, and
it was tamer and gentler than any other horse." <span
id="fr_176"></span>[2](#fn_176.md) Cossar Ewart has lately spoken of the
old species of horse of 30,000 years ago, and may be the wild-horse of
Scotland is reflected in its folklore. Mr. D. M. Rose drew attention to
this in the *Scotsman*, and as what he says of Sutherland holds further
south, I cannot but quote his words:

“In the folklore of the north, extending over a wide area, from
Caithness to Aberdeen, there is much concerning horses that at first
sight seems fabulous. But a different complexion is put on these tales
when it is taken into consideration that wild horses survived in the
north until the sixteenth century. Through the progress of time folklore
became invested with the supernatural. For instance, in Sutherland there
are many legends about the wild horses of the interior, and from these
yarns it would appear that later generations (in the absence of the real
wild horse) entertained a belief that his Satanic Majesty must have
assumed the shape of a horse to beguile

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

wayfarers. A queer thing is that in folklore all these wild horses were
lovely yellow coloured animals with bristling manes and long flowing
tails. If yellow was the prevailing colour of the wild animal, it is
somewhat singular that the yellow dun type of horse is somewhat rare in
the north.

“Let me give the story of the golden horse of Loch Lundie. Two men from
Culmailie went one Sunday to fish on Loch Lundie, and they saw,
pasturing in a meadow, one of the most lovely golden coloured ponies
they had ever seen. One of the men determined to seize the animal and
bring it home. His companion, in a state of great alarm tried to
dissuade him, assuring him that the animal was none other than the devil
in disguise. The man, nothing daunted, began to stalk the pony,
declaring that if he could get a chance he would mount on the beast,
even if it were the Evil One. At length he managed to get within reach,
and making a bound he seized the bristling mane, and leaped on the
animal's back. In an instant the pony gave one or two snorts that shook
the hills, fire flashed from its eyes and nostrils, and tossing its tail
into the air, it galloped away with the man to the hills, and he was
never again seen by mortal being.

“According to another version, the yellow horse of Loch Lundie was last
seen in a meadow near Brora by two boys who broke the Sabbath. They
tried to mount the animal, and one of them succeeded in doing so. The
other boy, getting alarmed, tried to withdraw, but found to his horror
that his finger had stuck in the animal's side. With great

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

presence of mind, he immediately pulled out his knife and cut off his
finger. The pony immediately gave an appallingly shrill neigh and
galloped madly away with his rider, who was never seen again.

"Of course, in folklore the pony was undoubtedly regarded as Auld Nick,
but the truth is that wild horses actually existed in the Sutherland
hills until after 1545. This wild herd was claimed by the Bishops of
Moray, but Sutherland of Duffus succeeded in making good his right to
them. They are described as the herd of 'wild meris, staigs, and folis,'
and they could hardly have been of the domesticated species, though
possibly later on they were captured and tamed, or died away. In
Aberdeenshire the same folklore exists regarding wild horses. There is a
story told about a son of Rose of Tullisnaught, who was lost in the
neighbouring Forest of Birse. When he and his servant went out hunting
one day he suddenly came upon a beautiful yellow pony in a glade of the
forest. The servant tried to persuade him that the pony was merely the
devil in disguise, but Rose determined to capture and mount the animal.
He managed to do this, but in a twinkling horse and rider disappeared
and were never seen again. Now, the recently issued *Records of the
Sheriffdom of Aberdeen* (vol. i. pp. 106-7), by the New Spalding Club,
clearly establishes the existence of a herd of wild horses in the Forest
of Birse in 1507. From the references they do not appear to have been of
the domesticated species, though they were being dispersed and
apparently broken in."

As regards the Boobrie as bird, this is the bird

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Forbes gives as
*bubaire*, 'the common bittern.' The upper parts of its body and wings
are of a rich brown buff, with cross bars and shaft lines which give it
colour-protection among the reeds of the marsh it frequents. The bittern
boom, at the breeding season, is a strangely weird sound. Its early
arrival was a good omen:

You may knaw there's na mair winter to cum  
When the Bull o’ Prestwick beats his drum.  
                               (Northumberland Lore.)

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> By Tweedside the
bird was called the *Miredrum*; it is known as *Botaurus stellaris*,
starred or speckled bird which bellows like an ox-bull. The French call
it *butor*, or else *bœuf du marais*, 'ox of the swamp,' or *taureau
d’étang*, 'bull of the pond.' Other English names are *butter-bumps*,
*bog-bull*. It is its weird hollow cry at evening or at night that has
led to its being regarded as an omen of disaster or death. Few retreats
are left for it, comparatively, and its irregular visits have caused a
good deal of confused belief regarding it. Burns calls it the *bluiter*,
*e.g*.

The howlet cried from the castle wa’,  
The bluiter from the bogie.

Scott's description is probably the best in poetry: it suggests the
solitary habits and the aloofness of the bird:

Yet the lark's shrill fife may come  
  At the daybreak from the fallow;  
And the bittern sound his drum  
  Booming from the sedgy shallow,  
Ruder sounds shall none be near,  
Guards nor warders challenge here.

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

The sound is described as hollow; a booming sound, as that of a drum; a
sort of bellow, but not so loud as that of a cow or bull, but suggestive
of that sound. Its note during the breeding season is variously
described as booming, bumping, bellowing, 'bumbling in the mire,' and
Sir Thomas Browne refers to the belief that "a bitter maketh that
mugient noyse, or as we term it bumping, by putting its bill into a
reed." The Germans call it *moosochse*, *mooskuhe*. It is questionable
whether the Latin *botaurus* has not been suggested by some survival of
a Celtic \**bo-tarvos*, issuing in Old English *botor*, perhaps also in
the Gaelic *bo’ithre*, tarbh *eithre*, if we put O’Davoren's *bo-oibre*
aside. A bird called a bull, which imitates the lowing of oxen is spoken
of by Pliny: "est quae boum mugitus imitetur in Arelatensi agro taurus
appellata" (*Hist. Nat*. x. 42). Its note has typified desolateness and
gloom from of old: cf. Isaiah xiv. 23, xxxiv. 11; Zephaniah ii. 14.
Though changed in the Revised Version to porcupine (hedge-hog),
Principal G. A. Smith, for instance, renders the last passage: "Yea,
pelican and bittern shall roost on the capitals,"  <span
id="fr_177"></span>[1](#fn_177.md) and points out that the other animals
mentioned here are birds, and that it is birds which would naturally
roost on capitals. <span id="fr_178"></span>[1](#fn_177.md)By the Tigris
the bittern abounds, as in the marshes of Syria. "No traveller," says
Canon Tristram, "who has heard the weird booming of the bittern in the
stillness of the night, while encamped near some ruined site, can ever
forget it, or mistake any other sound for it. The bird belongs to the
heron

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

tribe, but is utterly different in its habits; always solitary, standing
still and motionless through the day, with its beak upturned, looking
like a tuft of weathered leaves, and only feeding at night." The sound
is produced by the bird expelling the air from its throat while it
stands with neck outstretched and holding its bill vertically
upwards,—so Mr. J. E. Harting, who has observed the bird in the act. It
is uncommon now in Scotland. One has been found at Taprain Law, East
Lothian, on January 21, 1908. From a description given me over twenty
years ago it was heard about Loch Bruiach, Inverness-shire, several
years previously, and was known as the *tarbh boidhre* (*bo’eithre*,
*bo-oibhre*). I had made most of my investigation of the Boobrie over
six years ago when, following on an article on the 'Bull o’ the Bog,' by
Mr. J. Logie Robertson (*Scotsman*, March 1, 1910; cf. also that of Feb.
5, 1910, as to its rarity), there appeared this note, which I beg to
insert as quite confirmatory of my suggestion:

"*The Legend of the Water Bull*.—When reading 'J. L. R.’s' interesting
notes in The Scotsman of March 1st on the 'Bull o’ the Bog,' it occurred
to me that possibly in that bird of nocturnal habits we might find a
natural explanation of the water bull (sometimes called the water horse)
of Celtic legend. The main facts, viz., that the bittern haunts damp and
reedy quarters such as are quite common round so many of our Highland
lakes, that its booming notes are not unlike the guttural bellowing of a
bull, and more particularly that its voice is usually heard after
night-fall, all seem to suggest that it may have

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

been the natural source of the various mythological tales in which the
water bull figures. Some twenty years ago I came across an old
Highlander in the north-west of Argyllshire who thoroughly believed in
the existence of the water bull (the *Tarbh-uisge*). He told me a long
tale about it. It dwelt in a loch not far from his dwelling. It only
appeared at night. He had heard its roaring more than once. It was the
reputed sire of one of the calves in the next farm, and that particular
calf had, on being sent out with the others, gone straight to the loch,
and plunged into its waters, and disappeared—a sure proof of its
paternity. At the time, knowing that old Donald's hut was on the edge of
a deer forest, I came to the conclusion that he had attached a mythical
significance to the sound of the stag's roaring in the rutting season—a
weird melancholy sound when heard towards the gloaming, full of pathos,
and most appealing to the imagination. Now, however, after reading 'J.
L. R.’s' article on the bittern and its ways, I wonder if that nocturnal
bird—presuming it frequented the Highlands of old—may not be responsible
for some at least of the myths associated with the water bull.—B. B."

I may add that the long claw of a bittern's hind toe was once used as an
amulet. Its boom is reserved for the pairing or breeding season, and
less than a century ago it caused strange misgivings and mingled
feelings to whole communities.

References to the divine bull of the Celts can be carried very far back.
In the Banquet of the Sophists by Athenaeus, Ulpien, one of the

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

interlocutors, speaking of the tiger, cites a verse from one of the lost
comedies of Philemon, who, at the age of 99, died in 262 B.C.:

ὥσπερ Σέλευκος δεῦῤ ἔπεμψε τὴν τίγριν  
ἥν ἴδομεν ἡμεῖς τῷ Σελεύκῳ πάλιν ἔδει  
ἡμᾶς τι παῤ ἡμῶν ἀντιπέμψαι θηρίον  
τρυγέρανον· οὐ γὰρ γίγνεται τοῦτ᾽ αὐτόθι.  
                          Athenaeus, xiii. 57, p. 590 A.

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *I.e.* as Seleucus
has brought hither the tiger which we have seen, we ought to send him
back some animal in exchange, a *trugeranos*; there are none there.
This, as Monsieur J. Vendryes has pointed out, is simply the Gaulish
Trigaranos, an epithet of the divine Tarvos, *à trois grues*, which
figures on the altar of Notre Dame at Paris and on the bas-relief of
Treves (*Revue Celtique*, 28, 124). The king referred to is Seleucus
Nicator, one of the successors of Alexander the Great; having visited
the confines of India he met the famous prince, Chandragupta, and
brought back, in addition to some five hundred elephants, some exotic
animals such as tigers, to which he fell a prey in the city of Athens.
The Gauls about this time were invading Macedonia and Thrace; they were
checked at Delphi in 279. The fear of the Gauls,—ὁ ἀπὸ Γαλατῶν
φόβος,—was become proverbial; a decree of the year 278 B.C., discovered
in the ruins of the Asklepeion at Cos, expresses the joy caused in the
island by the tidings of the Gaulish defeat, and prescribes a festival
in honour of Apollo, of Zeus Soter and of Nikē in celebration of the
event.

The Celts had made three different expeditions in the Orient, and in the
age of Alexander some of

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

them were in contact with Greek civilisation; the Greeks recovered some
booty from their enemy, and it would have been an easy matter probably
to have seen in the Celtic camp some such symbolic representations as
are to be met with on the altar of Notre Dame at Paris, or on the
bas-relief of Treves,—figured emblems of the Celtic *Tarvos Trigaranos*.
A creature so bizarre was bound to excite curiosity among a people who
noted that a Gaulish word for horse was *marca* (cf. Gaelic *marcach*,
rider'), and whose Pausanias describes the τριμαρκισία or group of three
cavaliers fighting in unison.

That reverence was paid to the bull among the Celts is indicated by the
frequency of river-names signifying 'bull'; for instance, the river
Tarf, whence Abertarff, Gaelic *Obair-thairbh*, in Stratherrick,
Inverness-shire; while Tarf is a stream name in the shires of Perth,
Forfar, Kirkcudbright, Wigton. These Tarf names go back to Pictish
times. Rivers of old were held in holy reverence: witness names like
Boyne, \**bo-vinda*, 'white-cow,' appearing in legend as a personal
female name; Dee; Aberdeen, G. *Obair-dhea’on*, 'the mouth or inver of
the Devona,' a goddess-name; Affric, a river name, older *Aithbhrecc*, a
female name Affrica, and suitable as a nymph name, which is also the
case with Ness, from Pictish; <span id="fr_179"></span>[1](#fn_178.md)
Lōchy, the 'nigra dea,' or black goddess of Adamnan's *Life of Columba*.
The early human attitude may be inferred from what is told regarding

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

the Kaffirs asking permission of a river ere profaning it by crossing
it. The Roman bridge-builder or pontifex was the intermediary between
the divinity and man, hence our pontiff; cf. Virgil's *pontem indignatus
Araxes*. The old Celt Viridomaros thought himself descended from the
Rhine.

One meets also with the name Rhenogenos, 'born of the Rhine' god.
Certain of the Gaulish inhabitants plunged their newly-born infants into
its waters; if they survived the ordeal it was a token of their being
protected by the common ancestor. Gaulish inscriptions likewise testify
that rivers were the objects of a cult: *e.g*. **DEÆ SEQVAÆ** (the
Seine), **DEÆ ICAUNI** (the Yonne). <span
id="fr_180"></span>[1](#fn_179.md) In Scotland, too, the river names are
mostly pre-Christian and testify to their having been looked on with
more than sacred awe. Almost all of them have legends such as Hugh
Miller tells of the water-wraith of the Conon River in his *Schools and
Schoolmasters*, and Dr. Walter Gregor, of the water-spirit of Donside.
Scott in his *Journal* (23rd Nov., 1827) tells of an attempt to bait the
water-cow, while Mr. Dixon in his *Gairloch* (p. 162) tells a very
similar story. A plaid has several times been made an offering to the
water-spirit of the Dee, Aberdeenshire, which levied a heavy toll on
human life, if we believe the rhyme:

Blood-thirsty Dee  
Each year needs three,  
But bonny Don  
She needs non.

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

There are traces of a custom of throwing salt over the water and the
nets to propitiate the Fairies of the Tweed. In Scott's *Pirate* we find
the belief that whoever rescues a drowning man incurs the monster's
wrath by cheating him of his victim: perhaps from this idea we may infer
the belief, prevalent in the Highlands, in the unluck sure to come to
the family of the man who is the first to find a victim of drowning: the
unluck follows from robbing the spirit of the waters of its victim. The
legends of water-horses in Loch Ness and in the Beauly River, indeed in
all considerable streams, point to the spirit of the raging flood as an
external soul in the waters. <span id="fr_181"></span>[1](#fn_180.md)
Indeed, other river names, such as Ness, Don, Nevis, Annan, go back to
early Celtic nomenclature, which reveals them to be names of nymphs,
especially divine water-nymphs.

One of the altars discovered at Paris in 1710, under the apsis of the
Church of Notre Dame, has four interesting carvings, which represent:

1\. Jupiter, in standing posture, holding a sceptre in his left hand,
which is raised, the left side being covered with a tunic, which leaves
the right shoulder exposed. To the right of the god, on the ground, is
placed an eagle. The frame-work above the figure bears the inscription
**IOVIS**.

2\. Vulcan, in upright posture, clothed in working tunic, leaving the
right side exposed, as also the lower left arm. The left hand holds or
grips a tongs. The figure is inscribed **VOLCANUS**.

3\. A woodcutter, clad in a tunic similar to

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Vulcan's, is shown
as holding in his right hand, which is raised, an axe with which he is
to give a blow to some stems on the gnarled trunk, while in his left
hand he holds one of the branches. Inscribed above is **ESVS**.

4\. A bull carrying on his back a dorsal covering above which is a tree,
the foliage of which is the same as that on the tree in figure 3—in
fact, the foliage of the tree seems to be portrayed here as in
continuation of the preceding scene. On the bull's head is placed a
crane, while two other cranes are portrayed back to back on the animal's
croup. Above is the inscription **TARVOS · TRIGARANVS**.

 

In December, 1895, there was discovered on the left bank of the Moselle,
above Trèves, on the road leading to Luxembourg and to Metz, another
interesting sculpture, the first publication of which is due to Lehner
in the *Korrespondenzblatt der Westdeutschen Zeitschrift* for 1896. It
appeared next in the issue for 1897 of the *Bonner Jahrbücher*, and was
carefully discussed by the celebrated savant, M. Salomon Reinach, in the
*Revue Celtique* for that year. Though in very bad preservation, the
monument seems to have been an altar-piece. One face of this sculpture
portrays the Mercury and Rosmerta of the Gauls, according to Reinach.
Beneath it is. inscribed:

**NDVS MEDIOM ·  
MERCVRIO V · VS**

which Lehner has restored thus: *Indus Mediomatricus Mercurio votum
libens merito* (?) *solvit*. The face to the right is well preserved and
shows,

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

but on a much smaller scale than that on the principal face, a figure of
a man, probably beardless, clothed in a short tunic; he holds in his
hands the handle of a long implement which he is about to drive into a
tree. This tree, the denticulated leaves of which call to mind the
foliage on the altar found at Paris, supports a bull's head on the left;
and three great birds, <span id="fr_182"></span>[1](#fn_181.md) with long
beak, are on the right thereof. We are in the presence of a
representation of the same scene as is depicted on the altar of Notre
Dame—it shows us the woodcutter, the tree, the bull, and the three
cranes—with the sole difference that Esus and the Tarvos Trigaranos are
depicted on one piece instead of on two, as in the other case. This
tree, the foliage of which recalls that of the willow, is an essential
element in the representation. The more one considers the bas-relief of
Trèves, the more readily does one agree with Monsieur Reinach's
conclusion that there exists a relation between the tree and the
woodman, and the bull with the three cranes; that instead of four
isolated figures, Vulcan, Jupiter, Esus, and Tarvos Trigaranos, of the
altar at Paris, there are only three figures symbolised,—Esus and Tarvos
Trigaranos being elements of one scene though shown in juxtaposition.

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

Reinach points out that the bull often personifies the forces of the sun
and of the waters, and thinks that the god-bull prepared for sacrifice
(Notre Dame) and shown as slaughtered at Trèves, may be the Gaulish
Belenos, the Celtic Apollo-Hélios (*Cultes*, iii. 177).

The bull on the Trèves bas-relief is seemingly but an attribute in the
scene of which the tree is the central and basic symbol. The bull
represents some divinity conceived as inhabiting a tree: we have, in a
word, a primitive representation of the tree-soul animating a tree which
is about to be felled by some semi-divine hero known in legend surviving
among, though not necessarily original to, the Celts. Or if among a
Celtic people, it may have formed part of legendary belief among the
forerunners of the Gauls, to wit, the Ligurians, whose speech has been
called Celtican by Rhŷs, <span id="fr_183"></span>[1](#fn_182.md) who has
essayed recently to show it as most closely allied to Gadhelic. The
Highland survival of the Boobrie has much that may be traced to a common
origin with the root idea symbolised in bas-relief at Paris and at
Trèves, and I see no reason why one might not expect to find among
Gadhelic survivals some close parallels to the idea at the root of the
tree-cutter portrayed on these reliefs. Hirschfield has agreed that
certain Pyrenean gods of a non-Iberian type are to be attributed to the
Ligurian predecessors of the Celts, or, as I should prefer to say, of
the Gauls: he instances the oak-god (*Fagus deus*, the translation

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

of the name of a local god), the gods *Sexarbor*, *Sexarbores*, and the
nameless god on some coniferous tree represented on an altar found at
Toulouse. <span id="fr_184"></span>[1](#fn_183.md) Esus, on the Paris
altar, may have been the local name in that district, and not at all
Pan-Celtic. D’Arbois has tried to make out a close parallel for
Cuchulainn. The primary creation of the root ideas in this myth may be
due to precursors of the Celts alike in Gaul and Ireland, but they point
to early tree-worship, and to survivals of dendrolatry among the Celts.
May we not infer with Reinach the idea of a cosmic tree and of a cosmic
bull? Maximus of Tyre relates that the Celts worshipped Zeus under the
image of an oak—δρῦς ἄγαλμα Δίος—and Claudian in his praise of Stilicho
says of Celtdom: *robora Numinis instar barbarici*. M. Reinach recalls
the ideas associated with the Scandinavian Yggdrasil or world-ash, in
the branches of which, as it covered the universe, sat an eagle
cognisant of all things, while a serpent gnawed at the root. The
parallel to the semi-divine wood-cutter is met with in the Kalevala and
in the legends of Esthonia, in which a dwarf becomes transformed into a
giant and fells the tree that obscured the light of sun and moon,
shaking at its fall the whole heavens and earth. The bull appears in
Gaulish art of the Hallstatt and Là Tène periods, and symbolises a
religious idea at the stage when religious expression is at one with the
myth. The legend, which associates a semi-divine hero with the cutting
down of the tree which supports a bull with three cranes, must be of
great antiquity among the

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

\[cont}Celts, and in some way emblemises, how rudely soever, the
presence which pervades all thought and things. Certain of the Greeks
expressed this when they conceived Dionysos, not only as tutelary
divinity of the tree, but as in the tree, ἔνδενδρος, παρὰ Ῥοδίοις Ζεὺς
καὶ Δίονυσος ἐν Βοιωτίᾳ—a gloss of Hesychius. As to a connection between
death or transformation and eating the flesh of cranes, compare the
obscure formula in *West Highland Tales* (i. 240); to cause the death of
one who has lived too long it suffices to call thrice through the
keyhole: "Wish you to go or wish you to stay, or wish you to eat the
flesh of cranes?

Nor need the fact of the divine bull being prominent in Celtic belief
surprise us. Elsewhere the bull, as the source of all wealth among a
people of shepherds and hunters, became the object of religious
veneration. "In the eyes of such a people the capture of a wild bull was
an achievement so highly fraught with honour as to be apparently no
derogation even for a god." Thus the bull-slaying Mithra, dragged along
on the horns of the infuriated animal, was transformed until his painful
journey became the symbol of human sufferings. "But the bull, it would
appear, succeeded in making its escape from its prison, and roamed again
at large over the mountain pastures." The sun then sent the raven, his
messenger, to carry to his ally the command to slay the fugitive. Mithra
received this cruel mission much against his will, but submitting to the
decree of heaven he pursued the truant beast with his agile dog,
succeeded in overtaking it just at the moment when it was taking refuge
in the cave which it had

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

quitted. and seizing it by the nostrils with one hand, with the other he
plunged deep into its flank his 'hunting knife.' <span
id="fr_185"></span>[1](#fn_184.md) In the Mithraic religion, as Justin
tells us, there was a 'baptism for the remission of sins': the bull
being the recognised emblem of life, its blood constituted the
recognised laver of regeneration. In the rite known as Blood-Baptism or
Taurobolia, the person to be initiated, being stripped of all clothing,
went into a pit covered with planks pierced full of holes, whereupon the
hot blood of a newly-slaughtered bull was allowed down through the
apertures, as in a shower bath, upon the person to be regenerated. To
judge from the statement of Lampridius that the priest-emperor
Heliogabalus submitted to it, the rite must have been an important one,
and a pit for the purpose has been discovered within the
[precincts](errata.htm#2.md) of the temple at Eleusis in Greece.

The Celtic personal name, Donno-taurus, 'noble-bull' (lord-bull),
mentioned by Caesar, may contain a word cognate with Irish *donn*,
explained in O’Davoren's Glossary by 'noble, judge, king,' and may come,
according to Stokes, from \**domno-s*, and be cognate with L. *dominus*,
'lord, master.' <span id="fr_186"></span>[2](#fn_185.md) This is most
probably the same word that meets us in *Donn*, the name of the divine
bull located in the Irish epic at Cualnge (Cooley). In course of time it
easily got confused with an entirely different word, *donn*, 'dun.' In
referring to this latter, de Jubainville seems to have forgotten the
former word. <span id="fr_187"></span>[3](#fn_186.md)

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

To the Donn Cualnge one perhaps might compare the Minotaure, which also
had a divine origin, its father having been a bull given by Poseidon to
Minos, and its mother Pasiphae, daughter of the sun. During the Athenian
war Minos exacted as a condition of peace that each year there should be
sent to Crete seven youths and seven young maidens to be devoured by the
Minotaure. The Minotaure was killed by Theseus, as we learn from
Pherecydes. It has been suggested <span id="fr_188"></span>[1](#fn_187.md)
that the legend of Pasiphae and the Minotaure contains a reminiscence of
a marriage ceremony in which the King and Queen of Cnossos figured in
the disguise of a bull and cow respectively. Marrying a queen to a
bull-god was portrayed by marrying her to a man disguised as a bull. The
vine-god Dionysos was annually married to a queen at a building on the
N.E. slope of the Acropolis at Athens, named the Cattle-Stall, whence
Miss Harrison <span id="fr_189"></span>[2](#fn_188.md) conjectured that
Dionysos may have been represented as a bull at the marriage. "In that
case the part of the bridegroom might be played by a man wearing a
bull's head, just as in Egypt in similar rites the sacred animals were
represented by men and women wearing the masks of cows, hawks,
crocodiles, and so forth." <span id="fr_190"></span>[3](#fn_189.md)

I recall the wake orgy in Ireland mentioned by Lady Wilde, in which a
bull is married to a cow; compare *Calluinn a’ Bhuilg* ceremonies in the
Highlands, wherein a hide figures. Add for Britain perhaps the Hobby
Horse at Padstow.

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

Minos is suspected of having been murdered every nine years; his death
was a secret. His going into the Labyrinth is equivalent to going into
the Bull god's cave. <span id="fr_191"></span>[1](#fn_190.md) On Gadhelic
ground, when the Donn or Brown Bull of Cualnge triumphed over its rival
the Find Bennach, it soon after died itself of its wounds, but
paralleling the cruelty of the Minotaure it killed one hundred infants,
or two-thirds of the one hundred and fifty children that came in groups
of fifty to enjoy themselves after mid-day on its great and glossy
back. <span id="fr_192"></span>[2](#fn_191.md)

M. D’Arbois de Jubainville regards the Tarvos Trigaronos, now in the
museum at Cluny, as identical with the Donn Cualnge, and further, the
personage called Esus, who is about to apply his axe to the tree,
appears to him identical with the hero Cuchulainn, who is portrayed as
felling trees to arrest the march of the forces of Queen Medb: <span
id="fr_193"></span>[3](#fn_192.md) "At one blow Cuchulainn cut the chief
stem of an oak, root and branch."

Again, Cuchulainn's divine father was Lug of the Long Hand, already
referred to, and well remembered in Celtic myth. The name appears often
in Gaul, for instance in the place-name Lugudunum, now Lyons, also in
Leyden. His cult was widely diffused, to judge from the name being met
with in the plural *Lugoues*, *Lugouibus*, on inscriptions, one from
Switzerland, another from Spain. He was the Gaulish Mercury in Caesar's

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

time who speaks of him as the inventor of all the arts. The Irish Lug,
according to the account in the 'Second Battle of Moytura,' <span
id="fr_194"></span>[1](#fn_193.md) was skilful as poet, warrior, physician,
sorcerer, harpist, poet, and to him is given the epithet of 'master of
all the arts.' Balor of the evil eye received his death at the hand of
Lug, who thereupon is accorded the sovereignty of the Tuatha dé Danann
on the death of Nuada their king. <span id="fr_195"></span>[2](#fn_194.md)
In the effort at filling up pre-Christian history, the Annalists of
course make him figure as king in Ireland. I agree with M. D’Arbois in
regarding Lug, in his continental aspects, as having been chief among
the gods of Gaul, the god whom Caesar identified with Mercury: *Deum
maxime Mercurium colunt*. <span id="fr_196"></span>[3](#fn_195.md) The
Mercury of the *menhir* of Kervadel, now preserved at Kernuz, D’Arbois
identifies with Lug, while he recalls the exploit of Cuchulainn's youth
when, on having slain the hound of Culann the Smith, he offered
reparation by taking guard himself, on which account his name was
changed from the Setanta (older form \*Setantios?) of his boyhood to
Cú-chulainn, Hound of Culann. The name Setanta is not Gadhelic: it
existed probably among the Picts of Ulidia, and was an ethnic name in
Britain,—the Setantii were a tribe near the River Mersey in Ptolemy's
day. Among the near Gaulish kinsmen of the British tribes the god may
have been simply designated by a personal epithet or title such as
*Esus*, 'master, lord,' the name of the god on the altar-piece of Notre
Dame now in the Museum of Cluny. Cuchulainn alone was exempted from

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

the malady which befell the Ultonian heroes during the war of the
*Tāin*, but at last there came a moment when, weary and fatigued with
wounds, he felt unable to endure any longer. His hero's call was
answered by the appearance of a wondrous warrior whom the *Book of the
Dun* depicts as saying: "I come to succour thee, I am thy father come
from the abode of the gods, I am Lug the son of Ethniu." If we examine
the *menhir* of Kervadel in the light of comparative Celtic myth, it is
most probable that it depicts the Gaulish Mercury and his avatar or son,
in other words Lug (Lugos) and Esus. M. D’Arbois would go even further,
and suggests that the myth of Cuchulainn and the story now worked up
into the *Tāin* may have been brought from Britain by the Druids, who
were there taught the existing lore at a time when as yet the story had
not been entirely localised in Erin. But I cannot think that we are
justified in assuming an entire absence of at least parallel tales in
Gaul itself. The P-group of similar speaking tribes would have much in
common, including what they may have imbibed from their predecessors of
the Q-group, the Gadhelic Celts. For we must pre-suppose a time when
both groups were not as yet, in their continental home, foreign to one
another.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_152"></span>[119:1](sbc06.htm#fr_152.md) For his Midas-like
story see *Y Cymmrodor*, 6, 181-3; cf. for Breton, *Rev. Celt*. ii.
507-8, *re* le Roi de Portzmarch.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[120:1](sbc06.htm#fr_153.md) *Gum bu sheatha*
(spelling doubtful) *duit fein* = 'happy, lucky, may you be.' \[Probably
*sheagha*; cf. Irish *seaghais*, 'pleasure, joy, delight'—G. H.\]
*Shèamha* would be possible, only the *e* has no nasality.

<span id="fn_154"></span>[120:2](sbc06.htm#fr_154.md) *Ma bhrathas tu*,
etc. = 'If you locate, discover.'

<span id="fn_155"></span>[121:1](sbc06.htm#fr_155.md) O’Curry's *Manners
and Customs*, I. ccclxx.

<span id="fn_156"></span>[121:2](sbc06.htm#fr_156.md) Gordon-Cumming's
*Hebrides*, 369; transformation into the shape of a wild goose was known
in some parts of Wales (Trevelyan, 214); cf. *Trans. Gad. Soc. Inv.* 25,
132 for witch in hen-form.

<span id="fn_157"></span>[125:1](sbc06.htm#fr_157.md) *Glasgow Herald*,
Aug. 20, 1910, by the late Alex. Macpherson, Kingussie.

<span id="fn_158"></span>[126:1](sbc06.htm#fr_158.md) The doe is some fair
lady bound by enchantment, but able, for a short time only, to appear to
her lover in her natural figure. The enchanter in this instance permits
her offspring to assume the human form. Bran was the daughter of Fionn
by a lady who came to him as an enchanted hound, but the enchanter threw
his spells over her as well as over her mother. Oisin was half-brother
to Bran, who, instinctively, found out the relationship when the hounds
seized Oisin.

<span id="fn_159"></span>[128:1](sbc06.htm#fr_159.md) Pp. 221-224 of *Poems
of Oisin, Bard of Erin*. From the Irish by John Hawkins Simpson. London,
1857. The section cited comes under the heading of 'Mayo Mythology.'

<span id="fn_160"></span>[128:2](sbc06.htm#fr_160.md) *Campbell of Islay
MSS*., Advocates’ Library, vol. xxii. p. 8.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[129:1](sbc06.htm#fr_161.md) *v*. MacBain's 'Study
of Highland Personal Names,' *The Celtic Review*, 1905, p. 71; and
*Trans. Gael. Soc. Inverness*, vol. xx. 304-305.

<span id="fn_162"></span>[130:1](sbc06.htm#fr_162.md) O’Grady's *Silva
Gad*. p. 102 of the Eng. vol.

<span id="fn_163"></span>[130:2](sbc06.htm#fr_163.md) *Ib*. 225; also
*Irische Texte*, 4 ser. I heft, p. 140.

<span id="fn_164"></span>[131:1](sbc06.htm#fr_164.md) Frazer's *Golden
Bough*, 1st ed. vol. ii. 363.

<span id="fn_165"></span>[131:2](sbc06.htm#fr_165.md) Camden's *Britannia*,
by Gough, ii. 81.

<span id="fn_166"></span>[131:3](sbc06.htm#fr_166.md) References in Gomme's
*Governance of London*, p. 112.

<span id="fn_167"></span>[132:1](sbc06.htm#fr_167.md) Karl Pearson's
*Chances of Death*, ii. 19; in vol. ii. 64 n. he adds: "There are a
considerable number of local saints,—fossils of district goddesses,—who
have the roe or stag as their attribute." On the Cult of the Stag, cf.
*Journal of Hellenic Studies*, 14, 134.

<span id="fn_168"></span>[132:2](sbc06.htm#fr_168.md)  P. 185 of *Sermons
of a Buddhist Abbot*, by Soyer Shaku (Chicago Open Court Publishing
Co.).

<span id="fn_169"></span>[133:1](sbc06.htm#fr_169.md) Windisch's ed., l.
6162; and Hull, p. 225.

<span id="fn_170"></span>[133:2](sbc06.htm#fr_170.md) Faraday, Translation
of *Tāin*, ix.

<span id="fn_171"></span>[133:3](sbc06.htm#fr_171.md) Nutt's *Bran*, ii.
58.

<span id="fn_172"></span>[134:1](sbc06.htm#fr_172.md) The word rhymes with
*oighre*, but might be spelt *boidhbhre*, as if from bo + od + ber, with
meaning of cow-giver, cow-bestowing. Different is *boirche*, 'a large
hind,' O’Brien's *Irish Dictionary*, 1832; others give it as 'buffalo,'
and MacBain suggests alliance with L. *ferus*, E. *bear*. Dineen in his
*Irish Dictionary* under *ortha* gives *tarbh ortha*, 'an enchanted
bull.' A writer in an extinct Highland periodical writes *tarbh fhaire*
(*The Gael*, vol. v. 50). In *West Highland Tales* Campbell writes
*tarbh eithre*. These are all corrupt forms. Final -*bh* in *tarbh*
would tend to change initial *b* into *bh* in a rare word like
*boibhre*.

<span id="fn_173"></span>[138:1](sbc06.htm#fr_173.md) In those days ploughs
were almost always made of wood.

<span id="fn_174"></span>[140:1](sbc06.htm#fr_174.md) *Tarbh a
nathar-neimhe* (sic) .i. *cuileag mhór no gobhlachan mór riabhach donn;
fad do lùdaig ann’s e glé dhona air son bhith toirt full a na h-eich*.

<span id="fn_175"></span>[141:1](sbc06.htm#fr_175.md) Tha’n t-each uisge
coltach ri duine; ’na bhodach coltach ri creutair is riobanan no
luideagan air; chan fhaic a h-uile neach e agus is e comharradh romh
bhàthadh a th’ann.

<span id="fn_176"></span>[141:2](sbc06.htm#fr_176.md) *Rev. Cel*. 12, 347.

<span id="fn_177"></span>[145:1](sbc06.htm#fr_178.md) *Book of The Twelve
Prophets*, vol. ii. 65.

<span id="fn_178"></span>[149:1](sbc06.htm#fr_179.md) The name is the same
as in the goddess name Ness, mother of Conchobar; proto-Celtic \*nesta,
√*ned*, wet, water; German, *netzen*, to wet; *nass*, wet; Sanskrit,
*nadi*, river; cf. the river Neda in Greece, Nestos in Thrace. MacBain
in *Trans. Gael. Soc., Inverness*, 25, p. 62.

<span id="fn_179"></span>[150:1](sbc06.htm#fr_180.md) *Esquisse de la
Religion des Gaulois*, par H. Gaidoz, Paris, 1879, p. 12. Even Cicero
reasons: "ergo et flumines et fontes sunt dii" (*De Nat. Deorum*, iii.
20).

<span id="fn_180"></span>[151:1](sbc06.htm#fr_181.md) Cf. Mackenzie in
*Proceed. of Society of Scottish Antiquaries*, 1895-96, pp. 69-76, on
'Traces of River Worship in Scottish Folk-Lore.'

<span id="fn_181"></span>[153:1](sbc06.htm#fr_182.md) This signifies the
presence of divinity or of inspiration in the votary. In the early cult
of sacred trees and pillars, birds of various kinds play an important
part: the spirit descends on the tree or stone in the form of a bird. In
Greece the dove is connected with a sepulchral cult. "It is, in fact, a
favourite shape in which the spirit of the departed haunts his last
resting-place, and in accordance with this idea we see the heathen
Lombards ornamenting their grave-posts with the effigy of a dove." It is
the dove that bears the nectar to Zeus (*Ody*. xii. 62, 63); *v*.
Harrison's *The Dove Cult of Primitive Greece*, p. 7.

<span id="fn_182"></span>[154:1](sbc06.htm#fr_183.md) 'Celtic Inscriptions
of France and Italy,' from *Proceedings of the British Academy*:
reviewed by me in *The Scottish Historical Review*, July, 1908.

<span id="fn_183"></span>[155:1](sbc06.htm#fr_184.md) v. *Sitzungsberichte*
of Berlin Academy, 16th April, 1896.

<span id="fn_184"></span>[157:1](sbc06.htm#fr_185.md) Cumont, *The
Mysteries of Mithra*, Eng. trans., Chicago, 1903, pp. 135-6.

<span id="fn_185"></span>[157:2](sbc06.htm#fr_186.md) *Archiv für Celtische
Phil*. ii. B. p. 310.

<span id="fn_186"></span>[157:3](sbc06.htm#fr_187.md) *R.C*. 27,
329<sup>n</sup>.

<span id="fn_187"></span>[158:1](sbc06.htm#fr_188.md) A. B. Cook in
*Classical Review*, xvii. (1903), pp. 410, 412.

<span id="fn_188"></span>[158:2](sbc06.htm#fr_189.md) *Prolegomena to Greek
Religion*, p. 537.

<span id="fn_189"></span>[158:3](sbc06.htm#fr_190.md) Frazer, *On the
Kingship*, 174-5.

<span id="fn_190"></span>[159:1](sbc06.htm#fr_191.md) v. Gilbert Murray,
*The Rise of the Greek Epic*, p. 127<sup>n</sup>; and cf. *The
Pilgrimage to Loch Derg*.

<span id="fn_191"></span>[159:2](sbc06.htm#fr_192.md) *Táin bó Cúalnge*,
ed. Windisch, pp. 190-1, ll. 1532-1536.

<span id="fn_192"></span>[159:3](sbc06.htm#fr_193.md) *Ib*. p. 82, etc.;
also p. 68; Hull's *Cuch. Saga*, p. 128, sec. 8.

<span id="fn_193"></span>[160:1](sbc06.htm#fr_194.md) Transl. by Stokes,
*Rev. Celt*. 12.

<span id="fn_194"></span>[160:2](sbc06.htm#fr_195.md) *Book of Leinster*,
p. 9, col. 1, ll. 5-7.

<span id="fn_195"></span>[160:3](sbc06.htm#fr_196.md) *De Bello Gallico*,
vi. 17.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II. The Wanderings of Psyche (part 3)](sbc07.md)
