[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Tarot](../index)  [Tarot
Reading](../pkt/tarot0)  [Index](index)  [Previous](tob47) 
[Next](tob49) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### EXAMPLE OF THE APPLICATION OF THE TAROT TO THE KABBALAH.

THE HIEROGRAM OF ADAM, BY

STANISLAS DE GUAITA.

In asserting that the hierogram of Adam conceals the most profound
arcana of the living Universe, we shall not astonish those who have made
a serious study of the *Sepher Bereschit*. By comparing the admirable
translation of Fabre d'Olivet with the pentacular revelations of the
*Book of Thoth*, it is not impossible to strike out the supreme light of
truth. Here are a few data which will aid us to reach it.

Adam אדמ is written in Hebrew, *Aleph*, *Daleth*, *Mem*.

א (1st key of the Tarot: The Juggler). God and man; the Principle and
the end; the Equilibrant Unity.

ד (4th key of the Tarot: The Emperor). The Power and the Kingdom; the
verbal Quaternary; the Multiplication of the cube.

מ (13th key of the Tarot: Death). Destruction and Restoration; Night and
Day, moral and physical; Eternity and the Ephemeral; feminine Passivity;
at once the gulf of the Past, the matrix of the Future.

The ternary analysis of the fathomless principle that Yod manifests in
its inaccessible and synthetic unity, *Adam* 

<span id="page_295">p. 295</span>

is, in fact, very analogous to the hierogram *Aum*, which is so famous
in the sanctuaries of India.

In אדמ, *Aleph* corresponds to the Father, the source of the Trinity;
*Daleth* to the Son (whom the Kabbalah also names the King); and *Mem*
to the Holy Spirit, whose ethereal body, devouring yet fertilizing
transitory forms, causes life (inexhaustible and unalterable in its
essence) to blossom upon the changing hot-bed of *Growth*.

I have said that אדמ is the cyclic analysis of the principle, of which י
(Yod) is the inaccessible synthesis.

A simple calculation of the numerical Kabbalah confirms my assertion.
Let us translate the letters into numbers (Tarotic method).

א 1 ד 4 מ 13.  
1 + 4 + 13 = 18. In 18, 1 +8= 9.

In Kabbalistic absolute numericals the analytical number of Adam is then
9. Now we obtain 10 by adding, to 9 the specific unity which leads the
cycle back to its starting-point, and closes analysis in synthesis, and
10 is the number which corresponds to the letter Yod: this we were
anxious to prove.

The hierogrammatic vocable אדמ (Adam) then represents the ninth
evolution of the cycle, which emanated from י (Yod), and which closes in
10 by returning to its starting-point. Principle and end of all, the
eternal Yod, revealed in its expanded form *tertriune*.

Let us go further still.

We have then the right (noting, however, that Adam differs from Yod, or
from Wodh, as the totality of the sub-multiples differ from the
Unity),--we have the right to say, pursuing our analogies,

If Adam be equal to 1,

 

<span id="page_296">p. 296</span>

Adam-ah = *I-ah*; and *Adam Eve* = *I-eve*. He (ה) represents Universal
Life, *natura naturans*; יה then represents Yod united to Life, and אדמה
(Adamah), Adam united to Life. This is the union of the Spirit and of
the Universal Soul at two different degrees (always remembering the
distinction noticed above).

Lastly, in יהוה (IEVE), as in אדמ-הוה (Adam-Eve), Vau (ו) represents the
fecundity of this union, and the last He (ה) symbolizes *natura
naturata* (issued from *natura naturans*, increased by the mixed
principle).

These four letters, יהוה (IEVE), symbolize the quaternary of *Mercavah*,
the six letters of Adam-Eve, אדמ-הוה, the senary of *Bereschith*.

(Fragment of the Serpent of Genesis published in the *Lotus* of March
1888, p. 327, and 328 *note*.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIX. List of the Authors who Have Interested Themselves
in the Tarot](tob49)
