[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Tarot](../index.md)  [Tarot
Reading](../pkt/tarot0)  [Index](index)  [Previous](tob48.md) 
[Next](tob50.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_297">p. 297</span>

# CHAPTER XIX.

### LIST OF THE AUTHORS WHO HAVE INTERESTED THEMSELVES IN THE TAROT.

Raymond Lulle--Cardan--Postel--The Rosicrucians--Court de
Gébelin--Etteila--Claude de Saint--Martin--J.
A.--Vaillant--Christian--Eliphas Levi--Stanislas de Guaita--Joséphin
Péladan--The Platonist--Theosophical Publications--F. Ch. Barlet--Oswald
Wirth--Poirel--Ely Star--H. P. Blavatsky--Ch. de Sivry--Mathers.

SOME ACCOUNT

OF THE AUTHORS WHO HAVE SPECIALLY INTERESTED THEMSELVES IN THE TAROT.

RAYMOND LULLE (1235-1315), an eminently learned man, the founder of a
system of philosophy, but chiefly of logic, entirely based upon the
application of the Tarot; this is the *Ars Magna*.

CARDAN (JÉRÔME). Born in Paris in 1501, died in 1576. Professor of
Mathematics and Medicine at Milan and Boulogne.

Travelled through Scotland, England, and France, working miraculous
cures.

His treatise *On Subtility* (1550) is entirely based on the keys of the
Tarot.

POSTEL (GUILLAUME). Born at Dolerie (diocese of Avranches)

<span id="page_298">p. 298</span>

in 1510. Sent to the East by Francis I., he brought back some valuable
manuscripts, and was appointed Professor of Mathematics and Oriental
Languages in the College of France. Died in the Convent of Saint-Martin
des Champs in 1581.

One of the greatest Initiates of the sixteenth century. He discovered
the key to the Tarot, but did not disclose the secret, in spite of the
promise given in the title to his work, *The Key to the Hidden
Mysteries* (1580). A list of his works will be found in the index.

THE MYSTERIOUS FRATERNITY OF THE ROSICRUCIANS (1604). *La Fama
Fraternitatis Rosæ Crucis* (1613) shows the Initiate that the
Rosicrucians possessed the Tarot, which is described thus--

They possess a book from which they can learn everything that is in the
books already written and to be written.

We must not forget that the Rosicrucians are the Initiators of
*Leibnitz*, and the founders of actual Freemasonry through *Asmhole*.

COURT DE GÉBELIN. Born at Nîmes in 1725, died at Paris in 1784. An
illustrious scholar, who discovered the Egyptian origin of the Tarot.
Consult his *Primitive World* (1773-1783).

ETTEILA (1783). We have given a summary of his work upon Fortune-telling
with the Tarot, and upon the application of this work to the Kabbalah.

CLAUDE DR SAINT-MARTIN. The unknown philosopher. Born in 1743 at
Amboise, died in 1803. The disciple of Martinez Pasqualis and Jacob
Bœhm, the founder of the So-called Martinist order. His book, the
*Tableau Naturel des Rapports qui existent entre Dieu, l'Homme et
l'Univers*, is based upon the Tarot.

J. A. VAILLANT. Lived many years with the Gypsies, and received a great
many of their traditions orally: these are contained in his works--

<span id="page_299">p. 299</span>

\[paragraph continues\] *Les Rômes, Histoire vraie des vrais Bohémiens*
(towards 1853).

La Bible des Bohémiens (1860).

Clef Magique de la-Fiction et du Fait (1863).

CHRISTIAN. Librarian of the Arsenal. Has published an occult manuscript
upon the Tarot, blending with it his personal reflections upon astrology
in--

L'Homme Rouge des Tuileries (1854).

ELIPHAS LEVI. Amongst contemporary Masters of Occultism, he had the
greatest knowledge of the Tarot. His work *Dogme et Rituel de la Haute
Magie* (1861, 2 vols., 8vo.) is based upon the keys of the Tarot.
Eliphas Levi had a most romantic life, and died in 1870, leaving a son
(I believe).

STANISLAS DE GUAITA. Contemporary Kabbalistic scholar. He made several
applications of the Tarot to the Kabbalah. We have given one extract of
them already. Consult also, *Au Seuil du Mystère* (1886), and *Le
Serpent de la Genèse*.

JOSÉPHIN PÉLADAN. A clever novelist and eminent Kabbalist. He often
wrote upon the Tarot in his works (1885-1889).

"THE PLATONIST" (1888). Review of American Occultism. It contained a
poor study upon the application of the Tarot to horoscopy. This essay
has been reproduced in the

Theosophical Publications. Small pamphlets called "Siftings," No. 14
(London 1888) (7, Duke Street).

F. CH. BARLET. One of the most learned and most highly-esteemed
authorities amongst French Occultists. The summary of one of his works
on the *Tarot Initiatique* (1889) is quoted in extenso, page 253.

OSWALD WIRTH has studied the astronomical Tarot (see Chapter XVI.), and
has carefully reproduced the twenty-two symbolical figures, according to
the most recent information obtainable upon Symbolism (1889).

<span id="page_300">p. 300</span>

E. POIREL. Occultist. Editor of the *Tarot d'Oswald Wirth* (1889).

ELY STAR. An author known by his interesting work upon Astrology, the
*Mystères de l'Horoscope* (Dentu, 1888). It contains a chapter upon the
Tarot.

H. P. BLAVATSKY. This author, rendered eminent by her works upon
Theosophy, mentions the Tarot in her books (*Isis Unveiled* and *the
Secret Doctrine*), but very superficially and without any synthetic
basis.

CH. DE SIVRY. A very talented occultist, chiefly known by his works upon
music. To his kindness we owe the summary of a *Tarot Bohémien*
entitled--

Extract from the sacred book of the Opâchti tribe, the primitive family,
which adored Otchâvâtri representing the only God Otchawatra. This tribe
lived at the foot of the Himalaya.

This book describes the symbolism of the twenty-two arcana, according to
the Gypsies, with interesting details upon esoterism.

MATHERS, an English author, has recently published a short account of
the Tarot, which contains nothing very original: it is rather a summary
of the principal authors who have studied the question. It is chiefly
written as an aid to fortune-telling by cards.

This closes the list of authors whose books we have heard of, and who
have *alluded to the Tarot or used its keys*. We may have omitted some
of them, if so we must beg them to excuse us.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Introduction](tob50.md)
