[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Tarot](../index)  [Tarot
Reading](../pkt/tarot0)  [Index](index)  [Previous](tob44) 
[Next](tob46) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

# CHAPTER XVII.

### THE INITIATIVE TAROT.

Ch. Barlet's Essay on this Subject--Involution and Evolution--The Hours
of Apollonius of Tyana--The Phases of Initiation represented by the
Tarot.

THE INITIATIVE TAROT.

APPLICATION\` OF THE TAROT TO THE THEORETICAL AND PRACTICAL DOCTRINES OF
INITIATION.

OUR friend F. Ch. Barlet has written a very interesting article upon
this subject, which we will quote in extenso. Our readers will then see
the exactitude with which his conclusions harmonize with our own.

INITIATION.

Amongst the ancients the scientific men were also the sages, such as
Pythagoras, Plato, Aristotle; in modern times, on the contrary, science
and wisdom are unsuccessfully seeking for each other, or struggling in
mortal conflict over the religious question. That such a separation is
against nature is easily seen by the study of those Positivist
philosophers whose extensive learning and

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

admirable efforts to build up a synthesis of scientific wisdom merit
high rank in the modern intellectual world. Whilst their fundamental
aphorism is that nothing is attainable by man beyond the world of
phenomena, their works display an increasing though unintentional
tendency to cross the limits which they seek to impose upon themselves,
for they axe led by that nature which they love, and which in its final
manifestations they know better than any one else. We may compare them
to insects imprisoned behind a window; in despair they beat themselves
against the glass, clearly seeing the sunbeam which should lead them to
the source of all light, yet unable to follow it beyond the invisible
wall of their prison. On the other hand, the Spiritualists are outside,
free, and as it were lost in the luminous ocean, wandering without a
compass, unable to find the guiding sunbeam which is the despair of the
Positivists.

However, one school exists which promises to guide the one, to free the
other, and to direct each student towards the centre of Truth so
ardently desired; an unknown school, little frequented, like every
transcendent degree, although its masters have always given proofs of
considerable learning--the school of *Theosophy*, a positive
spiritualism preserved for ages in the ancient mysteries, transmitted
with more or less purity by the Kabbalists, Mystics, Templars,
Rosicrucians, and Freemasons, often degenerate, like every other
doctrine prematurely divulged, yet hidden at the root of every religion,
and carefully perpetuated in a few unknown sanctuaries, chiefly situated
in India.

The secret of Theosophy, in the, reconciliation between science and
metaphysics, lies in a certain practical development of those human
faculties which are best fitted to

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

extend the limits of reliable knowledge. Let us first try to understand
this possibility.

An attentive examination of any scientific method, however positive it
may be, proves that there is no evidence or certainty save in axioms,
and that the fragile and changeable scaffolding of our sciences, built
upon this immovable basis, is entirely due to *intuition*, of which
observation and experience are only instruments.

But the field of direct perception in which intuition exerts itself is
capable of extension; this fact is now demonstrated by the phenomena of
hypnotism and magnetism, the torments of our modern sciences; for by
them the limits of opaque matter, of space and time, are suppressed in
variable but incontestable degrees.

But still, in this realm of transcendental faculties the perception is
not always so reliable as the unvarying certainty which characterizes an
axiom; for amongst the hypnotizable or magnetizable subjects, the
material lucidity presents a number of gradations which are reproduced
in the intellectual order, and which vary between the fancies of a
disordered imagination and the sublime revelations of healthily inspired
genius.

We do not therefore exceed the possibilities given by the reliable
evidence of observation and experience, when we assert that the physical
or intellectual perception of the human being is capable of extending
beyond the limits of ordinary judgments and sensations; and that in the
transcendental regions which it can attain it is susceptible of more or
less certitude in its impressions. This assertion opens new fields for
human knowledge, an hierarchy of new immediate causes, and the prospect
of an indefinite progress in science.

Now Theosophy inspires man with the enthusiasm

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

which enables him to draw near to these transcendent regions of
perception, whilst it guards him from illusion, through the forces and
the new beings which he will meet there: it is this instruction which
constitutes *Initiation*.

The slight sketch which will now follow will at least give some idea of
the principles by which Religion and Philosophy, Wisdom and Science, are
united in Theosophy. Any defects which the reader way find in it must be
attributed to want of skill on the part of the student who has
undertaken it.

\*  
\*     \*

Initiation comprises two different but united sections. The *Theory* of
the resources and necessities of his enterprise, which the neophyte
always receives as an inheritance which leaves him absolute liberty of
thought--and the *Practice* in which he exercises, under the direction
of his masters, the physical, intellectual, and moral self-control which
will render him an *Initiate*.

The *Theory*, the primary instruction of Theosophy, is a preliminary
definition, consisting almost exclusively of the contents of the
Theosophical publications; but a student should not fancy himself one of
the Initiate because he possesses these public works; the knowledge of
them is an excellent preparation, but nothing more.

This theory is found scattered throughout a number of more or less
well-known and accessible books; but there are very few of them which
explain it as a whole, simply and methodically enough to satisfy a
beginner. This first difficulty, chiefly due to the actual state of many
minds, which will not admit regular instruction, also

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

corresponds to the numerous varieties of intelligence which examine
them. Some, previously opened to theosophical doctrines, approach every
detail with equal profit to themselves; others, on the contrary, who
cannot at first accept them as a whole, willingly examine them by means
of a secondary door which especially suits them, but which often forces
them to make enormous digressions through our sciences and philosophies.
The first steps are consequently very varied, and they require guidance
from some more advanced brother, who is capable of discerning the
intellectual and moral state of the neophyte.

This is why no work on the subject can be especially recommended here.
An excellent bibliography of theosophic works will be found in the
*Traité Élémentaire de Science Occulte*, by Papus. We now add to it an
excellent list of a series of studies, long but reliable, which will
form a gradual transition from Positivism to Theosophy:

For facts. Study: Richet, d'Assier, Liebault, Philipps, Dupotet,
Reichenbach, Mesmer, &c.

Hypothesis of the whole: Comte, Stuart Mill, Bain, Ribot, Spencer,
Taine, &c.

Philosophers: Du Prel, Hartmann, Schopenhauer, Hegel. Great profit can
then be derived from older works: Spinoza, Leibnitz, and even from the
ancients: Aristotle, Plato, the Neoplatonists, the Pythagorists; then
the modern mystic scientists: Wronski, Fabre d'Olivet, Lucas, &c.

The student will then fully understand Theosophy.

This series will, however, require further modifications, according to
the character and the scientific aptitudes of the student. We must also
point out some features of the theory, which are necessary for the
comprehension of

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

our principal subject; the reader must only remember that this
explanation is entirely due to the author of this article, and he must
not impute any of its errors to Theosophy itself.

\*  
\*     \*

Our positive sciences give the last formula of the visible world in the
following words--

There is no matter without force: no force without matter.

An indisputable but incomplete formula, unless the following commentary
be added to it--

1\. The combination of what we call *Force* and *Matter* present, itself
in various proportions, from that which is called materialized *Force*
(rocks, minerals, simple chemical bodies), to *subtilized Matter* or
*Matter-Force* (a grain of pollen, spermatozoid, the electric atom).
*Matter* and *Force*, although we cannot isolate them, therefore present
themselves as the extreme and opposing mathematical limits (or contrary
signs) of a series of which we see only a few medium terms, abstract but
indubitable.

2\. The terms of this series, that is to say, the substances of nature,
are never stable; *Force*, which is characterized by infinite mobility,
sways essentially inert matter from one pole to the other, as though it
were drawn by a continual current, while it retorts by a
counter-current, which leads it back to its inert condition. For
instance, an atom of phosphorus borrowed by a vegetable from the mineral
phosphates, becomes the element of a human *cerebral cellule*
(subtilized matter), then through disintegration falls back into the
inert mineral kingdom.

3\. The movement resulting from this unstable equilibrium

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

is not disorganized; it presents a series of chained harmonies which we
call *Laws*, and which are synthetized in our eyes in the supreme law of
*Evolution*.

One conclusion is forced upon us: This harmonious synthesis of phenomena
is the eminent manifestation of what we call a *will*.

Therefore, according to positive science, the visible world is the
expression of a will which manifests itself by the unstable but
progressive equilibrium of Force and Matter.

It is represented by this quaternary--

 

I. WILL (simple origin).  
III. FORCE (Elements of this polarized Will). II. MATTER.  
IV. THE VISIBLE WORLD  
(The result of their unstable, dynamic equilibrium).

 

The positive method will not allow us to pause there, we must analyze
the *Will* in its turn. We will abridge this analysis here, for the
reader will easily master it with the aid of the treatises on
psychology; it leads through the two opposing terms of *affirmation* and
*negation* to a new superior, apparently simple cause, the *Idea*, which
analysis again decomposes into *consciousness* and *unconsciousness*,
gradually remounting to its furthest limit, the absolute term, the
*One*, both conscious and unconscious, affirmative and negative, force
and matter, nameless, incomprehensible to man.

Let us designate this supreme term by Α, and the material atom by Ω, we
shall then have, according to our analysis, the following series of
hierarchized quaternaries as a representation of the Universe

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

<table data-cellspacing="0" data-border="0" data-cellpadding="8" width="779">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td width="50%" data-valign="TOP"><p>+ (1) Α ---</p></td>
<td width="50%" data-valign="TOP"><em></em>
<p>Divine World </p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td width="50%" data-valign="TOP"><p>(3) <em>Consciousness</em> (2) <em>Unconsciousness</em> </p></td>
<td width="50%" data-valign="TOP"><p>(The Transcendent)</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td width="50%" data-valign="TOP"><p>(4) IDEA</p></td>
<td width="50%" data-valign="TOP"><em></em>
<p>Intelligible World </p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td width="50%" data-valign="TOP"><p>(6) <em>Affirmation</em> (5) <em>Negation</em> </p></td>
<td width="50%" data-valign="TOP"><p>(Logic)</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td width="50%" data-valign="TOP"><p>(7) WILL</p></td>
<td width="50%" data-valign="TOP"><p> </p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td width="50%" data-valign="TOP"><p>(9) <em>Force</em> (8) <em>Matter</em> </p></td>
<td width="50%" data-valign="TOP"><em></em>
<p>Visible World </p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td width="50%" data-valign="TOP"><p>(10) Kosmos</p></td>
<td width="50%" data-valign="TOP"><p>(Positive, Science)</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td width="50%" data-valign="TOP"><p>Ω</p></td>
<td width="50%" data-valign="TOP"><p> </p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

 

The extreme terms, α and ω, Spirit and Matter, equally incomprehensible
to human intelligence in their infinite grandeur and infinite
littleness, <span id="fr_82"></span>[1](#fn_82) are not only linked
together by invariable intermediate chains, but they also make an
incessantly descending movement from one to the other, in which the
Spirit becomes Matter by the successive disintegrations which express
the Idea, the Will, and Kosmos. This constitutes the *creation*.

But since, as our sciences prove to us, the Kosmos itself is in a state
of evolutive movement, and since according to their teachings this
movement clearly inclines towards a progressive synthesis, which
spiritualizes the living being by entering more and more into its
composition, the preceding scheme expresses but one half of the
Universe, the *one which* descends. We must now add to it a second half,
which restores the atom, ω, to its opposing principle α, through the
progressive synthesis of individual lives. This is *Progress*, the
sequence of Creation.

Thus the Universe appears to us like a circular current, in which the
flow is necessarily inverse in the two opposing arcs: from the positive
pole a to the negative pole w the

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

current descends--this is *Involution*, the descent of the Spirit into
Matter; from the negative pole ω to the positive pole α the current
re-ascends--this is *Evolution*, the spiritualization of Matter. We
shall describe it presently.

\*  
\*     \*

Let us then infer for man--

The evidence of our sciences shows him to be upon the ascending arc,
already far from the negative pole, since he is at the head of the three
kingdoms of the terrestrial world. He thus belongs to the *visible
world* of the Universe; the imposing monument of science is a proof of
the position which he also occupies in the *intellectual world*; but at
the same time his errors, his doubts, the enormous deficiencies in his
knowledge, and his passions, sufficiently prove that he is no longer
master in this sphere, as he is in the inferior world. As to the *divine
world*, he conceives it, presses towards it; but if be attain it, it
will be by faith rather than by science.

Man is then a being who in his re-ascension has reached the middle
region, and even the centre of that region; his place is in the centre
of the ascending are, between the superior and the inferior beings of
creation, ruling the one, ruled by the others, midway between the Angel
and the Beast. A situation inevitably painful through the equality of
the two opposing forces, which retard his ascension; he has come to a
dead stop, which must be overcome by a special effort.

At the present time Initiation is the instrument which facilitates the
development of the human butterfly. We shall soon understand of what it
consists.

\*  
\*     \*

<span id="page_262">p. 262</span>

The Ancients, with the usual force of their synthetic genius, have
symbolized the whole of Involution and Evolution by a sequence of
twenty-two figures, full of hidden significations, which the occultists
name the *Twenty-two Great Arcana*.

Taking the ten first as a description of Involution, we find in the
others the successive phases of Initiation, such as they are depicted in
the *twelve hours* (or sentences) which form the *Nuctemeron* attributed
to Apollonius of Tyana. These we shall now enumerate.

To be perfectly clear we must first return to Evolution for one moment.

In fact its analysis is not completed by the ten terms which have led us
to the Kosmos, the dynamic equilibrium of Force and Matter. This Kosmos
can be analyzed in its turn as two principles which, according to all
the sciences, are conflicting in every movement of matter: the *Active*
and *Passive* (male and female of organizations, acid and basis of
chemistry, the opposing poles of electricity, &c.). Completely inert
matter is only found in their absolute equilibrium in the unsiezable
pole exactly opposed to the α--the ω of the Universe.

The occultists have represented this 4th tetractys, of which the Kosmos
is the first term (the tetractys of the inferior world, *infera, hell*),
by the 11th, 12th, and 13th arcana, the Kosmos being its first term. The
arcanum which bears the generally dreaded number 13 requires further
notice. It is called DEATH and RESURRECTION, and it represents absolute
Inertia, only found in Death; but here Involution stops and Evolution
commences, for the equilibrium of the two principles, active and
passive, is never prolonged.

This would seem to contradict the preceding remark,

<span id="page_263">p. 263</span>

that the description of Initiation, that is to say, of the re-ascension,
opens with the 10th arcanum, and not with the 14th. This however is not
so, because in Involution the being should retrace in an inverse sense,
to complete the synthesis, every stage by which the α has been
disintegrated in the course of its Involution. Man is the actual result
of a work of this kind anterior to his present state, but of this work
which has raised him from the ω to the stage of Will he is quite
unconscious; at first he was subjected to it under the fatal pressure of
pure Force only, then of instinct, desires, and passions; his previous
evolution is therefore *unknown* to him, and yet how can he master any
of these worlds without knowing them all? His first work in Initiation
must therefore be to re-descend to his first steps in Evolution, to
become acquainted with all the degrees, all the forces, and all the
beings that he has passed through, to penetrate the roots of life to
*death* itself, and to learn to dominate them all.

We shall see presently that this is not a figurative assertion; the
Neophyte cannot attain any reliable voluntary exercise of the
transcendental faculties without first obtaining the mastery, over the
forces which would produce illusion, which would threaten his life
itself; without reaching *Inertia* and conquering it. Like the Christ,
the model of regenerate man, he must expire upon the cross and rise
again the *third* day; that is to say, after descending, the three last
steps represented by the 11th, 12th, and 13th arcana, into the depths of
hell, there to discover *Death* and to overcome him.

This fully understood, we will describe the twelve hours or phases of
*Initiation*.

\*  
\*     \*

<span id="page_264">p. 264</span>

The 10th arcanum, the first hour of the series, corresponds with the
stage which man has reached at the present time. The symbol of this
arcanum is the *Sphinx*, which guarded the entrance to the Egyptian
world; the Neophyte descended between its paws into the tunnel which led
to the sanctuary, through a series of tests, the image and noviciate of
the descent which we have just mentioned.

This is then the hour of preparation; it separates the common life from
the transcendental life; in it the student learns the work that he must
undertake, and prepares himself for it. Let us see in what way.

The human head of the Sphinx, the centre of the intelligence, says to
the Neophyte: "First acquire the *Knowledge* which shows the goal, and
lights the way to it." This is the theoretic instruction mentioned
above.

Its bull's thighs, the image of the rough, persevering labour of the
agriculturist, say to him: "Be strong and patient in thy work."

Its lion's paws say to him: "Thou must *brave* all, and defend thyself
against every inferior force."

Its eagle's wings say to him: "Thou must will to raise thyself towards
the transcendent regions, which thy soul already approaches."

The riddle attributed to the Greek Sphinx, and the answer required for
it, are an equally expressive image of *man*, and his aim. He is the
animal that in the *morning* (that is to say, in the infancy of
humanity) goes on four feet (4 being the number of realization,
expresses matter and its instincts, the visible world); at *noon* (that
is to say, in the maturity of his humanity) he walks upon two feet (2,
the number of opposition, the image of science, of its contradictions,
its doubts, and of

<span id="page_265">p. 265</span>

the intelligible world); and in the *evening* (when the day is nearly
over) walks upon three feet (3, the number of the divine world, in which
the Trinity gives the solution of all the oppositions, of all the
antinomies, by the superior term, the harmonious synthesis of the two
adverse terms).

Apollonius describes the same hour in these words: "Here the Neophyte
praises God, utters no injurious words, inflicts no more pain," which
means that his theoretic knowledge of the Creation is increased, and
that he practises self-control. We will now pause and examine the
consistency of these various prescriptions.

We have seen that man, having reached the ascending are, has become the
object of dispute between the inferior forces of inertia, which he has
traversed under the impulse of instinct, and those active forces which
draw him upwards; we have noticed that the struggle must now be decided
by the intervention of the *Will*, sufficiently developed by Evolution,
and sufficiently free too exert its influence on one side or on the
other: man can therefore decide either for the inferior forces of
disintegration, or for the superior ones of synthesis, under the names
of *Good* and *Evil*. And truly evil for him if he redescend, for he
will meet the terrors of decomposition, of Death. Good, on the other
hand, if be ascend, for he will enjoy the realization of his natural
aspirations, the knowledge of the Creation and dominion over it.

Now where is the index of the forces of inertia in the human
organization?--In instinct, in the passions. Where, on the other hand,
is the index of the active forces?--In moral energy, in *Virtue*.

Where is the index of the forces of disintegration, which lead to
inertia in the human organization?--In the tendency to isolation, in
*egoism*. Where, on the other

<span id="page_266">p. 266</span>

hand, is the index of the integrant forces?--In the tendency to joint
responsibility, to altruism, in *Fraternity*.

The transcendent world is therefore open to whoever has sufficient
*Will* (or even artificial impulsion) to triumph over the forces which
guard it; but woe to that man who approaches it with a passionate and
selfish heart; with lowered head he will fall back into the current of
decomposition, where he will be dissolved. Nature destroys all *Evil*;
it is the law of selection!

Only the man whose heart is full of charity can raise himself to the
true destination of the human being in the region of Principles.

This is why the Sphinx prescribes, with the persevering will of the
Bull, the courage of the Lion against the forces of the passions; and
why Apollonius commands reserve and fraternity, with the Gospels which
place self-control at the foundation of all Law.

\*  
\*     \*

Such then, with the aid of knowledge, is the preparation for Initiation;
we shall soon see the importance of these precepts.

The Neophyte, sufficiently exercised in these preliminaries of the first
hour, then descends the three lower steps as follows--

ARCANUM XI.: *Strength*.

Second hour of Apollonius: "*The abyss of fire--the virtues of the stars
close as a crown through the dragons and the, fire*" (*the magnetic
chain*).

The Neophyte learns to distinguish universal Force and its double
current, positive and negative, in his own

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

organization. The application of this knowledge will be found in the two
following hours--

ARCANUM XII.: *The Great Work*.

Third hour of Apollonius: "*The serpents, the dogs, and fire*."

The first manifestation of force applied externally to inert matter for
affecting transmutations; this is Alchemy. The Neophyte having attained
this step in practice must be ready morally to make a complete sacrifice
of his personality; in the language of the alchemists, he must have
destroyed his fixed nature by fire so as to, volatilize it.

ARCANUM XIII.: *Death*.

Fourth hour of Apollonius: "*The Neophyte wanders in the sepulchres, and
it will injure him; he will experience horror and fear of visions; he
should devote himself to magic and to géotie*." <span
id="fr_83"></span>[1](#fn_83)

This is Necromancy, the application of Force to the domination of
inferior living beings: *Elemental*, or organisms ready to synthetize
themselves, and *Elementary*, remains of the dead, on the way to
disorganization.

Morally, the Neophyte should die to ordinary life, to enter the
spiritual life; the celestial man will he born from the corpse of the
terrestrial man.

The foundations of the Universe are now reached; the Neophyte touches
the extremity of the terrestrial aura, the sublunar atmosphere which
surrounds every planet, like the reservoir of the elements of its life;
he has now reached a terrible moment, when he must lose the earth

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

to launch out into the ocean of space; a formidable crisis, to which two
periods are consecrated.

The first is transitory.

ARCANUM XIV.: *The two Urns* (the terrestrial and celestial fluids).

Fifth hour of Apollonius: "*The waters above the heavens*."

Here the Neophyte learns the flow of the astral currents in the
planetary aura, just as in the second hour he acquired a preliminary
knowledge of Force, before exposing himself to it in the following hour.

ARCANUM XV.: *Typhon* (the electric whirlwind).

Sixth hour of Apollonius: "*Here one must remain quiet, immovable
through fear*."

Unprotected the Neophyte exposes himself to the double and formidable
fluid-current of celestial space, by which the ignorant or imprudent is
carried away without mercy, but which raises the strong man who has
purified himself. Silence, prudence, courage!

According to your deserts you will be enraptured like St. Paul, or you
will expose yourself either to madness, to the spiritualization of evil,
or to sorcery. This is the *Sabbat* or the Ecstasy!

The reader cannot pay too much attention to this solemn monument of
practical occultism, so well described in Lytton's novel *Zanoni* under
the name of the *Dragon of the Threshold*; it is the formidable danger
which necessitates so many secrets. This threshold is reached by many
artificial paths: the hachich, narcotics, hypnotics of every kind, the
practices of spiritual mediums;

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

but woe to him who attempts to pass it before he has triumphed in the
long and laborious preliminary preparation! His fate is foretold in the
next arcanum.

ARCANUM XVI.: *The Lightning-struck Tower*.

Seventh hour of Apollonius: "*Fire comforts every living creature, and
if some priest, himself a pure man, purloin and use, it, if he blend it
with holy oil, consecrate it, and then anoint some ailing limb, with it,
the malady will be cured*."

The irresistible current has touched the man who exposed himself to its
vortex on the terrestrial heights; if he The impure be is threatened
with disorganization more or less complete, according to his
intellectual or moral unworthiness, and his energy (incoherent
mysticism, folly, death, or complete disintegration, represented by the
genius of evil, the Devil)!

If, on the contrary, he be worthy of the higher regions, this baptism of
fire renders him one of the Magi; the sources of terrestrial life are at
his disposition; he becomes a Therapeut.

Having reached this point, he will then learn to know the celestial
spheres progressively as he knows the terrestrial one, and to dominate
them; three hours are consecrated to this exploration--

ARCANUM XVII.: *The Star of the Magi*.

Eighth hour of Apollonius: "*The astral virtues of the elements, of seed
of every kind*."

This is the region of the principles of the solar system: in it life
becomes clear; its distribution from the solar centre to all the
planets, and their reciprocal influences,

<span id="page_270">p. 270</span>

are understood in all their details, in what the occultists name the
*Correspondences*. The Initiate is then master of *Astrology* in every
branch of the science, in the widest meaning, of its acceptation.

ARCANUM XVIII.: *The Twilight*.

Ninth hour of Apollonius: "*Nothing is finished here*."

The Initiate now extends his perceptions beyond our solar system,
"beyond the Zodiac"; he is in sight of the Infinite; he touches the
limits of the intelligible world; the divine light commences to show
itself, the object of new terror and danger.

ARCANUM XIX.: *The Resplendent Light*.

Tenth hour of Apollonius: "*The gates of heaven are open, and man is
born again, docile in the lethargic sleep*."

The *Idea* appears to the regenerate soul of the Initiate, or, in the
language of the Occultist, the spiritual sun will rise for him; he will
by a new regeneration enter the *Divine World*, in which man dies no
more.

Two steps remain before the highest human destinies can be
accomplished--

ARCANUM XX.: *The Awakening of the Dead*.

Eleventh hour of Apollonius: "*The Angels, the Cherubim, and the
Seraphim fly with rustling wings; there is joy in heaven, the earth
rises, and the Sun, which issues from Adam*."

This is the hierarchy of the Divine world, which appears upon new earths
and new heavens. The Initiate will not pass through death again;
henceforth he will live eternally.

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

ARCANUM XXII.: *The Crown of the Magi*.

Twelfth hour of Apollonius: "*The cohorts of fire rest*."

Nirvana! Complete return to α.

Let us recapitulate these twelve hours of the initiation.

<table data-cellspacing="0" data-border="0" data-cellpadding="9" width="779">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td colspan="2" width="60%" data-valign="TOP"><p>0.--Preliminary studies and tests.</p></td>
<td width="23%" data-valign="TOP"><p>Arcanum X.</p></td>
<td width="17%" data-valign="TOP"><p>1st hour</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td colspan="2" width="60%" data-valign="TOP"><p>I.--Transcendent study of the <em>Visible World</em>.</p>
<p>Inferior Manifestations:</p></td>
<td width="23%" data-valign="TOP"> </td>
<td width="17%" data-valign="TOP"> </td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td width="37%" data-valign="TOP"><p>  1. Preliminary study of Force.</p></td>
<td width="23%" data-valign="TOP"><p>(<em>Magnetism</em>)</p></td>
<td width="23%" data-valign="TOP"><p>Arcanum XI.</p></td>
<td width="17%" data-valign="TOP"><p>2nd hour</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td width="37%" data-valign="TOP"><p>  2. Application to the inert world.</p></td>
<td width="23%" data-valign="TOP"><p>(<em>Alchemy</em>)</p></td>
<td width="23%" data-valign="TOP"><p>Arcanum XII.</p></td>
<td width="17%" data-valign="TOP"><p>3rd hour</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td width="37%" data-valign="TOP"><p>  3. Application to the animate elementary world.</p></td>
<td width="23%" data-valign="TOP"><p>(<em>Necromancy</em>)</p></td>
<td width="23%" data-valign="TOP"><p>Arcanum XIII.</p></td>
<td width="17%" data-valign="TOP"><p>4th hour</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td width="37%" data-valign="TOP"> </td>
<td width="23%" data-valign="TOP"><p>(<em>Magic</em>)</p></td>
<td colspan="2" width="40%" data-valign="TOP"><p>(DEATH)</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td width="37%" data-valign="TOP"><p>Transitory phase:</p></td>
<td width="23%" data-valign="TOP"> </td>
<td width="23%" data-valign="TOP"> </td>
<td width="17%" data-valign="TOP"> </td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td width="37%" data-valign="TOP"><p>  1. View of the superior forces.</p></td>
<td width="23%" data-valign="TOP"> </td>
<td width="23%" data-valign="TOP"><p>Arcanum XIV.</p></td>
<td width="17%" data-valign="TOP"><p>5th hour</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td width="37%" data-valign="TOP"><p>  2. Entrance into the ultra-terrestrial world.</p></td>
<td width="23%" data-valign="TOP"><p>(<em>Ecstasy</em>)</p></td>
<td width="23%" data-valign="TOP"><p>Arcanum XV.</p></td>
<td width="17%" data-valign="TOP"><p>6th hour</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td colspan="2" width="60%" data-valign="TOP"><p>THE DRAGON OF THE THRESHOLD!</p></td>
<td colspan="2" width="40%" data-valign="TOP"><p>(TYPHON)</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td width="37%" data-valign="TOP"><p>Higher regions:</p></td>
<td width="23%" data-valign="TOP"> </td>
<td width="23%" data-valign="TOP"> </td>
<td width="17%" data-valign="TOP"> </td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td width="37%" data-valign="TOP"><p>  1. Application of the higher forces to the <a href="errata.htm#1">terrestrial</a> life.</p></td>
<td width="23%" data-valign="TOP"><p>(<em>Therapeutics</em>)</p></td>
<td width="23%" data-valign="TOP"><p>Arcanum XVI.</p></td>
<td width="17%" data-valign="TOP"><p>7th hour</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td width="37%" data-valign="TOP"><p>  2. The forces in the solar system.</p></td>
<td width="23%" data-valign="TOP"><p>(<em>Astrology</em>)</p></td>
<td width="23%" data-valign="TOP"><p>Arcanum XVII.</p></td>
<td width="17%" data-valign="TOP"><p>8th hour</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td width="37%" data-valign="TOP"><p>  3. The forces of the whole Universe.</p></td>
<td width="23%" data-valign="TOP"> </td>
<td width="23%" data-valign="TOP"><p>Arcanum XVIII.</p></td>
<td width="17%" data-valign="TOP"><p>9th hour</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td colspan="2" width="60%" data-valign="TOP"><p>II.--Study of the <em>Intelligible World</em>.<br />
On the borders of the Infinite.</p></td>
<td width="23%" data-valign="TOP"><p>Arcanum XIX.</p></td>
<td width="17%" data-valign="TOP"><p>10th hour</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td colspan="2" width="60%" data-valign="TOP"><p>III.--Study of the Divine World.<br />
Divine hierarchies</p></td>
<td width="23%" data-valign="TOP"><p>Arcanum XX.</p></td>
<td width="17%" data-valign="TOP"><p>11th hour</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td colspan="2" width="60%" data-valign="TOP"><p>Nirvana!</p></td>
<td width="23%" data-valign="TOP"><p>Arcanum XXII.</p></td>
<td width="17%" data-valign="TOP"><p>12th hour</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

 

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

Need we add how much effort and time (years, lives, often centuries) are
required for each of these *hours*, how few there are who pass even the
first steps?

And what can we expect from their knowledge? The hope of indefinite
progress towards the realization of our most radiant hopes, the desire
to attain at least those first realizations, so that we may derive from
them the assurance of the others; confidence in the instruction of those
whom we recognize for masters already far advanced; lastly, the
certainty that in these fruitful doctrines we shall find the salvation
of our suffering societies, as well as the most longed-for individual
happiness. And these desires, this confidence, are felt after the first
preliminary studies.

To succeed, we need undertake but one work at first, that which the
Sphinx depicts to us: moral and intellectual preparations. But only the
man who seriously undertakes them can know what immense and persevering
efforts they exact! May this rough glimpse of them inspire the reader
with the desire and the courage to devote himself to them with all the
ardour of Hope!

F. CH. BARLET.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_82"></span>[260:1](tob45.htm#fr_82) The first α, *One* and
infinitely great; integration of Ω. The second ω, a multiple composed of
an *infinite number* of infinitely tiny elements; analysis of α.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[267:1](tob45.htm#fr_83) The magic which evokes
the evil genii who injure man--A.P.M.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Divine Name in the Tarot](tob46)
