[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Tarot](../index.md)  [Tarot
Reading](../pkt/tarot0)  [Index](index)  [Previous](tob50.md) 
[Next](tob52.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_305">p. 305</span>

# FIRST LESSON.

### SIMPLIFICATION OF THE RULES OF FORTUNE-TELLING BY THE TAROT.

THE great difficulty encountered by a beginner in the study of
divination by the Tarot, is the number of meanings to be remembered in
reading the cards.

Open any treatise upon this subject, and you will see that you must
first learn the different significations of the 78 cards of the Tarot.
Then you must learn the significations of these 78 cards *reversed*,
without counting the meetings and other complications, which bring them
to about 200 different meanings, which must be retained in the memory
before any one can become a good fortuneteller by cards. Habit only will
enable the student to remember all these details, and in this case
*intuition* becomes an important aid to the memory.

Now this complication always points to an imperfect system. Nature is
synthetic in its manifestations, and simplicity is always found at the
bottom of the most outwardly complicated phenomena. Whilst admitting
that our work upon the Tarot may be erroneous, no one can deny the
absolute simplicity of the constituent principles. We will therefore
apply the same method to the

<span id="page_306">p. 306</span>

divining Tarot, and endeavour to establish a system which will enable us
to dispense with memory almost entirely, or at least to considerably
reduce its work. We shall thus allow a certain scope for scientific
data, although we are unwilling to create any prejudice by this
influence, considering the subject we are dealing with.

The first point to retain from the commencement of this study is the
necessity for clear, simple rules, by which the divining Tarot may be
read. We will explain them in the following lessons.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Second Lesson. Minor Arcana. Signification from the Divining
Point of View](tob52.md)
