[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends/Sagas](../index.md) 
[Arthur](../eng/index.htm#arthurian)  [Index](index)  [Previous](frr01.md) 
[Next](frr03.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

# CONTENTS

### CHAPTER I

#### INTRODUCTORY

Nature of the Grail problem. Unsatisfactory character of results
achieved. Objections to Christian Legendary origin; to Folk-lore origin.
Elements in both theories sound. Solution to be sought in a direction
which will do justice to both. Sir J. G. Frazer's *Golden Bough*
indicates possible line of research. Sir W. Ridgeway's criticism of
*Vegetation* theory examined. *Dramas and Dramatic Dances*. The Living
and not the Dead King the factor of importance. Impossibility of proving
human origin for Vegetation Deities. Not Death but Resurrection the
essential centre of Ritual. *Muharram* too late in date and lacks
Resurrection feature. Relation between defunct heroes and special
localities. Sanctity possibly antecedent to connection. *Mana* not
necessarily a case of relics. Self-acting weapons frequent in Medieval
Romance. Sir J. G. Frazer's theory holds good. Remarks on method and
design of present Studies. pp. [1](frr04.htm#page_1.md)-10

### CHAPTER II

#### THE TASK OF THE HERO

Essential to determine the original nature of the task imposed upon the
hero. Versions examined. The GAWAIN forms--*Bleheris*, *Diû Crône*.
PERCEVAL versions--*Gerbert, prose Perceval, Chrétien de Troyes,
Perlesvaus, Manessier, Peredur, Parzival*. GALAHAD--*Queste*. Result,
primary task healing of Fisher King and removal of curse of Waste Land.
The two inter-dependent. Illness of King entails misfortune on Land.
Enquiry into nature of King's disability. *Sone de Nansai*. For
elucidation of problem necessary to bear in mind close connection
between Land and Ruler. Importance of Waste Land *motif* for criticism.
pp. [11](frr05.htm#page_11.md)-22

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

### CHAPTER III

#### THE FREEING OF THE WATERS

Enquiry may commence with early Aryan tradition. The *Rig-Veda*. Extreme
importance assigned to Indra's feat of "Freeing the Waters." This also
specific achievement of Grail heroes. Extracts from *Rig-Veda*. Dramatic
poems and monologues. Professor von Schroeder's theory. *Mysterium und
Mimus*. *<u>R</u>ishyaç<u>r</u>iñga* drama. Parallels with *Perceval*
story. Result, the specific task of the Grail hero not a literary
invention but an inheritance of Aryan tradition. pp.
[23](frr06.htm#page_23.md)-31

### CHAPTER IV

#### TAMMUZ AND ADONIS

General objects to be attained by these Nature Cults. Stimulation of
Fertility, Animal and Vegetable. Principle of Life ultimately conceived
of in anthropomorphic form. This process already advanced in *Rig-Veda*.
Greek Mythology preserves intermediate stage. The *Eniautos Daimon*.
TAMMUZ--earliest known representative of Dying God. Character of the
worship. Origin of the name. *Lament for Tammuz*. His death affects not
only Vegetable but Animal life. Lack of artistic representation of
Mysteries. Mr Langdon's suggestion. Ritual possibly dramatic. Summary of
evidence. ADONIS--Phoenician-Greek equivalent of Tammuz. Probably most
popular and best known form of Nature Cult. Mythological tale of Adonis.
Enquiry into nature of injury. Importance of recognizing true nature of
these cults and of the ritual observed. Varying dates of celebration.
Adonis probably originally *Eniautos Daimon*. Principle of Life in
general, hence lack of fixity in date. Details of the ritual. Parallels
with the Grail legend examined. Dead Knight or Disabled King. Consequent
misfortunes of Land. The Weeping Women. The Hairless Maiden. Position of
Castle. Summing up. Can incidents of such remote antiquity be used as
criticism for a Medieval text? pp. [32](frr07.htm#page_32.md)-48

### CHAPTER V

#### MEDIEVAL AND MODERN FORMS OF NATURE RITUAL

Is it possible to establish chain of descent connecting early Aryan and
Babylonian Ritual with Classic, Medieval and Modern forms of Nature
worship? Survival of Adonis cult established. Evidence of Mannhardt and
Frazer. Existing Continental customs recognized as survivals of

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

ancient beliefs. Instances. 'Directly related' to Attis-Adonis cult. Von
Schroeder establishes parallel between existing Fertility procession and
*Rig-Veda* poem. Identification of Life Principle with King. Prosperity
of land dependent on king as representative of god. Celts. Greeks.
Modern instances, the Shilluk Kings. Parallel between Shilluk King,
Grail King and Vegetation Deity. *Sone de Nansai* and the *Lament for
Tammuz*. Identity of situation. Plea for unprejudiced criticism.
Impossibility of such parallels being fortuitous; the result of
deliberate intention, not an accident of literary invention. If identity
of central character be admitted his relation to Waste Land becomes
fundamental factor in criticizing versions. Another African survival.
pp. [49](frr08.htm#page_49.md)-61

### CHAPTER VI

#### THE SYMBOLS

Summary of results of previous enquiry. *The Medieval Stage*. Grail
romances probably contain record of secret ritual of a Fertility cult.
The Symbols of the cult--Cup, Lance, Sword, Stone, or Dish. Plea for
treating Symbols as a related group not as isolated units. Failure to do
so probably cause of unsatisfactory result of long research. Essential
to recognize Grail story as an original whole and to treat it in its
*ensemble* aspect. We must differentiate between origin and accretion.
Instances. *The Legend of Longinus*. Lance and Cup not associated in
Christian Art. Evidence. The *Spear* of Eastern Liturgies only a
*Knife*. *The Bleeding Lance*. Treasures of the Tuatha de Danann.
Correspond as a group with Grail Symbols. Difficulty of equating
Cauldron-Grail. Probably belong to a different line of tradition.
Instances given. Real significance of Lance and Cup. Well known as Life
Symbols. The Samurai. Four Symbols also preserved as Suits of the Tarot.
Origin of Tarot discussed. Probably reached Europe from the East. Use of
the Symbols in Magic. Probable explanation of these various appearances
to be found in fact that associated group were at one time symbols of a
Fertility cult. Further evidence to be examined.

### CHAPTER VII

#### THE SWORD DANCE

Relation of Sword Dance, Morris Dance, and Mumming Play. Their
Ceremonial origin now admitted by scholars. Connected with seasonal
Festivals and Fertility Ritual. Earliest Sword Dancers, the Maruts.

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Von Schroeder, *Mysterium und Mimus*. Discussion
of their nature and functions. The Kouretes. Character of their dance.
Miss J. E. Harrison, *Themis*. The Korybantes. Dance probably
sacrificial in origin. The Salii. Dramatic element in their dance. Mars,
as Fertility god. Mamurius Veturius. Anna Perenna. Character of dance
seasonal. Modern British survivals. The Sword Dance. Mostly preserved in
North. Variants. Mr E. K. Chambers, *The Medieval Stage*. The Mumming
Plays. Description. Characters. Recognized as representing Death and
Revival of Vegetation Deity. Dr Jevons, *Masks and the Origin of the
Greek Drama*. Morris Dances. No dramatic element. Costume of character
significant. Possible survival of theriomorphic origin. Elaborate
character of figures in each group. Symbols employed. The Pentangle. The
Chalice. Present form shows dislocation. Probability that three groups
were once a combined whole and Symbols united. Evidence strengthens view
advanced in last Chapter. Symbols originally a group connected with lost
form of Fertility Ritual. Possible origin of Grail Knights to be found
in Sword Dancers. pp. [77](frr10.htm#page_77.md)-95

### CHAPTER VIII

#### THE MEDICINE MAN

The *rôle* of the Medicine Man, or Doctor in Fertility Ritual. Its
importance and antiquity. The *Rig-Veda* poem. Classical evidence, Mr F.
Cornford. Traces of Medicine Man in the Grail romances. Gawain as
Healer. Persistent tradition. Possible survival from pre-literary form.
Evidence of the *Triads*. Peredur as Healer. Evolution of theme. *Le
Dist de l'Erberie*. pp. [96](frr11.htm#page_96.md)-106

### CHAPTER IX

#### THE FISHER KING

Summary of evidence presented. Need of a 'test' element. To be found in
central figure. Mystery of his title. Analysis of variants. *Gawain*
version. *Perceval* version. Borron alone attempts explanation of title.
*Parzival*. *Perlesvaus*. *Queste*. *Grand Saint Graal*. Comparison with
surviving ritual variants. Original form King dead, and restored to
life. Old Age and Wounding themes. Legitimate variants. Doubling of
character a literary device. Title. Why *Fisher* King?

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Examination of Fish Symbolism. Fish a Life
symbol. Examples. Indian--Manu, Vishnu, Buddha. Fish in Buddhism.
Evidence from China. Orpheus. Babylonian evidence. Tammuz *Lord of the
Net*. Jewish Symbolism. The Messianic Fish-meal. Adopted by
Christianity. Evidence of the catacombs. Source of Borron's Fish-meals.
Mystery tradition not Celtic Folk-tale. Comparison of version with
*Finn* story. With Messianic tradition. *Epitaph of Bishop Aberkios*.
*Voyage of Saint Brandan*. Connection of Fish with goddess Astarte.
Cumont. Connection of Fish and Dove. Fish as Fertility Symbol. Its use
in Marriage ceremonies. Summing up of evidence. Fisher King inexplicable
from Christian point of view. Folk-lore solution unsatisfactory. As a
Ritual survival completely in place. Centre of action, and proof of
soundness of theory. pp. [107](frr12.htm#page_107.md)-129

### CHAPTER X

#### THE SECRET OF THE GRAIL (1)

#### The Mysteries

The Grail regarded as an object of awe. Danger of speaking of Grail or
revealing Its secrets. Passages in illustration. Why, if survival of
Nature cults, popular, and openly performed? A two-fold element in these
cults, *Exoteric*, *Esoteric*. The Mysteries. Their influence on
Christianity to be sought in the Hellenized rather than the Hellenic
cults. Cumont. Rohde. Radical difference between Greek and Oriental
conceptions. Lack of evidence as regards Mysteries on the whole. Best
attested form that connected with Nature cults. Attis-Adonis. Popularity
of the Phrygian cult in Rome. Evidence as to Attis Mysteries. Utilized
by Neo-Platonists as vehicle for teaching. Close connection with
Mithraism. The Taurobolium. Details of Attis Mysteries. Parallels with
the Grail romances. pp. [130](frr13.htm#page_130.md)-140

### CHAPTER XI

#### THE SECRET OF THE GRAIL (2)

#### The Naassene Document

Relations between early Christianity, and pre-Christian cults. Early
Heresies. Hippolytus, and *The Refutation of all Heresies*. Character of
the work. *The Naassene Document*. Mr Mead's analysis of text.

<span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span>

\[paragraph continues\] A synthesis of Mysteries. Identification of Life
Principle with the Logos. Connection between Drama and Mysteries of
Attis. Importance of the Phrygian Mysteries. Naassene claim to be sole
Christians. Significance of evidence. Vegetation cults as vehicle of
high spiritual teaching. Exoteric and Esoteric parallels with the Grail
tradition. Process of evolution sketched. Bleheris. *Perlesvaus*. Borron
and the Mystery tradition. Christian Legendary, and Folk-tale,
secondary, not primary, features. pp. [141](frr14.htm#page_141.md)-154

### CHAPTER XII

#### MITHRA AND ATTIS

Problem of close connection of cults. Their apparent divergence. Nature
of deities examined. Attis. Mithra. The Messianic Feast. Dieterich,
*Eine Mithrasliturgie*. Difference between the two initiations. Link
between Phrygian, Mithraic, and Christian, Mysteries to be found in
their higher, esoteric, teaching. Women not admitted to Mithraic
initiation. Possible survival in Grail text. Joint diffusion through the
Roman Empire. Cumont's evidence. Traces of cult in British Isles.
Possible explanation of unorthodox character of Grail legend. Evidence
of survival of cult in fifth century. The *Elucidation* a possible
record of historic facts. Reason for connecting Grail with Arthurian
tradition. pp. [155](frr15.htm#page_155.md)-164

### CHAPTER XIII

#### THE PERILOUS CHAPEL

The adventure of the Perilous Chapel in Grail romances. *Gawain* form.
*Perceval* versions. *Queste*. *Perlesvaus*. *Lancelot*. *Chevalier à
Deux Espées*. Perilous Cemetery. Earliest reference in *Chastel
Orguellous*. *Âtre Perilleus*. *Prose Lancelot*. Adventure part of
'Secret of the Grail.' The Chapel of Saint Austin. *Histoire de Fulk
Fitz-Warin*. Genuine record of an initiation. Probable locality North
Britain. Site of remains of Mithra-Attis cults. Traces of Mystery
tradition in Medieval romance. *Owain Miles*. Bousset, *Himmelfahrt der
Seele*. Parallels with romance. Appeal to Celtic scholars. Otherworld
journeys a possible survival of Mystery tradition. The Templars, were
they Naassenes? pp. [165](frr16.htm#page_165.md)-177

<span id="page_xv">p. xv</span>

### CHAPTER XIV

#### THE AUTHOR

Provenance and authorship of Grail romantic tradition. Evidence points
to Wales, probably Pembrokeshire. Earliest form contained in group of
*Gawain* poems assigned to Bleheris. Of Welsh origin. Master Blihis,
Blihos, Bliheris, Bréri, Bledhericus. Probably all references to same
person. Conditions of identity. Mr E. Owen, and Bledri ap Cadivor.
Evidence not complete but fulfils conditions of problem Professor Singer
and possible character of Bleheris' text. Mr Alfred Nutt. Irish and
Welsh parallels. Recapitulation of evolutionary process. Summary and
conclusion. pp. [178](frr17.htm#page_178.md)-196

INDEX pp. 197-202

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Quotes](frr03.md)
