[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends/Sagas](../index.md) 
[Arthur](../eng/index.htm#arthurian)  [Index](index)  [Previous](frr03.md) 
[Next](frr05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# From Ritual To Romance

# CHAPTER I

### INTRODUCTORY

In view of the extensive literature to which the Grail legend has
already given birth it may seem that the addition of another volume to
the already existing *corpus* calls for some words of apology and
explanation. When the student of the subject contemplates the countless
essays and brochures, the volumes of studies and criticism, which have
been devoted to this fascinating subject, the conflicting character of
their aims, their hopelessly contradictory results, he, or she, may well
hesitate before adding another element to such a veritable witches'
cauldron of apparently profitless study. And indeed, were I not
convinced that the theory advocated in the following pages contains in
itself the element that will resolve these conflicting ingredients into
one harmonious compound I should hardly feel justified in offering a
further contribution to the subject.

But it is precisely because upwards of thirty years' steady and
persevering study of the Grail texts has brought me gradually and
inevitably to certain very definite conclusions, has placed me in
possession of evidence hitherto ignored, or unsuspected, that I venture
to offer the result in these studies, trusting that they may be accepted
as, what I believe them to be, a genuine *Elucidation* of the Grail
problem.

My fellow-workers in this field know all too well the essential elements
of that problem; I do not need here to go over already well-trodden
ground; it will be sufficient to point out certain salient features of
the position.

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

The main difficulty of our research lies in the fact that the Grail
legend consists of a congeries of widely differing elements--elements
which at first sight appear hopelessly incongruous, if not completely
contradictory, yet at the same time are present to an extent, and in a
form, which no honest critic can afford to ignore.

Thus it has been perfectly possible for one group of scholars, relying
upon the undeniably Christian-Legendary elements, preponderant in
certain versions, to maintain the thesis that the Grail legend is a*b
initio* a Christian, and ecclesiastical, legend, and to analyse the
literature on that basis alone.

Another group, with equal reason, have pointed to the strongly marked
Folk-lore features preserved in the tale, to its kinship with other
themes, mainly of Celtic *provenance*, and have argued that, while the
later versions of the cycle have been worked over by ecclesiastical
writers in the interests of edification, the story itself is
non-Christian, and Folk-lore in origin.

Both groups have a basis of truth for their arguments: the features upon
which they rely are, in each case, undeniably present, yet at the same
time each line of argument is faced with certain insuperable
difficulties, fatal to the claims advanced.

Thus, the theory of Christian origin breaks down when faced with the
awkward fact that there is no Christian legend concerning Joseph of
Arimathea and the Grail. Neither in Legendary, nor in Art, is there any
trace of the story; it has no existence outside the Grail literature, it
is the creation of romance, and no genuine tradition.

On this very ground it was severely criticized by the Dutch writer Jacob
van Maerlant, in 1260. In his *Merlin* he denounces the whole Grail
history as lies, asserting that the Church knows nothing of it--which is
true.

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

In the same way the advocate of a Folk-lore origin is met with the
objection that the section of the cycle for which such a source can be
definitely proved, *i.e.*, the *Perceval* story, has originally nothing
whatever to do with the Grail; and that, while parallels can be found
for this or that feature of the legend, such parallels are isolated in
character and involve the breaking up of the tale into a composite of
mutually independent themes. A prototype, containing the main features
of the Grail story--the Waste Land, the Fisher King, the Hidden Castle
with its solemn Feast, and mysterious Feeding Vessel, the Bleeding Lance
and Cup--does not, so far as we know, exist. None of the great
collections of Folk-tales, due to the industry of a Cosquin, a Hartland,
or a Campbell, has preserved specimens of such a type; it is not such a
story as, *e.g.*, *The Three Days Tournament*, examples of which are
found all over the world. Yet neither the advocate of a Christian
origin, nor the Folk-lorist, can afford to ignore the arguments, and
evidence of the opposing school, and while the result of half a century
of patient investigation has been to show that the origin of the Grail
story must be sought elsewhere than in ecclesiastical legend, or popular
tale, I hold that the result has equally been to demonstrate that
neither of these solutions should be ignored, but that the ultimate
source must be sought for in a direction which shall do justice to what
is sound in the claims of both.

Some years ago, when fresh from the study of Sir J. G. Frazer's
epoch-making work, *The Golden Bough*, I was struck by the resemblance
existing between certain features of the Grail story, and characteristic
details of the Nature Cults described. The more closely I analysed the
tale, the more striking became the resemblance, and I finally asked
myself whether it were not possible that in this mysterious
legend--mysterious alike in its character, its sudden appearance, the
importance apparently assigned to it, followed by as

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

sudden and complete a disappearance--we might not have the confused
record of a ritual, once popular, later surviving under conditions of
strict secrecy? This would fully account for the atmosphere of awe and
reverence which even under distinctly non-Christian conditions never
fails to surround the Grail, It may act simply as a feeding vessel, It
is none the less *toute sainte cose*; and also for the presence in the
tale of distinctly popular, and Folk-lore, elements. Such an
interpretation would also explain features irreconcilable with orthodox
Christianity, which had caused some scholars to postulate a heterodox
origin for the legend, and thus explain its curiously complete
disappearance as a literary theme. In the first volume of my *Perceval*
studies, published in 1906, I hinted at this possible solution of the
problem, a solution worked out more fully in a paper read before the
Folk-lore Society in December of the same year, and published in Volume
XVIII. of the Journal of the Society. By the time my second volume of
studies was ready for publication in 1909, further evidence had come
into my hands; I was then certain that I was upon the right path, and I
felt justified in laying before the public the outlines of a theory of
evolution, alike of the legend, and of the literature, to the main
principles of which I adhere to-day.

But certain links were missing in the chain of evidence, and the work
was not complete. No inconsiderable part of the information at my
disposal depended upon personal testimony, the testimony of those who
knew of the continued existence of such a ritual, and had actually been
initiated into its mysteries--and for such evidence the student of the
letter has little respect. He worships the written word; for the oral,
living, tradition from which the word derives force and vitality he has
little use. Therefore the written word had to be found. It has taken me
some

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

nine or ten years longer to complete the evidence, but the chain is at
last linked up, and we can now prove by printed texts the parallels
existing between each and every feature of the Grail story and the
recorded symbolism of the Mystery cults. Further, we can show that
between these Mystery cults and Christianity there existed at one time a
close and intimate union, such a union as of itself involved the
practical assimilation of the central rite, in each case a 'Eucharistic'
Feast, in which the worshippers partook of the Food of Life from the
sacred vessels.

In face of the proofs which will be found in these pages I do not think
any fair-minded critic will be inclined to dispute any longer the origin
of the 'Holy' Grail; after all it is as august and ancient an origin as
the most tenacious upholder of Its Christian character could desire.

But I should wish it clearly to be understood that the aim of these
studies is, as indicated in the title, to determine the *origin* of the
Grail, not to discuss the *provenance* and interrelation of the
different versions. I do not believe this latter task can be
satisfactorily achieved unless and until we are of one accord as to the
character of the subject matter. When we have made up our minds as to
what the Grail really was, and what it stood for, we shall be able to
analyse the romances; to decide which of them contains more, which less,
of the original matter, and to group them accordingly. On this point I
believe that the table of descent, printed in Volume II. of my
*Perceval* studies is in the main correct, but there is still much
analytical work to be done, in particular the establishment of the
original form of the *Perlesvaus* is highly desirable. But apart from
the primary object of these studies, and the results therein obtained, I
would draw attention to the manner in which the evidence set forth in
the chapters on the Mystery cults, and especially that on *The Naassene
Document*, a text of extraordinary

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

value from more than one point of view, supports and complements the
researches of Sir J. G. Frazer. I am, of course, familiar with the
attacks directed against the 'Vegetation' theory, the sarcasms of which
it has been the object, and the criticisms of what is held in some
quarters to be the exaggerated importance attached to these Nature
cults. But in view of the use made of these cults as the medium of
imparting high spiritual teaching, a use which, in face of the document
above referred to, can no longer be ignored or evaded, are we not rather
justified in asking if the true importance of the rites has as yet been
recognized? Can we possibly exaggerate their value as a factor in the
evolution of religious consciousness?

Such a development of his researches naturally lay outside the range of
Sir J. G. Frazer's work, but posterity will probably decide that, like
many another patient and honest worker, he 'builded better than he
knew.'

I have carefully read Sir W. Ridgeway's attack on the school in his
*Dramas and Dramatic Dances*, and while the above remarks explain my
position with regard to the question as a whole, I would here take the
opportunity of stating specifically my grounds for dissenting from
certain of the conclusions at which the learned author arrives. I do not
wish it to be said: "This is all very well, but Miss Weston ignores the
arguments on the other side." I do not ignore, but I do not admit their
validity. It is perfectly obvious that Sir W. Ridgeway's theory, reduced
to abstract terms, would result in the conclusion that all religion is
based upon the cult of the Dead, and that men originally knew no gods
but their grandfathers, a theory from which as a student of religion I
absolutely and entirely dissent. I can understand that such Dead
Ancestors can be looked upon as Protectors, or as Benefactors, but I see
no ground for supposing that they have ever been

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

regarded as Creators, yet it is precisely as vehicle for the most lofty
teaching as to the Cosmic relations existing between God and Man, that
these Vegetation cults were employed. The more closely one studies
pre-Christian Theology, the more strongly one is impressed with the
deeply, and daringly, spiritual character of its speculations, and the
more doubtful it appears that such teaching can depend upon the unaided
processes of human thought, or can have been evolved from such germs as
we find among the supposedly 'primitive' peoples, such as *e.g.* the
Australian tribes. Are they really primitive? Or are we dealing, not
with the primary elements of religion, but with the *disjecta membra* of
a vanished civilization? Certain it is that so far as historical
evidence goes our earliest records point to the recognition of a
spiritual, not of a material, origin of the human race; the Sumerian and
Babylonian Psalms were not composed by men who believed themselves the
descendants of 'witchetty grubs.' The Folk practices and ceremonies
studied in these pages, the Dances, the rough Dramas, the local and
seasonal celebrations, do not represent the material out of which the
Attis-Adonis cult was formed, but surviving fragments of a worship from
which the higher significance has vanished.

Sir W. Ridgeway is confident that Osiris, Attis, Adonis, were all at one
time human beings, whose tragic fate gripped hold of popular
imagination, and led to their ultimate deification. The first-named cult
stands on a somewhat different basis from the others, the beneficent
activities of Osiris being more widely diffused, more universal in their
operation. I should be inclined to regard the Egyptian deity primarily
as a Culture Hero, rather than a Vegetation God.

With regard to Attis and Adonis, whatever their original character (and
it seems to me highly improbable that there should have been two youths
each beloved by a goddess, each

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

victim of a similar untimely fate), long before we have any trace of
them both have become so intimately identified with the processes of
Nature that they have ceased to be men and become gods, and as such
alone can we deal with them. It is also permissible to point out that in
the case of Tammuz, Esmun, and Adonis, the title is not a proper name,
but a vague appellative, denoting an abstract rather than a concrete
origin. Proof of this will be found later. Sir W. Ridgeway overlooks the
fact that it is not the tragic death of Attis-Adonis which is of
importance for these cults, but their subsequent restoration to life, a
feature which cannot be postulated of any ordinary mortal.

And how are we to regard Tammuz, the prototype of all these deities? Is
there any possible ground for maintaining that he was ever a man? Prove
it we cannot, as the records of his cult go back thousands of years
before our era. Here, again, we have the same dominant feature; it is
not merely the untimely death which is lamented, but the restoration to
life which is celebrated.

Throughout the whole study the author fails to discriminate between the
activities of the living, and the dead, king. The Dead king may, as I
have said above, be regarded as the Benefactor, as the Protector, of his
people, but it is the Living king upon whom their actual and continued
prosperity depends. The detail that the ruling sovereign is sometimes
regarded as the re-incarnation of the original founder of the race
strengthens this point--the king never dies--*Le Roi est mort, Vive le
Roi* is very emphatically the motto of this Faith. It is the insistence
on Life, Life continuous, and ever-renewing, which is the abiding
characteristic of these cults, a characteristic which differentiates
them utterly and entirely from the ancestral worship with which Sir W.
Ridgeway would fain connect them.

Nor are the arguments based upon the memorial rites of

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

definitely historical heroes, of comparatively late date, such as
Hussein and Hossein, of any value here. It is precisely the death, and
not the resurrection, of the martyr which is of the essence of the
Muharram. No one contends that Hussein rose from the dead, but it is
precisely this point which is of primary importance in the Nature cults;
and Sir W. Ridgeway must surely be aware that Folk-lorists find in this
very Muharram distinct traces of borrowing from the earlier Vegetation
rites.

The author triumphantly asserts that the fact that certain Burmese
heroes and heroines are after death reverenced as tree spirits 'sets at
rest for ever' the belief in abstract deities. But how can he be sure
that the process was not the reverse of that which he postulates,
*i.e.*, that certain natural objects, trees, rivers, etc., were not
regarded as sacred *before* the Nats became connected with them? That
the deified human beings were not after death assigned to places already
held in reverence? Such a possibility is obvious to any Folk-lore
student, and local traditions should in each case be carefully examined
before the contrary is definitely asserted.

So far as the origins of Drama are concerned the Ode quoted later from
the Naassene Document is absolute and definite proof of the close
connection existing between the Attis Mystery ritual, and dramatic
performances, *i.e.*, Attis regarded in his deified, Creative, 'Logos,'
aspect, not Attis, the dead youth.

Nor do I think that the idea of 'Mana' can be lightly dismissed as 'an
ordinary case of relics.' The influence may well be something entirely
apart from the continued existence of the ancestor, an independent
force, assisting him in life, and transferring itself after death to his
successor. A 'Magic' Sword or Staff is not necessarily a relic; Medieval
romance supplies numerous instances of self-acting weapons whose virtue
in no wise depends upon their previous owner, as *e.g.* the Sword in *Le
Chevalier à l'Épée*,

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

or the Flaming Lance of the *Chevalier de la Charrette*. Doubtless the
cult of Ancestors plays a large *rôle* in the beliefs of certain
peoples, but it is not a sufficiently solid foundation to bear the
weight of the super-structure Sir W. Ridgeway would fain rear upon it,
while it differs too radically from the cults he attacks to be used as
an argument against them; the one is based upon Death, the other on
Life.

Wherefore, in spite of all the learning and ingenuity brought to bear
against it, I avow myself an impenitent believer in Sir J. G. Frazer's
main theory, and as I have said above, I hold that theory to be of
greater and more far-reaching importance than has been hitherto
suspected.

I would add a few words as to the form of these studies--they may be
found disconnected. They have been written at intervals of time
extending over several years, and my aim has been to prove the
essentially archaic character of *all* the elements composing the Grail
story rather than to analyse the story as a connected whole. With this
aim in view I have devoted chapters to features which have now either
dropped out of the existing versions, or only survive in a subordinate
form, *e.g.* the chapters on *The Medicine Man*, and *The Freeing of the
Waters*. The studies will, I hope, and believe, be accepted as offering
a definite contribution towards establishing the fundamental character
of our material; as stated above, when we are all at one as to what the
Holy Grail really was, and is, we can then proceed with some hope of
success to criticize the manner in which different writers have handled
the inspiring theme, but such success seems to be hopeless so long as we
all start from different, and often utterly irreconcilable, standpoints
and proceed along widely diverging roads. One or another may, indeed,
arrive at the goal, but such unanimity of opinion as will lend to our
criticism authoritative weight is, on such lines, impossible of
achievement.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. The Task of the Hero](frr05.md)
