[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends/Sagas](../index.md) 
[Arthur](../eng/index.htm#arthurian)  [Index](index)  [Previous](frr11.md) 
[Next](frr13.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

# CHAPTER IX

### THE FISHER KING

The gradual process of our investigation has led us to the conclusion
that the elements forming the existing Grail legend--the setting of the
story, the nature of the task which awaits the hero, the symbols and
their significance--one and all, while finding their counterpart in
prehistoric record, present remarkable parallels to the extant practice
and belief of countries so widely separate as the British Isles, Russia,
and Central Africa.

The explanation of so curious a fact, for it is a fact, and not a mere
hypothesis, may, it was suggested, most probably be found in the theory
that in this fascinating literature we have the, sometimes partially
understood, sometimes wholly misinterpreted, record of a ritual,
originally presumed to exercise a life-giving potency, which, at one
time of universal observance, has, even in its decay, shown itself
possessed of elements of the most persistent vitality.

That if the ritual, which according to our theory lies at the root of
the Grail story, be indeed the ritual of a Life Cult, it should, *in*
and *per se*, possess precisely these characteristics, will, I think, be
admitted by any fair-minded critic; the point of course is, can we
definitely *prove* our theory, *i.e.*, not merely point to striking
parallels, but select, from the figures and incidents composing our
story, some one element, which, by showing itself capable of explanation
on this theory, and on this theory alone, may be held to afford decisive
proof of the soundness of our hypothesis?

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

It seems to me that there is one such element in the bewildering
complex, by which the theory can be thus definitely tested, that is the
personality of the central figure and the title by which he is known. If
we can prove that the Fisher King, *qua* Fisher King, is an integral
part of the ritual, and can be satisfactorily explained alike by its
intention, and inherent symbolism, we shall, I think, have taken the
final step which will establish our theory upon a sure basis. On the
other hand, if the Fisher King, *qua* Fisher King, does not fit into our
framework we shall be forced to conclude that, while the *provenance* of
certain elements of the Grail literature is practically assured, the
*ensemble* has been complicated by the introduction of a terminology,
which, whether the outcome of serious intention, or of mere literary
caprice, was foreign to the original source, and so far, defies
explanation. In this latter case our theory would not necessarily be
*manqué*, but would certainly be seriously incomplete.

We have already seen that the personality of the King, the nature of the
disability under which he is suffering, and the reflex effect exercised
upon his folk and his land, correspond, in a most striking manner, to
the intimate relation at one time held to exist between the ruler and
his land; a relation mainly dependent upon the identification of the
King with the Divine principle of Life and Fertility.

This relation, as we have seen above, exists to-day among certain
African tribes.

If we examine more closely into the existing variants of our romances,
we shall find that those very variants are not only thoroughly *dans le
cadre* of our proposed solution, but also afford a valuable, and
hitherto unsuspected, indication of the relative priority of the
versions.

In Chapter I, I discussed the task of the hero in general, here I
propose to focus attention upon his host, and while

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

in a measure traversing the same ground, to do so with a view to
determining the true character of this enigmatic personage.

In the *Bleheris* version <span id="fr_151"></span>[1](#fn_151.md), the
lord of the castle is suffering under no disability whatever; he is
described as "tall, and strong of limb, of no great age, but somewhat
bald." Besides the King there is a Dead Knight upon a bier, over whose
body Vespers for the Dead are solemnly sung. The wasting of the land,
partially restored by Gawain's question concerning the Lance, has been
caused by the 'Dolorous Stroke,' *i.e.*, the stroke which brought about
the death of the Knight, whose identity is here never revealed. Certain
versions which interpolate the account of Joseph of Arimathea and the
Grail, allude to 'Le riche Pescheur' and his heirs as Joseph's
descendants, and, presumably, for it is not directly stated, guardians
of the Grail <span id="fr_152"></span>[2](#fn_152.md), but the King himself
is here never called by that title. From his connection with the Waste
Land it seems more probable that it was the Dead Knight who filled that
*rôle*.

In the second version of which Gawain is the hero, that of *Diû
Crône* <span id="fr_153"></span>[3](#fn_153.md), the Host is an old and
infirm man. After Gawain has asked the question we learn that he is
really dead, and only compelled to retain the semblance of life till the
task of the Quester be achieved. Here, again, he is not called the
Fisher King.

In the *Perceval* versions, on the contrary, we find the name invariably
associated with him, but he is not always directly connected with the
misfortunes which have fallen upon his land. Thus, while the Wauchier
texts are incomplete, breaking off at the critical moment of asking the

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

question, Manessier who continues, and ostensibly completes, Wauchier,
introduces the Dead Knight, here Goondesert, or Gondefer (which I
suspect is the more correct form), brother of the King, whose death by
treachery has plunged the land in misery, and been the direct cause of
the self-wounding of the King <span id="fr_154"></span>[1](#fn_154.md). The
healing of the King and the restoration of the land depend upon
Perceval's slaying the murderer Partinal. These two versions show a
combination of Perceval and Gawain themes, such as their respective
dates might lead us to expect.

Robert de Borron is the only writer who gives a clear, and tolerably
reasonable, account of why the guardian of the Grail bears the title of
Fisher King; in other cases, such as the poems of Chrétien and Wolfram,
the name is connected with his partiality for fishing, an obviously
*post hoc* addition.

The story in question is found in Borron's *Joseph of Arimathea* <span
id="fr_155"></span>[2](#fn_155.md). Here we are told how, during the
wanderings of that holy man and his companions in the wilderness,
certain of the company fell into sin. By the command of God, Brons,
Joseph's brother-in-law, caught a Fish, which, with the Grail, provided
a mystic meal of which the unworthy cannot partake; thus the sinners
were separated from the righteous. Henceforward Brons was known as 'The
Rich Fisher.' It is noteworthy, however, that in the Perceval romance,
ascribed to Borron, the title is as a rule, *Roi* Pescheur, not *Riche*
Pescheur <span id="fr_156"></span>[3](#fn_156.md).

In this romance the King is not suffering from any special malady, but
is the victim of extreme old age;

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

not surprising, as he is Brons himself, who has survived from the dawn
of Christianity to the days of King Arthur. We are told that the effect
of asking the question will be to restore him to youth <span
id="fr_157"></span>[1](#fn_157.md); as a matter of fact it appears to bring
about his death, as he only lives three days after his restoration <span
id="fr_158"></span>[2](#fn_158.md).

When we come to Chrétien's poem we find ourselves confronted with a
striking alteration in the presentment. There are, not one, but two,
disabled kings; one suffering from the effects of a wound, the other in
extreme old age. Chrétien's poem being incomplete we do not know what he
intended to be the result of the achieved Quest, but we may I think
reasonably conclude that the wounded King at least was healed <span
id="fr_159"></span>[3](#fn_159.md).

The *Parzival* of von Eschenbach follows the same tradition, but is
happily complete. Here we find the wounded King was healed, but what
becomes of the aged man (here the grandfather, not as in Chrétien the
father, of the Fisher King) we are not told <span
id="fr_160"></span>[4](#fn_160.md).

The *Perlesvaus* is, as I have noted above <span
id="fr_161"></span>[5](#fn_161.md), very unsatisfactory. The illness of the
King is badly motivated, and he dies before the achievement of the
Quest. This romance, while retaining certain interesting, and
undoubtedly primitive features, is, as a whole, too late, and *remaniée*
a redaction to be of much use in determining the question of origins.

The same may be said of the *Grand Saint Graal* and *Queste* versions,
both of which are too closely connected with

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

the prose *Lancelot*, and too obviously intended to develope and
complete the *données* of that romance to be relied upon as evidence for
the original form of the Grail legend <span
id="fr_162"></span>[1](#fn_162.md). The version of the *Queste* is very
confused: there are two kings at the Grail castle, Pelles, and his
father; sometimes the one, sometimes the other, bears the title of Roi
Pescheur <span id="fr_163"></span>[2](#fn_163.md). There is besides, an
extremely old, and desperately wounded, king, Mordrains, a contemporary
of Joseph, who practically belongs, not to the Grail tradition, but to a
Conversion legend embodied in the *Grand Saint Graal* <span
id="fr_164"></span>[3](#fn_164.md). Finally, in the latest cyclic texts, we
have three Kings, all of whom are wounded <span
id="fr_165"></span>[4](#fn_165.md).

The above will show that the presentment of this central figure is much
confused; generally termed Le Roi Pescheur, he is sometimes described as
in middle life, and in full possession of his bodily powers. Sometimes
while still comparatively young he is incapacitated by the effects of a
wound, and is known also by the title of Roi Mehaigné, or Maimed King.
Sometimes he is in extreme old age, and in certain closely connected
versions the two ideas are combined, and we have a wounded Fisher King,
and an aged father, or grandfather. But I would draw attention to the
significant fact that in no case is the Fisher King a youthful
character; that distinction is reserved for his Healer, and successor.

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

Now is it possible to arrive at any conclusion as to the relative value
and probable order of these conflicting variants? I think that if we
admit that they do, in all probability, represent a more or less
coherent survival of the Nature ritual previously discussed, we may, by
help of what we know as to the varying forms of that ritual, be enabled
to bring some order out of this confusion.

If we turn back to Chapters 4, 5, and 7, and consult the evidence there
given as to the Adonis cults, the Spring Festivals of European Folk, the
Mumming Plays of the British Isles, the main fact that emerges is that
in the great majority of these cases the representative of the Spirit of
Vegetation is considered as dead, and the object of these ceremonies is
to restore him to life. This I hold to be the primary form.

This section had already been written when I came across the important
article by Dr Jevons, referred to in a previous chapter <span
id="fr_166"></span>[1](#fn_166.md). Certain of his remarks are here so much
to the point that I cannot refrain from quoting them. Speaking of the
Mumming Plays, the writer says: "The one point in which there is no
variation is that--the character is killed and brought to life again.
The play is a ceremonial performance, or rather it is the development in
dramatic form of what was originally a religious or magical rite,
representing or realizing the revivification of the character slain.
This revivification is the one essential and invariable feature of all
the Mummer's plays in England <span id="fr_167"></span>[2](#fn_167.md)."

In certain cases, *e.g.*, the famous Roman Spring festival of Mamurius
Veturius and the Swabian ceremony referred to above <span
id="fr_168"></span>[3](#fn_168.md), the central figure is an old man. In no
case do I find that the representative of Vegetation is merely

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

wounded, although the nature of the ritual would obviously admit of such
a variant.

Thus, taking the extant and recognized forms of the ritual into
consideration, we might expect to find that in the earliest, and least
contaminated, version of the Grail story the central figure would be
dead, and the task of the Quester that of restoring him to life. Viewed
from this standpoint the *Gawain* versions (the priority of which is
maintainable upon strictly literary grounds, Gawain being the original
Arthurian romantic hero) are of extraordinary interest. In the one form
we find a Dead Knight, whose fate is distinctly stated to have involved
his land in desolation, in the other, an aged man who, while preserving
the semblance of life, is in reality dead.

This last version appears to me, in view of our present knowledge, to be
of extreme critical value. There can, I think, be little doubt that in
the primary form underlying our extant versions the King was dead, and
restored to life; at first, I strongly suspect, by the agency of some
mysterious herb, or herbs, a feature retained in certain forms of the
Mumming play.

In the next stage, that represented by Borron, he is suffering from
extreme old age, and the task of the Quester is to restore him to youth.
This version is again supported by extant parallels. In each of these
cases it seems most probable that the original ritual (I should wish it
to be clearly understood that I hold the Grail story to have been
primarily dramatic, and actually performed) involved an act of
substitution. The Dead King in the first case being probably represented
by a mere effigy, in the second being an old man, his place was, at a
given moment of the ritual, taken by the youth who played the *rôle* of
the Quester. It is noteworthy that, while both Perceval and Galahad are
represented as mere lads, Gawain, whatever his age at the

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

moment of the Grail quest, was, as we learn from *Diû Crône*, dowered by
his fairy Mistress with the gift of eternal youth <span
id="fr_169"></span>[1](#fn_169.md).

The versions of Chrétien and Wolfram, which present us with a wounded
Fisher King, and a father, or grandfather <span
id="fr_170"></span>[2](#fn_170.md), in extreme old age, are due in my
opinion to a literary device, intended to combine two existing variants.
That the subject matter was well understood by the original redactor of
the common source is proved by the nature of the injury <span
id="fr_171"></span>[3](#fn_171.md), but I hold that in these versions we
have passed from the domain of ritual to that of literature. Still, we
have a curious indication that the Wounding variant may have had its
place in the former. The suggestion made above as to the probable
existence in the primitive ritual of a substitution ceremony, seems to
me to provide a possible explanation of the feature found alike in
Wolfram, and in the closely allied Grail section of *Sone de Nansai*;
*i.e.*, that the wound of the King was a punishment for sin, he had
conceived a passion for a Pagan princess <span
id="fr_172"></span>[4](#fn_172.md). Now there would be no incongruity in
representing the Dead King as reborn in youthful form, the aged King as
*revenu dans sa juvence*, but when the central figure was a man in the
prime of life some reason had to be found, his strength and vitality
being restored, for his supersession by the appointed Healer. This
supersession was adequately motivated by the supposed transgression of a
fundamental Christian law, entailing as consequence the forfeiture of
his crown.

I would thus separate the *doubling* theme, as found in Chrétien and
Wolfram, from the *wounded* theme, equally

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

common to these poets. This latter might possibly be accounted for on
the ground of a ritual variant; the first is purely literary, explicable
neither on the exoteric, nor the esoteric, aspect of the ceremony. From
the exoteric point of view there are not, and there cannot be, two Kings
suffering from parallel disability; the ritual knows one Principle of
Life, and one alone. Equally from the esoteric standpoint Fisher King,
and Maimed King, representing two different aspects of the same
personality, may, and probably were, represented as two individuals, but
one alone is disabled. Further, as the two are, in very truth, one, they
should be equals in age, not of different generations. Thus the
*Bleheris* version which gives us a Dead Knight, presumably, from his
having been slain in battle, still in vigorous manhood, and a hale King
is, ritually, the more correct. The original of Manessier's version must
have been similar, but the fact that by the time it was compiled the
Fisher King was generally accepted as being also the Maimed King led to
the introduction of the very awkward, and poorly motivated,
self-wounding incident. It will be noted that in this case the King is
not healed either at the moment of the slaying of his brother's murderer
(which would be the logical result of the *données* of the tale), nor at
the moment of contact with the successful Quester, but at the mere
announcement of his approach <span id="fr_173"></span>[1](#fn_173.md).

Thus, if we consider the King, apart from his title, we find that alike
from his position in the story, his close connection with the fortunes
of his land and people, and the varying forms of the disability of which
he is the victim,

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

he corresponds with remarkable exactitude to the central figure of a
well-recognized Nature ritual, and may therefore justly be claimed to
belong *ab origine* to such a hypothetical source.

But what about his title, why should he be called the *Fisher* King?

Here we strike what I hold to be the main crux of the problem, a feature
upon which scholars have expended much thought and ingenuity, a feature
which the authors of the romances themselves either did not always
understand, or were at pains to obscure by the introduction of the
obviously *post hoc* "motif" above referred to, *i.e.*, that he was
called the Fisher King because of his devotion to the pastime of
fishing: *à-propos* of which Heinzel sensibly remarks, that the story of
the Fisher King "presupposes a legend of this personage only vaguely
known and remembered by Chrétien <span id="fr_174"></span>[1](#fn_174.md)."

Practically the interpretations already attempted fall into two main
groups, which we may designate as the Christian-Legendary, and the
Celtic-Folk-lore interpretations. For those who hold that the Grail
story is essentially, and fundamentally, Christian, finding its root in
Eucharistic symbolism, the title is naturally connected with the use of
the Fish symbol in early Christianity: the *Icthys* anagram, as applied
to Christ, the title 'Fishers of Men,' bestowed upon the Apostles, the
Papal ring of the Fisherman--though it must be noted that no
manipulation of the Christian symbolism avails satisfactorily to account
for the lamentable condition into which the bearer of the title has
fallen <span id="fr_175"></span>[2](#fn_175.md)

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

The advocates of the Folk-lore theory, on the other hand, practically
evade this main difficulty, by basing their interpretation upon Borron's
story of the catching of the Fish by Brons, equating this character with
the Bran of Welsh tradition, and pointing to the existence, in Irish and
Welsh legend, of a Salmon of Wisdom, the tasting of whose flesh confers
all knowledge. Hertz acutely remarks that the incident, as related by
Borron, is not of such importance as to justify the stress laid upon the
name, Rich Fisher, by later writers <span
id="fr_176"></span>[1](#fn_176.md). We may also note in this connection
that the Grail romances never employ the form '*Wise* Fisher,' which, if
the origin of the name were that proposed above, we might reasonably
expect to find. It is obvious that a satisfactory solution of the
problem must be sought elsewhere.

In my opinion the key to the puzzle is to be found in the rightful
understanding of the *Fish-Fisher* symbolism. Students of the Grail
literature have been too prone to treat the question on the Christian
basis alone, oblivious of the fact that Christianity did no more than
take over, and adapt to its own use, a symbolism already endowed with a
deeply rooted prestige and importance.

So far the subject cannot be said to have received adequate treatment;
certain of its aspects have been more or less fully discussed in
monographs and isolated articles, but we still await a comprehensive
study on this most important question <span
id="fr_177"></span>[2](#fn_177.md).

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

So far as the present state of our knowledge goes we can affirm with
certainty that the Fish is a Life symbol of immemorial antiquity, and
that the title of Fisher has, from the earliest ages, been associated
with Deities who were held to be specially connected with the origin and
preservation of Life.

In Indian cosmogony Manu finds a little fish in the water in which he
would wash his hands; it asks, and receives, his protection, asserting
that when grown to full size it will save Manu from the universal
deluge. This is Jhasa, the greatest of all fish <span
id="fr_178"></span>[1](#fn_178.md).

The first Avatar of Vishnu the Creator is a Fish. At the great feast in
honour of this god, held on the twelfth day of the first month of the
Indian year, Vishnu is represented under the form of a golden Fish, and
addressed in the following terms: "Wie Du, O Gott, in Gestalt eines
Fisches die in der Unterwelt befindlichen Veden gerettet hast, so rette
auch mich <span id="fr_179"></span>[2](#fn_179.md)." The Fish Avatar was
afterwards transferred to Buddha.

In Buddhist religion the symbols of the Fish and Fisher are freely
employed. Thus in Buddhist monasteries we find drums and gongs in the
shape of a fish, but the true meaning of the symbol, while still
regarded as sacred, has been lost, and the explanations, like the
explanations of the Grail romances, are often fantastic afterthoughts.

In the Māhāyana scriptures Buddha is referred to as the Fisherman who
draws fish from the ocean of Samsara to

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

the light of Salvation. There are figures and pictures which represent
Buddha in the act of fishing, an attitude which, unless interpreted in a
symbolic sense, would be utterly at variance with the tenets of the
Buddhist religion <span id="fr_180"></span>[1](#fn_180.md).

This also holds good for Chinese Buddhism. The goddess Kwanyin (=
Avalokiteśvara), the female Deity of Mercy and Salvation, is depicted
either on, or holding, a Fish. In the Han palace of Kun-Ming-Ch'ih there
was a Fish carved in jade to which in time of drought sacrifices were
offered, the prayers being always answered.

Both in India and China the Fish is employed in funeral rites. In India
a crystal bowl with Fish handles was found in a reputed tomb of Buddha.
In China the symbol is found on stone slabs enclosing the coffin, on
bronze urns, vases, etc. Even as the Babylonians had the Fish, or
Fisher, god, Oannes who revealed to them the arts of Writing,
Agriculture, etc., and was, as Eisler puts it, 'teacher and lord of all
wisdom,' so the Chinese Fu-Hi, who is pictured with the mystic tablets
containing the mysteries of Heaven and Earth, is, with his consort and
retinue, represented as having a fish's tail <span
id="fr_181"></span>[2](#fn_181.md).

The writer of the article in *The Open Court* asserts that "the Fish was
sacred to those deities who were supposed to lead men back from the
shadows of death to life <span id="fr_182"></span>[3](#fn_182.md)." If this
be really the case we can understand the connection of the symbol first
with Orpheus, later with Christ, as Eisler remarks: "Orpheus is
connected with nearly all the mystery, and a great many of the ordinary
chthonic, cults in Greece and Italy. Christianity took its first
tentative steps into

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

the reluctant world of Graeco-Roman Paganism under the benevolent
patronage of Orpheus <span id="fr_183"></span>[1](#fn_183.md)."

There is thus little reason to doubt that, if we regard the Fish as a
Divine Life symbol, of immemorial antiquity, we shall not go very far
astray.

We may note here that there was a fish known to the Semites by the name
of Adonis, although as the title signifies 'Lord,' and is generic rather
than specific, too much stress cannot be laid upon it. It is more
interesting to know that in Babylonian cosmology Adapa the Wise, the son
of Ea, is represented as a Fisher <span id="fr_184"></span>[2](#fn_184.md).
In the ancient Sumerian laments for Tammuz, previously referred to, that
god is frequently addressed as *Divine Lamgar, Lord of the Net*, the
nearest equivalent I have so far found to our 'Fisher King <span
id="fr_185"></span>[3](#fn_185.md).' Whether the phrase is here used in an
actual or a symbolic sense the connection of idea is sufficiently
striking.

In the opinion of the most recent writers on the subject the Christian
Fish symbolism derives directly from the Jewish, the Jews, on their side
having borrowed freely from Syrian belief and practice <span
id="fr_186"></span>[4](#fn_186.md).

What may be regarded as the central point of Jewish Fish symbolism is
the tradition that, at the end of the world, Messias will catch the
great Fish Leviathan, and divide its flesh as food among the faithful.
As a foreshadowing of this Messianic Feast the Jews were in the habit of
eating fish upon the Sabbath. During the Captivity,

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

under the influence of the worship of the goddess Atargatis, they
transferred the ceremony to the Friday, the eve of the Sabbath, a
position which it has retained to the present day. Eisler remarks that
"in Galicia one can see Israelite families in spite of their being
reduced to the extremest misery, procuring on Fridays a single gudgeon,
to eat, divided into fragments, at night-fall. In the 16th century Rabbi
Solomon Luria protested strongly against this practice. Fish, he
declared, should be eaten on the Sabbath itself, not on the Eve <span
id="fr_187"></span>[1](#fn_187.md)."

This Jewish custom appears to have been adopted by the primitive Church,
and early Christians, on their side, celebrated a Sacramental Fish-meal.
The Catacombs supply us with numerous illustrations, fully described by
the two writers referred to. The elements of this mystic meal were Fish,
Bread, and Wine, the last being represented in the Messianic tradition:
"At the end of the meal God will give to the most worthy, *i.e.*, to
King David, the Cup of Blessing--one of fabulous dimensions <span
id="fr_188"></span>[2](#fn_188.md)."

Fish play an important part in Mystery Cults, as being the 'holy' food.
Upon a tablet dedicated to the Phrygian *Mater Magna* we find Fish and
Cup; and Dölger, speaking of a votive tablet discovered in the Balkans,
says, "Hier ist der Fisch immer und immer wieder allzu deutlich als die
heilige Speise eines Mysterien-Kultes hervorgehoben <span
id="fr_189"></span>[3](#fn_189.md)."

Now I would submit that here, and not in Celtic Folk-lore, is to be
found the source of Borron's Fish-meal. Let us consider the
circumstances. Joseph and his followers, in the course of their
wanderings, find themselves in danger of famine. The position is
somewhat curious, as apparently

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

the leaders have no idea of the condition of their followers till the
latter appeal to Brons <span id="fr_190"></span>[1](#fn_190.md).

Brons informs Joseph, who prays for aid and counsel from the Grail. A
Voice from Heaven bids him send his brother-in-law, Brons, to catch a
fish. Meanwhile he, Joseph, is to prepare a table, set the Grail,
covered with a cloth, in the centre opposite his own seat, and the fish
which Brons shall catch, on the other side. He does this, and the seats
are filled--"Si s'i asieent une grant partie et plus i ot de cels qui
n'i sistrent mie, que de cels qui sistrent." Those who are seated at the
table are conscious of a great "douceur," and "l'accomplissement de lor
cuers," the rest feel nothing.

Now compare this with the Irish story of the Salmon of Wisdom <span
id="fr_191"></span>[2](#fn_191.md).

Finn Mac Cumhail enters the service of his namesake, Finn Eger, who for
seven years had remained by the Boyne watching the Salmon of Lynn Feic,
which it had been foretold Finn should catch. The younger lad, who
conceals his name, catches the fish. He is set to watch it while it
roasts but is warned not to eat it. Touching it with his thumb he is
burned, and puts his thumb in his mouth to cool it. Immediately he
becomes possessed of all knowledge, and thereafter has only to chew his
thumb to obtain wisdom. Mr Nutt remarks: "The incident in Borron's poem
has been recast in the mould of mediaeval Christian Symbolism, but I
think the older myth can still be clearly discerned, and is wholly
responsible for the incident as found in the *Conte du Graal*."

But when these words were written we were in ignorance of the
Sacramental Fish-meal, common alike to Jewish, Christian, and Mystery
Cults, a meal which offers a far closer parallel to Borron's romance
than does the Finn story, in

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

which, beyond the catching of a fish, there is absolutely no point of
contact with our romance, neither Joseph nor Brons derives wisdom from
the eating thereof; it is not they who detect the sinners, the severance
between the good and the evil is brought about automatically. The Finn
story has no common meal, and no idea of spiritual blessings such as are
connected therewith.

In the case of the Messianic Fish-meal, on the other hand, the parallel
is striking; in both cases it is a communal meal, in both cases the
privilege of sharing it is the reward of the faithful, in both cases it
is a foretaste of the bliss of Paradise.

Furthermore, as remarked above, the practice was at one time of very
widespread prevalence.

Now whence did Borron derive his knowledge, from Jewish, Christian or
Mystery sources?

This is a question not very easy to decide. In view of the pronounced
Christian tone of Borron's romance I should feel inclined to exclude the
first, also the Jewish Fish-meal seems to have been of a more open,
general and less symbolic character than the Christian; it was frankly
an anticipation of a promised future bliss, obtainable by all.

Orthodox Christianity, on the other hand, knows nothing of the Sacred
Fish-meal, so far as I am aware it forms no part of any Apocalyptic
expectation, and where this special symbolism does occur it is often
under conditions which place its interpretation outside the recognized
category of Christian belief.

A noted instance in point is the famous epitaph of Bishop Aberkios, over
the correct interpretation of which scholars have spent much time and
ingenuity <span id="fr_192"></span>[1](#fn_192.md). In this curious text
Aberkios, after mentioning his journeys, says:

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

     "Paul I had as my guide,  
Faith however always went ahead and set before me as food a *Fish* from
a *Fountain*, a huge one, a clean one,  
Which a *Holy Virgin* has *caught*.  
This she gave to the friends ever to eat as food,  
Having good *Wine*, and offering it watered together with *Bread*.  
Aberkios had this engraved when 72 years of age in truth.  
*Whoever can understand this* let him pray for Aberkios."

Eisler (I am here quoting from the *Quest* article) remarks, "As the
last line of our quotation gives us quite plainly to understand, a
number of words which we have italicized are obviously used in an
unusual, metaphorical, sense, that is to say as terms of the Christian
Mystery language." While Harnack, admitting that the Christian character
of the text is indisputable, adds significantly: "*aber das Christentum
der Grosskirche ist es nicht*."

Thus it is possible that, to the various points of doubtful orthodoxy
which scholars have noted as characteristic of the Grail romances,
Borron's Fish-meal should also be added.

Should it be objected that the dependence of a medieval romance upon a
Jewish tradition of such antiquity is scarcely probable, I would draw
attention to the *Voyage of Saint Brandan*, where the monks, during
their prolonged wanderings, annually 'kept their Resurrection,' *i.e.*,
celebrate their Easter Mass, on the back of a great Fish <span
id="fr_193"></span>[1](#fn_193.md). On their first meeting with this
monster Saint Brandan tells them it is the greatest of all fishes, and
is named Jastoni, a name which bears a curious resemblance to the Jhasa
of the Indian tradition cited above <span
id="fr_194"></span>[2](#fn_194.md). In this last instance the connection of
the Fish with life, renewed and sustained, is undeniable.

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

The original source of such a symbol is most probably to be found in the
belief, referred to in a previous chapter <span
id="fr_195"></span>[1](#fn_195.md), that all life comes from the water, but
that a more sensual and less abstract idea was also operative appears
from the close connection of the Fish with the goddess Astarte or
Atargatis, a connection here shared by the Dove. Cumont, in his *Les
Religions Orientales dans le Paganisme Romain*, says: "Two animals were
held in general reverence, namely, Dove and Fish. Countless flocks of
Doves greeted the traveller when he stepped on shore at Askalon, and in
the outer courts of all the temples of Astarte one might see the flutter
of their white wings. The Fish were preserved in ponds near to the
Temple, and superstitious dread forbade their capture, for the goddess
punished such sacrilege, smiting the offender with ulcers and
tumours <span id="fr_196"></span>[2](#fn_196.md)."

But at certain mystic banquets priests and initiates partook of this
otherwise forbidden food, in the belief that they thus partook of the
flesh of the goddess. Eisler and other scholars are of the opinion that
it was the familiarity with this ritual gained by the Jews during the
Captivity that led to the adoption of the Friday Fish-meal, already
referred to, Friday being the day dedicated to the goddess and, later,
to her equivalent, Venus. From the Jews the custom spread to the
Christian Church, where it still flourishes, its true origin, it is
needless to say, being wholly unsuspected <span
id="fr_197"></span>[3](#fn_197.md).

Dove and Fish also appear together in ancient iconography. In Comte
Goblet d'Alviella's work *The Migration of Symbols* there is an
illustration of a coin of Cyzicus, on which is represented an Omphalus,
flanked by two Doves, with a Fish beneath <span
id="fr_198"></span>[4](#fn_198.md); and a whole section is devoted to the
discussion of the representations of two Doves on either side of a
Temple entrance, or of an Omphalus. In the

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

author's opinion the origin of the symbol may be found in the sacred
dove-cotes of Phoenicia, referred to by Cumont.

Scheftelowitz instances the combination of Fish-meal and Dove, found on
a Jewish tomb of the first century at Syracuse, and remarks that the two
are frequently found in combination on Christian tombstones <span
id="fr_199"></span>[1](#fn_199.md)

Students of the Grail romances will not need to be reminded that the
Dove makes its appearance in certain of our texts. In the *Parzival* it
plays a somewhat important *rôle*; every Good Friday a Dove brings from
Heaven a Host, which it lays upon the Grail; and the Dove is the badge
of the Grail Knights <span id="fr_200"></span>[2](#fn_200.md). In the prose
*Lancelot* the coming of the Grail procession is heralded by the
entrance through the window of a Dove, bearing a censer in its
beak <span id="fr_201"></span>[3](#fn_201.md). Is it not possible that it
was the already existing connection in Nature ritual of these two, Dove
and Fish, which led to the introduction of the former into our romances,
where its *rôle* is never really adequately motivated? It is further to
be noted that besides Dove and Fish the Syrians reverenced Stones, more
especially meteoric Stones, which they held to be endowed with life
potency, another point of contact with our romances <span
id="fr_202"></span>[4](#fn_202.md).

That the Fish was considered a potent factor in ensuring fruitfulness is
proved by certain prehistoric tablets described by Scheftelowitz, where
Fish, Horse, and Swastika, or in another instance Fish and Reindeer, are
found in a combination which unmistakeably denotes that the object of
the

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

votive tablet was to ensure the fruitfulness of flocks and herds <span
id="fr_203"></span>[1](#fn_203.md).

With this intention its influence was also invoked in marriage
ceremonies. The same writer points out that the Jews in Poland were
accustomed to hold a Fish feast immediately on the conclusion of the
marriage ceremony and that a similar practice can be prove for the
ancient Greeks <span id="fr_204"></span>[2](#fn_204.md). At the present day
the Jews of Tunis exhibit a Fish's tail on a cushion at their
weddings <span id="fr_205"></span>[3](#fn_205.md). In some parts of India
the newly-wedded pair waded knee-deep into the water, and caught fish in
a new garment. During the ceremony a Brahmin student, from the shore,
asked solemnly, "What seest thou?" to which the answer was returned,
"Sons and Cattle <span id="fr_206"></span>[4](#fn_206.md)." In all these
cases there can be no doubt that it was the prolific nature of the Fish,
a feature which it shares in common with the Dove, which inspired
practice and intention.

Surely the effect of this cumulative body of evidence is to justify us
in the belief that Fish and Fisher, being, as they undoubtedly are, Life
symbols of immemorial antiquity, are, by virtue of their origin,
entirely in their place in a sequence of incidents which there is solid
ground for believing derive ultimately from a Cult of this nature. That
Borron's Fish-meal, that the title of Fisher King, are not accidents of
literary invention but genuine and integral parts of the common body of
tradition which has furnished the incidents and *mise-en-scène* of the
Grail drama. Can it be denied that, while from the standpoint of a
Christian interpretation the character of the Fisher King is simply
incomprehensible, from the standpoint of Folk-tale inadequately
explained, from that of a Ritual survival it assumes a profound meaning
and significance? He is not merely a deeply symbolic

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

figure, but the essential centre of the whole cult, a being semi-divine,
semi-human, standing between his people and land, and the unseen forces
which control their destiny. If the Grail story be based upon a Life
ritual the character of the Fisher King is of the very essence of the
tale, and his title, so far from being meaningless, expresses, for those
who are at pains to seek, the intention and object of the perplexing
whole. The Fisher King is, as I suggested above, the very heart and
centre of the whole mystery, and I contend that with an adequate
interpretation of this enigmatic character the soundness of the theory
providing such an interpretation may be held to be definitely proved.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_151"></span>[109:1](frr12.htm#fr_151.md) Cf. my *Sir Gawain
and the Grail Castle*, pp. 3-30. The best text is that of MS. B.N.,
fonds Franç. 12576, ff. 87*vo*-91. The above remarks apply also to the
*Elucidation*, which is using a version of the Bleheris form.

<span id="fn_152"></span>[109:2](frr12.htm#fr_152.md) B.N. 12577, fo.
136*vo*.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[109:3](frr12.htm#fr_153.md) Cf. *Sir Gawain at
the Grail Castle*, pp. 33-46.

<span id="fn_154"></span>[110:1](frr12.htm#fr_154.md) Cf. B.N. 12576, ff.
220-222*vo* and fo. 258.

<span id="fn_155"></span>[110:2](frr12.htm#fr_155.md) Hucher, *Le Saint
Graal*, Vol. I. pp. 251 *et seq.*, 315 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_156"></span>[110:3](frr12.htm#fr_156.md) Cf. Modena MS. pp.
11, 12, 21, etc.; Dr Nitze, *The Fisher-King in the Grail Romances*, p.
373, says Borron uses the term *Rice* Pescheur, as opposed to the *Roi*
Pescheur of Chrétien. This remark is only correct as applied to the
*Joseph*.

<span id="fn_157"></span>[111:1](frr12.htm#fr_157.md) Modena MS p. 61 and
note.

<span id="fn_158"></span>[111:2](frr12.htm#fr_158.md) Ibid. p. 63.

<span id="fn_159"></span>[111:3](frr12.htm#fr_159.md) The evidence of the
Parzival and the parallel Grail sections of Sone de Nansai, which appear
to repose ultimately on a source common to all three authors, makes this
practically certain.

<span id="fn_160"></span>[111:4](frr12.htm#fr_160.md) This is surely a
curious omission, if the second King were as essential a part of the
scheme as Dr Nitze supposes.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[111:5](frr12.htm#fr_161.md) Cf. Chapter 2, [p.
15](frr05.htm#page_15.md).

<span id="fn_162"></span>[112:1](frr12.htm#fr_162.md) I cannot agree with
Dr Nitze's remark (*op. cit.* p. 374) that "in most versions the Fisher
King has a mysterious double." I hold that feature to be a peculiarity
of the Chrétien-Wolfram group. It is not found in the Gawain versions,
in Wauchier, nor in Manessier. Gerbert is using the *Queste* in the
passage relative to Mordrains, and for the reason stated above I hold
that neither *Queste* nor *Grand Saint Graal* should be cited when we
are dealing, as Dr Nitze is here dealing, with questions of ultimate
origin.

<span id="fn_163"></span>[112:2](frr12.htm#fr_163.md) Cf. my *Legend of Sir
Lancelot*, pp. 167 and 168.

<span id="fn_164"></span>[112:3](frr12.htm#fr_164.md) Cf. Heinzel, *Ueber
die Alt-Franz*. *Gral-Romanen*, pp. 136 and 137.

<span id="fn_165"></span>[112:4](frr12.htm#fr_165.md) Cf. *Legend of Sir
Perceval*, Vol. II. p. 343, *note*. These three kings are found in the
curious Merlin MS. B.N., f. Franç. 337, fo. 249 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_166"></span>[113:1](frr12.htm#fr_166.md) *Vide supra*, pp.
[91](frr10.htm#page_91.md). 92.

<span id="fn_167"></span>[113:2](frr12.htm#fr_167.md) *Op. cit.* p. 184.

<span id="fn_168"></span>[113:3](frr12.htm#fr_168.md) Cf. Chapter 5, [p.
52](frr08.htm#page_52), Chap. 7, [p. 88](frr10.htm#page_88.md).

<span id="fn_169"></span>[115:1](frr12.htm#fr_169.md) *Diû Crone*, ll.
17329 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_170"></span>[115:2](frr12.htm#fr_170.md) In the *Parzival*
Titurel is grandfather to Anfortas, Frimutel intervening; critics of the
poem are apt to overlook this difference between the German and French
versions.

<span id="fn_171"></span>[115:3](frr12.htm#fr_171.md) Cf. Chapter 2, [p.
20](frr05.htm#page_20.md).

<span id="fn_172"></span>[115:4](frr12.htm#fr_172.md) Cf. here my notes on
*Sone de Nansai* (*Romania*, Vol. XLIII. p. 412).

<span id="fn_173"></span>[116:1](frr12.htm#fr_173.md) In connection with my
previous remarks on the subject ([p. 112](#page_112).md) I would point out
that the Queste and Grand Sainte Graal versions repeat the Maimed King
*motif* in the most unintelligent manner. The element of old age,
inherent in the Evalach-Mordrains incident, is complicated and
practically obscured, by an absurdly exaggerated wounding element, here
devoid of its original significance.

<span id="fn_174"></span>[117:1](frr12.htm#fr_174.md) Heinzel, *op. cit.*
p. 13.

<span id="fn_175"></span>[117:2](frr12.htm#fr_175.md) For an instance of
the extravagances to which a strictly Christian interpretation can lead,
cf. Dr Sebastian Evans's theories set forth in his translation of the
*Perlesvaus* (*The High History of the Holy Grail*) and in his *The
Quest of the Holy Grail*. The author places the origin of the cycle in
the first quarter of the thirteenth century, and treats it as an
allegory of the position in England during <span id="page_118">p.
118</span> the Interdict pronounced against King John, and the
consequent withholding of the Sacraments. His identification of the
character with historical originals is most ingenious, an extraordinary
example of misapplied learning.

<span id="fn_176"></span>[118:1](frr12.htm#fr_176.md) For a general
discussion of the conflicting views cf. Dr Nitze's study, referred to
above. The writer devotes special attention to the works of the late
Prof. Heinzel and Mr Alfred Nutt as leading representatives of their
respective schools.

<span id="fn_177"></span>[118:2](frr12.htm#fr_177.md) R. Pischel's *Ueber
die Ursprung des Christlichen Fisch-Symbols* is specifically devoted to
the possible derivation from Indian sources. Scheftelowitz, *Das* <span
id="page_119">p. 119</span> *Fischsymbolik in Judentem und Christentum*
(*Archiv für Religionswissenschaft*, Vol. XIV.), contains a great deal
of valuable material. R. Eisler, *Orpheus the Fisher* (*The Quest*,
Vols. I and II.), *John, Jonas, Oannes* (*ibid*. Vol. III.), *The
Messianic Fish-meal of the Primitive Church* (*ibid*. Vol. IV.), are
isolated studies, forming part of a comprehensive work on the subject,
the publication of which has unfortunately been prevented by the War.

<span id="fn_178"></span>[119:1](frr12.htm#fr_178.md) *Mahâbhârata*, Bk.
III.

<span id="fn_179"></span>[119:2](frr12.htm#fr_179.md) Cf. Scheftelowitz,
*op. cit.* p. 51.

<span id="fn_180"></span>[120:1](frr12.htm#fr_180.md) Cf. *The Open Court*,
June and July, 1911, where reproductions of these figures will be found.

<span id="fn_181"></span>[120:2](frr12.htm#fr_181.md) *Op. cit.* p. 403.
Cf. here an illustration in Miss Harrison's *Themis* (p. 262), which
shows Cecrops, who played the same rôle with regard to the Greeks, with
a serpent's tail.

<span id="fn_182"></span>[120:3](frr12.htm#fr_182.md) *Ibid*. p. 168. In
this connection note the prayer to Vishnu, quoted above.

<span id="fn_183"></span>[121:1](frr12.htm#fr_183.md) Cf. Eisler, *Orpheus
the Fisher* (*The Quest*, Vol. I. p. 126).

<span id="fn_184"></span>[121:2](frr12.htm#fr_184.md) Cf. W. Staerk, *Ueber
den Ursprung der Gral-Legende*, pp. 55, 56.

<span id="fn_185"></span>[121:3](frr12.htm#fr_185.md) Cf. S. Langdon,
*Sumerian and Babylonian Psalms*, pp. 301, 305, 307, 313.

<span id="fn_186"></span>[121:4](frr12.htm#fr_186.md) Cf. Eisler, *The
Messianic Fish-meal of the Primitive Church* (*The Quest*, Vol. IV.),
where the various frescoes are described; also the article by
Scheftelowitz, already referred to. While mainly devoted to Jewish
beliefs and practices, this study contains much material derived from
other sources. So far it is the fullest and most thoroughly *documenté*
treatment of the subject I have met with.

<span id="fn_187"></span>[122:1](frr12.htm#fr_187.md) Cf. Eisler, *op.
cit.* and Scheftelowitz, pp. 19. 20.

<span id="fn_188"></span>[122:2](frr12.htm#fr_188.md) Cf. Eisler, *op.
cit.* p. 508.

<span id="fn_189"></span>[122:3](frr12.htm#fr_189.md) Cf. Scheftelowitz,
*op. cit.* pp. 337, 338, and note 4.

<span id="fn_190"></span>[123:1](frr12.htm#fr_190.md) Hucher, *Le Saint
Graal*, Vol. I. pp. 251 et seq., 315 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_191"></span>[123:2](frr12.htm#fr_191.md) Cf. A. Nutt, *Studies
in the Legend of the Holy Grail*, p. 209.

<span id="fn_192"></span>[124:1](frr12.htm#fr_192.md) Cf. Eisler, *The
Mystic Epitaph of Bishop Aberkios* (*The Quest*, Vol. V. pp. 302-312);
Scheftelowitz, *op. cit.* p. 8.

<span id="fn_193"></span>[125:1](frr12.htm#fr_193.md) Cf. *The Voyage of
Saint Brandan*, ll. 372, *et seq.*, 660 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_194"></span>[125:2](frr12.htm#fr_194.md) *Op. cit.* ll. 170
*et seq.*, and *supra*, [p. 119](#page_119.md).

<span id="fn_195"></span>[126:1](frr12.htm#fr_195.md) *Vide supra*, [p.
70](frr09.htm#page_70.md).

<span id="fn_196"></span>[126:2](frr12.htm#fr_196.md) *Op. cit.* p. 168.

<span id="fn_197"></span>[126:3](frr12.htm#fr_197.md) Cf. *The Messianic
Fish-meal*.

<span id="fn_198"></span>[126:4](frr12.htm#fr_198.md) *Op. cit.* p. 92,
fig. 42 *a*.

<span id="fn_199"></span>[127:1](frr12.htm#fr_199.md) *Op. cit.* p. 23, and
note, p. 29.

<span id="fn_200"></span>[127:2](frr12.htm#fr_200.md) *Parzival*, Bk. IX.
ll., 1109 et seq., Bk. XVI. ll. 175 et seq.

<span id="fn_201"></span>[127:3](frr12.htm#fr_201.md) Cf. *Sir Gawain at
the Grail Castle*, p. 55. Certain of the *Lancelot* MSS., e.g., B.N., f.
Fr. 123, give two doves.

<span id="fn_202"></span>[127:4](frr12.htm#fr_202.md) Cf. Scheftelowitz, p.
338. Haven, *Der Gral*, has argued that Wolfram's stone is such a
meteoric stone, a Boetylus. I am not prepared to take up any position as
to the exact nature of the stone itself, whether precious stone or
meteor; the real point of importance being its Life-giving potency.

<span id="fn_203"></span>[128:1](frr12.htm#fr_203.md) *Op. cit.* p. 381.

<span id="fn_204"></span>[128:2](frr12.htm#fr_204.md) *Ibid*. p. 376 *et
seq*.

<span id="fn_205"></span>[128:3](frr12.htm#fr_205.md) *Ibid*. p. 20.

<span id="fn_206"></span>[128:4](frr12.htm#fr_206.md) *Ibid*. p. 377.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X. The Secret of the Grail (1): The Mysteries](frr13.md)
