[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends/Sagas](../index.md) 
[Arthur](../eng/index.htm#arthurian)  [Index](index)  [Previous](frr13.md) 
[Next](frr15.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

# CHAPTER XI

### THE SECRET OF THE GRAIL (2)

### THE NAASSENE DOCUMENT

We have now seen that the Ritual which, as we have postulated, lies, in
a fragmentary and distorted condition, at the root of our existing Grail
romances, possessed elements capable of assimilation with a religious
system which the great bulk of its modern adherents would unhesitatingly
declare to be its very antithesis. That Christianity might have borrowed
from previously existing cults certain outward signs and symbols, might
have accommodated itself to already existing Fasts and Feasts, may be,
perforce has had to be, more or less grudgingly admitted; that such a
*rapprochement* should have gone further, that it should even have been
inherent in the very nature of the Faith, that, to some of the deepest
thinkers of old, Christianity should have been held for no new thing but
a fulfilment of the promise enshrined in the Mysteries from the
beginning of the world, will to many be a strange and startling thought.
Yet so it was, and I firmly believe that it is only in the recognition
of this one-time claim of essential kinship between Christianity and the
Pagan Mysteries that we shall find the key to the Secret of the Grail.

And here at the outset I would ask those readers who are inclined to
turn with feelings of contemptuous impatience from what they deem an
unprofitable discussion of idle speculations which have little or
nothing to do with a problem they hold to be one of purely literary
interest, to be

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

solved by literary comparison and criticism, and by no other method, to
withhold their verdict till they have carefully examined the evidence I
am about to bring forward, evidence which has never so far been examined
in this connection, but which if I am not greatly mistaken provides us
with clear and unmistakable proof of the actual existence of a ritual in
all points analogous to that indicated by the Grail romances.

In the previous chapter we have seen that there is evidence, and
abundant evidence, not merely of the existence of Mysteries connected
with the worship of Adonis-Attis, but of the high importance assigned to
such Mysteries; at the time of the birth of Christianity they were
undoubtedly the most popular and the most influential of the foreign
cults adopted by Imperial Rome. In support of this statement I quoted
certain passages from Cumont's *Religions Orientales*, in which he
touches on the subject: here are two other quotations which may well
serve as introduction to the evidence we are about to examine.
"Researches on the doctrines and practices common to Christianity and
the Oriental Mysteries almost invariably go back, beyond the limits of
the Roman Empire, to the Hellenized East. It is there we must seek the
key of enigmas still unsolved--The essential fact to remember is that
the Eastern religions had diffused, first anterior to, then parallel
with, Christianity, doctrines which acquired with this latter a
universal authority in the decline of the ancient world. The preaching
of Asiatic priests prepared in their own despite the triumph of the
Church <span id="fr_226"></span>[1](#fn_226.md)."

But the triumph of the new Faith once assured the organizing,
dominating, influence of Imperial Rome speedily came into play.
Christianity, originally an Eastern, became a Western, religion, the
'Mystery' elements were frowned upon, kinship with pre-Christian faiths
ignored, or denied;

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

where the resemblances between the cults proved too striking for either
of these methods such resemblances were boldly attributed to the
invention of the Father of Lies himself, a cunning snare whereby to
deceive unwary souls. Christianity was carefully trimmed, shaped, and
forced into an Orthodox mould, and anything that refused to adapt itself
to this drastic process became by that very refusal anathema to the
righteous.

Small wonder that, under such conditions, the early ages of the Church
were marked by a fruitful crop of Heresies, and heresy-hunting became an
intellectual pastime in high favour among the strictly orthodox. Among
the writers of this period whose works have been preserved Hippolytus,
Bishop of Portus in the early years of the third century, was one of the
most industrious. He compiled a voluminous treatise, entitled
*Philosophumena*, or *The Refutation of all Heresies*, of which only one
MS. and that of the fourteenth century, has descended to us. The work
was already partially known by quotations, the first Book had been
attributed to Origen, and published in the *editio princeps* of his
works. The text originally consisted of ten Books, but of these the
first three, and part of the fourth, are missing from the MS. The Origen
text supplies part of the lacuna, but two entire Books, and part of a
third are missing.

Now these special Books, we learn from the Introduction, dealt with the
doctrines and Mysteries of the Egyptians and Chaldaeans, whose most
sacred secrets Hippolytus boasts that he has divulged. Curiously enough,
not only are these Books lacking but in the Epitome at the beginning of
Book X. the summary of their contents is also missing, a significant
detail, which, as has been suggested by critics, looks like a deliberate
attempt on the part of some copyist to suppress the information
contained in the Books in question. Incidentally this would seem to
suggest that the

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

worthy bishop was not making an empty boast when he claimed to be a
revealer of secrets.

But what is of special interest to us is the treatment meted out to the
Christian Mystics, whom Hippolytus stigmatizes as heretics, and whose
teaching he deliberately asserts to be simply that of the Pagan
Mysteries. He had come into possession of a secret document belonging to
one of these sects, whom he calls the Naassenes; this document he gives
in full, and it certainly throws a most extraordinary light upon the
relation which this early Christian sect held to exist between the New,
and the Old, Faith. Mr G. R. S. Mead, in his translation of the Hermetic
writings entitled *Thrice-Greatest Hermes*, has given a careful
translation and detailed analysis of this most important text, and it is
from his work that I shall quote.

So far as the structure of the document is concerned Mr Mead
distinguishes three stages.

(*a*) An original Pagan source, possibly dating from the last half of
the first century B.C., but containing material of earlier date.

(*b*) The working over of this source by a Jewish Mystic whom the critic
holds to have been a contemporary of Philo.

(*c*) A subsequent working over, with additions, by a Christian Gnostic
(Naassene), in the middle of the second century A. D. Finally the text
was edited by Hippolytus, in the *Refutation*, about 222 A. D. Thus the
ground covered is roughly from 50 B. C. to 220 A. D. <span
id="fr_227"></span>[1](#fn_227.md)

In the translation given by Mr Mead these successive layers are
distinguished by initial letters and difference of type, but these
distinctions are not of importance for us; what we desire to know is
what was really held and taught by these mystics of the Early Church. Mr
Mead, in his

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

introductory remarks, summarizes the evidence as follows: "The claim of
these Gnostics was practically that Christianity, or rather the Good
News of The Christ, was precisely the consummation of the inner doctrine
of the Mystery-institutions of all the nations: the end of them all was
the revelation of the Mystery of Man <span
id="fr_228"></span>[1](#fn_228.md)." In other words the teaching of these
Naassenes was practically a synthesis of all the Mystery-religions, and
although Hippolytus regards them as nothing more than devotees of the
cult of the *Magna Mater*, we shall see that, while their doctrine and
teaching were undoubtedly based mainly upon the doctrine and practices
of the Phrygian Mysteries, they practically identified the deity therein
worshipped, *i.e.*, Attis, with the presiding deity of all the other
Mysteries.

Mr Mead draws attention to the fact that Hippolytus places these
Naassenes in the fore-front of his *Refutation*; they are the first
group of Heretics with whom he deals, and we may therefore conclude that
he considered them, if not the most important, at least the oldest, of
such sectaries <span id="fr_229"></span>[2](#fn_229.md).

With these prefatory remarks it will be well to let the document speak
for itself. It is of considerable length, and, as we have seen, of
intricate construction. I shall therefore quote only those sections
which bear directly upon the subject of our investigation; any reader
desirous of fuller information can refer to Mr Mead's work, or to the
original text published by Reitzenstein <span
id="fr_230"></span>[3](#fn_230.md).

At the outset it will be well to understand that the central doctrine of
all these Mysteries is what Reitzenstein sums up as "the doctrine of the
Man, the Heavenly Man, the Son of God, who descends and becomes a slave
of the Fate

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Sphere: the Man who, though originally endowed
with all power, descends into weakness and bondage, and has to win his
own freedom, and regain his original state. This doctrine is not
Egyptian, but seems to have been in its origin part and parcel of the
Chaldean Mystery-tradition and was widely spread in Hellenistic
circles <span id="fr_231"></span>[1](#fn_231.md)."

Thus, in the introductory remarks prefixed by Hippolytus to the document
he is quoting he asserts that the Naassenes honour as the Logos of all
universals Man, and Son of Man--"and they divide him into three, for
they say he has a mental, psychic, and choïc aspect; and they think that
the Gnosis of this Man is the beginning of the possibility of knowing
God, saying, 'The beginning of Perfection is the Gnosis of Man, but the
Gnosis of God is perfected Perfection.' All these, mental, psychic, and
earthy, descended together into one Man, Jesus, the Son of Mary <span
id="fr_232"></span>[2](#fn_232.md)."

Thus the *Myth of Man*, the Mystery of Generation, is the subject matter
of the document in question, and this myth is set forth with reference
to all the Mysteries, beginning with the Assyrian.

Paragraph 5 runs: "Now the Assyrians call this Mystery Adonis, and
whenever it is called Adonis it is Aphrodite who is in love with and
desires Soul so-called, and Aphrodite is Genesis according to them <span
id="fr_233"></span>[3](#fn_233.md)."

But in the next section the writer jumps from the Assyrian to the
Phrygian Mysteries, saying, "But if the Mother of the Gods emasculates
Attis, she too regarding him as the object of her love, it is the
Blessed Nature above of the super-Cosmic, and Aeonian spaces which calls
back the masculine power of Soul to herself <span
id="fr_234"></span>[4](#fn_234.md)."

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

In a note to this Mr Mead quotes from *The Life of Isidorus*: "I fell
asleep and in a vision Attis seemed to appear to me, and on behalf of
the Mother of gods to initiate me into the feast called Hilario, a
mystery which discloses the way of our salvation from Hades." Throughout
the document reference is continually made to the Phrygians and their
doctrine of Man. The Eleusinian Mysteries are then treated of as
subsequent to the Phrygian, "after the Phrygians, the Athenians," but
the teaching is represented as being essentially identical.

We have then a passage of great interest for our investigation, in which
the Mysteries are sharply divided into two classes, and their separate
content clearly defined. There are--"the little Mysteries, those of the
Fleshly Generation, and after men have been initiated into them they
should cease for a while and become initiated in the Great, Heavenly,
Mysteries--for this is the Gate of Heaven, and this is the House of God,
where the Good God dwells alone, into which House no impure man shall
come <span id="fr_235"></span>[1](#fn_235.md)." Hippolytus remarks that
"these Naassenes say that the performers in theatres, they too, neither
say nor do anything without design--for example, when the people
assemble in the theatre, and a man comes on the stage clad in a robe
different from all others, with lute in hand on which he plays, and thus
chants the Great Mysteries, not knowing what he says:

'Whether blest Child of Kronos, or of Zeus, or of Great Rhea,  
Hail Attis, thou mournful song of Rhea!  
Assyrians call thee thrice-longed-for Adonis;  
All Egypt calls thee Osiris;  
The Wisdom of Hellas names thee Men's Heavenly Horn;  
The Samothracians call thee august Adama;  
The Haemonians, Korybas; <span id="page_148">p. 148</span>  
The Phrygians name thee Papa sometimes;  
At times again Dead, or God, or Unfruitful, or Aipolos;  
Or Green Reaped Wheat-ear;  
Or the Fruitful that Amygdalas brought forth,  
Man, Piper--Attis!'

This is the Attis of many forms, of whom they sing as follows:

'Of Attis will I sing, of Rhea's Beloved,  
Not with the booming of bells,  
Nor with the deep-toned pipe of Idaean Kuretes;  
But I will blend my song with Phoebus' music of the lyre;  
Evoi, Evan,--for thou art Pan, thou Bacchus art, and Shepherd of bright
stars <span id="fr_236"></span>[1](#fn_236.md)!'"

On this Hippolytus comments: "For these and suchlike reasons these
Naassenes frequent what are called the Mysteries of the Great Mother,
believing that they obtain the clearest view of the universal Mystery
from the things done in them."

And after all this evidence of elaborate syncretism, this practical
identification of all the Mystery-gods with the Vegetation deity
Adonis-Attis, we are confronted in the concluding paragraph, after
stating that "the True Gate is Jesus the Blessed," with this astounding
claim, from the pen of the latest redactor, "And of all men we alone are
Christians, accomplishing the Mystery at the Third Gate <span
id="fr_237"></span>[2](#fn_237.md)."

Now what conclusions are to be drawn from this document which, in its
entirety, Mr Mead regards as "the most

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

important source we have for the higher side (regeneration) of the
Hellenistic Mysteries"?

First of all, does it not provide a complete and overwhelming
justification of those scholars who have insisted upon the importance of
these Vegetation cults--a justification of which, from the very nature
of their studies, they could not have been aware?

Sir James Frazer, and those who followed him, have dealt with the public
side of the cult, with its importance as a recognized vehicle for
obtaining material advantages; it was the social, rather than the
individual, aspect which appealed to them. Now we find that in the
immediate *pre*- and *post*-Christian era these cults were considered
not only most potent factors for assuring the material prosperity of
land and folk, but were also held to be the most appropriate vehicle for
imparting the highest religious teaching. The Vegetation deities,
Adonis-Attis, and more especially the Phrygian god, were the chosen
guides to the knowledge of, and union with, the supreme Spiritual Source
of Life, of which they were the communicating medium.

We must remember that though the document before us is, in its actual
form, the expression of faith of a discredited 'Christian-Gnostic' sect,
the essential groundwork upon which it is elaborated belongs to a period
anterior to Christianity, and that the Ode in honour of Attis quoted
above not only forms part of the original source, but is, in the opinion
of competent critics, earlier than the source itself.

I would also recall to the memory of the reader the passage previously
quoted from Cumont, in which he refers to the use made by the
Neo-Platonist philosophers of the Attis legend, as the mould into which
they poured their special theories of the universe, and of
generation <span id="fr_238"></span>[1](#fn_238.md). Can the

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

importance of a cult capable of such far-reaching developments be easily
exaggerated? Secondly, and of more immediate importance for our
investigation, is it not evident that we have here all the elements
necessary for a mystical development of the Grail tradition? The
Exoteric side of the cult gives us the Human, the Folk-lore,
elements--the Suffering King; the Waste Land; the effect upon the Folk;
the task that lies before the hero; the group of Grail symbols. The
Esoteric side provides us with the Mystic Meal, the Food of Life,
connected in some mysterious way with a Vessel which is the centre of
the cult; the combination of that vessel with a Weapon, a combination
bearing a well-known 'generative' significance; a double initiation into
the source of the lower and higher spheres of Life; the ultimate proof
of the successful issue of the final test in the restoration of the
King. I would ask any honest-minded critic whether any of the numerous
theories previously advanced has shown itself capable of furnishing so
comprehensive a solution of the ensemble problem?

At the same time it should be pointed out that the acceptance of this
theory of the origin of the story in no way excludes the possibility of
the introduction of other elements during the period of romantic
evolution. As I have previously insisted <span
id="fr_239"></span>[1](#fn_239.md), not all of those who handled the theme
knew the real character of the material with which they were dealing,
while even among those who did know there were some who allowed
themselves considerable latitude in their methods of composition; who
did not scruple to introduce elements foreign to the original *Stoff*,
but which would make an appeal to the public of the day. Thus while
Bleheris who, I believe, really held a tradition of the original cult,
contented himself with a practically simple

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

recital of the initiations, later redactors, under the influence of the
Crusades, and the Longinus legend--possibly also actuated by a desire to
substitute a more edifying explanation than that originally
offered--added a directly Christian interpretation of the Lance. As it
is concerning the Lance alone that Gawain asks, the first modification
must have been at this point; the bringing into line of the twin symbol,
the Vase, would come later.

The fellowship, it may even be, the rivalry, between the two great
Benedictine houses of Fescamp and Glastonbury, led to the redaction, in
the interests of the latter, of a *Saint-Sang* legend, parallel to that
which was the genuine possession of the French house <span
id="fr_240"></span>[1](#fn_240.md). For we must emphasize the fact that the
original Joseph-Glastonbury story is a *Saint-Sang*, and not a *Grail*
legend. A phial containing the Blood of Our Lord was said to have been
buried in the tomb of Joseph--surely a curious fate for so precious a
relic--and the Abbey never laid claim to the possession of the Vessel of
the Last Supper <span id="fr_241"></span>[2](#fn_241.md). Had it done so it
would certainly have become a noted centre of pilgrimage--as Dr Brugger
acutely remarks such relics are *besucht*, not *gesucht*.

But there is reason to believe that the kindred Abbey of Fescamp had
developed its genuine *Saint-Sang* legend into a Grail romance, and
there is critical evidence to lead us to suppose that the text we know
as *Perlesvaus* was, in its original form, now it is to be feared
practically impossible to reconstruct, connected with that Abbey. As we
have it, this alone, of all the Grail romances, connects the hero alike
with Nicodemus, and with Joseph of Arimathea, the respective
protagonists of the *Saint-Sang* legends; while its assertion that the
original Latin text was found in a holy

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

house situated in marshes, the burial place of Arthur and Guenevere,
unmistakably points to Glastonbury.

In any case, when Robert de Borron proposed to himself the task of
composing a trilogy on the subject the Joseph legend was already in a
developed form, and a fresh element, the combination of the Grail legend
with the story of a highly popular Folk-tale hero, known in this
connection as Perceval (though he has had many names), was established.

Borron was certainly aware of the real character of his material; he
knew the Grail cult as Christianized Mystery, and, while following the
romance development, handled the theme on distinctively religious lines,
preserving the Mystery element in its three-fold development, and
equating the Vessel of the Mystic Feast with the Christian Eucharist.
From what we now know of the material it seems certain that the equation
was already established, and that Borron was simply stating in terms of
romance what was already known to him in terms of Mystery. In face of
the evidence above set forth there can no longer be any doubt that the
Mystic Feast of the Nature cults really had, and that at a very early
date, been brought into touch with the Sacrament of the Eucharist.

But to Chrétien de Troyes the story was romance, pure and simple. There
was still a certain element of awe connected with Grail, and Grail
Feast, but of the real meaning and origin of the incidents he had, I am
convinced, no idea whatever. Probably many modifications were already in
his source, but the result so far as his poem is concerned is that he
duplicated the character of the Fisher King; he separated both, Father
and Son, from the Wasted Land, transferring the responsibility for the
woes of Land and Folk to the Quester, who, although his failure might be
responsible for their continuance, never had anything to do with their
origin. He bestowed the wound of the Grail King, deeply

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

significant in its original conception and connection, upon Perceval's
father, a shadowy character, entirely apart from the Grail tradition.
There is no trace of the Initiation elements in his poem, no Perilous
Chapel, no welding of the Sword. We have here passed completely and
entirely into the land of romance, the doors of the Temple are closed
behind us. It is the story of Perceval li Gallois, not the Ritual of the
Grail, which fills the stage, and with the story of Perceval there comes
upon the scene a crowd of Folk-tale themes, absolutely foreign to the
Grail itself.

Thus we have not only the central theme of the lad reared in woodland
solitude, making his entrance into a world of whose ordinary relations
he is absolutely and ludicrously ignorant, and the traditional
illustrations of the results of that ignorance, such as the story of the
Lady of the Tent and the stolen ring; but we have also the sinister
figure of the Red Knight with his Witch Mother; the three drops of blood
upon the snow, and the ensuing love trance; pure Folk-tale themes,
mingled with the more chivalric elements of the rescue of a distressed
maiden, and the vanquishing in single combat of doughty antagonists,
Giant, or Saracen. One and all of them elements offering widespread
popular parallels, and inviting the unwary critic into paths which lead
him far astray from the goal of his quest, the Grail Castle. I dispute
in no way the possible presence of Celtic elements in this complex. The
Lance may well have borrowed at one time features from early Irish
tradition, at another details obviously closely related to the Longinus
legend. It is even possible that, as Burdach insists, features of the
Byzantine Liturgy may have coloured the representation of the Grail
procession, although, for my own part, I consider such a theory highly
improbable in view of the facts that (*a*) Chrétien's poem otherwise
shows no traces of Oriental influence; (*b*) the 'Spear' in the Eastern
rite is

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

simply a small spear-shaped knife; (*c*) the presence of the lights is
accounted for by the author of *Sone de Nansai* on the ground of a
Nativity legend, the authenticity of which was pointed out by the late
M. Gaston Paris; (*d*) it is only in the later prose form that we find
any suggestion of a Grail Chapel, whereas were the source of the story
really to be found in the Mass, such a feature would certainly have had
its place in the earliest versions. But in each and all these cases the
solution proposed has no relation to other features of the story; it is
consequently of value in, and *per se*, only, and cannot be regarded as
valid evidence for the source of the legend as a whole. In the process
of transmutation from Ritual to Romance, the kernel, the Grail legend
proper, may be said to have formed for itself a shell composed of
accretions of widely differing *provenance*. It is the legitimate task
of criticism to analyse such accretions, and to resolve them into their
original elements, but they are accretions, and should be treated as
such, not confounded with the original and essential material. After
upwards of thirty years spent in careful study of the Grail legend and
romances I am firmly and entirely convinced that the root origin of the
whole bewildering complex is to be found in the Vegetation Ritual,
treated from the esoteric point of view as a Life-Cult, and *in that
alone*. Christian Legend, and traditional Folk-tale, have undoubtedly
contributed to the perfected romantic *corpus*, but they are in truth
subsidiary and secondary features; a criticism that would treat them as
original and primary can but defeat its own object; magnified out of
proportion they become stumbling-blocks upon the path, instead of
sign-posts towards the goal.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_226"></span>[142:1](frr14.htm#fr_226.md) Cumont, *op. cit.*
Introd. pp. xx and xxi.

<span id="fn_227"></span>[144:1](frr14.htm#fr_227.md) *Thrice-Greatest
Hermes*, Vol. I, p. 195.

<span id="fn_228"></span>[145:1](frr14.htm#fr_228.md) *Op. cit.* p. 141.

<span id="fn_229"></span>[145:2](frr14.htm#fr_229.md) *Op. cit.* p. 142.

<span id="fn_230"></span>[145:3](frr14.htm#fr_230.md) *Op. cit.* pp. 146
*et seq*. Reitzenstein, *Die Hellenistischen Mysterien Religionen*,
Leipzig, 1910, gives the document in the original. There is also a
translation of Hippolytus in the *Ante-Nicene Library*.

<span id="fn_231"></span>[146:1](frr14.htm#fr_231.md) Quoted by Mead, *op.
cit.* p. 138.

<span id="fn_232"></span>[146:2](frr14.htm#fr_232.md) *Op. cit.* pp. 146,
147.

<span id="fn_233"></span>[146:3](frr14.htm#fr_233.md) *Op. cit.* p. 151.

<span id="fn_234"></span>[146:4](frr14.htm#fr_234.md) *Op. cit.* p. 152. Mr
Mead concludes that there is here a lacuna of the original.

<span id="fn_235"></span>[147:1](frr14.htm#fr_235.md) *Op. cit.* p. 181. In
a note Mr Mead says of the Greater Mysteries, "presumably the candidate
went through some symbolic rite of death and resurrection."

<span id="fn_236"></span>[148:1](frr14.htm#fr_236.md) *Op. cit.* pp. 185,
186. I would draw especial attention to this passage in view of the
present controversy as to the Origin of Drama. It looks as if the
original writer of the document (and this section is in the Pagan
Source) would have inclined to the views of Sir Gilbert Murray, Miss
Harrison, and Mr Cornford rather than to those championed by their
sarcastic critic, Sir W. Ridgeway.

<span id="fn_237"></span>[148:2](frr14.htm#fr_237.md) *Op. cit.* p. 190.

<span id="fn_238"></span>[149:1](frr14.htm#fr_238.md) *Vide supra*, [p.
137](frr13.htm#page_137.md).

<span id="fn_239"></span>[150:1](frr14.htm#fr_239.md) Cf. *Legend of Sir
Perceval*, Vol. II. Chapters 10 and 11.

<span id="fn_240"></span>[151:1](frr14.htm#fr_240.md) Cf. my *Quest of the
Holy Grail*, Bell, 1913, Chap. 4, for summary of evidence on this point.

<span id="fn_241"></span>[151:2](frr14.htm#fr_241.md) Cf. Heinzel,
*Alt-Franz. Gral-Romanen*, p. 72.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII. Mithra and Attis](frr15.md)
