[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends/Sagas](../index) 
[Arthur](../eng/index.htm#arthurian)  [Index](index)  [Previous](frr15) 
[Next](frr17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

# CHAPTER XIII

### THE PERILOUS CHAPEL

Students of the Grail romances will remember that in many of the
versions the hero--sometimes it is a heroine--meets with a strange and
terrifying adventure in a mysterious Chapel, an adventure which, we are
given to understand, is fraught with extreme peril to life. The details
vary: sometimes there is a Dead Body laid on the altar; sometimes a
Black Hand extinguishes the tapers; there are strange and threatening
voices, and the general impression is that this is an adventure in which
supernatural, and evil, forces are engaged.

Such an adventure befalls Gawain on his way to the Grail Castle <span
id="fr_260"></span>[1](#fn_260). He is overtaken by a terrible storm,
and coming to a Chapel, standing at a crossways in the middle of a
forest, enters for shelter. The altar is bare, with no cloth, or
covering, nothing is thereon but a great golden candlestick with a tall
taper burning within it. Behind the altar is a window, and as Gawain
looks a Hand, black and hideous, comes through the window, and
extinguishes the taper, while a voice makes lamentation loud and dire,
beneath which the very building rocks. Gawain's horse shies for terror,
and the knight, making the sign of the Cross, rides out of the Chapel,
to find the storm abated, and the great wind fallen. Thereafter the
night was calm and clear.

In the *Perceval* section of Wauchier and Manessier we find the same
adventure in a dislocated form <span id="fr_261"></span>[2](#fn_261).

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

Perceval, seeking the Grail Castle, rides all day through a heavy storm,
which passes off at night-fall, leaving the weather calm and clear. He
rides by moonlight through the forest, till he sees before him a great
oak, on the branches of which are lighted candles, ten, fifteen, twenty,
or twenty-five. The knight rides quickly towards it, but as he comes
near the lights vanish, and he only sees before him a fair little
Chapel, with a candle shining through the open door. He enters, and
finds on the altar the body of a dead knight, covered with a rich
samite, a candle burning at his feet.

Perceval remains some time, but nothing happens. At midnight he departs;
scarcely has he left the Chapel when, to his great surprise, the light
is extinguished.

The next day he reaches the castle of the Fisher King, who asks him
where he passed the preceding night. Perceval tells him of the Chapel;
the King sighs deeply, but makes no comment.

Wauchier's section breaks off abruptly in the middle of this episode;
when Manessier takes up the story he gives explanations of the Grail,
etc., at great length, explanations which do not at all agree with the
indications of his predecessor. When Perceval asks of the Chapel he is
told it was built by Queen Brangemore of Cornwall, who was later
murdered by her son Espinogres, and buried beneath the altar. Many
knights have since been slain there, none know by whom, save it be by
the Black Hand which appeared and put out the light. (As we saw above it
had not appeared.) The enchantment can only be put an end to if a
valiant knight will fight the Black Hand, and, taking a veil kept in the
Chapel, will dip it in holy water, and sprinkle the walls, after which
the enchantment will cease.

At a much later point Manessier tells how Perceval, riding through the
forest, is overtaken by a terrible storm. He takes refuge in a Chapel
which he recognizes as that of

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

the Black Hand. The Hand appears, Perceval fights against and wounds it;
then appears a Head; finally the Devil in full form who seizes Perceval
as he is about to seek the veil of which he has been told. Perceval
makes the sign of the Cross, on which the Devil vanishes, and the knight
falls insensible before the altar. On reviving he takes the veil, dips
it in holy water, and sprinkles the walls within and without. He sleeps
there that night, and the next morning, on waking, sees a belfry. He
rings the bell, upon which an old man, followed by two others, appears.
He tells Perceval he is a priest, and has buried 3000 knights slain by
the Black Hand; every day a knight has been slain, and every day a
marble tomb stands ready with the name of the victim upon it. Queen
Brangemore founded the cemetery, and was the first to be buried within
it. (But according to the version given earlier she was buried beneath
the altar.) We have here evidently a combination of two themes, Perilous
Chapel and Perilous Cemetery, originally independent of each other. In
other MSS. the Wauchier adventure agrees much more closely with the
Manessier sequel, the Hand appearing, and extinguishing the light.
Sometimes the Hand holds a bridle, a feature probably due to
contamination with a Celtic Folk-tale, in which a mysterious Hand (here
that of a giant) steals on their birth-night a Child, and a foal <span
id="fr_262"></span>[1](#fn_262). These *Perceval* versions are
manifestly confused and dislocated, and are probably drawn from more
than one source.

In the *Queste* Gawain and Hector de Maris come to an old and ruined
Chapel where they pass the night. Each has a marvellous dream. The next
morning, as they are telling each other their respective visions, they
see, "a Hand, showing unto the elbow, and was covered with red samite,
and upon that hung a bridle, not rich, and held within the

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

fist a great candle that burnt right clear, and so passed afore them,
and entered into the Chapel, and then vanished away, and they wist not
where <span id="fr_263"></span>[1](#fn_263)." This seems to be an
unintelligent borrowing from the *Perceval* version.

We have, also, a group of visits to the Perilous Chapel, or Perilous
Cemetery, which appear to be closely connected with each other. In each
case the object of the visit is to obtain a portion of the cloth which
covers the altar, or a dead body lying upon the altar. The romances in
question are the *Perlesvaus*, the prose *Lancelot*, and the *Chevalier
à deux Espées* <span id="fr_264"></span>[2](#fn_264). The respective
protagonists being Perceval's sister, Sir Lancelot, and the young Queen
of Garadigan, whose city has been taken by King Ris and who dares the
venture to win her freedom.

In the first case the peril appears to lie in the Cemetery, which is
surrounded by the ghosts of knights slain in the forest, and buried in
unconsecrated ground. The *Lancelot* version is similar, but here the
title is definitely *Perilous Chapel*. In the last version there is no
hint of a Cemetery.

In the *Lancelot* version there is a dead knight on the altar, whose
sword Lancelot takes in addition to the piece of cloth. In the poem a
knight is brought in, and buried before the altar; the young queen,
after cutting off a piece of the altar cloth, uncovers the body, and
buckles on the sword. There is no mention of a Hand in any of the three
versions, which appear to be late and emasculated forms of the theme.

The earliest mention of a Perilous Cemetery, as distinct from a Chapel,
appears to be in the Chastel Orguellous section of the *Perceval*, a
section probably derived from a very early stratum of Arthurian romantic
tradition. Here

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Arthur and his knights, on their way to the
siege of Chastel Orguellous, come to the *Vergier des Sepoltures*, where
they eat with the Hermits, of whom there are a hundred and more.

"ne me l'oïst or pas chi dire  
Les merveilles del chimetire  
car si sont diverses et grans  
qu'il n'est hom terriens vivans  
qui poist pas quidier ne croire  
que ce fust onques chose voire <span id="fr_265"></span>[1](#fn_265)."

But there is no hint of a Perilous Chapel here.

The adventures of Gawain in the *Atre Perilleus* <span
id="fr_266"></span>[2](#fn_266), and of Gawain and Hector in the
*Lancelot* of the final cyclic prose version, are of the most *banal*
description; the theme, originally vivid and picturesque, has become
watered down into a meaningless adventure of the most conventional type.

But originally a high importance seems to have been attached to it. If
we turn back to the first version given, that of which Gawain is the
hero, we shall find that special stress is laid on this adventure, as
being part of 'the Secret of the Grail,' of which no man may speak
without grave danger <span id="fr_267"></span>[3](#fn_267). We are told
that, but for Gawain's loyalty and courtesy, he would not have survived
the perils of that night. In the same way Perceval, before reaching the
Fisher King's castle, meets a maiden, of whom he asks the meaning of the
lighted tree, Chapel, etc. She tells him it is all part of the *saint
secret* of the Grail <span id="fr_268"></span>[4](#fn_268). Now what
does this mean? Unless I am much mistaken the key is to be found in a
very curious story related in the *Perlesvaus*, which is twice referred
to in texts of a professedly historical

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

character. The tale runs thus. King Arthur has fallen into slothful and
*fainéant* ways, much to the grief of Guenevere, who sees her lord's
fame and prestige waning day by day. In this crisis she urges him to
visit the Chapel of Saint Austin, a perilous adventure, but one that may
well restore his reputation. Arthur agrees; he will take with him only
one squire; the place is too dangerous. He calls a youth named Chaus,
the son of Yvain the Bastard, and bids him be ready to ride with him at
dawn. The lad, fearful of over-sleeping, does not undress, but lies down
as he is in the hall. He falls asleep--and it seems to him that the King
has wakened and gone without him. He rises in haste, mounts and rides
after Arthur, following, as he thinks, the track of his steed. Thus he
comes to a forest glade, where he sees a Chapel, set in the midst of a
grave-yard. He enters, but the King is not there; there is no living
thing, only the body of a knight on a bier, with tapers burning in
golden candlesticks at head and foot. Chaus takes out one of the tapers,
and thrusting the golden candlestick betwixt hose and thigh, remounts
and rides back in search of the King. Before he has gone far he meets a
man, black, and foul-favoured, armed with a large two-edged knife. He
asks, has he met King Arthur? The man answers, No, but he has met him,
Chaus; he is a thief and a traitor; he has stolen the golden
candlestick; unless he gives it up he shall pay for it dearly. Chaus
refuses, and the man smites him in the side with the knife. With a loud
cry the lad awakes, he is lying in the hall at Cardoil, wounded to
death, the knife in his side and the golden candlestick still in his
hose.

He lives long enough to tell the story, confess, and be shriven, and
then dies. Arthur, with the consent of his father, gives the candlestick
to the church of Saint Paul, then newly founded, "for he would that this
marvellous

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

adventure should everywhere be known, and that prayer should be made for
the soul of the squire <span id="fr_269"></span>[1](#fn_269)."

The pious wish of the King seems to have been fulfilled, as the story
was certainly well known, and appears to have been accepted as a genuine
tradition. Thus the author of the *Histoire de Fulk Fitz-Warin* gives a
*résumé* of the adventure, and asserts that the Chapel of Saint Austin
referred to was situated in Fulk's patrimony, *i.e.*, in the tract known
as the Blaunche Launde, situated in Shropshire, on the border of North
Wales. As source for the tale he refers to *Le Graal, le lyvre de le
Seint Vassal*, and goes on to state that here King Arthur recovered *sa
bounté et sa valur* when he had lost his knighthood and fame. This
obviously refers to the *Perlesvaus* romance, though whether in its
present, or in an earlier form, it is impossible to say. In any case the
author of the *Histoire* evidently thought that the Chapel in question
really existed, and was to be located in Shropshire <span
id="fr_270"></span>[2](#fn_270). But John of Glastonbury also refers to
the story, and he connects it with Glastonbury <span
id="fr_271"></span>[3](#fn_271).

Now how can we account for so wild, and at first sight so improbable, a
tale assuming what we may term a semi-historical character, and becoming
connected with a definite and precise locality?--a feature which is, as
a rule, absent from the Grail stories.

At the risk of startling my readers I must express my opinion that it
was because the incidents recorded were a reminiscence of something
which had actually happened, and which, owing to the youth, and possible
social position, of the victim, had made a profound impression upon the
popular imagination.

For this is the story of an initiation (or perhaps it would

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

be more correct to say the test of fitness for an initiation) *carried
out on the astral plane, and reacting with fatal results upon the
physical*.

We have already seen in the Naassene document that the Mystery ritual
comprised a double initiation, the Lower, into the mysteries of
generation, *i.e.*, of physical Life; the higher, into the Spiritual
Divine Life, where man is made one with God <span
id="fr_272"></span>[1](#fn_272).

Some years ago I offered the suggestion that the test for the primary
initiation, that into the sources of physical life, would probably
consist in a contact with the horrors of physical death, and that the
tradition of the Perilous Chapel, which survives in the Grail romances
in confused and contaminated form, was a reminiscence of the test for
this lower initiation <span id="fr_273"></span>[2](#fn_273). This would
fully account for the importance ascribed to it in the *Bleheris-Gawain*
form, and for the asserted connection with the Grail. It was not till I
came to study the version of the *Perlesvaus*, with a view to
determining its original *provenance*, that I recognized its extreme
importance for critical purposes. The more one studies this wonderful
legend the more one discovers significance in what seem at first to be
entirely independent and unrelated details. If the reader will refer to
my Notes on the *Perlesvaus*, above referred to, he will find that the
result of an investigation into the evidence for *locale* pointed to the
conclusion that the author of the *Histoire de Fulk Fitz-Warin* and most
probably also the author of the *Perlesvaus* before him, were mistaken
in their identification, that there

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

was no tradition of any such Chapel in Shropshire, and consequently no
tale of its foundation, such as the author of the *Histoire* relates.
But I was also able to show that further north, in Northumberland, there
was also a Blanchland, connected with the memory of King Arthur,
numerous dedications to Saint Austin, and a tradition of that Saint
driving out the local demons closely analogous to the tale told of the
presumed Shropshire site. I therefore suggested that inasmuch as the
*Perlesvaus* represented Arthur as holding his court at Cardoil
(Carlisle), the Northern Blanchland, which possessed a Chapel of Saint
Austin, and lay within easy reach, was probably the original site rather
than the Shropshire Blaunche Launde, which had no Chapel, and was much
further away.

Now in view of the evidence set forth in the last chapter, is it not
clear that this was a locality in which these semi-Pagan,
semi-Christian, rites, might, *prima facie*, be expected to linger on?
It is up here, along the Northern border, that the Roman legionaries
were stationed; it is here that we find monuments and memorials of their
heathen cults; obviously this was a locality where the demon-hunting
activities of the Saint might find full scope for action. I would submit
that there is at least presumptive evidence that we may here be dealing
with the survival of a genuine tradition.

And should any of my readers find it difficult to believe that, even did
initiations take place, and even were they of a character that involved
a stern test of mental and physical endurance--and I imagine most
scholars would admit that there was, possibly, more in the original
institutions, than, let us say, in a modern admission to
Free-Masonry--yet it is 'a far cry' from pre-Christian initiations to
Medieval Romance, and a connection between the two is a rash postulate,
I would draw their attention to the fact that,

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

quite apart from our Grail texts, we possess a romance which is,
plainly, and blatantly, nothing more or less than such a record. I
refer, of course, to *Owain Miles*, or *The Purgatory of Saint Patrick*,
where we have an account of the hero, after purification by fasting and
prayer, descending into the Nether World, passing through the abodes of
the Lost, finally reaching Paradise, and returning to earth after Three
Days, a reformed and regenerated character <span
id="fr_274"></span>[1](#fn_274).

"*Then with his monks the Prior anon,  
With Crosses and with Gonfanon  
Went to that hole forthright,  
Thro' which Knight Owain went below,  
There, as of burning fire the glow,  
They saw a gleam of light;  
And right amidst that beam of light  
He came up, Owain, God's own knight,  
By this knew every man  
That he in Paradise had been,  
And Purgatory's pains had seen,  
And was a holy man*."

Now if we turn to Bousset's article *Himmelfahrt der Seele*, to which I
have previously referred ([p. 157](frr15.htm#page_157)), we shall find
abundant evidence that such a journey to the Worlds beyond was held to
be a high spiritual adventure of actual possibility--a venture to be
undertaken by those who, greatly daring, felt that the attainment of
actual knowledge of the Future Life was worth all the risks, and they
were great and terrible, which such an enterprise involved.

Bousset comments fully on Saint Paul's claim to have been 'caught up
into the Third Heaven' and points out

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

that such an experience was the property of the Rabbinical school to
which Saul of Tarsus had belonged, and was brought over by him from his
Jewish past; such experiences were rare in Orthodox Christianity <span
id="fr_275"></span>[1](#fn_275). According to Jewish classical tradition
but one Rabbi had successfully passed the test, other aspirants either
failing at a preliminary stage, or, if they persevered, losing their
senses permanently. The practice of this ecstatic ascent ceased among
Jews in the second century A.D.

Bousset also gives instances of the soul leaving the body for three
days, and wandering through other worlds, both good and evil, and also
discusses the origin of the bridge which must be crossed to reach
Paradise, both features characteristic of the *Owain* poem <span
id="fr_276"></span>[2](#fn_276). In fact the whole study is of immense
importance for a critical analysis of the sources of the romance in
question.

And here I would venture to beg the adherents of the 'Celtic' school to
use a little more judgment in their attribution of sources. Visits to
the Otherworld are not always derivations from Celtic Fairy-lore. Unless
I am mistaken the root of this theme is far more deeply imbedded than in
the shifting sands of Folk and Fairy tale. I believe it to be
essentially a Mystery tradition; the Otherworld is not a myth, but a
reality, and in all ages there have been souls who have been willing to
brave the great adventure, and to risk all for the chance of bringing
back with them some assurance of the future life. Naturally these
ventures passed into tradition with the men who risked them. The early
races of men became semi-mythic, their beliefs, their experiences,
receded into a land of mist, where their figures assumed fantastic
outlines, and the record of their deeds departed more and more widely
from historic accuracy.

The poets and dreamers wove their magic webs, and a

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

world apart from the world of actual experience came to life. But it was
not all myth, nor all fantasy; there was a basis of truth and reality at
the foundation of the mystic growth, and a true criticism will not rest
content with wandering in these enchanted lands, and holding all it
meets with for the outcome of human imagination.

The truth may lie very deep down, but it is there, and it is worth
seeking, and Celtic fairy-tales, charming as they are, can never afford
a satisfactory, or abiding, resting place. I, for one, utterly refuse to
accept such as an adequate goal for a life's research. A path that leads
but into a Celtic Twilight can only be a by-path, and not the King's
Highway!

The Grail romances repose eventually, not upon a poet's imagination, but
upon the ruins of an august and ancient ritual, a ritual which once
claimed to be the accredited guardian of the deepest secrets of Life.
Driven from its high estate by the relentless force of religious
evolution--for after all Adonis, Attis, and their congeners, were but
the 'half-gods' who must needs yield place when 'the Gods' themselves
arrive--it yet lingered on; openly, in Folk practice, in Fast and Feast,
whereby the well-being of the land might be assured; secretly, in cave
or mountain-fastness, or island isolation, where those who craved for a
more sensible (not necessarily sensuous) contact with the unseen
Spiritual forces of Life than the orthodox development of Christianity
afforded, might, and did, find satisfaction.

Were the Templars such? Had they, when in the East, come into touch with
a survival of the Naassene, or some kindred sect? It seems exceedingly
probable. If it were so we could understand at once the puzzling
connection of the Order with the Knights of the Grail, and the doom
which fell upon them. That they were held to be Heretics

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

is very generally admitted, but in what their Heresy consisted no one
really knows; little credence can be attached to the stories of idol
worship often repeated. If their Heresy, however, were such as indicated
above, a Creed which struck at the very root and vitals of Christianity,
we can understand at once the reason for punishment, and the necessity
for secrecy. In the same way we can now understand why the Church knows
nothing of the Grail; why that Vessel, surrounded as it is with an
atmosphere of reverence and awe, equated with the central Sacrament of
the Christian Faith, yet appears in no Legendary, is figured in no
picture, comes on the scene in no Passion Play. The Church of the
eleventh and twelfth centuries knew well what the Grail was, and we,
when we realize its genesis and true lineage, need no longer wonder why
a theme, for some short space so famous and so fruitful a source of
literary inspiration, vanished utterly and completely from the world of
literature.

Were Grail romances forbidden? Or were they merely discouraged? Probably
we shall never know, but of this one thing we may be sure, the Grail is
a living force, it will never die; it may indeed sink out of sight, and,
for centuries even, disappear from the field of literature, but it will
rise to the surface again, and become once more a theme of vital
inspiration even as, after slumbering from the days of Malory, it woke
to new life in the nineteenth century, making its fresh appeal through
the genius of Tennyson and Wagner.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_260"></span>[165:1](frr16.htm#fr_260) MS B.N. 12576, ff.
87*vo* et seq. A translation will be found in my *Sir Gawain at the
Grail Castle*, pp. 13-15.

<span id="fn_261"></span>[165:2](frr16.htm#fr_261) MS B.N. 12576, ff.
150*vo*, 222, 238*vo*.

<span id="fn_262"></span>[167:1](frr16.htm#fr_262) Cf. here Prof.
Kittredge's monograph *Arthur and Gorlagon*.

<span id="fn_263"></span>[168:1](frr16.htm#fr_263) Cf. Malory, Book XVI.
Chap. 2.

<span id="fn_264"></span>[168:2](frr16.htm#fr_264) Cf. Perlesvaus,
Branch XV. sections XII.-XX.; Malory, Book VI. Chap. 15; *Chevalier à
deux Espées*, ll. 531 et seq.

<span id="fn_265"></span>[169:1](frr16.htm#fr_265) B.N. 12576, fo.
74*vo*.

<span id="fn_266"></span>[169:2](frr16.htm#fr_266) Cf. B.N. MS 1433, ff.
10, 11, and the analysis and remarks in my *Legend of Sir Lancelot*, p.
219 and note.

<span id="fn_267"></span>[169:3](frr16.htm#fr_267) Cf. passage in
question quoted on [p. 137](frr13.htm#page_137).

<span id="fn_268"></span>[169:4](frr16.htm#fr_268) B.N. 12576, fo.
150*vo*.

<span id="fn_269"></span>[171:1](frr16.htm#fr_269) *Perlesvaus*, Branch
I. sections III., IV.

<span id="fn_270"></span>[171:2](frr16.htm#fr_270) Cf. my notes on the
subject, *Romania*, Vol. XLIII. pp. 420-426.

<span id="fn_271"></span>[171:3](frr16.htm#fr_271) Cf. Nitze,
*Glastonbury and the Holy Grail*, where the reference is given.

<span id="fn_272"></span>[172:1](frr16.htm#fr_272) *Vide supra*, [p.
147](frr14.htm#page_147).

<span id="fn_273"></span>[172:2](frr16.htm#fr_273) Cf. *Legend of Sir
Perceval*, Vol. II. p. 261. I suggested then that the actual initiation
would probably consist in enlightenment into the meaning of Lance and
Cup, in their sexual juxtaposition. I would now go a step further, and
suggest that the identification of the Lance with the weapon of Longinus
may quite well have replaced the original explanation as given by
Bleheris. In *The Quest*, Oct. 1916, I have given, under the title "The
Ruined Temple," a hypothetical reconstruction of the Grail Initiation.

<span id="fn_274"></span>[174:1](frr16.htm#fr_274) *Owain Miles*, edited
from the unique MS. by Turnbull and Laing, Edinburgh, 1837. *The
Purgatory of Saint Patrick* will be found in Horstmann's Southern
Legendary. I have given a modern English rendering of part of *Owain
Miles* in my *Chief Middle-English Poets*, published by Houghton Mifflin
Co., Boston, U.S.A.

<span id="fn_275"></span>[175:1](frr16.htm#fr_275) Cf. *op. cit.* pp.
148 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_276"></span>[175:2](frr16.htm#fr_276) *Op. cit.* pp. 155
and 254.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV. The Author](frr17)
