[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends/Sagas](../index) 
[Arthur](../eng/index.htm#arthurian)  [Index](index)  [Previous](frr16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

# CHAPTER XIV

### THE AUTHOR

Having now completed our survey of the various elements which have
entered into the composite fabric of the Grail Legend, the question
naturally arises where, and when, did that legend assume romantic form,
and to whom should we ascribe its literary origin?

On these crucial points the evidence at our disposal is far from
complete, and we can do little more than offer suggestions towards the
solution of the problem.

With regard to the first point, that of locality, the evidence is
unmistakably in favour of a Celtic, specifically a Welsh, source. As a
literary theme the Grail is closely connected with the Arthurian
tradition. The protagonist is one of Arthur's knights, and the hero of
the earlier version, Gawain, is more closely connected with Arthur than
are his successors, Perceval and Galahad. The Celtic origin of both
Gawain and Perceval is beyond doubt; and the latter is not merely a
Celt, but is definitely Welsh; he is always 'li Gallois.' Galahad I hold
to be a literary, and not a traditional, hero; he is the product of
deliberate literary invention, and has no existence outside the frame of
the later cyclic redactions. It is not possible at the present moment to
say whether the *Queste* was composed in the British Isles, or on the
continent, but we may safely lay it down as a basic principle that the
original Grail heroes are of insular origin, and that the Grail legend,
in its romantic, and literary, form is closely connected with British
pseudo-historical tradition.

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

The beliefs and practices of which, if the theory maintained in these
pages be correct, the Grail stories offer a more or less coherent
survival can be shown, on the evidence of historic monuments, and
surviving Folk-customs, to have been popular throughout the area of the
British Isles; while, with regard to the higher teaching of which I hold
these practices to have been the vehicle, Pliny comments upon the
similarity existing between the ancient Magian Gnosis and the Druidical
Gnosis of Gaul and Britain, an indication which, in the dearth of
accurate information concerning the teaching of the Druids, is of
considerable value <span id="fr_277"></span>[1](#fn_277).

As we noted in the previous chapter, an interesting parallel exists
between Wales, and localities, such as the Alps, and the Vosges, where
we have definite proof that these Mystery cults lingered on after they
had disappeared from public celebration. The Chart appended to Cumont's
*Monuments de Mithra* shows Mithraic remains in precisely the locality
where we have reason to believe certain of the *Gawain* and *Perceval*
stories to have originated.

As to the date of origin, that, of course, is closely connected with the
problem of authorship; if we can, with any possibility, identify the
author we can approximately fix the date. So far as the literary
evidence is concerned, we have no trace of the story before the twelfth
century, but when we do meet with it, it is already in complete, and
crystallized, form. More, there is already evidence of competing
versions; we have no existing Grail romance which we can claim to be
free from contamination, and representing in all respects the original
form.

There is no need here to go over old, and well-trodden, ground; in my
studies of the *Perceval* Legend, and in

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

the later popular *résumé* of the evidence <span
id="fr_278"></span>[1](#fn_278), *The Quest of the Holy Grail*, I have
analysed the texts, and shown that, while the poem of Chrétien de Troyes
is our earliest surviving literary version, there is the strongest
possible evidence that Chrétien, as he himself admits, was not
inventing, but re-telling, an already popular tale <span
id="fr_279"></span>[2](#fn_279). The Grail Quest was a theme which had
been treated not once nor twice, but of which numerous, and conflicting,
versions were already current, and, when Wauchier de Denain undertook to
complete Chrétien's unfinished work, he drew largely upon these already
existing forms, regardless of the fact that they not only contradicted
the version they were ostensibly completing, but were impossible to
harmonize with each other.

It is of importance for our investigation, however, to note that where
Wauchier does refer to a definite source, it is to an evidently
important and already famous collection of tales, *Le Grant Conte*,
comprising several 'Branches,' the hero of the collection being not
Chrétien's hero, Perceval, but Gawain, who, both in pseudo-historic and
romantic tradition, is far more closely connected with the Arthurian
legend, occupying, as he does, the traditional position of nephew,
Sister's Son, to the monarch who is the centre of the cycle; even as
Cuchullinn is sister's son to Conchobar, Diarmid to Finn, Tristan to
Mark, and Roland to Charlemagne. In fact this relationship was so
obviously required by tradition that we find Perceval figuring now as
sister's son to Arthur, now to the Grail King, according as the
Arthurian, or the Grail, tradition dominates the story <span
id="fr_280"></span>[3](#fn_280).

The actual existence of such a group of tales as those

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

referred to by Wauchier derives confirmation from our surviving *Gawain*
poems, as well as from the references in the *Elucidation*, and on the
evidence at our disposal I have ventured to suggest the hypothesis of a
group of poems, dealing with the adventures of Gawain, his son, and
brother, the *ensemble* being originally known as *The Geste of Syr
Gawayne*, a title which, in the inappropriate form *The Jest of Sir
Gawain*, is preserved in the English version of that hero's adventure
with the sister of Brandelis <span id="fr_281"></span>[1](#fn_281). So
keen a critic as Dr Brugger has not hesitated to accept the theory of
the existence of this *Geste*, and is of opinion that the German poem
*Diû Crône* may, in part at least, be derived from this source.

The central adventure ascribed to Gawain in this group of tales is
precisely the visit to the Grail Castle to which we have already
referred, and we have pointed out that the manner in which it is
related, its directness, simplicity, and conformity with what we know of
the Mystery teaching presumably involved, taken in connection with the
personality of the hero, and his position in Arthurian romantic
tradition, appear to warrant us in assigning to it the position of
priority among the conflicting versions we possess.

At two points in the re-telling of these *Gawain* tales Wauchier
definitely refers to the author by name, Bleheris. On the second
occasion he states categorically that this Bleheris was of Welsh birth
and origin, *né et engenuïs en Galles*, and that he told the tale in
connection with which the statement is made to a certain Comte de
Poitiers, whose favourite story it was, he loved it above all others,
which would imply that it was not the only tale Bleheris had told
him <span id="fr_282"></span>[2](#fn_282).

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

As we have seen in a previous chapter, the *Elucidation* prefaces its
account of the Grail Quest by a solemn statement of the gravity of the
subject to be treated, and a warning of the penalties which would follow
on a careless revelation of the secret. These warnings are put into the
mouth of a certain Master Blihis, concerning whom we hear no more. A
little further on in the poem we meet with a knight, Blihos-Bliheris,
who, made prisoner by Gawain, reveals to Arthur and his court the
identity of the maidens wandering in the woods, of the Fisher King, and
the Grail, and is so good a story-teller that none can weary of
listening to his tales <span id="fr_283"></span>[1](#fn_283).

Again, in the fragmentary remains of Thomas's *Tristan* we have a
passage in which the poet refers, as source, to a certain Bréri, who
knew "all the feats, and all the tales, of all the kings, and all the
counts who had lived in Britain <span id="fr_284"></span>[2](#fn_284)."

Finally, Giraldus Cambrensis refers to *famosus ille fabulator*,
Bledhericus, who had lived "shortly before our time" and whose renown he
evidently takes for granted was familiar to his readers.

Now are we to hold that the Bleheris who, according to Wauchier, had
told tales concerning Gawain, and Arthur's court, one of which tales was
certainly the Grail adventure; the Master Blihis, who knew the Grail
mystery, and gave solemn warning against its revelation; the
Blihos-Bliheris, who knew the Grail, and many other tales; the Bréri,
who knew all the legendary tales concerning the princes of Britain; and
the famous story-teller Bledhericus, of whom Giraldus speaks, are
distinct and separate personages, or mere inventions of the separate
writers, or do all these passages refer to one and the same individual,
who, in that case, may well have deserved the title *famosus ille
fabulator*?

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

With regard to the attitude taken up by certain critics, that no
evidential value can be attached to these references, I would point out
that when Medieval writers quote an authority for their statements they,
as a rule, refer to a writer whose name carries weight, and will impress
their readers; they are offering a guarantee for the authenticity of
their statements. The special attribution may be purely fictitious but
the individual referred to enjoys an established reputation. Thus, the
later cyclic redactions of the Arthurian romances are largely attributed
to Walter Map, who, in view of his public position, and political
activities, could certainly never have had the leisure to compose one
half of the literature with which he is credited! In the same way Robert
de Borron, Chrétien de Troyes, Wolfram von Eschenbach, are all referred
to as sources without any justification in fact. Nor is it probable that
Wauchier, who wrote on the continent, and who, if he be really Wauchier
de Denain, was under the patronage of the Count of Flanders, would have
gone out of his way to invent a Welsh source.

Judging from analogy, the actual existence of a personage named
Bleheris, who enjoyed a remarkable reputation as a story-teller, is,
*prima facie*, extremely probable <span id="fr_285"></span>[1](#fn_285).

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

But are these references independent, was there more than one Bleheris?
I think not. The name is a proper, and not a family, name. In the latter
case it might be possible to argue that we were dealing with separate
members of a family, or group, of bardic poets, whose office it was to
preserve, and relate, the national legends. But we are dealing with
variants of a proper name, and that of distinctly insular, and Welsh
origin <span id="fr_286"></span>[1](#fn_286).

The original form, Bledri, was by no means uncommon in Wales: from that
point of view there might well have been four or five, or even more, of
that name, but that each and all of these should have possessed the same
qualifications, should have been equally well versed in popular
traditions, equally dowered with the gift of story-telling, on equally
friendly terms with the Norman invaders, and equally possessed of such a
knowledge of the French language as should permit them to tell their
stories in that tongue, is, I submit, highly improbable. This latter
point, *i.e.*, the knowledge of French, seems to me to be of crucial
importance.

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Given the relations between conqueror and
conquered, and the *intransigeant* character of Welsh patriotism, the
men who were on sufficiently friendly terms with the invaders to be
willing to relate the national legends, with an assurance of finding a
sympathetic hearing, must have been few and far between. I do not think
the importance of this point has been sufficiently grasped by critics.

The problem then is to find a Welshman who, living at the end of the
eleventh and commencement of the twelfth centuries, was well versed in
the legendary lore of Britain; was of sufficiently good social status to
be well received at court; possessed a good knowledge of the French
tongue; and can be shown to have been on friendly terms with the Norman
nobles.

Mr Edward Owen, of the Cymmrodorion Society, has suggested that a
certain Welsh noble, Bledri ap Cadivor, fulfils, in a large measure, the
conditions required. Some years ago I published in the *Revue Celtique*
a letter in which Mr Owen summarized the evidence at his disposal. As
the review in question may not be easily accessible to some of my
readers I will recapitulate the principal points <span
id="fr_287"></span>[1](#fn_287)

The father of Bledri, Cadivor, was a great personage in West Wales, and
is looked upon as the ancestor of the most important families in the
ancient Dyfed, a division now represented by Pembrokeshire, and the
Western portion of Carmarthen. (We may note here that the traditional
tomb of Gawain is at Ross in Pembrokeshire, and that there is reason to
believe that the *Perceval* story, in its earliest form, was connected
with that locality.)

Cadivor had three sons, of whom Bledri was the eldest; thus, at his
father's death, he would be head of this ancient and distinguished
family. At the division of the paternal estates Bledri inherited, as his
share, lands ranging along

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

the right bank of the lower Towey, and the coast of South Pembrokeshire,
extending as far as Manorbeer, the birthplace of Giraldus Cambrensis.
(This is again a geographical indication which should be borne in mind.)
Cadivor himself appears to have been on friendly terms with the Normans;
he is said to have entertained William the Conqueror on his visit to St
David's in 1080, while every reference we have to Bledri shows him in
close connection with the invaders.

Thus, in 1113 the *Brut-y-Tywysogion* mentions his name as ally of the
Norman knights in their struggle to maintain their ground in, and
around, Carmarthen. In 1125 we find his name as donor of lands to the
Augustinian Church of St John the Evangelist, and St Theuloc of
Carmarthen, newly founded by Henry I. Here his name appears with the
significant title *Latinarius* (The Interpreter), a qualification
repeated in subsequent charters of the same collection. In one of these
we find Griffith, the son of Bledri, confirming his father's gift.
Professor Lloyd, in an article in *Archaeologia Cambrensis*, July 1907,
has examined these charters, and considers the grant to have been made
between 1129 and 1134, the charter itself being of the reign of Henry I,
1101-1135 <span id="fr_288"></span>[1](#fn_288)

In the Pipe Roll of Henry I, 1131, Bledri's name is entered as debtor
for a fine incurred by the killing of a Fleming by his men; while a
highly significant entry records the fine of 7 marks imposed upon a
certain Bleddyn of Mabedrud and his brothers for outraging Bledri's
daughter. When we take into consideration the rank of Bledri, this
insult to his family by a fellow Welshman would seem to indicate that
his relations with his compatriots were not of a specially friendly
character.

Mr Owen also points out that portion of the *Brut-y-Tywysogion* 

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

which covers the years 1101-20 (especially the events of the year 1113,
where we find Bledri, and other friendly Welsh nobles, holding the
castle of Carmarthen for the Normans against the Welsh), is related at
an altogether disproportionate length, and displays a strong bias in
favour of the invaders. The year just referred to, for instance,
occupies more than twice the space assigned to any other year. Mr Owen
suggests that here Bledri himself may well have been the chronicler; a
hypothesis which, if he really be the author we are seeking, is quite
admissible.

So far as indications of date are concerned, Bledri probably lived
between the years 1070-1150. His father Cadivor died in 1089, and his
lands were divided between his sons of whom Bledri, as we have seen, was
the eldest. Thus they cannot have been children at that date; Bledri, at
least, would have been born before 1080. From the evidence of the Pipe
Roll we know that he was living in 1131. The charter signed by his son,
confirmatory of his grant, must have been subsequent to 1148, as it was
executed during the Episcopate of David, Bishop of St David's 1148-1176.
Thus the period of 80 years suggested above (1070-1150) may be taken as
covering the extreme limit to be assigned to his life, and activity.

The passage in which Giraldus Cambrensis refers to *Bledhericus, famosus
ille fabulator* who *tempora nostra paulo praevenit*, was written about
1194; thus it might well refer to a man who had died some 40 or 50 years
previously. As we have noted above, Giraldus was born upon ground
forming a part of Bledri's ancestral heritage, and thus might well be
familiar with his fame.

The evidence is of course incomplete, but it does provide us with a
personality fulfilling the main conditions of a complex problem. Thus,
we have a man of the required name, and nationality; living at an
appropriate date; of the

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

requisite social position; on excellent terms with the French nobles,
and so well acquainted with their language as to sign himself officially
'The Interpreter.' We have no direct evidence of his literary skill, or
knowledge of the traditional history of his country, but a man of his
birth could scarcely have failed to possess the latter, while certain
peculiarities in that section of the national Chronicle which deals with
the aid given by him to the Norman invaders would seem to indicate that
Bledri himself may well have been responsible for the record. Again, we
know him to have been closely connected with the locality from which
came the writer who refers to the famous story-teller of the same name.
I would submit that we have here quite sufficient evidence to warrant us
in accepting Bledri ap Cadivor as, at least, the possible author of the
romantic Grail tradition. In any case, so far, there is no other
candidate in the field <span id="fr_289"></span>[1](#fn_289).

Shortly after the publication of the second volume of my *Perceval*
studies, I received a letter from Professor

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Singer, in which, after expressing his general
acceptance of the theories there advanced, in especial of the suggested
date and relation of the different versions, which he characterized as
"*sehr gelungen, und zu meiner Alffassung der Entwickelung der
Altfranzösischen Literatur sehr zu stimmen*," he proceeded to comment
upon the probable character of the literary activity of Bleheris. His
remarks are so interesting and suggestive that I venture to submit them
for the consideration of my readers.

Professor Singer points out that in Eilhart von Oberge's *Tristan* we
find the name in the form of *Pleherin* attached to a knight of *Mark's*
court. The same name in a slightly varied form, *Pfelerin*, occurs in
the *Tristan* of Heinrich von Freiberg; both poems, Professor Singer
considers, are derived from a French original. Under a compound form,
*Blihos*, (or *Blio*)-*Bliheris*, he appears, in the *Gawain-Grail*
compilation, as a knight at *Arthur's* court. Now
*Bréri-Blihis-Bleheris* is referred to as authority alike in the
*Tristan*, *Grail* and *Gawain* tradition, and Professor Singer makes
the interesting suggestion that these references are originally due to
Bleheris himself, who not only told the stories in the third person (a
common device at that period, *v*. Chrétien's *Erec*, and Gerbert's
continuation of the *Perceval*), but also introduced himself as
eye-witness of, and actor, in a subordinate *rôle*, in, the incidents he
recorded. Thus in the *Tristan* he is a knight of Mark's, in the
*Elucidation* and the *Gawain* stories a knight of Arthur's, court.
Professor Singer instances the case of Dares in the *De exidio Trojae*,
and Bishop Pilgrim of Passau in the lost *Nibelungias* of his secretary
Konrad, as illustrations of the theory.

If this be the case such a statement as that which we find in Wauchier,
regarding Bleheris's birth and origin, would have emanated from Bleheris
himself, and simply been taken over by the later writer from his source;
he incorporated

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

the whole tale of the shield as it stood, a quite natural and normal
proceeding <span id="fr_290"></span>[1](#fn_290). Again, this suggestion
would do away with the necessity for postulating a certain lapse of time
before the story-teller Bleheris could be converted into an Arthurian
knight--the two *rôles*, *Gewährsmann und Mithandelnden*, as Professor
Singer expresses it, are coincident in date. I would also suggest that
the double form, *Blihos-Bliheris*, would have been adopted by the
author himself, to indicate the identity of the two, Blihis, and
Bleheris. It is worthy of note that, when dealing directly with the
Grail, he assumes the title of *Master*, which would seem to indicate
that here he claimed to speak with special authority.

I sent the letter in question to the late Mr Alfred Nutt, who was
forcibly struck with the possibilities involved in the suggestion, the
full application of which he thought the writer had not grasped. I quote
the following passages from the long letter I received from him in
return.

"Briefly put we presuppose the existence of a set of semi-dramatic,
semi-narrative, poems, in which a Bledri figures as an active, and at
the same time a recording, personage. Now that such a body of literature
*may* have existed we are entitled to assume from the fact that two such
have survived, one from Wales, in the Llywarch Hen cycle, the other from
Ireland, in the Finn Saga. In both cases, the fact that the descriptive
poems are put in the mouth, in Wales of Llywarch, in Ireland largely of
Oisin, led to the ascription at an early date of the whole literature to
Llywarch and Oisin. It is therefore conceivable that a Welsh
'littérateur,' familiar as he must have been with the Llywarch, and as
he quite possibly was with the Oisin, instance, should cast his version
of the Arthurian stories in a similar form,

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

and that the facts noted by you and Singer may be thus explained."

Now that both Professor Singer (who has an exceptionally wide knowledge
of Medieval literature), and the late Mr Alfred Nutt, knew what they
were talking about, does not need to be emphasized, and the fact that
two such competent authorities should agree upon a possible solution of
a puzzling literary problem, makes that solution worthy of careful
consideration; it would certainly have the merit of simplifying the
question and deserves to be placed upon record.

But while it would of course be far more satisfactory could one
definitely place, and label, the man to whom we owe the original
conception which gave birth and impetus to this immortal body of
literature, yet the precise identity of the author of the earliest Grail
romance is of the accident, rather than the essence, of our problem.
Whether Bleheris the Welshman be, or be not, identical with Bledri ap
Cadivor, Interpreter, and friend of the Norman nobles, the general
hypothesis remains unaffected and may be thus summarized--

The Grail story is not *du fond en comble* the product of imagination,
literary or popular. At its root lies the record, more or less
distorted, of an ancient Ritual, having for its ultimate object the
initiation into the secret of the sources of Life, physical and
spiritual. This ritual, in its lower, exoteric, form, as affecting the
processes of Nature, and physical life, survives to-day, and can be
traced all over the world, in Folk ceremonies, which, however widely
separated the countries in which they are found, show a surprising
identity of detail and intention. In its esoteric 'Mystery' form it was
freely utilized for the imparting of high spiritual teaching concerning
the relation of Man to the Divine Source of his being, and the
possibility of a

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

sensible union between Man, and God. The recognition of the cosmic
activities of the Logos appears to have been a characteristic feature of
this teaching, and when Christianity came upon the scene it did not
hesitate to utilize the already existing medium of instruction, but
boldly identified the Deity of Vegetation, regarded as Life Principle,
with the God of the Christian Faith. Thus, to certain of the early
Christians, Attis was but an earlier manifestation of the Logos, Whom
they held identical with Christ. The evidence of the Naassene document
places this beyond any shadow of doubt, and is of inestimable value as
establishing a link between pre-Christian, and Christian, Mystery
tradition.

This curious synthetic belief, united as it was with the highly popular
cult of Mithra, travelled with the foreign legionaries, adherents of
that cult, to the furthest bounds of the Roman Empire, and when the
struggle between Mithraism and Christianity ended in the definite
triumph of the latter, by virtue of that dual synthetic nature, the
higher ritual still survived, and was celebrated in sites removed from
the centres of population--in caves, and mountain fastnesses; in
islands, and on desolate sea-coasts.

The earliest version of the Grail story, represented by our Bleheris
form, relates the visit of a wandering knight to one of these hidden
temples; his successful passing of the test into the lower grade of Life
initiation, his failure to attain to the highest degree. It matters
little whether it were the record of an actual, or of a possible,
experience; the casting into romantic form of an event which the
story-teller knew to have happened, had, perchance, actually witnessed;
or the objective recital of what he knew *might* have occurred; the
essential fact is that the *mise-en-scène* of the story, the
nomenclature, the march of incident, the character of the tests,
correspond to what we know from

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

independent sources of the details of this Nature Ritual. The Grail
Quest was actually possible then, it is actually possible to-day, for
the indication of two of our romances as to the final location of the
Grail is not imagination, but the record of actual fact.

As first told the story preserved its primal character of a composite
between Christianity and the Nature Ritual, as witnessed by the ceremony
over the bier of the Dead Knight, the procession with Cross and incense,
and the solemn Vespers for the Dead. This, I suspect, correctly
represents the final stage of the process by which Attis-Adonis was
identified with Christ. Thus, in its first form the story was the
product of conscious intention.

But when the tale was once fairly launched as a romantic tale, and came
into the hands of those unfamiliar with its Ritual origin (though the
fact that it had such an origin was probably well understood), the
influence of the period came into play. The Crusades, and the consequent
traffic in relics, especially in relics of the Passion, caused the
identification of the sex Symbols, Lance and Cup, with the Weapon of the
Crucifixion, and the Cup of the Last Supper; but the Christianization
was merely external, the tale, as a whole, retaining its pre-Christian
character.

The conversion into a definitely Christian romance seems to have been
due to two causes. First, the rivalry between the two great monastic
houses of Glastonbury and Fescamp, the latter of which was already in
possession of a genuine *Saint-Sang* relic, and fully developed
tradition. There is reason to suppose that the initial combination of
the Grail and *Saint-Sang* traditions took place at Fescamp, and was the
work of some member of the minstrel Guild attached to that Abbey. But
the Grail tradition was originally British; Glastonbury was from time
immemorial a British sanctuary; it was the reputed burial place of
Arthur, of

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

whose court the Grail Quest was the crowning adventure; the story must
be identified with British soil. Consequently a version was composed,
now represented by our *Perlesvaus* text, in which the union of
Nicodemus of Fescamp, and Joseph of Glastonbury, fame, as ancestors of
the Grail hero, offers a significant hint of the *provenance* of the
version.

Secondly, a no less important element in the process was due to the
conscious action of Robert de Borron, who well understood the character
of his material, and radically remodelled the whole on the basis of the
triple Mystery tradition translated into terms of high Christian
Mysticism. A notable feature of Borron's version is his utilization of
the tradition of the final Messianic Feast, in combination with his
Eucharistic symbolism, a combination thoroughly familiar to early
Christian Mystics.

Once started on a definitely romantic career, the Grail story rapidly
became a complex of originally divergent themes, the most important
stage in its development being the incorporation of the popular tale of
the Widow's Son, brought up in the wilderness, and launched into the
world in a condition of absolute ignorance of men, and manners. The
*Perceval* story is a charming story, but it has originally nothing
whatever to do with the Grail. The original tale, now best represented
by our English *Syr Percyvelle of Galles*, has no trace of Mystery
element; it is Folk-lore, pure and simple. I believe the connection with
the Grail legend to be purely fortuitous, and due to the fact that the
hero of the Folk-tale was known as 'The Widow's Son,' which he actually
was, while this title represented in Mystery terminology a certain grade
of Initiation, and as such is preserved to-day in Masonic ritual <span
id="fr_291"></span>[1](#fn_291)

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

Finally the rising tide of dogmatic Medievalism, with its crassly
materialistic view of the Eucharist; its insistence on the saving grace
of asceticism and celibacy; and its scarcely veiled contempt for women,
overwhelmed the original conception. Certain of the features of the
ancient ritual indeed survive, but they are factors of confusion, rather
than clues to enlightenment. Thus, while the Grail still retains its
character of a Feeding Vessel, comes and goes without visible agency,
and supplies each knight with 'such food and drink as he best loved in
the world,' it is none the less the Chalice of the Sacred Blood, and
critics are sorely put to it to harmonize these conflicting aspects. In
the same way Galahad's grandfather still bears the title of the Rich
Fisher, and there are confused references to a Land laid Waste as the
result of a Dolorous Stroke.

But while the terminology lingers on to our perplexity the characters
involved lie outside the march of the story; practically no trace of the
old Nature Ritual survives in the final *Queste* form. The remodelling
is so radical that it seems most reasonable to conclude that it was
purposeful, that the original author of the *Queste* had a very clear
idea of the real nature of the Grail, and was bent upon a complete
restatement in terms of current orthodoxy. I advisedly use this term, as
I see no trace in the *Queste* of a genuine Mystic conception, such as
that of Borron. So far as criticism of the literature is concerned I
adhere to my previously expressed opinion that the *Queste* should be
treated rather as a *Lancelot* than as a *Grail* romance. It is of real
importance in the evolution of the Arthurian romantic cycle; as a factor
in determining the true character and origins of the Grail legend it is
worse than useless; what remains of the

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

original features is so fragmentary, and so distorted, that any attempt
to use the version as basis for argument, or comparison, can only
introduce a further element of confusion into an already more than
sufficiently involved problem.

I am also still of opinion that the table of descent given on p. 283 of
Volume II. of my *Perceval* studies, represents the most probable
evolution of the literature; at the same time, in the light of further
research, I should feel inclined to add the Grail section of *Sone de
Nansai* as deriving from the same source which gave us Kiot's poem, and
the *Perlesvaus* <span id="fr_292"></span>[1](#fn_292). As evidence for
a French original combining important features of these two versions,
and at the same time retaining unmistakably archaic elements which have
disappeared from both, I hold this section of the poem to be of extreme
value for the criticism of the cycle.

While there are still missing links in the chain of descent, versions to
be reconstructed, writers to be identified, I believe that in its
*ensemble* the theory set forth in these pages will be found to be the
only one which will satisfactorily meet all the conditions of the
problem; which will cover the whole ground of investigation, omitting no
element, evading no difficulty; which will harmonize apparently hopeless
contradictions, explain apparently meaningless terminology, and thus
provide a secure foundation for the criticism of a body of literature as
important as it is fascinating.

The study and the criticism of the Grail literature will possess an even
deeper interest, a more absorbing fascination, when it is definitely
recognized that we possess in that literature a unique example of the
restatement of an ancient and august Ritual in terms of imperishable
Romance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_277"></span>[179:1](frr17.htm#fr_277) Cf. Mead, *Thrice
Greatest Hermes*, Vol. III. p. 295. On this point the still untranslated
*corpus* of Bardic poetry may possibly throw light.

<span id="fn_278"></span>[180:1](frr17.htm#fr_278) *The Quest of The
Holy Grail* (*Quest* series, Bell, 1913).

<span id="fn_279"></span>[180:2](frr17.htm#fr_279) On the point that
Chrétien was treating an already popular theme, cf. Brugger,
*Enserrement Merlin*, I. (*Zeitschrift für Franz. Sprache*, XXIX.).

<span id="fn_280"></span>[180:3](frr17.htm#fr_280) That is, the
relationship is due to romantic tradition, not to Mystery survival, as
Dr Nitze maintains.

<span id="fn_281"></span>[181:1](frr17.htm#fr_281) Cf. *Romania*, Vol.
XXXIII. pp. 333 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_282"></span>[181:2](frr17.htm#fr_282) Cf. *Legend of Sir
Perceval*, Vol. I. Chap. 12, for the passages referred to, also article
in *Romania*, XXXIII.

<span id="fn_283"></span>[182:1](frr17.htm#fr_283) Cf. my *Quest of the
Holy Grail*, pp. 110 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_284"></span>[182:2](frr17.htm#fr_284) Cf. *Tristan*
(Bédier's ed.), Vol. I. l. 2120.

<span id="fn_285"></span>[183:1](frr17.htm#fr_285) A critic of my
*Quest* volume remarks that "we have as little faith in Wauchier's
appeal to a Welshman Bleheris as source for his continuation of
Chrétien's '*Perceval*' as we have in Layamon's similar appeal to Bede
and St Austin at the beginning of the '*Brut*.'" The remark seems to me
singularly inept, there is no parallel between the cases. In the first
place Layamon does not refer to Bede and St Austin as *source*, but as
*models*, a very different thing. Then the statement is discredited by
the fact that we possess the writings of these men, and know them to be
of another character than Metrical Chronicles. In the case of Wauchier
his reference does not stand alone; it is one of a group, and that group
marked by an extraordinary unanimity of statement; whoever Bleheris may
have been he was certainly possessed of two definite qualifications--he
knew a vast number of tales, and he possessed a remarkable gift of
narration, *i.e.*, he was a story-teller, *par excellence*. Thus he was,
*a priori*, a probable source for that section of Wauchier's work which
is attributed to him, a section consisting of short, picturesque, and
<span id="page_184">p. 184</span> mutually independent tales, which
formed part of a popular collection. It is misleading to speak as if
Wauchier refers to him as general source for his *Perceval*
continuation; the references are clearly marked and refer to *Gawain*
tales. Apart from the fact that Wauchier's reference does not stand
alone we have independent evidence of the actual existence of such a
group of tales, in our surviving Gawain poems, certain of which, such as
*Kay and the Spit*, and *Golagros and Gawayne* are versions of the
stories given by Wauchier, while the author of the *Elucidation* was
also familiar with the same collection. If evidence for the identity of
Bleheris is incomplete, that for his existence appears to be
incontrovertible. Would it not be more honest if such a would-be critic
as the writer referred to said, 'I do not choose to believe in the
existence of Bleheris, because it runs counter to my pre-conceived
theory of the evolution of the literature'? We should then know where we
are. Such a parallel as that cited above has no value for those familiar
with the literature but may easily mislead the general reader. I would
also draw attention to the fact noted in the text--the extreme
improbability of Wauchier, a continental writer, inventing an insular
and Welsh source. This is a point critics carefully evade.

<span id="fn_286"></span>[184:1](frr17.htm#fr_286) Cf. *Bledhericus de
Cornouailles*, note contributed by M. Ferd. Lot, to *Romania*, Vol.
XXVIII. p. 336. M. Lot remarks that he has not met with the name in
Armorica; it thus appears to be insular.

<span id="fn_287"></span>[185:1](frr17.htm#fr_287) Cf. *Revue Celtique*,
1911, *A note on the identification of Bleheris*.

<span id="fn_288"></span>[186:1](frr17.htm#fr_288) Ed. Rhys-Evans, Vol.
II. p. 297; cf. also *Revue Celtique*.

<span id="fn_289"></span>[188:1](frr17.htm#fr_289) In the course of
1915-16 I received letters from Mr Rogers Rees, resident at Stepaside,
Pembrokeshire, who informed me that he held definite proof of the
connection of Bledri with both *Grail* and *Perceval* legends. The
locality had been part of Bledri's estate, and the house in which he
lived was built on the site of what had been Bledri's castle. Mr Rogers
Rees maintained the existence of a living tradition connecting Bledri
with the legends in question. At his request I sent him the list of the
names of the brothers of Alain li Gros, as given in the 1516 edition of
the *Perlesvaus*, a copy of which is in the Bibliothèque Nationale, and
received in return a letter stating that the list must have been
compiled by one familiar with the district. Unfortunately, for a year,
from the autumn of 1916, I was debarred from work, and when, on resuming
my studies, I wrote to my correspondent asking for the promised evidence
I obtained no answer to my repeated appeal. On communicating with Mr
Owen I found he had had precisely the same experience, and, for his
part, was extremely sceptical as to there being any genuine foundation
for our correspondent's assertions. While it is thus impossible to use
the statements in question as elements in my argument, I think it right
in the interests of scholarship to place them on record; they may afford
a clue which some Welsh scholar may be able to follow up to a more
satisfactory conclusion.

<span id="fn_290"></span>[190:1](frr17.htm#fr_290) Had Wauchier really
desired to *invent* an authority, in view of his date, and connection
with the house of Flanders, he had a famous name at hand--that of
Chrétien de Troyes.

<span id="fn_291"></span>[194:1](frr17.htm#fr_291) Cf. *Legend of Sir
Perceval*, Vol. II. p. 307 and note. I have recently received Dr
Brugger's review of Mr R. H. Griffith's study of the English poem, and
am glad to see that the critic accepts the independence of this version.
If <span id="page_195">p. 195</span> scholars can see their way to
accept as *faits acquis* the mutual independence of the *Grail*, and
*Perceval* themes, we shall, at last, have a solid basis for future
criticism.

<span id="fn_292"></span>[196:1](frr17.htm#fr_292) Cf. my Notes,
*Romania*, Vol. XLIII. pp. 403 *et seq*.
