[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lcc01)  [Next](lcc03.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417982012/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

![](img/tease.jpg)  
*The Little Clay Cart*, by Shudraka, tr. Arthur William Ryder, \[1905\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span> <span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

### NOTE BY THE EDITOR

WITH *the battle of the Sea of Japan another turning point in the brief
course of recorded human history has been reached. Whatever the outcome
of the negotiations for peace, one thing is sure: for better, for worse,
and whether we will or no, the West must know the East, and the East
must know the West. With that knowledge will inevitably come an
interchange of potent influences, of influences that will affect
profoundly the religion and morals, the philosophy, the literature, the
art, in short, all the elements that make up the civilizations of the
two hemispheres. It is a part of the responsibility resting upon the
molders and leaders of the thought and life of our time, and upon our
Universities in particular, to see to it that these new forces, mighty
for good or for evil, are directed aright.*

*The fruitfulness of those scions of Western civilization which the
Japanese have grafted upon their own stock is to-day the admiration of
the world. In our wonder, let us not forget that that stock is the
growth of centuries, and that it is rooted in a soil of racial character
informed by ethical ideals which we are wont to regard, with arrogant
self-complacency, as exclusively proper to Christianity, but which were,
in fact, inculcated twenty four centuries ago through precept and
example by Gotama the Enlightened, or, as the Hindus called him, Gotama
the Buddha. It has often been said that India has never influenced the
development of humanity as a whole. Be that as it may, it now seems no
less probable than strange that she is yet destined to do so, on the one
hand, indirectly, through the influence of Indian Buddhism upon Japan,
and, on the other, directly, by the diffusion in the West of a knowledge
of her sacred writings, especially* 

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

*those of Vedantism and Buddhism. To judge the East aright, we must know
not only what she is, but also how she has become what she is; know, in
short, some of the principal phases of her spiritual history as they are
reflected in her ancient literature, especially that of India. To
interpret to the West the thought of the East, to bring her best and
noblest achievements to bear upon our life,—that is today the problem of
Oriental philology.*

*The Harvard Oriental Series embodies an attempt to present to Western
scholars, in trustworthy texts and translations, some of the greatest
works of the Hindu literature and philosophy and religion, together with
certain instruments, such as the Vedic Concordance. or the History of
the Beast fable, for their critical study or elucidation. Some account
of the volumes completed or in progress may be found at the end of this
book. Dr. Ryder, passing by for the present the more momentous themes of
religion and philosophy, has in this volume attempted to show what the
Indian genius, in its strength and in its weakness, could do in the
field of literature pure and simple. The timeliness of the Series as a
whole is an eloquent tribute to the discernment of my loved and
unforgotten pupil and friend, Henry Clarke Warren. In him were united
not only the will and the ability to establish such a publication as
this, but also the learning and insight which enabled him to forecast in
a general way its possibilities of usefulness. He knew that the East had
many a lesson to teach the West; but whether the lesson be repose of
spirit or hygiene of the soldier in the field, whether it be the divine
immanence or simplicity of life or the overcoming of evil with good, he
knew that the first lesson to be taught us was the teachable habit of
mind*.

C. R. L.

June, 1905

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Preface](lcc03.md)
