[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lcc02)  [Next](lcc04.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417982012/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

![](img/tease.jpg)  
*The Little Clay Cart*, by Shudraka, tr. Arthur William Ryder, \[1905\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

### PREFACE

THE text chosen as the basis of this translation is that given in the
edition of Parab, <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md) and I have chosen it
for the following reasons. Parab's edition is the most recent, and its
editor is a most admirable Sanskrit scholar, who, it seems to me, has in
several places understood the real meaning of the text better than his
predecessors. This edition contains the comment of Pṛthvīdhara; it is
far freer from misprints than many texts printed in India, and, in
respect to arrangement and typography, it is clear and convenient.
Besides, it is easily obtainable and very cheap. This last consideration
may prove to be of importance, if the present translation should be
found helpful in the class-room. For the sake of cataloguers, I note
that the proper transliteration of the Sanskrit names of this title
according to the rules laid down by the American Library Association in
its Journal for 1885, is as follows: Mṛcchakaṭika; Çūdraka; Pṛthvīdhara;
Kāçīnātha Pāṇḍuraṅga Paraba; Nirṇaya-Sāgara.

The verse-numeration of each act follows the edition of Parab;
fortunately, it is almost identical with the numeration in the editions
of Godabole and Jīvānanda. For the convenience of those who may desire
to consult this book in connection with Stenzler's edition, I have added
references at the top of the page to that edition as well as to the
edition of Parab. In these references, the letter P. stands for Parab,
the letter S. for Stenzler.

There are a few passages in which I have deviated from Parab's text. A
list of such passages is given on page [177](lcc18.htm#page_177.md). From
this list

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

I have omitted a few minor matters, such as slight misprints and what
seem to me to be errors in the *chāyā;* these matters, and the passages
of unusual interest or difficulty, I shall treat in a series of notes on
the play, which I hope soon to publish in the Journal of the American
Oriental Society. It is hardly necessary to give reasons for the
omission of the passage inserted by Nīlakaṇṭha in the tenth act (Parab,
288.3-292.9). This passage is explicitly declared by tradition to be an
interpolation by another hand, and it is clearly shown to be such by
internal evidence. It will be noticed that the omission of this passage
causes a break in the verse-numeration of the tenth act, where the
verse-number 54 is followed by the number 58.

Of the books which have been useful to me in the present work, I desire
to mention especially the editions of Stenzler, Godabole, Jīvānanda
Vidyāsāgara, and Parab; the commentaries of Pṛthvīdhara, Lallādīkṣita,
and Jīvānanda; further, the translations of Wilson, Regnaud, and
Böhtlingk.

A number of friends were kind enough to read my manuscript, and each
contributed something. I wish to mention especially my friend and pupil,
Mr. Walter E. Clark, of Harvard University, whose careful reading of
both text and translation was fruitful of many good suggestions.

But by far my greatest personal indebtedness is to Professor Lanman,
whose generous interest in my work has never flagged from the day when I
began the study of Sanskrit under his guidance. He has criticized this
translation with the utmost rigor; indeed, the pages are few which have
not witnessed some improvement from his hand. It is to him also that I
owe the accuracy and beauty which characterize the printed book; nothing
has been hard enough to weary him, nothing small enough to escape him.

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

And more than all else, I am grateful to him for the opportunity of
publishing in the Harvard Oriental Series; for this series is that
enterprise which, since the death of Professor Whitney, most honorably
upholds in this country the standards of accurate scholarship set by the
greatest of American Sanskritists.

<span class="small">ARTHUR W. RYDER</span>

*Harvard University  
May 23, 1905*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[xi:1](lcc03.htm#fr_0.md) The Mṛichchhakaṭika of
Śūdraka with the commentary of Pṛithvīdhara. Edited by Kāshināth
Pāṇḍurang Parab. Bombay: Nirṇaya-Sāgar Press. 1900. Price 1 Rupee. It
may be had of O. Harrassowitz in Leipzig for 2½ Marks.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Introduction](lcc04.md)
