<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Wisdom of the East](../../woe/index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](tpol12)  [Next](tpol14.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Path of Light*, by L.D. Barnett, \[1909\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

### NOTES

\(1\) "As is fitting, the book begins with homage to the 'threefold
jewel,' or 'three pearls,' *i.e.* in early Buddhism, the Buddha
(Śākya-muni), the Law preached by him (Dharma), and the brotherhood of
his monks (Sangha). Hero, agreeably to the doctrines of the Great
Vehicle, we have (1) the Buddhas, designated by the title *Sugata*, 'the
well gone,' or 'the well arrived,' *i.e.* 'they who have left the world
of becoming in order to enter Nirvāṇa,' or 'who know the truth,' 'who
have departed to return no more,' 'who have cast off all frailty of
body, speech, and mind' These definitions aim at establishing from every
point of view a fundamental difference between the Buddhas and all other
beings. (ii) The sons of the Buddhas, namely (*a*) the *Bodhi-sattvas*
('creatures of enlightenment') who have reached a 'stage,' a 'ground,'
even though it be the first, in their career as future Buddhas (in
opposition to the future Buddhas, Bodhi-sattvas, who have not yet
entered upon the career, or are only at the outset of it); (*b*) all
'the worshipful ones,' *i.e.* the 'teachers of discipline or doctrine,'
etc. We must understand 'all spiritual friends.' (iii) The 'Body of the
Law,' *i.e.* either the sum-total of the Scriptures or 'the Body of the
Law of the Buddhas,' in opposition to their bodies as visible upon this
earth, and to their bodies us beatified in paradise. This Body is the
unrested wisdom which constitutes the essence of all the Buddhas; and
the Law preached by the Buddhas is only

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

the intellectual or verbal expression of this wisdom" (Prof. de la
Vallée Poussin).

\(2\) The "Thought of Enlightenment" (*Bodhi-chitta*) is to the
Mahā-yāna what 'grace' is to Christian theology. Buddhism, in common
with the other schools of Indian thought, holds that all living beings
are fettered in the beginningless and endless cycle of embodied births,
metempsychosis or *saṃsāra*, in which every instant of present
experience is a resultant of former actions. Only the Buddhas, the
loving teachers of salvation to mankind, have risen after æons of effort
in countless births into the transcendental peace of Nirvāṇa. Hence the
great religious duty of the believer is aspiration to become a Buddha
for the weal of fellow-creatures. This yearning arises in his heart, by
the special grace of the Buddhas, in the form of the Bodhi-chitta, which
is finely expressed by our author in his third chapter. By this vow the
believer constitutes himself a *Bodhi-sattva*, "or creature of
enlightenment," of the first stage; he has devoted himself to the
acquisition of merit by charity and knowledge which shall raise him
through higher and higher planes of existence, until he reaches the
condition of the celestial Bodhi-sattvas, such as Manjughosha and
Avalokiteśvara, who have attained the highest beatification that the
finite universe can give, and are only delaying their departure into the
infinite stillness of Nirvāṇa in order to continue their works as loving
guides and helpers of mankind towards happiness and spiritual
sanctification,

\(3\) The minions of life are the passions and other frailties which
keep the soul enchained in the cycle (saṃśāra) of bodily births*.*

\(4\) The *Musa sapiertum*.

\(5\) See the chapter on the Perfect Long-suffering, below.

\(6\) Thu Buddhas, here styled *Tathāgata*, on which see the *Journal of
the Royal Asiatic Society* for 1893, p. 103 f. Compare the term *Sugata*
(above, note 1).

\(7\) This term here denotes the divine Bodhi-sattvas

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (Avalokiteśvara,
Manju-ghosha, etc.). who have reached the higher stages of
beatification.

\(8\) A Buddha-kshetra, or "domain of Buddha," is a system of a thousand
millions of worlds, each under the guardianship of a Buddha.

\(9\) This refers to the Buddha of the present era, Gautama the Śākya,
and the places hallowed by his pious deeds in various births previous to
his Nirvāṇa.

\(10\) The Buddha, the Law, and the Congregation.

\(11\) See above, note 2.

\(12\) These are the celestial Bodhi-sattvas (see notes 1, 2).

\(13\) "Stillness" is perhaps the mast suitable term to express the
idea, of Nirvāṇa; compare Denssen, *Allgemeine Geschichte der
Philosophie*, bd. 1., abteil. 3, pp. 111 f., 152 f., etc. Nirvāṇa does
not signify extinction or annihilation, as is commonly imagined in
Europe, but the very reverse, perfect spiritual self-realisation in
transcendental being. The metaphor first occurs in the Upanishads, and
frequently reappears later in non-Buddhist theology; it denotes
*moksha*, the state in which the individual soul, identifying itself
with universal Being, is entirely at rest in itself and in Brahma, in
the stillness of infinite thought. The fire of delusion and earthly
desire has become extinguished in it by the annihilation of its feel,
the false imagination of finite being. Nirvāṇa is thus similar to the
*yoga*, or ecstasy of the Yogic adept, which is technically defined as
*chitta-vṛitti-nirodha*, cessation of the activity of the finite
imagination, and it is frequently used in the same connection. Nirvāṇa
properly may denote either the blowing-out of a flame, or the burning of
a flame undisturbed by wind (compare *Bhagavad-gītā*, vi, 19). The
latter interpretation will suit the oldest passages where the word
occurs; but the former is also applicable, and is necessary in some of
the later passages. Now the Buddhists denied the existence of a soul, or
permanent Self. Logically, therefore, they could not assert the
existence of a Nirvāṇa, or transcendental existence of the soul or Self;
and theoretically, indeed, the Mādhyamika

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

school of the Mahā-yāna denied Nirvāṇa, as well As finite being,
substituting for the whole the universal "Void," *Śūnya*, which however
is only another name for infinite) Being, the unqualified
Transcendental. Buddhist orthodoxy refused to speculate on this
antinomy. But in the same way as Buddhism, while denying the Brahmanic
conception of the soul, substitutes for it the *santāna*, or succession
of moments of consciousness, which practically differs very little from
it, so its conception of Nirvāṇa practically amounted to much the same
as the Brahmanic) ideal. See above, [p. 19](tpol03.htm#page_19.md).

\(14\) The "lucky jar" is a magic vessel in which is found whatever the
owner desires; the "wishing-tree" and the "cow of plenty" are part of
the furniture of the Hindu paradise, and have similar properties.

\(15\) Namely, human birth under the dispensation of a Buddha.

\(16\) Meru is an imaginary mountain in the Hindu cosmology, which forms
the centre of the universe, and around which the sun and moon turn.

\(17\) The ten points of space are the north, south, east, west,
north-east, south-east, north-west, south-west, zenith, and nadir.

\(18\) The remembrance is of the Law of the Buddha and of the teachings
of his Church.

\(19\) The Perfect Charity (*Dāna-pāramitā*) is not an actual
deliverance of the world from poverty (misery due to worldly desire),
but an *intention* for such deliverance; it is a grace of the spirit.
Thus purity of the will is the greatest of all virtues, and the
foundation of all, Similarly, the Perfect Conduct (*Śīla-pāramitā*),
which is the subject of this chapter, consists essentially in the will
to hurt no living creature.

\(20\) Morality is higher than charity, patience than morality, etc.,
and the aspirant to Buddhahood must not practise charity at the expense
of morality, and so on. But this rule has an exception. The essential
principle of the divine Bodhi-sattvas’ conduct is *śikshā-saṃvara*,
"right and holy

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

conduct," the dyke which holds in their place the "waters of
righteousness"; and this principle must never be infringed by the
aspirant's action.

\(21\) The aspirant, having collected alms of food by begging from door
to door, will divide it into four parts, one for each of the throe
classes here mentioned, and one for himself. The three robes allowed to
Buddhist devotees are of yellow rags.

\(22\) Namely, a person whose compassion is excited merely in connection
with friends, enemies, the unfortunate, etc. The aspirant devotes his
whole self to the welfare of fellow creatures, but this gift must not be
too hastily given. It should be reserved for occasions when it will
assist to enlightenment, etc., another aspirant of equal or greater
power for good.

\(23\) The fundamental principle of Hindu medicine, like that of the
Greeks, is the existence of three "humours" (*dosha*, *dhātu*), namely,
wind, gall, and slime, which when in equipoise cause health, and when
disturbed produce sickness.

\(24\) Here comes a polemic against the Sānkhya and the Vedānti schools.
The former divide existence into primal Matter and individual souls
which by connection with the former assume the functions of finite
thought. The Vedāntis believe in a single universal soul or Brahma,
essentially indeterminate, which by the operation of the cosmic Illusion
(*Māyā*) differentiates itself into individual finite souls. Buddhism
denies the existence of a permanent soul, substituting for it a
succession of instants of consciousness.

\(25\) It may be objected that if all action is a purely mechanical
result of previously existent forces, the action of the mind in hatred,
etc., is also mechanical, and cannot be checked, and hence the peace and
salvation of the spirit are unattainable. But this is not the case,
according to our author. Existence is a series of forces proceeding one
from the other (the *pratītya-samutpāda*; but by arresting one of these
the individual arrests all subsequent forces as far as he is concerned;
and the primary force is ignorance.

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

\(26\) If I save myself from hell by refraining from retaliation upon
those who wrong me, the merit of this is mine; and their merit, which
consists in forcing me to suffer and expiate my guilt from former deeds,
is not lessened by this merit of mine.

\(27\) The objector claims that, while he admits the merits of the
person praised, he cannot abide the pleasure which the eulogist feels in
praising him. But this is a sin. To every man must be given his just
reward, both in this and other worlds; and both the eulogy and the
eulogist's joy are part of the reward of the person eulogised.

\(28\) The presence of a *pravrājuka*, an ascetic who bas himself
withdrawn from the world, causes us to perform the *pravrajyā*, *i.e.*
to take from him the vows of his ascetic order and become a monk in his
company.

\(20\) Living creatures are a "domain" (*kshetra*) for the acquisition
of merit by the aspirants to enlightenment; for merit is gained by
showing love, charity, etc., towards them. The Buddhas or "Conquerors"
(*Jina*) are likewise a "domain"; merit is gained by doing service to
them. (Cf. note 7 above.)

\(30\) Both Buddhas and inferior creatures alike assist the aspirant to
win merit and become a Buddha himself. True, the Buddhas are
immeasurably good and great, and are always consciously beneficent,
while other creatures often are in their intention maleficent, But if we
measure the worth of a purpose by its results, noting that wrong-doing
is a "blessing in disguise" to the sufferer, we must conclude that the
purpose of a Buddha's help is not more valuable to the aspirant than the
various motives of other creatures with whom he has dealings.

\(31\) This refers to the Eastern custom of keeping fish alive in tanks
until they are needed for the kitchen.

\(32\) See [p. 76](tpol10.htm#page_76.md).

\(33\) This is a polemical reference to the Hīna-yāna school of
Buddhism, of which the adepts (*Śrāvaka*) sought enlightenment and
Nirvāṇa for themselves and by themselves.

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Is not such a
course more rapid and sure than that recommended by our author, in which
the aspirant to Buddhahood deliberately postpones his Nirvāṇa in order
to work for the welfare of the world? Śānti-deva here brushes aside this
objection. In his ninth chapter, in a passage omitted in this
translation, he attempts to prove that the Hīna-yāna can attain neither
Nirvāṇa nor suppression of passion.

\(34\) The sacred kite on which the god Vishnu rides.

\(35\) A reference to an ordeal in a well-known legend.

\(30\) See *Dhamma-pada*, ch. ii.

\(37\) Namely, conceptions inspired by sensual love, hatred, or
delusion, which agitate the spirit.

\(38\) To wit, alms of food and the rags from which is made the
beggar-monk's robe.

\(39\) This is a play on words. Bāla signifies (i) a fool, and (ii) the
morning sun, the rod glow of which dots not stain the pure whiteness of
the new moon.

\(40\) The bearers of the funeral bier.

\(41\) At the hour of death he can fix his thought upon the Buddha and
the Law, without disturbance from the laments of kinsfolk and friends.

\(42\) Under the malignant influence of former evil works men fail to
use the opportunity of salvation offered by their human birth, and after
death are reborn in hell or as lower beings.

\(43\) The chief of the gods, who dwells in paradise, *svarga*.

\(44\) *Dhamma-pada*, ch. ii.

\(45\) This refers to the spiritual exercises practised by the
Buddhists, as by other Hindu devotees. In order to render the thought
immobile and uninfluenced by external sensations, various physical
objects are prescribed to he rigidly contemplated by it, which, together
with the themes of meditation described above, raise it to a state of
still ecstasy, from which it passes either into a blessed rebirth or
into final Nirvāṇa.

\(46\) Namely, the Perfections of charity, morality, etc.

\(47\) This distinction of "veiled" or conventional reality

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (*samvṛiti-satya*)
and transcendental reality (*paramārthasatya*) is shared by the
Mādhyamikas with the monistic Vedāntis. The former conceives objects as
they appear to the normal intelligence of finite beings; but this mode
of conception is false when viewed from the standpoint of transcendental
verity, which insists upon the essentially infinite and inconceivable
nature of things. Thus in the higher reality nothing can be predicated
of anything; all is inconceivable, "void." Our author here launches upon
a long discussion, omitted in our translation, in which he argues that
the impermanence of finite being, which the Hīna-yāna regards as the
highest truth, is, from the transcendental standpoint of his school (the
Mādhyamika) mere illusion; that the *Vijnāna-vādis*, who hold that
nothing exists but pure absolute thought, are likewise mistaken; that
the Hīna-yāna is insufficient in theory and in practice; that the
conception of au ego held by non-Buddhist philosophers is false; that
the principles upon which various heretical schools wrongly regard being
as based are nonexistent; and that, the only legitimate attitude is that
of the Mādhyamikas, with their denial of the validity of the means of
knowledge and their doctrine of a conventional reality on the one hand
and a higher reality or "void" on the other.

\(48\) See above, note 4.

\(49\) She following stanza appears to mean: "In life there are many
precipices, and no true reality" (reading *atatvam*); "there are
contradictions, and can be no true reality." But as this meaning is
somewhat uncertain, I have omitted it in my translation.

\(50\) Māra, the embodiment of worldly desire and lust of the flesh.

\(51\) The tenth chapter, which follows in the original Sanskrit, is
omitted in this translation, as its 58 verses contain only prayers for
the welfare of all beings for the sake of the merit acquired by our
author in composing this work. A quotation is given in the Introduction,
[p. 26](tpol03.htm#page_26.md) f.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Appendix](tpol14.md)

</div>
