<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Wisdom of the East](../../woe/index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](tpol10)  [Next](tpol12.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Path of Light*, by L.D. Barnett, \[1909\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

### CHAPTER VIII.

### THE PERFECT CONTEMPLATION

<span class="smallcaps">When</span> thus vigour has been nurtured, it is
well to fix the thought in concentred effort; the man of wandering mind
lies between the fangs of the Passions. It cannot wander if body and
thought be in solitude; so it is well to forsake the world and put away
vain imaginations (37). Because of love, or hunger for gain, and the
like, men will not forsake the world; then in order to cast it aside the
wise will lay to heart these thoughts.

Passion is overcome only by him who has won through stillness of spirit
the perfect vision. Knowing this, I must first seek for stillness; it
comes through the contentment that is regardless of the world. What
creature of a day should cling to other frail beings, when he can never
again through thousands of births behold his beloved? Yet when he sees
him not, he is ill at ease; he rests not in concentred thought; and even
when he beholds him he is not satisfied, but is distressed by the same
longing as before. He

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

sees not things in their reality; he loses his horror of the world; ho
is consumed by his grief in yearning for union with the beloved. In
thoughts thereupon his brief life vainly passes away hour by hour; and
the eternal Law is broken for the sake of a short-lived friend!

If he share in the life of the foolish, a man assuredly goes to hell; if
he share it not, he wins hatred; what profits it to have commerce with
the foolish? They are friends for a moment, foes for a moment, wrathful
when they should be pleased—how hard to content are the worldly! They
are angered if wholesomely counselled, and hold me back from good; if I
heed them not they are wroth, and pass into hell. When can good come of
a fool? He is jealous of a better man, contentious with a peer, haughty
towards one that is lower, puffed up by praise, angered by blame.
Exaltation of self, blame of others, discourse in praise of worldly
pleasure—some such guilt will assuredly come from fool to fool. Thus it
is from the union of one with another; evil thereby meets evil. I will
live alone, in peace and with untroubled mind.

It is well to flee from the foolish. If he come in thy way, seek to win
him over by kindness, not so as to hold commerce with him, but in a
manner of godly indifference. I will take from him only enough for the
holy life (38), as the bee takes honey from the flower; thus in every

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

place I will hold myself from commerce with him, like the new moon (39).

The mortal who thinks of his gains or his honours or the favour of many
men will be afraid of death when it falls upon him, Whatsoever it be in
which the pleasure-crazed spirit takes its delight, that thing becomes a
pain a thousand times greater. Therefore the wise man will seek not for
pleasure, for from desire arises terror; and if it come of itself, let
him stand firm and wait, Many there are who have found gain, many who
have won fame; but none know whither they have gone, with their gains
and their fame. Some loathe me; then why shall I rejoice in being
praised? Some praise me; then why shall I be cast down by blame?

Living beings are of diverse character; not even the Conquerors can
content them, much less simple souls such as I. Then why think of the
world? They blame a fellow-creature who gains naught, they scorn him who
gains something; being thus by nature unpleasant companions, what
happiness can come from them? The Blessed Ones have said that the fool
is no man's friend; for the fool has no love save where his interest
lies. The love that rests on interest is but selfish, even as grief at
loss of wealth springs from loss of pleasure.

Trees are not disdainful, and ask for no toilsome wooing; fain would I
consort with those sweet

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

companions! Fain would I dwell in some deserted sanctuary, beneath a
tree or in caves, that I might walk without heed, looking never behind!
Fain would I abide in nature's own spacious and lordless lands, a
homeless wanderer free of will, my sole wealth a clay bowl, my cloak
profitless to robbers, fearless and careless of my body! Fain would I go
to my home the graveyard, and compare with other skeletons my own frail
body! for this my body will become so foul that the very jackals will
not approach it because of its stench. The bony members born with this
corporeal frame will fall asunder from it, much more so my friends.
Alone man is born, alone he dies; no other has a share in his sorrows.
What avail friends, but to bar his way? As a wayfarer takes a, brief
lodging, so he that is travelling through the way of existence finds in
each birth but a passing rest.

It is well for a man to depart to the forest ere the four bearers (40)
carry him away amidst the laments of his folk. Free from commerce and
hindrance, possessing naught but his body, he has no grief at the hour
of death, for already be has died to the world; no neighbours are there
to vex him or disturb his remembrance of the Enlightened and like
thoughts (41). Then I will ever woo sweet Solitude, untroubled dayspring
of bliss, stilling all unrest. Released from all other thoughts, with
mind utterly set upon my own

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

spirit, I will strive to concentre and control my spirit.

The desires beget harm in this world and beyond: here, by bondage,
slaughter, and loss of limb; beyond, in hell. That for the sake of which
thou hast bowed many a time before bawds, heeding not sin nor infamy,
and cast thyself into peril and wasted thy substance, that which by its
embrace has brought thee supreme delight—it is naught but bones, now
free and unpossessed; wilt thou not take thy fill of embraces now, and
delight thyself? This was the face that erstwhile turned downwards in
modesty and was unwilling to look up, hidden behind a veil whether eyes
gazed upon it or gazed not; and this face now the vultures unveil to
thee, as though they could not bear thy impatience. Look on. it—why dost
thou flee now from it? . . .

Mark how fortune brings endless misfortune by the miseries of winning
it, guarding it, and losing it; men's thoughts cling altogether to their
riches, so that they have not a moment to free themselves from the
sorrows of life. Thus they who are possessed by desire suffer much and
enjoy little, as the ox that drags a cart gets but a morsel of grass.
For the sake of this morsel of enjoyment, which falls easily to the
beast's lot, man, blinded by his destiny, wastes this brief fortune,
that is so hard to win (42). For all time lasts

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

the struggle for the welfare of the mean body that is doomed to depart
and fall into hell, and even a millionth part of this labour would win
the rank of the Enlightened. Greater is the pain of them that are
possessed by desire than the pain of the way of holiness, and no
Enlightenment comes to them. Neither sword, nor poison, nor fire, nor
fall into abysses, nor foemen may be compared to the desires, if we bear
in mind the agonies of hell and the like. Then shrink from the desires,
and learn delight in solitude, in the peaceful woodlands void of strife
and toil. Happy are they who are fanned by the sweet silent breezes of
the forest, as they walk upon the pleasant rock-floors broad as in a
palace and cooled by the moonbeams' sandal ointment, and take thought
for the weal of their fellow-creatures! Dwelling anywhere for what time
they will, in deserted sanctuary or cave or beneath the trees, saved
from the weariness of winning and guarding possessions, they wander
fancy-free at pleasure. Indra (43) himself can hardly win the bliss of
contentment that is enjoyed by hint who wanders homeless at his own free
will and unattached to aught.

By pondering in such wise upon the excellences of solitude a man stills
vain imaginations and strengthens his Thought of Enlightenment. First he
will diligently foster the thought that his fellow-creatures are the
same as himself. "All

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

have the same sorrows, the same joys as I, and I must guard them like
myself. The body, manifold of parts in its division of members, must be
preserved as a whole; and so likewise this manifold universe has its
sorrow and its joy in common. Although my pain may bring no hurt to
other bodies, nevertheless it is a pain to me, which I cannot bear
because of the love of self; and though I cannot in myself feel the pain
of another, it is a pain to him which he cannot bear because of the love
of self. I must destroy the pain of another as though it were my own,
because it is a pain; I must show kindness to others, for they are
creatures as I am myself. . . . Then, as I would guard myself from evil
repute, so I will frame a spirit of helpfulness and tenderness towards
others."

By constant use the idea of an "I" attaches itself to foreign drops of
seed and blood, although the thing exists not. Then why should I not
conceive my fellow's body as my own self? That my body is foreign to me
is not bard to see. I will think of myself as a sinner, of others as
oceans of virtue; I will cease to live as self, and will take as my self
my fellow-creatures. We love our hands and other limbs, as members of
the body; then why not love other living beings, as members of the
universe? By constant use man comes to imagine that his body, which has
no self-being, is a "self"; why then should he

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

not conceive his "self" to lie in his fellows also? Thus in doing
service to others pride, admiration, and desire of reward find no place,
for thereby we satisfy the wants of our own self. Then, as thou wouldst
guard thyself against suffering and sorrow, so exercise the spirit of
helpfulness and tenderness towards the world. . . .

Make thyself a spy for the service of others, and whatsoever thou seest
in thy body's work that is good for thy fellows, perform it so that it
may be conveyed to them. Be thou jealous of thine own self when thou
seest that it is at ease and thy fellow in distress, that it is in high
estate and he is brought low, that it is at rest and he is at labour.
Make thine own sell lose its pleasures and bear the sorrow of thy
fellows; mark its deceit at each time and in each act. Cast upon its
head the guilt even of others’ works; make confession to the Great Saint
of even its slightest sin. Darken its glory by telling of the greater
glory of others. Make it a carrier in thy fellow-creatures’ service,
like a mean slave. It is made of sin, and because it may have, some
chance morsel of goodness from without, it is not therefore worthy of
praise. Let no man know its goodness. In short, let all the wrong that
thou hast done for the sake of thine own self to others fall upon thine
own self for the sake of thy fellow-creatures. Grant it no power to talk
overmuch; keep it in the condition of a young bride, abashed,

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

timid, and guarded. Bend it to thy will by commanding it how it shall
act and stand and forbear, and chastise it for disobedience. "O my
spirit, thou wilt not do as I bid thee; then I will chastise thee, for
in thee all sins find a. home. Whither wilt thou go? I shall see thee,
and overthrow all thy pride; the days are gone when I let myself be
undone by thee. Put away now the hope that thou canst still seek an
advantage of thine own; I have sold thee into the hands of others,
heeding not however much thou mayst suffer. For if through heedlessness
I deliver thee not over to my fellow-creatures, thou wilt doubtless
deliver me to the warders of hell. Many times hast thou thus betrayed
me, and long have I been racked; remembering these deeds of enmity, I
will destroy thee, thou slave of self-seeking." If thou lowest thyself,
thou must have no love of self; if thou wouldst save thyself, thou dose
not well to be saving of self. The more heedfully the body is guarded,
the sorer are its sufferings and the deeper its fall.

But despite its fall, the whole earth cannot satisfy the lust of the
flesh; who can do its will? To him who longs for the impossible come
guilt and bafflement of desire; but he who is utterly without desire has
a happiness that ages not. Then give no room for the lust of the flesh
to swell; blessed indeed is the thing that is not imagined for the sake
of its pleasantness.

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The body is a
motionless thing stirred by something without, and ending in ashes, a
loathsome frame of foulness; why do I cling to it? What have I to do
with this machine, alive or dead? What distinguishes it from such things
as clods of earth? Alas, O thought of self, thou wilt not die! Through
complicity with the flesh I win sorrow, all to no purpose; it is no
better than a thing of wood, and what should avail its hatred or its
kindness? It feels no love when I guard it, no hate when vultures devour
'it; then why do I love it? I am angered when it is treated with scorn,
delighted when it is honoured; but if it has no knowledge, to 'what end
is my toil? My friends, forsooth, are they who wish well to this body;
but all men wish well to their own flesh, and why are not they also my
friends? So I have surrendered my body indifferently for the weal of the
world; it is but as an instrument of work that I still bear it, with all
its guilt. Enough then of worldly ways! I follow in the path of the
Wise, remembering the Discourse upon Heedfulness (44) and putting away
sloth. To overcome the power of darkness I concentre my thought, drawing
the spirit away from vain paths and fixing it straightly upon its stay
(45).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX. The Perfect Knowledge](tpol12.md)

</div>
