<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Wisdom of the East](../../woe/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tpol03)  [Next](tpol05) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Path of Light*, by L.D. Barnett, \[1909\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

### CHAPTER I

### THE PRAISE OF THE THOUGHT OF ENLIGHTENMENT

REVERENTLY bowing before the Blessed Ones, their Sons, the Body of the
Law, and aft the worshipful ones (1), I will briefly set forth in
accordance with Holy Writ the way whereby the sons of the Blessed Ones
enter the godly life. Nothing new will be told here, nor have I skill in
writing of books; therefore I have done this work to hallow my own
thoughts, not designing it for the welfare of others. By it the holy
impulse within me to frame righteousness is strengthened; but if a
fellow-creature should see it, this my book will fulfil another end
likewise.

This brief estate, which once gotten is a. means to all the aims of
mankind, is exceeding hard to win; if one use it not for wholesome
reflection, how shall it ever come again to his lot? As in the night,
amidst the gross darkness of the clouds, the lightning chews for an
instant its radiance, so by the grace of the Enlightened it may hap that
the mind of man turn for an instant to holy works. Thus righteousness is
feeble, and the power of evil is constant, mighty, and dire; by what
righteousness could it be overcome, if there

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

were not the Thought of Enlightenment? (2) Pondering through many æons,
the Supreme Saints have found this blessing, whereby a swelling joy
sweeps in sweetness down the boundless waters of mankind. They who would
escape the hundreds of life's sorrows, who would end the anguish of
living creatures, and who would taste hundreds of deep delights, must
never surrender the Thought of Enlightenment. 'The wretch held in thrall
by Life's minions (3) is declared a son of the Blessed Ones straightway
when the Thought of Enlightenment arises in him, and he becomes
worshipful to the worlds of men and gods. This foul form that ho has
taken he makes into the priceless jewel of a. Conqueror's form; oh,
grasp firmly the Thought of Enlightenment, that exceedingly potent
elixir! Ho, ye who are exiles in the marts of bodied being, grasp firmly
the precious jewel of the Thought of Enlightenment, which the
immeasurably wise sole Guides of the world's caravan have well assayed I
Like the plantain-tree (4), all other righteousness fades away after its
fruit is cast; but the tree of the Thought of Enlightenment bears
everlasting fruit and fades not, but Ls ever fecund. Though he have
wrought most grievous sins, a man by taking refuge therein escapes them
straightway; as ignorant beings under the guardianship of a mighty man
escape sore terrors, why seek they not their refuge in this? . . .

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

Eager to escape sorrow, men rush into sorrow; from desire of happiness
they blindly slay their own happiness, enemies to themselves; they
hunger for happiness and suffer manifold pains; whence shall come one so
kind as he who can satisfy them with all manner of happiness, allay all
their pains, and shatter their delusion—whence such a friend, and whence
such a holy deed? He who repays good deed with good deed is praised;
what shall be said of the Son of Enlightenment, who does kindness
unsought? He who sets a banquet before a few is called a "doer of
righteousness," and is honoured by the world, because in his pride he
entertains men for half a day with a brief largesse of mere food; but
what of him who bestows on a measureless number of creatures a
satisfaction of all desires unbounded in time and perishing not when the
world of heaven perishes? Such is the Master of the Banquet, the Son of
the Conqueror; whosoever sins in his heart against him, saith the Lord,
shall abide in hell as many ages as the moments of his sin. But he whose
spirit is at peace with them shall thence get abundant fruit; and truly,
wrong to the Sons of the Conqueror can he done only by great effort, but
kindness towards them is easy. I do homage to the bodies of them in whom
has arisen the choice jewel of the Thought, and even the ill-treatment
of whom leads to happiness (5); in these mines of bliss I seek my
refuge.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. The Confession of Sin](tpol05)

</div>
