<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Mysticism](../../myst/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](cjb00) 
[Next](cjb02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0031574NM/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Confessions of Jacob Boehme*, by Jacob Boehme, ed. W. Scott Palmer
\[1920\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_v">p. v</span>

### NOTE BY THE EDITOR

ONE day last winter, in a moment which I must confess to have been idle,
I took up Dr. Alexander Whyte's "Appreciation" of Behmen as, following
William Law, he calls him. There I found the following passage:

"While we have nothing that can properly be called a biography of Jacob
Behmen, we have ample amends made to us in those priceless morsels of
autobiography that lie scattered so plentifully up and down all his
books. And nothing could be more charming than just those incidental and
unstudied utterances of Behmen about himself. Into the very depths of a
passage of the profoundest speculation Behmen will all of a sudden

<span id="page_vi">p. vi</span>

throw a few verses of the most childlike and heart-winning confidences
about his own mental history and his own spiritual experience. And thus
it is that, without at all intending it, Behmen has left behind him a
complete history of his great mind and his holy heart in those outbursts
of diffidence, depreciation, explanation, and self-defence, of which his
philosophical and theological, as well as his apologetic and
experimental, books are all so full. It were an immense service done to
our best literature if some of Behmen's students would go through all
Behmen's books, so as to make a complete collection and composition of
the best of these autobiographic passages. … It would then be seen by
all, what few, till then, will believe, that Jacob Behmen's mind and
heart and spiritual experience all combine to give him a foremost place
among the most classical masters in that great field."

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

I turned at once to the massive volumes of English translation which the
eighteenth century has bequeathed to us. My copy has the name of Maurice
on the title-page—Frederick Denison Maurice—for whom Boehme was, he
said, "a generative thinker," and on the fly-leaf there is John
Sterling, whose granddaughter gave me the books. There I found, where
before I had looked for the doctrine only, the man himself. I determined
to do my best to extract from the formless mass of writings what was
necessary to show that man.

The old translation was known to be as faithful as could fairly be hoped
for, and nothing better existed or could now be made. Twentieth-century
English would not do. So I used my own copy and followed it very
closely. No translation is as sacred as an original, and I have
therefore allowed myself to make small changes in the interests of
clearness and accuracy,

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

while carefully respecting both the style of the translator and the mind
and meaning of the author.

My task has been in the main one of rigorous omission; I have kept only
what was precious for my purpose. Everything that did not reveal the man
himself I have rejected; but some of his doctrine is eminently the man,
and this I have retained. The outcome, I believe, is a spiritual
autobiography which, although it is by a writer who was born nearly
three hundred and fifty years ago and has been read and studied by
thousands, has never been seen in its continuity before.

W. S. P.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Introduction](cjb02)

</div>
