<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Mysticism](../../myst/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](cjb10) 
[Next](cjb12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0031574NM/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Confessions of Jacob Boehme*, by Jacob Boehme, ed. W. Scott Palmer
\[1920\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

### CHAPTER IX

THOU Sophister, I know thou wilt accuse me of pride because I saw so far
into the Deep. But it is said that you look only upon the wisdom of this
world: I do not esteem it or care for it; it affords me no joy at all. I
rejoice at this, that my soul moveth in wonders to the praise of God, so
that I know his wondrous works, in which my soul delighteth.

Now, since I know the wonders shall I be silent? Am I not born to this,
as are all creatures, that I should open the wonders of God? Therefore
now I labour in my work and another in his; and thou, proud Sophister,
in thine.

We stand all in God's field, and we

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

grow to God's glory and to his works of wonder, as well the wicked as
the godly. But every fruit groweth in its own manner: when the mower
shall cut it down, then every fruit shall come into its own barn, each
receiveth that which is its own. Then the field in its nature, out of
which each is grown, shall be made manifest; there are two centres in
eternity, the love and the wrath, and each centre brings forth its own
crop.

Therefore consider, O man, what you condemn, that you fall not upon the
sword of the Spirit of God, and that your work be not consumed in the
fire of wrath.

Thou, Sophister, runnest on wittingly to the Devil, for thine own
profit, for thy transitory voluptuousness and honour, and dost not see
the open gate which the Spirit showeth thee. If thou wilt not, then it
is as was said: *We have piped unto you but ye have not danced*. We have
called you, but you are not come to us;

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I have been hungry
after you, but you have not fed me; you are not grown in my garden of
roses, therefore you are none of my food; your heart hath not been found
in my praise, therefore you are not my food. And the bridegroom passeth
by; then cometh the other, and gathereth what he findeth into his barn.

 

O dear children, if you understood this, how would you tread underfoot
the contentions of the Sophisters! Much consisteth therein which shall
hereafter be shown you, so far as we ought; let none be wilfully
blinded, nor be offended by the simplicity of this hand.

If we will enter into the kingdom of heaven we must be children, and not
cunning and wise in the understanding of this world; we must depart from
our earthly reason and enter into obedience to our eternal first Mother.
So we shall receive the spirit and life of our

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Mother, and then
also we shall know her habitation.

No wit of our own attaineth the crown of the mystery of God. It is
indeed revealed in the writings of the Saints, but the spirit of this
world apprehendeth it not. No Doctors, though they have studied ever so
much, have any ability in their own wit to attain the crown of God's
hidden mysteries.

No one can in his own power apprehend anything of the depths of God and
teach it to another; all are children and scholars in their A B C.
Although I write and speak in high fashion thereof, yet the
understanding is not my own; the spirit of the Mother speaketh out of
her children what it will; it revealeth itself in many ways, in one
otherwise than in another, for its wondrous wisdom is a deep without
measure, and you should not marvel that the children of God have not one
manner of speech and word, for each speaketh

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

out of the wisdom of the eternal Nature-Mother whose diversity is
infinite.

But the goal is the Heart of God; they all run thither, and herein lies
the test whereby you shall know whether the spirit of a man speaketh
from God or from the Devil.

 

Hereby we know that we are God's children and generated of God. God is
himself the Being of all beings; and we are as Gods in him, through whom
he revealeth himself.

Now therefore I set before you the ground of the heavens, the stars and
elements, that you may see what is heavenly and what is earthly, what is
transitory and mortal, and what is eternal and enduring. To which end I
have now purposed to myself to write; not to boast of my high knowledge
but out of love in Christ, as a servant and minister of Christ.

For the Lord hath both the willing and

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

the doing in his hands; I am able to do nothing; also my earthly reason
understandeth nothing: I am yielded into our Mother's bosom and do as
the Mother showeth me; I know not from anybody else, I am not born with
knowledge from the wisdom of this world, neither do I understand it; but
what is bestowed upon me that I bestow again. I have no other purpose
herein, neither do I know to what end I must write these high things:
what the Spirit showeth me, that I set down.

Thus I labour in my vineyard, in which the Master of the house hath put
me; hoping also to eat of the pleasant sweet grapes, which indeed I have
very often received out of the paradise of God. I will so speak as for
the use of many, and yet I think I write it but for myself: the fiery
driving will have it so as if I did speak of and for many; and yet I
know nothing of this while I write.

Therefore if it shall happen to be read,

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

let none account it for a work of the outward reason; for it hath
proceeded from the inward hidden man, according to which this hand hath
written it without respect of any person.

I exhort the reader that he will enter into himself and behold himself
in the inward man; then I shall be welcome to him. This I speak
seriously and faithfully.

When we consider ourselves aright in this knowledge we see clearly that
we have been locked up and led as it were blindfold. The wise of this
world have shut and barred us up in their art and reason, so that we are
made to see with their eyes. And this spirit which hath so long led us
captive may well be called Antichrist; I find no other name in the light
of nature, which I can call it by, but Antichrist in Babel.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X](cjb12)

</div>
