<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Mysticism](../../myst/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](cjb16) 
[Next](cjb18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0031574NM/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Confessions of Jacob Boehme*, by Jacob Boehme, ed. W. Scott Palmer
\[1920\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

### CHAPTER XV

I WILL now speak to those who feel indeed in themselves a desire to
repent, and yet cannot come to acknowledge and bewail their committed
sins; the flesh saying continually to the soul, Stay awhile, it is well
enough, or, It is time enough to-morrow; and when tomorrow is come then
the flesh says again, To-morrow; the soul in the meanwhile, sighing and
fainting, conceiveth neither any true sorrow for the sins it hath
committed nor any comfort. Unto such an one, I say, I will write a
process or way, which I myself have gone, that he may know what he must
do and how it went with me, if peradventure he be inclined to enter into
and pursue the same way.

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

When any man findeth in himself, pressed home upon his mind and
conscience, a hunger or desire to repent, and yet feeleth no true sorrow
in himself for his sins which he hath committed, but only an hunger or
desire of such sorrow; so that the poor captive soul continually sighs,
fears, and must needs acknowledge itself guilty of sins before the
judgement of God; such an one, I say, can take no better course than
this, namely, to wrap up his senses, mind and reason together, and make
to himself instantly, as soon as ever he perceiveth in himself the
desire to repent, a mighty strong purpose and resolution that he will
that very hour, nay, that minute, immediately enter into repentance, and
go forth from his wicked way, not at all regarding the power and respect
of the world. Yea, and if it should be required, that he will forsake
and disesteem all things for true repentance sake; and never depart from
that resolution again though he

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

should be made the fool and scorn of all the world for it; that with the
full bent and strength of his mind he will go forth from the glory and
pleasure of the world, and patiently enter into the passion and death of
Christ, and set all his hope and confidence upon the life to come; that
even now in righteousness and truth he will enter into the vineyard of
Christ and therein do the will of God; that in the Spirit and will of
Christ he will begin and finish all his actions in this world; and for
the sake of Christ's word and promise, which holds forth to us a
heavenly reward, willingly take up and bear every adversity and cross,
so that he may be admitted into the communion and fellowship of the
children of Christ.

He must firmly imagine to himself, wholly wrapping up his soul in this
persuasion, that in such his purpose he shall obtain the love of God in
Christ Jesus, and that God will give unto him that

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

noble pledge, the Holy Ghost, for an earnest; that in the humanity of
Christ he himself shall be born again, and that the Spirit of Christ
will renew his mind with love and power and strengthen his weak faith.
Also that in his divine hunger he shall receive the flesh and blood of
Christ for food and drink in the desire of his soul, which hungereth and
thirsteth after it as its proper nutriment; and with the thirst of the
soul drink the water of eternal life out of the pure fountain of Jesus
Christ.

He must also wholly and firmly imagine to himself and set before him the
great love of God. He must persuade himself that God in Christ will much
more readily hear him and receive him to grace than he come; that God in
the love of Christ, in the most dear and precious name Jesus, cannot
will any evil; and that there is no angry countenance at all in this
Name, but only the highest and deepest love

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

and faithfulness, the greatest sweetness of God.

In this consideration he must firmly imagine to himself that this very
hour and instant God is really present within and without him. He must
know and believe that in his inward man he standeth really before God on
whom his soul hath turned its back; and he must, with the eyes of his
mind cast down in fear and deepest humility, begin to confess his sins
and unworthiness before the face of God in some such manner as the
following:

O thou great unsearchable God, Lord of all things; thou who in Christ
Jesus, of thy great love towards us, hath manifested thyself in our
humanity: I, poor, unworthy, sinful wretch, come before thy presence,
though I am not worthy to lift up mine eyes unto thee, acknowledging and
confessing that I am guilty of breaking off from thy great love and the
grace which thou hast freely bestowed upon us.

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> My soul knoweth
not itself because of the mire of sin; but accounteth itself a strange
child before thee, not worthy to desire thy grace.

O God in Christ Jesus, thou who for poor sinners’ sake didst become man
to help them, to thee I complain. The Devil hath poisoned me so that I
know not my Saviour; I am become a wild branch on thy tree. In myself I
am become a fool; I am naked and bare, my shame stands before mine eyes,
I cannot hide it; thy judgement waiteth for me. What shall I say before
thee, who art the Judge of all the world?

O merciful God, it is owing to thy love and longsuffering that I lie not
already in hell. I lie before thee as a dying man whose life is passing
from his lips, as a spark of life going out; kindle it, O Lord, and lift
up the breath of my soul before thee.

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

A man must bring a serious mind to this work. If ever he would obtain
the divine love, and union with the noble Wisdom of God, he must make an
earnest vow in his purpose and mind.

Beloved Reader, out of love to thee I will not conceal from thee what is
made known to me. If thou lovest the vanity of the flesh still, and art
not in an earnest purpose on the way to the new birth, intending to
become a new man, then leave the above-written words in that prayer
unspoken; else they will turn to a judgement of God in thee. Thou must
not take the holy names in vain; they belong to the thirsty soul. But if
thy soul be indeed athirst it shall find by experience what words they
are.

Beloved Soul; Christ was tempted in the wilderness, and, if thou wilt
put on him, thou must go through his whole progress even from his
incarnation to his ascension. Though thou art not able

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

nor required to do that which he hath done, yet thou must enter wholly
into his process and therein die continually from corruption. For the
Virgin, the Holy Wisdom, expouseth not herself to the soul except the
soul, through the death of Christ, spring up as a new plant, standing in
heaven.

Therefore take heed what thou doest: when thou hast made thy promise
keep it; then Wisdom will crown thee more readily than thou wouldst be
crowned. But thou must be sure, when the Tempter cometh to thee with the
pleasure and glory of the world, that thy mind reject it. The free will
of thy soul must stand the brunt as a warrior and champion. If the Devil
cannot prevail against thy soul with vanity, then he cometh against it
with its unworthiness and its catalogue of sins. There thou must fight
hard, for in this conflict it goeth so terribly with many a poor sinner
that outward reason

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

thinketh him to be distracted, or possessed by an evil spirit. In this
kind of combat heaven and hell are fighting one against the other. Yet a
soldier who hath been in the wars can tell how to fight, and can teach
another that may be in the like condition.

I have set down here for the help of the reader a very earnest prayer in
temptation, that he may know what to do if the same should befall him:

Most deep Love of God in Christ Jesus, leave me not in this distress. I
confess I am guilty of the sins which now rise up in my mind and
conscience; if thou forsake me I must perish. But hast thou not promised
me in thy word, saying, *If a mother could forget her child* (which can
hardly be), *yet thou wilt not forget me?* Thou hast set me as a sign in
thy hands which were pierced through with sharp nails, and in thy open
side whence blood and water gushed out. Poor wretch that

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I am! I can in my
own ability do nothing before thee; I sink myself down into thy wounds
and death; into thee I sink down in the anguish of my conscience; do
with me what thou wilt.

 

Beloved Reader, this is no light matter; he that accounteth it so hath
not yet passed through the trial. His conscience is still asleep. Happy
is he who passeth through this fire in the time of his youth, before the
Devil buildeth up in him a stronghold; he may prove a labourer in the
heavenly vineyard, and sow his seed in the garden of Christ, where in
due time he shall reap the fruit. This trial continueth a long while
with many a poor soul, several years if he do not earnestly and early
put on the armour of Christ. But to him who with a firm purpose striveth
to depart from his evil ways the temptation will not be so hard, neither
will it continue so long. Yet he must stand out valiantly till victory

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

be gotten over the Devil. He shall be mightily assisted, and all shall
end in the best for him; so that afterwards, when the day breaketh in
his soul, he turneth all to the great praise and glory of God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI](cjb18)

</div>
