[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dep072)  [Next](dep074) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002D48Q7A/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Discourses of Epictetus*, tr. by P.E Matheson, \[1916\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XIV

#### SCATTERED SAYINGS

<span class="smallcaps">As bad</span> actors cannot sing alone, but only
in a large company, so some men cannot walk alone. Man, if you are worth
anything, you must walk alone, and talk to yourself and not hide in the
chorus. Learn to bear mockery, look about you, examine yourself, that
you may get to know who you are.

When a man drinks water, or puts himself in training in any way, he
tells everybody at every opportunity, 'I am a water-drinker.' What? Do
you drink water for the sake of drinking it? Man, if it is to your
profit to drink it, drink; if not, your conduct is absurd. I say, if you
drink water because it does you good, say nothing to those who dislike
it. What? Are these the people of all others that you wish to please?

Actions have varying degrees of value: some are based on first
principles, others are determined by circumstances, or compromise, or
compliance, or manner of life.

There are two qualities that men must get rid of—conceit and diffidence.
Conceit is to think that one needs nothing beyond oneself: diffidence is
to suppose that one cannot live the untroubled life in the midst of so
many difficulties. Now conceit is removed by cross-questioning, and that
was what Socrates began with: that the thing is not impossible you must
discover by thought and search. This search will do you no harm: and
indeed philosophy means very little else but this—to search how it is
practicable to exercise the will to get and the will to avoid without
hindrance.

'I am better than you, for my father is of consular rank.' Another

<span id="page_368">p. 368</span>

says, 'I have been tribune, and you have not.' If we were horses you
would say, 'My sire was swifter', or, 'I have plenty of barley and
fodder', or, 'I have fine trappings.' If you said that, you may imagine
me replying, 'Very well then, let us try our paces.' Come, is there
nothing in men, like the pace of a horse, which will enable us to
distinguish the better from the worse? Are there not self-respect,
honour, justice? Show yourself superior in these qualities, that you may
be superior as a man should be. If you say to me, 'I am great at
kicking', I shall answer, 'That is the boast of an ass!'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV. That We Should Approach Everything with
Consideration](dep074)
