[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dep065)  [Next](dep067) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002D48Q7A/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Discourses of Epictetus*, tr. by P.E Matheson, \[1916\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_355">p. 355</span>

### CHAPTER VII

#### DIALOGUE WITH THE COMMISSIONER <span id="fr_31"></span>[3-4](dep086.htm#fn_31) OF THE FREE CITIES, WHO WAS AN EPICUREAN

<span class="smallcaps">When</span> the Commissioner, who was an
Epicurean, came into his lecture-room, It is proper, said Epictetus,
that we who are ignorant should inquire of you philosophers what is the
Best Thing in the world, just as those who come to a strange city make
inquiry of the citizens who know the place; that having learnt what it
is we may pursue it for ourselves, and come to the sight of it, as
foreigners visit the sights of the cities. For all, one may say, are
agreed that man has to do with three things, soul and body and external
things; it only remains for you to answer the question, 'What is the
*best* in man?' What shall we say to men? Shall we say, 'The flesh'? and
was it for this that Maximus sailed as far as Cassiope to see his son on
his way? Was it to have pleasure in the flesh? When the Commissioner
denied it, saying, 'God forbid!' Epictetus went on, Is it not proper to
devote our efforts to what is best in us?

'It is most proper.'

What have we then better than the flesh?

'The soul', he said.

And which are better, the goods of the best element in us or the goods
of the inferior?

'Those of the best.'

Are the goods of the soul in the sphere of the will or beyond it?

'Within the sphere of the will.'

Is the pleasure of the soul then within the sphere of the will?

'Yes', he said.

And what gives rise to it? Does it arise of itself? That is
inconceivable; for we must assume the existence of the good as something
which has value in itself, by partaking in which we shall have pleasure
in the soul.

To this too he agreed.

What then will give rise to this pleasure of the soul in us? If the
goods of the soul give rise to it, then the nature of the good is
discovered; for it is impossible that the good and that which gives us
rational delight should be different from one another, or that the
consequence should be good unless that on which it depends is good. For
the primary end must be good, if that which follows on it is to be
rational. But you cannot say this if you have any sense, for you will be
saying what is

<span id="page_356">p. 356</span>

inconsistent with Epicurus, and with the other judgements of your
school. You will be reduced to saying that the pleasure of the soul is
pleasure in bodily things: these, as it now appears, are of primary
value and are identical with the nature of the good.

Therefore Maximus acted foolishly, if he had any motive in sailing but
the flesh, that is the highest principle. He acts like a fool too if, as
a judge, he refrains from other men's goods when he can take them. If
you think fit to do it, the only point for us to look to is that it be
done secretly, securely, without any one's knowledge. For even Epicurus
himself does not set down stealing as evil, but only detected stealing:
and he says 'Do not steal', only because 'it is impossible to be sure of
escaping detection'. But I tell you that if it be done cleverly and
cautiously, we shall escape detection. Further, we have powerful friends
in Rome, both men and women, and the Greeks are feeble folk: no one will
have the courage to go to Rome to prosecute. Why do you refrain from
your own good? It is foolish and silly. Nay, even if you tell me you
refrain, I will not believe you; for just as it is impossible to assent
to what appears false and to reject what is true, so it is impossible to
hold aloof from what appears good. Now wealth is a good thing, and, so
to speak, most productive of pleasure. Why should not one acquire it?
Why should we not corrupt our neighbour's wife, if we can do it without
detection; and if her husband talks nonsense, why should we not break
his neck as well? This, if you wish to be a philosopher of the right
sort, to be perfect and consistent with your own judgements. Otherwise
you will be no better than we so-called Stoics, for we too say one thing
and do another: we say noble words and do shameful deeds! You will be
suffering from the opposite perversion, of uttering shameful judgements,
and doing noble deeds!

Before God, I ask you, can you imagine a city of Epicureans? 'I shall
not marry' (says one).

'Nor shall I,' (says another) 'for it is wrong to marry.'

Yes, and it is wrong to get children, and wrong to be a citizen!

What is to happen then? Where will your citizens come from? Who will
educate them? Who will be Governor of the Ephebi? Who will manage the
Gymnasia? Yes, and what will be their education? Will it be the
education the Lacedaemonians or Athenians received? Take me a young man
and bring him up in accordance with your judgements. The judgements are
bad, subversive of the city, ruinous to family life, not even fit for
women. Man, leave these principles alone. You live in an imperial city:
you must hold office, judge justly, refrain from other men's property:
no woman but your wife must seem fair in your eyes, no boy, no silver or
gold plate. You must look for judgements that will be in

<span id="page_357">p. 357</span>

keeping with such conduct, and will enable you to refrain with pleasure
from things so persuasive to attract and to overcome you. If on the
other hand we back up their persuasive power by this philosophy, such as
it is, that we have discovered, thrusting us forward and confirming us
in the same direction, what is to become of us? What is the best part of
a piece of plate, the silver or the art spent on it? The hand in itself
is mere flesh, it is the products of the hand that claim precedence. So
too appropriate actions are of three kinds: the first class relative to
k mere existence, the second relative to particular conditions, the
third commanding and absolute. On this principle too we ought not to
honour man's material being, his rags of flesh, but his leading
characteristics. What are these? Citizenship, marriage, procreation of
children, worship of God, care of parents, and in general, will to get
and to avoid, impulse to act and not to act, each in its proper and
natural manner.

What is our nature? To be free, noble, self-respecting. What other
animal blushes? What other can have a conception of shame? We must
subordinate pleasure to these principles, to minister to them as a
servant, to evoke our interests and to keep us in the way of our natural
activities.

'But I am rich, and have need of nothing.'

Why then do you still pretend to be a philosopher? Gold and silver plate
are enough for you: what need have you of judgements? 'Nay, but I also
sit as judge over the Greeks.'

What! you know how to judge? What made you know that? 'Caesar wrote me a
patent.'

Let him write to you to judge questions of music: what use will it be to
you? But let that pass. How did you get made a judge? Whose hand did you
kiss? Was it Symphorus’ or Numenius’? <span
id="fr_32"></span>[3-5](dep086.htm#fn_32) In whose antechamber did you
sleep? To whom did you send gifts? After all, do you not see that being
judge is worth no more nor less than Numenius is worth?

'Well, but I can put any one I wish in prison.'

As you may a stone!

'But I can cudgel to death any one I wish.'

As you can an ass! This is not governing men. Govern us as rational
creatures by showing us what is expedient, and we will follow it: show
us what is inexpedient and we will turn away from it. Make us admire and
emulate you, as Socrates made men do. He was the true ruler of men, for
he brought men to submit to him their will to get and to avoid, their
impulse to act and not to act.

'Do this, refrain from this, or I will put you in prison.' This is not
how rational beings are ruled. But, 'Do this as Zeus ordained: if not,
you will suffer penalty and harm.' What kind of harm? No harm but that
of failing to do your duty: you will destroy the trustworthy, self-

<span id="page_358">p. 358</span>

respecting, well-behaved man in you. Look not for any greater harm than
this!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. How We Should Train Ourselves to Deal With
Impressions](dep067)
