[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dep003)  [Next](dep005) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002D48Q7A/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Discourses of Epictetus*, tr. by P.E Matheson, \[1916\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER III

#### WHAT CONCLUSIONS MAY BE DRAWN FROM THE FACT THAT GOD IS FATHER OF MEN

<span class="smallcaps">If a</span> man could only take to heart this
judgement, as he ought, that we are all, before anything else, children
of God and that God is the Father of gods and men, I think that he will
never harbour a mean or ignoble thought about himself. Why, if Caesar
adopts you, your arrogance will be past all bearing; but if you realize
that you are a son of Zeus, will you feel no elation? We ought to be
proud, but we are not; as there are these two elements mingled in our
birth, the body which we share with the animals, and the reason and mind
which we share with the gods, men in general decline upon that wretched
and dead kinship with the beasts, and but few claim that which is divine
and blessed.

And so, since every one, whoever he be, must needs deal with each person
or thing according to the opinion that he holds about them, those few
who think that they have been born to be faithful, born to be
honourable, born to deal with their impressions without error, have no
mean or ignoble thought about themselves. But the thoughts of most men
are just the opposite to this. 'What am I? A miserable creature of a
man'; and 'my wretched rags of flesh'. Wretched indeed, but you have too
something better than your 'rags of flesh'. Why then do you discard the
better and cling to your rags?

By reason of this lower kinship some of us fall away and become like
wolves, faithless and treacherous and mischievous, others like lions,
savage and brutal and untameable, but the greater part of us become
foxes and the most god-forsaken creatures in the animal world. For a
foul-mouthed and wicked man is no better than a fox or the meanest and
most miserable of creatures. Look to it then and beware lest you turn
out to be one of these god-forsaken creatures.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. On Progress, or Moral Advance](dep005)
