[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dep054)  [Next](dep056) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002D48Q7A/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Discourses of Epictetus*, tr. by P.E Matheson, \[1916\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XXIII

#### ON THE FACULTY OF EXPRESSION

<span class="smallcaps">Every</span> one can read a book with the more
pleasure and ease the plainer the letters in which it is written. So too
every one can listen more easily to discourse which is expressed in
becoming and distinguished language. We must therefore not say that the
faculty of expression is nothing. To say so is at once irreligious and
cowardly; irreligious because it means disparaging God's gifts, just as
though one should deny the usefulness of the faculty of vision or
hearing or even the faculty of speech. Was it for nothing then that God
gave you your eyes? Was it for nothing He mingled with them a
spirit <span id="fr_26"></span>[2-12](dep059.htm#fn_26) so powerful and
cunningly devised, that even from a distance they can fashion the shapes
of what they see? And what messenger is so swift and attentive as they?
Was it for nothing that He made the intervening air so active and
sensitive that vision passes through it as through a tense medium? Was
it for nothing that He made light, without the presence of which all the
rest would have been useless?

Man, be not ungrateful, nor again forget higher things! Give thanks to
God for sight and hearing, yes, and for life itself and what is
conducive to life—for grain and fruit, for wine and oil; but remember
that He has given you another gift superior to all these, the faculty
which shall use them, test them, and calculate the value of each. For
what is it that pronounces on each of these faculties, and decides their
value? Is it the faculty itself, in each case? Did you ever hear the
faculty of vision saying anything about itself, or the faculty of
hearing? No, these faculties are ordained as ministers and slaves to
serve the

<span id="page_335">p. 335</span>

faculty which deals with impressions. And if you ask what each is worth,
whom do you ask? Who answers you? How then can any other faculty be
superior to this, which uses the rest as its servants and itself tests
each result and pronounces on it? Which of those faculties knows what it
is and what it is worth, which of them knows when it ought to be used
and when it ought not? What is the faculty that opens and closes the
eyes and brings them near some objects and turns them away, at need,
from others? Is it the faculty of vision? No, it is the faculty of will.
What is it that closes and opens the ears? What is it that makes us
curious and questioning, or again unmoved by discourse? Is it the
faculty of hearing? It is no other faculty but that of the will.

I say, when the will sees that all the other faculties which surround it
are blind and deaf and are unable to see anything else beyond the very
objects for which they are ordained to minister to this faculty and
serve it, and this alone has clear sight and surveys the rest and itself
and estimates their value, is it likely to pronounce that any other
faculty but itself is the highest? What is the function of the eye, when
opened, but to see? But what is it tells us whether we ought to look at
a man's wife or how? The faculty of will. What tells us whether we ought
to believe or disbelieve what we are told, and if we believe whether we
are to be excited or not? Is it not the faculty of will? This faculty of
eloquence I spoke of, if such special faculty there be, concerned with
the framing of fair phrases, does no more than construct and adorn
phrases, when there is an occasion for discourse, just as hairdressers
arrange and adorn the hair. But whether it is better to speak or be
silent, and to speak in this way or that, and whether it is proper or
improper—in a word, to decide the occasion and the use for each
discourse, all these are questions for one faculty only, that of the
will. Would you have it come forward and pronounce against itself?

'But', says the objector, 'what if the matter stands thus, what if that
which ministers can be superior to that which it serves, the horse to
the horseman, the hound to the hunter, the lyre to him that plays it,
the servants to the king they serve?' The answer is: What is it that
uses other things? The will. What is it that attends to everything? The
will. What is it that destroys the whole man, now by starvation, now by
a halter, now by a headlong fall? The will. Is there then anything
stronger in men than this? Nay, how can things that are subject to
hindrance be stronger than that which is unhindered? What has power to
hinder the faculty of vision? Will and events beyond the will. The
faculty of hearing and that of speech are subject to the same hindrance.
But what can hinder the will? Nothing beyond the will, only the
perversion of the will itself. Therefore vice or virtue resides in this
alone. Yet being so mighty a faculty, ordained to rule all the rest, you
would have it come

<span id="page_336">p. 336</span>

forward and tell us that the flesh is of all things most excellent. Why,
if the flesh itself asserted that it was the most excellent of things,
one would not tolerate it even then. But as it is, Epicurus, what is the
faculty that pronounces this judgement? Is it the faculty which has
written on 'The End' or 'Physics' or 'The Standard'? The faculty which
made you grow your beard as a philosopher? which wrote in the hour of
death 'I am living my last day and that a blessed one'? <span
id="fr_27"></span>[2-13](dep059.htm#fn_27) Is this faculty flesh or
will? Surely it is madness to admit that you have a faculty superior to
this. Can you be in truth so blind and deaf?

What follows? Do we disparage the other faculties? God forbid. Do we say
that there is no use nor advancement save in the faculty of will? God
forbid! That were foolish, irreligious, ungrateful toward God. We are
only giving each thing its due. For there is use in an ass, but not so
much as in an ox; there is use in a dog, but not so much as in a
servant; there is use in a servant, but not so much as in a
fellow-citizen; there is use in them too, but not so much as in those
who govern them. Yet because other faculties are higher we must not
depreciate the use which inferior faculties yield. The faculty of
eloquence has its value, but it is not so great as that of the will; but
when I say this, let no one suppose that I bid you neglect your manner
of speech, any more than I would have you neglect eyes or ears or hands
or feet or clothes or shoes.

But if you ask me, 'What then is the highest of all things,' what am I
to say? The faculty of speech? I cannot say that. No, the faculty of
will, when it is in the right way. For it is this which controls the
faculty of speech and all other faculties small and great. When this is
set in the right course, a man becomes good; when it fails, man becomes
bad; it is this which makes our fortune bad or good, this which makes us
critical of one another or well content; in a word, to ignore this means
misery, to attend to it means happiness.

Yet to do away with the faculty of eloquence and deny its existence is
indeed not only ungrateful to those who have given it, but shows a
coward's spirit. For he who denies it seems to me to fear that, if there
is a faculty of eloquence, we may not be able to despise it. It is just
the same with those who deny that there is any difference between beauty
and ugliness. What! are we to believe that the sight of Thersites could
move men as much as the sight of Achilles, and the sight of Helen no
more than the sight of an ordinary woman? No, these are the words of
foolish and uneducated persons, who do not know one thing from another,
and who fear that if once one becomes aware of such differences, one may
be overwhelmed and defeated.

No, the great thing is this—to leave each in possession of his own
faculty, and so leaving him to see the value of the faculty, and to

<span id="page_337">p. 337</span>

understand what is the highest of all things and to pursue this always,
and concentrate your interest on this, counting all other things
subordinate to this, yet not failing to attend to them too so far as you
may. For even to the eyes you must attend, yet not as though they were
the highest, but to these also for the sake of the highest; for the
highest will not fulfil its proper nature unless it uses the eyes with
reason, and chooses one thing rather than another.

What then do we see men doing? They are like a man returning to his own
country who, finding a good inn on his road, stays on there because it
pleases him. Man, you are forgetting your purpose! You were not
travelling to this, but through it.

'Yes, but this is a fine inn.'

And how many other fine inns are there, and how many fine meadows? But
they are merely to pass through; your purpose is yonder; to return to
your country, to relieve your kinsfolk of their fears, to fulfil your
own duties as a citizen, to marry, beget children, and hold office in
due course. For you have not come into the world to choose your pick of
fine places, but to live and move in the place where you were born and
appointed to be a citizen. The same principle holds good in what we are
discussing. Our road to perfection must needs lie through instruction
and the spoken word; and one must purify the will and bring into right
order the faculty which deals with impressions; and principles must be
communicated in a particular style, with some variety and epigram. But
this being so, some people are attracted by the very means they are
using and stay where they are, one caught by style, another by
syllogisms, a third by variable arguments, and a fourth by some other
seductive inn by the way; and there they stay on and moulder away, like
those whom the Sirens entertain.

Man, the purpose set before you was to make yourself capable of dealing
with the impressions that you meet as nature orders, so as not to fail
in what you will to get, nor to fall into what you will to avoid, never
suffering misfortune or bad fortune, free, unhindered, unconstrained,
conforming to the governance of God, obeying this, well pleased with
this, criticizing none, blaming none, able to say these lines with your
whole heart,

*Lead me, O Zeus, and thou my Destiny*.

\[Cleanthes\]

Having this purpose before you, are you going to stay where you are just
because a pretty phrase or certain precepts please you, and choose to
make your home there, forgetting what you have left at home, and say,
'These things are fine'? Who says they are not fine? But they are fine
as things to pass through, as inns by the way. What prevents you

<span id="page_338">p. 338</span>

from being unfortunate, though you speak like Demosthenes? Though you
can analyse syllogisms like Chrysippus, what prevents you from being
wretched, mournful, envious—in a word, bewildered and miserable? Nothing
prevents you. Do you see then that these were inns of no value; and the
goal set before you was different? Certain persons when I say this think
I am disparaging the study of rhetoric or of principles. No, I am not
depreciating that, but only the tendency to dwell unceasingly on such
matters and to set your hopes on them. If any man does his hearers harm
by bringing this truth home to them, count me among those who do this
harm. But when I see that what is highest and most sovereign is
something different, I cannot say that it is what it is not in order to
gratify you.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIV. To One Whom He Did Not Think Worthy](dep056)
