[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dep076)  [Next](dep078) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002D48Q7A/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Discourses of Epictetus*, tr. by P.E Matheson, \[1916\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XVIII

#### THAT WE MUST NOT ALLOW NEWS TO DISTURB US

<span class="smallcaps">When</span> any disturbing news is brought you,
bear this in mind, that news cannot affect anything within the region of
the will. Can any one bring news to you that you are wrong in your
thought or wrong in your will? Surely not: but only that some one is
dead; what does that concern you? That some one speaks ill of you; what
does that concern you? That your father has some design or other.
Against whom? Is it against your will? How can he have? No, it is
against your wretched body, or your wretched property; you are safe, it
is not against you.

But the judge pronounces that you are guilty of impiety. Did not the
judges pronounce the same on Socrates? Is it your concern that the judge
pronounced on you? No. Why then do you trouble yourself?

<span id="page_372">p. 372</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Your father has a
duty of his own, which he must fulfil, or else lose his character as
father, affectionate and gentle. Do not try to make him lose anything
else for that reason; for a man never suffers harm except in that in
which he is at fault.

Again, it is your duty to make your defence with firmness, self-respect,
dispassionately: otherwise you lose your character as son,
self-respecting and honourable. What then? Is the judge free from
danger? No: he too incurs danger just as much. Why then do you still
fear what judgement he will give? What have you to do with another's
evil? Your evil is to defend yourself badly: that is the only thing you
need be careful about. Whether you are condemned or not condemned is
an-other's business, and the evil in the same way is another's.

'So-and-so threatens you.'

Threatens me? No.

'He blames you.'

It will be for him to see how he does his own business.

'He is going to condemn you unjustly.'

All the worse for him!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIX. What is the Difference Between the Philosopher and
the Uneducated Man](dep078)
