[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dep040)  [Next](dep042) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002D48Q7A/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Discourses of Epictetus*, tr. by P.E Matheson, \[1916\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER IX

#### THAT WE ADOPT THE PROFESSION OF THE PHILOSOPHER WHEN WE CANNOT FULFIL THAT OF A MAN

<span class="smallcaps">It is</span> no ordinary task merely to fulfil
man's promise. For what is Man? A rational animal, subject to death. At
once we ask, from what does the rational element distinguish us? From
wild beasts. And from what else? From sheep and the like. Look to it
then that you do nothing like a wild beast, else you destroy the Man in
you and fail to fulfil his promise. See that you do not act like a
sheep, or else again the Man in you perishes.

You ask how we act like sheep?

When we consult the belly, or our passions, when our actions are random
or dirty or inconsiderate, are we not falling away to the state of
sheep? What do we destroy? The faculty of reason. When our actions are
combative, mischievous, angry, and rude, do we not fall away and

<span id="page_297">p. 297</span>

become wild beasts? In a word, some of us are great beasts, and others
are small but base-natured beasts, which give occasion to say, 'Nay,
rather let me be food for a lion.' All these are actions by which the
calling of man is destroyed.

What makes a complex proposition be what it is? It must fulfil its
promise: it keeps its character only if the parts it is composed of are
true. What makes a disjunctive proposition? It must fulfil its purport.
Is not the same true of flutes, lyre, horse, and dog? Is it surprising
then that man too keeps or loses his nature on the same principle? Each
man is strengthened and preserved by the exercise of the functions that
correspond to his nature, the carpenter by carpentering, the grammarian
by studies in grammar. If a man gets the habit of writing
ungrammatically, his art is bound to be destroyed and perish. In the
same way the modest man is made by modest acts and ruined by immodest
acts, the man of honour keeps his character by honest acts and loses it
by dishonest. So again men of the opposite character are strengthened by
the opposite actions: the shameless man by shamelessness, the dishonest
by dishonesty, the slanderous by slander, the ill-tempered by
ill-temper, the miser by grasping at more than he gives. That is why
philosophers enjoin upon us 'not to be content with learning only, but
to add practice as well and then training'. For we have acquired wrong
habits in course of years and have adopted for our use conceptions
opposite to the true, and therefore if we do not adopt true conceptions
for our use we shall be nothing else but interpreters of judgements
which are not our own.

Of course any one of us can discourse for the moment on what is good and
what is bad: as thus, 'Of things that are, some are good, some bad, some
indifferent; good are virtues and things that have part in virtues; evil
are the opposite; indifferent are wealth, health, reputation.' And then
if some loud noise disturbs us while we are speaking or one of the
bystanders laughs at us, we are put out of countenance. Philosopher,
where are those principles you were talking of? Whence did you fetch
them forth to utter? From the lips and no further.

These principles are not your own: why do you make a mess of them? Why
do you gamble with things of highest moment? It is one thing (to use an
illustration) to put bread and wine away into a store-cupboard, and
another thing to eat. What you eat is digested and distributed, and is
turned into sinews, flesh, bones, blood, complexion, breath. What you
store away you have at hand and can show to others at will, but it does
you no good except for the mere name of having it. What is the good of
expounding these doctrines any more than those of another school? Sit
down now and discourse on the doctrines of Epicurus, and you will soon
discourse more effectively than Epicurus

<span id="page_298">p. 298</span>

himself. Why then do you call yourself a Stoic, why do you deceive the
world, why being a Hellene do you act the Jew? <span
id="fr_17"></span>[2-3](dep059.htm#fn_17) Do you not see in what sense a
man is called a Jew, in what sense a Syrian, in what an Egyptian? When
we see a man trimming between two faiths we are wont to say, 'He is no
Jew, but is acting a part', but when he adopts the attitude of mind of
him who is baptized and has made his choice, then he is not only called
a Jew but is a Jew indeed. So we also are but counterfeit 'baptists',
Jews in name only, but really something else, with no feeling for
reason, far from acting on the principles we talk of, though we pride
ourselves on them as though we knew them. So, being unable to fulfil the
calling of Man we adopt that of the Philosopher, a heavy burden indeed!
It is as though one who could not lift ten pounds were fain to lift the
stone of Ajax!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X. How the Acts Appropriate to Man Are to be Discovered
From the Names He Bears](dep042)
