[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dep061)  [Next](dep063) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002D48Q7A/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Discourses of Epictetus*, tr. by P.E Matheson, \[1916\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER III

#### WHAT IS THE MATERIAL WITH WHICH THE GOOD MAN DEALS: AND WHAT SHOULD BE THE OBJECT OF OUR TRAINING

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> material of the good man is his own
Governing Principle, as the body is the material of the physician and
trainer, the land of the farmer; and it is the function of the good man
to deal with his impressions naturally. And just as it is the nature of
every soul to assent to what is true and dissent from what is false, and
withhold judgement in what is uncertain, so it is its nature to be moved
with the will to get what is good and the will to avoid what is evil,
and to be neutral towards what is neither good nor evil. For just as
neither the banker nor the greengrocer can refuse the Emperor's
currency, but, if you show it, he must part, willy-nilly, with what the
coin will buy, so it is also with the soul. The very sight of good
attracts one towards it, the sight of evil repels. The soul will never
reject a clear impression of good, any more than we reject Caesar's
currency. On this depends every motion of man and of God. Therefore the
good is preferred to every tie of kinship.

I have no concern with my father, but with the good!

'Are you so hard-hearted?'

It is my nature; this is the currency which God has given me. Therefore
if the good is different from the noble and just, then father and
brother, country and all such things disappear.

<span id="page_350">p. 350</span>

I say, am I to neglect my good, that you may get it? am I to make way
for you? Why should I?

'I am your father.'

But not my good.

'I am your brother.'

But not my good. If we make the good consist in right will, the mere
maintenance of such relations becomes good: further, he who resigns some
of his external possessions attains the good.

'My father is taking away my money.'

But he is not harming you.

'My brother will have the greater part of the land.'

Let him have as much as he likes: does he gain in character? Is he more
modest, trustworthy, brotherly? Who can eject one from *that*
possession? Not even Zeus: nor did He wish to eject me; He put my
character in my keeping and gave it me as He had it himself, unhindered,
unfettered, unrestrained.

Inasmuch then as different people have a different currency, a man shows
his coin and gets what it will buy. A thief has come to the province as
Proconsul. What coin does he use? Money. Show him money, and carry off
what you will. An adulterer has come. What currency does he use? Pretty
girls. 'Take your coin', says he, 'and sell me the thing I want.' Give,
and buy. Another's heart is set on minions. Give him the coin and take
what you will. Another is a sportsman. Give him a fine horse or dog.
With sighs and groans he will sell you what you like for it: for he is
constrained from within, by Another, who has ordained this currency.

It is by this principle above all that you must guide yourself in
training. Go out as soon as it is dawn and whomsoever you may see and
hear, question yourself and answer as to an interrogator.

What did you see? A beautiful woman or boy. Apply the rule: Is this
within the will's control or beyond it? Beyond. Away with it then!

What did you see? One mourning at his child's death. Apply the rule: Is
death beyond the will, or can the will control it? Death is beyond the
will's control. Put it out of the way then!

Did a Consul meet you? Apply the rule: What is a consulship? Is it
beyond the will's control or within it? Beyond it. Take it away: the
coin will not pass; reject it, you have no concern with it.

I say, if we did this and trained ourselves on this principle every day
from dawn to night, we should indeed achieve something. As it is, we are
caught open-mouthed by every impression we meet, and only in the
lecture-room, if then, does our mind wake up a little. Then we go into
the street and if we see a mourner we say, 'He is undone'; if a

<span id="page_351">p. 351</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Consul, 'Lucky
man'; if an outlaw, 'Miserable man'; if a poor man, 'Wretched man, he
has nothing to buy food with.'

These mistaken judgements we must eradicate, and concentrate our efforts
on doing so. For what is weeping and lamenting? A matter of judgement.
What is misfortune? Judgement. What is faction, discord, criticism,
accusation, irreligion, foolishness? All these are judgements, nothing
else, and judgements passed on things beyond the will, as though they
were good and evil. Only let a man turn these efforts to the sphere of
the will, and I guarantee that he will enjoy peace of mind, whatever his
circumstances may be.

The soul is like a dish full of water, and the impressions like the rays
of light which strike the water. Now when the water is disturbed the
light seems to be disturbed too, but it is not really disturbed. So when
a man has a fit of dizziness, the arts and virtues are not put to
confusion, but only the spirit in which they exist: when this is at
rest, they come to rest too.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. Against One Who was Indecorously Excited in the
Theatre](dep063)
