[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dep073)  [Next](dep075) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002D48Q7A/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Discourses of Epictetus*, tr. by P.E Matheson, \[1916\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XV

#### THAT WE SHOULD APPROACH EVERYTHING WITH CONSIDERATION <span id="fr_39"></span>[3-12](dep086.htm#fn_39)

<span class="smallcaps">In everything</span> you do consider what comes
first and what follows, and so approach it. Otherwise you will come to
it with a good heart at first because you have not reflected on any of
the consequences, and afterwards when difficulties come in sight you
will shamefully desist.

'I wish to win at the Olympic games.'

'So do I, by the gods, for it is a fine thing.'

Yes, but consider the first steps to it and what follows: and then, if
it is to your advantage, lay your hand to the work. You must be under
discipline, eat to order, touch no sweets, train under compulsion, at a
fixed hour, in heat and cold, drink no cold water, nor wine, except to
order; you must hand yourself over completely to your trainer as you
would to a physician. Then, when the contest comes, you get hacked,
sometimes dislocate your hand, twist your ankle, swallow plenty of sand,
get a flogging, and with all this you are sometimes defeated. First
consider these things and then enter on the athlete's career, if you
still wish to do so: otherwise, look you, you will be behaving like the
children, who one day play at athletes, another at gladiators, then
sound the trumpet, next dramatize anything they see and admire. You will
be just the same—now athlete, now gladiator, then philosopher, then
orator, but nothing with all your soul. Like an ape you imitate
everything you see, and one thing after another takes your fancy, but
nothing that is familiar pleases you, for you undertake nothing with
forethought; you do not survey the whole subject and examine it
beforehand, but you take it up half-heartedly and at random. In the same
way some people when they see a philosopher, and hear some one speaking
like Euphrates (and indeed who can speak as he can?) wish to be
philosophers themselves.

Man, consider first, what it is you are undertaking: then consider

<span id="page_369">p. 369</span>

your own powers, and what you can bear. If you want to be a wrestler,
look to your shoulders, your thighs, your loins. For different men are
born for different things. Do you suppose that you can be a philosopher
if you do as you do now? Do you suppose that you can eat and drink as
you do now, and indulge your anger and displeasure just as before? Nay,
you must sit up late, you must work hard, conquer some of your desires,
abandon your own people, be looked down on by a mere slave, be ridiculed
by those who meet you, get the worst of it in everything—in office, in
honour, in justice. When you have carefully considered these drawbacks,
then come to us, if you think fit: if you are willing to pay this price
for peace of mind, freedom, tranquillity. If not, do not come near: do
not be like the children, first a philosopher, then a tax-collector,
then an orator, then one of Caesar's procurators. These callings do not
agree. You must be one man, good or bad: you must develop either your
rational soul, or your outward endowments, you must be busy either with
your inner man, or with things outside, that is, you must choose between
the position of a philosopher and that of an ordinary man.

When Galba was killed some one said to Rufus, 'Now the world is governed
by Providence, isn't it?' To which he answered, 'Did I base my proof
that the world is governed by Providence upon a casual thing like
Galba's death?'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI. That We Must Be Cautious In Our Social
Relations](dep075)
