[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dep088)  [Next](dep090) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002D48Q7A/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Discourses of Epictetus*, tr. by P.E Matheson, \[1916\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER III

#### WHAT TO AIM AT IN EXCHANGE

<span class="smallcaps">If</span> you give up any external possession,
mind you see what you are to get in exchange for it: and if it is worth
more, then never say, 'I have been a loser.' You will not lose if you
get a horse for an ass, an ox for a sheep, a noble action for a piece of
money, true peace instead of pedantry, self-respect instead of foul
language. If you remember this you will everywhere preserve your
character as it ought to be: if you do not remember it, I warn you that
your time perishes for nought, and you will waste and overthrow all the
pains that you now spend upon yourself. It needs but a little to
overthrow and destroy everything—just a slight aberration from reason.
For the helmsman to wreck his vessel, he does not need the same
resources, as he needs to save it: if he turn it but a little too far to
the wind, he is lost; yes, and if he do it not deliberately but from
mere want of attention, he is lost all the same. It is very much the
same in life: if you doze but a little, all that you have amassed up
till now leaves you. Keep awake then and watch your impressions: it is
no trifle you have in keeping, but self-respect, honour, constancy, a
quiet mind, untouched by distress, or fear, or agitation—in a word,
freedom.

What are you going to sell all this for? Look and see what your purchase
is worth.

'But I am not going to sell my freedom for anything of that kind.'

Well, suppose you waive external gain, consider what the exchange is
that you are making. It is yours to say, 'Self-control for me, a
tribunate for him: a praetorship for him, self-respect for me. I do not
clamour, when to do so is unseemly, I will not jump from my seat, when I
ought not, for I am free and God's friend, to obey Him of my own free
will. I must not lay claim to anything else—body, property, office,
reputation, anything in short, for He does not wish me to lay claim to
them: had He wished it, He would have made them good for me, but He has
not done so, and therefore I cannot transgress any of His commands.' In
everything you do, guard what is your own good: for the rest, be content
just to take anything that is given you, so far as you may use it
rationally. Otherwise you will be wretched and miserable, hampered and
hindered. These are the laws that are sent you from God, these are His
ordinances. These you must expound, and these obey, not those of
Masurius and Cassius.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. To Those Whose Heart is Set On a Quiet Life](dep090)
