[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dep083)  [Next](dep085) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002D48Q7A/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Discourses of Epictetus*, tr. by P.E Matheson, \[1916\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XXV

#### TO THOSE WHO FAIL TO ACHIEVE WHAT THEY SET BEFORE THEM

<span class="smallcaps">Consider</span> which of the aims that you set
before you at the first you have achieved, and which you have not, and
how some things give you pleasure to remember and some give you pain;
and if possible, recover what you failed to obtain. For those who are
entering on the greatest of all struggles must not shrink, but must be
ready to endure stripes; for the struggle they are concerned with is not
wrestling or the pancration, in which a man may succeed or fail, and yet
be worth little or worth very much—nay more, he may be most fortunate or
most miserable; no, his struggle is for good fortune and happiness
itself.

What follows? In this competition, even if we give in for the moment,
nothing prevents us from returning to the struggle; we have not to wait
for another four years for the next Olympic Games to come. At once you
may recover yourself, and pull yourself together, and renew the struggle
with the same energy as before; and if you grow faint

<span id="page_401">p. 401</span>

again, you may renew it again, and if you once attain to victory you are
as one who has never failed. Only do not begin to take a pleasure in
failing from sheer force of habit, and go about as a sorry athlete
defeated in the whole round of all the Games, for all the world like
quails that have escaped!

'I am overpowered by the impression of a pretty maid. Well! was I not
overpowered lately? I am eager to find fault with some one. Did I not do
so lately?'

You talk lightly to us, as though you had got off scot-free. It is as
though a man, when his doctor forbade him to bathe, should say, 'Why,
did not I bathe quite lately?' What if the doctor can answer him, 'Well,
what effect did bathing have on you? Did you not fall into a fever? Did
you not get a headache?' So when you found fault with some one lately,
was it not the act of a bad man, and of a foolish one? Did you not feed
this habit, by putting before it acts which were congenial to it? And
when the pretty girl was too much for you, did you get away unpunished?
What do you mean then by talking of what you did lately? Nay, you ought
rather, I think, to have remembered, as slaves remember their floggings,
and to have refrained from repeating the same offence. But it is not the
same thing: pain makes the memory of the slave, but what pain or penalty
attends your offences? When did you acquire the habit of avoiding evil
activities?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVI. To Those Who Fear Want](dep085)
