[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dep038)  [Next](dep040) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002D48Q7A/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Discourses of Epictetus*, tr. by P.E Matheson, \[1916\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_293">p. 293</span>

### CHAPTER VII

#### HOW TO CONSULT DIVINERS

<span class="smallcaps">Many</span> of us often neglect acts which are
fitting because we consult the diviners out of season. What can the
diviner see more than death or danger or disease or generally things of
that sort? If then I have to risk my life for a friend, if even it is
fitting for me to die for him, how can it be in season for me to consult
a diviner? Have I not within me the diviner who has told me the true
nature of good and evil, who has expounded the signs of both? What need
have I then of the flesh of victims or the flight of birds? Can I bear
with him when he says, 'This is expedient for you'? Does he know what is
expedient, does he know what is good, has he learnt signs to distinguish
between good things and bad, like the signs in the flesh of victims? If
he knows the signs of good and evil, he knows also the signs of things
noble and shameful, just and unjust. It is yours, man, to tell me what
is portended—life or death, poverty or wealth; but whether this is
expedient or inexpedient I am not going to inquire of you.

Why do you not lay down the law in matters of grammar? Are you going to
do it here then, where all mankind are at sea and in conflict with one
another? Therefore that was a good answer that the lady made who wished
to send the shipload of supplies to Gratilla in exile, when one said,
'Domitian will take them away': 'I would rather', she said, 'that
Domitian should take them away than that I should not send them.'

What then leads us to consult diviners so constantly? Cowardice, fear of
events. That is why we flatter the diviners.

'Master, shall I inherit from my father?'

'Let us see: let us offer sacrifice.'

'Yes, master, as fortune wills.'

When he says, 'You shall inherit', we give thanks to him as though we
had received the inheritance from him. That is why they go on deluding
us.

What must we do then? We must come without the will to get or the will
to avoid, just as the wayfarer asks the man he meets which of two ways
leads anywhere, not wanting the right hand to be the road rather than
the left, for he does not wish to go one particular road, but the road
which leads to his goal. We ought to approach God as we approach a
guide, dealing with Him as we deal with our eyes, not beseeching

<span id="page_294">p. 294</span>

them to show us one sort of things rather than another, but accepting
the impressions of things as they are shown us. But instead of that we
tremble and get hold of the augur and appeal to him as if he were a god
and say, 'Master, have pity, suffer me to come off safe.'

Slave, do you not wish for what is better for you? Is anything better
than what seems good to God? Why do you do all that in you lies to
corrupt the judge, and pervert your counsellor?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. What is the True Nature of the Good](dep040)
