[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dep078)  [Next](dep080) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002D48Q7A/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Discourses of Epictetus*, tr. by P.E Matheson, \[1916\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_373">p. 373</span>

### CHAPTER XX

#### THAT BENEFIT MAY BE DERIVED FROM ALL OUTWARD THINGS

<span class="smallcaps">In regard</span> to intellectual impressions it
is generally agreed that good and evil depend upon us and not upon
external things. No one calls the proposition, 'It is day', good, or 'It
is night', bad, or 'Three is four', the greatest of evils. No, they say
that knowledge is good and error evil, so that good may arise even in
regard to what is false; that is, the knowledge that it is false. The
same ought to be true in practical life.

'Is health good, and disease evil?'

No, man.

'What then?'

To use health well is good, to use it ill is evil.

'Do you mean that benefit can be gained even from disease?'

By heaven, can it not be gained even from death, ay or from lameness? Do
you think Menoeceus gained but little good by his death? 'Nay, if any
one says that sort of thing, I wish him a benefit like that Menoeceus
gained!'

Out upon you, man, did he not preserve the patriot, the man of great
mind, trustworthy and noble? And if he had lived on, was he not bound to
lose all these, and win their very opposite? Would he not in that case
have assumed the character of the coward, the ignoble, the hater of his
country and lover of his life? Go to, do you think he gained but little
good by his death? Well, did Admetus' father gain great good by living
on so ignobly and miserably? Did he not die afterwards? I adjure you by
the gods, cease to admire material things, cease to make yourselves
slaves, first of things, and next, for their sake, of men who can
acquire them or take them away.

'Can we then get benefit from these things?'

From all.

'Even from one who reviles us?'

Why, what good does the athlete get from the man who wrestles with him?
The greatest. So my reviler helps to train me for the contest: he trains
me to be patient, dispassionate, gentle. You deny it? You admit that the
man who grips my neck and gets my loins and shoulders into order does me
good, and the trainer does well to bid me 'lift the pestle with both
hands', and the more severe he is, the more good do I get: and are you
going to tell me that he who trains me to be free from anger does me no
good? That means that you do not know how to get any good from
humankind.

<span id="page_374">p. 374</span>

'He is a bad neighbour', you say?

Yes, for himself: but he is good for me; he trains me to be considerate
and fair-minded.

'A bad father.'

Yes, for himself, but not for me. This is the magic wand of Hermes.
'Touch what you will', he says, 'and it will turn to gold.' Nay, bring
what you will and I will turn it to good. Bring illness, bring death,
bring poverty, bring reviling, bring the utmost peril of the law-court:
the wand of Hermes will turn them all to good purpose!

'What will you make of death?'

What else but an adornment for you, what else but a means for you to
show in deed what man is when he follows the will of nature? 'What will
you make of sickness?'

I will show its nature, I will shine in it. I will be firm and tranquil,
I will not flatter my physician nor pray for death. What more do you
look for? Whatever you give me I will make it a means of blessedness and
happiness, make it dignified and admirable.

That is not your way. You say, 'See you do not fall ill, it is an evil.'
It is like saying, 'See you do not get an impression that three is four,
it is an evil.' Man, how is it an evil? If 'I get a right notion of it,
it cannot harm me any more. Will it not rather do me good? If then I
have proper notions of poverty, of sickness, of life without office, is
not that enough for me? Will they not serve my good? How then should I
seek any more for good and evil in things external?

But we do not act on this. We carry these views to the lecture-room
door, but no one takes them home: as soon as we leave here we are at war
with our slave-boy, with our neighbours, with those who jeer and laugh
at us. Good luck to the Lesbian, <span
id="fr_40"></span>[3-13](dep086.htm#fn_40) for he convicts me every day
of knowing nothing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXI. To Those Who Undertake the Profession of Teacher
With A Light Heart](dep080)
