[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dep060)  [Next](dep062) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002D48Q7A/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Discourses of Epictetus*, tr. by P.E Matheson, \[1916\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER II

#### 1) IN WHAT MATTERS SHOULD THE MAN WHO IS TO MAKE PROGRESS TRAIN HIMSELF: AND (2) THAT WE NEGLECT WHAT IS MOST VITAL

<span class="smallcaps">There</span> are three departments <span
id="fr_30"></span>[3-3](dep086.htm#fn_30) in which a man who is to be
good and noble must be trained. The first concerns the will to get and
will to avoid; he must be trained not to fail to get what he wills to
get nor fall into what he wills to avoid. The second is concerned with
impulse to act and not to act, and, in a word, the sphere of what is
fitting: that we should act in order, with due consideration, and with
proper care. The object of the third is that we may not be deceived, and
may not judge at random, and generally it is concerned with assent.

Of these the most important and the most pressing is the first, which is
concerned with strong emotions, for such emotion does not arise except
when the will to get or the will to avoid fails of its object. This it
is which brings with it disturbances, tumults, misfortunes, bad
fortunes, mournings, lamentations, envies; which makes men envious and
jealous—passions which make us unable to listen to reason.

The second is the sphere of what is fitting: for I must not be without

<span id="page_348">p. 348</span>

feeling like a statue, but must maintain my natural and acquired
relations, as a religious man, as son, brother, father, citizen.

The third department is appropriate only for those who are already
making progress, and is concerned with giving certainty in the very
things we have spoken of, so that even in sleep or drunkenness or
melancholy no untested impression may come upon us unawares.

'This', says a pupil, 'is beyond us.'

But the philosophers of to-day have disregarded the first and second
departments, and devote themselves to the third—variable premisses,
syllogisms concluding with a question, hypothetical syllogisms,
fallacious arguments.

'Of course,' he says, 'when a man, is engaged on these subjects he must
take pains to escape being deceived.' But whose business is it to do
this? It is only for the man who is already good.

In logic then you fall short: but have you reached perfection in other
subjects? Are you proof against deceit in regard to money? If you see a
pretty girl, do you resist the impression? If your neighbour comes in
for an inheritance, do you not feel a twinge? Do you lack nothing now
but security of judgement? Unhappy man, even while you are learning this
lesson you are in an agony of terror lest some one should think scorn of
you, and you ask whether any one is talking about you! And if some one
comes and tells you, 'We were discussing who was the best philosopher,
and one who was there said, "There is only one philosopher, So-and-so
(naming you)"', straightway your poor little four-inch soul shoots up to
two cubits! Then if another who is by says, 'Nonsense! It is not worth
while to listen to So-and-so: what does he know? He has the first
rudiments, nothing more', you are beside yourself, and grow pale and cry
out at once, 'I will show him the man I am, he shall see I am a great
philosopher.' Why, the facts themselves are evidence; why do you want to
show it by something else? Do you not know that Diogenes pointed out one
of the sophists thus, making a vulgar gesture? Then, when the man was
furious, 'That is So-and-so,' said he, 'I have shown him to you.' A man
is not indeed like a stone or a log, that you can show what he is by
just pointing a finger, but you show what he is as a man, when you show
what are his judgements.

Let us look at your judgements too. Is it not clear that you set no
value on your will, but look outside to things beyond your will?—what
So-and-so will say, what men will think of you, whether they will think
you a scholar, one who has read Chrysippus or Antipater, for if you have
read them and Archedemus as well, you have read everything. Why are you
still in agony, lest you should fail to show us what manner of man you
are? Would you like me to say what manner of man you showed yourself to
us? A man who comes before us mean, critical, quick-tempered,

<span id="page_349">p. 349</span>

cowardly, blaming everything, accusing every one, never quiet,
vainglorious—that is what you showed us! Go away now and read
Archedemus; then if a mouse fall and make a noise, you die of fright!
For the same sort of death awaits you, as—whom shall I say?—Crinis! He
too was proud of understanding Archedemus!

Unhappy man, will you not leave these things alone, which do not concern
you? They are suited only to those who can learn them without confusion,
to those who are able to say, 'I feel no anger, pain, or envy; I am
under no hindrance, no constraint. What is left for me to do? I have
leisure and peace of mind. Let us see how we ought to deal with logical
changes: let us see how one may adopt a hypothesis and not be led to an
absurd conclusion.'

These are matters well enough for men like that. It is fitting for
sailors who are in good trim to light a fire, and take their dinner, if
luck serves, and to sing and dance: but you come to me when the ship is
sinking and begin hoisting the topsails!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. What is the Material with Which the Good Man Deals:
and What Should be the Object of Our Training](dep062)
