[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dep100)  [Next](dep102) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002D48Q7A/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Discourses of Epictetus*, tr. by P.E Matheson, \[1916\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_458">p. 458</span>

# FRAGMENTS <span id="fr_55"></span>[f-1](#fn_55)

### I

#### FROM ARRIAN THE PUPIL OF EPICTETUS. TO ONE DISCOURSING ON SUBSTANCE

<span class="smallcaps">What</span> matters it whether the world is
composed of atoms or of infinite parts or of fire and earth? Is it not
enough to know the true nature of good and evil, and the limits of the
will to get and the will to avoid, and again of impulses for action and
against it, and using these as rules so to order our life, and dismiss
those things that are beyond us. It may be that the human mind cannot
comprehend them, and even if one should assume that it can, of what use
is it to comprehend them? Should we not say that those who lay down that
these things are necessary for the philosopher trouble themselves in
vain? Is then the command at Delphi also superfluous: 'Know thyself'?

'No,' he replies.

What then is its meaning? If one ordered a chorus-singer to know
himself, would he not attend to the order by paying heed to his fellows
in the chorus so as to sing in harmony with them?

'Yes.'

And the same with a sailor and a soldier. Do you think then that man is
a creature made to live by himself or for society?

'For society.'

By whom?

'By Nature.'

What Nature is and how it administers the universe and whether it is or
no—these are matters it is not necessary to trouble ourselves with.
Stob. *Flor*. 80. 14; *Ecl*. ii. 1. 18a.

### 2

#### FROM ARRIAN

He who is discontented with what he has and with what is given him by
fortune is an ignoramus in life, and he who bears it in a noble spirit
and makes reasonable use of it deserves to be considered a good man.
*Flor*. 108. 65.

### 3

#### FROM THE SAME

All things obey and serve the Universe <span
id="fr_56"></span>[f-2](#fn_56)—earth and sea and sun and the other
stars and the plants and animals of the earth; and our body too

<span id="page_459">p. 459</span>

obeys it, enjoying sickness or health, and passing through youth and old
age and other changes when the Universe wills. Is it not reasonable then
that what is in our power, that is our judgement, should not be the only
thing to strive against it? For the Universe is strong and superior to
us and has provided for us better than we can, ordering our goings along
with all things. And, besides, to act against it is to side with
unreason, and brings nothing with it but vain struggle, involving us in
miseries and pains. *Flor*. 108. 66.

### 4

#### RUFUS: FROM THE SAYINGS OF EPICTETUS ON FRIENDSHIP

God has divided all things into those that He put in our power, and
those that are not in our power. He put in our power that which is
noblest and highest, that which in fact constitutes His own happiness,
the power to deal with impressions. For this faculty when rightly
exercised is freedom, peace, courage, steadfastness, and this too is
justice and law and self-control and all virtue. All else He put beyond
our power. We ought then to will what God wills and, adopting His
division, hold fast by all means to what is in our power and leave what
is not in our power to the world's order, and gladly resign to it
children, or country, or body, or anything else it may ask of us. *Ecl*.
ii. 7. 30.

### 5

#### RUFUS: FROM EPICTETUS ON FRIENDSHIP

Which of us does not admire that saying of Lycurgus the Lacedaemonian?
For when one of his young fellow citizens had blinded him in one eye and
was handed over to Lycurgus by the people to be punished as he chose, he
did not punish him but educated him and made a good man of him, and
brought him before the Lacedaemonians in the theatre, and when they
wondered he said, 'This man, when you gave him me, was insolent and
violent; I give him back to you a free and reasonable citizen'. *Flor*.
19. 13.

### 6

#### FROM THE SAME

But this above all things is the function of Nature, to associate in
close harmony the impulse that springs from the impression of what is
fitting and that which springs from the impression of what is
serviceable. *Flor*, 20. 60.

<span id="page_460">p. 460</span>

### 7

#### FROM THE SAME

It is a sure work of folly and want of breeding to think that we shall
be contemptible if we do not take every means to injure the first
enemies we meet; for we say that a man is perceived to be contemptible
by his incapacity of doing harm, whereas really it is much more by his
incapacity to do good. *Flor*. 20. 61.

### 8

#### RUFUS: FROM EPICTETUS ON FRIENDSHIP

Such was and is and shall be the nature of the universe, and it is
impossible that what happens should be other than it is. And this
process of revolution and change is shared not only by mankind and the
other living creatures upon earth, but also by things divine; yes, and
even by the four elements themselves, which turn and change upwards and
downwards, earth turning into water and water into air, and this again
into ether; and similarly the elements change from above downwards. If a
man endeavours to adjust his mind to this and to persuade himself to
accept necessity with a good will, he will live out his life very
reasonably and harmoniously. *Flor*. 108. 60.

### 9

#### FROM THE SAME

A philosopher famous in the Stoic school . . . brought out of his
satchel the fifth book of Epictetus the philosopher's Discourses, which
were arranged by Arrian, and no doubt are in agreement with the writings
of Zeno and Chrysippus. In this book, written of course in Greek, we
read this sentence: 'Impressions (which philosophers call φαντασίαι), by
which man's mind is struck at first sight of anything that reaches his
intellect, are not under his will or control, but thrust themselves on
the recognition of men by a certain force of their own; but the assents
(which they call συγκαταθέσεις) by which these impressions are
recognized are voluntary and depend on man's control. Therefore when
some fearful sound of thunder or a falling house or sudden news of some
danger or other, or something else of this sort happens, even the wise
man is bound to be moved for a while and shrink and grow pale, not from
anticipation of any evil, but from rapid and unconsidered movements
forestalling the action of the rational mind. Presently, however, the
wise man does not assent to such impressions (that is, these appearances
which

<span id="page_461">p. 461</span>

terrify his mind), he does not approve or confirm them by his opinion,
but rejects and repels them and does not think that there is anything
formidable in them; and this they say is the difference between the wise
man and the fool, that the fool thinks that the impressions which at
first strike him as harsh and cruel are really such, and as they go on
approves them with his own assent and confirms them by his opinion as if
they were really formidable (προσεπιδοξάζει is the phrase the Stoics use
in discussing this), while the wise man, after showing emotion in colour
and complexion for a brief moment, does not give his assent, but keeps
the opinions which he has always held about such impressions, firm and
strong, as of things which do not really deserve to be feared at all,
but only inspire an empty and fictitious terror.'

These opinions and words of Epictetus the philosopher, derived from the
judgements of the Stoics, we read, in the book I have mentioned, that he
held and expressed. Aul. Gell. *N. A.* 19. I.

### 10

I have heard Favorinus say that Epictetus the philosopher said that most
of those who seemed to philosophize were philosophers only with their
lips and without action. There is a still stronger saying which Arrian
in the books that he composed on his lectures has recorded that he
constantly used. For, said he, when he noticed a man lost to shame, of
misdirected energy and debased morals, bold and confident in speech and
devoting attention to all else but his soul, when he saw a man of this
sort meddling with the pursuits and studies of philosophy, venturing
into Physics and studying Dialectic, and initiating many inquiries of
this sort, he would appeal to gods and men, and so appealing would chide
the man in these words: 'Man, where are you putting them? Look and see
whether your vessel is made clean. For if you put them into the vessel
of fancy (οἴησις) they are lost; if they turn bad, they might as well be
vinegar or urine or worse.' Nothing surely could be truer or weightier
than these words, in which the greatest of philosophers asserted that
the written doctrines of philosophy, if poured into the dirty and
defiled vessel of a false and debased mind, are altered, changed and
spoilt, and (to use his Cynic phrase) turn to urine or anything fouler
than that. Moreover Epictetus also, as we heard from the same Favorinus,
used to say that there were two faults far more serious and vile than
any others, want of endurance and want of self-control, the failure to
bear and endure the wrongs we have to bear, and the failure to forbear
the pleasures and other things that we ought to forbear. And so, he
said, if a man should take to heart these two words, and watch and
command himself to keep them, he will be free for the most part from
error and will live a most

<span id="page_462">p. 462</span>

peaceful life. And the words he said were these two: 'Bear' and
'Forbear'. Aul. Gell. *N. A.* 17. 19.

### 10a

When the safety of our souls and regard for our true selves is in
question, one may have to act at times without reason: this is a saying
of Epictetus quoted with approval by Arrian. Arnobius, *Against the
Heathen*, 2. 78.

### 11

#### FROM THE DISCOURSES OF ARRIAN, EXHORTING TO VIRTUE

But when Archelaus sent for Socrates and said he would make him rich, he
bade the messenger take back word to him, 'At Athens one can buy four
quarts of barleymeal for an obol, and there are running springs of
water'. For if what I have is not sufficient for me, yet I am sufficient
for it, and so it is sufficient for me. Do you not see that Polus did
not act Oedipus the king in better voice or with greater pleasure than
he acted Oedipus the poor beggar at Colonus? What! is the good man and
true to show himself inferior to Polus, instead of playing any part well
that Providence puts upon him? Will he not rather make Odysseus his
pattern, who was just as remarkable in his rags as in his rich cloak of
purple? *Flor*. 97. 28.

### 12

#### FROM ARRIAN

There are certain persons who indulge their anger gently, and who do all
that the most passionate do, but in a quiet passionless way. Now we must
guard against their error as a much worse fault than passionate anger.
For the passionate are soon sated with their revenge, but the colder
spirits persist for a long period like men who take a fever lightly.
*Flor*. 20. 48.

### 13

#### FROM THE MEMORABILIA OF EPICTETUS

'But', one says, 'I see the noble and good perishing of hunger and
cold.' Well, and do you not see those who are not noble and good
perishing of luxury and ostentation and vulgarity?

'Yes; but it is base to be maintained by another.'

Miserable man, is there any one that maintains himself? Only the
Universe does that. The man who accuses Providence because the wicked

<span id="page_463">p. 463</span>

are not punished, but are strong and rich, is acting just as absurdly as
if, when they had lost their eyes, he said that they had not been
punished, because their nails were sound. For my part I hold that there
is a much greater difference between virtue and vice than between eyes
and nails. *Ecl*. i. 3. 50.

### 14

#### FROM THE MEMORABILIA OF EPICTETUS

... bringing forward the peevish philosophers, who hold that pleasure is
not natural, but accompanies things which are natural—justice,
self-control, freedom. Why then does the soul take a calm delight, as
Epicurus says, in the lesser goods, those of the body, and does not take
pleasure in her own good things, which are the greatest? I tell you that
nature has given me a sense of self-respect, and I often blush when I
think I am saying something shameful. It is this emotion which prevents
me from regarding pleasure as a good thing and as the end of life.
*Flor*. 6. 50.

### 15

#### FROM THE SAME

In Rome women make a study of Plato's Republic, because he enacts
community of wives; for they only attend to the man's words and not to
his spirit, not noticing that he does not first enact the marriage of
one man and one woman and then wish wives to be common, but removes the
first kind of marriage and introduces another kind in its place. And in
general men are fond of finding justifications for their own faults; for
philosophy says that one ought not even *to hold out one's finger at
random*. *Flor*. 6. 58.

### 16

#### FROM THE MEMORABILIA OF EPICTETUS

You must know that it is not easy for a man to arrive at a judgement,
unless he should state and hear the same principles every day and apply
them all the time to his life. *Flor*. 29. 84.

### 17

#### FROM EPICTETUS

When we are invited to a drinking-party we enjoy what is before us, and
if one should bid his entertainer to serve him fish or cakes one would
be thought eccentric. Yet in the world we ask the gods for what they do

<span id="page_464">p. 464</span>

not give us, and that although there are many gifts which they have
given us. *Flor*. 4. 92.

### 18

#### FROM THE SAME

Fine fellows, he said, are they who pride themselves on those things
which are beyond our control. 'I am better than you,' says one, 'for I
have abundance of lands, and you are prostrate with hunger.' Another
says, 'I am a consular'; another, 'I am a procurator'; another, 'I have
curly hair'. A horse does not say to a horse, 'I am better than you, for
I have plenty of fodder and plenty of barley, and I have bridles of gold
and saddles of inlaid work', but 'for I am swifter than you'. And every
creature is better or worse according as its own virtue or vice makes it
so. Is man then the only creature that has no virtue of his own, that we
should have to look at his hair and his clothes and his ancestors?
*Flor*. 4. 93.

### 19

Sick men are angry with their physician when he gives them no advice,
and think that he has given them up. Why should one not adopt the same
attitude to the philosopher and conclude that he has given up hope of
one's wisdom, if he tells one nothing that is of use? *Flor*. 4. 94.

### 20

#### FROM EPICTETUS

Those whose bodies are in good condition can endure heat and cold; so
those whose souls are in good condition can bear anger and pain and
exultation and other emotions. *Flor*. 4. 95.

### 21

#### FROM THE SAME

It is right to praise Agrippinus for this reason, that having shown
himself a man of the highest worth, he never praised himself, but
blushed if any one else praised him. His character was such that when
any distress befell him he wrote a eulogy of it; if fever was his
portion he praised fever; if disrepute, he praised disrepute; and if
exile, he praised exile. And one day, when he was about to breakfast, a
messenger interrupted him to say that Nero ordered him into exile. 'Well
then,' said he, 'we will breakfast at Aricia.' *Flor*. 7. 17.

<span id="page_465">p. 465</span>

### 22

#### FROM AGRIPPINUS

Agrippinus, when governor, tried to convince those whom he sentenced
that it was proper for them to be sentenced. 'It is not as their enemy',
he said, 'or as a robber that I give sentence against them, but as their
guardian and kinsman, just as the physician encourages the man on whom
he is operating and persuades him to submit his body.' Flor. 48. 44.

### 23

#### FROM EPICTETUS

Wondrous is Nature, and 'fond of her creatures', as Xenophon says. At
any rate, we love and tend the body, the least agreeable and most vile
of all things! For if we had to tend our neighbour's body for ten days
only we could not bear it. Consider what it would be to get up in the
morning and clean some one else's teeth, and then to perform some other
necessary office for him. Truly it is wondrous that we should love that
for which we do such mean services day by day. I stuff this bag; then I
empty it; what could be more tiresome? But I am bound to serve God. That
is why I stay here and put up with washing this miserable body of mine,
and giving it fodder and shelter; and when I was younger, it laid other
commands on me as well, and yet I bore with it. Why then, when Nature,
who gave you your body, takes it away, can you not bear it? 'I love it,'
he says. Well, but is it not Nature, as I said just now, that has given
you this very love of it? And yet Nature too says, 'Let it go now, and
trouble no more'. *Flor*. 121. 29.

### 24

#### FROM THE SAME

If a man dies young he accuses the gods, and an old man sometimes
accuses them because he still is put to trouble when the time for rest
has fully come, and yet, when death comes near, he is fain to live and
sends to his doctor and bids him spare no pains or effort. Wondrous, he
said, are men, for they are unwilling to live or to die. *Flor*. 121.
30.

### 25

#### FROM THE SAME

When you attack a man with threats and show of violence, remember to
warn yourself that you are not a wild beast; then you will do nothing

<span id="page_466">p. 466</span>

savage, and will live your life through without having to repent or be
called to account. *Flor*. 20. 67.

### 26

You are a little soul, carrying a corpse, as Epictetus used to say. M.
Aurelius, iv. 41.

### 27

Epictetus said that we must discover the art of assent, and use careful
attention in the sphere of the will; our impulses must be 'with
qualification', and social and according to desert: we must abstain
altogether from the will to get, and not attempt to avoid any of those
things that are not in our power. M. Aurelius, xi. 37.

### 28

It is no ordinary matter that is at stake, he said; the question is
between sanity and madness. M. Aurelius, xi. 38.

### 29 <span id="fr_57"></span>[f-3](#fn_57)

Always take thought for nothing so much as what is safe; silence is
safer than speech; refrain from saying what shall be void of sense and
open to blame. *Flor*. 35. 10.

### 30

We must not fasten our ship to one small anchor nor our life to one
hope. *Flor*. 110. 22.

### 31

We must not stretch our hopes too wide, any more than our stride.
*Flor*. 110. 23.

### 32

It is more needful to heal soul than body; for death is better than
living ill. *Flor*. 121. 27.

### 33

The rarest pleasures give most delight. *Flor*. 6. 59

### 34

If a man should go beyond the mean, the most joyous things would turn to
utter joylessness. *Flor*. 6. 60.

<span id="page_467">p. 467</span>

### 35

No one is free that is not his own master. *Flor*. 6. 59.

### 36

Truth is a thing immortal and eternal; it gives us not a beauty that
fades with time; nor does it take away the confident speech that is
based on justice, but confirms things just and lawful, distinguishing
things unjust from them and showing their falsehood. Antonius, i. 21.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[f-1](#fr_55) 'Most of these fragments come from
two selections from Greek writers, made by Stobaeus, John of Stobi in
Macedonia (sixth century A.D.). Those marked *Ecl*. are from his
Eclogues, and those marked *Flor*. from his Anthology. Fragments 9 and
10 are from the *Noctes Atticae* of Aulus Gellius, a Latin grammarian of
the second century A.D.; 26, 27, 28 from the *Meditations* of the
Emperor Marcus Aurelius Antoninus; 10a from the *Against the Heathen* of
Arnobius, an African Latin writer (*ca*. A.D. 300); 36 from Antonius
Melissa ('The Bee'), a Greek monk of uncertain date. The reference to
Musonius Rufus in the headings of 4-8 is not clear; the natural meaning
would be that they are sayings of Rufus, incorporated by Epictetus in
his discourses on Friendship.' (Matheson)

<span id="fn_56"></span>[f-2](#fr_56) 'The ordered universe, which is
sometimes identified with its Creator, God.' (Matheson)

<span id="fn_57"></span>[f-3](#fr_57) The genuineness of the remaining
fragments has been suspected.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Manual \[Enchiridion\] of Epictetus](dep102)
