[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc25003)  [Next](cc25005) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 25: Daniel, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v"></span>

<span id="v-p1"></span>Chapter 10

<span id="v-p2"></span>The tenth chapter now follows, which Daniel
introduces as a preface to the eleventh and twelfth. He relates the
manner in which he was affected, when the last vision was presented to
him. This he briefly explains as referring to events about to occur
until the advent of Christ; and then he extends it to the final day of
the resurrection. God had previously predicted to his Prophet the future
condition of the Church from its return from Babylon to the advent of
Christ, but in the eleventh chapter he more distinctly and clearly
points with the finger to every event, as we shall perceive in
proceeding with our comments. In this chapter Daniel assures us that the
prophecies which he is about to discuss are worthy of more than ordinary
attention; when the angel appeared, he was immediately affected with
sorrow and grief; then he was one moment astonished, and the next cast
down by the secret instinct of the Spirit; he lay like a dead man, till
he was restored again and again by the angel of God. We shall observe
these points as we proceed. He first says —

<span id="v.i"></span>

<span id="v.i-p1"></span><span id="v.i-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#001)<span id="v.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p2"></span>**1.** In the third year of Cyrus king of
Persia a thing was revealed unto Daniel, whose name was called
Belteshazzar; and the thing *was* true, but the time appointed *was*
long: and he understood the thing, and had understanding of the vision.

<span id="v.i-p3"></span>**1.** Anno tertio Cyri regis Persarum sermo
revelatus fuit Danieli, cujus nomen Beltsazar, et veritas sermo,  <span
id="fr_124"></span>[125](#fn_124) et tempus magnum,  <span
id="fr_125"></span>[126](#fn_125) et intellexit sermonem, et
intelligentia ei fuit in visione.

<span id="v.i-p6"></span> 

<span id="v.i-p7"></span><span id="v.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p8"></span>We observe the Prophet by no means content with
the usual method of address, for the purpose of stirring up the
attention of the pious, and of assuring them how worthy of special
notice are the prophecies which follow. He marks the time, the third
year of King Cyrus, as the Jews were then forbidden by a new edict to
build their temple, although liberty to do so had been previously
granted to them. He says, “*a* *word*” *was made known to him,* and he
adds, *the word was true,* although the time was long. The time is
treated more at length in the next verse. By saying*, a word was
manifested to him,* he is thought to distinguish this prophecy from
others, as it was not offered to him by either a dream or a vision. He
uses the word <span id="v.i-p8.1"></span>הארמ, *merah,* a “*vision,*” at
the end of this verse, but I do not see why the noun “word” should be
taken in so restricted a sense. Interpreters, again, seek for a reason
why he mentions his own name as Belteshazzar; some think it celebrates
some honor to which he was raised; others treat it as commending the
superiority of his abilities, as the name implies — descended from
heaven; while others bring forward various conjectures. I have no
hesitation in stating Daniel’s wish to erect some illustrious monument
of his vocation among the Medes, Persians, and Chaldeans. There, most
probably, he was usually called Belteshazzar, and the name Daniel was
almost buried in oblivion, and so he wished to testify to his being no
stranger to the people of God, although he suffered a foreign name to be
imposed upon him; for we have already seen the impossibility of his
avoiding it. I therefore think the Prophet had no other intention than
to render this prophecy notorious throughout all those regions in which
he was well known under the name of Belteshazzar. Besides this, he
wished to testify to his fellow-countrymen that he was not entirely cut
off from the Church through being called Belteshazzar by the Chaldees;
for he was always the same, and while banished from his country, was
endued with the Spirit of prophecy, as we have previously seen. As the
name of Daniel was almost unknown in Chaldea, he wished to make known
the existence of both his names.

<span id="v.i-p9"></span>It now follows, *And there is truth in the
word* Daniel here commends the certainty of the prophecy, as if he had
said, I bring nothing before you but what is firm and stable, and whose
actual performance the faithful ought confidently to expect. *There is
truth in the word,* says he; meaning, there was no room for doubting his
assertions, for he had been divinely instructed in events which should
be fulfilled in their own time. I understand what follows to mean,
although the time should be long. Some of the Rabbis take <span
id="v.i-p9.1"></span>אבצ*, tzeba,* for the angelic hosts, which is quite
absurd in this place. The word signifies “army” as well as an appointed
time, but the exposition which they thrust upon the passage cannot stand
its ground. The particle “and,” as I think, must here be taken
adversatively, in the sense of “although.” Thus the Prophet proclaims
our need of calmness of mind, and patient endurance, until God shall
really complete and perform what he has verbally announced. This feeling
ought to be extended to all prophecies. We know how ardent are the
dispositions of men, and how hastily they are carried away by their own
desires. We are compelled, therefore, to curb our impetuosity, if we
wish to make progress in the school of God, and we must admit this
general principle: If a promise should tarry, wait for it; for it will
surely come, and will not delay. (<span id="v.i-p9.2"></span>[Hab
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#003)<span id="v.i-p9.2"></span>) Here
Daniel affirms in a special sense, *the time will be long* this would
restrain the faithful from rushing headlong with too much haste; they
would command their feelings, and remain tranquil till the full maturity
of the period should arrive.

<span id="v.i-p10"></span>He afterwards adds, *He understood the
vision;* by this assertion he confirms the prophecy which he is about to
explain, and thus assures us of his not uttering anything either
perplexed or obscure. He also induces all the pious to hope for the
exercise of the same understanding as he had himself attained; as if he
had said, I know what God wished; he has explained to me by his angel
various events which I will now set forth in their own order; let every
one peruse these prophecies attentively and reverently, and may God
grant him the same gift of understanding, and lead him to certain
knowledge. The information conveyed by the Prophet belongs to all the
pious, to deter them from sluggishness and despair. At the first glance
this teaching may appear very obscure, but they must seek from the Lord
that light of manifestation which he deigned to bestow upon the Prophet
himself. It now follows, —

<span id="v.ii"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p1"></span><span id="v.ii-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
10:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#002)<span id="v.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p2"></span>**2.** In those days I Daniel was mourning
three full weeks.

<span id="v.ii-p3"></span>**2.** Diebus illis ego Daniel dedi me luctui
tribus hebdomadibus dierum.

<span id="v.ii-p4"></span>**3.** I ate no pleasant bread, neither came
flesh nor wine in my mouth, neither did I anoint myself at all, till
three whole weeks were fulfilled.

<span id="v.ii-p5"></span>**3.** Panem deliciarum  <span
id="fr_126"></span>[127](#fn_126) non comedi: et caro et vinum non
intravit in os meum: et unguendo non fui unctus donec impletae sunt tres
hebdomades dierum.

<span id="v.ii-p7"></span> 

<span id="v.ii-p8"></span><span id="v.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p9"></span>We gather from this passage why the angel
appeared to the Prophet in the third year of Cyrus. He says, *he was
then in the greatest sorrow;* and what was the cause of it? At that
period we know an interruption of the work of rebuilding the temple and
city to have taken place. Cyrus was gone to a distance; he had set out
for Asia Minor, and was carrying on war with the Scythians. his son
Cambyses was corrupted by his couriers, and forbade the Jews to proceed
with the rebuilding of their city and temple. The freedom of the people
might then seem in vain. For God had promised the Jews in glowing
language a return to their country with their standards unfurled.
Besides this, we know the splendid language of the prophets respecting
the glory of the second temple. (<span id="v.ii-p9.1"></span>[Isa
52:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#012)<span id="v.ii-p9.1"></span>;
<span id="v.ii-p9.2"></span>[Hag
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#009)<span id="v.ii-p9.2"></span>, and
elsewhere.) When thus deprived of all opportunity of rebuilding their
temple, what could the Jews determine except that they had been deluded
after returning to their country, and God had made a shew of
disappointing expectations which had turned out a mere laughing-stock
and deception? This was the cause of the grief and anxiety which
oppressed the holy Prophet. We now understand why he mentions the third
year of Cyrus, as the circumstances of that period, even at this day,
point out the reason of his abstinence from all delicacies.

<span id="v.ii-p10"></span>He says, *He was in affliction for three
weeks of days* The Hebrews often use the phrase weeks or times of days
for complete periods. Very possibly, Daniel uses the word “days” here,
to prevent a mistake which might easily occur through his so lately
speaking of weeks of years. The distinction is thus more clearly marked
between the seventy weeks of years previously explained, and these three
weeks of days here mentioned. And the angel appears to have dwelt
purposely on the completion of these three weeks, as this was the third
year of King Cyrus’s reign. He says, *He did not eat delicate bread, and
he abstained from flesh and wine,* implying his practice of uniting
fasting with mourning. The holy Prophet is here represented as freely
using flesh and other food, while the Church of God remained in a state
of tranquillity; but when there was danger, lest the few who had
returned home should be diminished, and many were still suffering at
Babylon those grievous calamities to which they were subject during
their exile from neighboring enemies, then the Prophet abstained from
all delicacies. In the beginning of this book, he had stated the
contentment of himself and his companions with bread, and pulse, and
water for meat and drink. This statement is not contrary to the present
passage. There is no necessity to fly to that refinement, which allows
an old man to use wine, which he never touched in his youth and the
flower of his age. This comment is far too frigid. We have shewn, how at
the beginning of his exile the only reason for the Prophet’s abstaining
from the delicacies of the palace, was the desire of preserving himself
free from all corruption. For what was the object of the king’s
designing shrewdness in commanding Daniel and his companions to be
treated thus daintily and luxuriously? He wished them to forget their
nation by degrees, and to adopt the habits of the Chaldeans, and to be
withdrawn by such enticements from the observance of the law, from the
worship of God, and from the exercises of piety. When Daniel perceived
the artful manner in which he and his companions were treated, he
requested to be fed upon pulse, he refused to taste the king’s wine, and
despised all his dainties. His reason, therefore, concerned the
exigencies of the times, as I then pointed out at full length.
Meanwhile, we need not hesitate to suppose, that after giving this proof
of his constancy, and escaping from these snares of the devil and of the
Chaldean monarch, he lived rather freely than frugally, and made use of
better bread, and fresh, and wine than before. This passage, then,
though it asserts his abstinence from flesh and wine, need not imply
actual fasting. Daniel’s method of living was clearly after the common
practice of the Chaldeans, and by no means implies the rejection of
wine, or flesh, or viands of any kind. When he says, *he did not eat
delicate bread,* this was a symbol of sorrow and mourning, like
abstinence from flesh and wine. Daniel’s object in rejecting delicate
bread and wine during those three weeks, was not merely the promotion of
temperance, but suppliantly to implore the Almighty not to permit a
repetition of those sufferings to his Church under which it had
previously labored. But I cannot here treat at any length the object and
use of fasting. I have done so elsewhere; even if I wished to do so, I
have no time now. To-morrow, perhaps, I may say a few words on the
subject, and then proceed with the rest of my observations.

<span id="v.iii"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="v.iii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since thou settest
before us so remarkable an example in thy holy Prophet, whom thou didst
adorn in so many ways that he wrestled to even extreme old age with
various and almost innumerable trials, and yet was never mentally broken
down: Grant us to be endowed with the same untiring fortitude. May we
proceed in the course of our holy calling without the slightest
despondency through whatever may happen. When we see thy Church upon the
brink of ruin, and its enemies plotting desperately for its destruction,
may we constantly look for that liberty which thou hast promised. May we
strive with unbroken courage, until at length we shall be discharged
from our warfare, and gathered into that blessed rest which we know to
be laid up for us in heaven, through Christ our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="v.iv"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p1"></span>Lecture Fifty-Third

<span id="v.iv-p2"></span>We yesterday stated the reason why Daniel
abstained from flesh and wine for three weeks. It was the sorrowful and
depressed condition of the Church while the Jews were prohibited from
building their Temple. We have stated the fallacious views of those who
think him to have been always so abstemious in the flower of his age.
Though he lived on bread and pulse, it was only for the purpose of
remaining pure without any leaning towards the habits of the Chaldees,
as it was the king’s design to withdraw both himself and his companions
from God’s people, as if they had originally sprung from Chaldea. That,
therefore, was but a temporary reason. But he now states, *He had not
tasted delicate bread,* that is, made of fine flour, *and had not tasted
either wine or flesh,* during the time in which the building of the
Temple had been impeded. We must diligently notice this; for many
celebrate fasting as if it were a principal part of the worship of God.
They think it an act of obedience peculiarly pleasing to God. But this
is a gross error, since fasting by itself ought to be treated as a
matter unimportant and indifferent. It deserves no praise unless with
reference to its object. Now the objects of fasting are various; the
principal one is this, to enable the faithful suppliantly to deprecate
God’s wrath with the solemn testimony of their repentance, and to
stimulate each other to more fervor in their prayers. Ordinary daily
prayers do not require fasting; but when any great necessity presses
upon us, that exercise is added by way of help, to increase the
alertness and fervor of our minds in the pouring forth of prayer. For
this reason the Scriptures often connect fasting with sorrow, and Daniel
here follows the usual practice. We perceive then the reason of his
rejecting all delicacies in meat and drink, through his desire to
withdraw himself entirely from all hindrances, and to become more intent
upon his prayers. I now touch but briefly upon fasting, because I cannot
stop on casual passages like these. We should notice, however, how
foolishly and absurdly fasting is observed in these days among the
Papists, who think they have discharged that duty by eating but once in
the day, and abstaining from flesh. The rule of fasting among the
Papists is, to avoid flesh and not to partake of either supper or
dinner. But real fasting requires something far different from this,
namely, perfect abstinence from all delicacies. For Daniel extends this
fasting even to bread. He says, *He did not taste wine,* meaning he
abstained from all wine. Then, as to the word “flesh,” he does not mean
only that of oxen, or calves, or lambs, or fowls, or birds in general,
but all food except bread is included under the term flesh. For Daniel
did not trifle childishly with God, as the Papists do at this day, who
feed without any religious scruple on the best and most exquisite
viands, so long as they avoid flesh. This appears more clearly from the
statement — *he did not eat pleasant bread,* that is, made of fine flour
or the very best of the wheat. He was content with plain bread to
satisfy his necessities. This abundantly proves the superstition of
those who distinguish between flesh, and eggs, and fish. Now, fasting
consists in this — the imposition of a bridle upon men’s lusts, eating
only sparingly and lightly what is absolutely necessary, and being
content with black bread and water. We now understand how fasting in
this and similar passages is not taken for that temperance which God
recommends to us throughout the whole course of our lives. The faithful
ought to be habitually temperate, and by frugality, to observe a
continual fast; they ought not to indulge in immoderate food and drink,
and in luxurious habits, lest they should debilitate the mind and weaken
the body by such indulgences. As a mark of mourning and an exercise of
humility, the faithful may impose upon themselves the law of fasting
beyond their ordinary habits of sobriety, when they feel any sign of
God’s wrath, and desire to stimulate themselves to fervor in prayer,
according to our former statements, and to confess themselves in the
face of the whole world guilty before the tribunal of God. Such was
Daniel’s intention in not permitting himself to taste pleasant bread, or
to drink wine, or to eat flesh. It now follows, —

<span id="v.v"></span>

<span id="v.v-p1"></span><span id="v.v-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#004)<span id="v.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.v-p2"></span>**4.** And in the four and twentieth day of the
first month, as I was by the side of the great river, which *is*
Hiddekel;

<span id="v.v-p3"></span>**4.** Die vicessima quarta mensis primi, ego
fui super ripam fluvii magni, nempe Hidekel.  <span
id="fr_127"></span>[128](#fn_127)

<span id="v.v-p5"></span> 

<span id="v.v-p6"></span><span id="v.v-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.v-p7"></span>Daniel now narrates the acceptance of his
prayers, because all angel appeared and instructed him in the future
condition of the Church. Without the slightest doubt, the fasting
already described was a preparation for prayer, as we have stated
before, and as we may gather from many passages of Scripture, especially
from the assertion of Christ, where he says, the demon could not be cast
out except by prayer and fasting. (<span id="v.v-p7.1"></span>[Mt
17:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#021)<span id="v.v-p7.1"></span>.)
Daniel, therefore, did not abstain from all food, and wine, and
luxuries, with the view of rendering any obedience to God, but of
testifying his own grief: then he was anxious to rouse himself to
prayer, and by that mark of humility, to prepare far better for
repentance. He says now — *on the twenty-fourth day of the first month*
— meaning March, the first month of the Jewish year — *he stood on the
bank of the great river,* namely, the Tigris. The word <span
id="v.v-p7.2"></span>די, *yid,* is metaphorically used for the bank, and
interpreters are agreed in identifying *Hiddekel* with the Tigris.
Geographers state the name of this river to be in some places, and
especially near its fountain, *Digliton,* which answers to the common
Hebrew name Hidekel. Without doubt, this river is called Phison by
Moses, since the Tigris has three names among profane nations. Its usual
name is Tigris, and in one part of its course it becomes the Hidekel,
and has also the names of *Pasitigris* and *Phasis,* which is equivalent
to Phison. The Prophet relates, *his standing on the bank of this great
river* It is uncertain whether he was then in that part of the world, or
whether God set before him the prospect of the river, as we have seen
elsewhere. I rather incline to the opinion of his being rapt in the
prophetic spirit, and obtaining vision of the river, and not to his
being really there. Possibly, that province might have been placed under
his government in the course of the great changes which took place in
those times. While Belshazzar lived, he could not have been at Susan,
and so we were compelled to explain his former language by the prophetic
rapture. And as to the present passage, I shall not quarrel with the
opinion of any one who supposes Daniel to have dwelt in that district,
but, as I have stated before, I think it most probable, that this
spectacle was offered to the holy Prophet when far distant from the
river’s bank, and only able to behold it in commenced his *abstinence*
from flesh, and food, and all pleasant viands, and then relaxed his fast
for three weeks, as he here marks the date on the twenty-fourth day. But
I leave this doubtful, through the impossibility of ascertaining the
point with certainty. Let us now proceed, —

<span id="v.vi"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p1"></span><span id="v.vi-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
10:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#005)<span id="v.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p2"></span>**5.** Then I lifted up mine eyes, and looked,
and behold a certain man clothed in linen, whose loins *were* girded
with fine gold of Uphaz:

<span id="v.vi-p3"></span>**5.** Et levavi oculos meos, et vidi, et ecce
vir unus indutus lineis, *vestibus scilicet*, et lumbi ejus accincti
auro Uphaz.

<span id="v.vi-p4"></span>**6.** His body also *was* like the beryl, and
his face as the appearance of lightning, and his eyes as lamps of fire,
and his arms and his feet like in colour to polished brass, and the
voice of his words like the voice of a multitude.

<span id="v.vi-p5"></span>**6.** Et corpus ejus sieut tharsis, et facies
ejus quasi lampades ignis: et brachia ejus, et pedes ejus quasi
conspectus aeris politi,  <span id="fr_128"></span>[129](#fn_128) et vox
sermonum ejus quasi vox multitudinis.  <span
id="fr_129"></span>[130](#fn_129)

<span id="v.vi-p8"></span> 

<span id="v.vi-p9"></span><span id="v.vi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p10"></span>As to the word *Uphaz,* some think it to be a
pearl or precious stone, and they take the word <span
id="v.vi-p10.1"></span>םתכ, *kethem,* which precedes it, for pure gold.
Others take *uphaz* adjectivally, for pure gold. I do not suppose it to
be an epithet, but I rather subscribe to the view of those who
understand it as the proper name of a place, because this view is in
accordance with the phraseology of the tenth chapter of Jeremiah. There
is another opinion which is unsuitable. Uphaz is said to be derived from
the noun Phaz, and is called “pure,” the letter Aleph being redundant.
The above mentioned passage of Jeremiah is sufficient to prove my
assertion, that it signifies a certain region; and so some have
translated it by ophir. The word <span id="v.vi-p10.2"></span>ששרת,
*tharsis,* is thought to mean chrysolite: some think it denotes the
color of the sea, and then, by a figure of speech, take it generally for
any sea. It is also said to mean sky-colored.

<span id="v.vi-p11"></span>Daniel now begins to relate the manner in
which the vision was offered to him. He says, when he stood on the bank
of the river a man appeared to him, different from the common order of
men. He calls him a man, but shews him to be endued, or adorned with
attributes which inspire full confidence in his celestial glory. We have
elsewhere stated, how angels are called men, whenever God wished them to
put on this outward form. The name of men is therefore used
metaphorically whenever they assumed that form by God’s command, and now
Daniel speaks after the accustomed manner. Meanwhile, some absurdly
imagine angels to have been really men, since they assumed this
appearance, and were clothed in a human body. We ought not to believe
them to be really men, because they appeared under a human form. Christ,
indeed, was really man, in consequence of his springing from the seed of
Abraham, David, and Adam. But as regards angels, God clothes them for a
single day or a short period in bodies, for a distinct purpose and a
special use. Wherefore, I assert the gross error of those who suppose
angels to become men, as often as they are corporeally visible in a
human form. Still they may be called men, because Scripture accommodates
itself to our senses, as we know sufficiently well. Daniel therefore
says, *he saw a man,* and afterwards distinguishes him from the human
race, and shews fixed and conspicuous marks inscribed upon him, which
discover him to be an angel sent down from heaven, and not a mere
earthly mortal. Some philosophize with subtlety on the word *raised,* as
if Daniel so raised his eyes upwards as to be unconscious of all earthly
objects; but this does not appear to me sufficiently certain. The
Prophet wishes to impress the certainty of the vision; not only was his
mind composed and collected, but he applied all his senses to the one
object before him — the attainment of some consolation from God. The
Prophet, therefore, denotes the earnestness of his desire, for when he
looked round he found himself subject to many cares and anxieties.
Again, with reference to the marks by which Daniel might infer the
object of his vision to be neither earthly nor mortal, he first says,
*he was clothed in linen* This kind of garment was common enough among
the people of the East. Those regions are remarkably warm, and their
inhabitants need not protect themselves against the cold, as we are
necessarily compelled to do. They seldom wear woolen clothing. But on
special occasions when they wish to use more splendid attire, they put
on linen tunics, as we learn not only from many passages of Scripture,
but also from profane writers. Hence I take this passage as if Daniel
had said, the man appeared to him in splendid apparel. For <span
id="v.vi-p11.1"></span>םידב, *bedim,* is supposed not to mean common
linen, but a more exquisite kind of fabric. This is one point.

<span id="v.vi-p12"></span>He next says, *He was girt with pure gold;*
that is, with a golden belt. The Orientals were formerly accustomed to
gird themselves with belts or girdles, as their garments were long and
reached almost down to the feet. Hence it became necessary for those who
wished to move expeditiously to gird themselves with belts. When the
angel appeared with raiment of this kind, the difference between himself
and other men was displayed to the Prophet. Some refer the linen garment
to the priesthood of Christ, and treat the girdle as an emblem of rigor.
But these are mere refinements, and seem to me destitute of all reality.
I therefore am content with the simple opinion on which I have touched,
namely, this form of clothing distinguished the angel from ordinary
mortals. But this will appear clearer from the following verse. For
Daniel says, *His body was sky-colored,* or like the precious stone
called beryl, of a golden hue Without doubt, the Prophet beheld
something different from a human form, for the purpose of his clearly
ascertaining the vision not to be a man, but an angel in the form of
man. I leave the allegory here, although it proceeds throughout the
whole verse. I am aware of the plausible nature of allegories, but when
we reverently weigh the teachings of the Holy Spirit, those speculations
which at first sight pleased us exceedingly, vanish from our view. I am
not captivated by these enticements myself, and I wish all my hearers to
be persuaded of this, — nothing can be better than a sober treatment of
Scripture. We ought never to fetch from a distance subtle explanations,
for the true sense will, as I have previously expressed it, flow
naturally from a passage when it is weighed with maturer deliberation.
He says, *His face was like the appearance of lightning* This, again,
assured the Prophet of his being an more than earthly mortal. His eyes
would lead to the same conclusion; they were *like lamps of fire;* then
*his arms and feet were like polished* or burnished *brass;* lastly,
*the voice of his words was the voice of a tumult, or noise, or
multitude.* The sum of the whole is this, — the angel, though clad in
human form, possessed certain conspicuous marks by which God separated
him from the common crowd of men. Thus Daniel clearly perceived the
divine mission of the angel, and God wished to establish the confidence
and certainty of those prophecies which will afterwards follow in the
eleventh chapter. Let us proceed:

<span id="v.vii"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p1"></span><span id="v.vii-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#007)<span id="v.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p2"></span>**7.** And I Daniel alone saw the vision: for
the men that were with me saw not the vision; but a great quaking fell
upon them, so that they fled to hide themselves.

<span id="v.vii-p3"></span>**7.** Et vidi ego Daniel solus visionem, et
viri qui erant mecum, non viderunt visionem, imo  <span
id="fr_130"></span>[131](#fn_130) terror magnus irruit super eos, et
fugerunt in latebras.  <span id="fr_131"></span>[132](#fn_131)

<span id="v.vii-p6"></span> 

<span id="v.vii-p7"></span><span id="v.vii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p8"></span>He pursues his own narrative in which he
appears prolix, but not without design. This prophecy required all kinds
of sanction for the purpose of inspiring unhesitating confidence in it,
not only with those Jews of that generation, but with all posterity.
Although the predictions of the eleventh chapter have been fulfilled,
yet their utility is manifest to us as follows: first, we behold in them
God’s perpetual care of his Church; secondly, we observe the pious never
left destitute of any necessary consolation; and lastly, we perceive, as
in a glass or in a living picture, the Spirit of God speaking in the
prophets, as I have observed before, and shall have occasion to remark
again. Daniel, therefore, has good reasons for impressing us with the
certainty of the vision, and with whatever tends to prove its reality.
He says, *I alone saw the vision; but the men who were with me did not
see it;* just as the companions of Paul did not hear Christ’s voice, but
only a confused sound: they did not understand his language, as Paul
alone was permitted to comprehend it. (<span id="v.vii-p8.1"></span>[Ac
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#007)<span id="v.vii-p8.1"></span>) This
is related to promote belief in the prophecy. Daniel’s power of hearing
was not superior to his companions, but God intended to address him
alone. Thus the voice, although like the voice of a multitude, did not
penetrate the ears of those who were with him. He alone was the
recipient of these prophecies, as he alone was endued with the power of
predicting future events, and of consoling and exhorting the pious to
live them a knowledge of futurity even to the last day. Should any one
inquire how he carried his companions with him while he was probably
lying on his bed at a distance from the bank of the river, the answer is
easy. He had his domestics with him; the river’s bank only existed in
the vision, and he was carried completely out of himself, and thus his
family would be acquainted with the ecstasy without being aware of the
cause. Daniel then continued at. his own home, and only visited the bank
of the river during the vision; although many witnesses were present,
God struck them all with astonishment, while Daniel only perceived what
is afterwards narrated. God deemed him worthy of this singular honor to
fit him to become a teacher and instructor to others. *The men who were
with me,* says he, *saw not the vision; but a great terror fell upon
them* This distinction, as I have stated, shews Daniel to have been
selected as the sole listener to the angel’s voice, and as receiving the
information which he was afterwards to convey to others. Meanwhile, God
intended many witnesses to notice Daniel’s entire freedom from any
delusion through either a dream or a passing imagination. *His
companions,* then, *were fright-eyed* This terror proves the Prophet to
have been divinely instructed and not to have labored under any
delirium. *They fled,* therefore, *into hiding-places* It afterwards
follows: —

<span id="v.viii"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p1"></span><span id="v.viii-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#008)<span id="v.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p2"></span>**8.** Therefore I was left alone, and saw
this great vision, and there remained no strength in me: for my
comeliness was turned in me into corruption, and I retained no strength.

<span id="v.viii-p3"></span>**8.** Et ego relictus fui solus, et vidi
visionem magnam hanc, et non fuit residuum in me robur  <span
id="fr_132"></span>[133](#fn_132) atque etiam decor  <span
id="fr_133"></span>[134](#fn_133) meus eversus fuit super me, *in me*,
ad corruptiones  <span id="fr_134"></span>[135](#fn_134) et non retinui
vigorem.

<span id="v.viii-p7"></span> 

<span id="v.viii-p8"></span><span id="v.viii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p9"></span>This language all tends to the same purpose
— to assure us that Daniel did not write his own comments with rashness,
but was truly and clearly taught by the angel on all the points which he
committed to writing, and thus all hesitation is removed as to our
embracing what we shall afterwards perceive, as he is a faithful
interpreter of God. He first states *he saw a vision.* He had said so
before, but he repeats it to produce a due impression; he calls the
vision *great,* to arouse our attention to its importance. He adds, *he
was deprived of all vigor;* as if he had been rendered lifeless by the
blast of the Spirit. Thus we gather the object of the exhibition of all
these outward signs; they not only bring before us God speaking by the
mouth of his angel, but they prepared the Prophet himself, and trained
him to reverence. God, however, does not terrify his sons, as if our
disquiet was with him an object of delight, but solely because it is
profitable for us; for unless our carnal feelings were utterly subdued,
we should never be fit to receive improvement. This necessarily requires
violence, on account of our inborn perverseness; and this is the reason
why the Prophet was reduced to this state of lifelessness. Even *my
comeliness, or* beauty, or appearance, *was turned to corruption;*
meaning, my deformity was similar to that induced by death. He adds
lastly, *I did not retain my vigor.* He uses a variety of phrases to
shew himself depressed by the heavenly blast, for but a slight amount of
vitality remained, and he was scarcely preserved from actual death. We
ought to learn to transfer this instruction to ourselves, not by the
vanishing of our rigor or the changing of our appearance whenever God
addresses us, but by all our resistance giving way, and all our pride
and loftiness becoming prostrate before God. Finally, our carnal
disposition ought to be completely reduced to nothing, as true docility
will never be found in us until all our senses are completely mortified;
for we must always remember how hostile all our natural thoughts are to
the will of God. It afterwards follows; — but I cannot proceed further
today; I must delay my comment on the next verses till to-morrow.

<span id="v.ix"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="v.ix-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, as thou didst formerly
appear to Daniel thy holy servant, and to the other prophets, and by
their doctrine didst render thy glory conspicuous to us at this day,
that we may reverently approach and behold it. When we have become
entirely devoted to thee, may those mysteries which it has pleased thee
to offer by means of their hand and labors, receive from us their due
estimation. May we be cast down in ourselves and be raised by hope and
faith towards heaven; when prostrate before thy face, may we so conduct
ourselves in the world, as in the interval to become free from all the
depraved desires and passions of our flesh, and dwell mentally in
heaven. Then at length may we be withdrawn from this earthly warfare,
and arrive at that celestial rest which thou hast prepared for us,
through the same Jesus Christ our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="v.x"></span>

<span id="v.x-p1"></span>Lecture Fifty-Fourth.

<span id="v.xi"></span>

<span id="v.xi-p1"></span><span id="v.xi-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
10:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#009)<span id="v.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xi-p2"></span>**9.** Yet heard I the voice of his words: and
when I heard the voice of his words, then was I in a deep sleep on my
face, and my face toward the ground.

<span id="v.xi-p3"></span>**9.** Et audivi vocem sermonum ejus, et cum
audirem vocem sermonum ejus, tunc ego fui sopitus super faciem meam,
 <span id="fr_135"></span>[136](#fn_135) et facies mea in terram,
*projecta fuit scilicet.*

<span id="v.xi-p5"></span>**10.** And, behold, an hand touched me, which
set me upon my knees and *upon* the palms of my hands.

<span id="v.xi-p6"></span>**10.** et ecce manus tetigit me,  <span
id="fr_136"></span>[137](#fn_136) et movere me fecit super genui mea, et
palmas, *aut volas*, manum mearum.

<span id="v.xi-p8"></span> 

<span id="v.xi-p9"></span><span id="v.xi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.xi-p10"></span>In yesterday’s Lecture Daniel confessed
himself astonished at the sight of the angel, and deprived of all inward
strength. He afterwards adds, *On hearing the sound of his words he
threw himself on the ground;* for this is the sense of the ninth verse,
as we have just read it. he represents himself as being *in a swoon* and
in the unconscious state which usually occurs when all our senses are
paralyzed by excessive fear. While lying thus senselessly on the ground,
*Behold,* he adds, *hands touched me, and placed me upon my knees and
the palms of my hands* He mentions his being partially raised by the
angel, not only through the sound of his voice, but by the touch of his
hand. He implies that he was not yet raised to either the standing or
sitting posture; he was only placed upon his knees with his hands upon
the ground, this posture being the sign of his dejection. Thus he was
partially relieved, and fear no longer seized upon either his mind or
his limbs. From this passage we should learn that when prostrated by the
voice of God, we cannot be restored otherwise than by his strength. We
know the hand to be the symbol of strength. Unless God himself stretches
out his hand to us, we shall always remain apparently dead. This is one
lesson. The Prophet next adds the address of the angel to him, —

<span id="v.xii"></span>

<span id="v.xii-p1"></span><span id="v.xii-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#011)<span id="v.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xii-p2"></span>**11.** And he said unto me, O Daniel, a man
greatly beloved, understand the words that I speak unto thee, and stand
upright: for unto thee am I now sent. And when he had spoken this word
unto me, I stood trembling.

<span id="v.xii-p3"></span>**11.** Et loquutus est ad me, Daniel vir
desideriorum intellige, *attentus sis*, ad verba quae loquor tecum et
sta super stare tuum: quia nunc missus sum ad te. Et cum loqueretur
mecum sermonem hunc, steti tremens, *vel, trepidus*

<span id="v.xii-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.xii-p5"></span><span id="v.xii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.xii-p6"></span>He here relates how he was strengthened, by
the angel’s exhortation. He now begins to raise himself from his former
position, and the angel now orders him to raise his drooping spirits,
and calls *him a man greatly beloved* We have previously discussed this
word, which some refer to Daniel’s zeal, and take it passively, because
he was inspired with a most invincible ardor through anxiety for the
common welfare of the Church. I rather incline to the opposite view,
thinking him so called through the force of his desires, because he was
dear and precious to God. By This epithet the angel wished to animate
the holy Prophet, and to calm and quiet his mind for listening to what
he so ardently expected. *Understand,* therefore, he says, or attend to,
*the words which I shall speak to thee, and stand upright.* Some
translate it, in thy station, but “station” does not refer to the
position of the body. I have already shewn how the Prophet was not now
quite prostrate; his face was towards the earth, while he was supported
by his hands and knees; and we now perceive him raised another step.
This doctrine is profitable to us, because many think themselves utterly
neglected and deserted by God, unless they immediately regain their
mental rigor. But God does not all at once restore to life those whom he
has rendered all but lifeless, but he conveys new life by degrees, and
inspires the dead with fresh animation. We perceive this to have been
done in Daniel’s case. Therefore I am never surprised when God raises us
gradually by distinct steps, and cures our infirmity by degrees; but if
even a single drop of his virtue is supplied to us, we should be content
with this consolation, until he should complete what he has begun within
us. Lastly, this passage unfolds to us how God works in his servants, by
not rendering them perfect all at once, but allowing some infirmity to
remain until the completion of his own work.

<span id="v.xii-p7"></span>Daniel afterwards adds, *When he heard this
address, he stood up.* We here observe the effect and fruit of the
angel’s exhortation, as Daniel no longer needed to support himself on
his hands and knees. He could stand upright, although he adds, *he
remained trembling* Although thus erect in body, he was not entirely
free from feelings of dread; and, though he stood upon his feet, he was
not yet relieved from all trepidation, even at the angel’s command. This
confirms my previous remark — God leaves in his servants some signs of
fear, to remind them of their infirmity; they venture to raise
themselves by hope above the world, but they do not forget they are but
dust and ashes, and so restrain themselves within the bounds of humility
and modesty. It now follows: —

<span id="v.xiii"></span>

<span id="v.xiii-p1"></span><span id="v.xiii-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#012)<span id="v.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xiii-p2"></span>**12.** Then said he unto me, Fear not,
Daniel: for from the first day that thou didst set thine heart to
understand, and to chasten thyself before thy God, thy words were heard,
and I am come for thy words.

<span id="v.xiii-p3"></span>**12.** Et dixit ad me, ne timeas Daniel,
quia a die primo quo adjecisti cor tuum ad, intelligendum, et affigendum
te, vel, *humiliandum*, coram facie Dei tui, exaudita sunt verba tua: et
ego veni in verbis tuis, *hoc est, propter verba tua.*

<span id="v.xiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.xiii-p5"></span><span id="v.xiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.xiii-p6"></span>By the angel’s commanding the Prophet to be
of a serene and tranquil mind, we gather the continuance of his fright,
and his being as yet unable to listen with composure. And yet this
trembling improved his teachableness. Without the slightest doubt, God
desired to prepare his servant in this way to render him more attentive
to his disciples, and yet this very terror prevented Daniel from
summoning all his senses to listen to the address of the angel. The
remedy is exhibited in these words, *O Daniel, fear not* The angel did
not wish to remove all fear from the Prophet’s mind, but rather to calm
it, lest his trembling should prevent him from giving due attention to
the prophecies which we shall soon discuss. I have already said enough
on the subject of this address. As God knows fear to be useful to us, he
does not wish us to be entirely free from it, as too great
self-confidence would immediately produce slothfulness and pride. God,
therefore, wishes our fears to restrain us like a bridle, but meanwhile
he moderates this dread in his servants, lest their minds become
stricken and disturbed, and thus disabled from approaching him with
calmness.

<span id="v.xiii-p7"></span>The angel adds*, From the first day on which
thou didst begin to apply thy mind to understanding, and to afflict
thyself before God, thy prayers were heard* This reason sufficiently
shews in what sense and with what intention the angel forbade the
Prophet’s fears — *because,* says he, *thy prayers have been heard* He
was unwilling to banish all fear, but he offered some hope and
consolation; and relying on this expectation, he might wait for the
revelation which he so earnestly desired. He states *his prayers to have
been heard from the time of his applying his mind to understanding, and
from his afflicting himself before God* These two points may be noticed:
first, by the word “understanding” the angel informs us of God’s being
propitious to the prayers of his servant, because they were sincere and
legitimate. For what spectacle did Daniel behold? He saw the condition
of the Church entirely confused, and he desired the communication of
some mark of favor, which might assure him of God’s being still mindful
of His covenant, and of his not despising those wretched Israelites whom
he had adopted. As this was the object of the Prophet’s prayer, he so
far obtained his request, and the angel bears witness to God’s being
entreated by him. We are taught then by this passage, if we are anxious
for our supplications to be both heard and approved by God, not to give
way to those foolish lusts and appetites, which solicit and entice us.
We ought to observe the rule here prescribed by the angel, and fashion
our entreaties according to God’s will. We know, says John, that if we
ask anything according to his will, he will hear us. (<span
id="v.xiii-p7.1"></span>[1Jo 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#014)<span
id="v.xiii-p7.1"></span>.) This is the first point. The second is the
addition of penitence to fervor in devotion, when the angel says,
*Daniel’s mind was afflicted* or humbled. A second condition of true
prayer is here set before us, when the faithful humble themselves before
God, and being touched with true penitence, pour out their groans before
him. The angel, therefore, shews how Daniel obtained his requests, by
suppliantly afflicting himself before God. He did not utter prayers for
the Church in a mere formal manner, but as we have previously seen, he
united fasting with entreaty, and abstained from all delicacies. For
this reason God did not reject his petitions. He says, *before thy God;*
this expression of the angel’s implying that the Prophet’s supplication
sprang from true faith. The prayers of the impious, on the other hand,
always repel the Almighty, and they can never be sure of his being
propitious to them. In consequence of the hesitation and vacillation of
unbelievers, this testimony to true faith is set before Daniel — he
*prayed to his own God* Whoever approaches God, says the Apostle, (<span
id="v.xiii-p7.2"></span>[Heb 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#006)<span
id="v.xiii-p7.2"></span>,) ought to acknowledge his existence, and his
being easily entreated by all those who seek and invoke him. We ought
diligently to notice this, as this fault is most manifest in all ages,
men often pray to God, but yet through their hesitation they pour forth
their petitions into the air. They do not realize God as their Father.
Another passage also reminds us how useless is the hope of obtaining
anything by prayer, if we are agitated and tossed about in our emotions.
(<span id="v.xiii-p7.3"></span>[Jas.
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#007)<span id="v.xiii-p7.3"></span>.)
Unless faith shine forth, we must not feel surprise at those who call
upon God losing all their labor through their profanation of his name.
Lastly, by this expression, the angel shews us how Daniel’s prayer was
founded on faith; he had not sought God with rashness, but was clearly
persuaded of his being welcomed among the sons of God. *He prayed,*
therefore, *to his own God,* and for this reason, his petitions were
heard. Then the angel adds, *he came at his words;* as it is said in the
Psalms. (<span id="v.xiii-p7.4"></span>[Ps
145:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#019)<span id="v.xiii-p7.4"></span>.)
God inclines with desire towards those who fear him; and in this sense
the angel waits upon Daniel. It now follows, —

<span id="v.xiv"></span>

<span id="v.xiv-p1"></span><span id="v.xiv-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#013)<span id="v.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xiv-p2"></span>**13.** But the prince of the kingdom of
Persia withstood me one and twenty days: but, lo, Michael, one of the
chief princes, came to help me; and I remained there with the kings of
Persia.

<span id="v.xiv-p3"></span>**13.** Et Princeps regni Persarum stetit
coram me, *vel, e regione*, viginti diebus et uno. Et ecce Michael unus
principum primorum  <span id="fr_137"></span>[138](#fn_137) venit ad
opem ferendam mihi,  <span id="fr_138"></span>[139](#fn_138) et ego
residuus  <span id="fr_139"></span>[140](#fn_139) fui apuds reges
Persarum, *vel, Persidis.*

<span id="v.xiv-p7"></span> 

<span id="v.xiv-p8"></span><span id="v.xiv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="v.xiv-p9"></span>The angel now assigns a reason why he did not
appear at once, and at the very first moment to the Prophet, who might
complain as follows, — “What treatment is this, to suffer me to consume
away through grief for so long a period?” for Daniel had remained
through three weeks in succession in the severest affliction. God had
heard him, indeed, from the very first day; how, then, could he still
behold this wretched man thus prostrate in mourning? why did not God
cause it to appear openly and really that he had not prayed in vain? The
angel now meets this objection, and shews how he had been otherwise
occupied in promoting the Prophet’s welfare. We ought carefully to
notice this, because delay often disturbs us when God does not
immediately extend his help, and for a long time hides from us the fruit
of our prayers. Whenever our passions burst forth with a strong
impetuosity, and we easily manifest tokens of impatience, we must notice
this expression of the angel, for our prayers may be already heard while
God’s favor and mercy is concealed from us. The experience of Daniel is
daily fulfilled in every member of the Church, and without the slightest
doubt the same discipline is exercised towards all the pious. This is
our practical reflection. We must notice, secondly, God’s condescension
in deigning to explain himself by the angel to his own Prophet. He
offers a reason for the delay of the angel’s return, and the cause of
this hindrance was, as I have already stated, his regard for the safety
of his elect people. The wonderful clemency of the Almighty is here
proved by his offering an excuse so graciously to his Prophet, because
he did not shew himself easily entreated on the very day when prayer was
offered to him. But we ought to derive another practical benefit from
the passage, — God does not cease to regard us with favor even while he
may not please to make us conscious of it, for he does not always place
it before our eyes, but rather hides it from our view. We infer from
this, God’s constant care for our safety, although not exhibited exactly
in the way which our minds may conceive and comprehend. God surpasses
all our comprehension in the way in which he provides for our safety, as
the angel here relates his mission in quite another direction, and yet
in the service of the Church. It now appears how Daniel obtained an
answer to his prayers from the very first day of their offering, and yet
remained unconscious of it, until God sent him some consolation in the
midst of his troubles. A very different interpretation of this verse has
been proposed, for some expounders think the angel sent into Persia to
protect that kingdom. There is some probability in this explanation,
because the Israelites were still under the Persian monarchy, and God
may have furnished some assistance to the kings of Persia for the sake
of his own people. But I think the angel stood in direct opposition and
conflict against Cambyses, to prevent him from raging more fiercely
against God’s people. He had promulgated a cruel edict, preventing the
Jews from building their temple, and manifesting complete hostility to
its restoration. He would not have been satisfied with this rigorous
treatment, had not God restrained his cruelty by the aid and hand of the
angel.

<span id="v.xiv-p10"></span>If we weigh these words judiciously, we
shall readily conclude, that the angel fought rather against the king of
the Persians than for him. *The prince,* says he, *of the kingdom of the
Persians,* meaning Cambyses, with his father Cyrus, crossed over the sea
and contended with the Scythians, as well as in Asia Minor. The prince
of the kingdom of Persia was ranged against him, as if he had said, — He
detained me from reaching you, but it was for the good of your race, for
had not God used me in assisting you, his cruelty would have been
aggravated, and your condition would have been utterly desperate. You
perceive, then, how there has been no want of zeal on my part, for God
was never deaf to your entreaties. *The prince of the kingdom of the
Persians stood against me for twenty-one days;* meaning, from the period
of your beginning to pour forth your prayers before God, I have never
flinched from any attack or assault, by which I might defend thy people.
*The prince of the kingdom of the Persians stood against me;* meaning,
he was so hot against the Israelites, as to intend to pour forth the
very dregs of his wrath, unless the help which I afforded you had been
divinely interposed.

<span id="v.xiv-p11"></span>He adds next, *Behold! Michael, one of the
chief leaders or princes, came to strengthen me* Some think the word
Michael represents Christ, and I do not object to this opinion. Clearly
enough, if all angels keep watch over the faithful and elect, still
Christ holds the first rank among them, because he is their head, and
uses their ministry and assistance to defend all his people. But as this
is not generally admitted, I leave it in doubt for the present, and
shall say more on the subject in the twelfth chapter. From this passage
we may clearly deduce the following conclusion, — angels contend for the
Church of God both generally and for single members, just as their help
may be needed. This we know to be a part of the occupation of angels,
who protect the faithful according to <span
id="v.xiv-p11.1"></span>[Psalm 34](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#000)<span
id="v.xiv-p11.1"></span> (<span id="v.xiv-p11.2"></span>[Ps
34:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#008)<span id="v.xiv-p11.2"></span>.)
They fix their camp in a circuit round them. God, therefore, plants his
angels against all the endeavors of Satan, and all the fury of the
impious who desire to destroy us, and are ever plotting for our complete
ruin. If God were not to protect us in this way, we should be utterly
undone. We are aware of Satan’s horrible hatred to us, and of the mighty
fury with which he assails us; we know how skillfully and variously he
contrives his artifices; we know him as the prince of this world,
dragging and hurrying the greater part of mankind along with him, while
they impiously pour forth their threats against us. What prevents Satan
from daily absorbing a hundred times over the whole Church both
collectively and individually? It clearly becomes necessary for God to
oppose his fury, and this he does by angels. While they are contending
for us and for our safety, we do not perceive this hidden malice,
because they conceal it from us.

<span id="v.xiv-p12"></span>We may now treat this passage a little more
in detail. The angel was stationed in Persia to repress the audacity and
cruelty of Cambyses, who was not content with a single edict, but would
have forcibly dragged the wretched Israelites back again to a fresh
exile. And he must have succeeded, had not first one angel and then
another confronted him. The angel now informs us how Michael, one of the
chief leaders, came up with the requisite supplies. The defense of one
angel might have been sufficient, for angels have no further power than
what is conferred upon them. But God is not bound to any particular
means, he is not limited to either one or a thousand, as when
Jehoshaphat speaks of a small army, he states, It matters not before
God, whether we be few or many. (<span id="v.xiv-p12.1"></span>[2Ch
14:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#011)<span id="v.xiv-p12.1"></span>;
<span id="v.xiv-p12.2"></span>[1Sa
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#006)<span id="v.xiv-p12.2"></span>.)
For God can save his people by either a small force or a mighty one; and
the same also is true of angels. But God is anxious to testify to the
care which he bestows upon the welfare of his people, and to his
singular loving-kindness towards the Israelites displayed by the mission
of a second angel. He doubled his re-enforcement to bear witness to his
love towards these wretched and innocent ones, who were oppressed by the
calumnies of their enemies, and by the tyranny of that impious king.
Finally, the angel says, *he was left among the Persian kings,* for the
purpose of removing the numerous obstacles in the way of the chosen
people; for, unless God had withstood that deluge of weapons with his
own shield, the Jews would have been buried beneath it on the spot. Let
us proceed —

<span id="v.xv"></span>

<span id="v.xv-p1"></span><span id="v.xv-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#014)<span id="v.xv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xv-p2"></span>**14.** Now I am come to make thee understand
what shall befall thy people in the latter days: for yet the vision *is*
for *many* days.

<span id="v.xv-p3"></span>**14.** Et veni ut tibi patefacerem  <span
id="fr_140"></span>[141](#fn_140) quod occurret populo tuo  <span
id="fr_141"></span>[142](#fn_141) in extremitate dierum, *diebus
postremis,* quia adhuc visio ad dies.

<span id="v.xv-p6"></span> 

<span id="v.xv-p7"></span><span id="v.xv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.xv-p8"></span>The angel follows up the same sentiment. He
states his arrival for the purpose of predicting to Daniel coming
events, and those, too, for a long period of time. He further proves the
prayers of Daniel to have been neither vain nor fruitless, as they
produced this conflict with the kings of Persia, both father and son. He
now brings forward another proof of this, because God wished his Prophet
to be instructed in patiently waiting for the arrival of the events,
after being made fully aware of the elect people being under God’s care
and protection. This he would readily acknowledge from the prophecies of
the next chapter. He next adds, *at the end of the days* By this
expression the angel commends God’s grace towards the Prophet, as he was
its special minister. His mission was not only to announce to him the
occurrences of three or four years, or of any brief period, but he had
to extend his predictions over many years, even to the extremity of the
days. I willingly refer this period to the renovation of the Church
which happened at the advent of Christ. The Scriptures in using the
phrase, the last days, or times, always point to the manifestation of
Christ, by which the face of the world was renewed. It is exactly
similar to the angel saying he would make Daniel fully acquainted with
all future events, until the final redemption of the people, when Christ
was exhibited for the salvation of his Church. Hence the angel embraces
the 490 years of which he had spoken. For Christ’s advent determined the
fullness of times, and the subjoined reason suits the passage
exceedingly well. *The vision is yet for days,* says he; thus frigidly
some expounders take these words. I feel persuaded that the angel
intends to shew how God is now opening future events to his servant, and
thus these prophecies become like a lamp ever shining in the Church. The
faithful complain in the 74th Psalm (<span id="v.xv-p8.1"></span>[Ps
74:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#009)<span id="v.xv-p8.1"></span>) of
the absence of all signs, because no prophets are left. We see no signs,
say they, no Prophet exists among us. This was an indication of God
having rejected and deserted them. However faintly the light of his
doctrine may shine upon us, the slightest glimmer ought to be sufficient
to produce patience and repose. But when all the light of the Word is
extinguished, we seem completely enveloped in tartarean darkness. As the
Israelites suffered so many afflictions for nearly 500 years, this
remedy ought completely to restore them; for when the angel testifies,
*the vision is yet for days,* it means, although God permits his people
to be miserably afflicted, yet by this new proof he shews that he had
not entirely cast them off. Some vision remained; that is, by the light
of prophecy he will always manifest his care for his chosen, and they
may even anticipate a happy issue out of all their sorrows. We now
understand the angel’s meaning when he says, *the vision is yet for
days.* Prophecies, indeed, ceased soon afterwards, and God no longer
sent other prophets to his people, yet their teaching always remained
permanent like a finger-post, for in it was completed the whole series
of times up to the advent of Christ. His children were never destitute
of all necessary consolation; for although there were no prophets
surviving who could instruct the people in God’s commands by the living
voice, yet Daniel’s teaching flourished for nearly 500 years after his
death. It also performed its part in supporting the courage of the
pious, and shewing them the firmness of God’s covenant not withstanding
all opposition. Although the Church was agitated in a variety of ways,
yet God is consistent in all his promises, until the complete redemption
of his Church by the advent of his only-begotten Son.

<span id="v.xvi"></span>

<span id="v.xvi-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="v.xvi-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, as the weakness of our
faith is such that it almost vanishes on the very least occasion: Grant,
I say, that we may not hesitate to derive support from this remarkable
and memorable example which thou wishest to propose to us in Daniel,
although for a time thou hidest thy face from us, and we lie prostrate
in darkness. Still do thou remain near us; and with undoubting hope may
we be steadfast in our prayers and groaning, until at length the fruit
of our prayers shall appear. Thus may we constantly make war with all
kinds of trials, and persist unconquered until thou shalt stretch forth
thine hand from heaven to us, and raise us to that blessed rest which is
there laid up for us by Christ our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="v.xvii"></span>

<span id="v.xvii-p1"></span>Lecture fifty-fifth.

<span id="v.xviii"></span>

<span id="v.xviii-p1"></span><span id="v.xviii-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
10:15](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#015)<span id="v.xviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xviii-p2"></span>**15.** And when he had spoken such words
unto me, I set my face toward the ground, and I became dumb.

<span id="v.xviii-p3"></span>**15.** Et cum loqueretur mecum secundum
verba haec, posui faciem meam in terram, et obmutui.

<span id="v.xviii-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.xviii-p5"></span><span id="v.xviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.xviii-p6"></span>Daniel again signifies by these words that
he was so inspired by reverence for the angel as to be unable to stand.
This tends to recommend the prophecy to our notice, — to shew us how the
holy Prophet was not only instructed by the angel, but to confirm what
he will afterwards record in the 11th chapter, and free it from all
doubt. Lastly, he enables us to confide in the angel’s words, which were
not uttered in an ordinary way, but were so obviously divine as to cast
Daniel headlong upon the earth. In my judgment those expounders of the
phrase, *he became dumb,* are in error when they refer it to his
repenting of his prophetic office, through supposing his prayers to have
been disregarded. This is much too forced, because the Prophet expresses
nothing more than his seizure by fear, causing both his feet and his
tongue to refuse their usual duties. Thus he was apparently carried
beyond himself. By becoming prostrate on the ground, he manifested his
reverence, and by becoming dumb displayed his astonishment. I have
already briefly explained the object of all these assertions — to prove
to us how the angel was adorned with his own attributes, and what full
authority should be assigned to his words. It follows: —

<span id="v.xix"></span>

<span id="v.xix-p1"></span><span id="v.xix-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
10:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#016)<span id="v.xix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xix-p2"></span>**16.** And, behold, *one* like the
similitude of the sons of men touched my lips: then I opened my mouth,
and spake, and said unto him that stood before me, O my lord, by the
vision my sorrows are turned upon me, and I have retained no strength.

<span id="v.xix-p3"></span>**16.** Et ecce secundum similitudinem
filiorum hominis,  <span id="fr_142"></span>[143](#fn_142) tetgit labia
mea, et aperui os meum, et loquutus sum; et dixi ad eum qui stabat ad
conspectum meum,  <span id="fr_143"></span>[144](#fn_143) Domine, in
visione conversi sunt dolores mei super me, et non continui robur.

<span id="v.xix-p6"></span>**17.** For how can the servant of this my
lord talk with this my lord? for as for me, straightway there remained
no strength in me, neither is there breath left in me.

<span id="v.xix-p7"></span>**17.** Et quomodo poterit servus Domini mei
hujus loqui cum domino meo hoc? Et exinde non stetit in me  <span
id="fr_144"></span>[145](#fn_144) robur; et anima, *halitus*, non fuit
residuus in me.

<span id="v.xix-p9"></span>**18.** Then there came again and touched me
*one* like the appearance of a man, and he strengthened me,

<span id="v.xix-p10"></span>**18.** Et addidit, *hoc est, secundo*,
tetigit me secundum similitudinem  <span
id="fr_145"></span>[146](#fn_145) hominis, et roboravit me.

<span id="v.xix-p12"></span> 

<span id="v.xix-p13"></span><span id="v.xix-p13.1"></span>

<span id="v.xix-p14"></span>Daniel here narrates how the angel who
inflicted the wound at the same time brought the remedy. Though he had
been cast down by fear, yet the touch of the angel raised him up, not
because there was any virtue in the mere touch, but the use of symbols
we know to be keenly encouraged by God, as we have previously observed.
Thus the angel raised the Prophet not only by his voice but by his
touch. Whence we gather the oppressive nature of the terror from the
difficulty with which he was roused from it. This ought to be referred
to its own end, which was to stamp the prophecy with the impress of
authority, and openly to proclaim Daniel’s mission from God. We are
aware, too, how Satan transforms himself into an angel of light, (<span
id="v.xix-p14.1"></span>[2Co
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#014)<span id="v.xix-p14.1"></span>;)
and hence God distinguishes this prediction, by fixed marks, from all
the fallacies of Satan. Lastly, by all these circumstances the Prophet
shews God to be the author of the prophecy to be afterwards uttered, as
the angel brought with him trustworthy credentials, by which he procured
for himself favor, and openly proved his mission to Daniel. He says he
appeared *after the likeness of a man,* or of the sons of man. He seems
here to be speaking of another angel; but as we proceed we shall
perceive the angel to be the same as at first. He had formerly imposed
upon him the name of a man; now, to distinguish him from men, and to
prove him to be only human in form and not in nature, he says he bore
the similitude of the sons of a man. Some restrict this to Christ, but I
fear this is too forced; and when all points shall have been more
accurately discussed, I have already anticipated the result, as most
probably the same angel is here designated of whom Daniel has hitherto
spoken. We have already stated him not to be the Christ, because this
interpretation is better suited to that Michael who has been already
mentioned, and will be again at the end of this chapter. Whence it is
more simple to receive it thus: the angel *strengthened Daniel by
touching his lips;* and the angel, formerly called a man, was only one
in appearance, wearing the human figure and image, yet not partaking of
our nature. For allowing God to have sent his angels clad frequently in
human bodies, he never created them men in the sense in which Christ was
made man; for this is the special difference between angels and Christ.
We have formerly stated how Christ was depicted for us under this
figure. And there is nothing surprising in this, because Christ assumed
some form of human nature before he was manifested in flesh, and angels
themselves have put on the human appearance.

<span id="v.xix-p15"></span>He says afterwards, *he opened his mouth and
spake* By these words he explains more fully what we previously stated,
for he was quite stupefied by terror, and to all appearance was dead.
Then he began to open his mouth, and was animated to confidence. No
wonder, then, if men fall down and faint away, when God shews such signs
of his glory; for when God puts forth his strength against us, what are
we? At his appearance alone the mountains melt, at his voice alone the
whole earth is shaken. (<span id="v.xix-p15.1"></span>[Ps
104:32](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#032)<span id="v.xix-p15.1"></span>.)
How, then, can men stand upright who are only dust and ashes, when God
appears in his glory? Daniel, then, was prostrate, but afterwards
recovered his strength when God restored his courage. We ought to
understand the certainty of our being compelled to vanish into nothing
whenever God sets before us any sign of his power and majesty; and yet
he restores us again, and shews himself to be our father, and bears
witness of his favor towards us by both words and other signs. The
language of this clause might seem superfluous — *he opened his mouth,
and spake, and said;* but by this repetition he wished, as I have
stated, to express plainly his own recovery of the use of speech after
being refreshed by the angel’s touch.

<span id="v.xix-p16"></span>He says he spoke *to him who stood opposite*
This phrase enables us to conclude the angel here sent to be the same as
the previous one; and this will appear more clearly from the end of the
chapter, and as we proceed with our subject. Then he says, *O my Lord,
in the vision my distresses are turned upon me, and I have not retained
my strength* He here calls the angel “Lord,” after the Hebrew custom.
Paul’s assertion was true under the law — there is but one Lord, (<span
id="v.xix-p16.1"></span>[1Co 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#006)<span
id="v.xix-p16.1"></span>,) but the Hebrews use the word promiscuously
when they address any one by a title of respect. It was no less
customary with them than with us to use this phrase in special cases. I
confess it to be a weakness; but as it was a common form of expression,
the Prophet uses no ceremony in calling angels lords. The angel, then,
is called *lord,* simply for the sake of respect, just as the title is
applied to men who excel in dignity. *In the vision itself,* that is,
before thou didst begin to speak, I was buried in grief and deprived of
strength. How then, says he, am I able to speak now? Thou by thy very
appearance hast depressed me; no wonder I was utterly dumb; and now if I
open my mouth, I know not what to say, as the fright which thy presence
occasioned me held all my senses completely spellbound. We perceive the
Prophet to be but partially erect, being still subject to some degree of
fear, and therefore unable to utter freely the thoughts of his mind.
Therefore he adds, *And how shall the servant of this my Lord be able to
speak with that my Lord?* The demonstrative <span
id="v.xix-p16.2"></span>הז, *zeh,* seems to be used by way of
amplifying, according to the phrase common enough in our day, *with such
a one.* Daniel does not simply point out the angel’s presence, but
wishes to express his rare and singular excellence. Dispute would be
both superfluous and out of place should any one assert the unlawfulness
of ascribing such authority to the angel. For, according to my previous
remark, the Prophet uses the common language of the times. He never
intended to detract in any way from the monarchy of God. He knew the
existence of only one God, and Christ to be the only prince of the
Church; meanwhile, he freely permitted himself to follow the common and
popular form of speech. And truly we are too apt either to avoid or
neglect religious ceremony in the use of words. Although we maintain
that the Prophet followed the customary forms of expression, he
detracted noting from God by transferring it to the angel, as the
Papists do when they manufacture innumerable patron saints, and despoil
Christ of his just honor. Daniel would not sanction this, but treated
the angel with honor, as he would any remarkable and illustrious mortal,
according to my previous assertion. He knew him to be an angel, but in
his discourse with him he did not give way to any empty scruples. As he
saw him under the form of a man, he conversed with him as such; and with
reference to the certainty of the prophecy, he was clearly persuaded of
the angel’s mission as a heavenly instructor.

<span id="v.xix-p17"></span>He next adds, *Henceforth my strength did
not remain within me, and my breath was no longer left in me.* Some
translate this in the future tense, — it will not stand; and certainly
the verb <span id="v.xix-p17.1"></span>דמגי *ignemed,* “shall stand,” is
in the future tense; but then the past tense follows when he says, *no
breath was left in me.* Without doubt, this is but a repetition of what
we observed before; for Daniel was seized not only by fear, but also by
stupor at the sight of the angel. Whence it appears how utterly
destitute he was of both intellect and tongue, both to understand and
express himself in reply to the angel. This is the full sense of the
words. He adds, secondly, *he was strengthened by the touch of him who
wore the likeness of a man;* for *he touched me,* says he. By these
words Daniel more clearly explains how he failed to recover his entire
strength at the first touch, but was roused by degrees, and could only
utter three or four words at first. We perceive, then, how impossible it
is for those who are prostrated by God to collect all their strength at
the first moment, and how they partially and gradually recover the
powers which they had lost. Hence the necessity for a second touch, to
enable Daniel to hear the angel speaking to him with a mind perfectly
composed. And here again he inspires us with faith in the prophecy, as
he was by no means in an ecstasy while the angel was discoursing
concerning future events. If he had always lain prostrate, his attention
could never have been given to the angel’s message, and he could never
have discharged towards us the duty of prophet and teacher. Thus God
joined these two conditions — terror and a renewal of strength — to
render it possible for Daniel to receive with calmness the angel’s
teaching, and to deliver faithfully to us what he had received from God
through the hand of the angel. It follows: —

<span id="v.xx"></span>

<span id="v.xx-p1"></span><span id="v.xx-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
10:19](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#019)<span id="v.xx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xx-p2"></span>**19.** And said, O man greatly beloved, fear
not: peace *be* unto thee, be strong, yea, be strong. And when he had
spoken unto me, I was strengthened, and said, Let my lord speak; for
thou hast strengthened me.

<span id="v.xx-p3"></span>**19.** Et dixit, ne timeas vir desideriorum,
 <span id="fr_146"></span>[147](#fn_146) Pax tibi, comfortare, et
confortare.  <span id="fr_147"></span>[148](#fn_147) Et cum loqueretur
mecum, roboravi me: tunc dixi, Loquatur dominus meus, quia roborasti me.

<span id="v.xx-p6"></span> 

<span id="v.xx-p7"></span><span id="v.xx-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.xx-p8"></span>He first explains how he recovered his spirits
at the angel’s exhortation; for he refers to this encouragement as a
command to be of good courage. *Fear not,* therefore, *O man of desires*
The angel here addresses Daniel soothingly, to calm his fears, for he
needed some enticement when oppressed with fear at both the words and
aspect of the angel. This is the reason why he calls him *a man to be
desired* He adds, *peace to thee,* a customary salutation with the
Hebrews, who mean by the phrase the same as the Latin expression, May it
be well with thee. Peace, as the Jews used it, means a state of
prosperity, happiness, and quiet, and everything of this kind. *Peace,*
therefore, *to thee,* meaning, May you prosper. By this word the angel
declares his arrival in the Prophet’s favor to bear witness to God’s
merciful feelings towards the Israelites, and to the reception of his
own prayers. We ought diligently to notice this, because, as I have
already remarked, whenever God puts forth any sign of his majesty, we
necessarily become frightened. No other remedy is equal to the favor of
God fully manifested towards us, and his testimony to his drawing near
us as a father. The angel expresses this feeling by the phrase which he
uses, shewing with what justice Daniel fell down lifeless through
reverence for God’s presence, and the necessity for his being calm and
collected when he knew himself sent forth to bear witness to God’s
favor. *Peace,* therefore, *to thee.* He next adds, *be strong, be
strong* By this repetition, the angel teaches how strong an effort was
required to arouse the Prophet; if he had been but slightly terrified,
one word would have been enough to recover him. But as he was carried
beyond himself, and all his senses had failed him, the angel inculcates
twice the same exhortation to be strong. *Be strong,* then, *be strong;*
that is, recover your spirits; and if this cannot be done in a moment,
persevere in recovering that alacrity which may render you a fitting
disciple; for, while you thus remain astonished, I should address you in
vain. There are two reasons why we must notice the Prophet’s informing
us again how dejected he was. First, it proves how free from ambiguity
this revelation really was, and how clearly it was stamped with marks of
genuineness. Secondly, we must learn how formidable God’s presence is to
us, unless we are persuaded of the exercise of his paternal love towards
us. Lastly, we must observe how, when once we are struck down, we cannot
immediately and completely recover our spirits, but we must be satisfied
if God gradually and successively inspires us with renewed strength.

<span id="v.xx-p9"></span>Daniel afterwards says, *he was strengthened,
and said, Let my lord speak, for thou hast made me strong* By these
words he indicates his peace of mind after the angel had roused him by
touching him twice, and by giving him courage by means of his
exhortation. It is very useful to us to take due notice of this mental
tranquillity, because the Prophet ought first to become a diligent
scholar to enable him afterwards to discharge for us the once of a
faithful teacher. With the greatest propriety, he repeats his assertion
about the recovery of his strength, which enabled him to address the
angel with facility. It now follows: —

<span id="v.xxi"></span>

<span id="v.xxi-p1"></span><span id="v.xxi-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
10:20](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#020)<span id="v.xxi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxi-p2"></span>**20.** Then said he, Knowest thou wherefore
I come unto thee? and now will I return to fight with the prince of
Persia: and when I am gone forth, lo, the prince of Grecia shall come.

<span id="v.xxi-p3"></span>**20.** Et dixit, An cognoscia, *scisne*,
quare venerim ad te, et nunc revertar ad pugnandum cum principe
Persarum; et ego egrediens, *hoc est ubi egressus fuero*, tunc ecce
princeps Javan, *hoc est, Graecorum*, veniet.

<span id="v.xxi-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.xxi-p5"></span><span id="v.xxi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxi-p6"></span>The angel appears here to lead the Prophet in
vain through a winding course; for he might directly and simply have
told him why he had come. It was necessary to recall the Prophet to his
senses, as he was at one time scarcely master of his actions. He was not
indeed permanently injured in his mind, but the disturbance of feeling
through which he had passed had temporarily disarranged the calmness of
his thoughts. This event both occurred and is narrated for our
advantage. This is the reason why the angel again uses this preface,
*Dost thee know?* as if he wished to gather together the Prophet’s
senses which were formerly wandering and dispersed. He urges him to pay
great attention. *And now,* says he, *I will return;* that is, after I
shall have explained to thee what thou wilt afterwards hear, *I will
return again to contend with the prince of the Persians.* Here the angel
indicates the reason for the delay of his mission, not because God
neglected the groans and prayers of his Prophet, but the fit time had
not yet arrived. The angel had formerly stated how the Persian prince
had stood before him; meaning, he detained me, and I was obliged to
enter into conflict with him, for his cruelty to the people had become
far more formidable and insolent. This is the account which he gives of
his occupation. But he now adds, *I will return to fight with the prince
of the Persians;* implying, God sent me purposely to unfold to thee
future occurrences, but you now know how far I was from being at leisure
or shall be hereafter. I now come to be God’s witness and herald of his
good will towards thyself and thy people. In reality, I am the defender
of thy safety, since I have constantly to fight for thee with the prince
of the Persians. He means Cambyses. I follow my former interpretation of
an engagement between the angel and the king of Persia, whom wicked men
had stimulated to cruelty; for he had revoked the edict of his father.
The angel resisted the king’s fury, who was naturally very turbulent,
and profane writers have described his character in a similar way.

<span id="v.xxi-p7"></span>He now adds, *I will go to fight against the
prince of the Persians;* for <span id="v.xxi-p7.1"></span>םע, *gnem,*
has the force of “against” here and in many other passages. He next
adds, *And when I shall depart,* that is, when I am gone, *the prince of
Greece shall approach,* says he; that is, God shall exercise him in
another way. He does not mean this to refer to Cambyses, but to other
Persian kings, as we shall state in the proper place. It is quite
correct to suppose the king of Macedon to have arrived by God’s
permission; but the angel simply means to state the existence of various
methods by which God hinders the cruelty of kings whenever they attempt
to injure his people. He shall send the prince of the Greeks, says he.
God, therefore, thus restrained Cambyses by the angel’s assistance, and
then he protected his people from the cruelty exercised by Alexander,
king of Macedon. God is always providing for the safety of his people,
and always has a variety of methods in operation. The angel desired to
teach us this with all simplicity. At length he adds: —

<span id="v.xxii"></span>

<span id="v.xxii-p1"></span><span id="v.xxii-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
10:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#021)<span id="v.xxii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxii-p2"></span>**21.** But I will shew thee that which is
noted in the scripture of truth: and *there is* none that holdeth with
me in these things, but Michael your prince.

<span id="v.xxii-p3"></span>**21.** Verum indicabo tibi quod exeratum
est in Scriptura veraci: et non unus qui se roboret, *vel, qui viriliter
agat,* mecum in his, nisi Michael princeps vester.

<span id="v.xxii-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.xxii-p5"></span><span id="v.xxii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxii-p6"></span>I omit the interpretation of those who say
that after the departure of the angel the prince of the Greeks came
forward, because God ceased to afford assistance to the kingdom of the
Persians. This is altogether different from the Prophet’s sense, and we
must hold the explanation which I have adopted. The angel now adds the
object of his mission — to make Daniel acquainted with what he will
afterwards relate. He again attracts our confidence towards his message,
not only for the sake of the Prophet privately, but to assure all the
pious how free Daniel’s writings were from any human delusion or
invention, and how fully they were inspired from above. *I will
announce,* therefore, *what has been engraven,* or ensculptured, *in the
Scripture of truth* By this phrase, “the Scripture of truth,” he
doubtless means the eternal and inviolable decree of God himself. God
needs no books; paper and books are but helps to our memory, which would
otherwise easily let things slip; but as he never suffers from
forgetfulness, hence he needs no books. We are aware how often holy
Scripture adopts forms of speech according to human customs. This clause
implies the same as if the angel had said, he brought nothing but what
God had already determined before, and thus the Prophet would expect a
full and complete accomplishment

<span id="v.xxii-p7"></span>He next adds, *There is no one who supports
me in this duty except Michael,* whom he calls *prince of the elect
people* It is surprising why the angel and Michael alone fought for the
safety of the people. It is written, Angels pitch their camp in a
circuit around those who fear God, (<span id="v.xxii-p7.1"></span>[Ps
34:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#007)<span id="v.xxii-p7.1"></span>,)
and then but one Church existed in the world. Why, then, did not God
commit this charge to more angels than one? Why did he not send forth
mighty forces? We acknowledge that God does not confine himself to any
fixed rule; he can help us as well by many forces as by a single angel
or by more. And he does not make use of angels as if he could not do
without them. This is the reason of that variety which we observe: he is
first content with one angel, and then joins more with him. He will give
to one man a great army, as we read of Elisha, and as other passages in
Scripture afford us examples. (<span id="v.xxii-p7.2"></span>[2Ki
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#017)<span id="v.xxii-p7.2"></span>.)
the servant of Elisha saw the air full of angels. Thus also Christ said,
Can I not ask my Father, and he will send me, not one angel only, but a
legion? (<span id="v.xxii-p7.3"></span>[Mt
26:53](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#053)<span id="v.xxii-p7.3"></span>.)
Again, the Spirit of God assigns many angels to each of the faithful.
(<span id="v.xxii-p7.4"></span>[Ps
91:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#011)<span id="v.xxii-p7.4"></span>.)
Now, therefore, we understand why God sends more angels, not always with
the same purpose or intention, to inform us that he is sufficient to
afford us protection, even if no other help should be supplied. He
provides for our infirmities by bringing us help by means of his angels,
who act like hands to execute his commands. But I have previously
remarked this is not an invariable practice, and we ought not to bind
him by any fixed conditions to supply our wants always in the same
manner. God seemed, at least for a time, to leave his people without
help, and afterwards two angels were sent to contend for them; first, a
single one was sent to Daniel, and then Michael, whom some think to be
Christ. I do not object to this view, for he calls him a prince of the
Church, and this title seems by no means to belong to any angels, but to
be peculiar to Christ. On the whole, the angel signifies that God did
not put forth his full strength in contending for his Church, but shews
himself to be a servant to promote its safety till the time of
deliverance should arise. He afterwards adds — for the next verse may be
treated shortly, and ought to be connected with this in one context.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_124"></span>[125](cc25004.htm#fr_124) <span
id="v.i-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p4"></span> That is, the word itself was most true. —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_125"></span>[126](cc25004.htm#fr_125) <span
id="v.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p5"></span> That is, although the time of its fulfillment
should be long. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_126"></span>[127](cc25004.htm#fr_126) <span
id="v.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p6"></span> “Delicate;” verbally, “of desires.” —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_127"></span>[128](cc25004.htm#fr_127) <span
id="v.v-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.v-p4"></span> The demonstrative pronoun is here used for the
sake of explanation. — *Calvin*

<span id="fn_128"></span>[129](cc25004.htm#fr_128) <span
id="v.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p6"></span> Some translate, burning brass. — *Calvin*

<span id="fn_129"></span>[130](cc25004.htm#fr_129) <span
id="v.vi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p7"></span> Some take <span id="v.vi-p7.1"></span>ןומח,
*chemon*, for noise or tumult — *Calvin*

<span id="fn_130"></span>[131](cc25004.htm#fr_130) <span
id="v.vii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p4"></span> The word <span id="v.vii-p4.1"></span>לבא,
*abel*, “but” is put adversatively; it is not a simple affirmation. —
*Calvin*

<span id="fn_131"></span>[132](cc25004.htm#fr_131) <span
id="v.vii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p5"></span> Verbally, to hide themselves. — *Calvin*

<span id="fn_132"></span>[133](cc25004.htm#fr_132) <span
id="v.viii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p4"></span> Or, no vigor was left in me. — *Calvin*

<span id="fn_133"></span>[134](cc25004.htm#fr_133) <span
id="v.viii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p5"></span> Verbally, and comeliness. — *Calvin*

<span id="fn_134"></span>[135](cc25004.htm#fr_134) <span
id="v.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p6"></span> That is, to vanishing away. — *Calvin*

<span id="fn_135"></span>[136](cc25004.htm#fr_135) <span
id="v.xi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.xi-p4"></span> That is, I fell on my face as if asleep. —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_136"></span>[137](cc25004.htm#fr_136) <span
id="v.xi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.xi-p7"></span> Touched upon me; but the <span
id="v.xi-p7.1"></span>ב, *beth*, is superfluous. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_137"></span>[138](cc25004.htm#fr_137) <span
id="v.xiv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.xiv-p4"></span> That is, one of the chief leaders. —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_138"></span>[139](cc25004.htm#fr_138) <span
id="v.xiv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.xiv-p5"></span> Or, to strengthen me. — *Calvin*

<span id="fn_139"></span>[140](cc25004.htm#fr_139) <span
id="v.xiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.xiv-p6"></span> That is, was left. — *Calvin*

<span id="fn_140"></span>[141](cc25004.htm#fr_140) <span
id="v.xv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.xv-p4"></span> To make thee understand. — *Calvin*

<span id="fn_141"></span>[142](cc25004.htm#fr_141) <span
id="v.xv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.xv-p5"></span> That is, what shall happen to thy people. —
*Calvin*

<span id="fn_142"></span>[143](cc25004.htm#fr_142) <span
id="v.xix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.xix-p4"></span> That is, some one wearing the form of the
sons of man. — *Calvin*

<span id="fn_143"></span>[144](cc25004.htm#fr_143) <span
id="v.xix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.xix-p5"></span> That is, who stood opposite me, or at a
distance from me. — *Calvin*

<span id="fn_144"></span>[145](cc25004.htm#fr_144) <span
id="v.xix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.xix-p8"></span> There is in the original the pleonasm of the
words, “and I,” of which the Latin language does not admit. — *Calvin*

<span id="fn_145"></span>[146](cc25004.htm#fr_145) <span
id="v.xix-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v.xix-p11"></span> That is, he who bore a human appearance. —
*Calvin*

<span id="fn_146"></span>[147](cc25004.htm#fr_146) <span
id="v.xx-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.xx-p4"></span> That is, to desire, as we said before. —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_147"></span>[148](cc25004.htm#fr_147) <span
id="v.xx-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.xx-p5"></span> Some translate, “Act like a man and be
strong.” Both words are the same in the original. — *Calvin*. See the
Dissertations on this chapter. — *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 11](cc25005)
