[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc25008)  [Next](cc25010.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 25: Daniel, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x"></span>

<span id="x-p1"></span> 

<span id="x-p2"></span>AN ANALYSIS OF THE CONTENTS  
OF THE BOOK OF DANIEL.

<span id="x-p3"></span>*There Are Two Main Divisions,* —

<span id="x-p4"></span>1. The Historical Portion. —

<span id="x-p5"></span>2. The Prophetical Portion.

<span id="x-p6"></span>Each Occupies Six Chapters.

<span id="x-p7"></span>**1**. The Historical Portion.

<span id="x-p8"></span>CHAPTER 1 TO 4

<span id="x-p9"></span>**Sect. 1.** The captivity of King Jehoiakim
about B.C. 607 — the treatment of Daniel and his three companions —
their superiority as they stood before the king. (Chap. 1)

<span id="x-p10"></span>**2.** King Nebuchadnezzar’s dream — forgotten —
submitted to the magicians — their failure and destruction — Daniel’s
proposal and success — the secret revealed to him and communicated to
the king — the image described and explained — the four kingdoms — the
elevation of Daniel and his companions to high honor, about B.C. 603.
(Chap. 2)

<span id="x-p11"></span>**3.** The golden image on the Plains of Dura —
the accusation against Daniel’s three companions — their reply to the
king — their condemnation to the burning fiery furnace — their
preservation — the king’s astonishment — his proclamation and promotion
of the three confessors over the province of Babylon, about B.C. 580.
(Chap. 3)

<span id="x-p12"></span>**4.** Nebuchadnezzar’s confession of the power
of the Most High — his dream respecting the Tree, the Watcher, and the
Holy One — Daniel’s interpretation — its accomplishment — the king
driven from among men — his madness, and his restoration to reason and
re-establishment in his kingdom, about B.C. 570-563. (Chap. 4)

<span id="x-p13"></span>**5.** The impious feast of Belshazzar — the
handwriting — the magicians’ ignorance — Daniel’s interpretation — its
fulfillment — Belshazzar slain — Darius the conqueror, about B.C. 538.
(Chap. 5)

<span id="x-p14"></span>**6.** One hundred and twenty princes set over
the kingdom — three presidents — the unalterable decree — Daniel’s habit
of prayer continued — his accusation and condemnation to the lions’ den
— his miraculous deliverance — the king’s rejoicing and decree — the
Prophet’s prosperity till the reign of Cyrus, about B.C. 537. (Chap. 6)

<span id="x-p15"></span>2. Prophetical Portion.

<span id="x-p16"></span>CHAPTER 7 TO 12

<span id="x-p17"></span>**Sect. 1.** Daniel’s own dream — the four
beasts — the Ancient of Days and the Son of Man — the explanation of
this dream — the fourth beast being the Roman Empire, and the ten horns
the Roman Senate — the kingdom given to the Son of Man — fulfilled,
according to Calvin, at the first advent of Christ and the early
propagation of the Gospel, — about B.C. 555. (Chap. 7)

<span id="x-p18"></span>**2.** Daniel’s vision at Shushan — the ram and
the he-goat — the little horn — the cleansing of the sanctuary — the
appearance of Gabriel — the explanation of the vision — the king of
fierce countenance said to be the power of heathen Rome — the Prince of
princes — the truth of the vision of the evening and morning — Daniel’s
fainting and astonishment, — about B.C. 553. (Chap. 8)

<span id="x-p19"></span>**3.** The Prophet, after studying the writings
of Jeremiah, anticipates the close of the captivity — he prays and
confesses his sins at full length in the first year of Darius the son of
Ahasuerus — while he is praying the angel Gabriel is sent to instruct
him — he is informed of the celebrated period of the seventy weeks — of
the coming of Messiah the prince and of the overspreading of
desolation’s, which events are historically explained in the course of
these Lectures, — about B.C. 538. (Chap. 9)

<span id="x-p20"></span>**4.** A vision by the river Hiddekel in the
third year of King Cyrus — during the Prophet’s terror an angel
addresses him, touches him, and inspires him with confidence, and then
returns to contend with the prince of Persia, together with another
angel called Michael your prince. This vision being introductory to the
following prophecy “noted in the Scripture of truth,” — about B.C. 534.
(Chap. 10)

<span id="x-p21"></span>**5.** The prophecy of the Scriptures of truth
detailed at full length by the angel — the three kings of Persia — the
fourth Xerxes — the mighty king Alexander and the division of his empire
into four parts — two monarchies specially dwelt upon rathe kings of the
north being the Seleucidae, and those of the south the Ptolemidae or
Lagidae — their various wars, intermarriages, treaties, and successes —
fully elucidated by historical testimony throughout these Lectures — the
willful king (ver. 16) interpreted of Antiochus the Great — the vile
person (ver. 21) being Antiochus Epiphanes — the willful king (ver. 36)
being the heathen Roman Empire — the remainder of the prophecy being
ingeniously accommodated to the well—known character of the Roman
conquests in the East, — about B.C. 534. (Chap 11)

<span id="x-p22"></span>**6.** Michael the prince stands up for the
people — the certainty of a future resurrection proclaimed — two angels
appear on the banks of the river — the Prophet inquires concerning the
timing of these events — the time, times, and a half — the closing and
sealing of the words till the time of the end — the abomination of
desolation set up — the 1290 days — the 1335 days — the angel’s command
to stand in thy lot at the end of the days — these periods said to be
completed at the first advent of Christ and the early history of the
Gospel dispensation, including the destruction of Jerusalem and the
persecutions of the Church under the heathen Emperors of Rome, — about
B.C. 534. (Chap. 12)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ancient Codexes and Versions](cc25010.md)
