[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc25007)  [Next](cc25009) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 25: Daniel, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix"></span>

<span id="ix-p1"></span>A CONNECTED TRANSLATION Of

<span id="ix-p2"></span>THE PROPHECIES OF DANIEL

<span id="ix-p3"></span>ACCORDING TO THE VIEWS OF CALVIN’S COMMENTARIES.

<span id="ix.i"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p2"></span>CHAPTER 1

<span id="ix.i-p3"></span>**1** In the third year of the reign of
Jehoiakim king of Judah, Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon arrived at
Jerusalem and besieged it.

<span id="ix.i-p4"></span>**2** And God delivered Jehoiakim king of
Judah into his hand, and part of the vessels of the house of God; and he
carried them into the land of Shinar, into the house of his god; and he
placed the vessels in the treasure-house of his god.

<span id="ix.i-p5"></span>**3** Then the king commanded Aspenaz, the
chief of the eunuchs, to bring some of the children of Israel, and of
the royal seed, and of the nobles,

<span id="ix.i-p6"></span>**4** Youths in whom there was no blemish, but
of beautiful aspect, skilled in all prudence, and understanding
knowledge, and capable of expressing their thoughts, and in whom was
rigor, that they might stand in the king’s palace and be taught the
literature and language of the Chaldees.

<span id="ix.i-p7"></span>**5** And the king appointed them a daily
allotment of the royal food, and of the wine of his own drinking; thus
nourishing them for three years, that at the end they should stand
before the king.

<span id="ix.i-p8"></span>**6** Now, among these youths there were of
the children of Judah, Daniel, Hananiah, Misael, and Azariah.

<span id="ix.i-p9"></span>**7** The chief of the eunuchs gave them each
names: he called Daniel, Belteshazzar; Hananiah, Shadrach; and Misael,
Meshach; and Azariah, Abednego.

<span id="ix.i-p10"></span>**8** And Daniel determined in his heart not
to pollute himself with the portion of the king’s food and drink: and he
requested the chief of the eunuchs that he might not thus defile
himself.

<span id="ix.i-p11"></span>**9** Now, God had placed Daniel in favor and
pity before the chief of the eunuchs.

<span id="ix.i-p12"></span>**10** And the chief of the eunuchs said to
Daniel, — I am afraid of my lord the king, he has appointed your food
and drink, for he will observe your faces emaciated when compared with
the youths your equals, thus ye will endanger my head with the king.

<span id="ix.i-p13"></span>**11** Then said Daniel to Meltzar, whom the
chief of the eunuchs had set over Daniel, Hananiah, Misael, and Azariah,
—

<span id="ix.i-p14"></span>**12** Try thy servants for ten days: let
nothing but pulse be given us to eat and water to drink.

<span id="ix.i-p15"></span>**13** Then let our countenances be inspected
before thy face, and the countenances of the youths who eat a portion of
the royal diet, and deal with thy servants, according to what thou shalt
behold.

<span id="ix.i-p16"></span>**14** So he listened to their advice, and
proved them for ten days.

<span id="ix.i-p17"></span>**15** And at the end of the ten days their
countenances appeared plump, and they were fatter than all the other
youths who had partaken of the royal diet.

<span id="ix.i-p18"></span>**16** Then Meltzar removed both their
portion of food and of wine, and gave them pulse.

<span id="ix.i-p19"></span>**17** Thus God gave to these four youths
knowledge, and science in all literature, and wisdom; and Daniel
received the power of understanding all visions and dreams.

<span id="ix.i-p20"></span>**18** At the end of the period at which the
king commanded them to be brought before him, the chief of the eunuchs
introduced them to Nebuchadnezzar.

<span id="ix.i-p21"></span>**19** Then the king addressed them: and
among them all none was like Daniel, Hananiah, Misael, and Azariah, as
they stood before the king.

<span id="ix.i-p22"></span>**20** And in every expression of wisdom and
intelligence, in which they were examined by the king, he found them ten
times superior to all the soothsayers and astrologers throughout his
whole realm.

<span id="ix.i-p23"></span>**21** And Daniel continued until the first
year of king Cyrus.

<span id="ix.ii"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 2

<span id="ix.ii-p3"></span>**1** Now, in the second year of the reign of
Nebuchadnezzar, Nebuchadnezzar dreamed dreams: and his spirit was
troubled, and his sleep became interrupted.

<span id="ix.ii-p4"></span>**2** Then the king commanded them to call
together the astrologers and soothsayers, the sorcerers and the
Chaldeans, to declare to the king his dreams. So they came and stood
before the king.

<span id="ix.ii-p5"></span>**3** And the king said to them, I have
dreamed a dream, and my spirit is troubled for understanding the dream,

<span id="ix.ii-p6"></span>**4** And the Chaldeans said to the king in
Syriac: O king, live for ever! Tell thy servants the dream, and we will
declare the interpretation.

<span id="ix.ii-p7"></span>**5** The king answered and said to the
Chaldeans, — The matter is gone from me: if ye will not make known unto
me both the dream and its interpretation, ye shall be cut in pieces and
your bones shall become a dunghill:

<span id="ix.ii-p8"></span>**6** But if ye will show the dream and its
interpretation, ye shall receive from me large rewards, and gifts, and
much honor; therefore declare to me the dream and its interpretation.

<span id="ix.ii-p9"></span>**7** They answered a second time and said:
Let the king narrate the dream to his servants, and we will declare its
interpretation.

<span id="ix.ii-p10"></span>**8** The king answered and said: In truth I
perceive that ye would gain time, because ye know that the dream has
fallen out of your mind,

<span id="ix.ii-p11"></span>**9** Besides, if ye will not declare to me
the dream, there is but one sentence for you: as ye have prepared a
lying and corrupt discourse to relate before me, until the time be
changed, wherefore narrate the dream to me, and I shall know your
ability to declare its interpretation.

<span id="ix.ii-p12"></span>**10** The Chaldeans replied before the
king, saying: There is not a man upon earth who can explain the king’s
matter; besides, no king, or prince, or prefect ever made such a request
to any magician, or astrologer, or Chaldean:

<span id="ix.ii-p13"></span>**11** And the subject of the king’s inquiry
is precious, and none can explain it before the king, except the gods,
whose dwelling is not with flesh.

<span id="ix.ii-p14"></span>**12** On this account the king was filled
with anger and fury, and ordered the destruction of all the wise men of
Babylon.

<span id="ix.ii-p15"></span>**13** Then the edict went forth, and the
wise men were slain, and they sought Daniel and his companions for the
purpose of slaying them.

<span id="ix.ii-p16"></span>**14** Then Daniel inquired concerning the
counsel, and the edict of Arioch the captain of the royal guards, who
had gone forth to slay the wise men of Babylon.

<span id="ix.ii-p17"></span>**15** He announced and said to Arioch, the
king’s captain: Wherefore is the decree so urgent from the king’s
presence? Then Arioch explained the matter to Daniel.

<span id="ix.ii-p18"></span>**16** Then Daniel entered and asked the
king to give him time, and he would bring the interpretation to the
king.

<span id="ix.ii-p19"></span>**17** Then Daniel went home, and opened the
subject to Hananiah, and Misael, and Azariah, his companions:

<span id="ix.ii-p20"></span>**18** That they might implore mercy from
the God of heaven concerning this secret, and that Daniel and his
companions should not perish with the rest of the wise men of Babylon.

<span id="ix.ii-p21"></span>**19** Then the secret was revealed to
Daniel in a vision by night: then Daniel blessed the God of heaven.

<span id="ix.ii-p22"></span>**20** Daniel answered and said, Blessed be
the name of God for ever and ever! Wisdom and might are his:

<span id="ix.ii-p23"></span>**21** It is he who changeth times and
seasons: He appoints and removes kings: He gives wisdom to the wise, And
knowledge to those who are skilled in science.

<span id="ix.ii-p24"></span>**22** He reveals hidden and secret things,
He knows what lies hid in darkness, And light dwells with him.

<span id="ix.ii-p25"></span>**23** O God of my fathers, I confess to
thee and praise thee: For thou hast given me wisdom and strength: Thou
hast now revealed to me what we desired of thee: Thou hast made known to
us the king’s request.

<span id="ix.ii-p26"></span>**24** Therefore Daniel went unto Arioch,
whom the king had ordered to slay the wise men of Babylon; he went and
said thus unto him: Destroy not the wise men of Babylon: Introduce me to
the king, and I will show him the interpretation.

<span id="ix.ii-p27"></span>**25** Then Arioch hastily introduced Daniel
to the king, and said thus to him: I have found a man among the sons of
the captivity of Judah, who will make known the interpretation to the
king.

<span id="ix.ii-p28"></span>**26** The king answered and said to Daniel,
whose name was Belteshazzar, Art thou able to tell me the dream which I
saw, as well as its interpretation?

<span id="ix.ii-p29"></span>**27** Daniel answered the king by saying:
The wise men and the magi, the astrologers and sorcerers, cannot declare
to the king what he demands;

<span id="ix.ii-p30"></span>**28** But there is a God in heaven who
reveals secrets: He has declared to King Nebuchadnezzar the events of
the latter days: This is thy dream, this is the vision of thy head upon
thy couch.

<span id="ix.ii-p31"></span>**29** Thy thoughts, O king, came up to thee
upon thy bed, as to what shall be hereafter: He who reveals secrets has
explained the future to thee.

<span id="ix.ii-p32"></span>**30** And as to me, this secret was not
revealed to me through my superiority in wisdom over other living men,
but that I should explain the interpretation to the king, and that thou
shouldst know the thoughts of thy heart.

<span id="ix.ii-p33"></span>**31** Thou, O king, wast looking, and
beheld a great image! This great image and its excellent splendor stood
before thee, And its form was terrible.

<span id="ix.ii-p34"></span>**32** The head of this image was of pure
gold: Its breast and its arms were of silver: Its belly and thighs of
brass.

<span id="ix.ii-p35"></span>**33** Its legs of iron: Its feet partly of
iron and partly of clay:

<span id="ix.ii-p36"></span>**34** Thou wast looking until a stone was
cut out without human hand, It struck the image on its feet of iron and
clay, and broke them.

<span id="ix.ii-p37"></span>**35** Then the iron and the clay, the
brass, the silver, and the gold, were broken in pieces together, and
became like the chaff of the summer thrashing-floor; and the wind
carried them away, and no place was found for them: and the stone which
struck the image became a great mountains and filled the whole earth.

<span id="ix.ii-p38"></span>**36** This is the dream; and we will
declare its interpretation before the king.

<span id="ix.ii-p39"></span>**37** Thou, O king, art a king of kings:
For the God of heaven has given to thee a kingdom of power, and
strength, and glory.

<span id="ix.ii-p40"></span>**38** And wherever the dwelling—place of
the children of men, of the beasts of the field, and of the fowls of
heaven exists, He hath given it into thine handy and hath made thee
ruler over all, Thou art this head of gold.

<span id="ix.ii-p41"></span>**39** And after this shall arise another
kingdom inferior to them, And another of brass — a third kingdom shall
succeed, And it shall bear sway over all the earth.

<span id="ix.ii-p42"></span>**40** Then a fourth kingdom shall be strong
as iron: For as iron breaks all things in pieces and reduces them to
atoms, And as iron bruises all these things, So shall this empire bruise
and brake to pieces.

<span id="ix.ii-p43"></span>**41** And whereas thou didst behold the
feet and the toes, partly of potter’s clay and partly of iron: The
kingdom shall be divided: the strength of iron shall be in it: Because
thou sawest iron mingled with the moistened clay.

<span id="ix.ii-p44"></span>**42** And as the toes of the feet were
partly of iron and partly of clay; So that kingdom shall be partly
strong and partly fragile:

<span id="ix.ii-p45"></span>**43** And whereas thou didst behold iron
mixed with testaceous clay, So they shall mingle themselves with the
seed of men: But they shall not adhere to one another, as iron will not
mingle with clay.

<span id="ix.ii-p46"></span>**44** And in the days of those kings the
God of heaven will set a kingdom, which shall never be destroyed: And
this kingdom shall not be left to any other people, But it shall break
in pieces and consume all these kingdoms, And it shall stand for ever.

<span id="ix.ii-p47"></span>**45** Besides this thou didst behold the
stone cut out of the mountain without hands, which broke the iron,
brass, clay, silver, and gold. The great God has made known the coming
events of futurity: The dream is true, and the interpretation of it is
correct.

<span id="ix.ii-p48"></span>**46** Then King Nebuchadnezzar fell upon
his face and worshipped Daniel; and commanded men to offer to him a
sacrifice and a sweet-smelling fragrance.

<span id="ix.ii-p49"></span>**47** The king answered unto Daniel, and
said, Truly your God is a God of gods, and a Lord of kings, and a
revealer of secrets, since thou hast been able to reveal this secret.

<span id="ix.ii-p50"></span>**48** Then the king exalted Daniel, and
gave him many valuable presents, and appointed him ruler of the whole
province of Babylon, and chief of the elders over all the wise men of
Babylon.

<span id="ix.ii-p51"></span>**49** Then Daniel made a request of the
king, and he set Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego over the administration
of the province of Babylon: but Daniel was at the king’s gate.

<span id="ix.iii"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 3

<span id="ix.iii-p3"></span>**1** Nebuchadnezzar the king made a golden
image; its height was sixty cubits, its breadth six cubits. He erected
it on the plain of Dura, in the province of Babylon.

<span id="ix.iii-p4"></span>**2** Then King: Nebuchadnezzar sent to
gather together the princes, the satraps, and the magistrates, the
judges, the treasurers, the counselors, the presidents, and all the
governors of the provinces, to come to the dedication of the image which
King Nebuchadnezzar had erected.

<span id="ix.iii-p5"></span>**3** Then the princes, the senators, and
the magistrates, the judges, the treasurers, the counselors, the
presidents, and all the governors of the provinces collected together at
the dedication of the image which King Nebuchadnezzar had erected. And
when they stood before the image which Nebuchadnezzar had erected,

<span id="ix.iii-p6"></span>**4** A herald proclaimed in the midst of
the multitude, O people, nations, and languages, to you it is spoken:

<span id="ix.iii-p7"></span>**5** Whenever ye shall hear the sound of
the trumpet, harp, pipe, psaltery, sackbut, dulcimer, and all kinds of
music, ye must fall down and worship the golden image which King
Nebuchadnezzar has erected.

<span id="ix.iii-p8"></span>**6** And whosoever shall not bend the knee
and adore, shall be instantly cast into the midst of a furnace of
burning fire.

<span id="ix.iii-p9"></span>**7** Therefore at the very same hour, when
the people heard the sound of the trumpet, harp, pipe, psaltery,
sackbut, dulcimer, and all musical instruments, all people, languages,
and nations, fell down adoring the golden image which King
Nebuchadnezzar had erected.

<span id="ix.iii-p10"></span>**8** Wherefore the Chaldeans immediately
approached and vociferously accused the Jews.

<span id="ix.iii-p11"></span>**9** They spoke, and said to King
Nebuchadnezzar, O king, live for ever.

<span id="ix.iii-p12"></span>**10** Thou, O king, hast issued an edict,
that as soon as every man shall hear the sound of the trumpet, harp,
pipe, psaltery, sackbut, dulcimer, and all musical instruments, he shall
fall down and adore the golden image.

<span id="ix.iii-p13"></span>**11** And he who shall not fall down and
adore, shall be east into the midst of a furnace of burning fire.

<span id="ix.iii-p14"></span>**12** There are certain Jews whom thou
hast set over the administration of the province of Babylon, Shadrach,
Meshach, and Abednego: these men have not paid attention to thee, O
king: they do not worship thy gods, and they do not adore the image
which thou hast erected.

<span id="ix.iii-p15"></span>**13** Then Nebuchadnezzar, with rage and
fury, commanded Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego to be brought before
him: then those men (the Chaldeans) brought them up before the king.

<span id="ix.iii-p16"></span>**14** Nebuchadnezzar spoke, and said to
them, Is it true, O Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, that ye do not
worship my gods, nor yet adore the image which I have erected?

<span id="ix.iii-p17"></span>**15** Now, are ye prepared, as soon as ye
shall hear the sound of the trumpet, harp, pipe, psaltery, sackbut,
dulcimer, and all musical instruments, to fall down and adore the image
which I have made? For if ye will not adore it, ye shall be east the
stone hour into the midst of a furnace of burning fire: and who is that
God who shall deliver you from my hand?

<span id="ix.iii-p18"></span>**16** Shadrach, Meshaeh, and Abednego,
answered and said to the king, we are not anxious about our reply to
thee concerning this matter.

<span id="ix.iii-p19"></span>**17** Behold! our God whom we worship is
powerful. He can free us from the furnace of burning fire, and he will
deliver us out of thy hand, O king.

<span id="ix.iii-p20"></span>**18** But if not, be it known unto thee, O
king, that we will not worship thy gods, and we will not adore the
golden image which thou hast erected.

<span id="ix.iii-p21"></span>**19** Then Nebuchadnezzar was filled with
fury, and the figure of his face was changed towards Shadrach, Meshach,
and Abednego: he spoke and commanded the furnace to be heated seven
times more than it was usual to heat it.

<span id="ix.iii-p22"></span>**20** And he commanded the very strongest
of his attendants to bind Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, and to east
them into the furnace of burning fire.

<span id="ix.iii-p23"></span>**21** Then those men were bound in their
mantles, and turbans, and garments, and were east into the furnace of
burning fire.

<span id="ix.iii-p24"></span>**22** Because the king’s order was urgent,
and he had commanded the furnace to be made so exceedingly hot, the
extremity of the flame slew the men who had taken up Shadrach, Meshach,
and Abednego.

<span id="ix.iii-p25"></span>**23** And those three men, Shadrach,
Meshach, and Abednego, fell down bound in the midst of the furnace of
burning fire.

<span id="ix.iii-p26"></span>**24** Then Nebuchadnezzar the king was
terrified, and rose in haste, and spoke, and said to his counselors, Did
we not cast these men bound into the furnace? They answered *and* said
to the king, True, O king!

<span id="ix.iii-p27"></span>**25** He answered and said, But I see four
men loose, walking in the fire, and they have no hurt: and the aspect of
the fourth is like the Son of a God.

<span id="ix.iii-p28"></span>**26** Then Nebuchadnezzar approached the
door of the furnace of burning fire; he spoke and said, Shadrach,
Meshach, and Abednego, servants of the most High God, come forth and
come hither. Then Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego came out of the midst
of the fire.

<span id="ix.iii-p29"></span>**27** Then the satraps, generals,
prefects, and counselors of the king assembled to behold those men, over
whose body the fire had no power, and a hair of their head was not
burnt, neither were their garments changed, nor had the smell of fire
passed over them.

<span id="ix.iii-p30"></span>**28** Nebuchadnezzar spoke and said,
Blessed be the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, who has sent his
angel and preserved his servants, who have trusted in him and changed
the king’s edict, and delivered up their bodies, that they might neither
worship nor adorn any god except their own God.

<span id="ix.iii-p31"></span>**29** Hence I issue a decree, that any
nation, people, and tongue, which shall utter a perverse speech against
the God of these men, namely, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, shall be
cut in pieces, and his house shall be reduced to a dungheap: because
there is no other God who can deliver after this method.

<span id="ix.iii-p32"></span>**30** Then the king rendered Shadrach,
Meshach, and Abednego prosperous in the province of Babylon.

<span id="ix.iv"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p2"></span>CHAPTER 4

<span id="ix.iv-p3"></span>**1** Nebuchadnezzar the king unto all
people, nations, and tongues, which dwell on the whole earth, peace be
multiplied unto you!

<span id="ix.iv-p4"></span>**2** It pleases me to narrate the signs and
wonders which the High God has wrought towards me.

<span id="ix.iv-p5"></span>**3** How great are his signs! how mighty his
wonders! His kingdom everlasting — his dominion from age to age.

<span id="ix.iv-p6"></span>**4** I Nebuchadnezzar was at rest in my
house, and flourishing in my palace:

<span id="ix.iv-p7"></span>**5** I saw a dream which terrified me: and
the thoughts upon my bed, and the visions of my head disturbed me.

<span id="ix.iv-p8"></span>**6** And I issued a decree for bringing all
the wise men of Babylon before me, who should explain the interpretation
of my dream to me.

<span id="ix.iv-p9"></span>**7** Then the magicians, astrologers,
Chaldeans, and soothsayers entered, and I told my dream before them, and
they did not furnish me with its interpretation.

<span id="ix.iv-p10"></span>**8** At length Daniel was brought before
me, whose name is Belteshazzar, according to the name of my god, and in
whom is the spirit of the holy gods, and I told my dream before him.

<span id="ix.iv-p11"></span>**9** O Belteshazzar, prince of the magi,
because I know the spirit of the holy gods is in thee, and no secret
overcomes thee, explain the visions of the dream which I saw and its
interpretation.

<span id="ix.iv-p12"></span>**10** These were the visions of my head
upon my bed: I saw, and behold! a tree in the midst of the land, and its
height was great.

<span id="ix.iv-p13"></span>**11** The tree grew and became strong, and
its height reached to heaven, and its aspect to the extremity of the
earth.

<span id="ix.iv-p14"></span>**12** Its leaves were beautiful, and its
fruit plentiful, and food for all was in it: the beast of the field took
shelter under it, and the fowls of heaven dwelt in its branches, and all
flesh was nourished by it.

<span id="ix.iv-p15"></span>**13** I was gazing in the visions of my
head upon my bed, and behold, a watcher and an holy one came down from
heaven.

<span id="ix.iv-p16"></span>**14** He cried with a loud voice, and said
thus, Hew down the tree, and tear off its leaves, pluck off its boughs,
and scatter its fruits: Let the beast flee away from its shadow, and the
birds from its branches.

<span id="ix.iv-p17"></span>**15** But leave the stump of its roots in
the earth, and with a band of iron and brass, in the herb of the field;
and let it be wet with the rain of heaven, and let its portion be with
the beast in the herb of the field.

<span id="ix.iv-p18"></span>**16** Let his heart be changed from a human
heart, and let the heart of a beast be given to him: and let seven times
pass over him.

<span id="ix.iv-p19"></span>**17** The edict is in the decree of the
watchers, and the demand in the word of the holy ones, That living men
may know the Most High to be ruler in the kingdom of men, He will give
it to whom he will, And will raise up the humble man as its ruler:

<span id="ix.iv-p20"></span>**18** I King Nebuchadnezzar saw this dream:
and do thou Belteshazzar declare the interpretation, since all the wise
men of my kingdom cannot unfold it to me: but thou canst do it, because
the spirit of the holy gods is in thee.

<span id="ix.iv-p21"></span>**19** Then Daniel, whose name was
Belteshazzar, became stupified for almost one hour, and his thoughts
disturbed him. The king answered and said, Belteshazzar, let not the
dream and its interpretation distress thee. Belteshazzar answered and
said, O my lord, may the dream be for thine enemies, and its
interpretation for thy foes.

<span id="ix.iv-p22"></span>**20** The tree which thou sawest so great
and strong, whose magnitude reached to heaven, and its aspect over the
whole earth;

<span id="ix.iv-p23"></span>**21** Whose foliage was beautiful, and
whose fruit was copious, In which was food for all, and under which
dwelt the beasts of the field, and on whose branches rested the birds of
heaven,

<span id="ix.iv-p24"></span>**22** Is thyself, O king; Thou hast become
great and strong; Thy magnitude has been multiplied, and extended to the
heavens; Thy power to the ends of the earth.

<span id="ix.iv-p25"></span>**23** When the king saw a watcher and a
holy one descend from heaven, who said, Hew down the tree and destroy
it; leave only the stump of its roots in the earth; and let it be with a
band of iron and brass in the herb of the field, and let it be washed
with the dew of heaven, and let its portion be with the beast of the
field, until seven times pass over it.

<span id="ix.iv-p26"></span>**24** This is the interpretation, O king:
this is the decree of the most High, which concerns the lord my king.

<span id="ix.iv-p27"></span>**25** They shall drive thee from men, and
thy habitation shall be with the beasts of the field; they shall feed
thee with grass like oxen, and shall moisten thee with the dew of
heaven; and seven times shall pass over thee, until thou shalt
acknowledge the most High as the ruler over the kingdom of men, who will
give it to whomsoever he will.

<span id="ix.iv-p28"></span>**26** And when they spoke of leaving the
stump of the tree’s roots: thy kingdom shall stand for thee, from which
thou shalt acknowledge that there is dominion in the heavens.

<span id="ix.iv-p29"></span>**27** Wherefore, O king, let my counsel be
acceptable unto thee; break away thy sins by righteousness, and thy
iniquities by pity to the poor. Behold, there shall be a prolongation to
thy peace, (a medicine for thine errors.)

<span id="ix.iv-p30"></span>**28** All this came upon King
Nebuchadnezzar.

<span id="ix.iv-p31"></span>**29** After twelve months he was walking in
the palace of his kingdom at Babylon.

<span id="ix.iv-p32"></span>**30** The king spoke, and said, Is not this
great Babylon which I have built for the royal seat of the kingdom, in
the mightiness of my valor, and in the splendor of my excellency?

<span id="ix.iv-p33"></span>**31** While the speech was in the mouth of
the king, a voice descended from heaven, They say unto thee, O King
Nebuchadnezzar, thy kingdom has departed from thee.

<span id="ix.iv-p34"></span>**32** They shall expel thee from among men,
and thy habitation shall be with the beasts of the field; they shall
make thee eat grass like oxen, and seven times shall pass over thee,
until thou shalt acknowledge a lofty ruler in the kingdom of men, and
who shall give it to whomsoever he pleases.

<span id="ix.iv-p35"></span>**33** In that hour was the word completed
upon Nebuchadnezzar; and he was cast out from men, and eat grass like
oxen, and was moistened by the dew of heaven, until his nails became
like claws, and his hair like the wings of eagles.

<span id="ix.iv-p36"></span>**34** And at the end of the days I
Nebuchadnezzar raised my eyes to heaven, and my intellect returned to
me, and I blessed him on high, and praised and glorified him living for
ever, because his power is eternal, and his kingdom of perpetual
duration.

<span id="ix.iv-p37"></span>**35** And all the dwellers on the earth are
considered as nothing; and he does according to his pleasure in the army
of the heavens, and among the dwellers upon earth; there is none who can
hinder his hand, or say unto him, Why dost thou act thus?

<span id="ix.iv-p38"></span>**36** At the determined time my intellect
returned to me, and I returned to the excellency of my kingdom; my honor
and my dignity was restored to me, and my counselors and elders
consulted me again; and I was established in my kingdom, and more ample
dignity was added to me.

<span id="ix.iv-p39"></span>**37** Now I Nebuchadnezzar praise, and
extol, and glorify the king of heaven, because all his works are truth,
and his ways are judgment: and those who walk in pride he is able to
humble.

<span id="ix.v"></span>

<span id="ix.v-p1"></span>

<span id="ix.v-p2"></span>CHAPTER 5

<span id="ix.v-p3"></span>**1** Belshazzar the king made a great banquet
for a thousand of his nobles, and drank wine before the thousand.

<span id="ix.v-p4"></span>**2** Belshazzar having tasted the wine,
commanded (men) to bring the vessels of gold and silver which
Nebuchadnezzar his father had brought from the Temple at Jerusalem, that
the king and his nobles, his wives and his concubines, might drink from
them.

<span id="ix.v-p5"></span>**3** Then they brought the golden vessels
which had been taken from the house of God at Jerusalem, and the king
and his nobles, his wives and his concubines, drank from them.

<span id="ix.v-p6"></span>**4** They drank wine, and praised the gods of
gold and silver, of brass and iron, of wood and stone.

<span id="ix.v-p7"></span>**5** In the same hour the fingers of a man’s
hand came forth, and wrote in the neighborhood of the candlestick on the
surface of the wall of the king’s palace; and the king saw the palm of
the hand as it was writing.

<span id="ix.v-p8"></span>**6** Then the king’s countenance changed, and
his thoughts affrighted him, and the joints of his loins were loosed,
and his knees smote against each other.

<span id="ix.v-p9"></span>**7** The king cried mightily that the magi,
the Chaldeans, and the astrologers, should be brought in; and the king
spoke and said to the wise men of Babylon, Whosoever shall read this
writing, and declare its interpretation to me, shall be clothed in
purple, with a chain of gold about his neck, and shall rank third in the
kingdom.

<span id="ix.v-p10"></span>**8** Then entered all the king’s wise men,
and were unable to read the writing, and to explain to the king its
interpretation.

<span id="ix.v-p11"></span>**9** Then king Belshazzar was much
frightened, and his countenance was changed, and his princes became
anxious.

<span id="ix.v-p12"></span>**10** The queen, in consequence of the words
of the king and his nobles, entered into the banqueting-house, and spoke
and said: O king! live for ever — Let not thy thoughts frighten thee,
nor let thy countenance be changed.

<span id="ix.v-p13"></span>**11** There is a man in thy kingdom in whom
exists the spirit of the holy gods, and in the days of thy father,
intelligence, and knowledge, and wisdom, like that of the gods, were
found in him; and King Nebuchadnezzar, thy father — the king, I say, thy
father — made him chief of the magi, astrologers, Chaldeans, and
soothsayers.

<span id="ix.v-p14"></span>**12** Because an enlarged mind, and a
discerning understanding, the interpretation of dreams, the revelation
of secrets, and the solution of difficulties were found in him, namely,
Daniel, whom the king named Belteshazzar; now let Daniel be called, and
he will show the interpretation.

<span id="ix.v-p15"></span>**13** Then Daniel was introduced before the
king. The king spoke and said to Daniel: Art thou that Daniel of the
sons of the captivity of Judah, whom my father led away from Judah?

<span id="ix.v-p16"></span>**14** I have heard of thee, that the spirit
of the gods is in thee; and intelligence, knowledge, and superior wisdom
have been found in thee.

<span id="ix.v-p17"></span>**15** And now the wise men and magicians
have been brought before me for the purpose of reading this writing, and
of unfolding its interpretation to me; and they cannot declare the
interpretation of the matter.

<span id="ix.v-p18"></span>**16** And I heard of thee, that thou canst
solve difficulties and unravel secrets; now, if thou canst read this
writing, and explain its interpretation to me, thou shalt be clothed in
purple with a chain of gold round thy neck, and shalt hold the third
rank in the kingdom.

<span id="ix.v-p19"></span>**17** Then answered Daniel and said before
the king: Let thy gifts be for thyself, and give thy rewards to another.
Yet I will read the writing to the king, and reveal its interpretation
to him.

<span id="ix.v-p20"></span>**18** O king, the High God gave to King
Nebuchadnezzar, thy father, an empire, and magnificence, and loftiness,
and splendor.

<span id="ix.v-p21"></span>**19** And on account of the magnificence
which God conferred upon him, all people, nations, and tongues trembled,
and were frightened at the sight of him; whom he wished to slay, was
slain, (vol. 1 p. 332, note,) and whom he wished, he raised up, and whom
he wished, he cast down.

<span id="ix.v-p22"></span>**20** But when his heart was lifted up, and
his spirit hardened to pride, he was cast down from the throne of his
kingdom, and they deprived him of his glory.

<span id="ix.v-p23"></span>**21** And he was driven away from the
children of men, and his heart was placed among the beasts, and his
dwelling was with the wild asses. They fed him with grass like oxen, and
his body was moistened with the dew of heaven, until he acknowledged the
rule of the most high God in the kingdom of men, and his appointing over
it whom he wills.

<span id="ix.v-p24"></span>**22** And thou, O Belshazzar his son, hast
not humbled thine heart, although thou knowest all this.

<span id="ix.v-p25"></span>**23** And thou hast raised thyself against
the God of heaven when they brought the vessels of his house before
thee, and thy nobles, thy wives and concubines, drank wine from them;
and thou hast praised the gods of silver and gold, of brass and iron, of
wood and stone, which neither see, nor hear, nor understand; and thou
hast not honored God, in whose hand is thy breath, and in whose power
are all things.

<span id="ix.v-p26"></span>**24** At that time a portion of a hand was
sent from God’s presence, and this writing was marked down.

<span id="ix.v-p27"></span>**25** And this is the writing which was
engraven. Mene, Mene, it has been numbered. Tekel, it has been weighed.
Upharsin, and they are dividing.

<span id="ix.v-p28"></span>**26** This is the interpretation of the
sentence, — Mene, God has numbered and finished thy kingdom.

<span id="ix.v-p29"></span>**27** Tekel, weigh, or it has been weighed —
thou hast been weighed in a balance, and hast been found wanting.

<span id="ix.v-p30"></span>**28** Peres for *Upharsin,* thy kingdom has
been divided and given to the Medes and Persians.

<span id="ix.v-p31"></span>**29** Then Belshazzar commanded, and they
clothed Daniel in purple, and a chain of gold was placed around his
neck, and they cried out before him that he was the third ruler in the
kingdom.

<span id="ix.v-p32"></span>**30** In that night Belshazzar the king of
the Chaldeans was slain.

<span id="ix.v-p33"></span>**31** And Darius the Mede received the
kingdom, when he was sixty-two years old.

<span id="ix.vi"></span>

<span id="ix.vi-p1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi-p2"></span>CHAPTER 6

<span id="ix.vi-p3"></span>**1** It pleased Darius, and he set over the
kingdom one hundred and twenty presidents of the provinces, who should
be over the whole kingdom.

<span id="ix.vi-p4"></span>**2** And over them were three satraps, of
whom Daniel was one, that the presidents of the provinces should render
an account to them, and the king should suffer no loss.

<span id="ix.vi-p5"></span>**3** Then Daniel himself was superior to the
satraps and presidents of the provinces, because a nobler spirit was in
him; and the king was thinking of elevating him over the whole kingdom.

<span id="ix.vi-p6"></span>**4** Then the satraps and presidents of the
provinces sought to find an occasion against Daniel in his
administration of the kingdom, and they could find neither occasion nor
fault, because he was trustworthy, and neither fault nor crime was found
in him.

<span id="ix.vi-p7"></span>**5** Then those men said, we shall not find
in this Daniel any occasion, unless we find it against him as to the law
of his God.

<span id="ix.vi-p8"></span>**6** Then the satraps and presidents of the
provinces came in a body to the king, and spoke thus to him, King
Darius, live for ever!

<span id="ix.vi-p9"></span>**7** All the presidents of the kingdom, the
senators and governors of provinces, the counselors and the generals,
have consulted together to establish a royal statute, and to confirm the
edict, that whoever should ask a petition from any god or man for thirty
days, except of thee, O king, shall be cast into the lions’ den.

<span id="ix.vi-p10"></span>**8** Now, O king, establish the edict, and
sign the writing which is immutable, according to the law of the Medes
and Persians, which does not pass away.

<span id="ix.vi-p11"></span>**9** Wherefore King Darius signed the
writing and the decree.

<span id="ix.vi-p12"></span>**10** But when Daniel knew the writing to
have been signed, he entered into his house, and his windows being open
in his chamber towards Jerusalem, three times every day he bent upon his
knees and prayed, and confessed before his God, as he was accustomed to
do.

<span id="ix.vi-p13"></span>**11** Then these men assembled, and found
Daniel uttering prayers and supplications before his God.

<span id="ix.vi-p14"></span>**12** Then they approached, and said before
the king concerning the edict: Hast thou not signed an diet, that if any
man shall ask anything from any god or man even for thirty days, except
of thee, O king, he should be cast into the lions’ den? The king
answered and said, — The saying is true, according to the law of the
Medes and Persians, which passes not away.

<span id="ix.vi-p15"></span>**13** Then they spoke, and said before the
king: Daniel, who is of the children of the captivity of Judah, has not
given his mind to thee, O king, nor to the edict which thou hast signed,
but prays according to his custom three times a day.

<span id="ix.vi-p16"></span>**14** Then the king, on hearing those
words, was much grieved within himself, and applied his heart to deliver
Daniel, and was anxious to snatch him away even to the setting of the
sun.

<span id="ix.vi-p17"></span>**15** Then those men assembled around the
king and said, — Know, O king, this is the law of the Medes and
Persians; No edict or statute which the king has established can be
changed.

<span id="ix.vi-p18"></span>**16** Then the king commanded, and *they*
brought Daniel, and east him into the lions’ den. The king answered, and
said to Daniel: Thy God, whom thou servest continually, will surely
deliver thee.

<span id="ix.vi-p19"></span>**17** And a stone was brought, and laid
upon the mouth of the cave; and the king sealed it with his own ring,
and with the ring of his nobles, lest the decree concerning Daniel
should be changed.

<span id="ix.vi-p20"></span>**18** Then the king went to his palace, and
passed the night fasting, and musical instruments were not brought
before him, and sleep departed from him.

<span id="ix.vi-p21"></span>**19** Then the king rose in the morning, as
soon as it was light, and came in haste to the lions’ den.

<span id="ix.vi-p22"></span>**20** And when he approached the den, he
cried with a sorrowful voice to Daniel, and the king spoke and said to
Daniel, Daniel! servant of the living God: Could thy God, whom thou
servest continually, preserve thee from the lions?

<span id="ix.vi-p23"></span>**21** Then Daniel said unto the king, O
king, live for ever!

<span id="ix.vi-p24"></span>**22** My God sent his angel, and shut the
lions’ mouths, and they have not hurt me, since integrity before him was
found in me, and also before thee, O king, I have committed nothing
wrong.

<span id="ix.vi-p25"></span>**23** Then the king was highly delighted
within himself, and commanded Daniel to be brought out of the den; and
Daniel was brought out of the den, and no injury was found upon him,
because he trusted in his God.

<span id="ix.vi-p26"></span>**24** And the king commanded, and they
brought those men who had invented the accusation against Daniel, and
they were cast into the den, themselves, their children, and their
wives, and before they arrived at the pavement of the den, the lions
obtained the mastery of them, and broke in pieces all their bones.

<span id="ix.vi-p27"></span>**25** Then King Darius wrote to all people,
nations, and languages, which dwell in all the earth: Peace be
multiplied unto you!

<span id="ix.vi-p28"></span>**26** I have issued a decree throughout the
whole of the dominions of my kingdom, that they may fear and be afraid
at the presence of the God of Daniel, because he is the living God, and
endureth for ever; and his kingdom shall not be overthrown, and his
dominion shall be for ever.

<span id="ix.vi-p29"></span>**27** In delivering and rescuing, and
uttering signs and wonders in heaven and earth; for he delivered Daniel
from the power of the lions.

<span id="ix.vi-p30"></span>**28** So Daniel himself lived prosperously
in the reigns of Darius, and of Cyrus the Persian.

<span id="ix.vii"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 7

<span id="ix.vii-p3"></span>**1** In the first year of Belshazzar king
of Babylon, Daniel saw a dream, and visions of his head upon his bed. He
wrote the dream at the time, and related the sum of the words.

<span id="ix.vii-p4"></span>**2** Daniel spoke and explained; I saw in
my vision by night, and behold! four winds of heaven contending in a
great sea.

<span id="ix.vii-p5"></span>**3** And four large beasts came forth from
the sea, differing among themselves.

<span id="ix.vii-p6"></span>**4** The first was like a lion, and had
eagle’s wings; I kept looking till the wings were plucked, and it was
raised from the ground, and stood on its feet like a man, and a man’s
heart was given to it.

<span id="ix.vii-p7"></span>**5** And behold a second beast following,
like a bear, and it was raised on one side, and three tusks were in its
mouth between its teeth; and thus they said to it, Arise, devour much
flesh.

<span id="ix.vii-p8"></span>**6** After this I looked, and behold
another beast like a leopard, and the wings of a bird were on its back;
the beast had four heads, and dominion was granted to it.

<span id="ix.vii-p9"></span>**7** I looked again after this in the
visions of the night, and behold! a fourth beast, formidable and
terrible, and exceedingly strong; it had large iron teeth, devouring and
crushing, and trampling the remnants under its feet; it was different
from all the former beasts, and had ten horns.

<span id="ix.vii-p10"></span>**8** I was attentive to the horns, and
behold another small horn grew up among the others; and three of the
former horns were torn away from its face; and behold! eyes like human
eyes were in that horn, and a mouth speaking boastfully.

<span id="ix.vii-p11"></span>**9** I continued looking till thrones were
placed, and the Ancient of days was seated. His raiment was white as
snow, and the hair of his head was like clean wool; his throne was
sparks of fire, and its wheels burning flame.

<span id="ix.vii-p12"></span>**10** A river of fire flowed forth, and
went out from his presence; a thousand thousand waited upon him, and ten
thousand times ten thousand stood before him; judgment was fixed, and
books were opened.

<span id="ix.vii-p13"></span>**11** Then I continued looking on account
of the utterance of boasting words which the horn uttered; I continued
gazing till the beast was slain, and its body destroyed, and given up to
the burning of fire.

<span id="ix.vii-p14"></span>**12** And they had taken away their
dominion from the rest of the beasts, and long life was given to them
even for a time and a time.

<span id="ix.vii-p15"></span>**13** I saw in visions of the night, and
behold in the clouds of heaven, as it were, the Son of man came, and
advanced even to the Ancient of days, and they brought him near before
him.

<span id="ix.vii-p16"></span>**14** And power was given unto him, and
glory, and a kingdom, and all people, nations, and languages, shall
serve him; his dominion is an eternal dominion which shall never be
taken away, and his kingdom shall never be abolished.

<span id="ix.vii-p17"></span>**15** As to me, Daniel, my breath was
stopped within my bodyand the visions of my head frightened me.

<span id="ix.vii-p18"></span>**16** I approached one of those who were
present, and inquired of him the truth concerning all these things, and
he informed me, and opened up for me the explanation of these events.

<span id="ix.vii-p19"></span>**17** These four great beasts which thou
sawest, are four kingdoms which shall arise out of the earth:

<span id="ix.vii-p20"></span>**18** And they shall possess the kingdom
of the saints of the most High, and these shall obtain the dominion even
for an age, and for ages of ages.

<span id="ix.vii-p21"></span>**19** Then I desired the truth concerning
the fourth beast, which was different from all the others, and very
terrible, whose teeth were of iron, and his claws of brass, devouring,
and crushing, and trampling the remnants under its feet.

<span id="ix.vii-p22"></span>**20** Also concerning the ten horns which
were on its head, and of the last which rose up when the three former
ones had fallen, namely, the horn which had eyes, and a mouth speaking
grandly, whose aspect was more mighty than its fellows.

<span id="ix.vii-p23"></span>**21** I continued gazing, and this horn
made war with the holy ones, and prevailed against them.

<span id="ix.vii-p24"></span>**22** Then came the Ancient of days, and
judgment was given to the saints of the lofty ones, and the time
arrived, and the saints received the kingdom.

<span id="ix.vii-p25"></span>**23** Thus he stated, The fourth beast
shall be a fourth kingdom upon earth, which shall be different from all
the former kingdoms, and shall devour the Whole earth, and shall crush
it, and break it completely in pieces.

<span id="ix.vii-p26"></span>**24** Also the ten horns from that kingdom
are ten kings which shall arise, and another shall arise after them,
which shall be distinguished from the former ones, and shall afflict the
three kings.

<span id="ix.vii-p27"></span>**25** And he shall speak words towards the
region of the Highest, and he shall crush the saints of the lofty ones,
and shall presume to alter times and the law; and it shall be delivered
into his hand for a time, and times, and the division of a time.

<span id="ix.vii-p28"></span>**26** And judgment shall be established,
and they shall take away his power, to disperse and destroy it even unto
the end.

<span id="ix.vii-p29"></span>**27** Then the kingdom and the power, and
the magnitude of their sway under the whole heaven, shall be given to
the people of the holy lofty ones, which kingdom is everlasting, and all
powers shall serve it and become obedient to it.

<span id="ix.vii-p30"></span>**28** Therefore an end of the matter. As
to me Daniel, my thoughts troubled me much; And my countenance was
changed upon me, And I laid up the matter in my heart.

<span id="ix.viii"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p1"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 8

<span id="ix.viii-p3"></span>**1** In the third year of the reign of
King Belshazzar, a vision appeared unto me Daniel, in addition to the
vision previously offered to me.

<span id="ix.viii-p4"></span>**2** I saw in a vision, and while I was
seeing, I happened to be in Susan the capital, which is in the province
of Elam. I saw in a vision, and behold I was near the river Ulai.

<span id="ix.viii-p5"></span>**3** Then I raised my eyes and looked, and
behold, A single ram stood before the river; it had two horns: The horns
were lofty, and one was higher than the other, And this lofty one grew
up last.

<span id="ix.viii-p6"></span>**4** I saw the ram butting westward, and
northward, and southward; No beasts could stand before him: No one could
snatch anything from his hand: Thus he did according to his pleasure,
and magnified himself.

<span id="ix.viii-p7"></span>**5** And I was attentive, and behold! A
he-goat came from the west over the face of the whole earth, And yet he
never touched the ground: The goat, too, had a remarkable horn between
its eyes.

<span id="ix.viii-p8"></span>**6** Then he approached the ram possessing
the two horns, which I had seen standing on the river’s bank, And he ran
at him with the fury of his bravery.

<span id="ix.viii-p9"></span>**7** Then I saw him approach the ram, and
exasperate himself against him, He smote the ram, and broke both his
horns; The ram had no power to stand before his face: For he threw the
ram upon the ground and trampled upon him, And no one could deliver the
ram from his power.

<span id="ix.viii-p10"></span>**8** Then the he-goat magnified himself
amazingly; And when he was in his strength, his mighty horn was broken;
The four conspicuous ones arose in its place towards the four winds of
heaven.

<span id="ix.viii-p11"></span>**9** And from one of these came forth a
single small horn, And magnified himself surprisingly towards the south,
and the east, and the desirable land.

<span id="ix.viii-p12"></span>**10** Then it magnified itself towards
the heavenly army, And it cast down upon the earth some of that army and
of the stars, and trampled upon them.

<span id="ix.viii-p13"></span>**11** Besides this, it magnified itself
against the prince of the army, and the continual sacrifice was removed
from him, and the place of his sanctuary was profaned.

<span id="ix.viii-p14"></span>**12** And time was given to the continual
sacrifice, in consequence of wickedness, and it shall cast forth truth
upon the ground, and shall succeed, and fare prosperously.

<span id="ix.viii-p15"></span>**13** Then I heard a holy one speaking,
And the speaking holy one said to the wonderful one, How long will the
vision of the perpetual sacrifice, and the desolating wickedness be
permitted to last? How long will the sanctuary and the army be trampled
down?

<span id="ix.viii-p16"></span>**14** And he said to me, Unto evenings
and mornings 2300: Then the sanctuary shall be re-cleansed.

<span id="ix.viii-p17"></span>**15** know it happened while I Daniel was
gazing on the vision, and was seeking intelligence, Behold! there stood
before me as it were the appearance of a man.

<span id="ix.viii-p18"></span>**16** Then I heard a man’s voice in Ulai,
which cried, and said, Gabriel, teach this man the vision.

<span id="ix.viii-p19"></span>**17** Then he approached my
standing-place; And at his arrival I was frightened and fell upon my
face, Then he said to me, Understand, O son of man; Because the vision
is for a definite time.

<span id="ix.viii-p20"></span>**18** Moreover, while he was talking to
me, I swooned away with my face to the ground; then he touched me, and
restored me to my place as before.

<span id="ix.viii-p21"></span>**19** Then he said, Behold! I will inform
thee of what shall happen at the close of the indignation: For the end
of the period is determined.

<span id="ix.viii-p22"></span>**20** The ram which thou sawest with two
horns, represents the kings of the Medes and Persians.

<span id="ix.viii-p23"></span>**21** The he-goat is the king of Greece,
(Jayan,) and the great horn between his eyes is the first king.

<span id="ix.viii-p24"></span>**22** But this was broken, and as four
horns stood forth in its stead, so four kingdoms shall arise out of the
nation, yet not to be compared with him in strength.

<span id="ix.viii-p25"></span>**23** And at the end of their kingdom,
when these wicked ones have departed, a king shall exist, fierce of
countenance, and skilled in enigmas.

<span id="ix.viii-p26"></span>**24** And his fortitude shall be
strengthened, but not by his own strength: He shall overthrow
wonderfully, and prosper, and succeed, and destroy the mighty, and the
people of the holy ones.

<span id="ix.viii-p27"></span>**25** And according to his intelligence
his craft shall prosper in his hand, and he shall magnify himself in his
heart, and in peace he shall destroy multitudes. Even against the prince
of princes shall he stand up, and shall be broken without hand.

<span id="ix.viii-p28"></span>**26** The vision of the morning and
evening which has been pronounced is truth. Do thou therefore seal up
the vision, because it extends to many days.

<span id="ix.viii-p29"></span>**27** Then I Daniel suffered deep sorrow
and languor for some days: Yet I rose and did the king’s business; I was
struck with astonishment at the vision, yet no one perceived it.

<span id="ix.ix"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p2"></span>CHAPTER 9

<span id="ix.ix-p3"></span>**1** In the first year of Darius, son of
Ahasuerus, of Median descent, who was appointed king over the kingdom of
the Chaldees.

<span id="ix.ix-p4"></span>**2** In the first year of this reign, I
Daniel diligently considered in books the number of the years concerning
which the word of Jehovah had come to Jeremiah the Prophet, to complete
the seventy years appointed for the desolation of Jerusalem.

<span id="ix.ix-p5"></span>**3** Then I raised my face towards the Lord
God, to inquire by prayer and supplication, with fasting, sackcloth, and
ashes.

<span id="ix.ix-p6"></span>**4** And I prayed to Jehovah my God, and
confessed, and said, O Lord God, great and terrible, keeping the
covenant and mercy towards those who love thee and keep thy
commandments;

<span id="ix.ix-p7"></span>**5** We have sinned and acted perversely: We
have conducted ourselves wickedly, and have rebelled: We have
transgressed thy precepts and thy judgments:

<span id="ix.ix-p8"></span>**6** We have not listened to thy servants
the prophets, who have spoken in thy name to our kings, our princes, cur
fathers, and all the people of the land.

<span id="ix.ix-p9"></span>**7** With thee, O Lord, is righteousness,
but with us confusion of face, As at this day: to all Judah, and to the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, and to all Israel, far and near, whither thou
hast driven them, on account of their transgression by which they have
transgressed against thee.

<span id="ix.ix-p10"></span>**8** O Lord, to us belongs confusion of
face, To our kings, our princes, our fathers, because we have sinned
against thee.

<span id="ix.ix-p11"></span>**9** To the Lord our God belong mercies and
forgivenesses, Although we have been rebellious against him.

<span id="ix.ix-p12"></span>**10** We have not listened to the voice of
Jehovah our God, that we should walk in his laws, which he has set
before our face by the hands of his servants the prophets.

<span id="ix.ix-p13"></span>**11** Even all Israel have transgressed thy
law, and have declined to listen to thy voice, Therefore the curse is
poured down upon us: And the oath which is written in the law of Moses,
the servant of God, Because we have sinned against him.

<span id="ix.ix-p14"></span>**12** And he has established his word which
he had spoken against us, and against our rulers who governed us, by
bringing upon us a great calamity: For under the whole heaven nothing
has occurred like that which has happened to Jerusalem.

<span id="ix.ix-p15"></span>**13** As it is written in the law of Moses,
all this evil is come upon us: Yet we have not deprecated the wrath of
Jehovah our God, to turn away from our iniquities, and to become
attentive to thy truth.

<span id="ix.ix-p16"></span>**14** And Jehovah has watched over the
evil, and sent it forth upon us: Because Jehovah our God is just in all
the works which he performs, And yet we have not listened to his voice.

<span id="ix.ix-p17"></span>**15** And now, O Lord our God, who didst
lead thy people out of the land of Egypt with a strong hand, and hast
made thyself a name as the fact itself has proved, we have sinned, we
have done wickedly.

<span id="ix.ix-p18"></span>**16** O Lord, according to all thy
righteous dealings, let thine anger be turned away, I pray thee: Let
thine indignation cease from thy city Jerusalem, thy holy mountain; For
through our sins, and through the iniquities of our fathers, Jerusalem
and thy people have become a reproach to all our neighbors.

<span id="ix.ix-p19"></span>**17** Hearken now, O our God, to the
prayers of thy servant, and to his supplications: Make thy face to shine
on the desolated sanctuary, for the Lord’s sake.

<span id="ix.ix-p20"></span>**18** Incline, O my God, thine ear, and
hear: open thine eyes and behold our distresses, and the desolation of
the city called by thy name: Because we do not pour out our
supplications before thy face on account of our own righteousness, but
by reason of thy many mercies.

<span id="ix.ix-p21"></span>**19** O Lord, hear; O Lord, be propitious;
O Lord, attend and perform; Delay not for thine own sake, O my God,
since thy name is invoked in behalf of thy city and thy people.

<span id="ix.ix-p22"></span>**20** And while I was yet speaking, and
praying, and confessing my sins, and those of my people Israel, and
while I was speaking my petition before Jehovah my God, on behalf of the
mountain of the sanctuary of my God;

<span id="ix.ix-p23"></span>**21** Even, while I was yet uttering my
prayer, The man Gabriel, whom I had before seen in a vision, flying
swiftly, Touched me about the time of the evening sacrifice.

<span id="ix.ix-p24"></span>**22** Then he taught me, and spoke to me,
and said, O Daniel, I have now come forth, to afford thee needful
information.

<span id="ix.ix-p25"></span>**23** At the beginning of thy prayers the
word went forth, which I am come to declare, because thou art greatly
beloved: Attend therefore to the word, and understand the vision.

<span id="ix.ix-p26"></span>**24** Seventy weeks have been determined
upon thy people and upon thy holy city, to close up wickedness, and seal
up sin, and expiate iniquity, and bring in eternal righteousness, and
seal up the vision and the prophecy, and anoint the holy of holies.

<span id="ix.ix-p27"></span>**25** Take notice therefore and understand,
From the going forth of the word concerning the return of the people,
And the rebuilding of Jerusalem to Messiah the Leader, Seventy weeks,
and sixty-two weeks; then the people shall be brought back, And the
street and the wall shall be rebuilt, and that too amidst the
perplexities (or “in the narrow limit”) of the times.

<span id="ix.ix-p28"></span>**26** Then after the sixty—two weeks,
Christ shall be cut off, and become nothing: The people of the coming
leader shall destroy the city and the sanctuary: Its end shall be with
an inundation: And at the close of the war a completion of desolation’s.

<span id="ix.ix-p29"></span>**27** And he shall make a firm covenant
with many for one week; And for half a week he shall cause the sacrifice
and offering to cease; And upon the spreading of abominations he shall
be astonished, And at the close, he shall pour the full accomplishment
upon the desolator.

<span id="ix.x"></span>

<span id="ix.x-p1"></span>

<span id="ix.x-p2"></span>CHAPTER 10

<span id="ix.x-p3"></span>**1** In the third year of Cyrus, king of
Persia, a revelation was made to Daniel, called Belteshazzar; and the
word was most true and the times most extended; and he understood the
word, and fully comprehended the vision.

<span id="ix.x-p4"></span>**2** In those days I Daniel gave myself up to
mourning for three weeks of days.

<span id="ix.x-p5"></span>**3** I did not eat any delicate food; neither
flesh nor wine entered my mouth: Nor did I anoint myself at all, till
three weeks of days were fulfilled.

<span id="ix.x-p6"></span>**4** On the twenty-fourth day of the first
month, I was upon the banks of the great river Hiddekel;

<span id="ix.x-p7"></span>**5** Then I lifted up my eyes and looked, and
behold! a man clothed in linen vesture, His loins were girt with the
gold of Uphaz:

<span id="ix.x-p8"></span>**6** His body was like the chrysolite, His
face like the appearance of lightning, and his eyes like lamps of fire,
His arms and his feet were as bright as polished brass, And the voice of
his words like the sound of a tumult.

<span id="ix.x-p9"></span>**7** I Daniel alone saw the vision: For the
men who were with me saw no vision; Yea, rather, great terror fell upon
them, and they fled into hiding places.

<span id="ix.x-p10"></span>**8** Then I Daniel was left alone, And I saw
this great vision: Then there remained no strength within me: My
comeliness was turned to corruption, and I did not retain my strength.

<span id="ix.x-p11"></span>**9** Yet I heard the voice of his words; And
when I heard the voice of his words, I fell down in a swoon with my face
towards the ground.

<span id="ix.x-p12"></span>**10** And behold! a hand touched me, and
raised me upon my knees, and upon the palms of my hands.

<span id="ix.x-p13"></span>**11** Then he said to me, O Daniel! a man of
desires, Understand the words which I address to thee, And stand
upright, because I am now sent unto thee. When he had spoken this word
unto me, I stood up trembling.

<span id="ix.x-p14"></span>**12** Then he said unto me, Fear not,
Daniel; for from the first day on which thou didst apply thy heart to
understanding, and to afflicting thyself before the face of thy God, thy
words were heard. And I am come through thy words.

<span id="ix.x-p15"></span>**13** The prince of the kingdom of the
Persians resisted me for twenty-one days; And, lo, Michael, one of the
chief leaders, came to my assistance; And I was left among the kings of
the Persians.

<span id="ix.x-p16"></span>**14** Now I am come to disclose to thee what
shall occur to thy people at the close of the days; for still the vision
is for days.

<span id="ix.x-p17"></span>**15** While he was speaking to me according
to these words, I placed my face upon the ground, and became dumb.

<span id="ix.x-p18"></span>**16** When, lo! one bearing the form of the
sons of men touched my lips; And I opened my mouth and spoke, and said
to the person standing before me, O lord, my sorrows are turned upon me
in vision, and I cannot retain my strength.

<span id="ix.x-p19"></span>**17** And how could the servant of this my
lord speak with this my lord? Henceforth no strength remained in me and
no breath was left in me.

<span id="ix.x-p20"></span>**18** Then a second time, he who bore a
human appearance, touched me, and strengthened me, and said,

<span id="ix.x-p21"></span>**19** Fear not, O man of desires, peace be
to thee, Take courage and be strong. And while he was addressing me, I
became strong, Then I said, Let my Lord speak, because thou hast
strengthened me.

<span id="ix.x-p22"></span>**20** He said next, Surely thou knowest why
I am come to thee, I am now going to return to contend with the prince
of Persia; And when I am gone, behold, the prince of Javan (Greece) will
come.

<span id="ix.x-p23"></span>**21** But I will declare unto thee what is
deeply graven in the scripture of truth: For there is not one who will
stand by me in these affairs, Except Michael your prince.

<span id="ix.xi"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p1"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p2"></span>CHAPTER 11

<span id="ix.xi-p3"></span>**1** In the first year of Darius the Mede, I
stood both to strengthen and to succor him: and now I will declare to
thee the truth.

<span id="ix.xi-p4"></span>**2** Behold, three kings shall yet stand up
in Persia, and a fourth shall be enriched with great riches above them
all: and when he is grown strong through his wealth, he shall stir up
the whole against the kingdom of Jayan (Greece.)

<span id="ix.xi-p5"></span>**3** Then a mighty king shall stand up, and
shall rule with extended dominion, and shall do according to his will.

<span id="ix.xi-p6"></span>**4** And when he shall be established, his
kingdom shall be broken, and shall be dispersed towards the four winds
of heaven, yet not to his posterity, nor yet according to the dominion
which he exercised; for his kingdom shall be extirpated, and shall be
for others, who are not of his posterity.

<span id="ix.xi-p7"></span>**5** A king of the south shall then become
strong, being one of his princes, and he shall be strengthened against
him, and shall become supreme, and his dominion shall be extensive.

<span id="ix.xi-p8"></span>**6** At the end of the years, they shall
become allies, and the daughter of the king of the south shall, come to
the king of the north for the purpose of making peace: Yet his arm shall
not retain its strength; neither shall he stand, nor his seed, but she
shall be delivered up with her attendants, and her mother, and whoever
supported her at that time.

<span id="ix.xi-p9"></span>**7** Yet there shall stand up a shoot from
her root in its own rank: it shall come with an army, and shall reach
the fortifications of the king of the north, and shall act among the
people, and shall prevail.

<span id="ix.xi-p10"></span>**8** Their gods also with their molten
images, with their precious vessels of silver and gold, shall they carry
into captivity to Egypt, and he shall stand for more years than the king
of the north.

<span id="ix.xi-p11"></span>**9** And the king of the north shall come
into the kingdom, and shall return to his own land.

<span id="ix.xi-p12"></span>**10** But his sons shall be provoked, and
shall assemble a multitude of mighty forces; and shall advance rapidly,
and overflow, and pass through: he shall return and shall be stirred up
even to his own fortress.

<span id="ix.xi-p13"></span>**11** Then the king of the south shall be
exasperated, and shall go forth to make war against the king of the
north: he shall set in motion a large multitude, and that multitude
shall be delivered into his hand.

<span id="ix.xi-p14"></span>**12** Then that multitude shall be taken
away, and his heart shall be elated: He shall east down tens of
thousands, and yet he shall not become strong.

<span id="ix.xi-p15"></span>**13** For the king of the north shall
return, and shall collect a greater multitude than before And at the end
of the times of the years, he shall come swiftly with a great army, and
with much wealth.

<span id="ix.xi-p16"></span>**14** And at those times many shall stand
up against the king of the south (Egypt), and sons, robbers of thy
people, shall exalt themselves to establish the vision, but yet they
shall fail.

<span id="ix.xi-p17"></span>**15** For the king of the north shall come,
and shall east up a rampart, and shall take the city of fortifications,
and the arms of the south shall not stand, nor yet the people of his
levies, for there shall be no strength for standing.

<span id="ix.xi-p18"></span>**16** Also when coming he shall do unto him
according to his will, and none shall stand before his face, and he
shall stand in the desirable land which shall be consumed in his hand.

<span id="ix.xi-p19"></span>**17** And he shall set his face to come
with the power of his whole kingdom to make alliances with him; he shall
accomplish this: he shall give the daughter of women to him to corrupt
her, but she shall not stand by him, nor be under his power.

<span id="ix.xi-p20"></span>**18** Then he shall turn his face towards
the islands, and shall take many: and a prince shall set at rest his
reproach against him: hence he shall not turn his reproach upon himself.

<span id="ix.xi-p21"></span>**19** And he shall turn his face towards
the fortifications of his own land, and shall stumbles and fall, and
never be found.

<span id="ix.xi-p22"></span>**20** Next there shall stand up in his
place one who shall send forth an exactor, or raiser of tribute, in
honor of his kingdom, but within a few days he shall perish, yet not
either in anger or in battle.

<span id="ix.xi-p23"></span>**21** Then a contemptible person shall
succeed him, on whom they shall not confer the honor of royalty, but he
shall come stealthily, and shall seize the kingdom by flatteries.

<span id="ix.xi-p24"></span>**22** His auxiliaries shall be overwhelmed
by a deluge before his sight: they shall be utterly broken, as well as
the leader of the covenant.

<span id="ix.xi-p25"></span>**23** After conjunction with him shall he
practice deceit, and shall ascend, and prevail with a small band.

<span id="ix.xi-p26"></span>**24** He shall advance in peace into the
richest portion of the province, and shall do what neither his father
nor his father’s father had done: he shall distribute among them spoils,
and booty, and wealth, and he shall think many thoughts respecting
fortified cities, and that for a time.

<span id="ix.xi-p27"></span>**25** And he shall stir up his strength and
his breast against the king of the south, with a great army; and the
king of the south shall be roused up to battle with a large and very
powerful army: and he shall not stand, because they shall agitate
perfidious counsels against him.

<span id="ix.xi-p28"></span>**26** Those who partake of his table shall
ruin him, and his army shall be overwhelmed, and many shall fall
wounded.

<span id="ix.xi-p29"></span>**27** The heart of both these kings shall
be inclined to evil; at the same table shall they speak deceitfully: yet
it shall not prosper, because the end is yet for a defined period.

<span id="ix.xi-p30"></span>**28** Then shall he return to his own land
with great wealth; and his heart shall be towards the covenant of
holiness, and he shall accomplish his purpose, and return to his own
land.

<span id="ix.xi-p31"></span>**29** After a time he shall return, and
shall come to the south; But this expedition small not succeed as the
former one.

<span id="ix.xi-p32"></span>**30** For ships of Chittim shall advance
against him, and he shall be humbled, and return, and shall be indignant
against the holy covenant, and shall do his work, and return and apply
his mind to the deserters of the holy covenant.

<span id="ix.xi-p33"></span>**31** And arms shall stand up from him; and
they shall profane the sanctuary of Ms strength, and abolish the
continual sacrifice, and set up the abomination which shall make
desolate.

<span id="ix.xi-p34"></span>**32** Now those who act impiously against
the covenant will he seduce with flatteries, but the people who know
their God shall be strengthened and will practice it.

<span id="ix.xi-p35"></span>**33** And the wise among the people shall
teach many, yet they shall fall by the sword, and by the flame, by
exile, and by rapine, for many days.

<span id="ix.xi-p36"></span>**34** Yet in their fall they shall be
assisted with moderate help, and many shall join themselves to them
through flatteries.

<span id="ix.xi-p37"></span>**35** Also some of those who have
understanding shall fall, to prove, and purge, and whiten them even for
a definite time, since it is still for an appointed time.

<span id="ix.xi-p38"></span>**36** And the king shall act according to
his will, and shall raise himself, and magnify himself above every
deity, and against the God of gods shall he speak wonderful things; He
shall prosper also unto the consummation of the anger, Since the
decision has been made.

<span id="ix.xi-p39"></span>**37** He shall not attend to either the God
of his fathers, nor to the desire of women: He shall not attend to any
deity, for he shall magnify himself above them all.

<span id="ix.xi-p40"></span>**38** And the God of fortresses shall he
honor in his own place; And a god whom his fathers knew not shall he
honor with gold, and silver, and precious stones, and with desirable
things.

<span id="ix.xi-p41"></span>**39** Then he shall attack the
fortifications of strength with the strange god whom he has
acknowledged: He shall multiply the glory, and cause them to reign over
many; for he shall divide the land for a price.

<span id="ix.xi-p42"></span>**40** After a fixed time, the king of the
south shall attack him; Then the king of the north shall rush at him
like a whirlwind, with chariots and horsemen, and with many ships; and
he shall enter his lands, and shall overflow and pass through.

<span id="ix.xi-p43"></span>**41** He shall also arrive at the land of
desire, (Judea;) Many regions shall fall, but these shall escape out of
his hand, Edom, Moab, and the heads of the children of Ammon.

<span id="ix.xi-p44"></span>**42** Then he shall extend his hand over
the lands, and the land of Egypt shall not escape.

<span id="ix.xi-p45"></span>**43** He shall have dominion over the
treasures of gold and silver, and over all the desirable things of
Egypt, and Libya and Ethiopia in his progress.

<span id="ix.xi-p46"></span>**44** But rumors shall disturb him from the
east and from the north; he shall go forth with great anger to destroy
many, and to devote them to utter destruction.

<span id="ix.xi-p47"></span>**45** And he shall fix the tabernacle of
his palace between the seas, near the mountain of the desire of
holiness; Then he shall come to his end, and no one shall help him.

<span id="ix.xii"></span>

<span id="ix.xii-p1"></span>

<span id="ix.xii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 12

<span id="ix.xii-p3"></span>**1** Moreover, at that time shall Michael
the mighty prince stand up, standing for the sons of thy people; And
there shall be a time of affliction, such as was not from the existence
of nations until that period. Yet at this period thy people shall
escape, every one who shall be found written in the book.

<span id="ix.xii-p4"></span>**2** And many of those who sleep, and have
been reduced to earth and dust, shall awake; some to perpetual life, and
others to shame and continued abomination.

<span id="ix.xii-p5"></span>**3** Then the wise shall shine as the
brightness of the firmament; And those who have turned many to
righteousness, like the stars for ever and ever.

<span id="ix.xii-p6"></span>**4** And thou, Daniel, shut up the words,
and seal up the book, till the time appointed. Many shall investigate,
and knowledge shall be increased.

<span id="ix.xii-p7"></span>**5** Then I Daniel was gazing, and behold
two others standing, One on this side, and the other on that of the
river’s bank.

<span id="ix.xii-p8"></span>**6** And one of them said to the man
clothed in linen, who was above the waters of the river, “How long will
it be to the end of these wonders?”

<span id="ix.xii-p9"></span>**7** Then I heard the man clothed in linen,
who was above the waters of the river; He raised his right hand and his
left towards the heavens, and swore by him who liveth for ever, That it
should be for the appointed time, times, and half a time; And at the
completion of the dispersion of the holy people, All these things shall
be accomplished.

<span id="ix.xii-p10"></span>**8** Then I heard, but I did not
understand; and I said, O my Lord, what shall be the end of these
events?

<span id="ix.xii-p11"></span>**9** Then he said, Depart, Daniel, because
the words are closed and sealed up to the time appointed.

<span id="ix.xii-p12"></span>**10** Many shall be purified, and made
white, and tried; Yet the impious shall act impiously: And the impious
will not understand, but the prudent will understand.

<span id="ix.xii-p13"></span>**11** From the time of taking away the
continual sacrifice, to the setting up of the desolating abomination,
shall be 1290 days.

<span id="ix.xii-p14"></span>**12** Blessed is he who shall have waited,
and shall have arrived at the 1335 days.

<span id="ix.xii-p15"></span>**13** And do thou go until the end, and
rest; And thou shalt stand in thy lot at the end of the days.

<span id="ix.xii-p16"></span>END OF CONNECTED TRANSLATION OF DANIEL

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Analysis of Daniel](cc25009)
