[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc25005)  [Next](cc25007) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 25: Daniel, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii"></span>

<span id="vii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 12

<span id="vii.i"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p1"></span><span id="vii.i-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#001)<span id="vii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p2"></span>**1.** And at that time shall Michael stand
up, the great prince which standeth for the children of thy people: and
there shall be a time of trouble, such as never was since there was a
nation *even* to that same time: and at that time thy people shall be
delivered, every one that shall be found written in the book.

<span id="vii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Et tempore illo stabit Michael
princeps, magnus stans pro filiis populi tui, et erit tempus
afflictionis, quale non fuit abesse gentem, *hoc est, ex quo coeperunt
esse gentes,* ad tempus illud usque: et tempore illo servabitur populus
tuus quicunque inventus fuerit scriptus in libro.

<span id="vii.i-p4"></span> 

<span id="vii.i-p5"></span><span id="vii.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p6"></span>The angel no longer relates future
occurrences specially, but proclaims God to be in general the guardian
of his Church, so as to preserve it wonderfully amidst many difficulties
and dreadful commotion’s, as well as in the profound darkness of
disaster and death. This is the meaning of this sentence. This verse
consists of two parts: the first relates to that most wretched period
which should be full of various and almost numberless calamities; and
the second assures us of God’s never-failing protection and preservation
of his Church by his own innate power. In this second part the promise
is restricted to the elect, and thus a third clause may be
distinguished, but it is only an addition to the second just mentioned.
At the close of the verse, the angel presents us with a definition of
the Church, as many professed to be God’s people who were not really so.
He says, *Michael, the prince of the people, should stand up* Then he
states the reason, *The calamities of that period should be such as were
never witnessed from the beginning of the world* As he addresses Daniel,
he says, *sons of thy people;* for he was one of the sons of Abraham,
and the nation from which Daniel sprang was in that sense “his.” From
this it follows that the calamities of which he will by and bye treat,
belong to the true Church, and not to the profane nations. The singular
aid of Michael would not have been needed, unless the Church had been
oppressed with the most disastrous distresses. We perceive, then, the
angel’s meaning to be according to my explanation. The Church should be
subject to most numerous and grievous calamities until the advent of
Christ, but yet it should feel God’s propitious disposition, ensuring
its own safety under his aid and protection. By Michael many agree in
understanding Christ as the head of the Church. But if it seems better
to understand Michael as the archangel, this sense will prove suitable,
for under Christ as the head, angels are the guardians of the Church.
Whichever be the true meaning, God was the preserver of his Church by
the hand of his only-begotten Son, and because the angels are under the
government of Christ, he might entrust this duty to Michael. That foul
hypocrite, Servetus, has dared to appropriate this passage to himself;
for he has inscribed it as a frontispiece on his horrible comments,
because he was called Michael! We observe what diabolic fury has seized
him, as he dared to claim as his own what is here said of the singular
aid afforded by Christ; to his Church. He was a man of the most impure
feelings, as we have already sufficiently made known. But this was a
proof of his impudence and sacrilegious madness — to adorn himself with
this epithet of Christ without, blushing, and. to elevate himself into
Christ’s place, by boasting himself to be Michael, the guardian of the
Church, and the mighty prince of the people! This fact is well known,
for I have the book at hand should any one distrust my word.

<span id="vii.ii"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="vii.ii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since we are placed in
similar distresses to those of which thou dost wish to warn us by thy
angel, as well as thine ancient people, that thy light may shine upon us
by means of thy only-begotten Son. May we feel ourselves always in
safety under his invincible power. May we dwell securely under his
shadow, and contend earnestly and boldly unto the end, against Satan and
all his impious crew. And when all our warfare is over, may we arrive at
last at that blessed rest where the fruit of our victory awaits us, in
the same Christ our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="vii.iii"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p1"></span>Lecture Sixty-Five.

<span id="vii.iii-p2"></span>The twelfth chapter commenced, as we stated
in yesterday’s Lecture, with the angel’s prediction as to the future
state of the Church after the manifestation of Christ It was to be
subject to many miseries, and hence this passage would soothe the sorrow
of Daniel, and of all the pious, as he still promises safety to the
Church through the help of God. Daniel therefore represented Michael as
the guardian of the Church, and God had enjoined this duty upon Christ,
as we learn from the 10th chapter of John, (<span
id="vii.iii-p2.1"></span>[John 10:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#028),
[29](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#029)<span id="vii.iii-p2.1"></span>.)
As we stated yesterday, Michael may mean an angel; but I embrace the
opinion of those who refer this to the person of Christ, because it
suits the subject best to represent him as standing forward for the
defense of his elect people. He is called the *mighty prince,* because
he naturally opposed the unconquered fortitude of God to those dangers
to which the angel represents the Church to be subject. We well know the
very slight causes for which terror often seizes our minds, and when we
begin to tremble, nothing can calm our tumult and agitation. The angel
then in treating of very grievous contests, and of the imminent danger
of the Church, calls *Michael the mighty prince* As if he had said,
Michael should be the guardian and protector of the elect people, he
should exercise immense power, and he alone without the slightest doubt
should be sufficient for their protection. Christ confirms the same
assertion, as we just; now saw, in the 10th chapter of John. He says all
his elect were given him by his father, and none of them should perish,
because his father was greater than all; no one, says he, shall pluck my
sheep out of my hand. My father, who gave them me, is greater than all;
meaning, God possesses infinite power, and displays it for the safety of
those whom he has chosen before the creation of the world, and he has
committed it to me, or has deposited it in my hands. We now perceive the
reason of this epithet, which designates *Michael as the great prince*
For in consequence of the magnitude of the contest, we ought to enjoy
the offer of insuperable strength, to enable us to attain tranquillity
in the midst of the greatest commotions. It was in no degree superfluous
for the angel to predict such great calamities as impending over the
Church, and in the present day the, same expressions are most useful to
us. We perceive then how the Jews imagined a state of happiness under
Christ, and the same error was adopted by the Apostles, who, when Christ
discoursed on the destruction of the temple and the; city, thought the
end of the world was at hand, and this they connected with their own
glory and triumph. (<span id="vii.iii-p2.2"></span>[Mt
24:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#003)<span id="vii.iii-p2.2"></span>.)
The Prophet then is here instructed by the angel how God should direct
the course of his Church when he should manifest to them his
only-begotten Son. Still the severity of distress awaited all the pious;
as if he had said, The time of your triumph is not yet arrived; you must
still continue your warfare, which will prove both laborious and
harassing. The condition of the new people is here compared with that of
the ancient one, who suffered many perils and afflictions at God’s
hands. The angel therefore says, even although the faithful suffered
very severely under the law and the prophets, yet a more oppressive
season was at hand, during which God would treat his Church far more
strictly than before, and submit it to far more excruciating trials.
This is the meaning of the passage, *a season full of afflictions should
arise, such as the nations had never seen since they began to exist.*
This may refer to the creation of the world, and if we refer it to the
people themselves, the exposition will prove correct; for although the
Church had in former periods been wretched, yet after the appearance of
Christ, it should suffer far more calamities than before. We remember
the language of the Psalmist: The impious have often opposed me from my
youth; they have drawn the plough across my back. (<span
id="vii.iii-p2.3"></span>[Ps
129:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa129.htm#001)<span
id="vii.iii-p2.3"></span>.) Through all ages then God subjected his
Church to really evils and disasters. But a comparison is here
instituted between two different states of the Church, and the angel
shews how after Christ’s appearance it should be far from either
quietness or happiness. As it should be oppressed with heavier
afflictions, it is not surprising that the fathers should wish us to be
conformed to the image of his only-begotten Son. (<span
id="vii.iii-p2.4"></span>[Ro 8:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#029)<span
id="vii.iii-p2.4"></span>.) Since the period of Christ’s resurrection,
even if a more harassing warfare awaits us, we ought to bear it with
great equanimity, because the glory of heaven is placed before our eyes
far more clearly than it was before theirs.

<span id="vii.iii-p3"></span>At length he adds, *At that time thy people
shall be preserved.* By this expression the angel points out to us the
great importance of the protection of Michael: He promises certain
salvation to his elect people, as if he had said, although the Church
should be exposed to the greatest dangers, yet with respect to God
himself, it should always be safe and victorious in all contests,
because Michael should be superior to every enemy. The angel then, in
thus exhorting the faithful to bear their cross, shews how free they
should be from all doubt as to the event, and the absolute certainty of
their victory. Although at first sight this prophecy might inspire us
with fear and dismay, yet this comfort ought to be sufficient for us:
“We shall be conquerors amidst fire and sword, and amidst many deaths we
are sure of life.” As perfect safety is here set before us, we ought to
feel secure, and to enter with alacrity into every engagement. We are in
truth obliged to fight, but Christ has conquered for us, as he says
himself, Trust in me, I have overcome the world. (<span
id="vii.iii-p3.1"></span>[Joh
16:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#033)<span id="vii.iii-p3.1"></span>.)
But the angel restricts what he had said generally by way of correction.
Many professed to belong to the people of God, and every one naturally
sprung from the stock of Israel boasted of being the, offspring of
divine seed. As all wished promiscuously to belong to God’s people, the
angel restricts his expression by a limiting phrase, *all people,* says
he, *who were found written in the book* This clause does not mean all
Israel after “the flesh,” (<span id="vii.iii-p3.2"></span>[Ro
9:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#006)<span id="vii.iii-p3.2"></span>,)
but such as God esteems to be real Israelites according to gratuitous
election alone. He here distinguishes between the carnal and spiritual
children of Abraham, between the outward Church and that inward and true
community which the Almighty approves. Upon what then does the
difference depend between those who boast of being Abraham’s children,
while they are rejected by God, and those who are really and truly his
sons? On the mere grace and favor of God. He declares his election when
he regenerates his elect by his Holy Spirit, and thus inscribes them
with a certain mark, while they prove the reality of this sonship by the
whole course of their lives, and confirm their own adoption. Meanwhile
we are compelled to go to the fountain at once; God alone by his
gratuitous election distinguishes the outward Church, which has nothing
but. the title, from the true Church, which can never either perish or
fall away. Thus we observe in how many passages of Scripture hypocrites
are rejected in the midst of their swelling pride, as they have nothing
in common with the sons of God but the external symbols of profession.

<span id="vii.iii-p4"></span>We ought to notice this restriction, which
assures us of the utter uselessness of outward pomp, and of the
unprofitable nature of even a high station in the outward Church, unless
we are truly among God’s people. This is expressed fully in <span
id="vii.iii-p4.1"></span>[Psalm
15](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#000)<span id="vii.iii-p4.1"></span> and
24, while <span id="vii.iii-p4.2"></span>[Psalm
73](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#000)<span id="vii.iii-p4.2"></span>
confirms the same sentiments. How good is God to Israel, especially to
the upright in heart! In these passages of the Psalms the cause is not
stated to be the secret election of God, but the outward testimony of
the conduct; and this although inferior in degree, is not contrary to
the first cause which produces it. This has its proper place, but God’s
election is always superior. The word *book* refers to that eternal
counsel of God, whereby he *elected* us and adopted us as his sons
before the foundation of the world, as we read in the first chapter of
Ephesians, (<span id="vii.iii-p4.3"></span>[Eph
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#004)<span id="vii.iii-p4.3"></span>.)
In the same sense Ezekiel inveighs against the false prophets who
deceived the people of Israel, (<span id="vii.iii-p4.4"></span>[Eze
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#009)<span id="vii.iii-p4.4"></span>.)
My hand, says God, shall be upon those prophets who deceive my people:
they shall not therefore be in the secret assembly of my people, nor
shall they be found in the roll of the house of Israel. The word
signifying to write is used here, — they shall not be written in the
enrollment of the house of Israel. The word book is here used in the
same sense and yet we need not adopt the gross idea, that the Almighty
has any need of a book. His book is that eternal counsel which
predestinates us to himself, and elects us to the hope of eternal
salvation. We now understand the full sense of this instruction, as the
Church shall remain in safety amidst many deaths, and even in the last
stage of despair it shall escape through the mercy and help of God. We
must also remember this definition of a church, because many boast of
being God’s sons, who are complete strangers to him. This leads us to
consider the subject of election, as our salvation flows from that
fountain. Our calling, which is his outward testimony to it, follows
that gratuitous adoption which is hidden within himself; and thus God
when regenerating us by his Spirit, inscribes upon us his marks and
signs, whence he is able to acknowledge us as his real children. It
follows, —

<span id="vii.iv"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p1"></span><span id="vii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#002)<span id="vii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p2"></span>**2.** And many of them that sleep in the
dust of the earth shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to
shame *and* everlasting contempt.

<span id="vii.iv-p3"></span>**2.** Et multi ex dormientibus in terra
pulvere, evigilabunt hi in vitam seculi, *hoc est, perpetuo,* hi vero in
opprobium et in abominationem perpetuam.

<span id="vii.iv-p4"></span> 

<span id="vii.iv-p5"></span><span id="vii.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p6"></span>As to the translation of the first words, it
is literally, *many who sleep in the earth of dust*, or *who are in
earth and dust*; for the genitive is used as an epithet, though it may
be read as if in opposition with the former word sleep, meaning those
who are reduced to earth and dust.

<span id="vii.iv-p7"></span>The angel seems here to mark a transition
from the commencement of the preaching of the gospel, to the final day
of the resurrection, without sufficient occasion for it. For why does he
pass over the intermediate time during which many events might be the
subject of prophecy? He unites these two subjects very fitly and
properly, connecting the salvation of the Church with the final
resurrection and with the second coming of Christ. Wheresoever we may
look around us, we never meet with any source of salvation on earth. The
angel announces the salvation of all the elect. They are most miserably
oppressed on all sides, and wherever they turn their eyes, they perceive
nothing but confusion. Hence the hope of the promised salvation could
not be conceived by man before the elect raise their minds to the second
coming of Christ. It is just as if the angel had said, God will be the
constant preserver of his Church, even unto the end; but the manner in
which he will preserve it must not be taken in a carnal sense, as the
Church will be like a dead body until it shall rise again. We here
perceive the angel teaching the same truth as Paul delivers in other
words, namely, we are dead, and our life is hidden with Christ; it shall
then be made manifest when he shall appear in the heavens. (<span
id="vii.iv-p7.1"></span>[Col 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#003)<span
id="vii.iv-p7.1"></span>.) We must hold this first of all, God is
sufficiently powerful to defend us, and we need not hesitate in feeling
ourselves safe under his hand and protection. Meanwhile it is necessary
to add this second point; as long as we fix our eyes only on this
present state of things, and dwell upon what the world offers us, we
shall always be like the dead. And why so? Our life ought to be hid with
Christ in God. Our salvation is secure, but we still hope for it, as
Paul says in another passage. (<span id="vii.iv-p7.2"></span>[Rom.
8:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#023),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#024)<span id="vii.iv-p7.2"></span>.)
What is hoped for is not seen, says he. This shews us how completely
seasonable is the transition from this doctrine respecting God’s elect
to the last advent of Christ. This then is enough with *respect* to the
context. The word *many* seems here clearly put for all, and this is not
to be considered as at all absurd, for the angel does not use the word
in contrast with all or few, but only with one. Some of the Jews strain
this expression to mean the restoration of the Church in this world
under themselves, which is perfectly frivolous. In this case the
following language would not be correct, — -*Some shall rise to life,
and others to disgrace and contempt* Hence if this concerned none but
the Church of God, certainly none would rise to disgrace and
condemnation. This shews the angel to be treating of the last
resurrection, which is common to all, and allows of no exceptions. I
have lately explained why he calls our attention to the advent of
Christ. Since all flyings in the world will be constantly confused, our
minds must necessarily be raised upwards, and gain the victory over what
we observe with our eyes, and comprehend with our outward senses.

<span id="vii.iv-p8"></span>*Those who sleep in the earth and the dust;*
meaning, wherever the earth and dust exist, nevertheless they shall
rise, implying the hope of a resurrection not founded on natural causes,
but depending upon the inestimable power of God, which surpasses all our
senses. Hence, although the elect as well as the wicked shall be reduced
to earth and dust, this shall by no means form an obstacle to God’s
raising them up again. He uses *earth and dust* In my judgment <span
id="vii.iv-p8.1"></span>תמדא, *admeth,* “of the earth,” is the genus,
and <span id="vii.iv-p8.2"></span>רפע, *gnepher,* “dust,” is the
species, meaning, although they are only putrid carcasses, yet they
shall be reduced to dust, which is minute particles of earth. God, then,
is endued with sufficient power to call forth the dead to newness of
life. This passage is worthy of especial notice, because the prophets do
not contain any clearer testimony than this to the last resurrection,
particularly as the angel distinctly asserts the future rising again of
both the righteous and the wicked. Eternity is here opposed to those
temporal miseries to which we are now subjected. Here we may notice the
admonition of Paul, that those momentary afflictions by which God tries
us, cannot be compared with that eternal glory which never shall cease.
(<span id="vii.iv-p8.3"></span>[Ro
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#018)<span id="vii.iv-p8.3"></span>.)
This, therefore, is the reason why the angel so clearly expresses, that
eternal life awaits the elect, and eternal disgrace and condemnation
will be the lot of the ungodly. He afterwards subjoins, —

<span id="vii.v"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p1"></span><span id="vii.v-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#003)<span id="vii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p2"></span>**3.** And they that be wise shall shine as
the brightness of the firmament; and they that turn many to
righteousness as the stars for ever and ever.

<span id="vii.v-p3"></span>**3.** Et prudentes fulgebunt quasi fulgor
expansionis,  <span id="fr_193"></span>[194](#fn_193) et qui justificant
multos,  <span id="fr_194"></span>[195](#fn_194) sicut stellae in
seculum et seculum, *id est, in perpetuum.*

<span id="vii.v-p6"></span> 

<span id="vii.v-p7"></span><span id="vii.v-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p8"></span>The word “prudent” means endued with
intellect. Some take it transitively, and in this passage their opinion
is probably correct, because the office of justifying will soon be
assigned to these prudent ones. But the former sense suits chapter 11
better, and in verse 10 it will be put absolutely. Hence it means those
who are endued with understanding. The angel here confirms what I have
lately expressed concerning the final resurrection, and shews how we
shall enjoy its fruits, because eternal glory is laid up for us in
heaven. We ought not to complain of being treated unworthily, whenever
we seem to suffer harshness at God’s hands, because we ought to be
satisfied with the glory of heaven, and with the perpetual existence of
that life which has been promised to us. He says then, *the teachers,*
or those who excel in understanding, *shall shine forth as the light of
heaven* If the word “teachers” is thought preferable, there will be a
figure of speech, a part being put for the whole, and, therefore, I
follow the usual explanation. He applies the phrase, “endued with
understanding,” to those who do not depart from the true and pure
knowledge of God, as will be afterwards explained more fully. For the
angel contrasts the profane who proudly and contemptuously rage against
God, and the faithful whose whole wisdom is to submit themselves to God,
and to worship him with the purest affection of their minds. We shall
say more on this subject to-morrow. But he now says, those who retained
sincere piety should be like *the light of the firmament;* meaning, they
shall be heirs of the kingdom of heaven, where they shall enjoy that
glory which surpasses all the splendor of the world. No doubt, the angel
here uses figures to explain what is incomprehensible, implying, nothing
can possibly be found in the world which answers to the glory of the
elect people.

<span id="vii.v-p9"></span>*And those who shall justify many* shall be
*like stars,* says he. He repeats the same thing in other words, and now
speaks of *stars,* having formerly used the phrase, *the brightness of
the firmament,* in the same sense; and instead of “those who are endued
with understanding,” he says, *those who shall have justified* Without
doubt, the angel here especially denotes the teachers of the truth, but
in my opinion he embraces also all the pious worshippers of God. No one
of God’s children ought to confine their attention privately to
themselves, but as far as possible, every one ought to interest himself
in the welfare of his brethren. God has deposited the teaching of his
salvation with us, not for the purpose of our privately keeping it to
ourselves, but of our pointing out the way of salvation to all mankind.
This, therefore, is the common duty of the children of God, — to promote
the salvation of their brethren. By this word “justifying,” the angel
means, not that it is in the power of one man to justify another, but
the property of God is here transferred to his ministers. Meanwhile, we
are as clearly justified by any teaching which brings faith within our
reach, as we are justified by the faith which springs from the teaching.
Why is our justification ever ascribed to faith? Because our faith
directs us to Christ in whom is the complete perfection of
justification, and thus our justification may be ascribed equally to the
faith taught and the doctrine which teaches it. And those who bring
before us this teaching are the ministers of our justification. The
assertion of the angel, in other words, is this, — The sons of God, who
being devoted entirely to God and ruled by the spirit of prudence, point
out the way of life to others, shall not only be saved themselves, but
shall possess surpassing glory far beyond anything which exists in this
world. This is the complete explanation. Hence, we gather the nature of
true prudence to consist in submitting ourselves to God in simple
teachableness*,* and in manifesting the additional quality of carefully
promoting the salvation of our brethren. The effect of this our labor
ought to increase our courage and alacrity. For how great is the honor
conferred upon us by our Heavenly Father, when he wishes us to be the
ministers of his righteousness? As James says, We preserve those about
to perish if we bring them back into the right way. (<span
id="vii.v-p9.1"></span>[Jas 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#019)<span
id="vii.v-p9.1"></span>.) James calls us preservers, just as the angel
calls us justifiers; neither the angel nor the apostle wish to detract
from the glory of God, but by these forms of speech the Spirit
represents us as ministers of justification and salvation, when we unite
in the same bonds with ourselves all those who have need of our
assistance and exertions. It follows next: —

<span id="vii.vi"></span>

<span id="vii.vi-p1"></span><span id="vii.vi-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#004)<span id="vii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vi-p2"></span>**4.** But thou, O Daniel, shut up the
words, and seal the book, *even* to the time of the end: many shall run
to and fro, and knowledge shall be increased.

<span id="vii.vi-p3"></span>**4.** Et tu Daniel, claude, *vel, obsera*
verba, *sermones*, et obsigna librum ad tempus finis; discurrent multi,
et augebitur scientia.

<span id="vii.vi-p4"></span> 

<span id="vii.vi-p5"></span><span id="vii.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vi-p6"></span>We have already explained “the time of the
end” is a period previously fixed on by God, and settled by his own
counsel. The following word refers to tracing out and running to and
fro, but not necessarily in a bad sense, while it also signifies to
investigate. Interpreters explain the angel’s meaning, as if many should
be unworthy to receive this prophecy from Daniel; and hence it was to be
closed up and only enigmatically delivered to a few, because scarcely
one in a hundred would attend to what he had delivered. I think the Holy
Spirit has a different intention here. The angel’s advice is this, There
is no reason why this prophecy should cause despondency or dismay,
because few should receive it. Although it should be universally
despised and ridiculed, *nevertheless shut it up* like a precious
treasure. Isaiah has a passage nearly similar, (<span
id="vii.vi-p6.1"></span>[Isa 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#016)<span
id="vii.vi-p6.1"></span>,) Close up nay law, seal the testimony among my
disciples. Isaiah’s spirit would be broken when he perceived himself an
object of universal derision, and God’s sacred oracles trodden under
foot; thus he might lose all courage and decline the office of a
teacher. But God affords him comfort: Close up, says he, nay law among
my disciples, and do not notice this profane crew; although they all
despise thy teaching, do not suppose thy voice deserves their ridicule;
close it up, close it up among my disciples, says he; how few soever may
embrace thy teaching, yet let it remain sacred and laid up in the hearts
of the pious. The Prophet afterwards says, Behold nay children with me.
Here he boasts in his contentment with very few, and thus triumphs over
the impious and insolent multitude. Thus at the present time in the
Papacy and throughout the whole world, impiety prevails so extensively
that there is scarcely a single corner in which the majority agree in
true obedience to God. As God foresaw how very few would embrace this
prophecy with becoming reverence, the angel desired to animate the
Prophet, lest he should grow weary, and esteem this prophecy as of
little value, in consequence of its failing to command the applause of
the whole world.

<span id="vii.vi-p7"></span>*Close up the book,* then but what does the
phrase imply? Not to hide it from all men, but to satisfy the Prophet
when he saw but few reverently embracing the teaching so plainly laid
before him by the angel. This is not properly a command; the angel
simply tells Daniel to hide or seal up this book and these words,
offering him at the same time much consolation. If all men despise thy
doctrine, and reject what thou dost set before them, — if the majority
pass it by contemptuously, *shut it up and seal it,* not treating it as
valueless, but preserving it as a treasure. I deposit it with time, do
thou lay it up among my disciples. *Thou, Daniel;* here the Prophet’s
name is mentioned. If thou thinkest thyself to be alone, yet companions
shall be afterwards added to thee who shall treat this prophecy with
true piety. *Shut up*, then, *and seal it, even, till the time of the
end;* for God will prove by the event that he has not spoken in vain,
and experience will shew me to have been sent by him, as every
occurrence has been previously predicted. It now follows, —

<span id="vii.vi-p8"></span>*Many shall investigate, and knowledge shall
increase.* Some writers take this second clause in a contrary sense, as
if many erratic spirits should run about with vague speculations, and
wander from the truth. But this is too forced. I do not hesitate to
suppose the angel to promise the arrival of a period when God should
collect many disciples to himself, although at the beginning they should
be very few and insignificant. *Many,* then, *shall investigate;*
meaning, though they are most careless and slothful, while boasting
themselves God’s people, yet God should gather to himself a great
multitude from other quarters. Small indeed and insignificant is the
apparent number of the faithful who care for the truth of God, and who
shew any eagerness to learn it, but let not this scantiness move thee.
The sons of God shall soon become increased. *Many shall investigate,
and knowledge shall increase* This prophecy shall not always be buried
in obscurity; the Lord will at length cause many to embrace it to their
own salvation. This event really came to pass. Before Christ’s coming,
this doctrine was not esteemed according to its value. The extreme
ignorance and grossness of the people is notorious, while their religion
was nearly overthrown till God afterwards increased his Church. And at
the present time any one who will carefully consider this prediction
will experience its utility. This can scarcely be fully expressed in
words; for, unless this prophecy had been preserved and laid up like an
inestimable treasure, much of our faith would have passed away. This
divine assistance affords us strength, and enables us to overcome all
the attacks of the world and of the devil.

<span id="vii.vii"></span>

<span id="vii.vii-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="vii.vii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, as we have to engage
in battle through the whole course of our lives, and our strength is
liable to fail in various ways, that we may be supported by thy power
and thus persevere unto the end. May we never grow weary, but learn to
overcome the whole world, and to look forward to that happy eternity to
which thou invitest us. May we never hesitate while Christ thy Son
fights for us, in whose hand and power our victory is placed, and may he
ever admit us into alliance with himself in that conquest which he has
procured for us, until at length he shall gather us at the last day into
the enjoyment of that triumph in which he has gone before us. — Amen.

<span id="vii.viii"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p1"></span>Lecture Sixty-Sixth.

<span id="vii.ix"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p1"></span><span id="vii.ix-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
12:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#005)<span id="vii.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p2"></span>**5.** Then I Daniel looked, and, behold,
there stood other two, the one on this side of the bank of the river,
and the other on that side of the bank of the river.

<span id="vii.ix-p3"></span>**5.** Et aspexi ego Daniel, et ecce duo
alii stantes, unus hac ad ripam fluminis, et unus, *id est, alter,*
illac ad ripam fluminis.  <span id="fr_195"></span>[196](#fn_195)

<span id="vii.ix-p5"></span>**6.** And *one* said to the man clothed in
linen, which *was* upon the waters of the river, How long *shall it be
to* the end of these wonders?

<span id="vii.ix-p6"></span>**6.** Et dixit ad virum qui indutus erat
lineis, *vestibus subaudiendum est,* qui erat supra aquas fluminis,
 <span id="fr_196"></span>[197](#fn_196) Quousque finis mirabilium?

<span id="vii.ix-p8"></span>**7.** And I heard the man clothed in linen,
which *was* upon the waters of the river, when he held up his right hand
and his left hand unto heaven, and swear by him that liveth for ever
that *it shall be* for a time, times, and an half; and when he shall
have accomplished to scatter the power of the holy people, all these
*things* shall be finished.

<span id="vii.ix-p9"></span>**7.** Et audivi virum indutum lineis, qui
erat supra aquas fluvii, et sustulit dextram suam, et sinistram suam
versus coelos, et juravit per viventem in aeternum, quod ad tempus
praefixum, tempora praefixa, et dimidium: et ut consumpserint, *vel,
compleverint,* dispersionem, *vel, contritionem,* manus populi sancti,
complebuntur omnia haec.

<span id="vii.ix-p10"></span> 

<span id="vii.ix-p11"></span><span id="vii.ix-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p12"></span>Daniel here relates his vision of other
angels standing on each bank of the river. He alludes to the Tigris
which he had previously mentioned, as the vision was offered to him
there. He says, *One asked the other, How long will it be to the end?*
He who was asked, swore, with hands upraised to heaven, by the living
God, that no single prediction was in vain, since the truth would be
evident in its own period, and men must wait for *the time, times, and
half a time* This is a summary of the passage. When he says *he beheld,*
he commends to our notice the certainty of the vision. Unless he had
been attentive, and had applied his mind seriously to these mysteries,
his narrative would have failed to produce confidence. But as his mind
was completely calm, and he was desirous of receiving the instruction
conveyed by God through his angel, not the slightest doubt can be thrown
upon what he so faithfully delivers to us. He speaks of angels as if
they were men, for the reason previously assigned. He does not imply
their being really men, but uses that expression in consequence of their
outward appearance, for as they had a human face, they were called men.
I do not assert their bodies to be merely imaginary, nor will I say
Daniel saw only special forms and human shapes, for God might have
clothed his angels in real bodies for the time, and yet they would not
on that account become men. For Christ took upon Him our flesh and was
truly man, while He was God manifest in flesh. (<span
id="vii.ix-p12.1"></span>[1Ti
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#016)<span id="vii.ix-p12.1"></span>.)
But this is not true of angels, who received only a temporary body while
performing the duties of their office There is no doubt of this
assertion, — the name of “men” cannot properly belong to angels, but it
suits yew well the human form or likeness which they sometimes wore.

<span id="vii.ix-p13"></span>It does not surprise us to find one angel
questioning another. When Paul is extolling the mystery of the calling
of the Gentiles, which had been hidden from the preceding ages, he adds,
— it was an object of wonder to angels, as they had never hoped for it,
and so it had not been revealed to them. (<span
id="vii.ix-p13.1"></span>[Eph
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#010)<span id="vii.ix-p13.1"></span>.)
So wonderfully does God work in his Church, that he causes admiration
among the angels in heaven, by leaving many things unknown to them, as
Christ testifies concerning the last day. (<span
id="vii.ix-p13.2"></span>[Mt
24:36](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#036)<span id="vii.ix-p13.2"></span>.)
This is the reason why the angel uses the interrogation, *How long is it
to the end of these wonders?* God doubtless here urged the angel to
inquire into an event veiled in obscurity, for the purpose of waking up
our attention. Absurd indeed would it be for us to pass by these things
with inattention, when angels themselves display such anxiety by their
questions, while they perceive traces of the secret power of God. Unless
we are remarkably stupid, this doubt of the angel ought to stir us up to
greater *diligence* and attention. This also is the force of the word
<span id="vii.ix-p13.3"></span>תואלפ *phlaoth,* “wonderful things;” for
the angel calls everything which he did not understand, *wonderful.* If
the comparison be allowable, how great would be our ingratitude not to
give our whole attention to the consideration of these mysteries which
angels are compelled to confess to be beyond their grasp! The angel, as
if he were astonished, calls those things “wonderful” which were hidden
not only from the minds of men, but also from himself and his
companions. *But the other answers;* whence some difference, although
not a perpetual one, exists between the angels. The philosophy of
Dionysius ought not to be admitted here, who speculates too cunningly,
or rather too profanely, when treating the order of angels. But I only
state the existence of some difference, because God assigns various
duties to certain angels, and he dispenses to each a certain measure of
grace and revelation, according to his pleasure. We know there is but
one teacher of men and angels, — the Son of God, who is his eternal
wisdom and truth. This passage may be referred to Christ, but as I
cannot make any positive assertion, I am content with the simple
statement already made. He states *this angel’s clothing to have been
linen garments,* implying splendor. Linen garments were then of great
value; hence an ornament and decoration is here applied to angels, as
God separates them from the common herd of men. Thus Daniel would the
more easily comprehend these persons not to be earth-born mortals, but
angels clad by God for a short period in the human form.

<span id="vii.ix-p14"></span><span id="vii.ix-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p15"></span>He says, *This angel raised up his hands to
heaven* Those who consider this action as a symbol of power are
mistaken, for without doubt the Prophet intended to manifest the usual
method of swearing. They usually raised the right hand, according to the
testimony of numerous passages of Scripture. I have raised my hand
towards God. (<span id="vii.ix-p15.1"></span>[Ge
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#022)<span id="vii.ix-p15.1"></span>.)
Here the angel raises both his hands, wishing by this action to express
the importance of the subject. Thus to raise both hands, as if doubling
the oath, is stronger than raising the right hand after the ordinary
manner. We must consider then the use of both hands as intended to
confirm the oath, as the subject was one of great importance. It
follows, *for a time, times, and half a time* I have stated my objection
to the opinion of those who think one year, and two, and a half, to be
here intended. I confess the passage ought to be understood of that
pollution of the Temple which the Prophet has already treated. History
clearly assures us that the Temple was not cleansed till the close of
the third year, and seven or eight months afterwards. That explanation
may suit its own passage, but with reference to the doctrine here
delivered, its meaning is very simple, *time* means a long period,
*times,* a longer period, and *a half* means the end or closing period.
The sum of the whole is this’ many years must elapse before God fulfills
what his Prophet had declared. *Time* therefore signifies a long period;
*times,* double this period; as if he had said, While the sons of God
are kept in suspense so long without obtaining an answer to their
petitions, the time will be prolonged, nay, even doubled. We see then
that a time does not mean precisely one year, nor do times signify two
years, but an indefinite period. With respect to the *half of a time,*
this is added for the comfort of the pious, to prevent their sinking
under the delay, because God does not accomplish their desire. Thus they
rest patiently until this “time” as well as “the times” pass away.
Besides, the issue is set before them by the words *half a time,* to
prevent them from despairing through excessive weariness. I admit the
allusion to years, but the words are not to be understood literally but
metaphorically, signifying, as I have already stated, an indefinite
period.

<span id="vii.ix-p16"></span>He afterwards adds, *And in the complement*
or consumption of *the dispersion* or contrition *of the hand of God’s
people, all these things shall be fulfilled:* first, the time must pass
away, next, the times must be added, then the half time must follow; all
these things must arrive at their accomplishment, and when they are
thoroughly completed, says he, then will *come the contrition of the
hand of the holy people* The angel again proclaims how the Church of God
should be oppressed by many calamities; and thus the whole of this verse
contains an exhortation to endurance, to prevent the faithful from
becoming utterly hopeless, and completely losing their spirits, in
consequence of their suffering severe and multiplied cares, not for a
few months merely, but for a lengthened duration. He uses this phrase,
*the wearing down of the hand of the holy people* — if you please to
read it so — metaphorically, meaning, the holy people should be deprived
of strength, just as if their hands were completely worn down. Whatever
agility men possess is usually shewn in the hands, and they were given
to men by God for the special purpose of being extended to all parts of
the body, and for executing the ordinary operations of mankind. This
metaphor is now very suitable, as the people were so mutilated, as to be
deprived of all strength and rigor. This is a slight sketch of the
meaning of the clause.

<span id="vii.ix-p17"></span>If we read “dispersion” according to the
common signification, it will suit very well, since the hand of the holy
people should be dispersed; meaning, the Church should be a stranger in
the world, and be dispersed throughout it. This was continually
fulfilled from that day to the present. How sad is the dispersion of the
Church in these days! God indeed defends it by His power, but this is
beyond human expectation For how does the body of the Church now appear
to us? how has it appeared throughout all ages? surely it has ever been
torn in pieces and dispersed. Hence the angel’s prediction is not in
vain, if we adopt the interpretation — the hand of the holy people
should be dispersed — but yet the end should be prosperous, as he had
previously announced, when treating of its resurrection and final
salvation. It now follows:

<span id="vii.x"></span>

<span id="vii.x-p1"></span><span id="vii.x-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#008)<span id="vii.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.x-p2"></span>**8.** And I heard, but I understood not:
then said I, O my Lord, what *shall be* the end of these *things?*

<span id="vii.x-p3"></span>**8.** Et ego audivi, et non intellexi: et
dixi, Domine mi, quod postremum horum?  <span
id="fr_197"></span>[198](#fn_197)

<span id="vii.x-p5"></span> 

<span id="vii.x-p6"></span><span id="vii.x-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.x-p7"></span>Now Daniel begins to ask questions in
accordance with the angel’s example. He had first heard one angel
inquiring of the other; he next summons up courage, and becomes desirous
of information, and asks what should be the end or issue? He says, *he
heard without understanding* By the word “hearing,” he bears witness to
the absence of ignorance, slothfulness, or contempt. Many depart without
any perception of a subject, although it may be very well explained,
because they were not attentive to it. But here the Prophet asserts that
he heard; implying, it would be no fault of his diligence if he did not
understand, because he was desirous of learning, and had exerted all his
powers, as we formerly intimated, and yet he confesses *he did not
understand* Daniel does not mean to profess utter stupidity, but
restricts his ignorance to the subject of this interrogation. Of what
then was Daniel ignorant? Of the final issue. He could not attain unto
the meaning of these predictions, which were so extremely obscure, and
this was needful to their full and thorough comprehension. It is quite
clear that God never utters his word without expecting fruit; as it is
said in Isaiah, I have not spoken unintelligibly, nor have I said to the
seed of Jacob, seek ye me in vain. (<span id="vii.x-p7.1"></span>[Isa
45:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#019)<span id="vii.x-p7.1"></span>.)
God was unwilling to leave his Prophet in this perplexity of hearing
without understanding, but we are aware of distinct degrees of
proficiency in the school of God. Again, sufficient revelation was
notoriously conferred upon the prophets for the discharge of their
office, and yet none of them ever perfectly understood the predictions
they delivered. We know, too, what Peter says, They ministered more for
our times than for their own. (<span id="vii.x-p7.2"></span>[1Pe
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#012)<span id="vii.x-p7.2"></span>.)
They were by no means useless to their own age, but when our age is
compared with theirs, certainly the instruction and discipline of the
prophets is more useful to us, and produces richer and riper fruit in
our age than in theirs. We are not surprised, then, at Daniel confessing
*he did not understand,* so long as we restrict the words to this single
instance. It now follows: —

<span id="vii.xi"></span>

<span id="vii.xi-p1"></span><span id="vii.xi-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
12:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#009)<span id="vii.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xi-p2"></span>**9.** And he said, Go thy way, Daniel: for
the words *are* closed up and sealed till the time of the end.

<span id="vii.xi-p3"></span>**9.** Et dixit, Vade Daniel, quia clausi
sunt, et obsignati sermones ad tempus finis.  <span
id="fr_198"></span>[199](#fn_198)

<span id="vii.xi-p5"></span> 

<span id="vii.xi-p6"></span><span id="vii.xi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xi-p7"></span>Although Daniel was not induced by any
foolish curiosity to inquire of the angel the issue of these wonderful
events, yet he did not obtain his request. God wished some of his
predictions to be partially understood, and the rest to remain concealed
until the full period of the complete revelation should arrive. This is
the reason why the angel did not reply to Daniel. The wish in truth was
pious, and, as we have previously stated, it did not contain anything
unlawful; but God, knowing what was good for him, did not grant his
request. He is dismissed by the angel, *because the words were shut up
and sealed* The angel uses this expression in a sense different from the
former one. For he ordered Daniel to close and seal the words like
precious treasures, as they would be set at naught by many disbelievers,
and by almost the whole people. Here then, he says*, the words were
closed up and sealed,* as there was no fitting occasion for revealing
them. As if he had said, nothing has been predicted either vainly or
rashly, but the full blaze of light has not yet been thrown upon the
prediction: hence we must wait until the truth itself is proved by the
event, and thus the divine utterance of the angel is made manifest. This
is the summary. He then says, *until the time of the end* Some one might
possibly object; then for what purpose was this prediction delivered?
For Daniel himself, who was instructed by the angel, could not
thoroughly comprehend his own message, and the rest of the faithful,
although versed in these prophetic studies, felt themselves in a
labyrinth here. The answer is at hand, *until the time of the end;* and
we must also remember that neither Daniel nor the rest of the faithful
were deprived of all the advantage of this prophecy, for God explained
to them whatever was sufficient for the necessities of their own times.
I must pass over some points slightly, with the view of finishing today.
It follows —

<span id="vii.xii"></span>

<span id="vii.xii-p1"></span><span id="vii.xii-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#010)<span id="vii.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xii-p2"></span>**10.** Many shall be purified, and made
white, and tried; but the wicked shall do wickedly: and none of the
wicked shall understand; but the wise shall understand.

<span id="vii.xii-p3"></span>**10.** Mundabuntur, et dealbabuntur, et
fundentur multi,  <span id="fr_199"></span>[200](#fn_199) et impie se
gerent impii: et non intelligent omnes impii, et prudentes intelligent.

<span id="vii.xii-p5"></span> 

<span id="vii.xii-p6"></span><span id="vii.xii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xii-p7"></span>Again, the angel mentions the persecutions
which were at hand for the purpose of arming the faithful for the
approaching conflicts. We know from other sources how tender and weak
our minds naturally are, for as soon as any cause for fear arises,
before it comes to blows, we fall down lifeless through terror. As,
therefore, our natural imbecility is so great, we necessarily require
many stimulants to patience, and to urge us to contend with earnestness,
and never to yield to any temptations. This is the reason why the angel
announces the necessity for such multiplied purification’s, *to cleanse
them,* as wheat from chaff; *to whiten them,* as cloth by the fuller;
and *to melt them,* as metal to be separated from dross. First of all,
as I have previously explained, he admonishes Daniel and all the pious
of the future state of the Church, to lead them to prepare and gird
themselves for battle, and to gather up their unconquered fortitude,
since the condition of life set before them is that of forcing their way
through the midst of troubles. This is one point. Again, the angel shews
the practical utility of this kind of life, which might otherwise seem
too bitter. We naturally refuse the cross because we feel it contrary to
our disposition, while God shews the pious that nothing can be more
profitable to them than a variety of afflictions. This is a second
point. But afflictions by themselves might possibly consume us, and
hence we are cast into a furnace. Now, then, could we expect these
sufferings to promote our salvation, except God changed their nature in
some wonderful way, as their natural tendency is to effect our
destruction? But while we are *melted down, and whitened, and cleansed,*
we perceive how God consults for our welfare by pressing us with his
cross and causing us to submit to adversity. Now, thirdly, the angel
shews the insufficiency of one single act of cleansing, and our need of
many more. This is the object of this numerous heaping together of
words*, they shall be cleansed, and whitened, and melted down,* or
poured forth. He might have embraced the whole idea in a single word;
but, as through our whole lives God never ceases to test us in various
ways, the angel heaps together these three words to shew the faithful
their need of continual cleansing as long as they are clothed in flesh;
just as garments which are in daily use have need of continual washing.
However snowy a mantle may be, it becomes soiled immediately when used
for even a single day; requiring constant ablution to restore it to its
original purity. Thus we are brought in contact with the defilement’s of
sin; and as long as we are pilgrims in this world, we necessarily become
subject to constant pollution. And as the faithful also are infected
with the contagion of numerous iniquities, they require daily
purification’s hi different ways. We ought, then, diligently to notice
these three distinct processes.

<span id="vii.xii-p8"></span>The angel afterwards adds, *The impious
will act impiously, and will never understand anything; but the prudent
will be ever endued with intelligence* Here he wishes to fortify the
pious against a stumbling block in their way, when they see the profane
despisers of God exulting in every direction, and defying God to his
face. When the faithful see the world so full of the impious, they seem
to be indulging so freely in lust as if there were no God in heaven’
time they are naturally subject to grievous sorrow and distress. To
prevent this trial from agitating their minds, the angel announces how
*the impious should conduct themselves impiously;* implying, — there is
no reason why thou, O Daniel, or the rest of the righteous, should
depend upon the example of others; Satan will cunningly set before you
whatever obstacles may draw you into the contempt of God, and the abyss
of impiety, unless you are remarkably cautious; but let not the conduct
of the impious cause either you or the rest of the pious to stumble.
Howsoever they conduct themselves, do you stand invincible. He
afterwards assigns a reason for their behavior — *they understand
nothing,* they are perfectly blinded. But what is the source of this
blindness? Their being given over to a reprobate sense. If any one
should see a blind man fall, and should cast himself down after this
blind man, would he be excusable? Surely his blindness was the cause of
his perishing so miserably, but why does the other person destroy
himself willingly? Whenever we see the impious rushing furiously on to
their destruction, while God is admonishing them that their blindness
proceeds from Satan, and that they are given over to a reprobate mind,
are we not doubly mad if we willingly follow them? The cause then of
this impious behavior on the part of the wicked, is added with good
reason; namely, they understand nothing. Meanwhile, the faithful are
recalled to the true remedy, and the angel subjoins, *But the prudent
shall understand,* meaning they shall not permit themselves to be
implicated in the errors of those whom they see entirely devoted to
their own destruction. Lastly, the angel points out to us the true
remedy which will prevent Satan from drawing us off towards impiety, and
the impious from infecting us with their evil examples, if we earnestly
apply ourselves to the pursuit of heavenly doctrine. If, therefore, we
heartily desire to be taught by God and to become his true disciples,
the instruction which we derive from him will snatch us from
destruction. This is the true sense of the passage. It afterwards
follows, —

<span id="vii.xiii"></span>

<span id="vii.xiii-p1"></span><span id="vii.xiii-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
12:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#011)<span
id="vii.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xiii-p2"></span>**11.** And from the time *that* the daily
*sacrifice* shall be taken away, and the abomination that maketh
desolate set up, *there shall be* a thousand two hundred and ninety
days.

<span id="vii.xiii-p3"></span>**11.** Et a tempore quo ablatum fuerit
juge, *nempe sacrificium,* et posita fuerit abominatio obstupefaciens,
 <span id="fr_200"></span>[201](#fn_200) erunt dies mille ducenti et
nonaginta.

<span id="vii.xiii-p5"></span>**12.** Blessed *is* he that waiteth, and
cometh to the thousand three hundred and five and thirty days.

<span id="vii.xiii-p6"></span>**12.** Beatus qui expectaverit, et
attigerit usque ad dies mille trecentos et triginta quinque.

<span id="vii.xiii-p7"></span> 

<span id="vii.xiii-p8"></span><span id="vii.xiii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xiii-p9"></span>In consequence of the obscurity of this
passage it has been twisted in a variety of ways. At the end of the
ninth chapter I have shewn the impossibility of its referring to the
profanation of the Temple which occurred under the tyranny of Antiochus;
on this occasion the angel bears witness to such a complete destruction
of the Temple, as to leave no room for the hope of its repair and
restoration. Then the circumstances of the time convinces us of this.
For he then said, Christ shall confirm the covenant with many for one
week, and shall cause the sacrifices and oblation to cease. *Afterwards,
the abomination that stupifieth shall be added,* and desolation or
stupor, and then death will distill, says he, upon the astonished or
stupefied one. The angel, therefore, there treats of the perpetual
devastation of the Temple. So in this passage, without doubt;, he treats
of the period after the destruction of the Temple; there could be no
hope of restoration, as the law with all its ceremonies would then
arrive at its termination. With This view Christ quotes this passage in
<span id="vii.xiii-p9.1"></span>[Matthew
24](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#000)<span id="vii.xiii-p9.1"></span>,
while he admonishes his hearers diligently to attend to it. Let him who
reads, understand, says he. We have stated this prophecy to be obscure,
and hence it requires no ordinary degree of the closest attention. First
of all, we must hold this point; the time now treated by the angel
begins at the last destruction of the Temple. That devastation happened
as soon as the gospel began to be promulgated. God then deserted his
Temple, because it was only founded for a time, and was but a shadow,
until the Jews so completely violated the whole covenant that no
sanctity remained in either the Temple, the nation, or the land itself.
Some restrict this to those standards which Tiberius erected on the very
highest pinnacle of the Temple, and others to the statue of Caligula,
but I have already stated my view of these opinions as too forced. I
have no hesitation in referring this language of the angel to that
profanation of the Temple which happened after the manifestation of
Christ, when sacrifices ceased, and the shadows of the law were
abolished. *From the time,* therefore, *at which the sacrifice really
ceased to be offered;* this refers to the period at which Christ by his
advent should abolish the shadows of the law, thus making all offering
of sacrifices to God totally valueless. *From that time,* therefore.
Next, *from the time at which the stupefying abomination shall have been
set up* God’s wrath followed the profanation of the Temple. The Jews
never anticipated the final cessation of their ceremonies, and always
boasted in their peculiar external worship, and unless God had openly
demonstrated it before their eyes, they would never have renounced their
sacrifices and rites as mere shadowy representations. Hence Jerusalem
and their Temple were exposed to the vengeance of the Gentiles. This,
therefore, was the setting up of this stupefying abomination; it was a
clear testimony to the wrath of God, exhorting the Jews in their
confusion to boast no longer in their Temple and its holiness.

<span id="vii.xiii-p10"></span>*Therefore, from that period there shall
be 1290 days* These days make up three years and a half. I have no
hesitation in supposing the angel to speak metaphorically. As he
previously put one year, or two years, and half a year, for long
duration of time, and a happy issue, so he now puts 1290 *days.* And for
what reason? To shew us what must happen when anxieties and troubles
oppress us. If a man should fall sick, he will not say, Here I have
already been one month, but I have a year before me — he will not say,
Here I have been three days, but now I languish wretchedly for thirty or
sixty. The angel, then, purposely puts days for years, implying —
although that time may seem immeasurably prolonged, and may frighten us
by its duration, and completely prostrate the spirits of the pious, yet
it must be endured. The number of days then is 1290, yet there is no
reason why the sons of God should despair in consequence of this number,
because they ought always to return to this principle — if those
afflictions await us for a time and times, the half time will follow
afterwards.

<span id="vii.xiii-p11"></span>Then he adds*, Happy is he who shall have
waited and endured until the 1335 days.* In numerical calculations I am
no conjurer, and those who expound this passage with too great subtlety,
only trifle in their own speculations, and detract from the authority of
the prophecy. Some think the days should be understood as years, and
thus make the number of years 2600. The time which elapsed from this
prophecy to the advent of Christ was about 600 years. From this advent
2000 years remain, and they think this is the assigned period until the
end of the world, as the law also flourished about 2000 years from the
date of its promulgation to its fulfillment at Christ’s advent. Hence
they fix upon this sense. But they are quite wrong in separating the
1290 days from the 1335, for they clearly refer to the same period, with
a slight exception. It is as if the angel had said, although half the
time should be prorogued, yet the faithful ought constantly to persist
in the hope of deliverance. For he adds, about two months, or a month
and a half, or thereabouts. By half a time, we said, the issue was
pointed out, as Christ informs us in <span
id="vii.xiii-p11.1"></span>[Mt
24:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#022)<span
id="vii.xiii-p11.1"></span>. Unless those days had been shortened, no
flesh would have been safe. Reference is clearly made here to that
abbreviation of the time for the Church’s sake. But the angel now adds
forty-five days, which make a month and a half, implying — God will put
off the deliverance of his Church beyond six months, and yet we must be
strong and of good courage, and persevere in your watchfulness. God at
length will not disappoint you — he will succor you in all your woes,
and gather you to his blessed rest. Hence, the next clause of the
prophecy is this, —

<span id="vii.xiv"></span>

<span id="vii.xiv-p1"></span><span id="vii.xiv-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#013)<span id="vii.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xiv-p2"></span>**13.** But go thou thy way till the end
*be:* for thou shalt rest, and stand in thy lot at the end of the days.

<span id="vii.xiv-p3"></span>**13.** Et tu vade ad finem, et quiesces,
et stabis in sorte tua ad finem dierum.

<span id="vii.xiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="vii.xiv-p5"></span><span id="vii.xiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xiv-p6"></span>Here the angel repeats what he had said
before, the, full time of perfect light had not yet arrived, because God
wished to hold the minds of his people in suspense until the
manifestation of Christ. The angel, therefore, dismisses the Prophet,
and in commanding him to depart, says — Be content with thy lot, for God
wishes to put off the complete manifestation of this prophecy to another
time, which he himself knows to be the fitting one. He afterwards adds,
*And then shalt rest and shalt stand* Others translate it, *rest and
stand;* but the angel does not seem to me to command or order what he
wishes to be done, but to announce future events, as if he had said, —
Thou shalt rest, meaning, thou shalt die, and then thou shalt stand;
meaning, thy death shall not be complete destruction. For God shall
cause thee to stand in thy lot with the rest of the elect; *and that,
too, at the end of the days, in thy lot;* that is, after God has
sufficiently proved the patience of his people, and by long and
numerous, nay, infinite contests, has humbled his Church, and purged it,
until the end shall arrive*. At that final period thou shalt stand in
thine own lot,* although a time of repose must necessarily intervene.

<span id="vii.xv"></span>

<span id="vii.xv-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="vii.xv-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since thou proposest to
us no other end than that of constant warfare during our whole life, and
subjectest us to many cares until we arrive at the goal of this
temporary race-course: Grant, I pray thee, that we may never grow
fatigued. May we ever be armed and equipped for battle, and whatever the
trials by which thou dost prove us, may we never be found deficient. May
we always aspire towards heaven with upright souls, and strive with all
our endeavors to attain that blessed rest which is laid up for us in
heaven, in Jesus Christ our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="vii.xv-p3"></span>Praise be to God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_193"></span>[194](cc25006.htm#fr_193) <span
id="vii.v-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p4"></span> Of the heavens, meaning the firmament. —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_194"></span>[195](cc25006.htm#fr_194) <span
id="vii.v-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p5"></span> That is, those who justified many. —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_195"></span>[196](cc25006.htm#fr_195) <span
id="vii.ix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p4"></span> That is, one on one side, and the other on
the opposite. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_196"></span>[197](cc25006.htm#fr_196) <span
id="vii.ix-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p7"></span> That is, stood above the bank. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_197"></span>[198](cc25006.htm#fr_197) <span
id="vii.x-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vii.x-p4"></span> That is, what shall be the end of these
things? — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_198"></span>[199](cc25006.htm#fr_198) <span
id="vii.xi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xi-p4"></span> That is, the prefixed time, as we have
formerly explained it. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_199"></span>[200](cc25006.htm#fr_199) <span
id="vii.xii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xii-p4"></span> Or, “shall be melted by fire;” the word
means originally “to pour out,” but is here taken transitively for to
purify. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_200"></span>[201](cc25006.htm#fr_200) <span
id="vii.xiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xiii-p4"></span> We have translated it so before; some
translate, “of desolation.” The word signifies “to be desolate,” but the
other sense suits better here. — *Calvin.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Dissertations](cc25007)
