[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc25002)  [Next](cc25004.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 25: Daniel, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv"></span>

<span id="iv-p1"></span>CHAPTER 9

<span id="iv.i"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p1"></span><span id="iv.i-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
9:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#001.md)<span id="iv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p2"></span>**1.** In the first year of Darius the son of
Ahasuerus, of the seed of the Medes, which was made king over the realm
of the Chaldeans;

<span id="iv.i-p3"></span>**1.** Anno uno, id est, primo, Darii filii
Assueri e semine Medorum, qui rex fuit constitutus,  <span
id="fr_77"></span>[78](#fn_77.md) in regno Chaldaico.

<span id="iv.i-p5"></span>**2.** In the first year of his reign I Daniel
understood by books the number of the years, whereof the word of the
LORD came to Jeremiah the prophet, that he would accomplish seventy
years in the desolations of Jerusalem.

<span id="iv.i-p6"></span>**2.** In anno primo, inquam,  <span
id="fr_78"></span>[79](#fn_78.md) regni illius, ego Daniel intellexi in
libris numerum annorum, de quibus fuerat sermo Jehovae, ad ad Jeremiam
prophetam,  <span id="fr_79"></span>[80](#fn_79.md) ad implendum
desolationem Jerusalem annos septuaginta.

<span id="iv.i-p9"></span>**3.** And I set my face unto the Lord God, to
seek by prayer and supplications, with fasting, and sackcloth, and
ashes:

<span id="iv.i-p10"></span>**3.** Et levavi faciem meam ad Dominum Deum,
ut quaererem oratione et precationibus,  <span
id="fr_80"></span>[81](#fn_80.md) cum jejunio, sacco, et cinere.

<span id="iv.i-p12"></span> 

<span id="iv.i-p13"></span><span id="iv.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p14"></span>In this chapter Daniel will explain to us two
things. First, how very ardently he was accustomed to pray when the time
of redemption, specified by Jeremiah, drew nigh; and next, he will
relate the answer he received from God to his earnest entreaties. These
are the two divisions of this chapter. First, Daniel informs us how *he
prayed when he understood from books the number of the years* Whence we
gather, that God does not here promise his children earthly blessings,
but eternal life, and while they grow torpid and ease aside all care and
spiritual concern, he urges them the more earnestly to prayer. For what
benefit do God’s promises confer on us, unless we embrace them by faith?
But prayer is the chief exercise of faith. This observation of Daniel’s
is worthy of notice. *He was stimulated to prayer because he knew from
books the number of the years* But I will defer the rest till to-morrow.

<span id="iv.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="iv.ii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, as in these days thou
hast called us to a similar lot to that which the fathers under the Law
formerly experienced, and as thou didst confirm them in patience, and
arm them for constancy in warfare, and render them superior in all
conflicts with Satan and the world. Grant, I pray thee, that we at this
day, whom thou wishest to be joined to them, may become proficient in
thy word. May we look forward to bearing the cross throughout our whole
life. May we be prepared for the contest, and prefer miserable
affliction under the standard of the cross, to spending a secure and
luxurious life in our own enjoyments, and thus becoming deprived of that
hope of victory which thou hast promised us, and whose fruit thou hast
laid up for us in heaven, through Jesus Christ our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="iv.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p1"></span>Lecture Forty-Fourth.

<span id="iv.iii-p2"></span><span id="iv.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p3"></span>We began to say yesterday, that the faithful
do not so acquiesce in the promises of God as to grow torpid, and become
idle and slothful through the certainty of their persuasion that God
will perform his promises, but are rather stimulated to prayer. For the
true proof of faith is the assurance when we pray that God will really
perform what he has promised us. Daniel is here set before us as an
example of this. For when he understood the time of deliverance to be at
hand, this knowledge became a stimulus to him to pray more earnestly
than he was accustomed to do. It is clear then, as we have already seen,
that the Prophet was diligent and anxious in this particular. He did not
deviate from his usual habit when he saw the greatest risk of being put
to death; for while the king’s edict prohibited every one from praying
to God, he still directed his face towards Jerusalem. This was the holy
Prophet’s daily habit. But we shall perceive the extraordinary nature of
his present prayer, when he says, he prayed in dust arid ashes. From
this it appears, how God’s promise stirred him up to supplication, and
hence we gather what I have lately touched upon, — that faith is no
careless speculation, satisfied with simply assenting to God. For the
stupid seem to assent by outward hearing, while true faith is something
far more serious. When we really embrace the grace of God which he
offers us, he meets us and precedes us with his goodness, and thus we in
time respond to his offers, and bear witness to. our expectation of his
promises. Nothing, therefore, can be better for us, than to ask for what
he has promised. Thus in the prayers of the saints these feelings are
united, as they plead God’s promises wherein they entreat him. And we
cannot possibly exercise true confidence in prayer, except by resting
firmly on God’s word. An example of this kind is here presented to us in
Daniel’s case. When *he understood the number of the years to be at hand
of which God had spoken by Jeremiah,* he applied his mind to
supplication. It is worth while to notice what I have mentioned: —
Daniel is not here treating of his daily prayers. We may easily collect
from the whole of his life, how Daniel had exercised himself in prayer
before Jeremiah had spoken of the seventy years. Because he knew the
time of redemption to be at hand, he was then stimulated to more than
his usual entreaties. He expresses this, by saying, *in fasting, and
sackcloth, and ashes* For the saints were not accustomed to throw ashes
over their heads every day, nor yet to separate themselves for prayer,
by either fasting or putting on sackcloth. This action was rare, used
only when God gave some sign of his wrath, or when he held out some
scarce and singular benefit. Daniel’s present prayer was not; after his
usual habit, but when he put on sackcloth and sprinkled himself with
ashes, and endured fasting, he prostrated himself suppliantly before
God. He also pleaded for pardon, as we shall afterwards see, and begged
the performance of what the Almighty had surely promised.

<span id="iv.iii-p4"></span>From this we should learn two lessons.
First, we must perseveringly exercise our faith by prayers; next, when
God promises us anything remarkable and valuable, we ought then to be
the more stirred up, and to feel this expectation as a sharper stimulus.
With reference to the fasting, and sackcloth, and ashes. we may shortly
remark, how the holy fathers under the law were in the habit of adding
extraordinary ceremonies to their prayers, especially when they wished
to confess their sins to God, and to cast themselves before him as
thoroughly guilty and convicted, and as placing their whole hope in
their supplication for mercy. And in the present day the faithful are
justified in adding certain external rites to their prayers; although no
necessity either can, or ought to be laid down beforehand in this case.
We know also, the, Orientals to be more devoted to ceremonies than we
are ourselves. And this difference must be noticed between the ancient
people and the new Church, since Christ by his advent abolished many
ceremonies. For the fathers under the Law were, in this sense, like
children, as Paul says. (<span id="iv.iii-p4.1"></span>[Ga
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#003)<span id="iv.iii-p4.1"></span>..md)
The discipline which God had formerly instituted, involved the use of
more ceremonies than were afterwards practiced. As there is this
important difference between our position and theirs, whoever desires to
copy them in all their actions, would rather become the ape than the
imitator of antiquity. Meanwhile, we must notice that the reality
remains for us, although external rites are abolished. Two kinds of
prayer, therefore, exist; one which we ought to practice daily, in the
morning, evening, and if possible, every moment; for we see how
constancy in prayer is commended to us in Scripture. (<span
id="iv.iii-p4.2"></span>[Lu 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#001.md)<span
id="iv.iii-p4.2"></span>; <span id="iv.iii-p4.3"></span>[Ro
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#012.md)<span id="iv.iii-p4.3"></span>;
<span id="iv.iii-p4.4"></span>[1Th
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#017)<span id="iv.iii-p4.4"></span>..md)
The second kind is used, when God denounces his wrath against us, or we
have need of his special aid, or seek anything unusual from him. This
was Daniel’s method of praying when he put on sackcloth, and sprinkled
himself with ashes. But as I have treated this subject elsewhere, I now
use greater brevity.

<span id="iv.iii-p5"></span>When Daniel perceived the period of
deliverance at hand, he not only prayed as usual, but left all his other
occupations for the purpose of being quite at ease and at leisure, and
thus he applied his mind exclusively to prayer, and made use of other
aids to devotion. For the sackcloth and the ashes availed far more than
mere outward testimony; they are helps to increase our ardor in praying,
when any one feels sluggish and languid. It is true, indeed, that when
the fathers under the Law prayed with sackcloth and ashes, this
appearance was useful as an outward mark of their profession. It
testified before men, how they came before God as guilty suppliants, and
placed their whole hope of salvation in pardon alone. Still this conduct
was useful in another way, as it stirred them up more eagerly to the
desire to pray. And both these points are to be noticed in Daniel’s
case. For if the Prophet had such need of this assistance, what shall be
said of our necessities? Every one ought surely to comprehend how dull
and cold he is in this duty. Nothing else, therefore, remains, except
for every one to become conscious of his infirmity, to collect all the
aids he can command for the correction of his sluggishness, and thus
stimulate himself to ardor in supplication. For when Daniel. according
to his daily custom, prayed so as to run the risk of death on that very
account, we ought to gather from this, how naturally alert he was in
prayer to God. He was conscious of the want of sufficiency in himself,
and hence he adds the use of sackcloth, and ashes, and fasting.

<span id="iv.iii-p6"></span>I pass by what might be treated more
diffusely — -how fasting is often added to extraordinary prayers. We
conclude also, how works by themselves fail to please the Almighty,
according to the fictions of the Papists of these days, and also to the
foolish imaginations of many others. For they think fasting a part of
the worship of God, although Scripture always commends it to us for
another purpose. By itself it is of no consequence whatever, but when
mingled with prayers, with exhortations to penitence, and with the
confession of sinfulness, then it is acceptable, but not otherwise.
Thus, we observe Daniel to have made use of fasting correctly, not as
wishing to appease God by this discipline, but to render him more
earnest in his prayers.

<span id="iv.iii-p7"></span>We must next notice another point. Although
Daniel was an interpreter of dreams, he was not so elated with
confidence or pride as to despise the teaching delivered by other
prophets. Jeremiah was then at Jerusalem, when Daniel was dragged into
exile, where he discharged the office of teacher for a long period
afterwards, so that Babylon became a kind of pulpit.  <span
id="fr_81"></span>[82](#fn_81.md) And Ezekiel names him the third among the
most excellent servants of God, (<span id="iv.iii-p8.3"></span>[Eze
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#014)<span id="iv.iii-p8.3"></span>,.md)
because Daniel’s piety, integrity, and holiness of life, were even then
celebrated. As to Jeremiah, we know him to have been either just
deceased in Egypt, or perhaps to be still living, when this vision was
offered to Daniel, who had perused his prophecies previously to this
occasion. We observe also, the great modesty of this holy man, because
he exercised himself in reading the writings of Jeremiah; and was not
ashamed to own how he profited by them. For he knew this prophet to have
been appointed to instruct himself as well as the rest of the faithful.
Thus he willingly submitted to the instruction of Jeremiah, and ranged
himself among his disciples. And if he had not deigned to read those
prophecies, he would have been unworthy to partake of the promised
deliverance. As he was a member of the Church, he ought to have been a
disciple of Jeremiah, so in like manner, Jeremiah would not have
objected to profit in his turn, if any prophecy of Daniel’s had been
presented to him. This spirit of modesty ought to flourish among the
servants of God, even if they excel in the gift of prophecy, inducing
them to learn from each other, while no one should raise himself above
the common level. While we are teachers, we ought at the same time to
continue learners. And Daniel teaches us this by saying, *he understood
the number of years in books, and the number was according to the word
of Jehovah to the prophet Jeremiah.* He shews why he exercised himself
in the writings of Jeremiah, — because he was persuaded that God had
spoken by his voice. Thus it caused him no trouble to read what he knew
to have proceeded from God.

<span id="iv.iii-p9"></span>We must now remark The Time Of This
Prophecy-*the first year of Darius* I will not dwell upon this point
here, because I had rather discuss the years when we come to the second
part; of the chapter. I stated yesterday that this chapter embraced two
principal divisions. Daniel first records his own prayer, and then he
adds the prediction which was brought to him by the hand of the angel.
We shall next speak of the seventy years, because the discussion will
then prove long enough. I will now touch but briefly upon one point —
the time of redemption was at hand, as the Babylonian monarchy was
changed and transferred to the Medes and Persians. In order to render
the redemption of his people the more conspicuous, God desired to wake
up the whole East after the Medes and Persians had conquered the
Babylonians. Cyrus and Darius published their edict about the same time,
by which the Jews were permitted to return to their native country. *In
that year,* therefore, meaning the year in which Darius began his reign.
Here it may be asked, Why does he name Darius alone, when Cyrus was far
superior to him in military prowess, and prudence, and other endowments?
‘The ready answer is this, Cyrus set out immediately on other
expeditions, for we know what an insatiable ambition had seized upon
him. He was not stimulated by avarice but by an insane ambition, and
never could rest quiet in one place. So, when he had acquired Babylon
and the whole of that monarchy, he set out for Asia Minor, and harassed
himself almost to death by continual restlessness. Some say he was slain
in battle, while Xenophon describes his death as if he was reclining on
his bed, and at his ease was instructing his sons in what he wished to
have done. But whichever be the true account, all history testifies to
his constant motion from place to place. Hence we are not surprised at
the Prophet’s speaking here of Darius only, who was more advanced in age
and slower in his movements through his whole life. It is sufficiently
ascertained that he was not a man fond of war; Xenophon calls him
Cyaxares, and asserts him to have been the son of Astyages. We know,
again, that Astyages was the maternal grandfather of Cyrus; and thus
this Darius was the uncle as well as father-in-law of Cyrus, as the
mother of Cyrus was his sister. When the Prophet calls his father
Ahasuerus, it need not occasion us any trouble, as the names vary very
much when we compare the Greek with the Hebrew. Without the slightest
doubt, Astyages was called Ahasuerus, or at least one was his name and
the other his surname. All doubt is removed by the expression, *Darius
was of the seed of the Medes* He distinguishes here between the Medes
and Persians, because the Medes had seized upon rich and splendid
territories, stretching far and wide on all sides, while the Persians
were shut up within their own mountains, and were more austere in their
manner of life. But the Prophet here states of this Darius his Median
origin, and adds another *circumstance,* namely, *his obtaining the
kingdom of the Chaldees* For Cyrus allowed him to be called king, not
only on account of his age and of his being both his uncle and
father-in-law, but because he would not attempt anything against his
authority. He knew he had no heir who might in future become troublesome
to him. Cyrus therefore yielded the empty title to his father-in-law,
while the whole power and influence remained completely within his own
grasp.

<span id="iv.iii-p10"></span>He says, then, *When I understood in books
the number of the years for filling up the desolation of Jerusalem,*
namely, *seventy years* This prophecy is found in the 25th chapter of
Jeremiah, (<span id="iv.iii-p10.1"></span>[Jer
25](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#000)<span id="iv.iii-p10.1"></span>.md),
and is repeated in the 29th, (<span id="iv.iii-p10.2"></span>[Jer
29](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#000)<span id="iv.iii-p10.2"></span>.md).
God fixed beforehand seventy years for the captivity of his people, as
it was a grievous trial to be cast out of the land of Canaan, which had
been granted them as a perpetual inheritance. They remembered those
celebrated sentences,

<span id="iv.iii-p11"></span>“This shall be my rest for ever,” and  
“Ye shall possess the land for ever.” (<span
id="iv.iii-p11.2"></span>[Ps
132:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#014.md)<span
id="iv.iii-p11.2"></span>.)

<span id="iv.iii-p12"></span><span id="iv.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p13"></span>When they were cast out and dispersed
throughout the various countries of the earth, it seemed as if the
covenant of God had been abolished, and as if there was no further
advantage in deriving their origin from those holy fathers to whom their
land had been promised. For the purpose of meeting these temptations,
God fixed beforehand a set time for their exile, and Daniel now recurs
to this prediction. He adds, *Then I raised my face* It is properly
<span id="iv.iii-p13.1"></span>הנתא, *ath-neh,* I placed; but as some
interpreters seem to receive this word too fancifully, as if Daniel had
then looked towards the sanctuary. I prefer rendering it, *He raised his
face to God* It is quite true that while the altar was standing, and the
ark of the covenant was in the sanctuary, God’s face was there, towards
which the faithful ought to direct, both their vows and prayers; but now
the circumstances were, different through the temple being overthrown.
We have previously read of Daniel’s praying and turning his eyes in that
direction, and towards Judea. but his object was not a desire to pray
after the manner of his fathers. For there was then neither sanctuary
nor ark of the covenant in existence. (<span
id="iv.iii-p13.2"></span>[Da 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#010.md)<span
id="iv.iii-p13.2"></span>.) His object in turning his face towards
Jerusalem was openly to shew his profession of such mentally dwelling in
that land which God had destined for the race of Abraham. By that
outward gesture and ceremony the Prophet claimed possession of the Holy
Land, although still a captive and an exile. With regard to the present
passage, I simply understand it to mean, he raised his face towards God.
*That I might inquire,* says he, by *supplication and prayers* Some
translate, that I might seek supplication and prayer. Either is equally
suitable to the sense, but the former version is less forced, because
the Prophet sought God by supplication and prayers. And this form of
speech is common enough in Scripture, as we are said to seek God when we
testify our hope of his performing what he has promised. It now follows:
—

<span id="iv.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p1"></span><span id="iv.iv-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#004.md)<span id="iv.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p2"></span>**4.** And I prayed unto the LORD my God, and
made my confession, and said, O Lord, the great and dreadful God,
keeping the covenant and mercy to them that love him, and to them that
keep his commandments.

<span id="iv.iv-p3"></span>**4.** Rt oravi Jehovam Deum meum, et
confessus sum,  <span id="fr_82"></span>[83](#fn_82.md) et dixi. Quaeso
Domine Deus magne et terribilis, custodiens foedus et misericordam
diligentibus ipsum, et custodientibus praecpeta ejus.

<span id="iv.iv-p5"></span> 

<span id="iv.iv-p6"></span><span id="iv.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p7"></span>Here Daniel relates the substance of his
prayer. He says, *He prayed and confessed before God* The greatest part
of this prayer is an entreaty that God would pardon his people. Whenever
we ask for pardon, the testimony of repentance ought to precede our
request. For God announces that he will be propitious and easily
entreated when men seriously and heartily repent. (<span
id="iv.iv-p7.1"></span>[Isa 58:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#009.md)<span
id="iv.iv-p7.1"></span>.) Thus confession of guilt is one method of
obtaining pardon; and for this reason Daniel fills up the greater part
of his prayer with the confession of his sinfulness. He reminds us of
this, not for the sake of boasting, but to instruct us by his own
example to pray as we ought. He says, therefore, *he prayed and made
confession* The addition of “my God” to the word Jehovah is by no means
superfluous. *I prayed,* he says, *to my God.* He here shews that he did
not utter prayers with trembling, as men too often do, for unbelievers
often flee to God, but without any confidence. They dispute with
themselves whether their prayers will produce any fruit; Daniel,
therefore, shews us two things openly and distinctly, since he prayed
with faith and repentance. By the word confession he implies his
repentance, and by saying *he prayed to God,* he expresses faith, and
the absence of all rashness in throwing away his prayers, as unbelievers
do when they pray to God confusedly, and are all the while distracted by
a variety of intruding thoughts. *I prayed,* says he*, to my God* No one
can use this language without a firm reliance on the promises of God,
and assuming that he will prove himself ready to be entreated. He now
adds, I *entreat thee, O Lord* The particle <span
id="iv.iv-p7.2"></span>אנא, *ana,* is variously translated; but it is
properly, in the language of grammarians, the particle of beseeching. O
*Lord God,* says he, *great and terrible* Daniel seems to place an
obstacle in his own way by using this language; for such is the sanctity
of God that it repels us to a distance as soon as we conceive it in the
mind: wherefore this terror seems to be removed when we seek a familiar
approach to the Almighty. One might suppose this method of prayer by no
means suitable, as Daniel places God before his eyes as great and
formidable. It seems something like frightening himself; yet the Prophet
deserves a due moderation, while on the one hand he acknowledges God to
be great and terrible, and on the other he allows him to *keep his
covenant towards those who love him and obey his statutes* We shall
afterwards see a third point added — God will receive the ungrateful and
all who have departed from his covenant. The Prophet joins these two
things together.

<span id="iv.iv-p8"></span>With reference to the epithets *great and
terrible,* we must maintain what I have already stated, namely, the
impossibility of our praying rightly, unless we humble ourselves before
God; and this humility is a preparation for repentance. Daniel,
therefore, sets before himself the majesty of God, to urge both himself
and others to cast themselves down before the Almighty, that, in
accordance with his example, they may really feel penitent before him.
*God,* therefore, says he, *is great and terrible* We shall never
attribute just honor to God unless we become cast down, as if dead,
before him. And we ought diligently to notice this, because we are too
often careless in prayer to God, and we treat it as a mere matter of
outward observance. We ought to know how impossible it is to obtain
anything from God, unless we appear in his sight with fear and
trembling, and become truly humbled in his presence. This is the first
point to be noticed. Then Daniel mitigates the asperity of his assertion
by adding, *keeping his covenant, and taking pity upon those who love
him.* Here is a change of person: the third is substituted for the
second, but there is no obscurity in the sense; as if he had said, *Thou
keepest thy covenant with those who love thee and observe thy statutes*
Here Daniel does not yet fully explain the subject, for this statement
is too weak for gaining the confidence of the people; they had
perfidiously revolted from God, and as far as related to him, his
agreement had come to an end. But Daniel descends by degrees and by sure
steps to lay a foundation for inspiring the people with assured trust in
the lovingkindness of God. Two points are embraced in this clause: first
of all, it shews us there is no reason why the Jews should expostulate
with God and complain of being too severely treated by him. Daniel,
therefore, silences all expressions of rebellion by saying*, Thou, O
God, keepest thy covenant* We must here notice the real condition of the
people: the Israelites were in exile; we know how hard that tyranny was
— how they were oppressed by the most cruel reproaches and disgrace, and
how brutally they were treated by their conquerors. This might impel
many to cry out, as doubtless they really did, “What does God want with
us? What, the better are we for being chosen as his peculiar people?
What is the good of our adoption if we are still the most miserable of
all nations?” Thus the Jews might complain with the bitterest grief and
weariness of the weight of punishment which God had inflicted upon them.
But Daniel here asserts his presenting himself before God, not to cavil
and murmur, but only to entreat his pardon. For this reason, therefore,
he first says, *God keeps his covenant towards all who love him;* but at
the same time he passes on to pray for pardon, as we shall afterwards
perceive. We shall treat of this covenant and the Almighty’s
lovingkindness in the next Lecture.

<span id="iv.v"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="iv.v-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, as at the present time
thou dost deservedly chastise us for our sins, according to the example
of thine ancient people, that we may turn our face to thee with true
penitence and humility: May we throw ourselves suppliantly and
prostrately before thee; and, despairing of ourselves, place our only
hope in thy pity which thou hast promised us. May we rely on that
adoption which is founded on and sanctioned by thine only-begotten Son,
and never hesitate to come to thee as a father whenever we fly to thee.
Meanwhile, do thou so thoroughly affect our minds, that we may not only
pray to thee as a matter of duty, but truly and seriously take refuge in
thee, and be touched with a sense of our sins, and never doubt thy
propitious disposition towards us, in the name of the same thy Son our
Lord. — Amen.

<span id="iv.vi"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p1"></span>Lecture Forty-Fifth.

<span id="iv.vi-p2"></span>Is the last Lecture Daniel said that *he
prayed and confessed* Now, in narrating the form of his prayer, he
begins by confession. We must notice this, to enable us to understand
the scope which Daniel had in view, as well as the special object of his
prayer. This is the kind of beginning which he makes, — the people are
guilty before God, and suppliantly pray for pardon; but before the
Prophet comes to this entreaty, he confesses how the people were most
severely and justly chastised by the Lord, as they had so grievously and
variously provoked his anger. First of all, he calls God terrible, for I
have recited and translated his words. When the Prophet desires to
attract God’s favor towards himself, he begins by bringing forward his
majesty. By these words he stirs up himself and the rest of the faithful
to reverence, urging them to approach the presence of God with
submission, to acknowledge themselves utterly condemned, and to be
deprived of all hope except in the mere mercy of God. He calls him,
therefore, *great and terrible,* in order to humble the minds of all the
pious before God, to prevent their aspiring to any self-exaltation, or
being puffed up with any self-confidence. For, as we have said
elsewhere:, the epithets of God are at one time perpetual, and at
another variable, with 1;he circumstances of the subject. in hand. God
may always be called great and terrible; but Daniel calls him so here,
to stir up himself and all others to humility and reverence, as I have
previously remarked. Then he adds, He is faithful in keeping his
covenant and in shewing pity towards all his true worshippers. I have
referred to a change of person in this clause, but it does not obscure
the sense or render it in any way doubtful. I have explained how these
words also testify to the absence of all cause why the people should
murmur or complain of being treated too harshly. For where the
faithfulness of God to his promises has once been laid down, men have
not the slightest reason to complain when he treats them less clemently,
or frustrates them because they are found fallacious and perfidious; for
God always remains true to his words. (<span id="iv.vi-p2.1"></span>[1Co
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#009.md)<span id="iv.vi-p2.1"></span>;
<span id="iv.vi-p2.2"></span>[1Co
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#013.md)<span id="iv.vi-p2.2"></span>;
<span id="iv.vi-p2.3"></span>[2Th
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#003)<span id="iv.vi-p2.3"></span>..md) In
this sense Daniel announces that *God keeps his covenant towards all who
love him.* We must next notice, how he adds the word “pity” to
“covenant.” He does not put these two words as differing from each
other, <span id="iv.vi-p2.4"></span>תירב, *berith,* and <span
id="iv.vi-p2.5"></span>דסח, *chesed,* but unites them together, and the
sentence ought to be understood by a common figure of speech, implying
that God made a gratuitous covenant which flows from the fountain of his
pity. What, therefore, is this agreement or covenant and pity of God?
The covenant flows from God’s mercy; it does not spring from either the
worthiness or the merits of men; it has its cause, and stability, and
effect, and completion solely in the grace of God. We must notice this,
because those who are not well versed in the Scriptures may ask why
Daniel distinguishes mercy from covenant, as if there existed a mutual
stipulation when God enters into covenant with man, and thus God’s
covenant would depend simply on man’s obedience. This question is solved
when we understand the form of expression here used, as this kind of
phrase is frequent in the Scriptures. For whenever God’s covenant is
mentioned, his clemency, or goodness, or inclination to love is also
added. Daniel therefore confesses, in the first place, the gratuitous
nature of the covenant of God with Israel, asserting it to have no other
cause or origin than the gratuitous goodness of God. He next testifies
to God’s faithfulness, for he never violates his agreement nor departs
from it, as in many other places God’s truth and faithfulness are united
with his clemency. (<span id="iv.vi-p2.6"></span>[Ps
36:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#006.md)<span id="iv.vi-p2.6"></span>, and
elsewhere.) It is necessary for us to rely on God’s mere goodness, as
our salvation rests entirely with him, and thus we render to him the
glory due to his pity, and thus it becomes needful for us, in the second
place, to obtain a clear apprehension of God’s clemency. The language of
the Prophet expresses both these points, when he shows how God’s
covenant both depends upon and flows from his grace, and also when he
adds the Almighty’s faithfulness in keeping his agreement.

<span id="iv.vi-p3"></span>He adds, *Towards those who love thee and
keep thy commandments* We must diligently notice this, because Daniel
here drives away the whole people from the defense which many might put
forward, hypocrites willingly become angry with God; nay, boldly
reproach him because he does not either pardon or indulge them. Daniel,
therefore, to check this pride and to cut off every pretense for strife
on the part of the impious, says, *God is faithful towards all who love
him* He admonishes us thus: God is never severe unless when provoked by
the sins of men; as if he had said, God’s covenant is firm in itself;
when men violate it, it is not surprising if God withdraws from his
promises and departs from his agreement, on perceiving himself treated
with perfidy and distrust. The people, therefore, are here obliquely
condemned, while Daniel testifies to God’s *constancy in keeping his
promises,* if men on their part act with good faith towards him. On the
whole, he shews how the people were in tumult, when God altered his
usual course of kind and beneficent treatment, and put in force instead
his severest vengeance, when the people were expelled from the land of
Canaan which was their perpetual inheritance. Daniel here explains how
all blame must be removed from God, as the people had revolted from him,
and by their perfidy had violated their compact. We see, therefore, how
he throws the blame of all their calamities upon the people themselves,
and thus absolves God from all blame and all unjust corer, labors.
Besides, the Prophet shews how the special object of the worship of God
is to induce us to love him. For many observe God’s law after the manner
of slaves; but we ought to remember this passage, God loveth a cheerful
giver. (<span id="iv.vi-p3.1"></span>[2Co
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#007)<span id="iv.vi-p3.1"></span>..md)
When, therefore, hypocrites are violently drawn towards obedience, the
Prophet here distinguishes between the true worshippers of God and those
who discharge their duty only in a perfunctory manner:, and not from the
heart. He asserts the principle of worshipping God to be a diligent love
of him, and this sentiment frequently occurs in the writings of Moses.
(<span id="iv.vi-p3.2"></span>[De
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#012)<span id="iv.vi-p3.2"></span>..md)
We must hold, therefore, the impossibility of pleasing God by obedience,
unless it proceeds from a sincere and free affection of the mind. This
is the very first rule in God’s worship. We must love him; we must be
prepared to devote ourselves entirely to obedience to him, and to the
willing performance of whatever he requires from us. As it is said in
the Psalms, (<span id="iv.vi-p3.3"></span>[Ps
119:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#024)<span id="iv.vi-p3.3"></span>.md)
Thy law is my delight. And again, in title same Psalm, David states
God’s law to be precious to him beyond gold and silver, yea, pleasing,
and sweet beyond even honey. (<span id="iv.vi-p3.4"></span>[Ps.
119:72](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#072.md),
[103](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#103)<span id="iv.vi-p3.4"></span>..md)
Unless we love God we have no reason for concluding that he will approve
of any of our actions: all our duties will become corrupt before him,
unless they proceed from the fountain of liberal affection towards him.
Hence the Prophet adds, *To those who keep his statutes* External
observance will never benefit us, unless the love of God precede them.
But we must notice this also in its turn; — God cannot be sincerely
loved by us unless all our outward members follow up this affection of
the soul. Our hands and all that belong to us will be kept steady to
their duty, if this spontaneous love flourish within our hearts. For if
any one asserts his love of God a thousand times over, all will\[ be
discovered to be vain and fallacious, unless the whole life correspond
with it. We can never separate love and obedience It now follows: —

<span id="iv.vii"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p1"></span><span id="iv.vii-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
9:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#005.md)<span id="iv.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p2"></span>**5.** We have sinned, and have committed
iniquity, and have done wickedly, and have rebelled, even by departing
from thy precepts and from thy judgments:

<span id="iv.vii-p3"></span>**5.** Peccavimus, et inique egimus et
imprope nos gessimus, et rebellavimus, et recessimus a praeceptis tuis,
et judicii tuis.  <span id="fr_83"></span>[84](#fn_83.md)

<span id="iv.vii-p5"></span>**6.** Neither have we hearkened unto thy
servants the prophets, which spake in thy name to our kings, and to our
princes, and our fathers, and to all the people of the land.

<span id="iv.vii-p6"></span>**6.** Et non auscultavimus servis tuis
prophetis, qui loquuti sunt in nomine tuo ad reges nostros, principes
nostros, et partres nostros, et ad populum terrae.

<span id="iv.vii-p7"></span>**7.** O Lord, righteousness *belongeth*
unto thee, but unto us confusion of faces, as at this day; to the men of
Judah, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and unto all Israel, *that
are* near, and *that are* far off, through all the countries whither
thou hast driven them, because of their trespass that they have
trespassed against thee.

<span id="iv.vii-p8"></span>**7.** Tibi domine justitia, et nobis pudor
vultus,  <span id="fr_84"></span>[85](#fn_84.md) scuti hodie viro Jehudah,
 <span id="fr_85"></span>[86](#fn_85.md) et incolis Jerusalem, et toti
Israeli, propinquis, et longinquis, in omnibus terris, quo expulsisti
eos, ob transgressiones,  <span id="fr_86"></span>[87](#fn_86.md) quibus
transgressi sunt contra te.

<span id="iv.vii-p12"></span> 

<span id="iv.vii-p13"></span><span id="iv.vii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p14"></span>Daniel here continues his confession of
sin. As we have already stated, he ought to begin here, because we must
remark in general the impossibility of our pleasing God by our prayers,
unless we approach him as criminals, and repose all our hopes on his
mercy. But there was a special reason for the extraordinary nature of
the Prophet’s prayers, and his use of fasting, sackcloth, and ashes.
This was the usual method of confession by which Daniel united himself
with the rest of the people, for rite purpose of testifying throughout
all ages the justice of the judgment which God had exercised in
expelling the Israelites from the promised land, and totally
disinheriting them. Daniel, therefore, insists upon this point. Here we
may notice, in the first place, how prayers are not rightly conceived,
unless founded on faith and repentance, and thus not being according to
law, they cannot find either grace or favor before God. But great weight
is to be attached to the phrases where Daniel uses more than a single
word in saying the people acted impiously. He puts <span
id="iv.vii-p14.1"></span>ונאטח, *chetanu, we have sinned,* in the first
place, as the word does not imply any kind of fault, but rather a
serious crime or offense. We, therefore, have sinned; then *we have done
wickedly;* afterwards *we have acted impiously;* for <span
id="iv.vii-p14.2"></span>עשר, *reshegn,* is stronger than <span
id="iv.vii-p14.3"></span>אטח, *cheta.* We have done wickedly, we have
been rebellious, says he, *in transgressing thy statutes and
commandments* Whence this copiousness of expression, unless Daniel
wished to stimulate himself and the whole people to penitence? For
although we are easily induced to confess ourselves guilty before God,
yet scarcely one in a hundred is affected with serious remorse; and
those who excel others, and purely and reverently fear God, are still
very dull and cold in recounting their sins. First of all, they
acknowledge scarcely one in a hundred; next, of those which do come into
their minds, they do not fully estimate their tremendous guilt, but
rather extenuate their magnitude; and, although they perceive themselves
worthy of a hundred deaths, yet they are not touched with their
bitterness, and fear to humble themselves as they ought, nay, they are
scarcely displeased with themselves, and do not loathe their own
iniquities. Daniel, therefore, does not accumulate so many words in
vain, when he wishes to confess his own sins and those of the people.
Let us learn then how far we are from penitence, while we only verbally
acknowledge our guilt; then let us perceive the need we have of many
incentives to rouse us up from our sloth; for although any one may feel
great terrors and tremble before God’s judgments, yet all those feelings
of dread vanish away too soon. It therefore becomes necessary to fix
God’s fear in our hearts with some degree of violence. Daniel shews us
this when using the phrase, *The people have sinned; they have acted
unjustly; they have conducted themselves wickedly and become rebellious,
and declined from the statutes and commandments of God* This doctrine,
therefore, must be diligently noticed, because, as I have said, all men
think they have discharged their duty to God, if they mildly profess
themselves guilty before him, and acknowledge their fault in a single
word. But as real repentance is a sacred thing, it is a matter of far
greater moment than a fiction of this kind. Although the multitude do
not perceive how they are only deceiving themselves when they confess a
fault, yet in the meantime they are only trifling with God like
children, while some say they are but men, and others shelter themselves
in the crowd of offenders. “What could I do? I am but a man; I have only
followed the example of the many.” Lastly, if we examine carefully the
confessions of men in. general, we shall always find some latent
hypocrisy, and that there are very few who prostrate themselves before
God as they ought. We must understand, therefore, this confession of
Daniel’s as stimulating himself and others to the fear of God, and as
laying great stress upon the sins of the people, that every one may feel
for himself real and serious alarms.

<span id="iv.vii-p15"></span><span id="iv.vii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p16"></span>Then he shews how *impiously, and wickedly,
and perfidiously the Israelites had rebelled,* and how *they had
declined from God’s statutes and commandments.* Daniel enlarges upon the
people’s fault, as they had no pretext for their ignorance after they
had been instructed in God’s law. They were like a man who stumbles in
broad daylight. He surely is without excuse who raises his eyes to
heaven or closes them while he walks, or casts himself forward with
blind impulse, for if he fall he will find no one to pity him. So Daniel
here enlarges upon the people’s crime, for the law of God was like a
lamp pointing out the path so clearly that they were willfully and even
maliciously blind. (<span id="iv.vii-p16.1"></span>[Ps
119:105](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#105.md)<span
id="iv.vii-p16.1"></span>.) Unless they had closed their eyes, they
could not err while God faithfully pointed out the way in which they
ought to follow and persevere. This is the first point. But we ought to
gather another doctrine from this passage, namely, there is no reason
why men should turn away entirely from God, even if they have
transgressed his commands, because, although. they please both
themselves and others, and think they have obtained the good opinion of
the whole world, yet this will avail men nothing if they decline from
God’s commandments and statutes. Whoever, therefore, has the law in his
hands, and turns aside in any direction, although he may use the
eloquence of all the rhetoricians, yet no defense will be available.
This perfidy is surely without excuse — to disobey the Almighty as soon
as he shews us what he approves and what he requires. Then, when he
forbids anything, if we turn aside ever so little from his teaching, we
are perfidious and wicked, rebellious and apostate. Lastly, this passage
proves that there is no rule of holy, pious, and sober living except a.
complete performance of God’s commandments. For this reason he puts
*statutes and judgments* to shew that the people did not sin in
ignorance. He might have concluded the sentence in one word: we have
departed from thy commandments; but he joins judgment to commands. And
why so? To point out how easy and clear and sufficiently familiar was
God’s institution, if the Israelites had only been teachable. Here we
may notice the frequent recurrence of this repetition. The unskillful
think these synonyms are heaped together without an object, when
statutes, judgments, laws, and precepts are used, but the Holy Spirit
uses them to assure us that nothing shall be wanting to us if we inquire
at the mouth of God. He instructs us perfectly in regulating the whole
course of our lives, and thus our errors become knowing and willful,
when God’s law has been clearly set before us, which contains in itself
a perfect rule of doctrine for our guidance.

<span id="iv.vii-p17"></span>He afterward, adds, *We have not obeyed thy
servants the Prophets who have spoken in, thy name* We ought also
diligently to notice this, because the impious often wickedly fail to
discern the presence of God, whenever he does not openly descend from
heaven and speak to them by angels; and so their impiety is increased
throughout all ages. Thus, in these days, many think themselves to have
escaped by boasting in the absence of any revelation from heaven: the
whole subject, they say, is full of controversy; the whole world is in a
state of confusion; and what do the teachers of the Church mean by
promoting such strife among *each* other? Then they boast and think as
they please, and are blind of their own accord. But Daniel here shews
how no turning to God is of the slightest avail, unless he is attended
to when he sends his prophets, because all who despise those prophets
*who speak it the name of the Lord* are perfidious and apostate, wicked
and rebellious. We see, then, the suitability of this language of
Daniel, and the necessity of this explanation: *The people were wicked,
unjust, rebellious, and impious, because they did not obey the prophets*
He does not assert that this wicked, impious, contumacious, and
perfidious character of the people arises from their not listening to
God thundering from heaven, or to his angels when sent to them, but
because they did not obey his prophets. Besides this, he calls the
prophets *servants of God who speak in his name* He distinguishes
between true and false prophets; for we know how many impostors formerly
abused this title in the ancient Church; as in these days the disturbers
of our churches falsely pretend to the name of God, and by this audacity
many of the simple are deceived. Daniel, therefore, distinguishes here
between the true and false prophets, who everywhere boast in their
divine election to the office of teachers. He speaks here of the effect,
treating all these boastings as vain and foolish, for we are not
ignorant of the manner in which all Satan’s ministers transform
themselves into angels of light. (<span id="iv.vii-p17.1"></span>[2Co
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#014)<span id="iv.vii-p17.1"></span>..md)
Thus the evil as well as the good speak in God’s name; that is, the
impious no less than the righteous teachers put forth the name of God;
but here, as we have said, Daniel refers to the effect and the matter
itself, as the phrase is. Thus when Christ says, When two or three are
gathered together in my name, (<span id="iv.vii-p17.2"></span>[Mt
18:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#020)<span id="iv.vii-p17.2"></span>,.md)
this is not to be applied to such deceptions as are observable in the
Papacy, when they proudly use God’s name as approving certain assemblies
of theirs. It is no new thing, then, for a deceiving Church to hide its
baseness under this mask. But when Christ says, Where two or three are
assembled in my name, this refers to true and sincere affection. So also
Daniel in this passage says, *True prophets speak in God’s name;* not
only because they shelter themselves under this name for the sake of its
authority, but because they have solid proofs of the exercise of God’s
authority, and are really conscious of their true vocation.

<span id="iv.vii-p18"></span>He afterwards adds, *To our kings, our
nobles, our fathers, and all the people of the land* Here Daniel lays
prostrate every high thing in this world with the view of exalting God
only, and to prevent any pride rising in the world to obscure his glory,
as it otherwise would do. Here, then, he implicates *kings, princes, and
fathers* in the same guilt; as if he had said, all are to be condemned
without exception before God. This, again, must be diligently noticed.
For we see how the common people think everything permitted to them
which is approved by their kings and counselors. For in the common
opinion of men, on what does the whole foundation of right and wrong
rest, except on the arbitrary will and lust of kings? Whatever pleases
kings and their counselors is esteemed lawful, sacred, and beyond all
controversy; and thus God is excluded from his supreme dominion. As,
therefore, men thus envelop themselves in clouds, and willingly involve
themselves in darkness, and prevent their approach to God, Daniel here
expresses how inexcusable all men are who do not obey the Prophets, even
if a thousand kings should obstruct them, and the splendor of the whole
world should dazzle them. By such clouds as these God’s majesty can
never be obscured; nay more, this cannot offer the slightest impediment
to God’s dominion or hinder the course of his doctrine. These points
might be treated more copiously: I am only briefly explaining the
Prophet’s meaning, and the kind of fruit which ought to be gathered from
his words. Finally, it is a remarkable testimony in favor of the
Prophet’s doctrine, when kings and their counselors are compelled to
submit, and all the loftiness of the world is brought under subjection
to the prophets, as God says in Jeremiah, (<span
id="iv.vii-p18.1"></span>[Jer
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#010)<span id="iv.vii-p18.1"></span>.md)
Behold! I have set thee above kingdoms, and above the empires of this
world, to destroy and to build up, to plant and to root out. There God
asserts the authority of his teaching, and shews its superiority to
everything in the world; so that all who wish to be free from it, as if
endowed with some peculiar privilege, are both foolish and ridiculous.
This, then, must be noticed in the Prophet’s words, when he says, *God
spoke by his prophets to kings, princes, and fathers* Respecting the
“fathers,” we see how frivolous is the excuse of those who use their
fathers as a shield in opposing God. For here Daniel unites both fathers
and children in the same guilt, and shews how all equally deserve
condemnation, when they do not listen to God’s prophets, or rather to
God speaking by means of his prophets.

<span id="iv.vii-p19"></span><span id="iv.vii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p20"></span>He next subjoins, *To thee, O Lord, belongs
righteousness, and to us confusion of face, as it is at this day* The
meaning is, God’s wrath, which he manifests towards his people, is just,
and nothing else remains but for the whole people to fall down in
confusion, and candidly acknowledge itself deservedly condemned. But
this contrast which unites opposite clauses, ought also to be noticed,
because we gather from the Prophet’s words that God can neither be
esteemed just nor his equity be sufficiently illustrious, unless when
the mouths of men are closed, and all are covered and buried in
disgrace, and confess themselves subject to just accusation, as Paul
also says, Let God be just, and let all men’s mouths be stopped, (<span
id="iv.vii-p20.1"></span>[Rom. 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#004.md),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#026)<span id="iv.vii-p20.1"></span>;.md)
that is, let men cease to cavil and to seek any alleviation of their
guilty their subterfuges. While, therefore, men are thus cast down and
prostrate, God’s true glory is illustrated. The Prophet now utters the
same instruction by joining these two clauses, of opposite meaning’s.
*Righteousness is to thee, but shame to us.* Thus we cannot praise God,
and especially while he chastises us and punishes us for our sins,
unless we become ashamed of our sins, and feel ourselves destitute of
all righteousness. Lastly, when we both feel and confess the equity of
our condemnation, and when this shame seizes upon our minds, then we
begin to confess God’s justice; for whoever cannot bear this
self-condemnation, displays his willingness to contend against God.
Although hypocrites apparently bear witness to God’s justice, yet
whenever they claim anything as due to their own worthiness, they at the
same time derogate from their judge, because it is clear that God’s
righteousness cannot shine forth unless we bury ourselves in shame and
confusion. *According as at this day,* says Daniel. He adds this to
confirm his teaching; as if he had said, the impiety of the people is
sufficiently conspicuous from their punishment. Meanwhile, he holds the
principle that the people were justly chastised; for hypocrites, when
compelled to acknowledge God’s power, still cry out against his equity.
Daniel joins both points together: thus, God has afflicted his people,
and this very fact proves them to be wicked and perfidious, impious and
rebellious. *As it is at this day,* meaning, I will not complain of any
immoderate rigor, I will not say thou hast treated my people cruelly;
for even if the punishments which thou hast inflicted on us are severe,
yet thy righteousness shines forth in them: I therefore confess how
fully we deserve them all. *To a man of Judah,* says he. Here Daniel
seems to wish purposely to strip the mask off the Israelites, under
which they thought to hide themselves. For it was an honorable title to
be called a Jew, an inhabitant of Jerusalem, an Israelite. It was a
sacred race, and Jerusalem was a kind of sanctuary and kingdom of God.
But now, says he, though we have hitherto been elevated aloft so as to
surpass the whole world, and though God has deigned to bestow upon us so
many favors and benefits, yet confusion of face is upon us: let our God
be just. Meanwhile, let all these empty boastings cease, such as our
deriving our origin from holy fathers and dwelling in a sacred land; let
us no longer cling to these things, says he, because they will profit us
nothing before God. But I see that I am already too prolix.

<span id="iv.viii"></span>

<span id="iv.viii-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="iv.viii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, as no other way of
access to thee is open for us except through unfeigned humility, that we
may often learn to abase ourselves with feelings of true repentance. May
we be so displeased with ourselves as not to be satisfied with a single
confession of our iniquities; but may we continue in the same state of
meditation, and be more and more penetrated with real grief. Then may we
fly to thy mercy, prostrate ourselves before thee in silence, and
acknowledge no other hope but thy pity and the intercession of thine
only-begotten Son. May we be so reconciled to thee, as not only to be
absolved from our sins, but also governed throughout the whole course of
our life by thy Holy Spirit, until at length we enjoy the victory in
every kind of contest, and arrive at that blessed rest which thou hast
prepared for us by the same our Lord Jesus Christ. — Amen.

<span id="iv.ix"></span>

<span id="iv.ix-p1"></span>Lecture Forty-Sixth

<span id="iv.x"></span>

<span id="iv.x-p1"></span><span id="iv.x-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#008.md)<span id="iv.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x-p2"></span>**8.** O Lord, to us *belongeth* confusion of
face, to our kings, to our princes, and to our fathers, because we have
sinned against thee.

<span id="iv.x-p3"></span>**8.** Jehovah, nobis pudor faciei, regibus
nostris, principibus nostris, et patribus nostris, quia peccavinus in
te.

<span id="iv.x-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.x-p5"></span><span id="iv.x-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x-p6"></span>In this verse Daniel completes his own
confession. We have stated the beginning of his prayer to be this: He
threw himself before God as a criminal, with the whole people, and
prayed earnestly for pardon. It was his duty to begin in this way: he
had previously named the whole people; he now speaks of *kings, princes,
and fathers,* and thus comprehends the common people. Besides, kings are
accustomed to absolve themselves and those who approach their presence
from all ordinary laws; wherefore Daniel uses the phrase, *kings,
princes, and fathers* While he treated of the people, he shewed how
those at a distance, as well as those at home, were equally subject to
God’s wrath, because, had he executed his vengeance equitably on all, no
one was so free from wickedness as to be free from punishment. God had
not driven all the Jews into either Chaldea or Assyria, and many had
remained in the neighboring nations. Yet Daniel denies them any
diminution of their guilt, although they had been treated more humanely
by God, who had spared them some portion of their suffering. We are
taught by this passage, that the crimes or guiltiness of men are not
always to be estimated by the amount of their punishment. For God acts
very mildly with some who deserve yet greater severity; and if he does
not entirely spare us, he partially remits his rigor towards us, either
to allure us to repentance, or for some reasons hitherto unknown to us.
Whatever the reason may be, even if God does not openly punish us all,
this ought neither to lead us to excuse ourselves, nor to ally
self-indulgence, because we do not experience the same severity from
God. The conclusion to be drawn is this, all the Israelites are justly
afflicted, because, from first to last, all have conducted themselves
impiously. For Daniel repeats the word which does not signify declension
merely, but to act with gross wickedness; as if he had said, the
Israelites deserved no common punishment, and thus it should not
surprise us when God executes such dreadful vengeance against them. It
follows: —

<span id="iv.xi"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p1"></span><span id="iv.xi-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#009.md)<span id="iv.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p2"></span>**9.** To the Lord our God *belong* mercies
and forgivenesses, though we have rebelled against him;

<span id="iv.xi-p3"></span>**9.** Domino Deo nostro miserationes, et
veniae,  <span id="fr_87"></span>[88](#fn_87.md) quamvis rebelles fuerimus
in ipsum.  <span id="fr_88"></span>[89](#fn_88.md)

<span id="iv.xi-p6"></span> 

<span id="iv.xi-p7"></span><span id="iv.xi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p8"></span>Daniel here betakes himself to God’s mercy as
to a sacred asylum; for it is not sufficient to acknowledge and confess
our sins, unless we are supported by a confidence of our obtaining
pardon from God’s mercy. We see numbers who use great prolixity in
bearing witness to the truth, that they richly deserve all kinds of
punishment; but no good result arises from this, because despair
overwhelms them and plunges them into an abyss. Recognition of a fault
is in truth without the slightest profit, unless with the addition of
the hope of pardon. Daniel, therefore, after candidly confessing the
treatment which the whole people had received from God to have been
deserved, although so severe and harsh, still embraces his pity.
According to the common saying, this is like a drowning man catching at
a straw. We observe also how David makes use of the same principle.
There is forgiveness with thee that thou mayest be feared. (<span
id="iv.xi-p8.1"></span>[Ps 130:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa130.htm#004.md)<span
id="iv.xi-p8.1"></span>.) And this moderation must be diligently marked,
because Satan either lulls us into torpid security, or else so agitates
us as utterly to absorb our minds in sorrow. These two artifices of
Satan are sufficiently known to us. Hence that moderation which I have
mentioned must be maintained, lest we should grow torpid in the midst of
our vices, and so indulge in contempt of God as to induce
forget-fullness of him. Then, on the other hand, we ought not to be
frightened, and thus close against us the gate of hope and pardon.
Daniel, therefore, here follows the best arrangement, and prescribes the
same rule for us. For, in confessing the people’s wickedness, he does
not entirely throw away the hope of pardon, but supports himself and
others with this consolation — God is merciful. He rests this hope of
pardon on the very nature of God; as if he had said, there is nothing so
peculiar to God as pity, and hence we ought never to despair. *To God,*
says he, *belong mercies and forgiveness.* No doubt Daniel took this
phrase from Moses, especially from that remarkable and memorable passage
where God pronounces himself a severe avenger, yet full of mercy,
inclined to clemency and pardon, and exercising much forbearance. (<span
id="iv.xi-p8.2"></span>[Ex 34:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#006.md)<span
id="iv.xi-p8.2"></span>.) As, therefore, Daniel held the impossibility
of God putting away his affectionate feelings of pity, he takes this as
the main point of his teaching, and it becomes the chief foundation for
his hopes and his petition for pardon. He argues thus, *To God belong
loving kindnesses;* therefore, as he can never deny himself, he will
always be merciful. This attribute is inseparable from his eternal
essence; and however we have rebelled against him, yet he will never
either cast away nor disdain our prayers.

<span id="iv.xi-p9"></span>We may conclude from this passage that no
prayers are lawful or rightly composed unless they consist of these two
members. First, all who approach God ought to cast themselves down
before him, and to acknowledge themselves deserving of a thousand
deaths; next, to enable them to emerge from the abyss of despair, and to
raise themselves to the hope of pardon, they should call upon God
without fear or doubt, and with firm and stable confidence. This
reliance upon God can have no other support than the nature of God
himself, and to this he has borne ample testimony. With respect to the
close of the verse, it may be explained in two ways: *Because, or
although, we are rebellious against him.* I have stated that I rather
approve of taking the particle <span id="iv.xi-p9.1"></span>יכ, *ki,* in
the sense of opposition. *Although* we have rebelled against God,
*still* he will be entreated, and never will be unmindful of his pity.
If any one prefers taking it in a causal sense, it will suit tolerably
well; as if Daniel had said, the people have no other hope left but the
mercy of God, as they have been convicted of sin over and over again.
*Because* we have acted wickedly towards him, what is left for us but to
throw ourselves with all our trust upon the clemency and goodness of
God, since he has borne witness to his being propitious to sinners who
truly and heartily implore his favor? It now follows: —

<span id="iv.xii"></span>

<span id="iv.xii-p1"></span><span id="iv.xii-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#010.md)<span id="iv.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xii-p2"></span>**10.** Neither have we obeyed the voice of
the LORD our God, to walk in his laws, which he set before us by his
servants the prophets.

<span id="iv.xii-p3"></span>**10.** Et non auscultavimus voci Jehovae
Dei nostri, ut ambularemus in legibus ejus, quas proposuit coram facie
nostra per manum servorum suorum prophetarum.

<span id="iv.xii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.xii-p5"></span><span id="iv.xii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xii-p6"></span>Here, again, Daniel shews how the Israelites
provoked God’s anger against them by the wickedness of their conduct. He
points out one special kind of sin and method of acting wickedly,
namely, despising the teaching which proceeded from God as its author,
and was expounded to them by his prophets. We must diligently notice
this, as we have previously advised; for although no one is excusable
before God by the pretext of ignorance, yet we perceive how our
wickedness is aggravated when we knowingly and willfully make a point of
rejecting what God commands and teaches. Daniel, therefore, enlarges
upon the people’s crime by adding the circumstance, *they would not hear
the prophets* Everything which would have been a fault in the Chaldeans
or Assyrians was the most grievous wickedness in the elect people. Their
obstinacy was the more provoking, because while God had pointed out the
way by his prophets, they had turned their backs upon him. *We have not
heard* Clearly enough this verse is added by way of explanation, as
Daniel might express the reason for their wickedness. Therefore he calls
the laws of God “doctrine,” which consists of many parts; for it is
certain that nothing was omitted by God which was useful to be known,
and thus he had embraced the whole perfection of justice in his
discourse. He is treating here not only the law of Moses, but the
teaching of the prophets, as the words clearly point out; and the noun
<span id="iv.xii-p6.1"></span>הרות *torah,* “law,” is to be taken for
“doctrine.” It is just as if Daniel had said, God was rejected when he
wished to rule his people by his prophets. But the plural number seems
to denote what I have staffed, namely, that the perfection of doctrine
was comprehended in the prophets; for God omitted nothing while he
completed the revelation of whatever was needful for the guidance of the
life. Yet this was rendered entirely useless by the perverseness of the
people’s nature, apparent. in their rejection of all God’s laws.

<span id="iv.xii-p7"></span>Daniel confirms this sentiment by adding,
*Those laws were set before the people* This shews how everything was
supplied to the people, since God had familiarly delivered to them
whatever was needful for the utmost degree of piety and justice. For
this phrase, *to put anything before one’s face,* means to deliver all
useful knowledge openly, perspicuously, and lucidly, and with great
familiarity and skillfulness. Thus nothing is left doubtful or
complicated, nothing remains obscure, unconnected, or confused. As,
therefore, God had unfolded the whole scope of righteousness by his law,
the people’s impiety was the more severe and detestable, because they
would not receive benefit from such familiar instruction. The Prophet
intends by these words to shew how such willful sinners were worthy of
double punishment. They are first convicted of contumacy because they
had no pretext for their ignorance; they made an open and furious
assault upon God, for although the way was pointed out to them, yet they
turned aside in all directions, and threw themselves headlong. We must
remember what I have previously touched upon, namely, the value of an
external ministry, because we are aware how the ancient people, when
rebellious against the prophets, were accustomed to pretend that they
did not really despise God. As, therefore, hypocrites think their sins
are concealed by a covering of this kind, Daniel clearly expresses that
God is despised in his prophets, although he neither descends from
heaven nor sends down his angels. And this is the meaning of the
expression, *the prophets were the servants of God;* it declares how
they taught nothing either rashly or in their own name or by their own
impulse, but faithfully executed the Almighty’s commands. It follows: —

<span id="iv.xiii"></span>

<span id="iv.xiii-p1"></span><span id="iv.xiii-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#011.md)<span id="iv.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xiii-p2"></span>**11.** Yea, all Israel have transgressed
thy law, even by departing, that they might not obey thy voice;
therefore the curse is poured upon us, and the oath that *is* written in
the law of Moses the servant of God, because we have sinned against him.

<span id="iv.xiii-p3"></span>**11.** Et totus Israel transgressi sunt
legem tuam, et defecerunt,  <span id="fr_89"></span>[90](#fn_89.md) ne
auscultarent voci tuae. Ideo,  <span id="fr_90"></span>[91](#fn_90.md)
effesa est super nos,  <span id="fr_91"></span>[92](#fn_91.md) maledicto,
 <span id="fr_92"></span>[93](#fn_92.md) et jusjurandum, quod scriptum est
in lege Mosis sevei Dei, quai peccavimus contra ipsum.

<span id="iv.xiii-p8"></span> 

<span id="iv.xiii-p9"></span>Daniel again confirms what I formerly said
concerning the punishment being most justly inflicted upon the people.
They had no cause for the slightest complaint of any excess of severity
on the part of God. He now says, *All Israel had sinned* He does not
enumerate the separate ranks of the people as he did before, but he
pronounces all to be transgressors in one single word, as they had
broken God’s law from the least to the greatest. He uses sometimes the
second and sometimes the third person, as a mark of his vehemence and
ardor, since Daniel now speaks for the whole world, and then prostrates
himself before God, and prepares to approach his tribunal. It is just as
if at one time he were to confess himself guilty before God and angels,
and next to ascend a theater and testify to his own infamy and that of
the whole people before all mankind. *In revolting,* he says, *so as not
to hear* By these words Daniel expresses the determined obstinacy of the
people, implying — this was not occasioned by either error or ignorance;
nay, even sloth was not the cause of Israel’s willful blindness and
inattention to God’s precepts, but was only the beginning of this act of
rebellion. *In revolting,* therefore, *so as not to hear thy voice* We
now understand the Prophet’s meaning. He was not content with the simple
condemnation of the people, but he wished to mark distinctly the various
forms of rebellion, to impress the Israelites with a further sense of
the grievous manner in which they had provoked God’s wrath. Not only had
they departed from the right course through negligence or folly, but
they had knowingly transgressed God’s law. We must carefully notice
this. Although hypocrites testify themselves to be prepared for
obedience, if only they can be quite sure that God is speaking to them,
yet they are certainly held back by some hidden depravity from coming
openly to the light. And whenever God’s word is put before us, whoever
does not prove himself of a docile disposition, even if he should swear
a hundred times over that he is perplexed and must decline embracing the
teaching proposed to him, because he is doubtful whether God speaks to
him or not, he lies; and the truth of Daniel’s assertion will always be
made clear; for all who do not hear God when he speaks to them are
backsliders and inwardly perverse, and by the depravity of their nature
place a veil before themselves which obscures their perceptions, and
then their own minds prevent them from becoming obedient to God.

<span id="iv.xiii-p10"></span>He next adds, *For this cause the curse of
which Moses had written is poured down upon us.* By this circumstance he
enlarges upon the people’s crime, because they had long ago been warned
of the impending judgments, and yet they closed their eyes and despised
both threats and instruction. This was the very height of wickedness;
for the Israelites were intractable, although God stretched out his hand
towards them, pointed out the way of safety, and taught them faithfully
whatever was useful for them; but this only increased their
perverseness, while they treated his threatenings as if utterly
worthless. Besides this, they added contempt of his teaching to
ridiculing his threats, as they thought either that God was deluding
them when he announced by Moses his coming vengeance unless they obeyed
his law, or else they imagined it all invented by Moses, and that God
could not possibly execute his threats. Thus the people are convicted of
desperate impiety, as they neither attended to the teaching of the
Almighty nor believed in the authority of his threatenings. If a father
threatens his son, or a master his servant, the vengeance will be just,
as the comic poet says, Do not say you have not been warned. (Terence
Ardria, <span id="iv.xiii-p10.1"></span>[Act
1](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#000.md)<span id="iv.xiii-p10.1"></span>,
Scene 2.) As God had predicted for so many ages that the Israelites
should not be unpunished if they transgressed the law, this proves how
completely unmanageable they were. (<span id="iv.xiii-p10.2"></span>[Le
26](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#000.md)<span id="iv.xiii-p10.2"></span>;
<span id="iv.xiii-p10.3"></span>[De
28](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#000)<span id="iv.xiii-p10.3"></span>..md)
And when he says *the curse was poured out* or distilled, he confesses
how the wrath of God inundated the whole people like a deluge, although
it was completely under control. For God had predicted what he intended
to do by the mouth of Moses, and whoever reads those curses which Moses
denounces against transgressors of the law, will confess them to be by
no means immoderate. When, therefore, execution really occurs, must we
not acknowledge the shining forth of God’s justice without the slightest
possibility of blame? I have stated that the word<span
id="iv.xiii-p10.4"></span> העובש, *shebugneh,* is explained by some as
an “oath,” and by others a “curse:” it properly means a curse, and is
deduced from the word <span id="iv.xiii-p10.5"></span>עובש *shebugn,*
which seems to be taken in an extraordinary sense, because this word
properly means *seven.,* and the word derived from it means to “swear,”
through the practice of bringing forward a certain number of witnesses;
and hence the noun means an oath. But because a curse is often
interposed, and the swearer calls God to witness against himself if he
fails to perform his verbal engagement, some interpreters elicit the
sense of a curse being poured out. But there may be some change of
construction here, and so I willingly interpret it. *The curse and the
oath,* then, *are poured out;* that is, the curse which God has
sanctioned by an oath, by a figure of speech well known to grammarians
under the name of *hypallage.* The curse, therefore, was sworn by the
mouth of God himself; and we know how threats cause more terror by being
confirmed by an oath, just as God, on the other hand, adds strength to
the promises of his favor.

<span id="iv.xiii-p11"></span>He adds afterwards, *Because we have acted
wickedly against him* By this expression, Daniel shortly but clearly
affirms that the people have no cause for complaint, as their calamities
were the result of neither accident nor chance. They might behold the
very source of their evils in the law of God. had there been no
predictions of this kind, the Israelites might have doubted and even
disputed with themselves, as to the origin and cause of their being
enslaved by their enemies, and of their being cast out with the utmost
contempt and cruelty into distant lands. They might then have inquired
into the causes of their evils, as if they were entirely unknown. But
when the law of Moses was before their eyes, and God had therein sworn
that he would perform the very threatenings just as they had happened,
no further doubt could possibly remain. This, then, is the summary of
Daniel’s meaning; the very denunciation of these punishments was
sufficient to condemn the Israelites, because their sins were brought
home to them over and over again, when God fulfilled against them, what
he had formerly predicted by his servant Moses. It follows, —

<span id="iv.xiv"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv-p1"></span><span id="iv.xiv-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#012.md)<span id="iv.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv-p2"></span>**12.** And he hath confirmed his words,
which he spake against us, and against our judges that judged us, by
bringing upon us a great evil: for under the whole heaven hath not been
done as hath been done upon Jerusalem.

<span id="iv.xiv-p3"></span>**12.** Et stabilivit sermonem suum, quem
loquutus fuerat super nos, et super judices,  <span
id="fr_93"></span>[94](#fn_93.md) ut adduceret super nos malum magnum quod
non factum est sub toto coelo, sicut factum est  <span
id="fr_94"></span>[95](#fn_94.md) in Jerusalem.

<span id="iv.xiv-p6"></span> 

<span id="iv.xiv-p7"></span><span id="iv.xiv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv-p8"></span>Daniel pursues the same sentiment, shewing
how the Israelites had no cause whatever for expostulating with God on
account of their being so heavily afflicted, and no reason for doubting
either its origin or intention. For now all had come to pass exactly as
it had been long ago predicted. *God,* therefore, *has stirred up his
word against us;* as if he had said, there is no reason why we should
strive with God, for we behold his truthfulness in the punishments which
he has inflicted upon us, and his threats are no mere vain scarecrows,
or fabulous inventions manufactured to frighten children. God now really
proves how seriously he had spoken. What then is the use of our turning
our backs upon him, or why should we seek vain excuses when God’s
truthfulness shines brightly in our destruction? Do we wish to deprive
God of his truthfulness? surely whatever our earnestness we shall never
succeed. Let, therefore, this suffice to condemn us, — God has predicted
everything which occurs, and thus effectually and experimentally proves
himself an avenger. *God,* therefore, *ratified his word;* that is,
God’s word would have remained without the slightest efficacy and rigor,
unless this curse had been suspended over our head; but while we lie
prostrate and almost buried under our calamities, God’s word is borne
aloft; that is, God makes his truthfulness conspicuously visible, which
otherwise would scarcely be perceptible at all. Unless God punished the
wickedness of men, who would not treat the threatening of his law as
childish? But when he demonstrates by certain proofs the very best
reasons for terrifying mankind, efficacy and rigor are immediately
imparted to his words. Besides this, Daniel here intends to cast off all
subterfuges, and to cause the people candidly to acknowledge, and really
to feel themselves justly afflicted. He says, *against us and against
our judges, who judged us.* Again, Daniel throws down all haughtiness of
the flesh, with the view of exalting God alone and of preventing any
mortal splendor from obscuring the authority of the Law. For we know how
the common people think they have a shield for the defense of all their
crimes, when they can quote the example of kings and judges. At this
very day, whenever we argue against the superstitions of the Papacy,
they say, “Well! if we do make a mistake, yet God has set over us both
kings and bishops who rule us after their manner, why then should we be
blamed when we have God’s command for following those who are endued
with power and dignity?” As, therefore, the vulgar generally catch at a
subterfuge like this, Daniel again affirms, that although those who
transgress God’s law are endowed with great worldly authority, yet they
are not exempt from either blame or punishment, nor can the ordinary
multitude be excused if they follow their example. Therefore, *as he had
spoken by Moses against our judges who judged us,* he says; that is,
although power had been conferred upon them for ruling us, yet the whole
ordination of it is from God: yet after they had utterly abused their
government, and violated God’s justice, and thus had endeavored to draw
down God, if possible, from his elevation, Daniel asserts that their
loftiness will by no means shelter them from the consequences of
transgression.

<span id="iv.xiv-p9"></span>He afterwards adds, *To bring upon us a
great evil, which has never happened under the whole heavens, as it has
now occurred at Jerusalem.* Here Daniel foresaw an objection which had
some slight force in it. Although God had deservedly punished the
Israelites, yet when he displayed his anger against them more severely
than against other nations, he might seem forgetful of his equity.
Daniel here removes all appearance of incongruity, even if God is more
severe against his elect people then against profane nations, because
the impiety of this people was far greater than that of all others on
account of their ingratitude, contumacy, and impracticable obstinacy, as
we have already said. Since the Israelites surpassed all nations in
malice, ingratitude, and all kinds of iniquity, Daniel here declares how
thoroughly their disastrous afflictions were deserved. Again, we are
here reminded, whenever God severely chastises his Church, of that
principle to which we must return, namely, our impiety is the more
detestable to God the nearer he approaches us; and the kinder he is to
us, the more chargeable we are, unless in our turn we prove ourselves
grateful and obedient. This state of things ought not to seem
troublesome to us, as vengeance begins at the house of God, and he puts
forth examples of his wrath against his own people far more tremendous
than against others; this, I say, we ought not to take ill, as I have
already explained the reason of it. It does not surprise us to find the
Gentiles groping in darkness, but when God shines upon us and we resist
him with determined willfulness, we are doubly impious. This comparison,
therefore, must be noticed, as evil was poured out upon Jerusalem;
meaning, no similar punishment was inflicted upon other nations, for
*what happened to Jerusalem,* says Daniel, *never occurred under the
whole heaven.* It follows, —

<span id="iv.xv"></span>

<span id="iv.xv-p1"></span><span id="iv.xv-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#013.md)<span id="iv.xv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xv-p2"></span>**13.** As *it is* written in the law of
Moses, all this evil is come upon us: yet made we not our prayer before
the LORD our God, that we might turn from our iniquities, and understand
thy truth.

<span id="iv.xv-p3"></span>**13.** Sicuti scriptum est in lege Mosis,
totum malum hoc venit super nos, et non deprecati sumus faciem Jehovae
Dei nostri, ut reverteremur ab iniquitatibus nostris, et attenti essemus
ad veritatum tuam.

<span id="iv.xv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.xv-p5"></span><span id="iv.xv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xv-p6"></span>He repeats what he had already said, without
any superfluity, shewing how God’s judgments are proved by their
effects, as the law of Moses contains within it all the penalties which
the Israelites endured. As, therefore, so manifest an agreement existed
between the law of God and the people’s experience, they ought not to
become restive and to have sought every kind of subterfuge without
profit. By this alone God sufficiently proved himself a just avenger of
their crimes, because he had predicted many ages before what he had
afterwards fully carried out. This is the object of the repetition, when
Daniel says the people felt the justice of the penalties denounced
against them in the law of Moses, for in the meantime he adds, *we have
not deprecated the face of God.* Here he severely blames the people’s
hardness, because even when beaten with stripes they never grew wise. It
is said — fools require calamities to teach them wisdom. This,
therefore, was the height of madness in the people to remain thus
stubborn under the rod of the Almighty, even when he inflicted the
severest blows. As the people were so obstinate in their wickedness, who
does not perceive how sincerely this conduct was to be deplored? *We
have not deprecated,* therefore, *the face of our God* This passage
teaches us how the Lord exercises his judgments by not utterly
destroying men, but holding his final sentence in suspense, as by these
means he wishes to impel men to repentance. First of all, he gently and
mercifully invites both bad and good by his word, and adds also
promises, with the view of enticing them; and then, when he observes
them either slow or refractory, he uses threatenings with the view of
arousing them from their slumber; and should threats produce no effect,
he goes forth in arms and chastises the sluggishness of mankind. Should
these stripes produce no improvement, the desperate character of the
people becomes apparent. In this way, God complains in Isaiah of their
want of soundness; the whole body of the people is subject to ulcers
from the head to the sole of the foot, (<span
id="iv.xv-p6.1"></span>[Isa 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#006.md)<span
id="iv.xv-p6.1"></span>;) and yet he would lose all his labor, through
their being utterly unmanageable. Daniel now asserts the existence of
the same failing in the people, while he states the Israelites to be so
untouched by a sense of their calamities, as never to supplicate for
pardon. I cannot complete the remainder today.

<span id="iv.xvi"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="iv.xvi-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that we may learn
seriously to consider in how many ways we become guilty before thee,
especially while we daily continue to provoke thy wrath against us. May
we be humbled by true and serious repentance, and fly eagerly to thee,
as nothing is left to us but thy pity alone; when cast down and
confounded, and reduced to nothing in ourselves, may we fly to this
sacred anchor, as thou art easily entreated, and hast promised to act as
a father of mercies to all sinners who seek thee. Thus may we approach
thee with true penitence, and relying on thy goodness, never doubt the
granting of our requests; and being freed by thy mercy from the tyranny
of Satan and of sin, may we be governed by thy Holy Spirit, and so
directed in the way of righteousness as to glorify thy name throughout
our lives, till we arrive at that happy and immortal life which we know
to be laid up in heaven for us, by Christ our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="iv.xvii"></span>

<span id="iv.xvii-p1"></span>Lecture Forty-Seventh.

<span id="iv.xvii-p2"></span>IN yesterday’s Lecture we dwelt on the
Prophet’s enlarging upon the people’s crime, in resisting the impression
made by God’s chastisements; but now he more clearly demonstrates the
kind of obstinacy displayed. For *they did not turn away from their
iniquities, and were not attentive to God’s truth* He had said before,
*we have not deprecated the anger of God.* But here he expresses
something more, namely, allowing the existence of some pretense to
prayer, there was no real sincerity, We know how impiously hypocrites
abuse God’s name, and pretend to the outward form of prayer, and even to
the greatest fervor, but there is no reality in their prayers. Thus the
Prophet has good reason for uniting what ought never to be separated,
and then convicts the Israelites of obstinacy, because they did not flee
suppliantly to God’s mercy with repentance and faith. There was,
doubtless, some form of piety left among the people; but Daniel here
estimates prayers according to God’s word, and thus puts these two
things before us, namely, repentance and faith. We must diligently
notice this. For nothing is more common than an earnest supplication for
pardon when the signs of God’s wrath are apparent; this was always
customary among all nations and at all times, and yet there existed
neither repentance nor faith. Hence their prayers became mere falsehood
and vanity. This is the meaning of the Prophet’s language when he says,
*We have not asked at the face of Jehovah our God, by turning away from
our iniquities,* (or that we may return,) *and by being instructed in
thy truth.* Finally, we may gather from this passage what the rule of
pious and acceptable prayer really is; first, we must be displeased with
ourselves for our sins; next, we must regard the threats and promises of
the Almighty. As to the first member of the sentence, experience teaches
us how rashly many break forth into prayer, even when their evil conduct
rises up professedly against God. On the one hand, they are so enraged
as not to hesitate to engage in warfare with God, and yet they pray unto
him, because terror seizes upon their minds and compels them to submit
themselves to God. The Prophet, therefore, here shews the utter
inutility of that outward shew and perverse mixture of noise and
flattery, because God cannot approve of any prayers, unless they spring
equally from repentance and faith. When he says, *the people were not
attentive to God’s truth,* in my opinion this is extended equally to
threats and promises, and faith apprehends both God’s pity and his
judgments. For, surely, it cannot be otherwise, when terror rouses the
pious to fly to God’s mercy. As, therefore, God embraces each quality in
his word, as he cites all who have sinned to his own tribunal, and then
gives them a hope of reconciliation, if the sinner is really converted
to him; so also Daniel, by saying, *the Israelites were not attentive to
God’s truth,* doubtless had respect to both objects, namely, their want
of sufficient consideration of God’s judgments, and next, their
stupidity in despising his pity when plainly set before them. On the
whole, This passage shews us the impossibility of our prayers being
pleasing to God, unless they flow from true repentance and faith; that
is, when we heartily feel our wickedness, we then flee to God’s mercy
and rely upon his promises. Hence we discover three things to be
necessary to render God propitious to us; first, dissatisfaction with
ourselves which occasions sorrow, through our being conscious of our
sins, and of our having provoked God’s anger. This is the first point.
Secondly, faith must necessarily be added. Lastly, prayer must follow as
a proof of our repentance and faith. When men remain without repentance
and faith, we observe how God’s name is profaned although we conceive
and utter many prayers, at the very time when the two principal
dispositions are entirely wanting. Now let us proceed, —

<span id="iv.xviii"></span>

<span id="iv.xviii-p1"></span><span id="iv.xviii-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#014.md)<span id="iv.xviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xviii-p2"></span>**14.** Therefore hath the LORD watched
upon the evil, and brought it upon us: for the LORD our God *is*
righteous in all his works which he doeth: for we obeyed not his voice.

<span id="iv.xviii-p3"></span>**14.** Et vigilavit Jehovah super malum,
et immisit illud  <span id="fr_95"></span>[96](#fn_95.md) spuer nos: quai
justus est Jehovah Deus noster in omnibus operibus suis quae fecit, *hoc
est, facit,* et non auscultavimus voci ejus.

<span id="iv.xviii-p5"></span> 

<span id="iv.xviii-p6"></span><span id="iv.xviii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xviii-p7"></span>Daniel confirms what he had formerly said
respecting the slaughter which afflicted the Israelites not being the
offspring of chance, but of the certain and remarkable judgment of God.
Hence he uses the word <span id="iv.xviii-p7.1"></span>רקש*, seked,*
which signifies to watch and to apply the mind attentively to anything.
It is properly used of the guards of cities, who keep watch both by
night and by day. This phrase does not appear to me to imply haste, but
rather continual carefulness. God often uses this metaphor of his
watching to chastise men who are far too eager to rush into sin. We are
familiar with the great intemperance of mankind, and their disregard of
all moderation whenever the lusts of the flesh seize upon them. God on
the other hand say’s he will not be either slothful or neglectful in
correcting this intemperance. The reason for this metaphor is expressed
in the forty-fourth chapter of Jeremiah, where men are said to burst
forth and to be carried away by their appetites, and then God is
continually on the watch till the time of his vengeance arrives. I have
mentioned how this word denotes rather continual diligence than hasty
swiftness; and the Prophet seems here to imply that although God had
endured the people’s wickedness, yet he had at length really performed
his previous threatenings, and was always on the watch, and rendering it
impossible for the people to escape his judgments upon the wickedness in
which they indulged. Therefore *hath Jehovah closely attended to the
calamity, and caused it to come upon us,* says he. With the view of
comprehending the Prophet’s intention more fully, we must notice what
God pronounces by Jeremiah in the Lamentations, (<span
id="iv.xviii-p7.2"></span>[La
3:38](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#038)<span id="iv.xviii-p7.2"></span>,.md)
where he accuses the people of sloth, because they did not acknowledge
the justice of the punishments which they suffered; he blames them in
this way. Who is he who denies both good and evil to proceed from the
mouth of God; as if he were pronouncing a curse against those who are
ignorant of the origin of calamities from God, when he chastises the
people. This sentiment is not confined to a single passage. For God
often inveighs against that stupidity which is born with mankind, and
leads them to attribute every event to fortune, and to neglect the hand
of the smiter. (<span id="iv.xviii-p7.3"></span>[Isa
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#013)<span id="iv.xviii-p7.3"></span>..md)
This kind of teaching is to be met with everywhere in the prophets, who
shew how nothing can be worse than to treat God’s judgments as if they
were accidents under the influence of chance. This is the reason why
Daniel insists so much upon this point. We know also what God denounces
in his law: If ye have walked against me rashly, I also will rashly walk
against you, (<span id="iv.xviii-p7.4"></span>[Lev.
26:27](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#027.md),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#028)<span id="iv.xviii-p7.4"></span>;.md)
that is, if ye do not cease to attribute to fortune whatever evil ye
suffer, I will rush against you with closed eyes, and will strive with
you with similar rashness; as if he had said, If ye cannot distinguish
between fortune and my judgments, I will afflict you on all sides, both
on the right hand and on the left, without the slightest discretion; as
if I were a drunken man, according. to the expression, With the
perverse, thou wilt be perverse. For this reason Daniel now confesses,
*God watched over the calamity, so as to bring down all those
afflictions* by which the people was oppressed.

<span id="iv.xviii-p8"></span>In this passage we are taught to recognize
God’s providence in both prosperity and adversity, for the purpose of
stirring us up to be grateful for his benefits, while his punishments
ought to produce humility. For when any one explains these things by
fortune and chance, he thereby proves his ignorance of the existence of
God, or at least of the character of the Deity whom we worship. For what
is left for God if we rob him of his providence? It is sufficient here
just to touch on these points which are often occurring, and of which we
usually hear something every day. It is sufficient for the exposition of
this passage to observe how the Prophet incidentally opposes God’s
judgment and providence to all notions of chance.

<span id="iv.xviii-p9"></span>He next adds, *Jehovah our God is just in
all his works* In this clause the Prophet confirms his former teaching,
and the phrase, *God is just,* appears like rendering a reason for his
dealings; for the nature of God supplies a reason why it becomes
impossible for anything to happen by the blind impulse of fortune. God
sits as a judge in heaven; whence these two ideas are directly contrary
to each other. Thus if one of the following assertions is made, the
other is at the same time denied; if God is the judge of the world,
fortune has no place in its government; and, whatever is attributed to
fortune is abstracted from God’s justice. Thus we have a confirmation of
our former sentence by the use of contraries or opposites; for we must
necessarily ascribe to God’s judgment both good and evil, both adversity
and prosperity, if he governs the world by his providence, and exercises
the office of judge. And if we incline in the least degree to fortune,
then God’s judgment and providence will cease to be acknowledged.
Meanwhile, Daniel not only attributes power to God, but also celebrates
his justice; as if he had said, he does not arbitrarily govern the world
without any rule of justice or equity, but *he is just.* We must not
suppose the existence of any superior law to bind the Almighty; he is a
law unto himself, and his will is the rule of all justice; yet we must
lay down this point; God does not reign as a tyrant over the world,
while in the perfection of his equity, he performs some things which
seem to us absurd, only because our minds cannot ascend high enough to
embrace a reason only partially apparent, and almost entirely hidden and
incomprehensible in the judgments of God. Daniel, therefore, wished to
express this by these words, *Jehovah our God,* says he, *is just in all
the works which he performs* The meaning is, the people would not have
been so severely chastised and afflicted with so many miserable
calamities, unless they had provoked God’s wrath; this might be easily
collected from the threatenings which God had denounced many ages
beforehand, and which he at that time proved in real truth to be in no
degree frivolous. Next, a second part is added, as not only God’s power
but his justice shines forth in the slaughter of the people; and I have
touched briefly on each of these points, as far as it was necessary for
explanation. But we must notice the Prophet’s allusion in these words to
those numerous trials which had fallen upon the faithful for the purpose
of proving their faith. They perceived themselves the most despised and
miserable of mortals; the peculiar and sacred people of God was
suffering under the greatest reproach and detestation, although God had
adopted them by his law with the intention of their excelling all other
people. While, therefore, they perceived themselves drowned in that deep
whirlpool of calamities and disgrace, what would they suppose, except
that God had deceived them, or that his covenant was utterly
annihilated? Daniel, therefore, establishes the justice of God in all
his works for the purpose of meeting this temptation, and of confirming
the pious in their confidence, and of inducing them to fly to God in the
extremity of their calamities.

<span id="iv.xviii-p10"></span>He adds, as a reason, *Because they did
not listen to his voice.* Here, again, he points out the crime of the
people who had not transgressed through ignorance or error, but had
purposely taken up arms against God. Whenever God’s will is once made
known to us, we have no further excuse for ignorance; for our open
defiance of the Almighty arises from our being led away by the lusts of
the flesh. And hence we gather how very detestable is the guilt of all
who do not obey God’s voice whenever he deigns to teach us, and who do
not instantly acquiesce in his word. It now follows, —

<span id="iv.xix"></span>

<span id="iv.xix-p1"></span><span id="iv.xix-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
9:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#015.md)<span id="iv.xix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xix-p2"></span>**15.** And now, O Lord our God, that hast
brought thy people forth out of the land of Egypt with a mighty hand,
and hast gotten thee renown, as at this day; we have sinned, we have
done wickedly.

<span id="iv.xix-p3"></span>**15.** Et nunc Domine Deus noster, qui
eduxisti populum tuum e terra Aegypt cum manu forti, et fecisti,
comparasti, tibi nomen secundum diem hanc,  <span
id="fr_96"></span>[97](#fn_96.md) peccavimus, impie egimus.

<span id="iv.xix-p5"></span>**16.** O Lord, according to all thy
righteousness, I beseech thee, let thine anger and thy fury be turned
away from thy city Jerusalem, thy holy mountain: because for our sins,
and for the iniquities of our fathers, Jerusalem and thy people *are
become* a reproach to all *that are* about us.

<span id="iv.xix-p6"></span>**16.** Domine secundum omnes justitias tuas
avertatur, quaeso, ira tua, et excandescentia tua ab urbe tua Jerusalem,
monte sanctitatis tuae: quoniam ob peccata nostra, et ob iniquitates,
 <span id="fr_97"></span>[98](#fn_97.md) patrum nostrorom, Jerusalem, et
populus tuus est in probum cunctis vicinis,  <span
id="fr_98"></span>[99](#fn_98.md) circuitibus nostris.  <span
id="fr_99"></span>[100](#fn_99.md)

<span id="iv.xix-p10"></span>**17.** Now therefore, O our God, hear the
prayer of thy servant, and his supplications, and cause thy face to
shine upon thy sanctuary that is desolate, for the Lord’s sake.

<span id="iv.xix-p11"></span>**17.** Et nunc audias, Deus noster,
precationem servi tua, et orationem ejus atque illumina faciem tuam
 <span id="fr_100"></span>[101](#fn_100.md) super sanctuarium tuum quod
vastatum est, *vel, desolatum,* propter Dominum.

<span id="iv.xix-p13"></span> 

<span id="iv.xix-p14"></span><span id="iv.xix-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xix-p15"></span>After Daniel has sufficiently *confessed*
the justice of those judgments which God had inflicted upon the people,
he again returns to beg for pardon. First, he would conciliate favor for
himself; next, he would stir up the minds of the pious to confidence,
and so he sets before them that proof of grace which ought to avail to
support the minds of the pious even to the end of the world. For when
God led his people out of Egypt, he did not set before them any
momentary benefit merely, but he bore witness to the adoption of the
race of Abraham on the condition of his being their perpetual Savior.
Therefore, whenever God wishes to gather together those who have been
dispersed, and to raise their minds from a state of despair to cheerful
hope, he reminds them of his being their Redeemer. I am that God, says
he, who led you out of Egypt. (<span id="iv.xix-p15.1"></span>[Le
11:45](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#045.md)<span id="iv.xix-p15.1"></span>,
and often elsewhere.) God not only commends his own power in such
passages, but denotes the object of their redemption; for he then
received his people under his care on the very ground of never ceasing
to act towards them with the love and anxiety of a father. And when in
their turn such anxiety seized upon the faithful as to lead them to
apprehend their own utter desertion by God, they are in the habit of
seizing upon this shield — God did not lead our fathers out of Egypt in
vain. Daniel now follows up this reasoning-*Thou, O Lord our God,* says
he, *who hast led forth thy people;* as if he had said, he called upon
God, because by one single proof he had testified to all ages the sacred
character of the race of Abraham. We observe, then, how he stirs up
himself and all the rest of the pious to prayer, because by laying this
foundation, he could both complain familiarly, and fearlessly request of
God to pity his people, and to put an end to their calamities. We now
understand the Prophet’s meaning, when he says, *the people were led
forth from Egypt.*

<span id="iv.xix-p16"></span>He afterwards adds another cause, *God then
acquired renown for himself, as the event evidently displayed* He here
joins God’s power with his pity, implying, when the people were led
forth, it was not only a specimen of paternal favor towards the family
of Abraham, but also an exhibition of divine power. Whence it follows,
his people could not be cast off without also destroying the remembrance
of that mighty power by which God had acquired for himself renown. And
the same sentiment often occurs in the prophets when they use the
argument: — If this people should perish, what would prevent the
extinction of thy glory, and thus whatever thou hadst conferred upon
this people would be buried in oblivion? So, therefore, Daniel now says,
*By bringing thy people from the land of Egypt, thou hast made thyself a
name;* that is, thou hast procured for thyself glory, which ought to
flourish through all ages unto the end of the world. What, then, will
occur, if the whole of thy people be now destroyed? He next. adds, *We
have done impiously, and have acted wickedly* In these words Daniel
declares how nothing was left except for God to consider himself rather
than his people, as by looking to them he would find nothing but
material for vengeance. The people must necessarily perish, should God
deal with them as they deserved. But Daniel here turns away God’s face
by some means from the people’s sins, with the view of fixing his
attention on himself alone and his own pity, and on his consistent
fidelity to that perpetual covenant which he had made with their
fathers.

<span id="iv.xix-p17"></span><span id="iv.xix-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xix-p18"></span>Lastly, he would not permit that redemption
to fail which was an illustrious and eternal proof of his virtue, favor,
and goodness. Hence he subjoins, *O Lord, may thine anger be averted
according to all thy righteousness, and thine indignation from thy city
Jerusalem, the mountain of thy holiness.* We observe how Daniel here
excludes whatever merit there might be in the people. In reality they
did not possess any, but I speak according to that foolish imagination
which men can scarcely put off. They always take credit to themselves,
although they are convicted of their sins a hundred times over, and
still desire to conciliate God’s favor by pleading some merit before
God. But here Daniel excludes all such considerations when he pleads
before God his own justice, and uses the strong expression, *according
to all thy righteousness* Those who take this word “righteousness” to
mean “judgment,” are in error and inexperienced in interpreting the
Scriptures; for they suppose God’s justice to be opposed to his pity.
But we are familiar with God’s righteousness as made manifest,
especially in the benefits he confers on us. It is just as if Daniel had
said, that the single hope of the people consisted in God’s having
regard to himself alone, and by no means to their conduct. Hence he
takes the righteousness of God for his liberality, gratuitous favor,
consistent fidelity, and protection, which he promised his servants: *O
God,* therefore, he says, *according to all thy prormsed mercies;* that
is, thou dost not fail those who trust in thee, thou dost promise
nothing rashly, and thou art not accustomed to desert those who flee to
thee; oh! by thy very justice, succor us in our distress. We must also
notice the universal particle “all,” because when Daniel unites so many
sins which might drown the people in an abyss a thousand times over, he
opposes to this *all* God’s promised mercies. As if he had said,
although the number of our iniquities is so great that we must perish a
hundred times over, yet thy promised mercies are far more numerous,
meaning, thy justice surpasses whatever thou mayest find in us of the
deepest dye of guilt.

<span id="iv.xix-p19"></span>He says, again, *Let thine anger be turned
away, and thy burning wrath from thy city Jerusalem, and from thy holy
mountain* In joining together anger and burning wrath, the Prophet does
not imply any excess on the part of God, as if he revenged the sins of
the people too severely, but he again represents the aggravation of
their wickedness, causing him to become so angry with them as to lay
aside his usual character, and to treat their adoption as vain and
fruitless. Daniel does not complain in this case of the severity of the
punishment, but rather condemns himself and the rest of the people for
causing a necessity for such severe measures. Once more, he sets before
God the holy mountain which he had chosen, and in this way averts his
countenance from judgment, lest he should reckon with them for so many
sins, by which God was deservedly incensed. Here, therefore, God’s
election is interposed, because he had consecrated Mount Zion to
himself, and desired to be worshipped there, where also his name should
be celebrated and sacrifices offered to him. In this respect, therefore,
Daniel obtains favor for himself before God, and, as I have said, he
excludes all other considerations.

<span id="iv.xix-p20"></span>He next adds, *Because on account of our
sins, and the iniquities of our fathers, Jerusalem. and thy people are a
reproach to all our neighbors* By another argument, the Prophet desires
to bend God to pity; for Jerusalem as well as the people were a disgrace
to the nations; yet this caused equal disgrace to fall upon God himself.
As, therefore, the Gentiles made a laughing-stock of the Jews, they did
not spare the sacred name of God; nay, the Jews were so despised, that
the Gentiles scarcely deigned to speak of them, and the God of Israel
was contemptuously traduced, as if he had been conquered, because he had
suffered his temple to be destroyed, and the whole city Jerusalem to be
consumed with burning and cruel slaughter. The Prophet, therefore, now
takes up this argument, and in speaking of the sacred city, doubtless
refers to the sacredness of God’s name. His language implies, — Thou
hast chosen Jerusalem as a kind of royal residence; it was thy wish to
be worshipped there, and now this city has become an object of the
greatest. reproach to our neighbors. Thus he declares how God’s name was
exposed to the reproaches of the Gentiles. He afterwards asserts the
same of God’s people, not by way of complaint when the Jews suffered
these reproaches, for they deserved them by their sins, but the language
is emphatic, and yet they were God’s people. God’s name was intimately
bound up with that of his people, and whatever infamy the profane east
upon them, reflected chiefly on God himself. Here Daniel places before
the Almighty his own name; as if he had said, O Lord! be thou the
vindicater of thine own glory, thou hast once adopted us on this
condition, and may the memory of thy name be ever inscribed upon us;
permit us not to be so reproachfully slandered, let not the Gentiles
insult thee on our account. And yet he says this was done *on account of
the iniquities of the people and of their fathers;* by which expression
he removes every possibility of doubt. 0h! how can it happen, that God
will so lay his people prostrate? Why has he not spared at least his own
name! Daniel, therefore, here testifies to his being just, because the
iniquity of the people and of their fathers had risen so high, that God
was compelled to exercise such vengeance against them.

<span id="iv.xix-p21"></span><span id="iv.xix-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xix-p22"></span>His next prayer is, *Do thou who art our
God hear the prayer of thy servant, and his supplications, and cause thy
face to shine forth* In these words Daniel wrestles with distrust, not
for his own sake privately, but for that of the whole Church to whom he
set forth the true method of prayer. And experience teaches all the
pious how necessary this remedy is in those doubts which break into all
our prayers, and make our earnestness and ardor in prayer grow dull and
cold within us, or at least we pray without any composed or tranquil
confidence, and this trembling vitiates whatever we had formerly
conceived. As, therefore, this daily happens to all the pious when they
leave off the duty of prayer for even a short period, and some doubt
draws them off and shuts the door of familiar access to God, this is the
reason why Daniel so often repeats the sentence*, Do thou, O Lord, hear
the prayer of thy. servant* David also inculcates such sentiments in his
prayers, and has the greatest necessity for acting so. And those who are
truly exercised in praying feel how God’s servants have good cause for
such language whenever they pray to him. But I will complete the rest
to-morrow.

<span id="iv.xx"></span>

<span id="iv.xx-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="iv.xx-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, as thou hast deigned to
gather us once among thy people, and hast wished us also to bear thy
name, and that of thine only-begotten Son; although we so often provoke
thine anger by our sins, and never cease to heap evil upon evil: Grant
that we may never be exposed as a laughing-stock and spectacle, to the
disgrace of thy sacred name. As, therefore, thou now seest the impious
seizing all occasions of grossly slandering thyself, and thy sacred
gospel, and the name of thine only-begotten Son, do not permit them, I
pray thee, petulantly to insult thee. May thy Spirit so govern us, that
we may desire to glorify thy name. May it be glorified in spite of Satan
and all the impious, until we are gathered into that celestial kingdom
which thou hast promised us in the same Christ our Lord.-Amen.

<span id="iv.xxi"></span>

<span id="iv.xxi-p1"></span>Lecture Forty-Eighth

<span id="iv.xxi-p2"></span>We yesterday commenced our comment on the
passage in which Daniel asks the Almighty *to make his face to shine
upon his own sanctuary* We are well aware how often this expression
occurs in the Scriptures, where God is said to manifest his opposition
by hiding his face, when he does not assist his own people, but hides
himself as if he were forgetful of them. As Scripture everywhere
compares our calamities and adversities to darkness, therefore God in
whose favor our happiness is placed is said to hide his face when he
does not succor us; and again, he is said to render his face bright and
conspicuous, when he gives us some sign of his parental layout. God
seemed for a long time to have deserted his sanctuary, and therefore the
Prophet prays him *to make his face to shine* We must remark his
expression; *upon thy sanctuary which is laid waste* We gather from it,
that although the Prophet saw all things lost in a carnal sense, yet he
neither despaired nor desisted from his prayers. And this rule must be
noticed, — God’s grace is not to be estimated by the present aspect of
things, because he often shews himself angry with us. Our carnal reason
must be overcome, if we wish to pray to God in adversity, as the Prophet
here teaches us by his own example. For the sanctuary was cut off; its
very devastation might have formed an excuse to Daniel and all the pious
for offering their prayers no longer. What success could be hoped for in
such a deplorable state of affairs? Daniel by this circumstance shews
how he struggled on without allowing any obstacle to interrupt the
course of his prayer. He adds, *for the Lord’s sake;* all the Hebrew
doctors agree that the word <span id="iv.xxi-p2.1"></span>ינדא, *Adoni,*
when written with the great point *karnetz,* is taken for God alone; but
in certain passages of Scripture it is as clearly used for the Mediator
also. And very probably it has this sense here; although the Hebrews use
this form *for God’s sake,* or for thy sake, when they make a direct,
appeal to the Deity, yet I confess they often use the third person. But
what necessity is there for flying to this harsher form of speech, when
the other sense appears more appropriate to the passage? He will
afterwards say, on account of thee, my God; but he says here, *for the
Lord’s sake* If, however, I had to contend with a person of a captious
disposition, I confess I could not convince him from this passage; but
if we weigh the Prophet’s words without contention, we shall rather
incline to this view of the subject. Here, therefore, he sets before God
the Mediator by whose favor he hopes to obtain his request. Still, if
any one prefers to apply this to God, let him retain his opinion. Let us
now proceed,.—

<span id="iv.xxii"></span>

<span id="iv.xxii-p1"></span><span id="iv.xxii-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
9:18](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#018.md)<span id="iv.xxii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxii-p2"></span>**18.** O my God, incline thine ear, and
hear; open thine eyes, and behold our desolations, and the city which is
called by thy name: for we do not present our supplications before thee
for our righteousnesses, but for thy great mercies.

<span id="iv.xxii-p3"></span>**18.** Inclina Deus mi, aurem tuam, et
audi: eperi oculos tuos, et respice desolationes nostras,  <span
id="fr_101"></span>[102](#fn_101.md) et civitem super quam invocatum est
nomen tuum, super eam,  <span id="fr_102"></span>[103](#fn_102.md) quia non
propter justitias nostras nos prosternimus preces nostras coram facie
tua, sed propter misericordias tuas  <span
id="fr_103"></span>[104](#fn_103.md) multas, *vel, magnas.*

<span id="iv.xxii-p7"></span> 

<span id="iv.xxii-p8"></span><span id="iv.xxii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxii-p9"></span>This short clause breathes a wonderful
fervor and vehemence of prayer; for Daniel pours forth his words as if
he were carried out of himself. God’s children are often in an ecstasy
in prayer; they moan and plead with God, use various modes of speech and
much tautology, and cannot satisfy themselves. In forms of speech,
indeed, hypocrites are sometimes superior; they not only rival God’s
sincere worshippers, but are altogether carried along by outward pomps,
and by a vast heap of words in their prayers, they arrive at much
elegance and splendor, and even become great rhetoricians. But Daniel
here only displays some portion of his feelings; there is no doubt of
his wishing to bear witness to the whole Church how vehemently and
fervently he prayed with the view of inflaming others with similar
ardor. In this verse, he says, *O my God, incline thine ear and hear.*
It would have been sufficient simply to have said, hearken; but as God
seemed to remain deaf notwithstanding so many prayers and entreaties,
the Prophet begs him to incline his ear. There is a silent antithesis
here, because the faithful had seemed to be uttering words to the deaf,
while their groans had been continually carried upwards to heaven during
seventy years without the slightest effect. He adds next, *open thine
eyes and see.* For God’s neglecting to answer must have cast down the
hopes of the pious, because the Israelites were treated so undeservedly.
They were oppressed by every possible form of reproach, and suffered the
most grievous molestation in their fortunes as well as in everything
else. Yet God passed by all these calamities of his people, as if his
eyes were shut; and for this reason Daniel now prays him to open his
eyes. It is profitable to notice these circumstances with diligence, for
the purpose of learning how to pray to God; first, when at peace and
able to utter our petitions without the slightest disquietude, and next,
when sorrow and anxiety seize upon all our senses, and darkness
everywhere surrounds us; even then our prayers should be steadily
continued in the midst of these great obstacles. And we gather at the
same time, while God presses us to the very extremity of our lives, how
we ought to be still more importunate, because the new object; of this
our severe affliction, is to awaken us amidst our slothfulness. Thus it
is said in the Psalms, (<span id="iv.xxii-p9.1"></span>[Ps
32:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#006)<span id="iv.xxii-p9.1"></span>,.md)
*The saint will approach thee in an accepted time*. Our opportunity
arises when the very vast necessities overwhelm us, because God then
stirs us up, and, as I have said, corrects our slowness. Let us learn,
therefore, to accustom ourselves to vehemence in prayer whenever God
urges and incites us by stimulus of this kind.

<span id="iv.xxii-p10"></span>He next says, *Look upon our desolation’s*
— *of* this we have already said enough — *and on the city on which thy
name is called* Again Daniel sets before himself the sure foundation of
his confidence, — Jerusalem had been chosen as God’s sanctuary. We know
God’s adoption to have been without repentance, as Paul says. (<span
id="iv.xxii-p10.1"></span>[Ro
11:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#029.md)<span
id="iv.xxii-p10.1"></span>.) Daniel, therefore, here takes the very
strongest method of appealing to God’s honor, by urging his wish to be
worshipped on Mount Zion, and by his destining Jerusalem for himself as
a royal seat. The phrase, to be called by God’s name, means, reckoning
either the place or the nation as belonging to God. For God’s name is
said to be called upon us, when we profess to be his people, and he
distinguishes us by his mark, as if he would openly shew to the eyes of
mankind his recognition of our profession. Thus God’s name was called
upon Jerusalem, because his election had been celebrated already for
many ages, and he had also gathered together one peculiar people, and
pointed out a place where he wished sacrifices to be offered.

<span id="iv.xxii-p11"></span>He adds afterwards, *Because we do not
pour forth our prayers before thy face upon or through our own
righteousness,* (<span id="iv.xxii-p11.1"></span>יכ *ki,* “but,” is in
my opinion put adversatively here,) *but on account of thy many or great
mercies* Daniel more clearly confirms what was said yesterday, shewing
how his hope was founded in God’s mercy alone. But I have stated how he
expresses his meaning more clearly by opposing two members of a sentence
naturally contrary to each other. *Not in our righteousness,* says he,
*but in thy compassion’s* Although this comparison is not always put so
distinctly, yet this rule must be held — whenever the saints rely upon
the grace of God, they renounce at the same time all their merits, and
find nothing in themselves to render God propitious. But this passage
must be diligently noticed, where Daniel carefully excludes whatever
opposes God’s gratuitous goodness; and he next shews how, by bringing
forward anything of their own, as if men could deserve God’s grace, they
diminish in an equal degree from his mercy. Daniel’s words also contain
another truth, manifesting the impossibility of reconciling two opposite
things, viz., the faithful taking refuge in God’s mercy, and yet
bringing anything of their own and resting upon their merits. As,
therefore, a complete repugnance exists between the gratuitous goodness
of God and all the merits of man, how stupid are those who strive to
combine them, according to the usual practice of the Papacy! And even
now, those who do not yield willingly to God and his word, wish to throw
a covering over their error, by ascribing half the praise to God and his
mercy, and retaining the remainder as peculiar to man. But all doubt is
removed when Daniel places these two principles in opposition to each
other, according to my former remark — the righteousness of man and the
mercy of God. Our merits, in truth, will no more unite with the grace of
God than fire and water, mingled in the vain attempt to seek some
agreement between flyings so opposite. He next calls these mercies
“great,” as we previously remarked the use of a great variety of words
to express the various ways in which the people were amenable to his
judgment. Here, therefore, he implores God’s mercies as both many and
great, as the people’s wickedness had arrived at its very utmost pitch.

<span id="iv.xxii-p12"></span>As for the following expression, *The
people pour down their prayers before God,* Scripture seems in some
degree at variance with itself, through the frequent use of a different
metaphor, representing prayers as raised towards heaven. This phrase
often occurs, — O God, we elevate or raise our prayers to thee. Here
also, as in other places, the Spirit dictates a different form of
expression, representing the faithful as casting down upon the ground
their vows and prayers. Each of these expressions is equally suitable,
because, as we said yesterday, both repentance and faith ought to be
united in our prayers. But repentance throws men downwards, and faith
raises them upwards again. At the first glance these two ideas do not
seem easily reconciled; but by weighing these two members of a true and
logical form of speech, we shall not find it possible to raise our
prayers and vows to heaven, without depressing them, so to speak, to the
very lowest depths. For on the one hand, when the sinner comes into the
presence of God, he must necessarily fall completely down, nay, vanish
as if lifeless before him. This is the genuine effect of repentance. And
in this way the saints cast down all their prayers, whenever they
suppliantly acknowledge themselves unworthy of the notice of the
Almighty. Christ sets before us a picture of this kind in the character
of the publican, who beats on his breast and begs for pardon with a
dejected countenance. (<span id="iv.xxii-p12.1"></span>[Lu
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#013.md)<span
id="iv.xxii-p12.1"></span>.) Thus also the sons of God throw down their
prayers in that spirit of humility which springs from penitence. Then
they raise their prayers by faith for when God invites them to himself,
and gives them the witness to his propitious disposition, they raise
themselves up and overtop the clouds, yea, even heaven itself. Whence
this doctrine also shines forth Thou art a God who hearest prayer, as we
read in the Psalms. (<span id="iv.xxii-p12.2"></span>[Ps
65:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#002)<span id="iv.xxii-p12.2"></span>..md)
In consequence of the faithful determining God to be propitious, they
boldly approach his presence, and pray with minds erect, through an
assurance that God is well pleased with the sacrifice which they offer.
It follows:

<span id="iv.xxiii"></span>

<span id="iv.xxiii-p1"></span><span id="iv.xxiii-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
9:19](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#019.md)<span id="iv.xxiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxiii-p2"></span>**19.** O Lord, hear; O Lord, forgive; O
Lord, hearken and do; defer not, for thine own sake, O my God: for thy
city and thy people are called by thy name.

<span id="iv.xxiii-p3"></span>**19.** Domine audi, Domine propitius
esto, Domine attende, *vel, animadverte,* et fac, ne moreris propter te,
Deus mi, quia nomen tuum invocatum est super urbem tuam, et super
populum tuum.

<span id="iv.xxiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.xxiii-p5"></span><span id="iv.xxiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxiii-p6"></span>Here vehemence is better expressed, as I
have previously observed. For Daniel does not display his eloquence, as
hypocrites usually do, but simply teaches by his example the true law
and method of prayer. Without doubt, he was impelled by singular zeal
for the purpose of drawing others with him. God, therefore, worked in
the Prophet by his Spirit, to render him a guide to all the rest, and
his prayer as a kind of common form to the whole Church. With this
intention, Daniel now relates his own conceptions. He had prayed without
any witness, but he now calls together the whole Church, and wishes it
to become a witness of his zeal and fervor, and invites all men to
follow this prescription, proceeding as it does not from himself but
from God. *O Lord, hear,* says he; and next, *O Lord, be propitious* By
this second clause he implies the continual and intentional deafness of
the Almighty, because he was deservedly angry with the people. And we
ought to observe this, because we foolishly wonder at God’s not
answering our prayers as soon as the wish has proceeded from our lips.
Its reason, too, must be noticed. God’s slowness springs from our
coldness and dullness, while our iniquities interpose an obstacle
between ourselves and his ear. *Be thou,* therefore, *propitious, O
Lord, that thou mayest hear.* So the sentence ought to be resolved. He
afterwards adds, *O Lord, attend* By this word Daniel means to convey,
that while the people had in many ways and for a length of time provoked
God’s anger, they were unworthily oppressed by impious and cruel
enemies, and that this severe calamity ought to incline God to pity
them. *O Lord,* therefore, he says, *attend and do not delay* Already
God had cast away his people for seventy years, and had suffered them to
be so oppressed by their enemies, as to cause the faithful the utmost
mental despondency. Thus we perceive how in this passage the holy
Prophet wrestled boldly with the severest temptation. He requests God
not *to delay* or put off. Seventy years had already passed away since
God had formally cast off his people, and had refused them every sign of
his good will towards them.

<span id="iv.xxiii-p7"></span>The practical inference from this passage
is the impossibility of our praying acceptably, unless we rise superior
to whatever befalls us; and if we estimate God’s favor according to our
own condition, we shall lose the very desire for prayer, nay, we shall
wear away a hundred times over in the midst of our calamities, and be
totally unable to raise our minds up to God. Lastly, whenever God seems
to have delayed for a great length of time, he must be constantly
entreated *not to delay* He next adds, *For thine own sake, O, my God.*
Again, Daniel reduces to nothing those sources of confidence by which
hypocrites imagine themselves able to obtain God’s favor. Even if one
clause of the sentence is not actually the opposite of the other, as it
was before, yet when he says, *for thy sake,* we may understand the
inference to be, therefore not for our own sakes. He confirms this view
by the remainder of the context, *For thy sake, O my God, because thy
name has been invoked upon thy city,* says he, *and upon thy people* We
observe, then, how Daniel left no means untried for obtaining his
request, although he relied on his gratuitous adoption, and never
doubted God’s propitious feelings towards his own people. He finds
indeed no cause for them either in mortals or in their merits, but he
wishes mankind perpetually to behold his benefits and to continue
steadfast to the end. It follows: —

<span id="iv.xxiv"></span>

<span id="iv.xxiv-p1"></span><span id="iv.xxiv-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
9:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#020.md)<span id="iv.xxiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxiv-p2"></span>**20.** And whiles I *was* speaking, and
praying, and confessing my sin and the sin of my people Israel, and
presenting my supplication before the LORD my God for the holy mountain
of my God;

<span id="iv.xxiv-p3"></span>**20.** Et adhuc ego loquens,  <span
id="fr_104"></span>[105](#fn_104.md) et precarer, et confiterer peecatum
meum, et peccatum populi mei Israel, et prosternerem,  <span
id="fr_105"></span>[106](#fn_105.md) precationem meam coram Jehova Deo meo,
super montem  <span id="fr_106"></span>[107](#fn_106.md) sanctuarii Dei me.

<span id="iv.xxiv-p7"></span>**21.** Yea, whiles I *was* speaking in
prayer, even the man Gabriel, whom I had seen in the vision at the
beginning, being caused to fly swiftly, touched me about the time of the
evening oblation.

<span id="iv.xxiv-p8"></span>**21.** Cum, inquam, loquerer in precatione
mea, tunc vir Gabriel quem videram in visione principio voluntam volatu,
tetigit me circa tempus oblationis vespertinae.

<span id="iv.xxiv-p9"></span> 

<span id="iv.xxiv-p10"></span><span id="iv.xxiv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxiv-p11"></span>As to the translation, some take it as I
do; others say “flying swiftly,” implying fatigue and alacrity. Some
derive the word for “flying” from <span id="iv.xxiv-p11.1"></span>ףוע,
*gnof,* which signifies to fly, and they join it with its own
participle, which is common Hebrew; others again think it derived from
<span id="iv.xxiv-p11.2"></span>ףעי, *yegnef;* signifying to fatigue,
and then explain it metaphorically as flying hastily.  <span
id="fr_107"></span>[108](#fn_107.md)

<span id="iv.xxiv-p13"></span>Here Daniel begins to shew us that his
prayers were by no means useless, nor yet without their fruit, as
Gabriel was sent to elevate his mind with confidence, and to lighten his
grief by consolation. He next sets him forth as a minister of the grace
of God to the whole Church, to inspire the faithful with the hope of a
speedy return to their country, and to encourage them to bear their
afflictions until God should open a way for their return. Next, as to
ourselves, we need not wonder at God’s refusing at times an answer to
our prayers, because those who seem to pray far better than the rest
scarcely possess a hundredth part of the zeal and fervor required. On
comparing our method of prayer with this vehemence of the Prophet,
surely we are in truth very far behind him; and it is by no means
surprising, if, while the difference is so great, the success should be
so dissimilar. And yet we may be assured that our prayers will never be
in vain, if we follow the holy Prophet at even a long interval. If the
limited amount of our faith hinders our prayers from emulating the
Prophet’s zeal, yet God will nevertheless listen to them, so long as
they are founded in faith and penitence. Daniel says, therefore, *While
I was as yet speaking, and praying, and confessing my sin and the sin of
my people Israel* First of all, we must notice how the Holy Spirit here
purposely dictated to the Prophet, how God’s grace would be prepared for
and extended to all the wretched who fly to it and implore it. The
Prophet, therefore, shews why we are so destitute of help, for if pain
occasions so much groaning, yet we never look up to God, from whom
consolation is always to be sought in all evils. He thus exhorts us to
the habit of prayer by saying his requests were heard. He does not bring
forward any singular example, but, as I have already said, he pronounces
generally that the prayers of those who seek God as a deliverer will
never be either vain or unfruitful. I have shewn how our supplications
do not always meet with either the same or equal attention, since our
torpor requires God to differ in the help which he supplies. But in this
way the Prophet teaches us how those who possess true faith and
repentance, however slight, will never offer up their prayers to God in
vain.

<span id="iv.xxiv-p14"></span>He next adds what is necessary to
conciliate God’s favor, namely, that men should anticipate God’s
judgment by condemning themselves. So he asserts, *He confessed his sin
and that of his people* He does not speak here of one kind of sin, but
under the word <span id="iv.xxiv-p14.1"></span>אטח, *cheta,* he
comprehends all kinds of wickedness; as if he had said, when I was
confessing myself as steeped in sin and drowned in iniquity, I confessed
the same on behalf of my people. We must notice also the phrase, *the
sin of my people Israel* He might have omitted this noun, but he wished
to testify before God to the Church being guilty and without the
slightest hope of absolution, unless God, whom they had so deservedly
offended, was graciously pleased to reconcile them to himself. But the
first clause is more worthy of notice, where Daniel relates the
confession of his own sins before God. We know what Ezekiel says, or
rather the Spirit speaking through his mouth. (<span
id="iv.xxiv-p14.2"></span>[Eze
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#014.md)<span
id="iv.xxiv-p14.2"></span>.) For God names the three most perfect
characters which had then existed in the world, and includes Daniel
among them, although he was then living. Although Daniel was an example
of angelic justice, and is celebrated by so remarkable an honor, yet, if
even he were before me, and were to entreat me for this state, I would
not listen to him, but I would free him only on account of his own
righteousness. As, therefore, God so extols his own Prophet, and raises
him on high as if he were beyond all the pollution and vices of the
world, where shall we find a man upon earth who can boast himself free
from every stain and failing? Let the most perfect characters be brought
before us — what a difference between them and Daniel! But even he
confesses himself a sinner before God, and utterly renounces his own
righteousness, and openly bears witness to his only hope of salvation
being placed in the mere mercy of God. Hence Augustine with much wisdom
often cites this passage against the followers of Pelagius and
Celestius. We are well aware with what specious pretenses these heretics
obscured God’s grace, when they argued that God’s sons ought not always
to remain in prison, but to reach the goal. The doctrine indeed is
passable enough, that the sons of God ought to be free from all fault,
but where is such integrity really found? Augustine, therefore, with the
greatest propriety, always replied to those triflers by shewing that no
one ever existed so just in this world as not to need God’s mercy. For
had there been such a character, surely the Lord, who alone is a fitting
judge, could have found him. But he asserts his servant Daniel to be
among the most perfect, if three only are taken from the beginning of
the world. But as Daniel casts himself into the flock of sinners, not
through any feigned pretense or humility, but when uttering the fullness
of his mind before God, who shall now claim for himself greater sanctity
than this? *When, therefore, I confess my sins before the face of my
God* Here surely there is no fiction, whence it follows that those who
pretend to this imaginary perfection are demons in human shape, as
Castalio and other cynics, or rather dogs like him.

<span id="iv.xxiv-p15"></span>We must therefore cling to this principle:
no man, even if semi-angelic, can approach God, unless he conciliates
his favor by sincere and ingenuous confession of his sins, as in reality
a criminal before God. This, then, is our righteousness, to confess
ourselves guilty in order that God may gratuitously absolve us. These
observations, too, respecting the Israelites concern us also, as we
observe from the direction which Christ has given us to say, Forgive us
our trespasses. (<span id="iv.xxiv-p15.1"></span>[Mt
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#012.md)<span id="iv.xxiv-p15.1"></span>;
<span id="iv.xxiv-p15.2"></span>[Lu
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#004)<span id="iv.xxiv-p15.2"></span>..md)
For whom did Christ wish to use this petition? Surely all his disciples.
If any one thinks that he has no need of this form of prayer, and this
confession of sin, let him depart from the school of Christ, and enter
into a herd of swine.

<span id="iv.xxiv-p16"></span>He now adds, *Upon the mountain of the
sanctuary of my God.* Here the Prophet suggests another reason for his
being heard, namely, his anxiety for the common welfare and safety of
the Church. For whenever any one studies his own private interests, and
is careless of his neighbor’s advantage, he is unworthy to obtain
anything before God. If, therefore, we desire our prayers to be pleasing
to God, and to produce useful fruit, let us learn to unite the whole
body of the Church with us, and not only to regard what is expedient for
ourselves, but what will tend to the common welfare of all the elect
people. *While, therefore,* says he, *I was yet speaking, and in the
midst of my prayer* It appears that Daniel prayed not only with his
affections, but broke forth into some outward utterance. It is quite
true that this word is often restricted to mental utterance; for even
when a person does not use his tongue, he may be said to speak when he
only thinks mentally within himself. But since Daniel said, *When I was
yet speaking in my prayer,* he seems to have broken forth into some
verbal utterance; for although the saints do not intend to pronounce
anything orally, yet zeal seizes upon them, and words at times escape
them. There is another reason also for this: we are naturally slow, and
then the tongue aids the thoughts. For these reasons Daniel was enabled
not only to conceive his prayers silently and mentally, but to utter
them verbally and orally.

<span id="iv.xxiv-p17"></span>He next adds, *Gabriel came;* but I cannot
complete my comments on this occurrence today.

<span id="iv.xxv"></span>

<span id="iv.xxv-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="iv.xxv-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that we may learn more
and more fully to probe ourselves, and to discover the faults of which
we are guilty: nay, may the serious weight of our wickedness truly
humble us when we come into thy sight, and call upon thee even from the
lowest depths. May we never cease to hope for thy grace; may we be
elevated by that hope to the highest heavens, and be firmly assured that
thou wilt always prove thyself a propitious Father to us. And as thou
hast granted us a Mediator who may procure favor for us from thee, may
we never hesitate to approach thee familiarly, through reliance on him.
Whenever our miseries induce us to despair, may we never succumb to it;
but with unconquered fortitude of mind, may we persevere in invoking thy
name and imploring thy pity, until we perceive the fruit of our prayers,
and after being freed from all warfare, may we at length arrive at that
blessed rest which is laid up for us in heaven, by the same, Christ our
Lord. — Amen.

<span id="iv.xxvi"></span>

<span id="iv.xxvi-p1"></span>Lecture Forty Ninth

<span id="iv.xxvi-p2"></span><span id="iv.xxvi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxvi-p3"></span>In the last Lecture we explained the
appearance of the angel to Daniel, who satisfied the eagerness of his
desires. For he prayed with great earnestness when he perceived the time
to have elapsed which God had fixed beforehand by the mouth of Jeremiah,
while the people still remained in captivity. (<span
id="iv.xxvi-p3.1"></span>[Jer
25:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#011)<span id="iv.xxvi-p3.1"></span>..md)
We have shewn how the angel was sent by God to the holy Prophet, to
alleviate his sorrow and to remove the pressure of his anxiety. He
called the angel *a man,* because he took the form of a man, as we have
already stated. One thing only remains — his saying, *the vision was
offered to him about the time of the evening sacrifice* Already seventy
years had passed away, during which Daniel had never observed any
sacrifice offered; and yet he still mentions sacrifices as if he were in
the habit of attending daily in the Temple, which was not really in
existence. Whence it appears how God’s servants, though deprived of the
outward means of grace for the present moment, are yet able to make them
practically useful by meditating upon God, and the sacrifices, and other
rites, and ceremonies of His institution. If any one in these days is
cast into prison, and even prohibited from enjoying the Lord’s Supper to
the end of his life, yet he ought not on that account to cast away the
remembrance of that sacred symbol; but should consider within himself
every day, why that Supper was granted us by Christ, and what advantages
he desires us to derive from it. Such, then, we perceive were the
feelings of the holy Prophet, because he speaks of these daily
sacrifices as if then in actual use. Yet we know them to have been
abolished, and he could not have been present at them for many years,
although during that period the Temple was standing. Now let us go
forward, —

<span id="iv.xxvii"></span>

<span id="iv.xxvii-p1"></span><span id="iv.xxvii-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
9:22](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#022.md)<span id="iv.xxvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxvii-p2"></span>**22.** And he informed *me,* and talked
with me, and said, Daniel, I am now come forth to give thee skill and
understanding.

<span id="iv.xxvii-p3"></span>**22.** Et docuit me, et loquutus est
mecum, et dixit, Daniel, nunc exivi ut te intelligere facerem
intelligentiam.  <span id="fr_108"></span>[109](#fn_108.md)

<span id="iv.xxvii-p5"></span> 

<span id="iv.xxvii-p6"></span><span id="iv.xxvii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxvii-p7"></span>Here the angel prepares the Prophet’s mind
by saying, *he came from heaven to teach him. I went forth,* says he*,
to cause thee to understand.* For Daniel ought to understand from this
angel’s duty, what he ought himself to do. As God had deigned to honor
him so highly by setting before him one of his angels as his master and
teacher, the Prophet ought not to neglect so singular a favor, lest he
should seem ungrateful to God. We now understand why the angel testifies
to *his coming to teach the Prophet* And we also ought to reflect upon
this whenever we enter God’s Temple, or read any passage of holy
Scripture, and acknowledge teachers to be sent to us from God to assist
us in our ignorance, and to interpret the Scriptures for us. We ought
also to admit Scripture to be given to us to enable us to find there
whatever would otherwise be hidden from us. For God opens, as it were,
his own heart to us, when he makes known to us his secrets by means of
the Law, and the Prophets, and his Apostles also. Thus, Paul shews the
gospel to be preached for the obedience of the faith, (<span
id="iv.xxvii-p7.1"></span>[Ro 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#005.md)<span
id="iv.xxvii-p7.1"></span>;) as if he had said, we shall not escape with
impunity, unless we obediently embrace the doctrine of the gospel;
otherwise, we do our utmost to frustrate the designs of God and elude
his counsels, unless we faithfully obey his word. It follows, —

<span id="iv.xxviii"></span>

<span id="iv.xxviii-p1"></span><span id="iv.xxviii-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#023.md)<span id="iv.xxviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxviii-p2"></span>**23.** At the beginning of thy
supplications the commandment came forth, and I am come to shew *thee;*
for thou *art* greatly beloved: therefore understand the matter, and
consider the vision.

<span id="iv.xxviii-p3"></span>**23.** Principio precationum tuarum
exivit verbum, et ego veni ut annuntiarem, quia tu desideriorum vir,
 <span id="fr_109"></span>[110](#fn_109.md) itaque intellige in sermone, et
intellige in visione.

<span id="iv.xxviii-p5"></span> 

<span id="iv.xxviii-p6"></span><span id="iv.xxviii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxviii-p7"></span>Here the angel not only exacts docility
from the Prophet, but also exhorts him to greater attention. We shall
afterwards perceive that this singular and extraordinary prophecy needed
no common study. This is the reason why the angel not only commands
Daniel to receive his message with the obedience of faith, but also to
pay greater attention than usual, because this was an important and
singular mystery. He states first of all — *the word went forth from the
time when the Prophet began to pray* I will not delay by reciting the
opinions of others, because I think I understand the genuine sense of
the passage; namely, God heard the prayers of his servant, and then
promulgated what he had already decreed. For by the word “went forth” he
expresses the publication of a decree which had formerly been made; it
was then issued just as the decrees of princes are said to go forth when
they are publicly spread abroad. God had determined what he would do,
directly Daniel had ceased, for God’s counsel would never fail of its
accomplishment; but he here points out the impossibility of the prayers
of his saints being in vain, because he grants them the very thing which
he would have bestowed had they not prayed for them, as if he were
obedient to their desires, and approved of their conduct. It is clear
enough, that we can obtain nothing by our prayer, without God’s previous
determination to grant it; yet these points are not contrary to each
other; for God attends to our prayers, as it is said in the Psalms, —
-He performs our wishes, and yet executes what he had determined before
the creation of the world. (<span id="iv.xxviii-p7.1"></span>[Ps
145:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#019.md)<span
id="iv.xxviii-p7.1"></span>.) He had predicted by Jeremiah, (<span
id="iv.xxviii-p7.2"></span>[Jer
25:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#011.md)<span
id="iv.xxviii-p7.2"></span>,) as we have remarked before, the close of
the people’s exile in seventy years; Daniel already knew this, as he
related at the beginning of the chapter, yet he did not relax in his
prayers, for he knew that God’s promises afford us no ground or occasion
for sloth or listlessness. The Prophet, therefore, prayed, and God shews
how his desires were by no means vain as they concerned the welfare of
the whole Church. He next states — *the word went forth as soon as
Daniel began to pray;* that is, as soon as he opened his lips he was
divinely answered. He afterwards adds, *he came to make this known,
because,* says he, *thou art a desirable man* Some take the word
“desirable” actively, as if Daniel glowed with intense zeal; but this is
forced and contrary to the usage of the language. Without doubt, the
Prophet uses the word in the sense of acceptance with God, and the
majority of interpreters fully agree with me. The angel therefore
announces his arrival on behalf of Daniel, because he was in the
enjoyment of God’s favor. And this is worthy of notice, for we gather
from the passage the impossibility of our vows and prayers acquiring
favor for us before God, unless we are already embraced by his regards;
for in no other way do we find God propitious, than when we flee by
faith to his loving-kindness. Then, in reliance upon Christ as our
Mediator and Advocate, we dare to approach him as sons to a parent. For
these reasons our prayers are of no avail before God, unless they are in
some degree founded in faith, which alone reconciles us to God, since we
can never be pleasing to him without pardon and remission of sins. We
observe also, the sense in which the saints are said to please God by
their sometimes failing to obtain their requests. For Daniel was subject
to continual groaning for many years, and was afflicted by much grief;
and yet he never perceived himself to have accomplished anything worthy
of his labors. he might really conclude all his labor to be utterly
lost, after praying so often and so perseveringly without effect. But
the angel meets him finally and testifies to his acceptance with God,
and enables him to acknowledge that he had not suffered any repulse,
although he had failed to obtain the object of his earnest desires.
Hence, when we become anxious in our thoughts, and are induced to
despair through the absence of all profit or fruit from our prayers, and
through the want of an open and immediate answer, we must derive this
instruction from the angel’s teaching, Daniel, who was most acceptable
to God, was heard at length, without being permitted to see the object
of his wishes with his bodily eyes. He died in exile, and never beheld
the performance of the Prophet’s prophecies concerning the happy state
of the Church, as if immediately preparing to celebrate its triumphs. At
the end of the verse, as I have already mentioned, the angel stimulates
Daniel to greater zeal, and urges him to apply his mind and all his
senses attentively to understand the prophecy which the angel was
commanded to bring before him. It now follows, —

<span id="iv.xxix"></span>

<span id="iv.xxix-p1"></span><span id="iv.xxix-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#024.md)<span id="iv.xxix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxix-p2"></span>**24.** Seventy weeks are determined upon
thy people and upon thy holy city, to finish the transgression, and to
make an end of sins, and to make reconciliation for iniquity, and to
bring in everlasting righteousness, and to seal up the vision and
prophecy, and to anoint the most Holy.

<span id="iv.xxix-p3"></span>**24.** Septuaginta hebdomades finitae sunt
super populum tuum et super urbem tuam sanctum,  <span
id="fr_110"></span>[111](#fn_110.md) ad claudendum scelus, et obsignandum
peccatum, et expiandam iniquitatem, et adducendam justitiam aeternam, et
obsignandam visionem,  <span id="fr_111"></span>[112](#fn_111.md) et
prophetiam, et ungendum sanctum sanctorum.  <span
id="fr_112"></span>[113](#fn_112.md)

<span id="iv.xxix-p7"></span> 

<span id="iv.xxix-p8"></span><span id="iv.xxix-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxix-p9"></span>This passage has been variously treated,
and so distracted, and almost torn to pieces by the various opinions of
interpreters, that it might be considered nearly useless on account of
its obscurity. But, in the assurance that no prediction is really in
vain, we may hope to understand this prophecy, provided only we are
attentive and teachable according to the angel’s admonition, and the
Prophet’s example. I do not usually refer to conflicting opinions,
because I take no pleasure in refuting them, and the simple method which
I adopt pleases me best, namely, to expound what I think delivered by
the Spirit of God. But I cannot escape the necessity of confuting’
various views of the present passage. I will begin with the Jews,
because they not only pervert its sense through ignorance, but through
shameful impudence. Whenever they’re exposed to the light which shines
from Christ, they instantly turn their backs in utter shamelessness, and
display a complete want of ingenuousness. They are like dogs who are
satisfied with barking. In this passage especially, they betray their
petulance, because with brazen forehead they elude the Prophet’s
meaning. Let us observe, then, what they think, for we should condemn
them to little purpose, unless we can convict them by reasons equally
firm and certain. When Jerome relates the teaching of the Jews who lived
before his own day, he attributes to them greater modesty and discretion
then their later descendants have displayed. He reports their
confession, that this passage cannot be understood otherwise than of the
advent of Messiah. that perhaps Jerome was unwilling to meet them in
open conflict, as he was not fully persuaded of its necessity, and
therefore he assumed more than they had allowed. I think this very
probable, for he does not let fall a single word as to what
interpretation he approves, and excuses himself for bringing forward all
kinds of opinions without any prejudice on his part. Hence, he dares not
pronounce whether or not the Jewish interpreters are more correct than
either the Greek or the Latin, but leaves his readers entirely in
suspense. Besides, it is very clear that all the Rabbis expounded this
prophecy of Daniel’s, of that continual punishment which God was about
to inflict upon his people after their return from captivity. Thus, they
entirely exclude the grace of God, and blame the Prophet, as if he had
committed an error in thinking that God would be propitious to these
miserable exiles, by restoring them to their homes and by rebuilding
their Temple. According to their view, the seventy weeks began at the
destruction of the former Temple, and closed at the overthrow of the
second. In one point they agree with us, — in considering the Prophet to
reckon the weeks not by days but by years, as in Leviticus. (<span
id="iv.xxix-p9.1"></span>[Le 25:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#008.md)<span
id="iv.xxix-p9.1"></span>.) There is no difference between us and the
Jews in numbering the years; they confess the number of years to be 490,
but disagree with us entirely as to the close of the prophecy. They say
— as I have already hinted — the continual calamities which oppressed
the people are here predicted. The Prophet hoped the end of their
troubles was fast approaching, as God had testified by Jeremiah his
perfect satisfaction with the seventy years of captivity. They say also
— the people were miserably harassed by their enemies again overthrowing
their second Temple; thus they were deprived of their homes, and the
ruined city became a sorrowful spectacle of devastation and disaster. In
this way, I shewed how they excluded the grace of God; and to sum up
their teaching shortly, this is its substance, — the Prophet is deceived
in thinking the state of the Church would improve at the close of the
seventy years, because seventy weeks still remained; that is, God
multiplied the number in this way, for the purpose of chastising them,
until at length he would abolish the city and the Temple, disperse their
nation over the whole earth and destroy their very name, until at length
the Messiah whom they expected should arrive. This is their
interpretation, but all history refutes both their ignorance and their
rashness. For, as we shall afterwards observe, all who are endued with
correct judgment will scarcely approve of this, because all historians
relate the lapse of a longer period between the monarchy of Cyrus, and
the Persians, and the coming of Christ, than Daniel here computes. The
Jews again include the years which occurred from the ruin of the former
Temple to the advent of Christ, and the final overthrow of their city.
Hence, according to the commonly received opinion, they heap together
about six hundred years. I shall afterwards state how far I approve of
this computation, and how far I differ from it. Clearly enough, however,
the Jews are both shamefully deceived and deceive others, when they thus
heap together different periods without any judgment.

<span id="iv.xxix-p10"></span>A positive refutation of this error is
readily derived from the prophecy of Jeremiah, from the beginning of
this chapter, and from the opinion of Ezra. That deceiver and impostor,
Barbinel, who fancies himself the most acute of all the Rabbis, thinks
he has a convenient way of escape here, as he eludes the subject by a
single word, and answers only one objection. But I will briefly shew how
he plays with frivolous trifles. By rejecting Josephus, he glories in an
easy victory. I candidly confess that I cannot place confidence in
Josephus either at all times or without exception. But what conclusions
do Barbinel and his followers draw from this passage? Let us come to
that prophecy of Jeremiah which I have mentioned, and in which he takes
refuge. He says, the Christians make Nebuchadnezzar reign forty-five
years, but he did not complete that number. Thus he cuts off half a
year, or perhaps a whole one, from those monarchies. But what is this to
the purpose? Because 200 years will still remain, and the contention
between us concerns this period. We perceive then how childishly he
trifles, by deducting five or six years from a very large number, and
still there is the burden of 200 years which he does not remove. But as
I have already stated, that prophecy of Jeremiah concerning the seventy
years remains immovable. But when do they begin? From the destruction of
the Temple? This will not suit at all.

<span id="iv.xxix-p11"></span>Barbinel makes the number of the years
forty-nine or thereabouts, from the destruction of the Temple to the
reign of Cyrus. But we previously perceived the Prophet to be then
instructed concerning the close of the captivity. Now, that impudent
fellow and his followers are not ashamed to assert that Daniel was a bad
interpreter of this part of Jeremiah’s prophecy, because he thought the
punishment completed, although some time yet remained. Some of the
Rabbis make this assertion, but its frivolous character appears from
this, Daniel does not here confess any error, but confidently affirms
that he prayed in consequence of his learning from the book of Jeremiah
the completion of the time of the captivity. Then Ezra uses the
following words, — When the seventy years were completed, which God had
predicted by Jeremiah, he stirred up the spirit of Cyrus, king of
Persia, to free the people in the first year of his monarchy. (<span
id="iv.xxix-p11.1"></span>[Da 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#001.md)<span
id="iv.xxix-p11.1"></span>.) Here Ezra openly states, that Cyrus gave
the people liberty by the secret impulse of the Spirit. Had the Spirit
of God become forgetful, when he hastened the people’s return? For then
we must necessarily convict Jeremiah of deception and falsehood, while
Ezra treats the people’s return as an answer to the prophecy. On the
other hand, they cite a passage from the first chapter of Zechariah,
(<span id="iv.xxix-p11.2"></span>[Zec
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#012)<span id="iv.xxix-p11.2"></span>,.md)
Wilt thou not, O Lord, pity thy city Jerusalem, because the seventy
years are now at an end? But here the Prophet does not point out the
moment at which the seventy years were finished, but while some portion
of the people had returned to their country by the permission of Cyrus,
and the building of the Temple was still impeded, after a lapse of
twenty or thirty years, he complains of God not having completely and
fully liberated his people. Whether or not this is so, the Jews must
explain the beginning of the seventy years from the former exile before
the destruction of the Temple; otherwise the passages cited from Daniel
and Ezra would not agree. We are thus compelled to close these seventy
years before the reign of Cyrus, as God had said he should then put all
end to the captivity of his people, and the period was completed at that
point.

<span id="iv.xxix-p12"></span>Again, almost all profane writers reckon
550 years from the reign of Cyrus to the advent of Christ.

<span id="iv.xxix-p13"></span>I do not hesitate to suppose some error
here, because no slight difficulty would remain to us on this
calculation, but I shall afterwards state the correct method of
calculating the number of years. Meanwhile, we perceive how the Jews in
every way exceed the number of 600 years, by comprehending the seventy
years’ captivity under these seventy weeks; and then they add the time
which elapsed from the death of Christ to the reign of Vespasian. But
the facts themselves are their best refutation. For the angel says, *the
seventy weeks were finished.* Barbinel takes the word <span
id="iv.xxix-p13.1"></span>ךתח*, chetek,* for “to cut off,” and wishes us
to mark the continual miseries by which the people were afflicted; as if
the angel had said, the time of redemption has not yet arrived, as the
people were continually wretched, until God inflicted upon them that
final blow which was a desperate slaughter. But when this word is taken
to mean to “terminate” or “finish,” the angel evidently announces the
conclusion of the seventy weeks here. That impostor contends with this
argument — weeks of years are here used in vain, unless with reference
to the captivity. This is partially true, but he draws them out longer
than he ought. Our Prophet alludes to the seventy years of Jeremiah, and
I am surprised that the advocates of our side have not considered this,
as no one suggests any reason why Daniel reckons years by weeks. Yet we
know this figure to be purposely used, because he wished to compare
seventy weeks of years with the seventy years. And whoever will take the
trouble to consider this likeness or analogy, will find the Jews slain
with their own sword. For the Prophet here compares God’s grace with his
judgment; as if he had said, the people have been punished by an exile
of seventy years, but now their time of grace has arrived; nay, the day
of their redemption has dawned, and it shone forth with continual
splendor, shaded, indeed, with a few clouds, for 490 years until the
advent of Christ. The Prophet’s language must be interpreted as follows,
— Sorrowful darkness has brooded over you for seventy years, but God
will now follow up this period by one of favor of sevenfold duration,
because by lightening your cares and moderating your sorrows, he will
not cease to prove himself propitious to you even to the advent of
Christ. This event was notoriously the principal hope of the saints who
looked forward to the appearance of the Redeemer.

<span id="iv.xxix-p14"></span>We now understand why the angel does not
use the reckoning’ of years, or months, or days, but weeks of years,
because this has a tacit reference to the penalty which the people had
endured according to the prophecy of Jeremiah. On the other hand, this
displays God’s great loving kindness, since he manifests a regard for
his people up to the period of his setting forth their promised
salvation in his Christ. *Seventy weeks,* then, says he, *were finished
upon thy people, and upon thy holy city* I do not approve of the view of
Jerome, who thinks this an allusion to the rejection of the people; as
if he had said, the people is thine and not mine. I feel sure this is
utterly contrary to the Prophet’s intention. He asserts the people and
city to be here called Daniel’s, because God had divorced his people and
rejected his city. But, as I said before, God wished to bring some
consolation to his servant and all the pious, and to prop them up by
this confidence during their oppression by their enemies. For God had
already fixed the time of sending the Redeemer. The people and the city
are said to belong to Daniel, because, as we saw before, the Prophet was
anxious for the common safety of His nation, and the restoration of the
city and Temple. Lastly, the angel confirms his previous expression —
God listened to his servant’s prayer, and promulgated the prophecy of
future redemption. The clause which follows convicts the Jews of
purposely corrupting Daniel’s words and meaning, because the angel says,
*the time was finished for putting an end to wickedness, and for sealing
up sins, and for expiating iniquity* We gather from this clause, God’s
compassionate feelings for His people after these seventy weeks were
over. For what purpose did God determine that time? Surely to prohibit
sin, to close up wickedness, and to expiate iniquity. We observe no
continuance of punishment here, as the Jews vainly imagine; for they
suppose God always hostile to his people, and they recognize a sign of
most grievous offense in the utter destruction of the Temple. The
Prophet, or rather the angel, gives us quite the opposite view of the
case, by explaining how God wished to finish and close up their sin, and
to expiate their iniquity He afterwards adds, *to bring in everlasting
righteousness* We first perceive how joyful a message is brought forward
concerning the reconciliation of the people with God; and next,
something promised far better and more excellent than anything which had
been granted under the law, and even under the flourishing times of the
Jews under David and Solomon. The angel here encourages the faithful to
expect something better than what their fathers, whom God had adopted,
had experienced. There is a kind of contrast between the expiation’s
under the law and this which the angel announces, and also between the
pardon here promised and that which God had always given to his ancient
people; and there is also the same contrast between the eternal
righteousness and that which flourished under the law.

<span id="iv.xxix-p15"></span>He next adds, *To seal up the vision and
the prophecy* Here the word “to seal” may be taken in two senses. Either
the advent of Christ should sanction whatever had been formerly
predicted — and the metaphor will imply this well enough — or we may
take it otherwise, namely:, the vision shall be sealed up, and so
finally closed that all prophecies should cease. Barbinel thinks he
points out a great absurdity here, by stating it to be by no means in
accordance with God’s character, to deprive his Church of the remarkable
blessing of prophecy. But that blind man does not comprehend the force
of the prophecy, because he does not understand anything about Christ.
We know the law to be distinguished from the gospel by this
peculiarity,-they formerly had a long course of prophecy according to
the language of the Apostle. (<span id="iv.xxix-p15.1"></span>[Heb
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#001)<span id="iv.xxix-p15.1"></span>..md)
God spake formerly in various ways by prophets, but in these last times
by his only-begotten Son. Again, the law and the prophets existed until
John, says Christ. (<span id="iv.xxix-p15.2"></span>[Mt
11:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#011.md)<span
id="iv.xxix-p15.2"></span>; <span id="iv.xxix-p15.3"></span>[Lu
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#016.md)<span id="iv.xxix-p15.3"></span>;
<span id="iv.xxix-p15.4"></span>[Lu
7:28](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#028)<span id="iv.xxix-p15.4"></span>..md)
Barbinel does not perceive this difference, and as I have formerly said,
he thinks he has discovered an argument against us, by asserting that
the gift of prophecy ought not to be taken away. And, truly, we ought
not to be deprived of this gift, unless God desired to increase the
privilege of the new people, because the least in the kingdom of heaven
is superior in privilege to all the prophets, as Christ elsewhere
pronounces. tie next adds, *that the Holy of Holies may be anointed*
Here, again, we have a tacit contrast between the anointings of the law,
and the last which should take place. Not only is consolation here
offered to all the pious, as God was about to mitigate the punishment
which he had inflicted, but because he wished to pour forth the fullness
of all his pity upon the new Church. For, as I have said, the Jews
cannot escape this comparison on the part of the angel between the state
of the Church under the legal and the new covenants; for the latter
privileges were to be far better, more excellent, and more desirable,
than those existing in the ancient Church from its commencement. But the
rest tomorrow.  <span id="fr_113"></span>[114](#fn_113.md)

<span id="iv.xxx"></span>

<span id="iv.xxx-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="iv.xxx-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, as through our extreme
blindness, we cannot gaze upon open daylight, that we may be enlightened
by thy Spirit. May we profit by all thy prophecies by which thou wishest
to direct us to thine only-begotten Son; embrace him with true and
certain faith, and remain obedient to him as our ruler and guide; and
after we have passed through this world, may we at length arrive at that
heavenly rest which has been obtained for us by the blood of the same
thy Son. — Amen.

<span id="iv.xxxi"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxi-p1"></span>Lecture Fiftieth

<span id="iv.xxxi-p2"></span>We began yesterday to shew how foolishly
the Rabbis corrupt by their comments this prophecy of which we are now
treating; for they suppose the angel to be treating of the continual
wrath of God which the Jewish people had partially experienced, and
which was still to be of longer duration and greater severity, according
to their supposition. We have explained how openly this is opposed to
the words of Daniel, who here promises the return of God’s favor to his
people, and then shews the object and intention of the Holy Spirit. By
this consolation he wished to lighten the sorrow of the holy man whom we
have already seen to be extremely anxious about the state of the Church
which he then perceived to be so deplorable. The phrase on which we have
already commented confirms the same point, for the angel promises, at
the arrival of the predicted period, *an end to sin and wickedness, and
iniquity, because iniquity should then be expiated* He next promises
*the approach of eternal righteousness;* and lastly adds, *the sealing
of the vision and prophecy, together with the spiritual anointing of the
Holy of Holies* Every one admits this to be a promise of a blessing more
excellent than anything under the law. No other interpretation can
possibly be received than that which refers it to the advent of Christ,
and the entire restoration of the Church of God. Other arguments follow.
For the Prophet adds what I shall repeat again, for I must explain more
fully what I now only casually run through.

<span id="iv.xxxii"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxii-p1"></span><span id="iv.xxxii-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
9:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#025.md)<span id="iv.xxxii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxii-p2"></span>**25.** Know therefore and understand,
*that* from the going forth of the commandment to restore and to build
Jerusalem unto the Messiah the Prince *shall be* seven weeks, and
threescore and two weeks: the street shall be built again, and the wall,
even in troublous times.

<span id="iv.xxxii-p3"></span>**25.** Cognosces ergo et intelliges,
 <span id="fr_114"></span>[115](#fn_114.md) ab exitu verbi de reditu,
 <span id="fr_115"></span>[116](#fn_115.md) et de aedificanda Jerosolyma
usque ad Christum ducem hebdomadas septam, et hebdomadas sexaginta duas,
et reducetur,  <span id="fr_116"></span>[117](#fn_116.md) et
re-aedificabutur platea,  <span id="fr_117"></span>[118](#fn_117.md) et
murus, idque in angustia temporum.

<span id="iv.xxxii-p8"></span> 

<span id="iv.xxxii-p9"></span><span id="iv.xxxii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxii-p10"></span>Daniel here repeats the divisions of time
already mentioned. He had previously stated seventy weeks; but he now
makes two portions, one of seven weeks, and the other of sixty-two.
There is clearly another reason why he wished to divide into two parts
the number used by the angel. One portion contains seven weeks, and the
other sixty-two; a single week is omitted which will afterwards be
mentioned. The Jews reject seven weeks from the rule of Herod to that of
Vespasian. I confess this to be in accordance with the Jewish method of
speech; instead of sixty-two and seven, they will say seven and
sixty-two; thus putting the smaller number first. The years of man (says
Moses) shall be twenty and a hundred, (<span
id="iv.xxxii-p10.1"></span>[Ge
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#003)<span id="iv.xxxii-p10.1"></span>.md)
the Greeks and Latins would say, shall be a hundred and twenty years. I
confess this to be the common phrase among the Hebrews; but here the
Prophet is not relating the continuance of any series of years, as if he
were treating of the life of a single man, but he first marks the space
of seven weeks, and then cuts off another period of sixty-two weeks. The
seven weeks clearly precede in order of time, otherwise we could not
sufficiently explain the full meaning of the angel.

<span id="iv.xxxii-p11"></span>We shall now treat the sense in which
*the going forth of the edict* ought to be received. In the meantime, it
cannot be denied that the angel pronounces this concerning the edict
which had been promulgated about the bringing back of the people, and
the restoration of the city. It would, therefore, be foolish to apply it
to a period at which the city was not restored, and no such decree had
either been uttered or made public. But, first of all, we must treat
what the angel says, *until the Christ, the Messiah* Some desire to take
this singular noun in a plural sense, as if it were the Christ of the
Lord, meaning his priests; while some refer it to Zerubbabel, and others
to Joshua. But clearly enough the angel speaks of Christ, of whom both
kings and priests under the law were a type and figure. Some, again,
think the dignity of Christ lessened by the use of the word <span
id="iv.xxxii-p11.1"></span>דיגנ, *negid,* “prince” or “leader,” as if in
his leadership there existed neither royalty, nor scepter, nor diadem.
This remark is altogether without reason; for David is called a leader
of the people, and Hezekiah when he wore a diadem, and was seated on his
throne, is also termed a leader. (<span id="iv.xxxii-p11.2"></span>[2Sa
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#002.md)<span id="iv.xxxii-p11.2"></span>;
<span id="iv.xxxii-p11.3"></span>[2Ki
20:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#005.md)<span
id="iv.xxxii-p11.3"></span>.) Without doubt, the word here implies
superior excellence. All kings were rulers over the people of God, and
the priests were endowed with a certain degree of honor and authority.
Here, then, the angel calls Christ, leader, as he far surpassed all
others, whether kings or priests. And if the reader is not captious,
this contrast will be admitted at once.

<span id="iv.xxxii-p12"></span>He next adds, *The people shall return or
be brought back, and the street shall be built, and the wall, and that,
too, in the narrow limit of the times.* Another argument follows, —
namely, after sixty-two weeks Christ shall be cut off. This the Jews
understand of Agrippa, who certainly was cut off when Augustus obtained
the empire. In this they seek only something to say; for all sound and
sensible readers will be perfectly satisfied that they act without
either judgment or shame, and vomit forth whatever comes into their
thoughts. They are quite satisfied when they find anything plausible to
say. That trifler, Barbinel, of whom I have previously spoken, thinks
Agrippa has just as much right to be called a Christ as Cyrus; he allows
his defection to the Romans, but states it to have been against his
will, as he was still a worshipper of God. Although he was clearly an
apostate, yet he treats him as by no means worse than all the rest, and
for this reason he wishes him to be called the Christ. But, first of
all, we know Agrippa not to have been a legitimate king, and his tyranny
was directly contrary to the oracle of Jacob, since the scepter had been
snatched away from the tribe of Judah. (<span
id="iv.xxxii-p12.1"></span>[Ge
49:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#010.md)<span
id="iv.xxxii-p12.1"></span>.) He cannot by any means be called Christ,
even though he had surpassed all angels in wisdom, and virtue, and
power, and everything else. Here the lawful government of the people is
treated, and this will not be found in the person of Agrippa. Hence the
Jewish arguments are altogether futile. Next, another statement is
added, *he shall confirm the treaty with many.* The Jews elude the force
of this clause very dishonestly, and without the slightest shame. They
twist it to Vespasian and Titus. Vespasian had been sent into Syria and
the East by Nero. It is perfectly true, that though a wish to avoid a
severe slaughter of his soldiers, he tried all conditions of peace, and
enticed the Jews by every possible inducement to give themselves up to
him, rather than to force him to the last extremity. Truly enough, then,
Vespasian exhorted the Jews to peace, and Titus, after his father had
passed over to Italy, followed the same policy; but was this confirming
the covenant? When the angel of God is treating events of the last
importance, and embracing the whole condition of the Church, their
explanation is trifling who refer it to the Roman leaders wishing to
enter into a treaty with the people. They attempted either to obtain
possession of the whole empire of the East by covenant, or else they
determined to use the utmost force to capture the city. This
explanation, then, is utterly absurd. It is quite clear that the Jews
are not only destitute of all reason when they explain this passage of
the continual wrath of God, and exclude his favor and reconciliation
with the people, but they are utterly dishonest, and utter words without
shame, and throw a mist over the passage to darken it. At the same time
their vanity is exposed, as they have no pretext for their comments.

<span id="iv.xxxii-p13"></span>I now come to the Ancient Writers.
Jerome, as I stated shortly yesterday, recites various opinions. But
before I treat them singly, I must answer in few words, the calumny of
that impure and obstinate Rabbi, Barbinel. To deprive the Christians of
all confidence and authority, he objects to their mutual differences; as
if differences between men not sufficiently exercised in the Scriptures,
could entirely overthrow their truth. Suppose, for instance, that I were
to argue against him, the absence of consent among the Jews themselves.
If any one is anxious to collect their different opinions, he may exult
as a conqueror in this respect, as there is no agreement between the
Rabbis. Nay, he does not point out the full extent of the differences
which occur among Christians, for I am ready to concede far more than he
demands. For that brawler was ignorant of all things, and betrays only
petulance and talkativeness. His books are doubtless very plausible
among the Jews who seek nothing else. But he takes as authorities with
us, Africanus and Nicolaus de Lyra, Burgensis, and a certain teacher
named Remond. He is ignorant of the names of Eusebius,  <span
id="fr_118"></span>[119](#fn_118.md) Origen, Tertullian, Hippolytus,
Apollinaris, Jerome, Augustine, and other similar writers. We here
perceive how brazen this prater is, who dares to babble about matters
utterly beyond his knowledge. But as I have stated, I allow many
differences among Christians. Eusebius himself agrees with the Jews in
referring the word “Christ” to the priests, and when the angel speaks of
the death of Christ, he thinks the death of Aristobulus, who was slain,
is intended here. But this is altogether foolish. He is a Christian, you
will say; true, but he fell into ignorance and error. The opinion of
Africanus is more to the point, but the time by no means accords with
that of Darius the son of Hystaspes, as I shall afterwards show. He errs
again on another chapter, by taking the years to be lunar ones, as
Lyranus does. Without doubt, this was only a cavil of his; through not
finding their own years suit, they thought the whole number might be
made up, by using intercalary years together with the 490. For before
the year was adjusted to the course of the sun, the ancients were
accustomed to reckon twelve lunar months, and afterwards to add another.
The whole number of years may be made up according to their imagination,
if we add those additional periods to the years here enumerated by the
Prophet. But I reject this altogether. Hippolytus also errs in another
direction; for he reckons the seven weeks as the time which elapsed
between the death and resurrection of Christ, and herein he agrees with
the Jews. Apollinaris also is mistaken, for he thinks we must begin at
Christ’s birth, and then extends the prophecy to the end of the world.
Eusebius also, who contends with him in a certain passage, takes the
last week for the whole period which must elapse till the end of the
world shall arrive. I therefore am ready to acknowledge all these
interpretations to be false, and yet I do not allow the truth of God to
fail.

<span id="iv.xxxii-p15"></span>How, therefore, shall we arrive at any
certain conclusion? It is not sufficient to refute the ignorance of
others, unless we can make the truth apparent, and prove it by clear and
satisfactory reasons. I am willing to spare the names of surviving
commentators, and of those who have lived during our own times, yet I
must say what will prove useful to my readers; meanwhile, I shall speak
cautiously, because I am very desirous of being silent upon all points
except those which are useful and necessary to be known. If any one has
the taste and the needful leisure to inquire diligently into the time
here mentioned, Oecolampadius rightly and prudently admonishes us, that
we ought to make the computation from the beginning of the world. For
until the ruin of the Temple and the destruction of the city, we can
gather with certainty the number of years which have elapsed since the
creation of the world; here there is no room for error. The series is
plain enough in the Scriptures. But after this they leave the reader to
other sources of information, since the computation from the overthrow
of the Temple is loose and inaccurate, according to Eusebius and others.
Thus, from the return of the people to the advent of Christ 540 years
will be found to have elapsed. Thus we see how impossible it is to
satisfy sensible readers, if we only reckon the years in the way
Oecolampadius has done.  <span id="fr_119"></span>[120](#fn_119.md)

<span id="iv.xxxii-p17"></span>Philip Melancthon, who excels in genius
and learning, and is happily versed in the studies of history, *fakes* a
double computation. He begins one plan from the second year of Cyrus,
that is, from the commencement of the Persian monarchy; but he reckons
the seventy weeks to be finished about the death of Augustus, which is
the period of the birth of Christ. When he arrives at the baptism of
Christ, he adds another method of reckoning, which commences at the
times of Darius: and as to the edict here mentioned, he understands it
to have been promulgated by Darius the son of Hystaspes, since the
building of the Temple was interrupted for about sixty-six years. As to
this computation, I cannot by any means approve of it. And yet I confess
the impossibility of finding any other exposition of what the angel says
— *until Christ the Leader,* unless by referring it to the baptism of
Christ.

<span id="iv.xxxii-p18"></span>These two points, then, in my judgment,
must be held as fixed; first, the seventy weeks begin with the Persian
monarchy, because a free return was then granted to the people; and
secondly, they did not terminate till the baptism of Christ, when he
openly commenced his work of satisfying the requirements of the office
assigned him by his father. But we must now see how this will accord
with the number of years. I confess here, the existence of such great
differences between ancient writers, that we must use conjecture,
because we have no certain explanation to bring forward, which we can
point out as the only sufficient one. I am aware of the various
calumnies of those who desire to render all things obscure, and to pour
the darkness of night upon the clearest daylight. For the profane and
the skeptical catch at this directly; for when they see any difference
of opinion, they wish to shew the uncertainty of all our teaching. So if
they perceive any difference in the views of various interpreters, even
in matters of the smallest moment, they conclude all things to be
involved in complete darkness. But their perverseness ought not to
frighten us, because when any discrepancies occur in the narratives of
profane historians, we do not pronounce the whole history fabulous. Let
us take Grecian history, — how greatly the Greeks differ from each
other? If any should make this a pretext for rejecting them all, and
should assert all their narrations to be false, would not every one
condemn him as singularly impudent? Now, if the Scriptures are not
self-contradictory, but manifest slight diversities in either years or
places, shall we on that account pronounce them entirely destitute of
credit? We are well aware of the existence of some differences in all
histories, and yet this does not cause them to lose their authority;
they are still quoted, and confidence is reposed in them.

<span id="iv.xxxii-p19"></span>With respect to the present passage, I
confess myself unable to deny the existence of much controversy
concerning these years, among all the Greek and Latin writers. This is
true: but, meanwhile, shall we bury whatever has already past, and think
the world interrupted in its course? After Cyrus had transferred to the
Persians the power of the East, some kings must clearly have followed
him, although it is not evident who they were, and writers also differ
about. the period and the reigns of each of them, and yet on the main
points there is a general agreement. For some enumerate about 200 years;
others 125 years; and some are between the two, reckoning 140 years.
Whichever be the correct statement, there was clearly some succession of
the Persian kings, and many additional years elapsed before Alexander
the Macedonian obtained the monarchy of the whole East. This is quite
clear. Now, from the death of Alexander the number of years is well
known. Philip Melancthon cites a passage from Ptolemy which makes them
292; and many testimonies may be adduced, which confirm that period of
time. If any object, the number of years might be reckoned by periods of
five years, as the Romans usually did, or by Olympiads, with the Greeks,
I confess that the reckoning by Olympiads removes all source of error.
The Greeks used great diligence and minuteness, and were very desirous
of glory. We cannot say the same of the Persian empire, for we are
unable accurately to determine under what Olympiad each king lived, and
the year in which he commenced his reign and in which he died. Whatever
conclusion we adopt, my previous assertion is perfectly true, — if
captious men are rebellious and darken the clear light of history, yet,
they cannot wrest this passage from its real meaning, because we can
gather from both the Greek and Latin historians, the whole sum of the
times which will suit very clearly this prophecy of Daniel. Whoever will
compare all historical testimony with the desire of learning, and,
without any contention, will carefully number the years, he will find it
impossible to express them better than by the expression of the angel —
seventy weeks. For example, let any studious person, endued with
acuteness, experience, and skill, discover whatever has been written in
Greek and Latin, and distinguish the testimony of each writer under
distinct heads, and afterwards compare the writers together, and
determine the credibility of each, and how far each is a fit and
classical authority, he will find the same result as that here given by
the Prophet. This ought to be sufficient for us. But, meanwhile, we must
remember how our ignorance springs chiefly from this Persian custom;
whoever undertook a warlike expedition, appointed his son his viceroy.
Thus, Cambyses reigned, according to some, twenty years, and according
to others, only seven; because the crown was placed on his head during
his father’s lifetime. Besides this, there was another reason. The
people of the East are notoriously very restless, easily excited, and
always desiring a change of rulers. Hence, contentions frequently arose
among near relatives, of which we have ample narratives in the works of
Herodotus. I mention him among others, as the fact is sufficiently
known. When fathers saw the danger of their sons mutually destroying
each other, they usually created one of them a king; and if they wished
to prefer the younger brother to the elder, they called him “king” with
the concurrence of their council. Hence, the years of their reigns
became intermingled, without any fixed method of reckoning them. And,
therefore, I said, even if Olympiads could never mislead us, this could
not be asserted of the Persian empire. While we allow much diversity and
contradiction united with great obscurity, still we must always return
to the same point, — some conclusion may be found, which will agree with
this prediction of the Prophet. Therefore I will not reckon these years
one by one, but will only admonish each of you to weigh for himself,
according to his capacity, what he reads in history. Thus all sound and
moderate men will acquiesce, when they perceive how well this prophecy
of Daniel agrees with the testimony of profane writers, in its general
scope, according to my previous explanations.

<span id="iv.xxxii-p20"></span>I stated that we must begin with the
monarchy of Cyrus; this is clearly to be gathered from the words of the
angel, and especially from the division of the weeks. For he says, *The
seven weeks have reference to the repair of the city and temple* No
cavils can in any way deprive the Prophet’s expression of its true
force: *from the going forth of the edict concerning the bringing back
of the people and the building of the city, until Messiah the Leader,
shall be seven weeks;* and then, *sixty-two weeks:* afterward he adds,
*After the sixty-two weeks Christ shall be cut off* When, therefore, he
puts *seven weeks* in the first place, and clearly expresses his
reckoning the commencement of this period from the promulgation of the
edict, to what can we refer these seven weeks, except to the times of
the monarchy of Cyrus and that of Darius the son of Hystaspes? This is
evident from the history of the Maccabees, as well as from the testimony
of the evangelist John; and we may collect the same conclusion from the
prophecies of Haggai and Zechariah, as the building of the Temple was
interrupted during forty-six years. Cyrus permitted the people to build
the Temple; the foundations were laid when Cyrus went out to the war in
Scythia; the Jews were then compelled to cease their labors, and his
successor Cambyses was hostile to this people. Hence the Jews say,
(<span id="iv.xxxii-p20.1"></span>[Joh
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#020.md)<span
id="iv.xxxii-p20.1"></span>,) Forty-six years was this Temple in
building, and wilt thou build it in three days? They strive to deride
Christ because he had said, Destroy this Temple, and I will rebuild it
in future days, as it was then a common expression, and had been handed
down by their fathers, that the Temple had occupied this period in its
construction. If you add the three years during which the foundations
were laid, we shall then have forty-nine years, or seven weeks. As the
event openly shews the completion of what the angel had predicted to
Daniel, whoever wishes to wrest the meaning of the passage, only
displays his own hardihood. And must we not reject every other
interpretation, as obscuring so clear and obvious a meaning? We must
next remember what I have previously stated. In yesterday’s Lecture we
saw that seventy weeks were cut off for the people; the angel had also
declared the going forth of the edict, for which Daniel had prayed. What
necessity, then, is there for treating a certainty as doubtful? and why
litigate the point when God pronounces the commencement of this period
to be at the termination of the seventy years proclaimed by Jeremiah? It
is quite certain, that these seventy years and seventy weeks ought to be
joined together. Since, therefore, these periods are continuous, whoever
refers this passage to the time of Darius Hystaspes, first of all breaks
the links of a chain of events all connected together, and then perverts
the whole spirit of the passage; for, as we yesterday stated, the
angel’s object was to offer consolation in the midst of sorrow. For
seventy years the people had been miserably afflicted in exile, and they
seemed utterly abandoned, as if God would no longer acknowledge these
children of Abraham for his people and inheritance. As this was the
Almighty’s intention, it is quite clear that the commencement of the
seventy weeks cannot be otherwise interpreted than by referring it to
the monarchy of Cyrus. This is the first point.

<span id="iv.xxxii-p21"></span>We must now turn to the sixty-two weeks;
and if I cannot satisfy every one, I shall still content myself with
great simplicity, and I trust that all sound and humble disciples of
Christ will easily acquiesce in this exposition. If we reckon the years
from the reign of Darius to the baptism of Christ, sixty-two weeks or
thereabouts will be found to have elapsed. As I previously remarked, I
am not scrupulous to a few days or months, or even a single year; for
how great is that perverseness which would lead us to reject what
historians relate because they do not all agree to a single year?
Whatever be the correct conclusion, we shall find about 480 years
between the time of Darius and the death of Christ. Hence it becomes
necessary to prolong these years to the baptism of Christ, because when
the angel speaks of the last week, he plainly states, *The covenant
shall be confirmed at that time,* and then *the Messiah shall be cut
off* As this was to be done in the last week, we must necessarily extend
the time to the preaching of the Gospel. And for this reason Christ is
called a “Leader,” because at his conception he was destined to be king
of heaven and earth, although he did not commence his reign till he was
publicly ordained the Master and Redeemer of his people. The word
“Leader” is applied as a name before the office was assumed; as if the
angel had said, the end of the seventy weeks will occur when Christ
openly assumes the office of king over his people, by collecting them
from that miserable and horrible dispersion under which they had been so
long ground down. I shall put off the rest till to-morrow.

<span id="iv.xxxiii"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxiii-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="iv.xxxiii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since thy servants
before the setting forth of thine only-begotten Son were sustained by
those oracles which had not then been realized by the event, that we at;
this day may learn to put our trust in our Lord, who has so clearly
revealed himself to us by his Gospel. May we stand so firm and constant
in the faith of that Gospel, that we may never be tossed about by the
disturbances and tumults of this world. May we ever proceed in the
course of thy holy calling, till at length we are released from all
contests, and arrive at that blessed rest which is laid up for us in
heaven, by the same our Lord Jesus Christ. — Amen.

<span id="iv.xxxiv"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxiv-p1"></span>Lecture Fifty-First.

<span id="iv.xxxiv-p2"></span>In yesterday’s Lecture I explained my
views of the seventy weeks. I now return to the words of the Prophet, on
which I touched but briefly. He first says, *Seventy weeks have been cut
off upon thy people, and upon the holy city* By these words he implies
first, the Israelites should be under the care and protection of God
until the arrival of Christ; and next, Christ would come before the
completion of the seventy years. The angel announces these two points,
to assure the faithful of God’s perpetual remembrance of his covenant,
and to sustain them in the midst of all their anxieties and distresses.
A remarkable passage now follows concerning the office of Christ. The
angel foretells what they were to expect from Christ. First of all, he
announces remission of sins; for he points this out by the form of
expression, *to prohibit* or close up *wickedness, to seal up
sinfulness, and to expiate iniquity.* It does not surprise us to find
the angel using many phrases in a matter of such importance. Such
repetition in the language seems to us superfluous, but the knowledge of
salvation is comprehended under this head. We are thus informed how God
is reconciled to us by gratuitous pardon, and this is the reason why the
angel insists on this subject by so many words. (<span
id="iv.xxxiv-p2.1"></span>[Lu
1:77](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#077)<span id="iv.xxxiv-p2.1"></span>..md)
But we must remember what I said the day before yesterday-there is a
tacit contrast between the remission now offered to us under the Gospel,
and that formerly offered to the fathers under the Law. From the
creation of the world no one could call upon God with a tranquil mind
and with sure confidence, unless by relying upon the hope of pardon. For
we know the door of mercy to be closed against us all through our being
deservedly under God’s wrath. Hence, unless the doctrine of gratuitous
remission of sins shone forth, we should enjoy no liberty of calling
upon God, and all hope of salvation would be at the same time extinct.
It follows, therefore, the fathers under the Law had this benefit in
common with us, namely, a certain persuasion of God’s being’ propitious
to them, and of his pardoning their transgressions. What, then, is the
meaning of the phrase, Christ at his advent will seal up sins, and
expiate iniquities? Here, as I have said, a difference is shewn between
the condition of the old and the new Church. The fathers indeed had
hopes of remission of their sins, but their condition was inferior to
ours in two respects. Their teaching was not so plain as ours, nor were
their promises so full and steadfast. We excel them also in another
respect. God bears witness to us that he is our Father, and so we flee
to him with the utmost freedom and fearlessness; and, in addition to
this, Christ has already reconciled us to the Father by his blood.
(<span id="iv.xxxiv-p2.2"></span>[Ro
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#015.md)<span id="iv.xxxiv-p2.2"></span>;
<span id="iv.xxxiv-p2.3"></span>[Ga
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#006)<span id="iv.xxxiv-p2.3"></span>..md)
Thus we are superior to them, not only in our instruction, but in effect
and completeness, since at this day God not only promises us the pardon
of our sins, but testifies and affirms their entire blotting out and
becoming abolished through the sacrifice of Christ his Son. This
difference is openly denoted by the angel when he says, *Sins should be
closed up and sealed, and iniquities also expiated* when Christ came.
Hence we stated previously how something better was promised than the
fathers experienced before the manifestation of Christ.

<span id="iv.xxxiv-p3"></span>We here perceive the sense in which Christ
*shut up sins, and sealed wickedness, and expiated iniquity;* for he not
only introduced the doctrine of gratuitous pardon, and promised that God
would be entreated by the people, through his desire to pardon their
iniquity, but he really accomplished whatever was needful to reconcile
men to God. He poured forth his blood by which he blotted out our sins;
he also offered himself as an expiatory victim, and satisfied God by the
sacrifice of his death, so as entirely to absolve us from guilt. Moses
often uses the word <span id="iv.xxxiv-p3.1"></span>אטח, *cheta,* when
speaking of sacrifices; but the angel here teaches us indirectly how all
the expiation’s under the law were only figurative, and nothing but
shadows of the future; for, had sins been then really expiated, there
would have been no need of the coming of Christ. As, therefore,
expiation was suspended until the manifestation of Christ, there never
was any true expiation under the law, but all its ceremonies were but
shadowy representations. He afterwards adds, *To bring in eternal
righteousness* This righteousness depends on the expiation. For how
could God reckon the faithful just, or impute righteousness to them, as
Paul informs us, unless by covering and burying their sins, or purging
them in, the blood of Christ? (<span id="iv.xxxiv-p3.2"></span>[Ro
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#011)<span id="iv.xxxiv-p3.2"></span>..md)
Is not God himself appeased by the sacrifice of his Son? These phrases,
then, must be united, *Iniquity shall be expiated, and eternal
righteousness brought manifestly forward* No righteousness will ever be
found in mortal man, unless he obtain it from Christ; and if we use
great accuracy of expression, righteousness cannot exist in us otherwise
than through that gratuitous pardon which we obtain through the
sacrifice of Christ. Meanwhile, Scripture purposely unites together
remission of sins and righteousness, as also Paul says, Christ died for
our sins, and rose again for our justification. (<span
id="iv.xxxiv-p3.3"></span>[Ro
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#025)<span id="iv.xxxiv-p3.3"></span>..md)
His death procured satisfaction for us, so that we should not always
remain guilty, nor be subject to the condemnation of eternal death, and
then by his resurrection he procured righteousness for us, and also
acquired eternal life. The reason why the Prophet here treats justice as
perpetual or “of the ages,” is this: the fathers under the Law were
compelled to please God by daily sacrifices. There would have been no
necessity for repeating sacrifices, as the Apostle admonishes us, if
there had been any inherent virtue in a single sacrifice to appease the
Almighty. (<span id="iv.xxxiv-p3.4"></span>[Heb
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#001)<span id="iv.xxxiv-p3.4"></span>..md)
But since all the rites of the law tended to the same purpose of
foreshadowing Christ, as the one and perpetual victim for reconciling
men to God, daily sacrifices must necessarily be offered. Whence, as we
formerly said, these satisfactions were plainly insufficient for
procuring righteousness. Therefore Christ alone brought in eternal
righteousness, — his death alone sufficed for expiating all
transgressions. For Christ suffered, not only to satisfy for our sins,
but he sets before us his own death in which we should acquiesce. Hence
this eternal justice depends upon the enduring effect of the death of
Christ, since the blood of Christ flowed as it were before God, and
while we are daily purged and cleansed from our pollution, God is also
daily appeased for us. We observe, then, how righteousness was not
completely revealed under the law, but is now set before us under the
Gospel. It follows, *To seal up the vision and the prophecy*

<span id="iv.xxxiv-p4"></span>This clause may have two senses, because,
as I said before, Christ sealed up all visions and prophecies, for they
are all yea and amen in him, as Paul says. (<span
id="iv.xxxiv-p4.1"></span>[2Co
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#020)<span id="iv.xxxiv-p4.1"></span>..md)
As, therefore, God’s promises were all satisfied and fulfilled in Christ
for the salvation of the faithful, so with propriety the angel affirms
of his advent, *It shall seal up the vision and the prophecy.* This is
one sense. The other is, the vision shall be sealed in the sense of its
ceasing, as if the angel had said, Christ shall put an end to
prophecies, because our spiritual position differs from that of the
fathers. For God formerly spoke in many ways, as the Church had to pass
through a variety of conflicting states and circumstances. But when
Christ was manifested, we arrive at the close of prophetic times. Hence
his advent is called the fullness of times, (<span
id="iv.xxxiv-p4.2"></span>[Ga 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#004.md)<span
id="iv.xxxiv-p4.2"></span>; <span id="iv.xxxiv-p4.3"></span>[Heb
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#001)<span id="iv.xxxiv-p4.3"></span>;.md)
and elsewhere Paul says, we have arrived at the last days, (<span
id="iv.xxxiv-p4.4"></span>[1Co
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#011.md)<span
id="iv.xxxiv-p4.4"></span>,) since we are waiting for the second advent
of Christ, and we have no need of fresh prophecies as formerly. Then all
things were very obscure, and God governed his people under the dark
shadow of a cloud. Our condition is in these days different. Hence we
are not surprised at the angel pronouncing *all the visions and
prophecies sealed up;* for the law and the prophets were until John, but
from that time the kingdom of God began to be promulgated; that is, God
appeared much more clearly than before. (<span
id="iv.xxxiv-p4.5"></span>[Mt
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#013.md)<span id="iv.xxxiv-p4.5"></span>;
<span id="iv.xxxiv-p4.6"></span>[Lu
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#016.md)<span
id="iv.xxxiv-p4.6"></span>.) The very name of vision implies something
obscure and doubtful. But now Christ, the Sun of righteousness, has
shone upon us, and we are in meridian brightness; the Law appears only
like a candle in the government of our life, because Christ points out
to us in full splendor the way of salvation. Without doubt, the angel
here wished us to distinguish between the obscure teaching of the Law,
with its ancient figures, and the open light of the Gospel. Besides, the
name “prophecy” is taken as well for the prophetic office as for the
predictions delivered.

<span id="iv.xxxiv-p5"></span>He afterwards adds, *To anoint the Holy of
Holies* The angel here alludes to the rite of consecration which was
observed under the Law; for the tabernacle with its appendages was
consecrated by anointing. It is here shewn how the perfect and truly
spiritual anointing was put off until the advent of Christ. He is
himself properly and deservedly called the Holy One of holy ones, or the
Tabernacle of God, because his body was really the temple of deity, and
holiness must be sought from him. (<span id="iv.xxxiv-p5.1"></span>[Col
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#009)<span id="iv.xxxiv-p5.1"></span>..md)
The Prophet here reminds us of the anointing of the sanctuary under the
Law being only a figure; but in Christ we have the true exhibition of
the reality, although he was not visibly anointed with oil, but
spiritually, when the Spirit of God rested upon him with all his gifts.
Wherefore he says, (<span id="iv.xxxiv-p5.2"></span>[Joh
17:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#019.md)<span
id="iv.xxxiv-p5.2"></span>,) For their sakes I sanctify myself.

<span id="iv.xxxiv-p6"></span>It now follows, *Thou shalt know and
understand, from the going forth of a word,* (or decree,) *for the
bringing back of the people and the building of Jerusalem, until Christ
the Leader, shall be seven weeks, and sixty-two weeks, and the people
shall returns,* (or be brought back,) *and the street shall be built,
and the wall,* (or trench,) *and that too, in the narrow interval of the
times;* for thus I resolve the copula. As we have already said, the time
which had been fixed beforehand for the perfect state of the Church is
divided. In the first place, he puts seven weeks by themselves; he then
adds sixty-two weeks, and leaves one, of which we shall afterwards
speak. He immediately explains why he separates the seven weeks from the
rest, rendering every other interpreter unnecessary. Next, as to the
going forth of the edict, we have stated how inadmissible is any
interpretation but the first decree of Cyrus, which permitted the people
freely to return to their country. For the seven weeks which make up
forty-nine years clearly prove this assertion. From the beginning of the
Persian monarchy to the reign of Darius the son of Hystaspes, the
hostility of all the neighboring nations to the Jews is notorious,
especially in interrupting the building of their temple and city.
Although the people had free permission to return to their country, yet
they were there harassed by hostilities, and were almost induced to
repine at this mark of God’s favor. A great part of them preferred their
former exile to a harassing and perplexing life spent among their most
cruel foes. This is the reason why the angel informs them of the seven
weeks to elapse after the people should be brought back, for they must
not expect to spend their life in peace, and build their city and temple
without any inconvenience; for he announces the occurrence of this event
*in the narrowness of the time* By the word <span
id="iv.xxxiv-p6.1"></span>קוצ, *tzok,* he does not mean “shortness,” but
rather signifies the anxious nature of the times, in consequence of the
numerous troubles which all their neighbors should bring on the wretched
people. It was worth while to support the pious by this previous
admonition, lest they should cast away the desire of building the
temple, or become utterly desponding through the weight of the
afflictions which they must bear. We know what glowing predictions the
prophets uttered concerning the happy state of the Church after its
return; but the reality was far different from this, and the faithful
might have been quite drowned in despair unless the angel had raised
their spirits by this prophecy. We thus perceive the great utility of
this admonition, and at the same time it may be applied as a practical
example to ourselves. Although God’s loving-kindness to us was
wonderful, when the pure Gospel emerged out of that dreadful darkness in
which it had been buried for so many ages, yet we still experience the
troubled aspect of affairs. The impious still ceaselessly and furiously
oppose the miserable Church by both the sword and the virulence of their
tongues. Domestic enemies’, use clandestine arts in their schemes to
subvert our edifice; wicked men destroy all order, and interpose many
obstacles to impede our progress. But God still wishes in these days to
build his spiritual temple *amidst the anxieties of the times;* the
faithful have still to hold the trowel in one hand and the sword in the
other, as we find it in the book of Nehemiah, (<span
id="iv.xxxiv-p6.2"></span>[Ne
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#017)<span id="iv.xxxiv-p6.2"></span>,.md)
because the building of the Church must still be united with many
contests. It afterwards follows: —

<span id="iv.xxxv"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxv-p1"></span><span id="iv.xxxv-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
9:26](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#026.md)<span id="iv.xxxv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxv-p2"></span>**26.** And after threescore and two weeks
shall Messiah be cut off, but not for himself: and the people of the
prince that shall come shall destroy the city and the sanctuary; and the
end thereof *shall be* with a flood, and unto the end of the war
desolations are determined.

<span id="iv.xxxv-p3"></span>**26.** Et post hebdomadas sexaginta duas
excidetur Christus, et nihil erit, et urbem et sanctuarium perdet
populus ducis venientis, et finis ejus cum inundatione erit, vel, in
diluvio, et ad finem belli definitio desolationum.

<span id="iv.xxxv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.xxxv-p5"></span><span id="iv.xxxv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxv-p6"></span>Here Daniel treats of the sixty-two weeks
which elapsed between the sixth year of Darius and the baptism of
Christ, when the Gospel began to be promulgated, but at the same time he
does not neglect the seven weeks of which he had been speaking. For they
comprehend the space of time which intervened between the Persian
monarchy and the second edict which again granted liberty to the people
after the death of Cambyses. *After the sixty-two weeks* which should
succeed the seven former ones, *Messiah shall be cut off,* says he. Here
the angel predicts the death of Christ. The Jews refer this to Agrippa,
but this, as we have already observed, is utterly nugatory and foolish.
Eusebius and others refer it to Aristobulus, but this is equally
destitute of reason. Therefore the angel speaks of the only Mediator, as
in the former verse he had said, *until Christ the Leader* The extension
of this to all the priesthood is both forced and absurd. The angel
rather means this — Christ should then be manifest to undertake the
government of his people; or, in other words, until Messiah shall appear
and commence his reign. We have already remarked upon those who
erroneously and childishly explain the name “Leader,” as if it were
inferior in dignity to that of king. As the angel had used the name
“Christ” in the sense of Mediator, so he repeats it in this passage in
the same sense. And surely, as he had formerly treated of those singular
marks of God’s favor, by which the new Church was to surpass the old, we
cannot understand the passage otherwise than of Christ alone, of whom
the priests and kings under the Law were equally a type. The angel,
then, here asserts, *Christ should die,* and at the same time he
specifies the kind of death by saying, *nothing shall remain to him.*
This short clause may be taken in various senses, yet I do not hesitate
to represent the angel’s meaning to be this — Christ should so die as to
be entirely reduced to nothing. Some expound it thus, — -the city or the
people shall be as nothing to him; meaning, he shall be divorced from
the people, and their adoption shall cease, since we know the Jews to
have so fallen away from true piety by their perfidy as to be entirely
alienated from God, and to have lost the name of a Church. But that is
forced. Others think it means, it shall be neither hostile nor
favorable; and others, nothing shall remain to him in the sense of being
destitute of all help; but all these comments appear to me too frigid.
The genuine sense, I have no doubt, is as follows, — the death of Christ
should be without any attractiveness or loveliness, as Isaiah says.
(<span id="iv.xxxv-p6.1"></span>[Isa
53:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#002)<span id="iv.xxxv-p6.1"></span>..md)
In truth, the angel informs us of the ignominious character of Christ’s
death, as if he should vanish from the sight of men through want of
comeliness. *Nothing,* therefore, *shall remain to him,* says he; and
the obvious reason is, because men would think him utterly abolished.

<span id="iv.xxxv-p7"></span>He now adds, *The leader of the coming
people shall destroy the city and the sanctuary* Here the angel inserts
what rather concerns the end of the chapter, as he will afterwards
return to Christ. He here mentions what should happen at Christ’s death,
and purposely interrupts the order of the narrative to shew that their
impiety would not escape punishment, as they not only rejected the
Christ of God, but slew him and endeavored to blot out his remembrance
from the world. And although the angel had special reference to the
faithful alone, still unbelievers required to be admonished with the
view of rendering them without excuse. We are well aware of the
supineness and brutality of this people, as displayed in their putting
Christ to death; for this event occasioned a triumph for the priests and
the whole people. Hence these points ought to be joined together. But;
the angel consulted the interests of the faithful, as they would be
greatly shocked at the death of Christ, which we have alluded to, and
also at his ignominy and rejection. As this was a method of perishing so
very horrible in the opinion of mankind, the minds of all the pious
might utterly despond unless the angel had come to their relief. Hence
he proposes a suitable remedy*, The leader of the coming people shall
destroy the city and the sanctuary;* as if he had said, There is no
encouragement for the unbelievers to please and flatter themselves,
because Christ was reduced to nothing after a carnal sense; vengeance
shall instantly overtake them; *the leader of the coming people shall
destroy both the city and the sanctuary* He names *a coming leader,* to
prevent the unbelievers from resting secure through self-flattery, as if
God would not instantly stretch forth his hand to avenge himself upon
them. Although the Roman army which should destroy the city and
sanctuary did not immediately appear, yet the Prophet assures them of
the arrival of a leader with an army which should occasion the
destruction of both the city and the sanctuary. Without the slightest
doubt, he here signifies that God would inflict dreadful vengeance upon
the Jews for their murder of his Christ. That trifler, Barbinel, when
desirous of refuting the Christians, says — more than two hundred years
elapsed between the destruction of the Temple and the death of Christ.
How ignorant he was! Even if we were to withhold all confidence from the
evangelists and apostles, yet profane writers would soon convict him of
folly. But such is the barbarity of his nation, and so great their
obstinacy, that they are ashamed of nothing. As far as we are concerned,
we gather with sufficient clearness from the passage how the angel
touched briefly upon the future slaughter of the city and the
destruction of the Temple, lest the faithful should be overwhelmed with
trials in consequence of Christ’s death, and lest the unbelievers should
be hardened through this occurrence. The interpretation of some writers
respecting the people of the coming leader, as if Titus wished to spare
the most beautiful city and preserve it untouched, seems to me too
refined. I take it simply as a leader about to come with his army to
destroy the city, and utterly to overthrow the Temple.

<span id="iv.xxxv-p8"></span>He afterwards adds, *Its end shall be in a
deluge* Here the angel removes all hope from the Jews, whose obstinacy
might lead them to expect some advantage in their favor, for we are
already aware of their great stupidity when in a state of desperation.
Lest the faithful should indulge in the same feelings with the apostates
and rebellious, he says, *The end of the leader,* Titus, *should be in a
deluge;* meaning, he should overthrow the city and national polity, and
utterly put an end to the priesthood and the race, while all God’s
favors would at the same time be withdrawn. In this sense *his end
should be in a deluge* Lastly, *at the end of the war a most decisive
desolation* The word <span id="iv.xxxv-p8.1"></span>תצרחנ,
*nech-retzeth,* “a completion,” can scarcely be taken otherwise than as
a noun substantive. A plural noun follows, <span
id="iv.xxxv-p8.2"></span>תוממש, *shem-moth*, “of desolation’s” or
“devastation’s;” and taken verbally it means “definite or terminated
laying waste.” The most skillful grammarians allow that the former of
these words may be taken substantively for “termination,” as if the
angel had said: Even if the Jews experience a variety of fortune in
battle, and have hopes of being superior to their enemies, and of
sallying out and prohibiting their foes from entering the city; nay,
even if they repel them, still the end of the war shall result in utter
devastation, and their destruction is clearly defined. Two points, then,
are to be noticed here; first, all hope is to be taken from the Jews, as
they must be taught the necessity for their perishing; and secondly, a
reason is ascribed for this, namely, the determination of the Almighty
and his inviolable decree. It afterwards follows: —

<span id="iv.xxxvi"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p1"></span><span id="iv.xxxvi-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#027.md)<span id="iv.xxxvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p2"></span>**27.** And he shall confirm the covenant
with many for one week: and in the midst of the week he shall cause the
sacrifice and the oblation to cease, and for the overspreading of
abominations he shall make *it* desolate, even until the consummation,
and that determined shall be poured upon the desolate.

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p3"></span>**27.** Et roborabit,  <span
id="fr_120"></span>[121](#fn_120.md) foedus multis, hebdomade una: et
dimidia hebdomade quiescere faciet  <span
id="fr_121"></span>[122](#fn_121.md) sacrificium, et oblationem: et super
extensionem  <span id="fr_122"></span>[123](#fn_122.md) abominationem
obstupescet,  <span id="fr_123"></span>[124](#fn_123.md) et ad finem, et ad
determinationem stillabit super stupentem.

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p8"></span> 

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p9"></span><span id="iv.xxxvi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p10"></span>The angel now returns to Christ. We have
explained why he made mention of the coming slaughter; first, to shew
the faithful that they had no reason for remaining in the body of the
nation in preference to being cut off from it; and next, to prevent the
unbelievers from being satisfied with their obstinacy and their contempt
of their inestimable blessings, by their rejecting the person of Christ.
Thus this clause was interposed concerning the future devastation of the
city and temple. The angel now continues his discourse concerning Christ
by saying, *he should confirm the treaty with many for one week* This
clause answers to the former, in which Christ is called a Leader. Christ
took upon him the character of a leader, or assumed the kingly office,
when he promulgated the grace of God. This is the confirmation of the
covenant of which the angel now speaks. As we have already stated, the
legal expiation of other ritual ceremonies which God designed to confer
on the fathers is contrasted with the blessings derived from Christ; and
we now gather the same idea from the phrase, the confirmation of the
covenant. We know how sure and stable was God’s covenant under the law;
he was from the beginning always truthful, and faithful, and consistent
with himself. But as far as man was concerned, the covenant of the law
was weak, as we learn from Jeremiah. (<span
id="iv.xxxvi-p10.1"></span>[Jer.
31:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#031.md),
[32](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#032)<span id="iv.xxxvi-p10.1"></span>..md)
I will enter into a new covenant with you, says he; not such as I made
with your fathers, for they made it vain. We here observe the difference
between the covenant which Christ sanctioned by his death and that of
the Jewish law. Thus God’s covenant is established with us, because we
have been once reconciled by the death of Christ; and at the same time
the effect of the Holy Spirit is added, because God inscribes the law
upon our hearts; and thus his covenant is not engraven in stones, but in
our hearts of flesh, according to the teaching of the Prophet Ezekiel.
(<span id="iv.xxxvi-p10.2"></span>[Eze
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#019.md)<span
id="iv.xxxvi-p10.2"></span>.) Now, therefore, we understand why the
angel says, *Christ should confirm the covenant for one week,* and why
that week was placed last in order. In this week will he confirm the
covenant *with many* But I cannot finished this exposition just now.

<span id="iv.xxxvii"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since all the
treasures of thy goodness and indulgence were so liberally diffused,
when thine only-begotten Son appeared, and are now daily offered to us
through the Gospel: Grant, I say, that we may not deprive ourselves of
such important blessings by our ingratitude. May we embrace thy Son with
true faith; and enjoy the benefit of the redemption which he has
procured for us. Being cleansed and purged by his blood, may we be
acceptable in thy sight, and venture with full and certain confidence to
call thee Father. May we fly to thy pity and assistance in all our
miseries and troubles, until at length thou shalt gather us into that
eternal rest, which has been obtained for us through the blood of thine
only-begotten Son. — Amen.

<span id="iv.xxxviii"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p1"></span>Lecture Fifty-Second.

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p2"></span>In the last Lecture we explained how
*Christ confirmed the covenant with many during the last week;* for he
gathered together the sons of God from their state of dispersion when
the devastation of the Church was so horrible and wretched. Although the
Gospel was not instantly promulgated among foreign nations, yet Christ
is correctly said to *have confirmed the covenant with many,* as the
nations were directly called to the hope of salvation. (<span
id="iv.xxxviii-p2.1"></span>[Mt
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#005.md)<span
id="iv.xxxviii-p2.1"></span>.) Although he forbade the disciples to
preach the Gospel then to either the Gentiles or Samaritans, yet he
taught them that many sheep were dispersed abroad, and that the time at
which God would make one sheep-fold was at hand. (<span
id="iv.xxxviii-p2.2"></span>[Joh
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#016.md)<span
id="iv.xxxviii-p2.2"></span>.) This was fulfilled after his
resurrection. During his lifetime he began to anticipate slightly the
calling of the Gentiles, and thus I interpret these words of the
Prophet, *he will confirm the covenant with many* For I take the word
“many” here, <span id="iv.xxxviii-p2.3"></span>םיבר, *rebim,*
comparatively, for the faithful Gentiles united with the Jews. It is
very well known that God’s covenant was deposited by a kind of
hereditary right with the Israelites until the same favor was extended
to the Gentiles also. Therefore Christ is said not only to have renewed
God’s covenant with a single nation, but generally with the world at
large. I confess, indeed, the use of the word *many* for all, as in the
fifth chapter of the Epistle to the Romans, and in other places, (<span
id="iv.xxxviii-p2.4"></span>[Ro
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#019.md)<span
id="iv.xxxviii-p2.4"></span>,) but there seems to be a contrast between
the ancient Church, included within very narrow boundaries, and the new
Church, which is extended over the whole world. We know how many,
formerly strangers, have been called from the distant regions of the
earth by the gospel, and so joined in alliance to the Jews as to be all
in the same communion and all reckoned equally sons of God.

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p3"></span>The Prophet now subjoins, *He will make
to cease the sacrifice and offering for half a week.* We ought to refer
this to the time of the resurrection. For while Christ passed through
the period of his life on earth, he did not put an end to the
sacrifices; but after he had offered himself up as a victim, then all
the rites of the law came to a close. By the words “sacrifice and
offering” the Prophet implies all ceremonies, a part being put for the
whole; as if he had said, after Christ had offered up one eternal
sacrifice, all the customary ceremonies of the Law were abolished; for
otherwise Christ’s death would have been superfluous, had he not put an
end to all the old shadows of the Law. Although the sacrifices were
continued for many years after Christ’s death, yet we can no longer call
them “legitimate,” for no reason can be offered why the sacrifices of
the Law should be pleasing to God, except their reference to that
heavenly pattern which Moses saw on the mount. (<span
id="iv.xxxviii-p3.1"></span>[Ex
25:40](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#040.md)<span
id="iv.xxxviii-p3.1"></span>.) Hence, after Christ had appeared and
expiated all the sins of the world, it became necessary for all
sacrifices to cease. (<span id="iv.xxxviii-p3.2"></span>[Heb
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#005.md)<span
id="iv.xxxviii-p3.2"></span>.) This is the Prophet’s intention when he
says, *Christ should cause the sacrifices to cease for half a week.* He
embraces two points at the same time; first, Christ really and
effectually put an end to the sacrifices of the Law; and secondly, he
proved it to the world in the preaching of the Gospel by his Apostles.
We observe, then, the sense in which God testified by his Prophet *the
cessation of sacrifices after Christ’s resurrection.* The veil of the
temple was then rent in twain; true liberty was proclaimed; the faithful
might then feel themselves to be full grown men, and no longer subject
to that government of childhood to which they had submitted under the
Law.

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p4"></span>The second clause of the verse now
follows: we have read it before, but we now repeat it to refresh the
memory. *And over the extension,* or expansion, of *abominations he
shall cause astonishment,* or stupefaction; *and even to consumption and
determination he shall pour himself upon the desolator* Some translate,
It shall be poured or shall distill: we shall treat the words
afterwards. The passage is obscure, and may be rendered in a variety of
ways, and consequently interpreters differ much from each other. Some
take <span id="iv.xxxviii-p4.1"></span>ףנכ, *knaph,* “a wing,” for a
“cherub;” then they change the numbers from singular to plural, and
think the Prophet alludes to winged cherubim. This gives those who adopt
this rendering a two-fold method of explaining it. Some say the
abomination shall be *above the wings,* that is, the ark of the
covenant, because the temple was profaned, and the abomination was so
ruinous that it destroyed even the very cherubim. Others take it
causally — the abominations shall be for the sake of the cherubim. But I
leave these subtleties, as they do not seem to me to have any solidity.
Others, again, follow the Greek version, as quoted by Christ in the 24th
chapter of Matthew (<span id="iv.xxxviii-p4.2"></span>[Mt
24](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#000)<span id="iv.xxxviii-p4.2"></span>.md)
and elsewhere, although Christ seems rather to refer to the 12th chapter
of our Prophet. But as these two passages refer to the same abomination,
I will not insist on this point; I will only remark upon the translation
of one word. Those who translate “the abominations of desolation” treat
the words of Daniel too carelessly, for there is no grammatical
dependence of one word on the other, or, technically speaking, no *state
of regimen* The preferable opinion is that which considers the word
“wing” to mean extremity or extension. Others, again, treat “extremity”
as if it meant a state of despair; as if the angel had said, on account
of the extremity of the abominations, as evils should accumulate upon
evils without end till matters came to the last pitch of despair.
Others, again, explain “the wing of abominations” more simply for the
expansion itself, as if the angel had stated, the temple shall be openly
profaned, and the pollution shall be apparent far and wide.

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p5"></span>Interpreters differ again about the
words <span id="iv.xxxviii-p5.1"></span>םמשמ, *rmesmem* and <span
id="iv.xxxviii-p5.2"></span>םמש, *sem-em* usually translated “make
desolate,” and “desolation.” Some take the former transitively, and
others as neuter; the latter signifies to destroy and lay waste, and
also to wonder and be astonished. I think these two words ought to be
used in the same sense; as if the Prophet had said, all shall be
astonished at the extent of the abominations; when they shall perceive
the temple worship, swept away as by a deluge, then they shall be
mightily astonished. He afterwards adds the calamity which commenced
when God shewed the pollution of the temple *shall distill* or pour
itself *upon him who is astonished* We will treat the occurrence itself
to enable us to understand the sense of the words better. I have no
hesitation in stating God’s wish to cut off all hope of restoration from
the Jews, whom we know to have been blinded by a foolish confidence, and
to have supposed God’s presence confined to a visible temple. As they
were thus firmly persuaded of the impossibility of God’s ever departing
from them, they ought to be deprived of their false confidence, and no
longer deceive themselves by such flattering hopes. Thus the temporary
pollution of the temple was shewn by Ezekiel. (<span
id="iv.xxxviii-p5.3"></span>[Eze
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#018.md)<span
id="iv.xxxviii-p5.3"></span>.) For when the prophets constantly
proclaimed the approach of their enemies to destroy both the city and
temple, the greater part of the people derided them. In their opinion
this would overthrow all their confidence in God, as if he had been
false to his word, in promising them perpetual rest on Mount Zion.
(<span id="iv.xxxviii-p5.4"></span>[Ps
132:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#014.md)<span
id="iv.xxxviii-p5.4"></span>.) Here Ezekiel relates his vision of God
sitting in the temple — he then vanished, and the temple was deprived of
all its glory. This was but temporary.

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p6"></span>But we are now treating of a profanation
of the temple, which should prove, if I may use the phrase, eternal and
irreparable. Without the slightest doubt, this prophecy was fulfilled
when the city was captured and overthrown, and the temple utterly
destroyed by Titus the son of Vespasian. This satisfactorily explains
the events here predicted. Some consider the word “abominations” to be
used metaphorically, and to signify the overthrow of the city; but this
seems to me forced. Others explain it of the statue of Caligula erected
in the temple; and others again, of the standard of Tiberius, who
ordered the eagles to be placed on the pinnacle of the temple. But I
interpret it simply of that profanation which occurred after the gospel
began to be promulgated, and of the punishment inflicted upon the Jews
when they perceived their temple subject to the grossest forms of
desecration, because they were unwilling to admit the only-begotten Son
of God as its true glory. Others, again, understand the impious
doctrines and superstitions, as well as the perverse errors with which
the priests were imbued. But I think the passage marks generally the
change which took place directly after Christ’s resurrection, when the
obstinate impiety of the people was fully detected. They were then
summoned to repentance; although they had endeavored to extinguish all
hope of salvation through Christ, yet God stretched forth his hand to
them, and tried whether their wickedness was curable or not. After the
grace of Christ had been obstinately rejected, then the *extension of
abominations* followed; that is, God overwhelmed the temple in
desecration, and caused its sanctity and glory to pass utterly away.
Although this vengeance did not take place immediately after the close
of the last week, yet God sufficiently avenged their impious contempt of
his gospel, and besides this, he shews how he had no longer need of any
visible temple, as he had now dedicated the whole world to himself from
east to west.

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p7"></span>I now return again to the explanation of
the words separately. The angel says, *Upon the extension of
abominations, astonishment,* or astonishing; for some think it an
adjective, and others a substantive; but the meaning is, *all should be
stupefied,* or astonished. I do not. altogether object to the meaning
already referred to — namely, rendering the word “wing” as “extremity;”
for the sense will then be — when the abominations come to their height
or extremity; and the sense is the same, if we use the word “expansion.”
God intends to shew us the extensive range of the pollutions,. —
upwards, downwards, and all around, they should obscure and bury the
temple’s glory. Hence *on account of the extremity* or *expansion of
abominations there shall be astonishment,* for all shall be amazed. The
angel seems to oppose this stupor to pride; for the Jews were thoroughly
persuaded of God’s being strictly bound to themselves, and of the
impossibility of his being torn away from his own temple where he had
fixed his eternal dwelling-place. He predicts the approach of this
amazement instead of their supine security.

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p8"></span>He adds next, *And unto consumption.,*
<span id="iv.xxxviii-p8.1"></span>הלכ *keleh,* signifies “end” and
“perfection,” as well as “destruction.” I take it here for consumption
or destruction. *It shall flow even unto astonishment* I have already
remarked upon the words implying this astonishment; slaughter, or
something like it, ought to be understood before the verb. There is no
doubt at all about the Prophet’s meaning. He says this slaughter should
be like a continual shower, consuming the whole people. He speaks of the
people as astonished by their calamities, and deprived of all hope of
escape from them; for the slaughter shall flow forth upon the astonished
people. Meanwhile he shews how foolishly the Jews indulged in pride and
how fallaciously they flattered themselves in supposing the Almighty
permanently attached and bound to themselves and their visible temple.
*The slaughter shall flow forth even to consumption,* meaning, until the
whole people should perish. He adds also another noun, *even to a
determined end* We have already unfolded the meaning of this noun. Here
the Prophet explains the cause of that eternal distinction which the
Almighty had determined and decreed to be irrevocable.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_77"></span>[78](cc25003.htm#fr_77.md) <span
id="iv.i-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p4"></span> Verbally, was crowned, *ie*, was king. —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_78"></span>[79](cc25003.htm#fr_78.md) <span
id="iv.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p7"></span> He repeats the words, the first year. —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_79"></span>[80](cc25003.htm#fr_79.md) <span
id="iv.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p8"></span> Some translate the word <span
id="iv.i-p8.1"></span>יתניב *binthni*, I was attentive, I diligently
considered, but this is of little consequence as to the sense. —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_80"></span>[81](cc25003.htm#fr_80.md) <span
id="iv.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p11"></span> Some take “prayers and supplications” for
the accusative sense. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_81"></span>[82](cc25003.htm#fr_81.md) <span
id="iv.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p8"></span> A turn of expression rather unexpected. The
Latin text is <span id="iv.iii-p8.1"></span>*quasi suggestus*; and both
the French editions translate <span id="iv.iii-p8.2"></span>*comme une
chaire pour prescher*. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_82"></span>[83](cc25003.htm#fr_82.md) <span
id="iv.iv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p4"></span> The same word in Hiphil signifies to
celebrate God’s praises, but it is here taken for confessing a fault. —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_83"></span>[84](cc25003.htm#fr_83.md) <span
id="iv.vii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p4"></span> Or, we have revolted from thy precepts and
thy judgments. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_84"></span>[85](cc25003.htm#fr_84.md) <span
id="iv.vii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p9"></span> Verbally, of faces. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_85"></span>[86](cc25003.htm#fr_85.md) <span
id="iv.vii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p10"></span> That is, to all the Jews. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_86"></span>[87](cc25003.htm#fr_86.md) <span
id="iv.vii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p11"></span> Or, on account of transgressions. —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_87"></span>[88](cc25003.htm#fr_87.md) <span
id="iv.xi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p4"></span> <span id="iv.xi-p4.1"></span>הלס, *selech,*
signifies “to pardon.” It is translated “propitiations,” but there is no
doubt about the sense. — *Calvin*

<span id="fn_88"></span>[89](cc25003.htm#fr_88.md) <span
id="iv.xi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p5"></span> Or, because they are rebellious; for the
particle <span id="iv.xi-p5.1"></span>יכ, *ki,* is properly causal; but
it appears from many passages of Scripture to be taken adversatively,
which seems to suit this passage better. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_89"></span>[90](cc25003.htm#fr_89.md) <span
id="iv.xiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xiii-p4"></span> Verbally, receded or declined. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_90"></span>[91](cc25003.htm#fr_90.md) <span
id="iv.xiii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xiii-p5"></span> The copula here has a inferential force. —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_91"></span>[92](cc25003.htm#fr_91.md) <span
id="iv.xiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xiii-p6"></span> Or, distilled; for <span
id="iv.xiii-p6.1"></span>קתנ, *nethak*, has both meanings. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_92"></span>[93](cc25003.htm#fr_92.md) <span
id="iv.xiii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xiii-p7"></span> Some translate, “execration.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_93"></span>[94](cc25003.htm#fr_93.md) <span
id="iv.xiv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv-p4"></span> That is, against our judges and rulers who
governed us; for the Hebrews use “to judge,” as signifying “to govern.”
— *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_94"></span>[95](cc25003.htm#fr_94.md) <span
id="iv.xiv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv-p5"></span> That is, as it happened. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_95"></span>[96](cc25003.htm#fr_95.md) <span
id="iv.xviii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xviii-p4"></span> Made it *come.* — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_96"></span>[97](cc25003.htm#fr_96.md) <span
id="iv.xix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xix-p4"></span> That is, as the event itself pointed out. —
*Calvin*.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[98](cc25003.htm#fr_97.md) <span
id="iv.xix-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xix-p7"></span> Or, in our sins and iniquities. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_98"></span>[99](cc25003.htm#fr_98.md) <span
id="iv.xix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xix-p8"></span> Verbally, “all.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_99"></span>[100](cc25003.htm#fr_99.md) <span
id="iv.xix-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xix-p9"></span> That is, those who are in our circuit. —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_100"></span>[101](cc25003.htm#fr_100.md) <span
id="iv.xix-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xix-p12"></span> That is, make thy face to shine. —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_101"></span>[102](cc25003.htm#fr_101.md) <span
id="iv.xxii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxii-p4"></span> Or, devastation. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_102"></span>[103](cc25003.htm#fr_102.md) <span
id="iv.xxii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxii-p5"></span> The words <span
id="iv.xxii-p5.1"></span>*super eam*, “upon it,” are redundant. —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_103"></span>[104](cc25003.htm#fr_103.md) <span
id="iv.xxii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xxii-p6"></span> Or, on account of thy compassion’s. —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_104"></span>[105](cc25003.htm#fr_104.md) <span
id="iv.xxiv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxiv-p4"></span> That is, while I was yet speaking. —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_105"></span>[106](cc25003.htm#fr_105.md) <span
id="iv.xxiv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxiv-p5"></span> Or, made to fall; the same word as before.
— *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_106"></span>[107](cc25003.htm#fr_106.md) <span
id="iv.xxiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxiv-p6"></span> That is, on account of, or for the sake
of, the mountain. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_107"></span>[108](cc25003.htm#fr_107.md) <span
id="iv.xxiv-p11.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xxiv-p12"></span> See Wintle’s clear and comprehensive note
*in loc*. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_108"></span>[109](cc25003.htm#fr_108.md) <span
id="iv.xxvii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxvii-p4"></span> That is, that I may teach thee what is
necessary to be known. — *Calvin.* See Dissertations at the end of the
volume. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_109"></span>[110](cc25003.htm#fr_109.md) <span
id="iv.xxviii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxviii-p4"></span> That is, thou art a man to be desired. —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_110"></span>[111](cc25003.htm#fr_110.md) <span
id="iv.xxix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxix-p4"></span> Verbally, upon the city of thy holiness. —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_111"></span>[112](cc25003.htm#fr_111.md) <span
id="iv.xxix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxix-p5"></span> The word <span
id="iv.xxix-p5.1"></span>םתח, *chethem,* “to seal,” is repeated twice. —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_112"></span>[113](cc25003.htm#fr_112.md) <span
id="iv.xxix-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xxix-p6"></span> Or, holiness of holiness, alluding to the
Temple. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_113"></span>[114](cc25003.htm#fr_113.md) <span
id="iv.xxix-p15.5"></span>

<span id="iv.xxix-p16"></span> See Dissertations at the end of this
volume. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_114"></span>[115](cc25003.htm#fr_114.md) <span
id="iv.xxxii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxii-p4"></span> Or, know and understand. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_115"></span>[116](cc25003.htm#fr_115.md) <span
id="iv.xxxii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxii-p5"></span> Or, concerning the bringing back of the
people. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_116"></span>[117](cc25003.htm#fr_116.md) <span
id="iv.xxxii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxii-p6"></span> Or, the people shall return. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_117"></span>[118](cc25003.htm#fr_117.md) <span
id="iv.xxxii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxii-p7"></span> A plain, from the word to spread. —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_118"></span>[119](cc25003.htm#fr_118.md) <span
id="iv.xxxii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxii-p14"></span> See this verse quoted in *Euseb.,* Hist.
Ecc., lib. 1, chapter 6 and the Dissertations at the end of this volume,
for an account of these writers. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_119"></span>[120](cc25003.htm#fr_119.md) <span
id="iv.xxxii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxii-p16"></span> See his Chronology at full length in his
comment on this verse, lib.2. Edit. fol. 1567. The Editor ventures to
recommend the readers of Calvin’s Daniel, to peruse the judicious
comments of CEcolampadins. They are worthy of more attention than they
have received in England. See our Dissertations throughout. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_120"></span>[121](cc25003.htm#fr_120.md) <span
id="iv.xxxvi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p4"></span> Shall confirm. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_121"></span>[122](cc25003.htm#fr_121.md) <span
id="iv.xxxvi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p5"></span> Shall make to cease. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_122"></span>[123](cc25003.htm#fr_122.md) <span
id="iv.xxxvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p6"></span> Or, expansion, verbally, wing. —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_123"></span>[124](cc25003.htm#fr_123.md) <span
id="iv.xxxvi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p7"></span> Or, shall stupefy, for some take it
transitively. — *Calvin.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 10](cc25004.md)
