[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc25001)  [Next](cc25003.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 25: Daniel, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii"></span>

<span id="iii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 8

<span id="iii.i"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p1"></span><span id="iii.i-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#001.md)<span id="iii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p2"></span>**1.** In the third year of the reign of King
Belshazzar a vision appeared unto me, *even unto* me Daniel, after that
which appeared unto me at the first.

<span id="iii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Anno tertio regni Beltsazar Regnis,
visio visa fuit, visio apparuit, mihi, mihi inquam Danieli postquam
apparuerat mihi in principio.  <span id="fr_38"></span>[39](#fn_38.md)

<span id="iii.i-p5"></span> 

<span id="iii.i-p6"></span><span id="iii.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p7"></span>Here Daniel relates another vision, differing
from the former as a part from the whole. For God wished to show him
first what various changes should happen before Christ’s advent. The
second redemption was the beginning of a new life, since God then not
only restored afresh his own Church, but as it were created a new
people; and hence the departure from Babylon and the return to their
country are called the second birth of the Church. But as God at that
time afforded then only a taste of true and solid redemption, whenever
the prophets treat of that deliverance, they extended their thoughts and
their prophecies as far as the coming of Christ. God therefore, with
great propriety, shows the Four Monarchies to His Prophet, lest the
faithful should grow weary in beholding the world so often convulsed,
and all but changing its figure and nature. Thus they would be subject
to the most distressing cares, become a laughing stock to their enemies,
and ever remain contemptible and mean, without the power to help
themselves, under these constant innovations. The faithful, then, were
forewarned concerning these Four Monarchies, lest they should suppose
themselves rejected by God and deprived altogether of his care. But now
God wished to show only one part to his Prophet. As the destruction of
the Babylonian empire was at hand, and the second kingdom was
approaching, this dominion also should speedily come to its close, and
then God’s people should be reduced to the utmost extremity. And the
chief object of this vision is to prepare the faithful to bear patiently
the horrible tyranny of Antiochus, of which the Prophet treats in this
chapter. Now, therefore, we understand the meaning of this prophet,
where God speaks of only two Monarchies, for the kingdom of the Chaldees
was soon to be abolished: he treats first of the Persian kingdom; and
next, adds that of Macedon, but omits all others, and descends directly
to Antiochus, king of Syria. He then declares the prevalence of the most
wretched confusion in the Church; for the sanctuary should be deprived
of its dignity, and the elect people everywhere slain, without sparing
even innocent blood. We shall see also why the faithful were informed
beforehand of these grievous and oppressive calamities, to induce them
to look up to God when oppressed by such extreme darkness. And at this
day this prophecy is useful to us, lest our courage should fail us in
the extreme calamity of the Church, because a perpetual representation
of the Church is depicted for us under that calamitous and mournful
state. Although God often spares our infirmities, yet the Church is
never free from many distresses, and unless we are prepared to undergo
all contests, we shall never stand firm in the faith. This is the scope
and explanation of the prophecy. I will defer the rest.

<span id="iii.ii"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="iii.ii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since thou formerly
didst permit thy servants to maintain their courage in the midst of so
many and such heavy commotion, that we may reap the same edification
from these prophecies: are since we have fallen upon the fullness of
times, may we profit by the examples of the ancient Church, and by the
pious and holy admonitions which thou hast set before us. Thus may we
stand firm and unconquered against all the attacks of Satan, and the
world, and the impious, and so may our faith remain impregnable, until
at length we enjoy the fruit of its victory in thy heavenly kingdom,
through Christ our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="iii.iii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p1"></span>Lecture Thirty-Ninth

<span id="iii.iii-p2"></span>I have written a short preface to this
vision, which is here described for us in this eighth chapter, to enable
you to comprehend its contents, and to perceive the object for which it
was offered to the Prophet. As to the time, we must remember that the
Prophet was informed of the victory of Cyrus and Darius while the
Babylonian monarchy was still standing., and flourishing. Although Cyrus
had already made great progress, and begun to lay waste the Chaldean
territories, yet Belshazzar, as we have already seen, was carelessly
enjoying his festivities. No one ever thought Cyrus would become the
conqueror of so great a monarchy, for Belshazzar would not collect a
great army to defend the boundaries of his kingdom. He thought he should
repel all *the* endeavors of Cyrus as easily as possible; and the
greater his violence the more King Belshazzar hoped to overthrow him.
Now God wished to show his servant these future events. First of all,
the immediate change is revealed; and next the calamity to follow
ultimately is made known — -the calamity, I mean, of the Church under
King Antiochus and his successors. The Prophet therefore says: —

<span id="iii.iv"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p1"></span><span id="iii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
8:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#002.md)<span id="iii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p2"></span>**2.** And I saw in a vision; and it came to
pass, when I saw, that I *was* at the Shushan *in* the palace, which
*is* in the province of Elam; and I saw in a vision, and I was by the
river of Ulai.

<span id="iii.iv-p3"></span>**2.** Vidi in visione: et fuit cum videram,
ut ego essem in Susan,  <span id="fr_39"></span>[40](#fn_39.md) quae est in
Elam provincia. Vidi in visione, et ecce eram super fluvium Ulai.

<span id="iii.iv-p5"></span>**3.** Then I lifted up mine eyes, and saw,
and, behold, there stood before the river a ram which had *two* horns:
and the *two* horns *were* high; but one *was* higher than the other,
and the higher came up last.

<span id="iii.iv-p6"></span>**3.** Et extuli oculos meos, et vidi: et
ecce aries unus stabat coram fluvio,  <span
id="fr_40"></span>[41](#fn_40.md) et ei cornua duo, et cornua erant
excelsa, et unam excelsius altero, et excelsum hoc ascendebat retro.

<span id="iii.iv-p8"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv-p9"></span><span id="iii.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p10"></span>Without any doubt, the Prophet here
recognized a new empire as about to arise, which could not happen
without Babylon being reduced to slavery. Hence it would tend in. no
slight degree to alleviate the cares of the pious, and to mitigate their
sorrows, when they saw what they had previously thought incredible,
namely, the approaching destruction of that horrible tyranny under which
they had been so, cruelly oppressed. And if the liberty of returning to
their country was not immediately granted to the people, it would be no
small consolation to behold God’s judgment against the Chaldeans as
foretold by the prophets. We must now examine the Prophet’s language. *I
have seen in a vision,* says he. This word <span
id="iii.iv-p10.1"></span>ןוזח, *chezon,* a “vision,” is added to show us
that the ram of which mention is made was not seen by the eyes of the
body. Hence this was a heavenly oracle, and ought to have raised the
beholder above all human sensations, to enable him to discern from lofty
watch-tower what was hidden from the rest of mankind. He did not see
then what ordinary men might behold, but God showed in a vision things
which no mortal senses could apprehend. He next adds, *The vision was
shewn to me, Daniel, and I happened, says he, when I saw it, to be in
Shushan* Some think Daniel to be then dwelling in Persia, bug this view
is by no means probable; for who could persuade the holy Prophet of God,
who had been led captive with the rest and was attached to the king of
Babylon, to depart as if he had been entirely his own master, and to go
into Persia when the Persians were then open enemies? This is not at all
likely; and I wonder what can induce men to adopt this comment, so
contrary to all reason. For we need not dispute about a matter by no
means obscure if we weigh the Prophet’s words, as he removes all doubt
by saying *he was in Shushan when he saw,* that is, when he was caught
up by the prophetic spirit beyond himself and above the world. The
Prophet does not say he dwelt in Shushan, or in the neighborhood, but he
was there in the vision only. The next verse, too, sufficiently shews
him to have then been in Chaldean in the third year, he says, of the
reign of King Belshazzar. By naming the king, he clearly expresses that
he then dwelt under his power and dominion. It is clearly to be gathered
from these words, without the slightest doubt, that the Prophet then
dwelt in Chaldea. And perhaps Babylon had been already besieged, as we
saw before. He says *he was in the palace at Shushan* I know not how I
ought to translate this word, <span id="iii.iv-p10.2"></span>הריבה,
*hebireh,* as I see no reason for preferring the meaning “palace” to
that of” citadel.” We are sure of the nobility and celebrity of the
citadel which was afterwards the head of the East, for all nations and
tribes received from thence their laws, rights, and judgments. At the
same time, I think this citadel was not then built, for its empire over
the Persian territory was not firmly established till the successors of
Cyrus. We may perhaps distinguish Shushan from Persia at large, yet as
it is usually treated as a part of that kingdom, I will not urge the
distinction. The country is, however, far milder and more fertile than
Persia, as it receives its name from being flowery and abounding in
roses. Thus the Prophet says *he was there in a vision.*

<span id="iii.iv-p11"></span>He afterwards repeats this *I saw in a
vision, and behold I was near the river Ulai* The Latin writers mention
a river Eulaeus, and as there is a great similitude between the words, I
have no hesitation in understanding Daniel’s language of the Eulaeus.
The repetition is not superfluous. It adds certainty to the prophecy,
because Daniel affirms it; not to have been any vanishing specter, as a
vision might be suspected to be, but clearly and certainly a divine
revelation, as he will afterwards relate. He says, too, *he raised his
eyes upwards* This attentive attitude has the same meaning, as
experience informs us how often men are deceived by wandering in
erroneous imaginations. But Daniel here bears witness to his raising his
eyes upwards, because he, knew himself to be, divinely called upon to
discern future events.

<span id="iii.iv-p12"></span><span id="iii.iv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p13"></span>He next subjoins, *And behold a ram, stood
at the bank of the river, and it had horns* He now compares the empire
of Persia and Media to a ram. It ought not to seem absurd that God
proposed to his servant various similitude’s, because his duty was to
teach a rude people in various ways; and\[ we know this vision to have
been presented before the Prophet, not for his private instruction only,
but for the common advantage of the whole people. I do not think we need
scrupulously inquire why the Persian kings are called rams. I know of no
valid reason, unless perhaps to institute a comparison between them and
Alexander of Macedon and his successors. If so, when God, under the
image of a ram, exhibits to his Prophet the Persian Empire, he does not
illustrate its nature absolutely, but only by comparison with that of
Alexander. ‘We are well aware of the opposition between these two
empires. The Persian monarchy is called “a ram,” with reference to the
Macedonian, which, as we shall afterwards see, bears the name of
“he-goat” with respect to its antagonism. And we may gather the best
reason for this comparison in the humble origin of the kings of Persia.
With great propriety, then, Cyrus, the first ruler of this empire, is
here depicted for us under the form or image of a ram. His “horn”
produced a concussion through the whole earth, when no one expected
anything to spring from a region by no means abounding in anything
noble. And as to Alexander, he is called a “he-goat,” with respect to
the “ram,” as being far more nimble, and yet more obscure in his origin.
For what was Macedon but a mere corner of Greece? But I do not propose
to run the parallel between these points; it is sufficient that God
wishes to show to his Prophet and to the whole Church, how among the
Persians, unknown as they were, and despised by their neighbors, a king
should arise to consume the Median power, as we shall soon see, and also
to overthrow the Babylonian monarchy. *Behold,* therefore, says he, *a
ram stood before the river,* or at the bank of the river, since Cyrus
subdued both the Medes and his grandfather, as historians inform us.
Cyrus then rushed forth from his own mountains *and stood at the bank of
the river* He also says, *He had two horns.* Here the Prophet puts two
horns for two empires, and not by any means for two persons. For
although Cyrus married the daughter of Cyaxares his uncle, yet we know
the Persian empire to have lasted a long time, and to have supplied
historians with a long catalogue of kings. As Cyrus had so many
successors, by the two horns God doubtless showed his Prophet those two
empires of the Medes and Persians united under one sovereignty.
Therefore, when the ram appeared to the Prophet, it represented both
kingdoms under one emblem.

<span id="iii.iv-p14"></span>The context confirms this by saying*, The
two horns were lofty, one higher than the other, and this was raised
backwards* The two horns were lofty; for, though the Persian territory
was not rich, and the people rustic and living in woods, spending an
austere life and despising all luxuries, yet the nation was always
warlike. Wherefore the Prophet says this horn *was higher than the
other,* meaning, than the empire of the Medes. Now Cyrus surpassed his
father-in-law Darius in fame, authority, and rank, and still he always
permitted Darius to enjoy the royal majesty to the end of his life. As
he was an old man, Cyrus might easily concede to him the highest one
without any loss to himself. With respect then to the following period,
Cyrus was clearly pre-eminent, as he was certainly superior to Darius,
whom Xenophon calls Cyaxares. For this reason, then, *this horn was
higher.* But meanwhile the Prophet shews how gradually Cyrus was raised
on high. The horn rose *backwards;* that is, “afterwards” — meaning,
although the horn of the Median kingdom was more illustrious and
conspicuous, yet *the horn which rose afterwards* obscured the
brightness and glory of the former one. This agrees with the narratives
of profane history: for every reader of those narratives will find
nothing recorded by Daniel which was not fulfilled by the event. Let us
go on: —

<span id="iii.v"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p1"></span><span id="iii.v-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#004.md)<span id="iii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p2"></span>**4.** I saw the ram pushing westward, and
northward, and southward; so that no beasts might stand before him,
neither *was there any* that could deliver out of his hand; but he did
according to his will, and became great.

<span id="iii.v-p3"></span>**4.** Vidi arietem ferientem Occasum et
Aquilonem, *Septentrionem* et Meridiem: et nullae bestiae consistebant
coram ipso,  <span id="fr_41"></span>[42](#fn_41.md) et nemo eripiens e
manu ejus,  <span id="fr_42"></span>[43](#fn_42.md) itaque fecit secundum
arbitrium suum, et magnificatus est.

<span id="iii.v-p6"></span> 

<span id="iii.v-p7"></span><span id="iii.v-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p8"></span>The Prophet, now shortly sketches the great
success which should attend this double kingdom. He says, *The ram
struck all the nations towards the west, and north, and south.* The
Persian and Median territory lay to the east of Babylon and Egypt,
Syria, Asia Minor, and Greece. This, without doubt, is extended to all
the successors of Cyrus, who are recorded as having convulsed the whole
world. Cyrus himself was shortly afterwards cruelly and basely slain,
according to many historians, although Xenophon affirms that he died in
his bed. But I have before warned you not to put your trust in that
writer, although most excellent, since, under the image of that king, he
wished to set before us an example of perfect manliness; and hence he
brings him forward as discoursing on his deathbed, and exhorting his
sons to kingly virtues. Whichever is the true account, Cyrus was clearly
overtaken in the midst of his career. In this way God wished to chastise
his insatiable cupidity, a vice in which he resembled Alexander. As to
his successors, they excited such commotion in the whole world as to
stir up heaven and earth. Xerxes alone said he could bind the sea with
fetters! and we know the greatness of the army which he commanded; and
this passage treats not only of one king, but of all those of Persia. As
they obtained a dominion so far and wide, their ambition and pride
always inflamed them, and there was no end to their warfare till they
had subdued the distant boundaries of the world. We are acquainted too
with their numerous attempts to destroy the liberty of Greece. All this
the Prophet embraces in but few words. God also wished to give his
Prophet a short glance into futurity, as far as such knowledge could be
useful. *I saw,* then, says he*, a ram,* namely, a beast which possessed
a double horn, representing the Medes and Persians united in the same
sovereignty.

<span id="iii.v-p9"></span>*He struck the west, and the north, and the
south, so that no beasts could stand before him.* As the Persian kingdom
is here depicted under the, image of a ram, all kings and people are
called “beasts.” Thus, no *beast stood before him, and no one could
deliver out of his hand* It is well known, indeed, how Xerxes and others
failed in their attacks, and how many wars the Monarchs of Persia
attempted in which they were conquered by the Greeks; but still their
conquerors were in no better condition, as they were compelled to seek
peace like suppliants. So great became the power of the Persians, that
they inspired all nations with fear. For this reason the Prophet says,
*he did according to his pleasure,* not implying the complete success of
these Monarchs according to their utmost wishes, for their desires were
often frustrated, as we have already narrated on the testimony of
historical evidence. Still they were always formidable, not only to
their neighbors who submitted to their yoke, but to the most distant
nations, as they crossed the sea and descended from Asia upon Greece. In
the last word, he expresses this fact, — the *ram became mighty.* For
the Persian king became the greatest of all Monarchs in the world, and
it is sufficiently notorious that no one could add to his dignity and
strength. It follows: —

<span id="iii.vi"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p1"></span><span id="iii.vi-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
8:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#005.md)<span id="iii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p2"></span>**5.** And as I was considering, behold, an
he goat came from the west on the face of the whole earth, and touched
not the ground: and the goat *had* a notable horn between his eyes.

<span id="iii.vi-p3"></span>**5.** Et ego eram intentus,  <span
id="fr_43"></span>[44](#fn_43.md) ecce, inquit hircus caprarum venit ab
Occasu,  <span id="fr_44"></span>[45](#fn_44.md) super faciem totius
terrae, neque tamen attingebat terram,  <span
id="fr_45"></span>[46](#fn_45.md) et hirco cornu illustre erat inter oculos
ejus.

<span id="iii.vi-p7"></span>**6.** And he came to the ram that had *two*
horns, which I had seen standing before the river, and ran unto him in
the fury of his power.

<span id="iii.vi-p8"></span>**6.** Et venit ad arietem, cui erant cornua
duo,  <span id="fr_46"></span>[47](#fn_46.md) quem videram standem in ripa
fluvii,  <span id="fr_47"></span>[48](#fn_47.md) et cucurrit, ad eum cum
furore fortitudinnnis suae.

<span id="iii.vi-p11"></span> 

<span id="iii.vi-p12"></span><span id="iii.vi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p13"></span>Here another change is shown to the
Prophet, namely, Alexander’s coming to the east and acquiring. for
himself the mighty sway of the Persians, as afterwards happened. With
the view, then, of procuring confidence for his prediction, he says, *he
was attentive* He doubtless dwells upon the reverence with which he
received the vision to exhort us to the pursuit of piety, and also to
modesty and attention. The Prophet, therefore, was not carried away in
imagination by a dream which could be called in question; he knew this
vision to have been set before him by God, and acknowledged his duty to
receive it with modesty and humility. Wherefore, I *was attentive, and
behold a he-goat came forth from the west,* says he. The situation of
Macedon with respect to Persia must be noticed. As the Greeks were
situated to the west, of Persia, the Prophet says, *the he-goat came
from the west, and went over the surface of the whole earth* These words
signify the very extensive dominion of Alexander, aid. the terror of
surrounding nations. His arrival in Asia with a very insignificant army
is well known. He thought 30,000 men sufficient, after he had been
created their general by the States of Greece. Hence, the passage is to
be understood not of numbers, but of the terror inspired on all sides;
for, although he advanced with but a moderate force, yet he terrified
the whole earth.

<span id="iii.vi-p14"></span>*But he did not touch the ground,* says he.
This refers to his swiftness, for he rather flew than traveled either on
foot or by sea, so incredible was his speed in this expedition. For if
any one had galloped through regions completely at peace, he could not
have passed through Asia more speedily. Hence a he-goat was shewn to the
Prophet *who did not touch the ground,* that is, who was borne along
with a rapid impulse, like that of lightning itself. *And the goat had a
horn,* says he, *between its eyes* — *a remarkable horn.* We know how
much glory Alexander acquired for himself in a short time, and yet he
did not undertake the war in his own name, or on his own responsibility,
but he used every artifice to obtain from the Grecian States the office
of general-in-chief against the Persians, as perpetual enemies. We are
well acquainted with the hostility of the Persians to the Greeks, who,
though often compelled to retreat with great disgrace, and infamy, and
loss of troops, still kept renewing the war, as they had abundance of
men and of pecuniary resources. When Alexander was created general of
the whole of Greece, *he had a remarkable horn between his eyes;* that
is, he took care to have his title of general made known to increase his
personal superiority. Besides, it was sufficiently prominent to
constitute him alone general of the whole army, while all things were
carried on according to his will, as he had undertaken the war. This,
then, is the reason why the Prophet says, *the horn was visible between
the eyes of the goat* It follows, *It came to the ram, which had two
horns;* that is, it came against the king of the Medes and Persians.
Cyrus also had seized on Babylon, and had subdued many kings, but two
horns are assigned to the ram, since the Persian kings had united the
Medes in alliance to themselves. Hence *one he-goat with his horn, came
against the ram which had two horns, and ran against it in the ardor of
its bravery* Thus the perseverance of Alexander is denoted, as he
hastened so as to surpass all expectation by the speed of his arrival.
For Darius continued in security, although he had collected a large
army, but Alexander *rushed forwards in the boldness of his strength,*
and surrounded the enemy by his celerity. It follows: —

<span id="iii.vii"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p1"></span><span id="iii.vii-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#007.md)<span id="iii.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p2"></span>**7.** And I saw him come close unto the
ram, and he was moved with choler against him, and smote the ram, and
brake his two horns: and there was no power in the ram to stand before
him, but he cast him down to the ground, and stamped upon him: and there
was none that could deliver the ram out of his hand.

<span id="iii.vii-p3"></span>**7.** Et vidi appropin quantem ad arietem,
et exasperantem seipsum  <span id="fr_48"></span>[49](#fn_48.md) et
confregit duo cornua ejus, et non fuit virtus in ariete ad standum coram
facie ejus et dejecit eum in terram,  <span
id="fr_49"></span>[50](#fn_49.md) et calcavit eum: et non fuit qui erueret
e manu ejus.

<span id="iii.vii-p6"></span> 

<span id="iii.vii-p7"></span><span id="iii.vii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p8"></span>Here God shews to his Prophet the victory
of Alexander, by which he subdued almost the whole east. Although he
encountered many nations in battle, and especially the Indians, yet the
name of the Persian empire was so celebrated in *the* world, that the
dignity of others never approached it. Alexander, therefore, by
conquering Darius, acquired nearly the whole east. God showed his
Prophet the easiness of his victory under this figure. *I looked,* says
he, *when he approached the land* Darius was fortified by both the
distance of his stations and the strength of his fortifications; for
many of his cities were impregnable, according to the common opinion of
mankind. It was incredible, then, that the he-goat should approach the
ram, surrounded as he was on all sides by such strong and such powerful
garrisons. But the Prophet says *he; approached the ram,* and then, *he
exasperated himself against him* This applies to Alexander’s furious
assaults. We are well acquainted with the keenness of his talents and
the superiority of his valor; yet, such was his unbridled audacity, that
his promptness approached rather to rashness than to regal bravery. For
he often threw himself with a blind impulse against his foes, and it was
not his fault if the Macedonian name was not destroyed ten times over.
As, then, he rushed on with such violent fury, we are not surprised when
the Prophet says *he was exasperated of his own accord. And he struck
the ram,* says he. He conquered Darius in two battles, when the power of
the Persian sway throughout Asia Minor was completely ruined. We are all
familiar with the results of these hazardous battles, shewing the whole
stress of the war to have rested on that engagement in which Darius was
first conquered; for when he says, *The ram had no strength to stand;*
and although he had collected an immense multitude, yet that preparation
was available for nothing but: empty pomp. For Darius was resplendent
with gold, and silver, and gems, and he rather made a show of these,
luxuries in warfare, than displayed manly and vigorous strength. *The
ram,* then, *had no power to stand before the he goat.* Hence, *he threw
him prostrate on the earth, and trod him down; and no one was able to
deliver out of his hand.* Darius, indeed, was slain by his attendants,
but Alexander trod down all his glory, and the dignity of the Persian
Empire, under which all the people of the east trembled. We are aware
also of the pride with which he abused his victory, until under the
influence of harlots and debauchees, as some report, he tumultuously set
fire to that most celebrated citadel of Susa in the drunken fit. As he
so indignantly trampled under foot the glory of the Persian monarchy, we
see how aptly the events fulfilled the prophecy, in the manner recorded
by all profane historians.

<span id="iii.viii"></span>

<span id="iii.viii-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="iii.viii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since thou desirest
us to be tossed about amidst many and various convulsions, that our
minds may always look upwards towards heaven, where thou hast prepared
for us certain rest and a tranquil inheritance beyond the reach of
disturbance and commotion. When the land through which we are on
pilgrimage is in confusion, may we be so occupied during its storms, as
to stand composed and grounded upon the faith of thy promises, until
having discharged our warfare, we are gathered together into that happy
rest, where we shall enjoy the fruit of our victory, in Christ Jesus our
Lord. — Amen.

<span id="iii.ix"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p1"></span>Lecture Fortieth.

<span id="iii.x"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p1"></span><span id="iii.x-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#008.md)<span id="iii.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p2"></span>**8.** Therefore the he goat waxed very
great: and, when he was strong, the great horn was broken; and for it
came up four notable ones toward the four winds of heaven.

<span id="iii.x-p3"></span>**8.** Et hircus caprarum magnificatus est
admodum: et cum in robore suo esset, fractum fuit cornu magnum, et
prodierunt loco ejus illusttria quatuor alia, versus quatuor ventos
coelorum.

<span id="iii.x-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.x-p5"></span><span id="iii.x-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p6"></span>This prophecy relates to the death of
Alexander. We have explained how, under the image of a he-goat, the
Macedonian empire is set before us, having its beginning in the person
of Alexander, but by no means ending there, as the monarchy was divided
into four parts. The angel said, or at least Daniel records his words*,*
— *that he-goat increased to an immense magnitude,* because he wandered
as it were in sport through almost the whole east, and at the same time
subdued it; *but when it was in its strength,* says he, *its great horn
was broken* By the great horn, he means the monarchy which was solely m
Alexander’s power during his life, as he, was the first and last monarch
of his race. And in consequence of his generals, who had obtained
dominion in the four quarters of the world, becoming kings, as we shall
soon see, the word “he-goat” is not restricted to his person, but is
extended to his successors. He Himself is called “the great horn.”
Hence, *when the he-goat was in his strength, the great horn was broken*
For Alexander had arrived at the height of prosperity when he died.
Whether he perished by disease or by poison is unknown, since historians
report; a great suspicion of foul-play. The angel does not notice his
age, which was thirty-three years at his death, while he seemed to have
been born for subduing the whole world, although he was so suddenly
snatched away. But the angel regards those continued successes, since
Alexander almost by a look subdued the whole land, as we have stated
before, and hurried on rashly from place to place. Hence he perpetually
gained fresh victories, though at the constant hazard of his life, as he
had far more audacity than skill. *When he was in his strength,* says
he; meaning, after having subjugated the whole east. He had returned
from India, and had determined to re-cross the sea, and to reduce Greece
under his power; for the States had rebelled against him, and the
Athenians had already collected a great army; but all the eastern States
of Asia had been rendered subservient to Alexander when he died. The
angel refers to this by the breaking of *the great horn.*

<span id="iii.x-p7"></span>He afterwards adds, In *his place four
conspicuous horns sprang up* For he uses the noun <span
id="iii.x-p7.1"></span>תוזח *chezeveth,* notable,” as in yesterday’s
Lecture.  <span id="fr_50"></span>[51](#fn_50.md) There were, therefore,
four kingdoms which excelled, and each of them was celebrated and placed
aloft. Nor is this superfluous, since we know how many became kings, who
had enlisted in the service of Alexander with reputation and dignity.
Perdiccas was the first, and all thought him to have been favored with
special honor by Alexander When asked whom he wished for a successor, he
replied, according to the greatness or pride of his spirit, “The person
whom he considered most worthy of empire.” He had a son by Roxana the
daughter of Darius, as well as another son; then Aridmus his brother
approached; yet he deemed no one worthy of the honor of being his
successor, as if the world contained no equal to himself. His answer,
then, was a proof of his pride. But when he was unable to speak, he took
a ring from his hand and gave it to Perdieeas. Hence all conjectured
that he had the preference in Alexander’s judgment, and he obtained the
supreme authority. After this, Eumenes was slain, who had served under
him. Although he was an ally, he was judged as an enemy, and betrayed by
his men; Lysimachus being slain on the other side. Fifteen generals were
put to death. And as so many succeeded to the place of Alexander and
exercised the royal authority, the angel correctly expresses how *four
conspicuous horns sprang up in the place of one great one* For after
various conflicts and many fluctuations for fifteen years or
thereabouts, Alexander’s monarchy was at length divided into four parts.
Cassander, the son of Antipater, obtained the kingdom of Macedon, after
slaying Olympias, the mother of Alexander, his sister, his sons, and his
wife Rexaria. This was a horrible slaughter, and if ever God offered a
visible spectacle to the world, whereby he openly denounced the shedding
of human blood, surely a memorable proof of this existed in the whole of
Alexander’s race! Not a single one survived for twenty years after his
death. Though his mother had grown old, she was not permitted to descend
naturally to the grave, but was murdered. His wife, and son, and
brother, and all his relations, shared her fate. And that slaughter was
even yet more cruel, as no single leader spared the life of his
companions, but each either openly attacked or craftily assailed his
friend and confederate! But omitting details, four kingdoms were at last
left after such remarkable devastation’s. For Cassander, the son of
Antipater, obtained Macedon and some part of Thrace, together with the
cities of Greece. Seleucus became master in Syria; Antigonus in Asia
Minor, joining Phrygia, Paphlagonia, and all other Asiatic regions,
after five or six generals were slain. Ptolemy became prefect of Egypt.
This makes four horns, which the angel calls “conspicuous,” for on the
testimony of history, all the other principalities vanished away.
Alexander’s generals had divided among themselves many large and fertile
provinces, but at length they were summed up in these four heads. He
says, *by the four winds of heaven,* that is, of the atmosphere. Now the
kingdom of Macedon was very far distant from Syria; Asia was in the
midst, and Egypt lay to the south. Thus, the he-goat, as we saw before,
reigned throughout the four quarters of the globe; since Egypt, as we
have said, was situated towards the south; but the kingdom of Persia,
which was possessed by Seleucus, was towards the east and united with
Syria; the kingdom of Asia was to the north, and that of Macedon to the
west, as we formerly saw the he-goat setting out from the west. It now
follows, —

<span id="iii.xi"></span>

<span id="iii.xi-p1"></span><span id="iii.xi-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#009.md)<span id="iii.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi-p2"></span>**9.** And out of one of them came forth a
little horn, which waxed exceeding great, toward the south, and toward
the east, and toward the pleasant *land.*

<span id="iii.xi-p3"></span>**9.** Et ex uno illorum egressum est cornu
unum parvum, et magnificatum fuit eximie versus Meridiem, et ad
Orientum, et ad glorium.  <span id="fr_51"></span>[52](#fn_51.md)

<span id="iii.xi-p5"></span> 

<span id="iii.xi-p6"></span><span id="iii.xi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi-p7"></span>Now God shews his Prophet what peculiarly
concerned the welfare of his Church. For it was of very great importance
to warn the Jews of the calamities which were about to oppress them.
There is nothing which more torments the minds of men than their
becoming bewildered in false imaginations, and thinking the world the
sport of chance, while they never ponder over the providence of God nor
reflect upon his judgments. Hence, with this design, God wished to teach
the Prophet and all the pious the nature of their future afflictions,
since they would thus understand how events never happened by chance,
but all these scourges proceeded from God; for the same God both
determines and executes his decrees, as he also predicts future events.
For if nothing had been predicted, the pious would have glided gently
downwards to despair in consequence of their heavy afflictions. We know
also how magnificently the prophets extol the grace of God when they
promise return and deliverance. Isaiah, too, has elsewhere spoken to
this effect: Not in haste nor in tumult shall ye go forth, but with a
standard displayed. Again, The wealth of all the nations shall flow
towards you; kings shall come, and submit, and bow the knee to thee.
(<span id="iii.xi-p7.1"></span>[Isa
52:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#010.md)<span id="iii.xi-p7.1"></span>;
<span id="iii.xi-p7.2"></span>[Isa
55:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#012.md)<span id="iii.xi-p7.2"></span>;
<span id="iii.xi-p7.3"></span>[Isa
55:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#006)<span id="iii.xi-p7.3"></span>..md)
The Jews were permitted to return to their own land; but we know how
cruelly they were harassed by all their neighbors, so that they did not
dwell in that corner of the world without the greatest difficulties. The
building of both the city and the Temple was hindered by many enemies,
till at length they became tributary to the kings of Syria. Antiochus,
indeed, who is here alluded to, advanced with cruel tyranny against the
people of God. If this had not been predicted, they would have thought
themselves deceived by the splendid promises concerning their return.
But when they perceived everything occurring according as they had been
opportunely forewarned, this became no slight solace in the midst of
their woes; they could then determine at once how completely it was in
the power of God to relieve them from so many and such oppressive evils.
With what intention, then, had God predicted all these things to his
Prophet Daniel? clearly that the Jews might look forward to a happy
result, and not give way to despair under events so full of anxiety and
confusion. This, then, was the utility of the prophecy, with reference
to that particular period.

<span id="iii.xi-p8"></span>When the Prophet says, *Out of one of those
four horns a little horn arose,* Antiochus Epiphanes is most distinctly
pointed out. The title Epiphanes entails “illustrious,” as, after the
capture of his father, he was detained as a hostage at Rome, and then
escaped from custody. Historians inform us of his possessing a servile
disposition, and being much addicted to gross flattery. As he had
nothing royal or heroic in his feelings, but was simply remarkable for
cunning, the Prophet is justified in calling him *the little horn* He
was far more powerful than his neighbors; but *the horn is* called
*little,* not in comparison with the kingdoms of either Egypt, or Asia,
or Macedon, but because no one supposed he would ever be king and
succeed his father. He was the eldest of many brothers, and singularly
servile and cunning, without a single trait worthy of future royalty.
Thus he was *the little horn* who escaped secretly and fraudulently from
custody, as, we have already mentioned, and returned. to his native
country, which he afterwards governed.

<span id="iii.xi-p9"></span>He now adds, *This horn was very mighty
towards the south, and the east, and “the desire*”’ for unless he had
been checked by the Romans, he would have obtained possession of Egypt.
There is a remarkable and celebrated story of Pompilius, who, was sent
to him to command him to abstain from Egypt at the, bidding of the
senate. After he had delivered his message, Antiochus demanded time for
deliberation, but Pompilius drew a circle with the staff which he held
in his hand, and forbade him to move his foot until he gave him an
answer. Though he claimed Egypt as his own by right of conquest, yet he
dared not openly to deny the Romans their request; at first he pretended
to be merely the guardian of his nephew, but he certainly seized upon
the kingdom in his own name. However, he dared not oppose the Romans,
but by changing his ground wished to dismiss Pompilius. They had been
mutual acquaintances, and a great familiarity had arisen between them
while he was a hostage at Rome; hence he offered to salute Pompilius at
the interview, but he rejected him disdainfully, and, as I have said,
drew a line around him, saying, “Before you go out of this circle answer
me; do not delude me by asking time to consult with your councilors;
answer at once, otherwise I know how to treat thee.” He was compelled to
relinquish Egypt, although he had formerly refused to do so. The
language of the Prophet, then, was not in vain, *The small horn became
mighty towards the south,* that is, towards Egypt, *and the east;* for
he extended his kingdom as far as Ptolemais. In the third place, he uses
the word *glory;* that is, Judea, the sanctuary of God, which he had
chosen as his dwelling, and desired his name to be invoked. Thus this
small horn *extended itself to the glory,* or the land of glory or
desire. There is nothing doubtful in the sense, though the
interpretation scarcely agrees with the words. It afterwards follows: —

<span id="iii.xii"></span>

<span id="iii.xii-p1"></span><span id="iii.xii-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#010.md)<span id="iii.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii-p2"></span>**10.** And it waxed great, *even* to the
host of heaven; and it cast down *some* of the host and of the stars to
the ground, and stamped upon them.

<span id="iii.xii-p3"></span>**10.** Et magnificatum est *cornu illud
parvum* ad exercitum coelorum, dejecit in terram ex illo exercitu,
*nenipe coelesti*, et ex stellis, et calcavit eas.

<span id="iii.xii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.xii-p5"></span><span id="iii.xii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii-p6"></span>Here Daniel continues the vision which he
had received. We have already shewn he object of the Almighty to be the
preparation of the faithful to bear serious calamities, because nothing
new or unexpected should happen to them. Now, Daniel’s dwelling upon
this point is not surprising, for it becomes his duty to inform the
faithful of the heavy calamities which were at hand, and thus to mould
them to patience and equity. Thus he says, *The horn became magnificent,
even to the army of the heavens.* Without the slightest doubt this
figure marks the elect people of God. Although the Church often lies
prostrate in the world, and is trodden under foot and buried, yet it is
always precious before God. Hence the Prophet adorns the Church with
this remarkable praise, not to obtain for it any honor before men, but
because God has separated it from the world, and provided a sure
inheritance in heaven. Although the sons of God are pilgrims on earth,
and have scarcely any dwelling-place here, becoming like castaways
before men, yet they are nevertheless citizens of heaven. The usefulness
of this teaching to us is apparent, by its inducing us to bear it
patiently whenever we are often thrown prostrate on the ground, and
whenever tyrants and the despiser’s of God look down upon us with scorn.
Meanwhile our seat is laid up in heaven, and God numbers us among the
stars, although, as Paul says, we are as dung and the offscouring of all
things. (<span id="iii.xii-p6.1"></span>[1Co
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#013)<span id="iii.xii-p6.1"></span>..md)
In fine, God here shews his Prophet, as in a mirror, the estimation in
which he holds his Church, however contemptible it is on earth. *That
horn,* then, *was magnified before the army of the heavens, and cast
down some of that army upon the earth, and trod them out of the stars*
Exactly as if he proclaimed the loosening of the reins from the tyrant,
permitting him to treat the Church with contempt, to tread it under
foot;, and to draw down the stars from heaven, just as if God never
appeared for its protection. For when God permits us to be safe and
secure in his hand, and pronounces it impossible to prevail against his
help, while tyrants harass and oppress us by their lust, it is like
drawing down stars from heaven. God therefore, while he takes us under
his guardianship, does not offer us. any succor, but dissembles as if he
wished to betray us to our enemies. Nothing therefore is superfluous in
these expressions of the Prophet — *The stars were trodden down and the
heavenly army thrown down to earth* He now adds —

<span id="iii.xiii"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii-p1"></span><span id="iii.xiii-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#011.md)<span id="iii.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii-p2"></span>**11.** Yea, he magnified *himself* even
to the prince of the host, and by him the daily *sacrifice* was taken
away, and the place of his sanctuary was cast down.

<span id="iii.xiii-p3"></span>**11.** Et ad Principem exercitus
magnificatum est  <span id="fr_52"></span>[53](#fn_52.md) et ab eo ablatum
fuit juge,  <span id="fr_53"></span>[54](#fn_53.md) et projectus fuit
 <span id="fr_54"></span>[55](#fn_54.md) locus sancturii ejus.

<span id="iii.xiii-p7"></span> 

<span id="iii.xiii-p8"></span><span id="iii.xiii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii-p9"></span>Daniel announces something still more
atrocious here, namely, the exaltation of the little horn against God.
Some take “the prince of the army” for the high priest, as princes are
sometimes called <span id="iii.xiii-p9.1"></span>םינהוכ, *kuhnim,* as
well as <span id="iii.xiii-p9.2"></span>םירש, *serim;* but that is too
forced. The true sense of the passage imputes such arrogance and folly
to Antiochus as to urge him to declare war with the stars of heaven,
implying not only his opposition to God’s Church, which is separate from
the world, but also his daring defiance of God himself and his
resistance to his power. He not only exercised his cruelty against the
faithful, but profaned the temple itself, and endeavored to extinguish
all piety, and to abolish the worship of God throughout Judea, as we
shall explain more fully in other passages. As, therefore, Antiochus not
only raged against men, but used his utmost endeavors to overthrow
religion, Daniel relates how *that horn was raised up even against the
prince of the army* God is deservedly entitled to this appellation,
because he defends his Church, and cherishes it under his wings. This
expression ought to be explained not only of God’s glory and empire, but
also of his paternal favor towards us, as he deigns to manifest his care
for us as if he were our Prince.

<span id="iii.xiii-p10"></span>*From him,* says he, *was the perpetual
sacrifice utterly snatched away, and the place of his sanctuary cast
down* These words are horrible in their import; God was thus spoiled of
his rights, since he had chosen but a single corner in the world for his
special worship. What heathen, then, would not despise this forbearance
of God, in permitting himself to be deprived of his legitimate honor by
that sordid tyrant? As we have already stated, Antiochus had neither
greatness of mind nor warlike courage, being skillful only in cunning
and in the basest acts of flattery. Besides, granting him to have
comprised a hundred Alexanders in his own person, what can be the
Almighty’s design in allowing his temple to be polluted, and all true
sacrifices to cease throughout the world? One corner alone, as we have
lately mentioned, was left where God wished to be worshipped, and now
Antiochus seizes upon the temple, and profanes and defiles it with the
utmost possible indignity, thus leaving no single place sacred to the
Almighty. For this reason I have asserted the prophecy to appear very
harsh. The Prophet now increases the indignity when he speaks of *the
perpetual sacrifice* For God had often borne witness to his temple being
his perpetual “rest,” or “station,” or “seat;” yet he is now ejected
from this spot, as if exiled from the earth entirely. The temple could
not exist without sacrifices, for the whole worship under the law was a
kind of appendage to the temple. As God had promised the sacrifice
should be perpetual and eternal, who would not assert, when Antiochus
destroyed it, either all the promises to have been deceptive, or all
authority to have departed from God, who failed to defend his right
against that impious tyrant. Surely this must have been a distressing
calamity, overwhelming all the faithful! And when even at this moment we
read the prophecy, all our senses are horrified by its perusal. No
wonder, then, that God forewarned his servant of such sorrowful events,
and such incredible evils, to admonish his whole Church in due season,
and to arm them against the severest temptations, which might otherwise
strike down even the most courageous. *The sacrifice,* then, says he,
*was snatched away from God himself, and the place of his sanctuary was
cast down* or *dissipated*. It afterwards follows: —

<span id="iii.xiv"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv-p1"></span><span id="iii.xiv-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#012.md)<span id="iii.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv-p2"></span>**12.** And an host was given *him* against
the daily *sacrifice* by reason of transgression, and it cast down the
truth to the ground; and it practised, and prospered.

<span id="iii.xiv-p3"></span>**12.** Et tempus  <span
id="fr_55"></span>[56](#fn_55.md) datum est super jugi sacrificio in
scelere,  <span id="fr_56"></span>[57](#fn_56.md) et projiciet veritatem in
terram et faciet,  <span id="fr_57"></span>[58](#fn_57.md) et prospere
aget.

<span id="iii.xiv-p7"></span> 

<span id="iii.xiv-p8"></span><span id="iii.xiv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv-p9"></span>The Prophet mitigates the asperity which he
now records. It seems absurd for God to allow such license to Antiochus,
that his temple should be spoiled and all sacrifices and all worship
exterminated. It is difficult to reconcile this, for the opinion will
naturally creep in, — possibly God is constrained and deprived of power
to subdue his foes. The, Prophet therefore clearly states here how the
license for vexing and oppressing’ the Church would never have been
granted to Antiochus without God’s permission. *Time,* therefore, *shall
be given him,* says he. By the words, *time shall be given.* he refers
to the will of God, meaning, the pious shall have no cause for
desponding while they see all things disturbed and confused in every
direction, as God will rule all these perplexities by his secret
judgment. *Time, then, shall be given,* implying, Antiochus can do
nothing by his unbridled and furious audacity, unless divinely permitted
and previously limited.<span id="iii.xiv-p9.1"></span> אבצ *tzeba,*
signifies both “army” and “time,” but the latter meaning is the most
suitable here; for when it is translated “an army shall be given him,”
the sense appears forced. I more willingly embrace the sense of time
being allowed; that is, God will try the patience of his Church for a
certain definite time, and will then bring their troubles to an end. We,
know it to be impossible to sustain the spirits of the faithful,
otherwise that by their expectation of a favorable termination, and by
the hope of their emerging from the abyss of sorrow. This, then, is the
reason why God shews his Prophet by a vision the temporary duration of
the sway of Antiochus. *A period,* then, *shall be appointed to him over
the perpetual sacrifice;* meaning, whatever he may intend, he shall not
abolish the worship of God. For, however he may exert himself, God will
not permit the sacrifices to perish utterly and forever; he will restore
them in his own time, as we shall afterwards see, and when we come to
the close, we shall find the context flowing on in accordance with this
meaning — a *time shall be given him over the continual sacrifice.*

<span id="iii.xiv-p10"></span>He afterwards adds <span
id="iii.xiv-p10.1"></span>עשפב, *beph-sheng,* “in wickedness,” or “in
sin.” I prefer the simple translation “in sin” to “by sin,” although
different senses are elicited according to the different views of
interpreters. It is better to leave it to every one’s free choice, and
thus simply to translate “in wickedness” or “sin.” Some refer it to
Antiochus, because he wickedly polluted God’s temple, and abolished the
sacrifices. This sense is probable, but I will add others, and then say
which of them I like best. Some understand “in sin” of the priests,
because, through the perfidy of Jason, Antiochus entered the city,
spoiled the temple, and introduced those abominations which exterminated
all piety and divine worship. (<span id="iii.xiv-p10.2"></span>[2Ma
4:7](../../../bib/apo/ma2004.htm#007)<span id="iii.xiv-p10.2"></span>..md)
As Jason desired to snatch the priesthood from his brother Onias, he
opened the gates to Antiochus; then a great slaughter followed, in which
all the adherents of Onias were cruelly slain. Afterwards Menelaus
expelled Jason again by similar perfidy. Some translate “by means of
wickedness,” as these priests induced Antiochus to exercise cruelty in
the holy city, and to violate the temple itself. Others approach nearer
the real sense, by supposing the sacrifices to have ceased through
wickedness, because they were adulterated by the priests. But this
appears to me too restricted. In my judgment, I rather hold towards the
view of those who take “wickedness” as a cause arid origin, thereby
teaching the Jews how justly they were punished for their sins. I have
already explained how properly the vision was limited as to time, and
controlled by God’s permission and secret counsel. The cause is here
expressed; for it might still be objected, “How happens it that God
submits himself and his sacred name to the ridicule of the impious, and
even deserts his own people? What does he intend by this?” The Prophet,
therefore, assigns this cause — the Jews must feel the profanation of
the temple, the sad devastation. of the whole city and their horrible
slaughter, to be the reward due to their sins. *A time, therefore, shall
be assigned over the perpetual sacrifice in sin;* that is, on account of
sin. We here see how God on the one hand moderates the weight of the
evils which pressed upon the Jews, and shews them some kindness, lest
sorrow, anxiety, and despair should consume the wretched people; on the
other hand, he humbles them and admonishes them to confess their sins,
and then he urges them to apply their minds to repentance, by stating
their own sins to be the cause of their afflictions. He thus shews how
the source of all their evils was in the Jews themselves, while God’s
anger was provoked by their vices. It is necessary to stop here till
tomorrow.

<span id="iii.xv"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="iii.xv-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, as thou hast
enlightened us by the teaching of thy Gospel, and set before our eyes
thine only begotten Son as a Sun of righteousness to rule us, and hast
deigned to separate us from the whole world, and to make us thy peculiar
people, and to prepare for us a certain seat in heaven: Grant, I pray
thee, that we may be heirs of eternal life. Grant us also, to be mindful
of thy sacred calling, and to make our pilgrimage on earth with spirits
looking upwards and tending towards thee. May we meditate upon the
righteousness of thy kingdom, and be entirely devoted to thee. Do thou
protect us by thy hand even to the end, and may we march boldly under
thy standard, till at length we arrive at that blessed rest, where the
fruit of our victory is laid up for us in Jesus Christ our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="iii.xvi"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi-p1"></span>Lecture FORTY-First.

<span id="iii.xvi-p2"></span>Daniel here mentions one among the many
crimes of Antiochus, *his casting down truth to the ground.* This clause
ought to be joined with the former; for Antiochus could not deprive God
of his lawful worship without abolishing sound doctrine. The angel seems
here to express the reason for the destruction of the sanctuary, because
the worship of God depended upon the teaching of the law, which is here
understood by the word “*truth.*” This passage then states that no
religion is pleasing to God unless founded on truth; for God, according
to the uniform teaching of the Scriptures, does not desire to be
worshipped according to man’s caprice, but rather tries the obedience of
men by prescribing what he demands and approves, lest men should pass
over these bounds. We must here remark the union which Daniel now
establishes between the overthrow and abolition of the worship of God,
and the casting down of truth to the ground, when it neither obtains its
proper rank, nor subdues all mortals to itself.

<span id="iii.xvi-p3"></span>It may be read, he will east down truth in
the earth; thus making a distinction between heaven and earth. And if we
like to read it so, the sense will be — truth still remains stable
although it perishes in the earth, because it has its station in heaven.
Thus the sense would be — after the abolition of the worship of God, and
the cessation of the sacrifices, piety could no longer exist among
mortals. At length he adds, *he shall succeed and prosper* The first
word here implies execution. God wished on the whole to admonish his
Church concerning the prosperous success of Antiochus, lest the faithful
should be dispirited at beholding the impious tyranny so petulantly and
wantonly polluting God’s temple, and utterly destroying his religion, as
if he had provoked God himself to the contest. For this conduct was
equivalent to a direct declaration of war against God. For his success
would trouble all the pious, as if the tyrant was superior to God
himself. Hence this prediction would warn the faithful against the
novelty or suddenness of anything which might occur. It follows, —

<span id="iii.xvii"></span>

<span id="iii.xvii-p1"></span><span id="iii.xvii-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
8:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#013.md)<span
id="iii.xvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvii-p2"></span>**13.** Then I heard one saint speaking,
and another saint said unto that certain *saint* which spake, How long
*shall be* the vision *concerning* the daily *sacrifice,* and the
transgression of desolation, to give both the sanctuary and the host to
be trodden under foot?

<span id="iii.xvii-p3"></span>**13.** Et audivi sanctum unum loquentum:
dixit ergo sanctus unus mirabili, *dicemus postea de voce*, loquens,
Quousque visiom jugis *sacrificii,* et sceleris vastantis *ad* dandum,
 <span id="fr_58"></span>[59](#fn_58.md) et sanctuarium, et exercitus
conculcatio.  <span id="fr_59"></span>[60](#fn_59.md)

<span id="iii.xvii-p6"></span>**14.** And he said unto me, Unto two
thousand and three hundred days; then shall the sanctuary be cleansed.

<span id="iii.xvii-p7"></span>**14.** Et dixit mihi, ad vesperum, mane,
 <span id="fr_60"></span>[61](#fn_60.md) duo millia et trecenti *anni:* et
justificabitur sanctuarium.

<span id="iii.xvii-p9"></span> 

<span id="iii.xvii-p10"></span><span id="iii.xvii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvii-p11"></span>Here he expresses more clearly, what I
formerly said, unfolding God’s intention of consoling and soothing the
sorrows of the pious lest they should sink under the severity of their
trials, at the sight of an impious tyrant domineering in the sanctuary
of God. Besides, the spot which God had promised should be his perpetual
dwelling-place, was exposed to impious superstitions, for the idol of
Jupiter Olympius was erected there, the history of the Maccabees informs
us. (<span id="iii.xvii-p11.1"></span>[2 Maccabees.
1:57](../../../bib/apo/ma2001.htm#057.md)<span id="iii.xvii-p11.1"></span>;
<span id="iii.xvii-p11.2"></span>[2 Maccabees.
6:2](../../../bib/apo/ma2006.htm#002)<span id="iii.xvii-p11.2"></span>..md)
God therefore wished to uphold his servants, lest too severe a
temptation should overwhelm them, and lest trial in so many forms should
cause them to yield and become deficient in piety through want of
courage. But while Daniel is stupefied through astonishment, God
provides for his infirmity by means of an angel. Daniel himself, without
doubt, inquired concerning the vision as we shall see he did afterwards;
but here God desired to meet him, as he saw the holy man so overcome by
fear as scarcely to dare to make any inquiry. God, therefore, here
affords no common proof of his paternal goodness and indulgence, in
interposing and sending his angel to make inquiries in the Prophet’s
name. He says, then, *he heard a holy one,* meaning an angel. For,
although God deigns to call the faithful while dwelling in the world by
this honorable title, yet the superior purity of angels is familiar to
us, as they are altogether free from the lusts of the flesh. But we,
alas! are detained in this prison-house, we are bound down in slavery to
sin, and are polluted by much corruption. The holiness of angels,
however, is far greater than that of mortals, and thus this attribute of
“holiness” is properly applied to them. When Daniel was caught up by the
prophetic spirit, he was separated from the society of men, and was
admitted to that of angels.

<span id="iii.xvii-p12"></span>*An angel then, said to the wonderful
one* The Hebrews often use this expression when they mean “whoever it
may be” — *ploni almoni* and apply it to places as well as persons. They
use it also of any place unknown to them or concealed from them. They
treat the noun as compounded of two words, and many interpret it of any
one unknown, but I think the word to be more emphatic than this.  <span
id="fr_61"></span>[62](#fn_61.md) Daniel here brings forward an angel
speaking, and adds dignity to his description by calling him “holy.”
Without doubt, then, the person of whom the angel asked the question was
his superior; it is not likely that he would be called “a certain one,”
while the angel is termed a holy one. Reason, then, requires the
expression to be applied to some angel whose glory was incomprehensible,
or at least far superior to ordinary ones; for, as Daniel calls one
angel “holy,” so he would have called the rest, as we shall afterwards
see. When treating, however, of a distinct being, he uses the word <span
id="iii.xvii-p13.2"></span>ינומלפ, *palmoni,* and its etymology guides
us to its sense, as meaning something mysterious and incomprehensible.
Then, who does not see that Christ is denoted, who is the chief of
angels and far superior to them all? In the ninth chapter of Isaiah,
(<span id="iii.xvii-p13.3"></span>[Isa
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006)<span id="iii.xvii-p13.3"></span>,.md)
he is called <span id="iii.xvii-p13.4"></span>אלפ *pela,* “wonderful.”
The word in the text is a compound one, as we have said, but as <span
id="iii.xvii-p13.5"></span>אלפ *pela,* signifies “hidden” in Hebrew, as
Christ is so called, and as in <span id="iii.xvii-p13.6"></span>[Jud
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#001.md)<span id="iii.xvii-p13.6"></span>,
God claims this name as peculiarly his own, all these points agree well
together. The sense then is, an angel comes to Christ for the sake of
Daniel and of the whole Church, and seeks from him as from the supreme
teacher and master, the meaning of the declarations which we have just
heard. We need not feel surprise at angels inquiring into eternity, as
if it were unknown to them. It is the property of Deity alone to know
all things, while the knowledge of angels is necessarily limited. Paul
teaches us to wonder at the Church being collected out of profane and
strange people; this was a mystery hidden from angels themselves, before
God really showed himself the father of the whole world. (<span
id="iii.xvii-p13.7"></span>[Eph
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#010.md)<span
id="iii.xvii-p13.7"></span>.) Hence, there is no absurdity in supposing
angels to inquire into mysteries, as ignorance is not necessarily
deserving of blame, and as God has not raised his creatures for his own
level. It is his peculiar province to know all things, and to have
everything under his eye. The angel desires to understand this mystery,
not so much for his own sake as on account of the whole Church; for we
know them to be our ministers, according to the clear testimony of the
Apostle. (<span id="iii.xvii-p13.8"></span>[Heb
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#014.md)<span
id="iii.xvii-p13.8"></span>.) As they keep watch over us so carefully,
it does not surprise us to find the angel inquiring so anxiously
concerning this vision, and thus benefiting the whole Church by the hand
of Daniel.

<span id="iii.xvii-p14"></span>Meanwhile, we must notice, how Christ is
the chief of angels and also their instructor, because he is the eternal
Wisdom of God. Angels, therefore, must draw all the light of their
intelligence from that single fountain. Thus angels draw us to Christ by
their example, and induce us to devote ourselves to him through the
persuasion that this is the supreme and only wisdom. If we are his
disciples, being obedient, humble, and teachable, we shall desire to
know only what he will make manifest to us. But the angel asks. *What is
the meaning of the vision of the perpetual* sacrifice, *and of the sin?*
that is, what, is the object of the vision concerning the abrogation of
the perpetual sacrifice, and concerning the sin which lays waste? As to
the second point, we explained yesterday the various opinions of
interpreters, some twisting it to Antiochus, who impiously dared to
violate God’s temple, and others to the priests. But we said the people
were intended, lest many, as they are accustomed, should blame the
Almighty for so heavily afflicting the Church. But God wished to bear
witness to the origin of this devastation from the sins of the people.
It is just as if the angel had said, How long will the sacrifices cease?
How long will this vengeance, by which God will chastise the wickedness
of his people, endure? For the sin is called devastating, through being
the cause of that calamity. It is afterwards added*, how long will the
sanctuary and the army be trodden, down?* that is, how long will the
worship of God, and true piety, and the people itself, be trodden down
under this cruel tyranny of Antiochus? But this question has far more
efficacy, than if the Prophet had said, as we saw yesterday, that the
punishment should be uniform and temporal. It was now necessary to
explain what had already been stated more clearly. Thus this question
was interposed with the view of rendering Daniel more attentive, and of
stirring up the people by this narrative to the pursuit of learning. For
it is no common event when angels approach Christ for our sakes, and
inquire into the events which concern the state and safety of the
Church. As, therefore, angels discharge this duty, we must be worse than
stony, if we are not urged to eagerness and carefulness in the pursuit
of divine knowledge. We see, then, why this passage concerning the angel
is interposed.

<span id="iii.xvii-p15"></span><span id="iii.xvii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvii-p16"></span>The phrase, *And he said to me,* now
follows. This ought to be referred not to the angel inquiring, but to
the Wonderful One. Whence we, rather gather the great anxiety of the
angel concerning the interpretation of the prophecy, not for his own
sake, but for the common benefit of the pious. Respecting this Wonderful
One, though I am persuaded he was the Son of God, yet whoever he was, he
certainly does not reject the angel’s request. Why then does he address
Daniel rather than the angel? Because the angel was not seeking his own
benefit, but took up the cause of the whole Church, as we have Shawn how
angels are occupied in our salvation. Thus also we see how the angel
notices the Prophet’s astonishment, when he was almost dead, and had not
thought of inquiring for himself, or at least did not dare to break
forth at once; for he afterwards recovered himself, and was raised up by
the angel’s hand, as we shall soon perceive*. The Wonderful One said to
me* — that is, the incomprehensible or the mysterious one said to *me* —
*for two thousand three hundred evenings and mornings, then the
sanctuary shall be justified* Here the Hebrews are mutually at variance
whether they ought to understand the number of years or of months; but
it is surprising to perceive how grossly they are deluded in so plain a
matter. The expression, *to evening and morning,* is not doubtful, since
Christ, clearly means two thousand three hundred days; for what else can
the phrase, *morning and evening,* signify? It cannot be used of either
years or months. Evidently we ought to understand natural days here,
consisting of twenty-four hours each. Those who receive it of years and
months are wretchedly mistaken, and even ridiculous in their
calculations. For some begin to calculate the, time from Samuel, they
next descend to the reign of Saul, and next to that of David; and thus
they foolishly trifle, through not understanding the intention of
Christ, who wished his Church to be forewarned of the coming empires and
slaughters, with the view of rendering the faithful invincible, however
sorely they may be oppressed on all sides. Christ therefore wished to
hold up a light to direct all the elect through the approaching darkness
under the tyranny of Antiochus, and to assure them that in the very
depths of it they would not be deserted by the favor of God. Hope would
thus elevate their minds and all their senses unto the promised
termination. To what purpose, then, do those interpreters speak of the
reigns of Saul and David? We see this to be altogether foreign and
adverse to the mind of Christ, and to the use of this prophecy. No less
absurd is the guess of those who prate about months. Their refutation
would occupy three or four hours, and would be a waste of time, utterly
profitless. It is sufficient to gather this simple meaning from the
words — Christ does not speak here of years or months, but of days. We
must now seek the true interpretation of the passage from the whole
context. We have shewn how impossible it is to explain this prophecy
otherwise than by Antiochus: the event itself proves this to be its
meaning. Blind indeed must be those who do not hold this principle — the
small horn sprang from one of those remarkable and illustrious persons
who came forth in place of one very large horn. Boys even know this by
reading the accredited history of those times. As Christ here alluded to
the tyranny of Antiochus, we must observe how his words accord with the
facts. Christ numbers 2300 days for the pollution of the sanctuary, and
this period comprehends six years and about four months. We know the
Jews to have used lunar years as well as months. They afterwards used
interealary periods, since twelve lunar months did not correspond with
the sun’s course. The same custom prevailed among both Greeks and
Romans. Julius Caesar first arranged for us the solar year, and supplied
the defect by intercalary days, so that the months might accord with the
sun’s course. But however that was, these days, as I have said, fill up
six years and three months and a half. Now, if we compare the testimony
of history, and especially of the book of Maccabees, with this prophecy,
we shall find that miserable race oppressed for six years under the
tyranny of Antiochus. The idol of Olympian Jove did not remain in the
temple for six continuous years, but the commencement of the pollution
occurred at the first attack, as if he would insult the very face of
God. No wonder then if Daniel understood this vision of six years and
about a third, because Antiochus then insulted the worship of God and
the Law; and when he poured forth innocent blood promiscuously, no one
dared openly to resist him. As, therefore, religion was then laid
prostrate on the ground, until the cleansing of the temple, we see how
very clearly the prophecy and the history agree, as far as this
narrative is concerned. Again, it is clear the purifying of the temple
could not have been at the end of the sixth current year, but in the
month <span id="iii.xvii-p16.1"></span>ולסכ, *keslu,* answering to
October or November, as leaned men prudently decide, it was profaned.
For this month among the Jews begins sometimes in the middle of October,
and sometimes at the end, according to the course of the moon; for we
said the months and years were lunar. In the month Keslu the temple was
polluted; in the month <span id="iii.xvii-p16.2"></span>רדא *Ader,*
about three months afterwards, near its close, the Maccabees purged it.
(<span id="iii.xvii-p16.3"></span>[1 Maccabees
4:36](../../../bib/apo/ma1004.htm#036.md)<span
id="iii.xvii-p16.3"></span>.) Thus the history confirms in every way
what Daniel had predicted many ages previously — nay, nearly three
hundred years before it came to pass. For this occurred a hundred and
fifty years after the death of Alexander. Some time also had already
elapsed, as there were eight or ten kings of Persia between the deaths
of Cyrus and Darius. I do not remember any but the chief events just
now, and it ought it to be sufficient for us to perceive how Daniel’s
predictions were fulfilled in their own season, as historians clearly
narrate. Without the slightest doubt, Christ predicted the profanation
of the temple, and this would depress the spirits of the pious as if God
had betrayed them, had abandoned all care of his temple, and had given
up his election and his covenant entirely. Christ therefore wished to
support the spirit of the faithful by this prediction, thereby informing
them how fully they deserved these future evils, in consequence of their
provoking God’s wrath; and yet their punishment should be temporary,
because the very God who announced its approach promised at the same
time a prosperous issue.

<span id="iii.xvii-p17"></span>Respecting the phrase, *the sanctuary
shall be justified,* some translate it — “Then the sanctuary shall be
expiated;” but I prefer retaining the proper sense of the word. We know
how usually the Hebrews use the word “justify” when they speak of
rights. When their own rights are restored to those who have been
deprived of them — when a slave has been blessed with his liberty — when
he who has been unjustly oppressed obtains his cause, the Hebrews use
this word “justified.” As God’s sanctuary was subject to infamy by’ the
image of Olympian Jove being exhibited there, all respect for it had
passed away; for we know how the glory of the temple sprang from the
worship of God. As the temple had been defiled by so great disgrace, it
was then justified, when God established his own sacrifices again, and
restored his pure worship as prescribed by the Law. *The sanctuary,*
therefore, *shall be justified;* that is, vindicated from that disgrace
to which for a time it had been subject. It follows: —

<span id="iii.xviii"></span>

<span id="iii.xviii-p1"></span><span id="iii.xviii-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#015.md)<span id="iii.xviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xviii-p2"></span>**15.** And it came to pass, when I,
*even* I Daniel, had seen the vision, and sought for the meaning, then,
behold, there stood before me as the appearance of a man.

<span id="iii.xviii-p3"></span>**15.** Et factum est. cum videram ego
Daniel visionem, et quaererem intelligentiam, ecce stetit coram me quasi
aspectus, *vel species,* viri.

<span id="iii.xviii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.xviii-p5"></span><span id="iii.xviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xviii-p6"></span>Daniel again confirms his original
statement. But before he descends to the interpretation, he makes a
preface concerning the faithfulness and certainty of the oracle, lest
the Church should hesitate to embrace his utterance as really proceeding
from God. In doing this, he uses no artifice as rhetoricians do; but God
wished to stir up both him and all the pious to meditate upon this
prophecy, the knowledge of which was then so peculiarly necessary and
useful. He says, therefore, *when he sought the understanding of this
vision, there appeared to him a form like that of a man* Now God had
anticipated this desire of the Prophet, by the answer which the angel
received from Christ, who in reply had partly explained the sense of
this vision. Now Daniel, finding himself anticipated by God who did not
wait for his inquiry, gathers courage, and trusting in God’s readiness
to furnish an answer, he wishes to learn the matter more clearly; not
that he was altogether ignorant of the subject, but he did not yet
perceive with sufficient clearness what was useful to himself and the
whole Church. We see then, how the answer of Christ only afforded him a
taste of the vision, and only urged him forwards towards the full
comprehension of it. Many are immediately satisfied with but moderate
information, and as soon as they understand a portion of any subject,
they reject every addition, and many too often settle down at the first
elements, and their obstinacy prevents that complete knowledge which is
necessary. Daniel therefore shews himself to be far distant from such
fastidiousness, as he was rendered more attentive by hearing from
Christ’ lips the rea1 object of the vision. *When I was attentive 1
sought to understand it,* says he, *behold! there stood before my face*
(or near it) like *the aspect of a man* We ought probably to interpret
this passage of Christ, who is now called like a man, as formerly.
(<span id="iii.xviii-p6.1"></span>[Da
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#013.md)<span
id="iii.xviii-p6.1"></span>.) For he had not yet put on our flesh, so as
to be properly entitled to the name of a man; but he was here like a
man, because he wished to allow the holy fathers a taste from which they
might understand his future coming as Mediator, when he should put on
human nature as God manifest in flesh:. (<span
id="iii.xviii-p6.2"></span>[1Ti
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#016.md)<span
id="iii.xviii-p6.2"></span>.) Thus Daniel speaks suitably as before when
he says, Christ *appeared to him under the aspect of a man* But this
adds to the same purpose, —

<span id="iii.xix"></span>

<span id="iii.xix-p1"></span><span id="iii.xix-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#016.md)<span id="iii.xix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xix-p2"></span>**16.** And I heard a man’s voice between
*the banks of* Ulai, which called, and said, Gabriel, make this *man* to
understand the vision.

<span id="iii.xix-p3"></span>**16.** Et audivi vocem hominis in Ulai
 <span id="fr_62"></span>[63](#fn_62.md) et clamavit, et dixit, Gabriel,
doce hane visionem.

<span id="iii.xix-p5"></span> 

<span id="iii.xix-p6"></span><span id="iii.xix-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xix-p7"></span>He does not use the particle implying
fitness, but says he heard the voice of a man, because he treats no
longer of either a man or a figure, but of a voice. It is sufficient to
say at once, he was like a man, not really so, but only under the image
and appearance of one. Christ therefore *appeared as a man,* and is
called one, since Scripture often records how angels often appeared
under the form of men, and are called indiscriminately, either angels or
men. (<span id="iii.xix-p7.1"></span>[Jud
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#003.md)<span id="iii.xix-p7.1"></span>,
etc.) So in this place Daniel relates the appearance of a. man, or the
aspect of one, improperly indeed, but without any danger of mistake; for
he afterwards admonishes the faithful, how this person was not clothed
with the substance of flesh, but had only a human form and aspect. *I
heard then a human voice in the midst of the river* We gather from this
that the same person is here intended of whom mention was lately made,
because he commands the angel; whence this can be referred to Christ
alone.

<span id="iii.xix-p8"></span>*Gabriel,* says he, *teach him.* We observe
the speaker from the midst of the river here commanding Gabriel, as if
superior to him. For Gabriel as the name of an angel, is sufficiently
known from other passages of Scripture; (<span
id="iii.xix-p8.1"></span>[Luke 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#019.md),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#026)<span id="iii.xix-p8.1"></span>;.md)
and its etymology, “The strength of God,” is very suitable to this
meaning. Without ally doubt, the angel here receives his commands from
Christ. Thus, we see the supreme power and authority represented under
the form and aspect of a man, as well as obedience portrayed in Gabriel,
who discharges the duty enjoined upon him. From this Christ’s divinity
is inferred, as he could not issue orders to angels, without either
having special authority, or being God himself. But when the phrase
“like a man” is used, we are taught his manifest superiority to man. And
what does this imply? not angelic nature but divine. Christ by thus
presenting himself under a human form, shews, by a kind of
foreshadowing, how he would become a man, when the fullness of time
arrived. Then he would really manifest himself as the head of the
Church, and the guardian of the salvation of the pious. For he proves
himself to have power over all angels, when he orders Gabriel to
discharge the office of the Prophet’s instructor. We will put off the
remainder.

<span id="iii.xx"></span>

<span id="iii.xx-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="iii.xx-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since in these days the
earth is full of defilement’s which pollute the sacred worship of thy
name, as there is scarcely a corner of the world which Satan has not
corrupted, and as thy truth is everywhere adulterated, that we may
persevere and remain steadfast in our course of piety. May we always be
attentive to that light which thou didst first set before us in the Law,
and which shines upon us now more fully under the Gospel. May we never
become plunged into that darkness in which we see the world wrapped up,
and in which those who seem to be themselves most acute are still
involved. Grant us always to follow that life which thou shewest us,
until we arrive at that goal which thou hast set before us, and to which
thou daily invitest us by thine only-begotten Son. — Amen.

<span id="iii.xxi"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p1"></span>Lecture Forty-Second.

<span id="iii.xxii"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p1"></span><span id="iii.xxii-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#017.md)<span id="iii.xxii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p2"></span>**17.** So he came near where I stood: and
when he came, I was afraid, and fell upon my face: but he said unto me,
Understand, O son of man: for at the time of the end *shall be* the
vision.

<span id="iii.xxii-p3"></span>**17.** Et venit ad stationem meam: et cum
veniret territus sum, et cecidi super faciem meam: tunc dixit ad me,
Intellige, fil hominis, quai ad tempus finis visio.  <span
id="fr_63"></span>[64](#fn_63.md)

<span id="iii.xxii-p5"></span> 

<span id="iii.xxii-p6"></span><span id="iii.xxii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p7"></span>I will not repeat what I have already
explained. I will proceed with what I had commenced, namely, the
Prophet’s need of instruction, because he could not understand the
vision without an interpreter; wherefore the angel was ordered to
explain his revelation of God more fully. But, before he narrates this,
he says, *he was frightened at the approach of the angel.* Without
doubt, this reverence was always present to his mind. Whenever he
perceived himself called or taught by God, he was doubtless struck with
fear; but here some special feeling is expressed, as God desired to
influence his mind to set us an example, and to render us more
attentive. Here Daniel explains his own mind to us, commending the
magnitude and importance of the vision, lest we should read with
carelessness what he will afterwards relate, and not treat the occasion
with sufficient seriousness. For God used the angel as his servant to
explain his intention to the Prophet; at the same time he inwardly
touched his mind by his Spirit to show us the way, and thus he would not
only train us to docility, but also to fear. He says, then, *he was
frightened and fell down* This, as I have said, was usual with the
Prophet, as it ought to be with all the pious. Paul also, in celebrating
the effect and power of prophecy, says, if any unbelievers should enter
into the assembly and hear a prophet speaking in God’s name, he would
prostrate himself, says he, upon his face. (<span
id="iii.xxii-p7.1"></span>[1Co
14:25](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#025.md)<span
id="iii.xxii-p7.1"></span>.) If this happened to unbelievers, how great
will be our troubles, unless we receive most reverently and humbly, what
we know to have been uttered by the mouth of God? Meanwhile, we should
remember what I have lately touched upon, — the importance of the
present oracle as here commended to us by the Prophet; *for he fell upon
his face through his fright,* as he will repeat in the next verse.

<span id="iii.xxii-p8"></span>Nor is the following exhortation
superfluous; *understated,* says *he, O son of Adam* It would be of
little use to us to be moved and excited for a time, unless our minds
were afterwards composed for hearing. For many are touched by fear when
God appears to them; that is, when he compels them to feel the force and
power of his sway; but they continue in their stupidity, and thus their
fright is rendered profitless. But Daniel here makes a difference
between himself and the profane, who are only astonished and by no means
prepared for obedience. At the same time, he relates how his own
excitement was effected by the assistance of the angel. The fear, then,
of which we have lately made mention, was preparation for docility; but;
this terror would have been useless by itself, unless it had been added,
*that he might understand* We ought to understand how piety does not
consist merely in acknowledging the fear of God, but obedience is also
required, preparing us to receive with tranquil and composed feelings
whatever we shall be taught. We ought diligently to observe this order.

<span id="iii.xxii-p9"></span>It now follows: *Because there shall be an
end of the vision at a fixed time.* Some join <span
id="iii.xxii-p9.1"></span>ףק-תעל *legneth-ketz,* making the sense “at
the end of the time,” <span id="iii.xxii-p9.2"></span>ףק *ketz,* in this
sense being in the genitive case by way of an epithet, as the Hebrews
commonly use it. They elicit this sense — the vision shall be for a
prefixed time. But others prefer — the end of the vision shall be for a
time. I think this latter sense is better, as the former seems to me
forced. On the whole, it is not of much consequence, yet as that form of
expression is the easier, namely, the end or fulfillment of the vision
should be at a definite time, I had rather follow that interpretation.
The angel asserts, then, that this was no vain speculation, but a cause
joined with its effect, which should have its completion at a stated
period. *There shall be an end,* then, *of the vision in its time;*
meaning, what you now behold shall neither vanish away nor be destroyed,
but its end shall happen when the time shall arrive which God has
determined. <span id="iii.xxii-p9.3"></span>ףק*, ketz,* is often taken
in this sense. Hence *there shall be an end of the vision,;* that is,
the vision shall be completed when the fitting time shall arrive. We
ought to bear in mind this exhortation of the angel, because unless we
are certainly persuaded of the fixedness of anything when God speaks, we
shall not be ready to receive whatever he pronounces. But when we are
convinced of this saying, God never separates his hand from his mouth —
meaning, he is never unlike himself, but his power follows up his word,
and thus he fulfills whatever he declares; this becomes a sure and firm
foundation for our faith. This admonition of the angel ought to be
extended generally to the whole of Scripture, since God does not throw
words into the air, according to the common phrase. For nothing happens
rashly, but as soon as he speaks, his truth, the matter itself and its
necessary effect, are all consistent. It follows: —

<span id="iii.xxiii"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p1"></span><span id="iii.xxiii-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#018.md)<span id="iii.xxiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p2"></span>**18.** Now as he was speaking with me, I
was in a deep sleep on my face toward the ground: but he touched me, and
set me upright.

<span id="iii.xxiii-p3"></span>**18.** Et cum loqueretur mecum, sopitus
corrui super faciem meam in terram, et tetigit me,  <span
id="fr_64"></span>[65](#fn_64.md) et restituit me super stationem meam.
 <span id="fr_65"></span>[66](#fn_65.md)

<span id="iii.xxiii-p6"></span> 

<span id="iii.xxiii-p7"></span><span id="iii.xxiii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p8"></span>The Prophet repeats what he had said,
namely, how he had been frightened by the magnitude of this vision;
meanwhile, he was raised up by the angel, lest he should remain in that
state of stupor. Yet these two clauses must be noticed: Daniel was
astonished at the outset, for he could not otherwise be sufficiently
composed to listen to the angel’s voice; but at the same time another
clause is added, stating, the angel set him upright in his place.
Whenever God addresses us, we must necessarily be subject to fear and
dread, to produce humility, and to render us docile and obedient. Fears
the true preparation for obedience; but, as we formerly said, another
feeling ought to follow; namely, as God has previously prostrated and
cast us down, he will also raise us up, thereby preparing us for
listening; and this disposition cannot arise except our minds are sedate
and composed. The Prophet then expresses both these states of mind here.
This, as I have said, is common to all the pious; but a peculiarity is
noticed here, lest the readers of the vision should become torpid, and
receive it carelessly; for they ought to collect all their senses,
conscious of their inability to understand it, unless the fear of God
should precede, and thus form the mind for obedience. *While he was
speaking with me,* therefore, *I fell into a swoon with my face upon the
ground;* that is, I lay astonished, *and he touched me.* I have already
stated the opinion of others, that the angel approached him, but it is
only tolerable. He now adds: —

<span id="iii.xxiv"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p1"></span><span id="iii.xxiv-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
8:19](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#019.md)<span id="iii.xxiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p2"></span>**19.** And he said, Behold, I will make
thee know what shall be in the last end of the indignation: for at the
time appointed the end *shall be.*

<span id="iii.xxiv-p3"></span>**19.** Et dixit, Ecce ego docebo te
 <span id="fr_66"></span>[67](#fn_66.md) quod erit in fine irae: quia ad
praefixum, *vel statutem tempus finis.*

<span id="iii.xxiv-p5"></span> 

<span id="iii.xxiv-p6"></span><span id="iii.xxiv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p7"></span>Those who read the noun <span
id="iii.xxiv-p7.1"></span>ףק *ketz,* “*end,*” in the genitive case in
<span id="iii.xxiv-p7.2"></span>[Da
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#017.md)<span id="iii.xxiv-p7.2"></span>,
understand in this place the word “vision” again, as if the Prophet had
said, “At the time of the end there shall be a vision.” But as <span
id="iii.xxiv-p7.3"></span>דעומ, *meveged,* or *moed,* signifies a “time
fixed and settled beforehand,” there is nothing superfluous in that
method of speech; then *ketz,* as I have said, is properly taken for the
effect itself, and it would be harsh and far-fetched to say “at the time
of the end there shall be a vision,” in the, sense of the filling up of
the vision. For this word expresses all which such interpreters wish it
to imply. Besides, all are agreed as to the matter itself, since the
angel bears witness to his being the interpreter chosen by God, who
explains futurity to the Prophet. *Behold,* therefore, says he, *I will
explain to thee* He here acquires confidence for himself from his
office, as he had accepted the commands divinely laid upon him. And we
should remark this also, since our faith will never rest or become firm
unless the authority on which it is founded be fixed. As then the angel
declares himself to be executing an office divinely enjoined upon him,
ought we to put confidence in men who conduct themselves with rashness,
and, though they assume authority in God’s name, yet have no certain and
lawful calling? We may learn, then, how neither angels nor men ought to
be held in such honor as to induce us to receive whatever they bring
forward, unless the Almighty has appointed them to be his ministers and
interpreters.

<span id="iii.xxiv-p8"></span>He then says, *I will announce to thee
what shall happen even at the end of the wrath.* Without doubt, the
angel asserts by this phrase the suddenness of God’s wrath. We are aware
how instantaneously on the return of the people their enemies attacked
them in Judea, and never ceased to inflict upon them numberless
troubles. Wherefore, as soon as the Jews had returned from exile, God
began to exercise them in various ways, and not without sufficient
reason. Every one privately studied his own interests, but without any
regard for the temple and any desire for the worship of God, and thus
they were given up to avarice and caprice. They also defrauded God
himself in tithes and offerings, as is evident from the prophets Malachi
and Haggai. (<span id="iii.xxiv-p8.1"></span>[Hag
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#012.md)<span id="iii.xxiv-p8.1"></span>;
<span id="iii.xxiv-p8.2"></span>[Mal
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#008)<span id="iii.xxiv-p8.2"></span>..md)
From that period God began to punish them, but deferred his vengeance
till the time of Antiochus. The angel, therefore, calls *the end of the
vengeance* that severer punishment which God inflicted after the people
had abused his forbearance. Therefore *I will teach thee,* or lay before
time, *what shall happen at the close of the vengeance, because,* says
he, *it shall be the time of the end.* He here repeats what he had said
concerning the effect of the prophecy, meaning, the fulfillment should
take place at its own appointed season. We must; now notice the noun
*moed,* because it is here opposed to our fervor and intemperance. Haste
in desiring anything leads, as they say, to delay; for as soon as God
bears witness to anything, we wish it to be fulfilled at the very first
moment, and if he suspend its execution only a very few days, we not
only wonder but cry out with vexation. God, therefore, here admonishes
us by his angel that he has a settled time, and thus we are to learn to
put a bridle on ourselves, and not to be rash and unseasonably hasty,
according to our usual habit. We ought, then, to remember the
explanation given, and perceive how the effect of the vision is shewn
here, and thus it will obtain from us its just reverence. It follows: —

<span id="iii.xxv"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p1"></span><span id="iii.xxv-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
8:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#020.md)<span id="iii.xxv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p2"></span>**20.** The ram which thou sawest having
*two* horns *are* the kings of Media and Persia.

<span id="iii.xxv-p3"></span>**20.** Et aries quem vidisti habentem duo
cornua, reges sunt Medorum et Persarum.

<span id="iii.xxv-p4"></span>**21.** And the rough goat *is* the king of
Grecia: and the great horn that *is* between his eyes *is* the first
king.

<span id="iii.xxv-p5"></span>**21.** Et hircus caprae, qui natus erit ex
hirco, rex Graecae, et cornu magnum quod erat inter oculos, ejus, est
rex primus.

<span id="iii.xxv-p6"></span> 

<span id="iii.xxv-p7"></span><span id="iii.xxv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p8"></span>By the word “Javan” the Hebrews designate
not only the Greeks but the: Macedonians, and the whole of that tract
which is divided by the Hellespont, from Asia Minor as far as Illyricmn.
Therefore the meaning is — the king of Greece.

<span id="iii.xxvi"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p1"></span><span id="iii.xxvi-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
8:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#022.md)<span
id="iii.xxvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p2"></span>**22.** Now that being broken, whereas
four stood up for it, four kingdoms shall stand up out of the nation,
but not in his power.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p3"></span>**22.** Et confractum est,  <span
id="fr_67"></span>[68](#fn_67.md) et extiterunt quatuor, cornua scilicet,
loco ejus: quatuor regna a gente exsurgent, vel, existent, et non pro
fortitudine illius.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p5"></span>**23.** And in the latter time of their
kingdom, when the transgressors are come to the full, a king of fierce
countenance, and understanding dark sentences, shall stand up.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p6"></span>**23.** Et in fine regni illorum, ubi
perfecti fuerint scelerati, existet rex praefractus facie,  <span
id="fr_68"></span>[69](#fn_68.md) et intelligens aenigmata.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p8"></span> 

<span id="iii.xxvi-p9"></span>Hence Luther, indulging his thoughts too
freely, refers this passage to the masks of Antichrist, but we shall
trace this point afterwards.  <span id="fr_69"></span>[70](#fn_69.md)

<span id="iii.xxvii"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvii-p1"></span><span id="iii.xxvii-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
8:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#024.md)<span
id="iii.xxvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvii-p2"></span>**24.** And his power shall be mighty,
but not by his own power: and he shall destroy wonderfully, and shall
prosper, and practise, and shall destroy the mighty and the holy people.

<span id="iii.xxvii-p3"></span>**24.** Et roborabitur fortitudo ejus, et
non in fortitudine sua,  <span id="fr_70"></span>[71](#fn_70.md) et
mirabilia  <span id="fr_71"></span>[72](#fn_71.md) evertet, prosperabitur,
et efficiet, et perdet, *repetit idem verbum,* robustos, et populum
sanctorum.

<span id="iii.xxvii-p6"></span>**25.** And through his policy also he
shall cause craft to prosper in his hand; and he shall magnify *himself*
in his heart, and by peace shall destroy many: he shall also stand up
against the Prince of princes; but he shall be broken without hand.

<span id="iii.xxvii-p7"></span>**25.** Et pro intelligentia sua
prosperabitur dolus in manu ejus, et in corde suo magnificabit se, et in
pace perdet multos, *vel fortes,* et contra Principem principum stabit,
*vel exsurget*, et absque manu frangetur.

<span id="iii.xxvii-p8"></span> 

<span id="iii.xxvii-p9"></span><span id="iii.xxvii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvii-p10"></span>We have previously given a brief
explanation of all these subjects. But here the angel removes all doubt,
lest we should still anxiously inquire the meaning of the ram which
Daniel saw, and of the he-goat which followed and prostrated the ram.
The angel, therefore, here pronounces the ram to represent two kingdoms,
which coalesced in one. Cyrus, as we have said, granted it for a time to
his father-in-law Cyaxares, but yet; drew the whole power to himself,
and the Persians began to extend their sway over all the realms of the
East. But God in this vision had respect to the beginning of that
monarchy. When, however, the Persians and Medes, were united, then the
ram bore two horns; then the he-goat succeeded, and he threw down the
ram, as we have already seen. In that he-goat there was first one great
horn and then four small ones. The angel then answers concerning the
he-goat representing the kingdom of the Greeks. There is not the
slightest doubt here, since Alexander seized upon the whole East, and
thus the Persian monarchy was utterly destroyed. In the he-goat,
therefore, the kingdom of Greece or Macedon was displayed, but the horns
will mark something special.

<span id="iii.xxvii-p11"></span>*That great, horn,* says Daniel, *was
the first king,* namely, Alexander; afterwards four smaller horns arose
in his place. We have already explained these. For when much blood had
been shed, and the greater part of the leaders had been slain, and after
the followers of Alexander had mutually attacked and. destroyed each
other, those who remained divided his dominions among themselves.
Cassander the son of Antipater obtained Macedon; Seleueus, Syria;
Ptolemy, Egypt; and Antigonus his own fourth share. In this way the
smaller horns succeeded Alexander, according to the clear testimony of
profane history. From the frequency with which God sets this prophecy
before us, we gather his intention of giving us a conspicuous sign of
his majesty. For how could Daniel conjecture future events for so long a
period before they happened? He does not pronounce mere enigmas, but;
narrates things exactly as if they were already fulfilled. At the
present time Epicureans despise the Scriptures and laugh at our
simplicity, as if we were too ridiculous. But they rather display their
own prodigious madness, and blindness, by not acknowledging the
prediction of Daniel to be divine. Nay, from this prophecy alone we may
prove with certainty the unity of God. If any one was inclined to deny
that first principle, and utterly reject the doctrine of his divinity,
he might be convinced by this single prophecy. Not only is this subject
treated here, but Daniel points with his finger to the God of Israel as
the only one in whose hand and will are all things, and from whom
nothing either escapes or is concealed. From this prophecy alone the
authority of Scripture is established by proofs perfectly sure and
undoubted, as the Prophet treats with perfect clearness events at the
time unknown, and which no mortal could ever have divined.

<span id="iii.xxvii-p12"></span>First of all he says, *The ram which,
thou sawest, having two horns, means the kings of the Medes and
Persians* This had not then occurred, for that ram had not yet risen and
seized upon Babylon, as we have stated already. Thus Daniel was raised
up as it were to heaven, and observed from that watch-tower things
hidden from the minds of men. He afterwards adds, *The he-goat is the
king of Greece.* Philip, the father of Alexander, although a strenuous
and a most skillful warrior, who surpassed all the kings of Macedon for
cleverness, yet, superior as he was, never dared to cross over the sea.
It, was sufficient for him if he could strengthen his power in Greece,
and render himself formidable against his neighbors in Asia Minor. But
he never dared to attack the power of Persia, or even to harass them,
and much less to overcome the whole East. Alexander, inflamed rather by
rashness and pride than by good judgment, thought nothing would prove
difficult to him. But when Daniel saw this vision, who ever would have
thought of any king of Greece invading that most powerful monarchy, and
not only seizing upon the whole of Asia, but obtaining sway in Egypt,
Syria, and other regions? Although Asia Minor was an extensive region,
and well known to be divided into many rich and fertile provinces, yet
it was but a small addition to his immense empire. Nay, when Nineveh was
conquered by Babylon, and the Chaldeans became masters of Assyria, this
also was an addition to the Persian monarchy. We are familiar with the
amazing riches of the Medes, and yet they were entirely absorbed. Darius
drew with him 800,000 men, and quite buried the earth under his army.
Alexander met him at the head of 30,000. What comparison was there
between them! When Xerxes  <span id="fr_72"></span>[73](#fn_72.md) came to
Greece he brought with him 800,000 men, and threatened to put fetters
upon the sea; yet Daniel speaks of his incredible event just as if it
had already taken place, and were matter of history. These points must
be diligently noticed that the Scriptures may inspire us with the
confidence which they deserve.

<span id="iii.xxvii-p14"></span><span id="iii.xxvii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvii-p15"></span>*The great horn,* says he, *which was
between his eyes was the first king, and when it was broken, four others
sprang up.* Alexander, as we have mentioned, perished in the flower of
his age, and was scarcely’ thirty years old when he died, through the
influence of either poison or disease. Which of the two is uncertain,
although great suspicion of fraud attaches to the manner of his death;
and whichever way it happened, that horn was broken. In his place there
arose four horns, *which sprang up,* say’s he, from that nation. Here we
must notice this, since I very much wonder what has come into some
persons’ minds, to cause them to translate it “from the nations” and yet
these are persons skilled in the Hebrew language. First, they show great
ignorance by changing the number, and next, they do not comprehend the
intention of the angel. For he confirms what he formerly said concerning
the unity of the kingdom and its division into four parts, and he
assigns the reason here. They shall spring, says he, from *a nation,*
meaning the Greeks, and all from a single origin. For by what right did
Polemy obtain the empire? solely by being one of Alexander’s generals.
At the beginning, he dared not use the royal name, nor wear the diadem,
but only after a lapse of time. The same is true of Selcucus, and
Antigonus, and Cassander. We see, then, how correctly the kingdom of the
Greeks is represented to us under the figure of a single beast, although
it was immediately dispersed and torn into four parts. The kingdoms,
then, which sprang from *the nation* meaning; Greece, *shall stand, but
not in full strength* The copula is here taken in the sense of “but*;*”
*the four kingdom* shall stand, *but not by his strength,* for Alexander
had touched upon the Indian sea, and enjoyed the tranquil possession of
his empire throughout the whole east, having filled all men with the
fear of his industry, valor, and speed. Hence, the;angel states the four
horns to be so small, that not one of them should be equal to the first
king.

<span id="iii.xxvii-p16"></span><span id="iii.xxvii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvii-p17"></span>*And at the end of their reign, when the
wicked shall be at their height, one king shall stand* By saying at the
end of their kingdom, he does not mean to imply the destruction of the
four kingdoms had ceased. The successors of Antiochus were not directly
cast down from their sway, and Syria was not reduced into a province
till about eighty or a hundred years after Antiochus the Great had been
completely conquered. He again left heirs, who, without doubt, succeeded
to the throne, as we shall see more clearly in the eleventh chapter. But
this point is certain — Perseus was the last king of Macedon, and the
Ptolemies continued to the times of Julius Caesar and Augustus, and we
are well aware how completely Cleopatra was conquered and ruined by
Antony. As women succeeded to the throne, we could not place the
destruction of the Macedonian empire under Antiochus Epiphanes. But the
angel means, *at the end of their kingdom,* when they had really come to
the close of their reigns, and their final ruin was at hand. For when
Antiochus Epiphanes returned to his country, he seemed to have
re-established his power though it very soon afterwards began to die
away. Similar circumstances also happened to Egypt and to Macedon, for
the reign of all their kings was precarious, and although not directly
overthrown, yet they depended on the Romans, and thus their royal
majesty was but fleeting. *At the end,* therefore, of *their kingdom,*
that is, when they arrived at the height, and their fall led them on to
ruin, then, says he, *when the wicked were consummated or perfected.*
Some apply this to the professed and outward enemies of the Church, but
I rather approve of another opinion, which supposes the angel to be
speaking of the impious, who provoked God’s wrath, till it became
necessary for grievous and severe penalties to be inflicted on the
people, to whom God had so magnificently promised a happy and a tranquil
state. This, however, was no common temptation, after the prophets had
treated so fully of the happy and prosperous state of the people after
their return from captivity, to behold the horrible dispersion, and to
witness these tyrants making their assault not only upon men, but upon
the temple of God itself. Wherefore the angel, as before, fortifies the
Prophet and all the rest of the pious against this kind of trial, and
shews how God had not changed his counsels in afflicting his Church, to
which he had promised tranquillity, but had been grievously provoked by
the sins of the people. He then shews the urgent necessity which had
compelled God to exercise this severity. When, therefore, *the impious
had come to their height,* that is, when they had arrived at the highest
pitch, and their intolerable obstinacy had become desperate. We perceive
how the angel here meets the trial, and instructs the pious beforehand,
unfolding to them the inviolability of God’s word, while the people’s
impiety compelled him to treat, them severely, although he had
determined to display liberality in every way. Then, he says, a *king
shall stand with a fierce countenance* But the rest tomorrow.

<span id="iii.xxviii"></span>

<span id="iii.xxviii-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="iii.xxviii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since we see thy
Church throughout all ages to have been exercised by the Cross in
various ways, and with constant suffering, that we also may prepare
ourselves for undergoing whatever thou mayest lay upon us. May we learn
also to consider our sins as the cause of whatever adversity happens to
us; may we consider thee to be not only faithful in all thy promises,
but also a Father — propitious to those wretched ones who suppliantly
fly to thee for pardon. When we are humbled under thy powerful hand, may
we be raised up by the hope of eternal salvation which is prepared for
us. Thus may we look for a happy and joyful termination of all our
contests, until we enjoy the fruit of our victory in thy’ heavenly
kingdom, as it has been obtained for us by the blood of thine
only-begotten Son. — Amen.

<span id="iii.xxix"></span>

<span id="iii.xxix-p1"></span>Lecture Forty-Third.

<span id="iii.xxix-p2"></span><span id="iii.xxix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxix-p3"></span>After the angel had explained the Grecian
monarchy, he records the future origin of a king who should be *hard of
face* Without the slightest doubt, he implies the iniquity of Antiochus
by this phrase. He was notoriously destitute of any nobleness of mind,
and remarkable for low cunning, and to this disposition was added an
impudence which faltered at nothing. This is the sense in which I take
the words *hard of face* The following phrase asserts his cunning, when
it says, *he shall be skilled in enigmas* This is equivalent to saying,
he should excel in cunning, and should not be easily deceived. By these
two epithets he does not compliment, but rather defames Antiochus
Epiphanes, by representing him as hardened as the wicked usually are,
without the slightest particle of either reason, or equity, or shame. He
next blames his craftiness and deceit, by stating he should be *skilled
in enigmas* He afterwards adds, *his power shall be strengthened, and
yet not by his own might* Some are of opinion that Antiochus Epiphanes
is here compared to Alexander, as the angel had previously stated the
inferiority of the four kings to the first; for they were prefigured by
four small horns. For the most powerful of them all did not reign over a
fifth part of the dominions which Alexander had acquired for himself by
violence and war. Others, again, explain this passage as if the power of
Antiochus would be great, but still very unlike that of Alexander, and
far inferior to it, according to the sense, *not in his, i.e.,*
Alexander’s, *strength,.* Many, however, refer this to Antiochus,
although they do not agree among themselves. Some, again, want a kind of
correction, as if the angel implied that the power of Antiochus should
be great, but not quite openly so. Hence *his valor shall be
strengthened,* not meaning by “valor” that heroic spirit with which
kings are usually endowed, nor any increase in magnanimity; nor yet that
Antiochus should imitate such monarchs as these, but his strength should
lie concealed. He should creep on by clandestine acts, and not contend
in open battle according to the practice of those who excel in courage;
he should secretly try many schemes, and thus stealthily extend his
empire. This makes a tolerable sense. Others, again, think this ought to
be referred to God, since the strength of Antiochus was not the result
of his own industry or valor, but of the judgment of God, who armed him
with it, because he wished to use him as a scourge to execute his
punishments on the Jews. His fortitude, therefore, shall be
strengthened, yet not by his own valor, as this entirely depended on the
just designs and vengeance of God. Although this last sense is more
profitable, and contains much useful instruction, yet I fear it is
distorted. And thus the last clause is either a correction of the
preceding words, meaning” because he should not increase with ingenuous
earnestness,” or else, the angel is still comparing his strength with
the power of Alexander. *His power,* therefore, *shall be strengthened,*
and yet not bear comparison with Alexander’s; or, his power shall be
strengthened, but not by habits of war nor by open magnanimity, but he
shall grow great by fraudulent and clandestine arts; because he was on
the one hand most impious, and on the other, of a servile disposition,
as we have formerly said.

<span id="iii.xxix-p4"></span>It follows, *He shall make wonderful
havoc, and shall prosper, and shall proceed,* that is, shall execute,
*and shall destroy the strong, and the people of the saints. By* <span
id="iii.xxix-p4.1"></span>םימוצע*, gnetzumim,* I understand not only the
Jews, but also other neighboring nations; as if the angel had said,
Antiochus shall be conqueror wherever he shall extend his arms, until at
length he shall subdue Judea, and miserably afflict the people of God.
Wherefore*, he shall strike or destroy the brave, and the people of the
saints,* that is, the holy people, as we saw before. *And according to
his understanding shall his craftiness prosper in his hand* The
conjunction “and may be here superfluous; in this sense the passage is
usually received, thus reading it on in one context; according to his
understanding he shall prosper, although there is the conjunction “and”
in the way, but this is frequently superfluous in Hebrew. It means,
*deceit shall prosper in his hand* Here the angel confirms the former
assertion respecting the servile cunning of Antiochus, as he did not act
with ingenuous manliness, but with his audacity and hardihood he united
malicious arts and craftiness unworthy of a king. *Craft,* therefore,
*shall prosper in his hand, and that too, as far as he understands it.*
Some suppose the sharpness of Antiochus to be noticed here, as if the
angel had said, Craftiness shall prosper in his hand, in consequence of
his possessing superior ability and penetration. But the passage may be
suitably explained in this way, — Antiochus shall act prosperously
according to his mental perception, and shall be so assisted by’ his
craftiness, as to obtain whatever he shall grasp at.

<span id="iii.xxix-p5"></span><span id="iii.xxix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxix-p6"></span>It follows next; *He shall magnify himself
in his heart, or* he shall raise himself, and bear himself
magnificently; although this expression implies boasting and pride, and
is taken in a disadvantageous sense. *He shall be insolent, therefore,
in his heart.* The angel seems to distinguish here between the scheming
and penetration of Antiochus, and his pride of heart; for, although he
should obtain great: victories, and should subdue many nations according
to his desires, yet he would oppress the Jews, and *then, should be
magnified in heart;* that is, should be puffed up with greater pride
than before, on account of those continuous successes. And *in peace he
shall destroy many,* or the brave; for the word <span
id="iii.xxix-p6.1"></span>םיבר *rabbim,* signifies either. Some
translate, on account of his prosperity, because the Lord wished to
relax the reins, so that no one should hinder the course of his
victories. On account, then, of that success, he shall destroy many.
Profane men, indeed, who understand nothing of God’s providence, have
said that folly and chance prevail more in war than skill or arms; but
the success of generals does not spring from either chance or fortune,
but as God pleases to conduct the affairs of the world in various ways,
so in some eases the evil and unskillful warriors succeed, while others
make many fruitless efforts and trials, although they are superior in
counsel, and are provided with the very best ornaments. But I rather
incline to another sense which interpreters do not mention; namely,
Antiochus should destroy and lay waste many nations without any trouble,
with the greatest ease, and as it were in sport. Wherefore the Prophet
signifies, or the angel who addresses the Prophet., that Antiochus
should be the conqueror of many nations, not only because he should be
endowed with great cunning, and should carry on the war more by
treachery than by open violence, but as it is reported of Timotheus the
Athenian general: He will take cities and lands, and subject them to
himself, through fortune spreading her net for him while he is indulging
in sleep. The angel, therefore, seems to point out this listlessness, by
predicting much devastation by the hand of Antiochus in apparent ease
and calmness. Others expound it thus, — nations shall be laid waste by
that robber which have given him no occasion for attack, because they
have never stirred up any hostility against him; but when they attempt
to cultivate peace, he wearies them without the slightest pretext. But
this interpretation seems to be forced.

<span id="iii.xxix-p7"></span>He afterwards adds, *And against the
Prince Of Princes he shall stand,* or rise up, *and he shall be
destroyed without hand,* or shall be ruined. The <span
id="iii.xxix-p7.1"></span>ו, *vau,* is put adversatively; *yet* he shall
be destroyed without hand. This was far more galling to the Prophet, and
to the whole people, for the angel to predict the contests of Antiochus,
not only with mortals, but with God himself. Some understand <span
id="iii.xxix-p7.2"></span>םירש-רש, *sar-sarim,* of the high priest, but
this is too confined and spiritless. I have not the least doubt that God
is here meant by the *Prince of Princes* Wherefore the complete sense
is, — Antiochus should be not only bold, and cruel, and proud towards
men, but this madness and full should proceed so far as to lead him to
attack and resist God. This is the full sense. But a consolation is soon
added, when the angel says, *he should be destroyed without hand* It
would, indeed, have been almost intolerable for the Jews to hear only of
the insolence of Antiochus in contending against God, unless this
correction had been added — the end of the contest must be the
self-destruction of Antiochus by his own impiety. *He shall be
destroyed* then. But how? *without hand,* says he. For after subduing so
many nations, and after obtaining whatever he wished, what more could be
hoped for as far as man is concerned? Who would dare to rise up against
him? Clearly enough, if the kings of Syria had been content with their
own boundaries, they need not have feared any one, for no enemy would
have molested them; but they provoked the Romans to attack them, and
when they wished to invade Egypt, they did not prosper in their
attempts. Whichever be the meaning, the angel here announces the
sufficiency of the divine power without any human aid, for the
destruction and overthrow of Antiochus. Some think this prophet refers
to Antichrist, thus they pass by Antiochus altogether, and describe to
us the appearance of Antichrist, as if the angel had shewn to Daniel
what should happen after the second renovation of the Church. The first
restoration took place when liberty was restored to the people, and they
returned from exile to their native land, and the second occurred at the
advent of Christ. These interpreters suppose this passage to unfold that
devastation of the Church which should take place after the coming of
Christ, and the promulgation of the gospel. But as we have previously
seen, this is not a suitable meaning, and I am surprised that men versed
in the Scriptures should so pour forth clouds upon clear light. For, as
we said yesterday, nothing can be clearer, or more perspicuous, or even
more familiar, than this prophecy. And what is the tendency of ascribing
so violently to Antichrist what even mere children clearly see to be
spoken of Antiochus, except to deprive Scripture of all its authority?
Others speak more modestly and more considerately, when they suppose the
angel to treat of Antiochus for the purpose of depicting in his person
the figure of Antichrist. But I do not think this reasoning sufficiently
sound. I desire the sacred oracles to be treated so reverently, that no
one may introduce any variety according to the will of man, but simply
hold what is positively certain. It would please me better to see any
one wishing to adapt this prophecy to the present use of the Church, and
to apply to Antichrist by analogy what is said of Antiochus. We know
that whatever happened to the Church of old, belongs also to us, because
we have fallen upon the fullness of times.

<span id="iii.xxix-p8"></span>No doubt the Holy Spirit wished to teach
us how to bear our cross by making use of this example, but as I have
already said, it seems to me far too frivolous to search for allegories.
We should be content with true simplicity, and transfer to ourselves
whatever occurred to the ancient people. (<span
id="iii.xxix-p8.1"></span>[1Co
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#011.md)<span
id="iii.xxix-p8.1"></span>.) With how much reason does the Apostle say
there should be false teachers in the kingdom of Christ, as there were
formerly false prophets! (<span id="iii.xxix-p8.2"></span>[2Pe
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#001)<span id="iii.xxix-p8.2"></span>..md)
So we must determine, that the devil, who was a murderer from the
beginning, will always find those whom he will stir up and impel to
persecute the Church. The devil contends at this very day, not only by
fallacious doctrines, and impious errors, and impostures, but also by
cruel tyranny, as he inflames many impious men to madness, and thus
harasses the sons of God. As the Jews ought not to quail under the
calamities which oppressed them, through Daniel’s predictions concerning
Antiochus, so the same doctrine ought in these days to fortify us, lest
the novelty of our calamities should appall us, when the Church is
oppressed by heavy burdens, and tyrants rage and storm, with fire and
sword. (<span id="iii.xxix-p8.3"></span>[Ro
8:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#028)<span id="iii.xxix-p8.3"></span>:.md)
For the fathers experienced similar trials, to whom Christ had not then
pointed out the way of life, and who did not comprehend so clearly as we
do our duty to be conformed to the only-begotten Son of God, because he
is the first-born in the Church; he is our head and we are his members.
This. was not so fully unfolded to those holy men, who still endured
under so many afflictions, when they might suppose the Church completely
buried, as it is certainly surprising that they did not yield a hundred
times over to so many and such dreadful calamities. Therefore this
doctrine will be best accommodated to our instruction, if we are
convinced of the justice of our condition not being better than that of
the fathers. What, therefore, happened to them? *These wicked ones
should be destroyed,* namely, the Jews:, who professed themselves to be
the elect people of God, and the holy family of Abraham, and in
numberless ways had obstinately provoked God’s wrath; thus the Church
was miserably harassed. Antiochus, especially, like a sweeping tempest,
reduced all things to ruin, till the people felt themselves utterly
undone, and to all human appearance were without the slightest hope. As
God punished so severely the wickedness of his ancient people, it does
not surprise us when we feel his present chastisements, as in these days
the land is full of sinfulness, and we do not cease perpetually and
purposely to provoke God’s wrath. (<span id="iii.xxix-p8.4"></span>[1Th
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#003)<span id="iii.xxix-p8.4"></span>..md)
Lastly, to avoid the penalty due to our sins, let us consider the end of
our calling, the subjection of our whole life to the cross. This is the
warfare to which our heavenly Father destines us. As this is our lot, we
ought to look into this mirror, and there behold the perpetual condition
of the

<span id="iii.xxix-p9"></span> Church. It is therefore no matter of
surprise, if, instead of one Antiochus, God should raise up many who are
hardened and invincible in their obstinacy, and in their cruelty make
many attempts with clandestine arts, and plot for the destruction of the
Church. If the fathers experienced this, it does not surprise us, if we
in these days undergo similar sufferings. This, I say, is a useful
analogy, and does not distort the simple sense of Scripture. Now, let us
go on, —

<span id="iii.xxx"></span>

<span id="iii.xxx-p1"></span><span id="iii.xxx-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
8:26](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#026.md)<span id="iii.xxx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxx-p2"></span>**26.** And the vision of the evening and
the morning which was told *is* true: wherefore shut thou up the vision;
for it *shall be* for many days.

<span id="iii.xxx-p3"></span>**26.** Et visio matutina, et vespertina,
quae pronuntiata fuit, veritas est, Tu ergo obsigna, vel claude,
visionem, quia ad dies multos, protenditur.

<span id="iii.xxx-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.xxx-p5"></span><span id="iii.xxx-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxx-p6"></span>The angel again confirms the assertion that
no part of this vision was shewn to the Prophet in vain, because not
even the slightest portion of it should fail of its effect. The
necessity of this method of confirming our faith is notorious, because,
although the events may be well known to us, yet we cannot acquiesce in
God’s word, unless he should testify so repeatedly to the truth of his
assertions, and sanction by such repetition whatever appears to us
ambiguous. When it becomes perfectly obvious that the angel discourses
upon obscure events, and such as were utterly incredible at the time, it
does not surprise us when he announces again, that the Prophet had seen
nothing which God would not accomplish. *This vision,* therefore, says
he, *is truth.* He calls it “the vision of the evening and morning,”
because while the angel was treating of the six years and almost a half,
he used this form of speech. And we said this was purposely expressed,
lest any one should extend it to years or months, as some did; as if the
angel had said, — Behold! by calculating single days up to six years and
about a half, the completion of this prophecy when the Temple shall be
cleansed, shall be accurately discovered. Again it is asserted, that the
vision is certain, because God had computed day by day the time of the
profanation of the Temple until the period of its cleansing. *Do thou,*
therefore, says he*, seal* or close *the vision, because it is for many
days* It may surprise us why God should wish what he had explained to
his servant to remain concealed. For Daniel was not instructed in
futurity for his own private advantage, but for the common usefulness of
the whole people. It seems, therefore, contrary to his office to be
commanded to close up the vision, and to keep it. in complete obscurity.
But the angel means, if the greater part of the people should reject
this prophecy, this formed no reason why Daniel should hesitate. *Be
thou, therefore, the guardian of this prophecy,* as if God had deposited
a treasure in the hands of his servant, and had said, “Pay no regard to
any who despise this prophecy; many may deride thee, and others think
thou art narrating fables, and very few will have confidence in thee but
do not relax on this account, but faithfully guard this treasure,”
*since it is for many days;* that is, although its effect is not
immediately apparent, because God will suspend for some time the
punishments of which entreats, and will not restore the Temple all at
once, nor wrest His people immediately out of the hand of the tyrant. In
consequence, then, of his deferring his judgments as well as his pity
for many days, *do thou close up this visions,* that is, keep it to
thyself, as if thou art alone. Thus God does not simply command his
Prophet to be silent, or to conceal what he had learnt, but rather
confirms him in his consistency, lest he should estimate this prophecy
according to the ordinary opinions of his countrymen. And at the same
time he shews, that though the Jews did not pay attention to what Daniel
announced to them, yet nothing whatever should be in vain. It follows, —

<span id="iii.xxxi"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxi-p1"></span><span id="iii.xxxi-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
8:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#027.md)<span id="iii.xxxi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxi-p2"></span>**27.** And I Daniel fainted, and was sick
*certain* days; afterward I rose up, and did the king’s business; and I
was astonished at the vision, but none understood *it.*

<span id="iii.xxxi-p3"></span>**27.** Et ergo Daniel deliquium passus,
*vel, fractus sum,* et aegrotavi dies,  <span
id="fr_73"></span>[74](#fn_73.md) et surrexi,  <span
id="fr_74"></span>[75](#fn_74.md) feci opus regis,  <span
id="fr_75"></span>[76](#fn_75.md) et obstupui propter visionem: neque
intelligens.  <span id="fr_76"></span>[77](#fn_76.md)

<span id="iii.xxxi-p8"></span> 

<span id="iii.xxxi-p9"></span><span id="iii.xxxi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxi-p10"></span>Again, Daniel shews himself to have been
so touched with the secret instinct of God, that he knew for certain
this vision to have been divinely presented to him. For God wished so to
affect his servant, that he might embrace with greater reverence what he
both heard and saw. I have already referred to our want; of attention in
listening to God’s word as it deserves, unless some kind of fear
precedes it which may rouse our minds by some means from their torpor;
but this prophecy had a special intention. In an ordinary case, God did
not humble his servant; but by the disease which is here mentioned, he
wishes to show how this prediction related to some event of serious
magnitude. Daniel, therefore, states *himself to have been astonished,
as if suffering under some defect, and afflicted by disease* This
disease did not happen to the Prophet naturally, but it fell upon him in
consequence, of his being suddenly terrified. And he afterwards shews
this, by saying, no one understood the prediction. Here, then, he
admonishes all the pious, neither to hear nor read this, narrative with
carelessness, but to summon up their utmost attention, and to perceive
that God here shews them things of the greatest importance, and which
vitally concern their salvation. This forms a reason why Daniel ought to
suffer dejection and to be afflicted by disease. He next says, *he
returned to the king’s business,* meaning his ordinary occupation. We
infer from this expression, the grievous error of those who think him to
have been in Persia at this period, because he could not return to his
duties, unless to were present in the king’s palace. But why is this
added? To assure us that the Prophet was not drawn off from the duties
which the king had assigned to him, although God had chosen him to
perform the peculiar office of Prophet and teacher of his Church. This
is a rare instance, and ought not to be drawn into a precedent,
according to the usual phrase. Which of us, for instance, would be
sufficient for those duties of political government assigned to Daniel,
and also for those incumbent upon a pastor and teacher? But God made use
of his servant Daniel in an extraordinary way, because he had many
reasons for wishing him occupied in the king’s palace. We have
previously seen how God’s glory was illustrated by his position, for
Daniel admonished Belshazzar of his approaching death, when his enemies
had already partially captured the city. And the utility of this was
proved by Cyrus and Darius sparing the Jews. As long as the Chaldeans
held the supreme power, Daniel was of no slight benefit to those
miserable exiles; for even if he lived under cruel tyrants, yet he had
some authority remaining, and this enabled him to alleviate many of the
sufferings of his nation. God, therefore, was consulting the advantage
of the whole people, when he desired Daniel to proceed in the course of
his usual duties. Besides this, he wished to confer upon him the
extraordinary gift of prophecy, an endowment, as I have said, peculiar
to Daniel. It now follows, —

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_38"></span>[39](cc25002.htm#fr_38.md) <span
id="iii.i-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p4"></span> That is, in addition to the vision which was
offered me before. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_39"></span>[40](cc25002.htm#fr_39.md) <span
id="iii.iv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p4"></span> <span id="iii.iv-p4.1"></span>הריבה,
*hebirah*, which some translate citadel, or palace, or royal residence.
— *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_40"></span>[41](cc25002.htm#fr_40.md) <span
id="iii.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p7"></span> That is, on the river’s bank. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_41"></span>[42](cc25002.htm#fr_41.md) <span
id="iii.v-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p4"></span> Or, before his face. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_42"></span>[43](cc25002.htm#fr_42.md) <span
id="iii.v-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p5"></span> There was none to snatch it from his hand. —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_43"></span>[44](cc25002.htm#fr_43.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p4"></span> That is, I attended or was attentive. —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_44"></span>[45](cc25002.htm#fr_44.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p5"></span> From the west. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_45"></span>[46](cc25002.htm#fr_45.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p6"></span> It did not touch the ground. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_46"></span>[47](cc25002.htm#fr_46.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p9"></span> Which was possessed of two horns, or
verbally, “master of horns.”-*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_47"></span>[48](cc25002.htm#fr_47.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p10"></span> Before the river. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_48"></span>[49](cc25002.htm#fr_48.md) <span
id="iii.vii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p4"></span> That is, when the he-goat approached the
ram, and excited himself, or became savage against him. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_49"></span>[50](cc25002.htm#fr_49.md) <span
id="iii.vii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p5"></span> Threw him prostrate. — *Calvin.* He had
collected fresh forces, and engaged a second time, he despaired of his
kingdom, was betrayed by his followers, and cruelly slain. Thus *the
he-goat struck the ram, and broke his two horns;* for Alexander acquired
the Median as well as the Persian Empire.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[51](cc25002.htm#fr_50.md) <span
id="iii.x-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p8"></span> This noun is connected with <span
id="iii.x-p8.1"></span>ןוזח *chezeven,* “vision,” and is translated in
our version variously. In <span id="iii.x-p8.2"></span>[Isa
28:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#018.md)<span id="iii.x-p8.2"></span>, it
is rendered by “agreement,” and in <span id="iii.x-p8.3"></span>[Da
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#005.md)<span id="iii.x-p8.3"></span>, by
“notable,” and in the margin correctly by “of sight.” Calvin’s Latin
“<span id="iii.x-p8.4"></span>illustre,” is very suitable. — Ed.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[52](cc25002.htm#fr_51.md) <span
id="iii.xi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi-p4"></span> Or, desire; some translate it in the
genitive, and understand “desirable land;” for Judea was often called
the desirable land, because God of his own free will chose to be
worshipped there; but we may receive it simply for glory.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_52"></span>[53](cc25002.htm#fr_52.md) <span
id="iii.xiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii-p4"></span> That is, proceeded even to the prince of
the army. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_53"></span>[54](cc25002.htm#fr_53.md) <span
id="iii.xiii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii-p5"></span> Namely, the sacrifice. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_54"></span>[55](cc25002.htm#fr_54.md) <span
id="iii.xiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii-p6"></span> Or, dissipated. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_55"></span>[56](cc25002.htm#fr_55.md) <span
id="iii.xiv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv-p4"></span> Some translate “army” but I approve of the
other sense, and shall give the reason by and bye. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_56"></span>[57](cc25002.htm#fr_56.md) <span
id="iii.xiv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv-p5"></span> Or, on “account of wickedness,” verbally,
“time shall be given” - the future tense. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_57"></span>[58](cc25002.htm#fr_57.md) <span
id="iii.xiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv-p6"></span> That is, shall have execution prepared, as
we commonly say. — *Calvin*.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[59](cc25002.htm#fr_58.md) <span
id="iii.xvii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvii-p4"></span> Some translate, How long will the vision
be permitted? but it ought rather to be treated by the rules of grammar
— “How long will be allowed for the vision of the perpetual sacrifice
and the devastating wickedness?” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_59"></span>[60](cc25002.htm#fr_59.md) <span
id="iii.xvii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvii-p5"></span> That is, for treading down. This word may
be repeated. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_60"></span>[61](cc25002.htm#fr_60.md) <span
id="iii.xvii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvii-p8"></span> That is, until evening and morning.
*Calvin*. — Wintle’s notes on these verses are very explanatory, and
agree on the whole with Calvin’s comments. See Dissertation on this
verse. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_61"></span>[62](cc25002.htm#fr_61.md) <span
id="iii.xvii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvii-p13"></span> Calvin means to imply that the Jews used
these words to express the idea of the Latin phrase, “<span
id="iii.xvii-p13.1"></span>*omne ignotum pro magnifico* ” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_62"></span>[63](cc25002.htm#fr_62.md) <span
id="iii.xix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xix-p4"></span> That is, between the two banks of the
river. — *Calvin*.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[64](cc25002.htm#fr_63.md) <span
id="iii.xxii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p4"></span> Or, at the end of the vision. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_64"></span>[65](cc25002.htm#fr_64.md) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p4"></span> Some translate, “approached me,” an
interpretation which is tolerable. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_65"></span>[66](cc25002.htm#fr_65.md) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p5"></span> Verbally, “upon my standing,” as in old
French, “<span id="iii.xxiii-p5.1"></span>en mon estre.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_66"></span>[67](cc25002.htm#fr_66.md) <span
id="iii.xxiv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p4"></span> Or I will open to thee, or verbally, make
thee to know. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_67"></span>[68](cc25002.htm#fr_67.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p4"></span> That is, the horn was broken. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_68"></span>[69](cc25002.htm#fr_68.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p7"></span> Verbally, “in faces.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_69"></span>[70](cc25002.htm#fr_69.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p10"></span> The English reader may consult
Michelet’s Life of Luther. *Hazlitt*’*s Ed.*, 1846.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[71](cc25002.htm#fr_70.md) <span
id="iii.xxvii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvii-p4"></span> Or, according to his fortitude; we shall
treat this phrase also. — *Calvin*

<span id="fn_71"></span>[72](cc25002.htm#fr_71.md) <span
id="iii.xxvii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvii-p5"></span> That is, “in wonderful ways”
“wonderfully;” the noun being used in the place of the adverb. —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_72"></span>[73](cc25002.htm#fr_72.md) <span
id="iii.xxvii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvii-p13"></span> The edit. Gen., 1617 read *Merces*
incorrectly: that of Vincent, 1571, and the French of Perrin, 1569, are
correct, as in the text. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_73"></span>[74](cc25002.htm#fr_73.md) <span
id="iii.xxxi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxi-p4"></span> That is, for a time. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_74"></span>[75](cc25002.htm#fr_74.md) <span
id="iii.xxxi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxi-p5"></span> That is, after I rose up. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_75"></span>[76](cc25002.htm#fr_75.md) <span
id="iii.xxxi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxi-p6"></span> That is, I discharged my duty to which
the king had appointed me. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_76"></span>[77](cc25002.htm#fr_76.md) <span
id="iii.xxxi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxi-p7"></span> That is, there is no one who could
understand. — *Calvin*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 9](cc25003.md)
