[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Parapsychology](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mrad03)  [Next](mrad05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002FGTN5A/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Mental Radio*, by Upton Sinclair, \[1930\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

### III

<span class="smallcaps">Much</span> of the evidence which I am using
rests upon the good faith of Mary Craig Sinclair; so, before we go
further, I ask your permission to introduce her. She is a daughter of
the far South; her father a retired planter, bank president and judge,
of Mississippi. The fates endowed his oldest child with the blessings of
beauty, health, wealth and wisdom—and then spoiled it, by adding a curse
in the shape of a too tender heart. The griefs of other people overwhelm
Craig like a suffocation. Strangers take one glance at her, and
instantly decide that here is one who will "understand." I have seen her
go into a store to buy a piece of ribbon, and come out with tears in her
eyes, because of a tragic story which some clerk was moved to pour out
to her, all in a moment, without provocation. She has always said that
she "gets" the feelings of people, not by their words, but by intuition.
But she never paid any attention to this gift; never associated it with
"psychic" matters. She was always too busy, first with eight younger

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

brothers and sisters, and then with the practical affairs of an
unpractical author-husband.

Early in childhood, things like this would happen: her mother would say
to a little negro servant, "Go and find Miss Mary Craig"; but before the
boy could start, Craig would know that her mother wanted her, and would
be on the way. This might, of course, have been coincidence; if it stood
alone, it would have no value. But the same thing happened with dreams.
Craig dreamed there was a needle in her bed, and woke up and looked for
it in vain; in the morning she told her mother, who slept in another
room. The mother said: "How strange! I dreamed the same thing, and I
woke up and really found one!"

Of her young ladyhood Craig tells this story, one of many: Driving with
a girl friend, miles from home, she suddenly remarked: "Let's go home;
Mr. B is there." Now this was a place to which Mr. B had never come; it
was three hundred miles from his town. But Craig said: "I have just had
an impression of him, sitting on our front porch." Going home, they
found him there.

Another instance, of more recent date. Shortly after our coming to
California, my wife all at

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

once became greatly worried about Jack London; she insisted that he was
in terrible mental distress. As it happened, George Sterling had told us
much about Jack's troubles, but these were of old standing, and there
was nothing to account for the sudden notion which my wife took up on a
certain day. We had a lot of conversation about it; I offered to take
her to the London ranch, but she said she would not attempt to meddle in
the affairs of a married man, unless at his wife's request. I made the
laughing suggestion that she go alone, in the guise of a gypsy
fortune-teller—a rôle which in her young ladyhood she had played with
social éclat. Two days later we read that Jack London was dead, and very
soon came letters from George Sterling, telling us that he had taken his
own life. This, again, might be coincidence; if it stood alone I would
attach no importance to it. But taken with this mass of evidence, it has
a share of weight.

When we were married, seventeen years ago, we spent some time in
England, and there we met a woman physician, interested in "mental
healing," and full of ideas about "psychic" things. Both Craig and I
were in need of healing, having been through a siege of trouble.

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Craig was
suffering with intense headaches, something hitherto unknown in her
life; while I had an ancient problem of indigestion, caused by excess of
brain work and lack of body work. We began to experiment with healing by
the "laying on of hands"—without knowing anything about it, just groping
in the dark. I found that I could cure Craig's headaches—and get them
myself; while she found that she could take my indigestion, a trouble
she had never known hitherto. Each of us was willing to take the other's
pains, but neither was willing to give them, so our experiments came to
a halt.

We forgot the whole subject for more than ten years. I was busy trying
to reform America; while Craig was of the most intensely materialistic
convictions. Her early experiences of evangelical religion had repelled
her so violently that everything suggestive of "spirituality" was
repugnant to her. Never was a woman more "practical," more centered upon
the here and now, the things which can be seen and touched. I do not go
into details about this, but I want to make it as emphatic as possible,
for the light it throws upon her attitude and disposition.

But shortly after the age of forty, her custom of carrying the troubles
of all who were near her

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

resulted in a breakdown of health. A story of suffering needless to go
into: suffice it that she had many ills to experiment upon, and mental
control became suddenly a matter of life and death. In the course of the
last five or six years Craig has acquired a fair-sized library of books
on the mind, both orthodox scientific, and "crank." She has sat up half
the night studying, marking passages and making notes, seeking to
reconcile various doctrines, to know what the mind really is, and how it
works, and what can be done with it. Always it was a practical problem:
things had to work. If now she believes anything, rest assured that it
is because she has tried it out in the crucibles of pain, and proved it
in her daily regimen.

She was not content to see psychic phenomena produced by other persons.
Even though authorities warned her that trances might be dangerous, and
that *rapport* with others might lead to dissociations of
personality—even so, she had to find out for herself. A hundred times in
the course of the experiments of which I am going to tell, she has
turned to me, saying: "Can you think of any way this can be chance? What
can I do to make it more sure?" When I said, the other night: "This
settles it for me. I am

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

going to write the story," her reply was, "Wait a while!" She wants to
do more experimenting; but I think that enough is enough.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV](mrad05)
