[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Parapsychology](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mrad26) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002FGTN5A/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Mental Radio*, by Upton Sinclair, \[1930\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

### XXVI

<span class="smallcaps">One</span> interesting point I observe: in any
company where the subject of this manuscript is brought up, invariably
some person declares that he or she has had such experiences. One lady,
highly educated, assured me that she and her husband had developed
telepathy to a point where it served them on a lonely ranch in the place
of telegraph and telephone. Only a few days ago I met at luncheon Bruno
Walter, orchestra leader, who had come from Germany to conduct concerts
in the Hollywood Bowl. Mr. Walter narrated to me the incident which
follows:

While conducting in some middle western city, he was a guest at a
luncheon, and found himself becoming very ill. He explained matters to
his host, who called a taxicab, but this cab did not arrive, and Mr.
Walter, in great distress, took his hat and left the house, saying that
he would look for a cab. Turning the corner of the street, he came upon
his manager, driving a car, and hailed him. "A most fortunate accident!"
exclaimed

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

the sick man, but the manager assured him that it was no accident; about
half an hour previously, the manager had been seized by an intense
feeling that Mr. Walter was in trouble, and had been moved to get into
his car and drive. He did not know where Mr. Walter had gone, but simply
followed his impulse to drive in a certain direction.

Another incident, told me by Fremont Older, editor of the San Francisco
*Call*, and a veteran fighter in the cause of social justice. Older has
seen many demonstrations of telepathy, and is completely convinced of
its reality. A friend of his, living on a ranch, employed a cook named
Sam who had the gift, and agreed to give a demonstration for the Olders.
Sam asked Older to get a book and wrap it in thick paper, and Sam would
tell the name of the book and the author. Older went out to his car, but
could find no book, only a folder of maps, which he wrapped in several
thicknesses of paper. Sam put the package to his head, and after a
minute or two said, "This is not a book, it is a map or something. Why
don't you get me a regular book?" So Older went to his car again and
found a book belonging to his wife, and wrapped it with care and tied
it. Sam put it to his head,

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

and began to spell letters, and finally stated as follows: "Julia France
and her Times, by Gertrude Atherton, published by the Macmillan
Company." This was correct. Sam added: "I get another name. What has
Ernest Hopkins got to do with this book?" Older and his wife were
dumbfounded; for the name was that of a member of the newspaper staff
who had been asked to review the book, but Mrs. Older had taken the copy
from him because at the last moment she wanted something to read on her
trip.

As this book is going to the printer, my attention is called to the fact
that Dr. Carl Bruck of Berlin has published a book entitled
"Experimentelle Telepathie," in which he reports a series of tests
closely resembling those here described. The main difference is that he
used hypnotized subjects, four different young men, as the recipients of
his telepathic messages. He made drawings at home, and locked them in a
large portfolio, which he placed in an adjoining room from the subject,
two or three yards distant through a wall. He himself sat in front of
the hypnotized subject, and concentrated upon "sending" one of the
drawings. Under these conditions, in a total of 111 experiments,
one-third

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

were successful. The Berlin correspondent of the "Scientific American"
reported these tests in the issue of May, 1924, where those interested
may read the details, and inspect twelve of the drawings. The tests were
conducted in the presence of various physicians and scientists; and I am
interested in a recent comment on the matter by a German physician
living in Mexico City: "Bruck's work has gone almost wholly unnoticed."

I say to scientific men, that such work deserves to be noticed. There is
new knowledge here, close to the threshold, waiting for us; and we
should not let ourselves be repelled by the seeming triviality of the
phenomena, for it is well known that some of the greatest discoveries
have come from the following up of just such trivial dews.

What did Benjamin Franklin have to go on when he brought the lightning
down from the clouds on the string of a kite? Just a few hints, picked
up in the course of the previous hundred years; a few traces of
electricity noted by accident. The fact that you got a spark if you
stroked a cat's fur; the fact that you got the same kind of a spark by
rubbing amber, and a bigger one by storing the energy in a glass jar

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

lined with tinfoil—that was all men had as promise of the miracles of
our time, dynamos and superpower, telegraph and telephone, x-ray
surgery, radio, wireless, television, and new miracles just outside our
door. If now it be a fact that there is a reality behind the notions of
telepathy and clairvoyance, to which so many investigators are bearing
testimony all over the world, who can set limits to what it may mean to
the future? What new powers of the human mind, what ability to explore
the past and future, the farthest deeps of space, and those deeps of our
own minds, no less vast and marvelous?

To set limits to such possibilities is not to be scientific, it is
merely to be foolish. The true scientist sets no limits to human powers,
he merely asks that we verify our facts. This my wife and I have tried
to do, and I think that, so far as concerns telepathy at least, we can
claim success. We present here a mass of real evidence, and we shall not
be troubled by any amount of ridicule from the ignorant. I tell you—and
because it is so important, I put it in capital letters: TELEPATHY
HAPPENS!

 

 

 
