[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends/Sagas](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oprt11)  [Next](oprt13.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1603123210/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002IKKL9K/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Old Peter's Russian Tales*, by Arthur Ransome, \[1916\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

### PRINCE IVAN, THE WITCH BABY, AND THE LITTLE SISTER OF THE SUN.

<span id="img_13300"></span> ![](img/13300.jpg)

Once upon a time, very long ago, there was a little Prince Ivan who was
dumb. Never a word had he spoken from the day that he was born--not so
much as a "Yes" or a "No," or a "Please" or a "Thank you." A great
sorrow he was to his father because he could not speak. Indeed, neither
his father nor his mother could bear the sight of him, for they thought,
"A poor sort of Tzar will a dumb boy make!" They even prayed, and said,
"If only we could have another child, whatever it is like, it could be
no worse than this tongue-tied brat who cannot say a word." And for that
wish they were punished, as you shall hear.

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> And they took no
sort of care of the little Prince Ivan, and he spent all his time in the
stables, listening to the tales of an old groom.

He was a wise man was the old groom, and he knew the past and the
future, and what was happening under the earth. Maybe he had learnt his
wisdom from the horses. Anyway, he knew more than other folk, and there
came a day when he said to Prince Ivan,--

"Little Prince," says he, "to-day you have a sister, and a bad one at
that. She has come because of your father's prayers and your mother's
wishes. A witch she is, and she will grow like a seed of corn. In six
weeks she'll be a grown witch, and with her iron teeth she will eat up
your father, and eat up your mother, and eat up you too, if she gets the
chance. There's no saving the old people; but if you are quick, and do
what I tell you, you may escape, and keep your soul in your body. And I
love you, my little dumb Prince, and do not wish to think of your little
body between her iron teeth. You must go to your father and ask him for
the best horse he has, and then gallop like the wind, and away to the
end of the world."

The little Prince ran off and found his father. There was his father,
and there was his mother, and a little baby girl was in his mother's

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

arms, screaming like a little fury.

"Well, she's not dumb," said his father, as if he were well pleased.

"Father," says the little Prince, "may I have the fastest horse in the
stable?" And those were the first words that ever left his mouth.

"What!" says his father, "have you got a voice at last? Yes, take
whatever horse you want. And see, you have a little sister; a fine
little girl she is too. She has teeth already. It's a pity they are
black, but time will put that right, and it's better to have black teeth
than to be born dumb."

Little Prince Ivan shook in his shoes when he heard of the black teeth
of his little sister, for he knew that they were iron. He thanked his
father and ran off to the stable. The old groom saddled the finest horse
there was. Such a horse you never saw. Black it was, and its saddle and
bridle were trimmed with shining silver. And little Prince Ivan climbed
up and sat on the great black horse, and waved his hand to the old
groom, and galloped away, on and on over the wide world.

"It's a big place, this world," thought the little Prince. "I wonder
when I shall come to the end of it." You see, he had never been

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

outside the palace grounds. And he had only ridden a little Finnish
pony. And now he sat high up, perched on the back of the great black
horse, who galloped with hoofs that thundered beneath him, and leapt
over rivers and streams and hillocks, and anything else that came in his
way.

On and on galloped the little Prince on the great black horse. There
were no houses anywhere to be seen. It was a long time since they had
passed any people, and little Prince Ivan began to feel very lonely, and
to wonder if indeed he had come to the end of the world, and could bring
his journey to an end.

Suddenly, on a wide, sandy plain, he saw two old, old women sitting in
the road.

They were bent double over their work, sewing and sewing, and now one
and now the other broke a needle, and took a new one out of a box
between them, and threaded the needle with thread from another box, and
went on sewing and sewing. Their old noses nearly touched their knees as
they bent over their work.

Little Prince Ivan pulled up the great black horse in a cloud of dust,
and spoke to the old women.

"Grandmothers," said he, "is this the end of the world? Let me stay

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

here and live with you, and be safe from my baby sister, who is a witch
and has iron teeth. Please let me stay with you, and I'll be very little
trouble, and thread your needles for you when you break them."

"Prince Ivan, my dear," said one of the old women, "this is not the end
of the world, and little good would it be to you to stay with us. For as
soon as we have broken all our needles and used up all our thread we
shall die, and then where would you be? Your sister with the iron teeth
would have you in a minute."

The little Prince cried bitterly, for he was very little and all alone.
He rode on further over the wide world, the black horse galloping and
galloping, and throwing the dust from his thundering hoofs.

He came into a forest of great oaks, the biggest oak trees in the whole
world. And in that forest was a dreadful noise--the crashing of trees
falling, the breaking of branches, and the whistling of things hurled
through the air. The Prince rode on, and there before him was the huge
giant, Tree-rooter, hauling the great oaks out of the ground and
flinging them aside like weeds.

"I should be safe with him," thought little Prince Ivan, "and this,
surely, must be the end of the world."

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

He rode close up under the giant, and stopped the black horse, and
shouted up into the air.

"Please, great giant," says he, "is this the end of the world? And may I
live with you and be safe from my sister, who is a witch, and grows like
a seed of corn, and has iron teeth?"

"Prince Ivan, my dear," says Tree-rooter, "this is not the end of the
world, and little good would it be to you to stay with me. For as soon
as I have rooted up all these trees I shall die, and then where would
you be? Your sister would have you in a minute. And already there are
not many big trees left."

And the giant set to work again, pulling up the great trees and throwing
them aside. The sky was full of flying trees.

Little Prince Ivan cried bitterly, for he was very little and was all
alone. He rode on further over the wide world, the black horse galloping
and galloping under the tall trees, and throwing clods of earth from his
thundering hoofs.

He came among the mountains. And there was a roaring and a crashing in
the mountains as if the earth was falling to pieces. One after another
whole mountains were lifted up into the sky and flung down to earth, so
that they broke and scattered into dust. And the big black horse

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

galloped through the mountains, and little Prince Ivan sat bravely on
his back. And there, close before him, was the huge giant
Mountain-tosser, picking up the mountains like pebbles and hurling them
to little pieces and dust upon the ground.

"This must be the end of the world," thought the little Prince; "and at
any rate I should be safe with him."

"Please, great giant," says he, "is this the end of the world? And may I
live with you and be safe from my sister, who is a witch, and has iron
teeth, and grows like a seed of corn?"

"Prince Ivan, my dear," says Mountain-tosser, resting for a moment and
dusting the rocks off his great hands, "this is not the end of the
world, and little good would it be to you to stay with me. For as soon
as I have picked up all these mountains and thrown them down again I
shall die, and then where would you be? Your sister would have you in a
minute. And there are not very many mountains left."

And the giant set to work again, lifting up the great mountains and
hurling them away. The sky was full of flying mountains.

Little Prince Ivan wept bitterly, for he was very little and was all
alone. He rode on further over the wide world, the black horse

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

galloping and galloping along the mountain paths, and throwing the
stones from his thundering hoofs.

At last he came to the end of the world, and there, hanging in the sky
above him, was the castle of the little sister of the Sun. Beautiful it
was, made of cloud, and hanging in the sky, as if it were built of red
roses.

"I should be safe up there," thought little Prince Ivan, and just then
the Sun's little sister opened the window and beckoned to him.

Prince Ivan patted the big black horse and whispered to it, and it leapt
up high into the air and through the window, into the very courtyard of
the castle.

"Stay here and play with me," said the little sister of the Sun; and
Prince Ivan tumbled off the big black horse into her arms, and laughed
because he was so happy.

Merry and pretty was the Sun's little sister, and she was very kind to
little Prince Ivan. They played games together, and when she was tired
she let him do whatever he liked and run about her castle. This way and
that he ran about the battlements of rosy cloud, hanging in the sky over
the end of the world.

But one day he climbed up and up to the topmost turret of the castle.
From there he could see the whole world. And far, far away, beyond the

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

mountains, beyond the forests, beyond the wide plains, he saw his
father's palace where he had been born. The roof of the palace was gone,
and the walls were broken and crumbling. And little Prince Ivan came
slowly down from the turret, and his eyes were red with weeping.

"My dear," says the Sun's little sister, "why are your eyes so red?"

"It is the wind up there," says little Prince Ivan.

And the Sun's little sister put her head out of the window of the castle
of cloud and whispered to the winds not to blow so hard.

But next day little Prince Ivan went up again to that topmost turret,
and looked far away over the wide world to the ruined palace. "She has
eaten them all with her iron teeth," he said to himself. And his eyes
were red when he came down.

"My dear," says the Sun's little sister, "your eyes are red again."

"It is the wind," says little Prince Ivan.

And the Sun's little sister put her head out of the window and scolded
the wind.

But the third day again little Prince Ivan climbed up the stairs of
cloud to that topmost turret, and looked far away to the broken palace

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

where his father and mother had lived. And he came down from the turret
with the tears running down his face.

"Why, you are crying, my dear!" says the Sun's little sister. "Tell me
what it is all about."

So little Prince Ivan told the little sister of the Sun how his sister
was a witch, and how he wept to think of his father and mother, and how
he had seen the ruins of his father's palace far away, and how he could
not stay with hen happily until he knew how it was with his parents.

"Perhaps it is not yet too late to save them from her iron teeth, though
the old groom said that she would certainly eat them, and that it was
the will of God. But let me ride back on my big black horse."

"Do not leave me, my dear," says the Sun's little sister. "I am lonely
here by myself."

"I will ride back on my big black horse, and then I will come to you
again."

"What must be, must," says the Sun's little sister; "though she is more
likely to eat you than you are to save them. You shall go. But you must
take with you a magic comb, a magic brush, and two apples of youth.
These apples would make young once more the oldest things on earth."

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

Then she kissed little Prince Ivan, and he climbed up on his big black
horse, and leapt out of the window of the castle down on the end of the
world, and galloped off on his way back over the wide world.

He came to Mountain-tosser, the giant. There was only one mountain left,
and the giant was just picking it up. Sadly he was picking it up, for he
knew that when he had thrown it away his work would be done and he would
have to die.

"Well, little Prince Ivan," says Mountain-tosser, "this is the end;" and
he heaves up the mountain. But before he could toss it away the little
Prince threw his magic brush on the plain, and the brush swelled and
burst, and there were range upon range of high mountains, touching the
sky itself.

"Why," says Mountain-tosser, "I have enough mountains now to last me for
another thousand years. Thank you kindly, little Prince."

And he set to work again, heaving up mountains and tossing them down,
while little Prince Ivan galloped on across the wide world.

He came to Tree-rooter, the giant. There were only two of the great oaks
left, and the giant had one in each hand.

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

"Ah me, little Prince Ivan," says Tree-rooter, "my life is come to its
end; for I have only to pluck up these two trees and throw them down,
and then I shall die."

"Pluck them up," says little Prince Ivan. "Here are plenty more for
you." And he threw down his comb. There was a noise of spreading
branches, of swishing leaves, of opening buds, all together, and there
before them was a forest of great oaks stretching farther than the giant
could see, tall though he was.

"Why," says Tree-rooter, "here are enough trees to last me for another
thousand years. Thank you kindly, little Prince."

And he set to work again, pulling up the big trees, laughing joyfully
and hurling them over his head, while little Prince Ivan galloped on
across the wide world.

He came to the two old women. They were crying their eyes out.

"There is only one needle left!" says the first.

"There is only one bit of thread in the box!" sobs the second.

"And then we shall die!" they say both together, mumbling with their old
mouths.

"Before you use the needle and thread, just eat these apples," says
little Prince Ivan, and he gives them the two apples of youth.

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

The two old women took the apples in their old shaking fingers and ate
them, bent double, mumbling with their old lips. They had hardly
finished their last mouthfuls when they sat up straight, smiled with
sweet red lips, and looked at the little Prince with shining eyes. They
had become young girls again, and their gray hair was black as the
raven.

"Thank you kindly, little Prince," say the two young girls. "You must
take with you the handkerchief we have been sewing all these years.
Throw it to the ground, and it will turn into a lake of water. Perhaps
some day it will be useful to you."

"Thank you," says the little Prince, and off he gallops, on and on over
the wide world.

He came at last to his father's palace. The roof was gone, and there
were holes in the walls. He left his horse at the edge of the garden,
and crept up to the ruined palace and peeped through a hole. Inside, in
the great hall, was sitting a huge baby girl, filling the whole hall.
There was no room for her to move. She had knocked off the roof with a
shake of her head. And she sat there in the ruined hall, sucking her
thumb.

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

And while Prince Ivan was watching through the hole he heard her mutter
to herself,--

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"*Eaten the father, eaten the mother,*  
*And now to eat the little brother*"

</div>

And she began shrinking, getting smaller and smaller every minute.

Little Prince Ivan had only just time to get away from the hole in the
wall when a pretty little baby girl came running out of the ruined
palace.

"You must be my little brother Ivan," she called out to him, and came up
to him smiling. But as she smiled the little Prince saw that her teeth
were black; and as she shut her mouth he heard them clink together like
pokers.

"Come in," says she, and she took little Prince Ivan with her to a room
in the palace, all broken down and cobwebbed. There was a dulcimer lying
in the dust on the floor.

"Well, little brother," says the witch baby, "you play on the dulcimer
and amuse yourself while I get supper ready. But don't stop playing, or
I shall feel lonely." And she ran off and left him.

Little Prince Ivan sat down and played tunes on the dulcimer--sad enough
tunes. You would not play dance music if you thought you were going to
be eaten by a witch.

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

But while he was playing a little gray mouse came out of a crack in the
floor. Some people think that this was the wise old groom, who had
turned into a little gray mouse to save Ivan from the witch baby.

"Ivan, Ivan," says the little gray mouse, "run while you may. Your
father and mother were eaten long ago, and well they deserved it. But be
quick, or you will be eaten too. Your pretty little sister is putting an
edge on her teeth!"

Little Prince Ivan thanked the mouse, and ran out from the ruined
palace, and climbed up on the back of his big black horse, with its
saddle and bridle trimmed with silver. Away he galloped over the wide
world. The witch baby stopped her work and listened. She heard the music
of the dulcimer, so she made sure he was still there. She went on
sharpening her teeth with a file, and growing bigger and bigger every
minute. And all the time the music of the dulcimer sounded among the
ruins.

As soon as her teeth were quite sharp she rushed off to eat little
Prince Ivan. She tore aside the walls of the room. There was nobody
there--only a little gray mouse running and jumping this way and that on
the strings of the dulcimer.

When it saw the witch baby the little mouse ran across the floor and

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

into the crack and away, so that she never caught it. How the witch baby
gnashed her teeth! Poker and tongs, poker and tongs--what a noise they
made! She swelled up, bigger and bigger, till she was a baby as high as
the palace. And then she jumped up so that the palace fell to pieces
about her. Then off she ran after little Prince Ivan.

Little Prince Ivan, on the big black horse, heard a noise behind him. He
looked back, and there was the huge witch, towering over the trees. She
was dressed like a little baby, and her eyes flashed and her teeth
clanged as she shut her mouth. She was running with long strides, faster
even than the black horse could gallop--and he was the best horse in all
the world.

Little Prince Ivan threw down the handkerchief that had been sewn by the
two old women who had eaten the apples of youth. It turned into a deep,
broad lake, so that the witch baby had to swim--and swimming is slower
than running. It took her a long time to get across, and all that time
Prince Ivan was galloping on, never stopping for a moment.

The witch baby crossed the lake and came thundering after him. Close
behind she was, and would have caught him; but the giant Tree-rooter

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

saw the little Prince galloping on the big black horse, and the witch
baby tearing after him. He pulled up the great oaks in armfuls, and
threw them down just in front of the witch baby. He made a huge pile of
the big trees, and the witch baby had to stop and gnaw her way through
them with her iron teeth.

It took her a long time to gnaw through the trees, and the black horse
galloped and galloped ahead. But presently Prince Ivan heard a noise
behind him. He looked back, and there was the witch baby, thirty feet
high, racing after him, clanging with her teeth. Close behind she was,
and the little Prince sat firm on the big black horse, and galloped and
galloped. But she would have caught him if the giant Mountain-tosser had
not seen the little Prince on the big black horse, and the great witch
baby running after him. The giant tore up the biggest mountain in the
world and flung it down in front of her, and another on the top of that.
She had to bite her way through them, while the little Prince galloped
and galloped.

At last little Prince Ivan saw the cloud castle of the little sister of
the Sun, hanging over the end of the world and gleaming in the sky as if
it were made of roses. He shouted with hope, and the black horse

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

shook his head proudly and galloped on. The witch baby thundered after
him. Nearer she came and nearer.

"Ah, little one," screams the witch baby, "you shan't get away this
time!"

The Sun's little sister was looking from a window of the castle in the
sky, and she saw the witch baby stretching out to grab little Prince
Ivan. She flung the window open, and just in time the big black horse
leapt up, and through the window and into the courtyard, with little
Prince Ivan safe on its back.

How the witch baby gnashed her iron teeth!

"Give him up!" she screams.

"I will not," says the Sun's little sister.

"See you here," says the witch baby, and she makes herself smaller and
smaller and smaller, till she was just like a real little girl. "Let us
be weighed in the great scales, and if I am heavier than Prince Ivan, I
can take him; and if he is heavier than I am, I'll say no more about
it."

The Sun's little sister laughed at the witch baby and teased her, and
she hung the great scales out of the cloud castle so that they swung
above the end of the world.

Little Prince Ivan got into one scale, and down it went.

"Now," says the witch baby, "we shall see."

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

And she made herself bigger and bigger and bigger, till she was as big
as she had been when she sat and sucked her thumb in the hall of the
ruined palace. "I am the heavier," she shouted, and gnashed her iron
teeth. Then she jumped into the other scale.

She was so heavy that the scale with the little Prince in it shot up
into the air. It shot up so fast that little Prince Ivan flew up into
the sky, up and up and up, and came down on the topmost turret of the
cloud castle of the little sister of the Sun.

The Sun's little sister laughed, and closed the window, and went up to
the turret to meet the little Prince. But the witch baby turned back the
way she had come, and went off, gnashing her iron teeth until they
broke. And ever since then little Prince Ivan and the little sister of
the Sun play together in the castle of cloud that hangs over the end of
the world. They borrow the stars to play at ball, and put them back at
night whenever they remember.

"So when there are no stars?" asked Maroosia.

"It means that Prince Ivan and the Sun's little sister have gone to
sleep over their games and forgotten to put their toys away."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Stolen Turnips, the Magic Tablecloth, the Sneezing Goat, and
the Wooden Whistle](oprt13.md)
