[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends/Sagas](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oprt20) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1603123210/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002IKKL9K/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Old Peter's Russian Tales*, by Arthur Ransome, \[1916\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

### THE THREE MEN OF POWER--EVENING, MIDNIGHT, AND SUNRISE.

<span id="img_26600"></span> ![](img/26600.jpg)

Long ago there lived a King, and he had three daughters, the loveliest
in all the world. He loved them so well that he built a palace for them
underground, lest the rough winds should blow on them or the red sun
scorch their delicate faces. A wonderful palace it was, down there
underground, with fountains and courts, and lamps burning, and precious
stones glittering in the light of the lamps. And the three lovely
princesses grew up in that palace underground, and knew no other light
but that of the coloured lanterns, and had never seen the broad world
that lies open under the sun by day and under the stars by night.
Indeed, they did not know that there was a world

<span id="page_270">p. 270</span>

outside those glittering walls, above that shining ceiling, carved and
gilded and set with precious stones.

But it so happened that among the books that were given them to read was
one in which was written of the world: how the sun shines in the sky;
how trees grow green; how the grass waves in the wind and the leaves
whisper together; how the rivers flow between their green banks and
through the flowery meadows, until they come to the blue sea that joins
the earth and the sky. They read in that book of white-walled towns, of
churches with gilded and painted domes, of the brown wooden huts of the
peasants, of the great forests, of the ships on the rivers, and of the
long roads with the folk moving on them, this way and that, about the
world.

And when the King came to see them, as he was used to do, they asked
him,--

"Father, is it true that there is a garden in the world?"

"Yes," said the King.

"And green grass?"

"Yes," said the King.

"And little shining flowers?"

"Why, yes," said the King, wondering and stroking his silver beard.

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

And the three lovely princesses all begged him at once,--

"Oh, your Majesty, our own little father, whom, we love, let us out to
see this world. Let us out just so that we may see this garden, and walk
in it on the green grass, and see the shining flowers."

The King turned his head away and tried not to listen to them. But what
could he do? They were the loveliest princesses in the world, and when
they begged him just to let them walk in the garden he could see the
tears in their eyes. And after all, he thought, there were high walls to
the garden.

So he called up his army, and set soldiers all round the garden, and a
hundred soldiers to each gate, so that no one should come in. And then
he let the princesses come up from their underground palace, and step
out into the sunshine in the garden, with ten nurses and maids to each
princess to see that no harm came to her.

The princesses stepped out into the garden, under the blue sky, shading
their eyes at first because they had never before been in the golden
sunlight. Soon they were taking hands, and running this way and that
along the garden paths and over the green grass, and gathering posies of
shining flowers to set in their girdles and to shame their

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

golden crowns. And the King sat and watched them with love in his eyes,
and was glad to see how happy they were. And after all, he thought, what
with the high walls and the soldiers standing to arms, nothing could get
in to hurt them.

<span id="img_27200"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![It caught up the
princesses and carried them up into the air.](tn/27200.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/27200.jpg)  
It caught up the princesses and carried them up into the air.  
</span>

But just as he had quieted his old heart a strong whirlwind came down
out of the blue sky, tearing up trees and throwing them aside, and
lifting the roofs from the houses. But it did not touch the palace
roofs, shining green in the sunlight, and it plucked no trees from the
garden. It raged this way and that, and then with its swift whirling
arms it caught up the three lovely princesses, and carried them up into
the air, over the high walls and over the heads of the guarding
soldiers. For a moment the King saw them, his daughters, the three
lovely princesses, spinning round and round, as if they were dancing in
the sky. A moment later they were no more than little whirling specks,
like dust in the sunlight. And then they were out of sight, and the King
and all the maids and nurses were alone in the empty garden. The noise
of the wind had gone. The soldiers did not dare to speak. The only sound
in the King's ears was the sobbing and weeping of the maids and nurses.

<span id="page_273">p. 273</span>

The King called his generals, and made them send the soldiers in all
directions over the country to bring back the princesses, if the
whirlwind should tire and set them again upon the ground. The soldiers
went to the very boundaries of the kingdom, but they came back as they
went. Not one of them had seen the three lovely princesses.

Then the King called together all his faithful servants, and promised a
great reward to any one who should bring news of the three princesses.
It was the same with the servants as with the soldiers. Far and wide
they galloped out. Slowly, one by one, they rode back, with bent heads,
on tired horses. Not one of them had seen the King's daughters.

Then the King called a grand council of his wise boyars and men of
state. They all sat round and listened as the King told his tale and
asked if one of them would not undertake the task of finding and
rescuing the three princesses. "The wind has not set them down within
the boundaries of my kingdom; and now, God knows, they may be in the
power of wicked men or worse." He said he would give one of the
princesses in marriage to any one who could follow where the wind went
and bring his daughters back; yes, and besides, he would make him the
richest man in the kingdom. But the boyars and the wise men of state

<span id="page_274">p. 274</span>

sat round in silence. He asked them one by one. They were all silent and
afraid. For they were boyars and wise men of state, and not one of them
would undertake to follow the whirlwind and rescue the three princesses.

The King wept bitter tears.

"I see," he said, "I have no friends about me in the palace. My soldiers
cannot, my servants cannot, and my boyars and wise men will not, bring
back my three sweet maids, whom I love better than my kingdom."

And with that he sent heralds throughout the kingdom to announce the
news, and to ask if there were none among the common folk, the moujiks,
the simple folk like us, who would put his hand to the work of rescuing
the three lovely princesses, since not one of the boyars and wise men
was willing to do it.

Now, at that time in a certain village lived a poor widow, and she had
three sons, strong men, true bogatirs and men of power. All three had
been born in a single night: the eldest at evening, the middle one at
midnight, and the youngest just as the sky was lightening with the dawn.
For this reason they were called Evening, Midnight, and Sunrise. Evening
was dusky, with brown eyes and hair; Midnight was dark, with

<span id="page_275">p. 275</span>

eyes and hair as black as charcoal; while Sunrise had hair golden as the
sun, and eyes blue as morning sky. And all three were as strong as any
of the strong men and mighty bogatirs who have shaken this land of
Russia with their tread.

As soon as the King's word had been proclaimed in the village, the three
brothers asked for their mother's blessing, which she gave them, kissing
them on the forehead and on both cheeks. Then they made ready for the
journey and rode off to the capital--Evening on his horse of dusky
brown, Midnight on his black horse, and Sunrise on his horse that was as
white as clouds in summer. They came to the capital, and as they rode
through the streets everybody stopped to look at them, and all the
pretty young women waved handkerchiefs at the windows. But the three
brothers looked neither to right nor left but straight before them, and
they rode to the palace of the King.

They came to the King, bowed low before him, and said,--

"May you live for many years, O King. We have come to you not for
feasting but for service. Let us, O King, ride out to rescue your three
princesses."

<span id="page_276">p. 276</span>

"God give you success, my good young men," says the King. "What are your
names?"

"We are three brothers--Evening, Midnight, and Sunrise."

"What will you have to take with you on the road?"

"For ourselves, O King, we want nothing. Only, do not leave our mother
in poverty, for she is old."

The King sent for the old woman, their mother, and gave her a home in
his palace, and made her eat and drink at his table, and gave her new
boots made by his own cobblers, and new clothes sewn by the very
sempstresses who were used to make dresses for the three daughters of
the King, who were the loveliest princesses in the world, and had been
carried away by the whirlwind. No old woman in Russia was better looked
after than the mother of the three young bogatirs and men of power,
Evening, Midnight, and Sunrise, while they were away on their adventure
seeking the King's daughters.

The young men rode out on their journey. A month they rode together, two
months, and in the third month they came to a broad desert plain, where
there were no towns, no villages, no farms, and not a human being to be
seen. They rode on over the sand, through the rank grass,

<span id="page_277">p. 277</span>

over the stony wastes. At last, on the other side of that desolate
plain, they came to a thick forest. They found a path through the thick
undergrowth, and rode along that path together into the very heart of
the forest. And there, alone in the heart of the forest, they came to a
hut, with a railed yard and a shed full of cattle and sheep. They called
out with their strong young voices, and were answered by the lowing of
the cattle, the bleating of the sheep, and the strong wind in the tops
of the great trees.

They rode through the railed yard and came to the hut. Evening leant
from his brown horse and knocked on the window. There was no answer.
They forced open the door, and found no one at all.

"Well, brothers," says Evening, "let us make ourselves at home. Let us
stay here awhile. We have been riding three months. Let us rest, and
then ride farther. We shall deal better with our adventure if we come to
it as fresh men, and not dusty and weary from the long road."

The others agreed. They tied up their horses, fed them, drew water from
the well, and gave them to drink; and then, tired out, they went into
the hut, said their prayers to God, and lay down to sleep with

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span>

their weapons close to their hands, like true bogatirs and men of power.

In the morning the youngest brother. Sunrise, said to the eldest
brother, Evening,--

"Midnight and I are going hunting to-day, and you shall rest here, and
see what sort of dinner you can give us when we come back."

"Very well," says Evening; "but to-morrow I shall go hunting, and one of
you shall stay here and cook the dinner."

Nobody made bones about that, and so Evening stood at the door of the
hut while the others rode off--Midnight on his black horse, and Sunrise
on his horse, white as a summer cloud. They rode off into the forest,
and disappeared among the green trees.

Evening watched them out of sight, and then, without thinking twice
about what he was doing, went out into the yard, picked out the finest
sheep he could see, caught it, killed it, skinned it, cleaned it, and
set it in a cauldron on the stove so as to be ready and hot whenever his
brothers should come riding back from the forest. As soon as that was
done, Evening lay down on the broad bench to rest himself.

He had scarcely lain down before there were a knocking and a rattling

<span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

and a stumbling, and the door opened, and in walked a little man a yard
high, with a beard seven yards long <span id="fr_4"></span>[4](#fn_3)
flowing out behind him over both his shoulders. He looked round angrily,
and saw Evening, who yawned, and sat up on the bench, and began
chuckling at the sight of him. The little man screamed out,--

"What are you chuckling about? How dare you play the master in my house?
How dare you kill my best sheep?"

Evening answered him, laughing,--

"Grow a little bigger, and it won't be so hard to see you down there.
Till then it will be better for you to keep a civil tongue in your
head."

The little man was angry before, but now he was angrier.

"What?" he screamed. "I am little, am I? Well, see what little does!"

And with that he grabbed an old crust of bread, leapt on Evening's
shoulders, and began beating him over the head. Yes, and the little
fellow was so strong he beat Evening till he was half dead, and was
blind in one eye and could not see out of the other. Then, when he was

<span id="page_280">p. 280</span>

tired, he threw Evening under the bench, took the sheep out of the
cauldron, gobbled it up in a few mouthfuls, and, when he had done, went
off again into the forest.

When Evening came to his senses again, he bound up his head with a
dishcloth, and lay on the ground and groaned.

Midnight and Sunrise rode back, on the black horse and the white, and
came to the hut, where they found their brother groaning on the ground,
unable to see out of his eyes, and with a dishcloth round his head.

"What are you tied up like that for?" they asked; "and where is our
dinner?"

Evening was ashamed to tell them the truth--how he had been thumped
about with a crust of bread by a little fellow only a yard high. He
moaned and said,--

"O my brothers, I made a fire in the stove, and fell ill from the great
heat in this little hut. My head ached. All day I lay senseless, and
could neither boil nor roast. I thought my head would burst with the
heat, and my brains fly beyond the seventh world."

Next day Sunrise went hunting with Evening, whose head was still bound
up in a dishcloth, and hurting so sorely that he could hardly see.

<span id="page_281">p. 281</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Midnight stayed at
home. It was his turn to see to the dinner. Sunrise rode out on his
cloud-white horse, and Evening on his dusky brown. Midnight stood in the
doorway of the hut, watched them disappear among the green trees, and
then set about getting the dinner.

He lit the fire, but was careful not to make it too hot. Then he went
into the yard, caught the very fattest of the sheep, killed it, skinned
it, cleaned it, cut it up, and set it on the stove. Then, when all was
ready, he lay down on the bench and rested himself.

But before he had lain there long there were a knocking, a stamping, a
rattling, a grumbling, and in came the little old man, one yard high,
with a beard seven yards long, and without wasting words the little
fellow leapt on the shoulders of the bogatir, and set to beating him and
thumping him, first on one side of his head and then on the other. He
gave him such a banging that he very nearly made an end of him
altogether. Then the little fellow ate up the whole of the sheep in a
few mouthfuls, and went off angrily into the forest, with his long white
beard flowing behind him.

Midnight tied up his head with a handkerchief, and lay down under the
bench, groaning and groaning, unable to put his head to the ground, or

<span id="page_282">p. 282</span>

even to lay it in the crook of his arm, it was so bruised by the beating
given it by the little old man.

In the evening the brothers rode back, and found Midnight groaning under
the bench, with his head bound up in a handkerchief.

Evening looked at him and said nothing. Perhaps he was thinking of his
own bruised head, which was still tied up in a dishcloth.

"What's the matter with you?" says Sunrise.

"There never was such another stove as this," says Midnight. "I'd no
sooner lit it than it seemed as if the whole hut were on fire. My head
nearly burst. It's aching now; and as for your dinner, why, I've not
been able to put a hand to anything all day."

Evening chuckled to himself, but Sunrise only said, "That's bad,
brother; but you shall go hunting to-morrow, and I'll stay at home, and
see what I can do with the stove."

And so on the third day the two elder brothers went hunting--Midnight on
his black horse, and Evening on his horse of dusky brown. Sunrise stood
in the doorway of the hut, and saw them disappear under the

<span id="page_283">p. 283</span>

green trees. The sun shone on his golden curls, and his blue eyes were
like the sky itself. There, never was such another bogatir as he.

He went into the hut and lit the stove. Then he went out into the yard,
chose the best sheep he could find, killed it, skinned it, cleaned it,
cut it up, and set it on the stove. He made everything ready, and then
lay down on the bench.

Before he had lain there very long he heard a stumping, a thumping, a
knocking, a rattling, a grumbling, a rumbling. Sunrise leaped up from
the bench and looked out through the window of the hut. There in the
yard was the little old man, one yard high, with a beard seven yards
long. He was carrying a whole haystack on his head and a great tub of
water in his arms. He came into the middle of the yard, and set down his
tub to water all the beasts. He set down the haystack and scattered the
hay about. All the cattle and the sheep came together to eat and to
drink, and the little man stood and counted them. He counted the oxen,
he counted the goats, and then he counted the sheep. He counted them
once, and his eyes began to flash. He counted them twice, and he began
to grind his teeth. He counted them a third time, made sure that one was
missing, and then he flew into a violent rage,

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span>

rushed across the yard and into the hut, and gave Sunrise a terrific
blow on the head.

Sunrise shook his head as if a fly had settled on it. Then he jumped
suddenly and caught the end of the long beard of the little old man, and
set to pulling him this way and that, round and round the hut, as if his
beard was a rope. Phew! how the little man roared.

Sunrise laughed, and tugged him this way and that, and mocked him,
crying out, "If you do not know the ford, it is better not to go into
the water," meaning that the little fellow had begun to beat him without
finding out who was the stronger.

The little old man, one yard high, with a beard seven yards long, began
to pray and to beg,--

"O man of power, O great and mighty bogatir, have mercy upon me. Do not
kill me. Leave me my soul to repent with."

Sunrise laughed, and dragged the little fellow out into the yard,
whirled him round at the end of his beard, and brought him to a great
oak trunk that lay on the ground. Then with a heavy iron wedge he fixed
the end of the little man's beard firmly in the oaken trunk, and,
leaving the little man howling and lamenting, went back to the

<span id="page_285">p. 285</span>

hut, set it in order again, saw that the sheep was cooking as it should,
and then lay down in peace to wait for the coming of his brothers.

Evening and Midnight rode home, leapt from their horses, and came into
the hut to see how the little man had dealt with their brother. They
could hardly believe their eyes when they saw him alive and well,
without a bruise, lying comfortably on the bench.

He sat up and laughed in their faces.

"Well, brothers," says he, "come along with me into the yard, and I
think I can show you that headache of yours. It's a good deal stronger
than it is big, but for the time being you need not be afraid of it, for
it's fastened to an oak timber that all three of us together could not
lift."

He got up and went into the yard. Evening and Midnight followed him with
shamed faces. But when they came to the oaken timber the little man was
not there. Long ago he had torn himself free and run away into the
forest. But half his beard was left, wedged in the trunk, and Sunrise
pointed to that and said,--

"Tell me, brothers, was it the heat of the stove that gave you your
headaches? Or had this long beard something to do with it?"

The brothers grew red, and laughed, and told him the whole truth.

<span id="page_286">p. 286</span>

Meanwhile Sunrise had been looking at the end of the beard, the end of
the half beard that was left, and he saw that it had been torn out by
the roots, and that drops of blood from the little man's chin showed the
way he had gone.

Quickly the brothers went back to the hut and ate up the sheep. Then
they leapt on their horses, and rode off into the green forest,
following the drops of blood that had fallen from the little man's chin.
For three days they rode through the green forest, until at last the red
drops of the trail led them to a deep pit, a black hole in the earth,
hidden by thick bushes and going far down into the underworld.

Sunrise left his brothers to guard the hole, while he went off into the
forest and gathered bast, and twisted it, and made a strong rope, and
brought it to the mouth of the pit, and asked his brothers to lower him
down.

He made a loop in the rope. His brothers kissed him on both cheeks, and
he kissed them back. Then he sat in the loop, and Evening and Midnight
lowered him down into the darkness. Down and down he went, swinging in
the dark, till he came into a world under the world, with a light that
was neither that of the sun, nor of the moon, nor of the stars. He
stepped from the loop in the rope of twisted bast, and set

<span id="page_287">p. 287</span>

out walking through the underworld, going whither his eyes led him, for
he found no more drops of blood, nor any other traces of the little old
man.

He walked and walked, and came at last to a palace of copper, green and
ruddy in the strange light. He went into that palace, and there came to
meet him in the copper halls a maiden whose cheeks were redder than the
aloe and whiter than the snow. She was the youngest daughter of the
King, and the loveliest of the three princesses, who were the loveliest
in all the world. Sweetly she curtsied to Sunrise, as he stood there
with his golden hair and his eyes blue as the sky at morning, and
sweetly she asked him,--

"How have you come hither, my brave young man--of your own will or
against it?"

"Your father has sent to rescue you and your sisters."

She bade him sit at the table, and gave him food and brought him a
little flask of the water of strength.

"Strong you are," says she, "but not strong enough for what is before
you. Drink this, and your strength will be greater than it is; for you
will need all the strength you have and can win, if you are to rescue us
and live."

<span id="page_288">p. 288</span>

Sunrise looked in her sweet eyes, and drank the water of strength in a
single draught, and felt gigantic power forcing its way throughout his
body.

"Now," thought he, "let come what may."

Instantly a violent wind rushed through the copper palace, and the
Princess trembled.

"The snake that holds me here is coming," says she. "He is flying hither
on his strong wings."

She took the great hand of the bogatir in her little fingers, and drew
him to another room, and hid him there.

The copper palace rocked in the wind, and there flew into the great hall
a huge snake with three heads. The snake hissed loudly, and called out
in a whistling voice,--

"I smell the smell of a Russian soul. What visitor have you here?"

"How could any one come here?" said the Princess. "You have been flying
over Russia. There you smelt Russian souls, and the smell is still in
your nostrils, so that you think you smell them here."

"It is true," said the snake: "I have been flying over Russia. I have
flown far. Let me eat and drink, for I am both hungry and thirsty."

<span id="page_289">p. 289</span>

All this time Sunrise was watching from the other room.

The Princess brought meat and drink to the snake, and in the drink she
put a philtre of sleep.

The snake ate and drank, and began to feel sleepy. He coiled himself up
in rings, laid his three heads in the lap of the Princess, told her to
scratch them for him, and dropped into a deep sleep.

The Princess called Sunrise, and the bogatir rushed in, swung his
glittering sword three times round his golden head, and cut off all
three heads of the snake. It was like felling three oak trees at a
single blow. Then he made a great fire of wood, and threw upon it the
body of the snake, and, when it was burnt up, scattered the ashes over
the open country.

"And now fare you well," says Sunrise to the Princess; but she threw her
arms about his neck.

"Fare you well," says he. "I go to seek your sisters. As soon as I have
found them I will come back."

And at that she let him go.

He walked on further through the underworld, and came at last to a
palace of silver, gleaming in the strange light.

<span id="page_290">p. 290</span>

He went in there, and was met with sweet words and kindness by the
second of the three lovely princesses. In that palace he killed a snake
with six heads. The Princess begged him to stay; but he told her he had
yet to find her eldest sister. At that she wished him the help of God,
and he left her, and went on further.

He walked and walked, and came at last to a palace of gold, glittering
in the light of the underworld. All happened as in the other palaces.
The eldest of the three daughters of the King met him with courtesy and
kindness. And he killed a snake with twelve heads and freed the Princess
from her imprisonment. The Princess rejoiced, and thanked Sunrise, and
set about her packing to go home.

And this was the way of her packing. She went out into the broad
courtyard and waved a scarlet handkerchief, and instantly the whole
palace, golden and glittering, and the kingdom belonging to it, became
little, little, little, till it went into a little golden egg. The
Princess tied the egg in a corner of her handkerchief, and set out with
Sunrise to join her sisters and go home to her father.

Her sisters did their packing in the same way. The silver palace and its
kingdom were packed by the second sister into a little silver egg.

<span id="page_291">p. 291</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> And when they came
to the copper palace, the youngest of the three lovely princesses
clapped her hands and kissed Sunrise on both his cheeks, and waved a
scarlet handkerchief, and instantly the copper palace and its kingdom
were packed into a little copper egg, shining ruddy and green.

And so Sunrise and the three daughters of the King came to the foot of
the deep hole down which he had come into the underworld. And there was
the rope hanging with the loop at its end. And they sat in the loop, and
Evening and Midnight pulled them up one by one, rejoicing together. Then
the three brothers took, each of them, a princess with him on his horse,
and they all rode together back to the old King, telling talcs and
singing songs as they went. The Princess from the golden palace rode
with Evening on his horse of dusky brown; the Princess from the silver
palace rode with Midnight on his horse as black as charcoal; but the
Princess from the copper palace, the youngest of them all, rode with
Sunrise on his horse, white as a summer cloud. Merry was the journey
through the green forest, and gladly they rode over the open plain, till
they came at last to the palace of her father.

There was the old King, sitting melancholy alone, when the three

<span id="page_292">p. 292</span>

brothers with the princesses rode into the courtyard of the palace. The
old King was so glad that he laughed and cried at the same time, and his
tears ran down his beard.

"Ah me!" says the old King, "I am old, and you young men have brought my
daughters back from the very world under the world. Safer they will be
if they have you to guard them, even than they were in the palace I had
built for them underground. But I have only one kingdom and three
daughters."

"Do not trouble about that," laughed the three princesses, and they all
rode out together into the open country, and there the princesses broke
their eggs, one after the other, and there were the palaces of silver,
copper, and gold, with the kingdoms belonging to them, and the cattle
and the sheep and the goats. There was a kingdom for each of the
brothers. Then they made a great feast, and had three weddings all
together, and the old King sat with the mother of the three strong men,
and men of power, the noble bogatirs, Evening, Midnight, and Sunrise,
sitting at his side. Great was the feasting, loud were the songs, and
the King made Sunrise his heir, so that some day he would wear his
crown. But little did Sunrise think of that. He thought of nothing but
the youngest Princess. And little she thought of it, for

<span id="page_293">p. 293</span>

she had no eyes but for Sunrise. And merrily they lived together in the
copper palace. And happily they rode together on the horse that was as
white as clouds in summer.

<span id="img_29000"></span> ![](img/29000.jpg)

<span id="page_294">p. 294</span>

## SALT.

<span id="img_29100"></span> ![](img/29100.jpg)

One evening, when they were sitting round the table after their supper,
old Peter asked the children what story they would like to hear. Vanya
asked whether there were any stories left which they had not already
heard.

"Why," said old Peter, "you have heard scarcely any of the stories, for
there is a story to be told about everything in the world."

<span id="page_295">p. 295</span>

"About everything, grandfather?" asked Vanya.

"About everything," said old Peter.

"About the sky, and the thunder, and the dogs, and the flies, and the
birds, and the trees, and the milk?"

"There is a story about everyone of those things."

"I know something there isn't a story about," said Vanya.

"And what's that?" asked old Peter, smiling in his beard.

"Salt," said Vanya. "There can't be a story about salt." He put the tip
of his finger into the little box of salt on the table, and then he
touched his tongue with his finger to taste.

"But of course there is a story about salt," said old Peter.

"Tell it us," said Maroosia; and presently, when his pipe had been lit
twice and gone out, old Peter began.

Once upon a time there were three brothers, and their father was a great
merchant who sent his ships far over the sea, and traded here and there
in countries the names of which I, being an old man, can never rightly
call to mind. Well, the names of the two elder brothers do not matter,
but the youngest was called Ivan the Ninny, because he was always
playing and never working; and if there was a silly thing to do, why,
off he went and did it. And so, when the brothers grew up, the father
sent the two elder ones off, each in a fine ship laden with gold and
jewels, and rings and bracelets, and laces and silks, and

<span id="page_296">p. 296</span>

sticks with little bits of silver hammered into their handles, and
spoons with patterns of blue and red, and everything else you can think
of that costs too much to buy. But he made Ivan the Ninny stay at home,
and did not give him a ship at all. Ivan saw his brothers go sailing off
over the sea on a summer morning, to make their fortunes and come back
rich men; and then, for the first time in his life, he wanted to work
and do something useful. He went to his father and kissed his hand, and
he kissed the hand of his little old mother, and he begged his father to
give him a ship so that he could try his fortune like his brothers.

"But you have never done a wise thing in your life, and no one could
count all the silly things you've done if he spent a hundred days in
counting," said his father.

"True," said Ivan; "but now I am going to be wise, and sail the sea and
come back with something in my pockets to show that I am not a ninny any
longer. Give me just a little ship, father mine--just a little ship for
myself."

"Give him a little ship," said the mother. "He may not be a ninny after
all."

"Very well," said his father. "I will give him a little ship; but I am
not going to waste good roubles by giving him a rich cargo."

<span id="page_297">p. 297</span>

"Give me any cargo you like," said Ivan.

So his father gave him a little ship, a little old ship, and a cargo of
rags and scraps and things that were not fit for anything but to be
thrown away. And he gave him a crew of ancient old sailormen who were
past work; and Ivan went on board and sailed away at sunset, like the
ninny he was. And the feeble, ancient, old sailormen pulled up the
ragged, dirty sails, and away they went over the sea to learn what
fortune, good or bad, God had in mind for a crew of old men with a ninny
for a master.

The fourth day after they set sail there came a great wind over the sea.
The feeble old men did the best they could with the ship; but the old,
torn sails tore from the masts, and the wind did what it pleased, and
threw the little ship on an unknown island away in the middle of the
sea. Then the wind dropped, and left the little ship on the beach, and
Ivan the Ninny and his ancient old men, like good Russians, praising God
that they were still alive.

"Well, children," said Ivan, for he knew how to talk to sailors, "do you
stay here and mend the sails, and make new ones out of the rags we

<span id="page_298">p. 298</span>

carry as cargo, while I go inland and see if there is anything that
could be of use to us."

So the ancient old sailormen sat on deck with their legs crossed, and
made sails out of rags, of torn scraps of old brocades, of soiled
embroidered shawls, of all the rubbish that they had with them for a
cargo. You never saw such sails. The tide came up and floated the ship,
and they threw out anchors at bow and stern, and sat there in the
sunlight, making sails and patching them and talking of the days when
they were young. All this while Ivan the Ninny went walking off into the
island.

Now in the middle of that island was a high mountain, a high mountain it
was, and so white that when he came near it Ivan the Ninny began
thinking of sheepskin coats, although it was midsummer and the sun was
hot in the sky. The trees were green round about, but there was nothing
growing on the mountain at all. It was just a great white mountain piled
up into the sky in the middle of a green island. Ivan walked a little
way up the white slopes of the mountain, and then, because he felt
thirsty, he thought he would let a little snow melt in his mouth. He
took some in his fingers and stuffed it in. Quickly enough it came out
again, I can tell you, for the mountain was not

<span id="page_299">p. 299</span>

made of snow but of good Russian salt. And if you want to try what a
mouthful of salt is like, you may.

"No, thank you, grandfather," the children said hurriedly together.

Old Peter went on with his tale.

Ivan the Ninny did not stop to think twice. The salt was so clean and
shone so brightly in the sunlight. He just turned round and ran back to
the shore, and called out to his ancient old sailor-men and told them to
empty everything they had on board over into the sea. Over it all went,
rags and tags and rotten timbers, till the little ship was as empty as a
soup bowl after supper. And then those ancient old men were set to work
carrying salt from the mountain and taking it on board the little ship,
and stowing it away below deck till there was not room for another
grain. Ivan the Ninny would have liked to take the whole mountain, but
there was not room in the little ship. And for that the ancient old
sailormen thanked God, because their backs ached and their old legs were
weak, and they said they would have died if they had had to carry any
more.

Then they hoisted up the new sails they had patched together out of the
rags and scraps of shawls and old brocades, and they sailed away

<span id="page_300">p. 300</span>

once more over the blue sea. And the wind stood fair, and they sailed
before it, and the ancient old sailors rested their backs, and told old
tales, and took turn and turn about at the rudder.

And after many days' sailing they came to a town, with towers and
churches and painted roofs, all set on the side of a hill that sloped
down into the sea. At the foot of the hill was a quiet harbour, and they
sailed in there and moored the ship and hauled down their patchwork
sails.

Ivan the Ninny went ashore, and took with him a little bag of clean
white salt to show what kind of goods he had for sale, and he asked his
way to the palace of the Tzar of that town. He came to the palace, and
went in and bowed to the ground before the Tzar.

"Who are you?" says the Tzar.

"I, great lord, am a Russian merchant, and here in a bag is some of my
merchandise, and I beg your leave to trade with your subjects in this
town."

"Let me see what is in the bag," says the Tzar. Ivan the Ninny took a
handful from the bag and showed it to the Tzar.

"What is it?" says the Tzar.

"Good Russian salt," says Ivan the Ninny.

Now in that country they had never heard of salt, and the Tzar looked at
the salt, and he looked at Ivan and he laughed.

<span id="page_301">p. 301</span>

"Why, this," says he, "is nothing but white dust, and that we can pick
up for nothing. The men of my town have no need to trade with you. You
must be a ninny."

Ivan grew very red, for he knew what his father used to call him. He was
ashamed to say anything. So he bowed to the ground, and went away out of
the palace.

But when he was outside he thought to himself, "I wonder what sort of
salt they use in these parts if they do not know good Russian salt when
they see it. I will go to the kitchen."

So he went round to the back door of the palace, and put his head into
the kitchen, and said, "I am very tired. May I sit down here and rest a
little while?"

"Come in," says one of the cooks. "But you must sit just there, and not
put even your little finger in the way of us; for we are the Tzar's
cooks, and we are in the middle of making ready his dinner." And the
cook put a stool in a corner out of the way, and Ivan slipped in round
the door, and sat down in the corner and looked about him. There were
seven cooks at least, boiling and baking, and stewing and

<span id="page_302">p. 302</span>

toasting, and roasting and frying. And as for scullions, they were as
thick as cockroaches, dozens of them, running to and fro, tumbling over
each other, and helping the cooks.

Ivan the Ninny sat on his stool, with his legs tucked under him and the
bag of salt on his knees. He watched the cooks and the scullions, but he
did not see them put anything in the dishes which he thought could take
the place of salt. No; the meat was without salt, the kasha was without
salt, and there was no salt in the potatoes. Ivan nearly turned sick at
the thought of the tastelessness of all that food.

There came the moment when all the cooks and scullions ran out of the
kitchen to fetch the silver platters on which to lay the dishes. Ivan
slipped down from his stool, and running from stove to stove, from
saucepan to frying pan, he dropped a pinch of salt, just what was
wanted, no more no less, in everyone of the dishes. Then he ran back to
the stool in the corner, and sat there, and watched the dishes being put
on the silver platters and carried off in gold-embroidered napkins to be
the dinner of the Tzar.

The Tzar sat at table and took his first spoonful of soup.

<span id="page_303">p. 303</span>

"The soup is very good to-day," says he, and he finishes the soup to the
last drop.

"I've never known the soup so good," says the Tzaritza, and she finishes
hers.

"This is the best soup I ever tasted," says the Princess, and down goes
hers, and she, you know, was the prettiest princess who ever had dinner
in this world.

It was the same with the kasha and the same with the meat. The Tzar and
the Tzaritza and the Princess wondered why they had never had so good a
dinner in all their lives before.

"Call the cooks," says the Tzar. And they called the cooks, and the
cooks all came in, and bowed to the ground, and stood in a row before
the Tzar.

"What did you put in the dishes to-day that you never put before?" says
the Tzar.

"We put nothing unusual, your greatness," say the cooks, and bowed to
the ground again.

"Then why do the dishes taste better?"

"We do not know, your greatness," say the cooks.

"Call the scullions," says the Tzar. And the scullions were called, and
they too bowed to the ground, and stood in a row before the Tzar.

"What was done in the kitchen to-day that has not been done there
before?" says the Tzar.

<span id="page_304">p. 304</span>

"Nothing, your greatness," say all the scullions except one.

And that one scullion bowed again, and kept on bowing, and then he said,
"Please, your greatness, please, great lord, there is usually none in
the kitchen but ourselves; but to-day there was a young Russian
merchant, who sat on a stool in the corner and said he was tired."

"Call the merchant," says the Tzar.

So they brought in Ivan the Ninny, and he bowed before the Tzar, and
stood there with his little bag of salt in his hand.

"Did you do anything to my dinner?" says the Tzar.

"I did, your greatness," says Ivan.

"What did you do?"

"I put a pinch of Russian salt in every dish."

"That white dust?" says the Tzar.

"Nothing but that."

"Have you got any more of it?"

"I have a little ship in the harbour laden with nothing else," says
Ivan.

"It is the most wonderful dust in the world," says the Tzar, "and I will
buy every grain of it you have. What do you want for it?"

<span id="page_305">p. 305</span>

Ivan the Ninny scratched his head and thought. He thought that if the
Tzar liked it as much as all that it must be worth a fair price, so he
said, "We will put the salt into bags, and for every bag of salt you
must give me three bags of the same weight--one of gold, one of silver,
and one of precious stones. Cheaper than that, your greatness, I could
not possibly sell."

"Agreed," says the Tzar. "And a cheap price, too, for a dust so full of
magic that it makes dull dishes tasty, and tasty dishes so good that
there is no looking away from them."

So all the day long, and far into the night, the ancient old sailormen
bent their backs under sacks of salt, and bent them again under sacks of
gold and silver and precious stones. When all the salt had been put in
the Tzar's treasury--yes, with twenty soldiers guarding it with great
swords shining in the moonlight--and when the little ship was loaded
with riches, so that even the deck was piled high with precious stones,
the ancient old men lay down among the jewels and slept till morning,
when Ivan the Ninny went to bid good-bye to the Tzar.

"And whither shall you sail now?" asked the Tzar.

<span id="page_306">p. 306</span>

"I shall sail away to Russia in my little ship," says Ivan.

And the Princess, who was very beautiful, said, "A little Russian ship?"

"Yes," says Ivan.

"I have never seen a Russian ship," says the Princess, and she begs her
father to let her go to the harbour with her nurses and maids, to see
the little Russian ship before Ivan set sail.

She came with Ivan to the harbour, and the ancient old sailormen took
them on board.

She ran all over the ship, looking now at this and now at that, and Ivan
told her the names of everything--deck, mast, and rudder.

"May I see the sails?" she asked. And the ancient old men hoisted the
ragged sails, and the wind filled the sails and tugged.

"Why doesn't the ship move when the sails are up?" asked the Princess.

"The anchor holds her," said Ivan.

"Please let me see the anchor," says the Princess.

"Haul up the anchor, my children, and show it to the Princess," says
Ivan to the ancient old sailormen.

And the old men hauled up the anchor, and showed it to the Princess;

<span id="page_307">p. 307</span>

and she said it was a very good little anchor. But, of course, as soon
as the anchor was up the ship began to move. One of the ancient old men
bent over the tiller, and, with a fair wind behind her, the little ship
slipped out of the harbour and away to the blue sea. When the Princess
looked round, thinking it was time to go home, the little ship was far
from land, and away in the distance she could only see the gold towers
of her father's palace, glittering like pin points in the sunlight. Her
nurses and maids wrung their hands and made an outcry, and the Princess
sat down on a heap of jewels, and put a handkerchief to her eyes, and
cried and cried and cried.

Ivan the Ninny took her hands and comforted her, and told her of the
wonders of the sea that he would show her, and the wonders of the land.
And she looked up at him while he talked, and his eyes were kind and
hers were sweet; and the end of it was that they were both very well
content, and agreed to have a marriage feast as soon as the little ship
should bring them to the home of Ivan's father. Merry was that voyage.
All day long Ivan and the Princess sat on deck and said sweet things to
each other, and at twilight they sang songs, and drank tea, and told
stories. As for the nurses and maids, the Princess told

<span id="page_308">p. 308</span>

them to be glad; and so they danced and clapped their hands, and ran
about the ship, and teased the ancient old sailormen.

When they had been sailing many days, the Princess was looking out over
the sea, and she cried out to Ivan, "See, over there, far away, are two
big ships with white sails, not like our sails of brocade and bits of
silk."

Ivan looked, shading his eyes with his hands.

"Why, those are the ships of my elder brothers," said he. "We shall all
sail home together."

And he made the ancient old sailormen give a hail in their cracked old
voices. And the brothers heard them, and came on board to greet Ivan and
his bride. And when they saw that she was a Tzar's daughter, and that
the very decks were heaped with precious stones, because there was no
room below, they said one thing to Ivan and something else to each
other.

To Ivan they said, "Thanks be to God, He has given you good trading."

But to each other, "How can this be?" says one. "Ivan the Ninny bringing
back such a cargo, while we in our fine ships have only a bag or two of
gold."

"And what is Ivan the Ninny doing with a princess?" says the other.

<span id="page_309">p. 309</span>

And they ground their teeth, and waited their time, and came up
suddenly, when Ivan was alone in the twilight, and picked him up by his
head and his heels, and hove him overboard into the dark blue sea.

Not one of the old men had seen them, and the Princess was not on deck.
In the morning they said that Ivan the Ninny must have walked overboard
in his sleep. And they drew lots. The eldest brother took the Princess,
and the second brother took the little ship laden with gold and silver
and precious stones. And so the brothers sailed home very well content.
But the Princess sat and wept all day long, looking down into the blue
water. The elder brother could not comfort her, and the second brother
did not try. And the ancient old sailormen muttered in their beards, and
were sorry, and prayed to God to give rest to Ivan's soul; for although
he had been a ninny, and although he had made them carry a lot of salt
and other things, yet they loved him, because he knew how to talk to
ancient old sailormen.

But Ivan was not dead. As soon as he splashed into the water, he crammed
his fur hat a little tighter on his head, and began swimming in the sea.
He swam about until the sun rose, and then, not far away, he saw a
floating timber log, and he swam to the log, and got astride

<span id="page_310">p. 310</span>

of it, and thanked God. And he sat there on the log in the middle of the
sea, twiddling his thumbs for want of something to do.

There was a strong current in the sea that carried him along, and at
last, after floating for many days without ever a bite for his teeth or
a drop for his gullet, his feet touched land. Now that was at night, and
he left the log and walked up out of the sea, and lay down on the shore
and waited for morning.

When the sun rose he stood up, and saw that he was on a bare island, and
he saw nothing at all on the island except a huge house as big as a
mountain; and as he was looking at the house the great door creaked with
a noise like that of a hurricane among the pine forests, and opened; and
a giant came walking out, and came to the shore, and stood there,
looking down at Ivan.

"What are you doing here, little one?" says the giant.

Ivan told him the whole story, just as I have told it to you.

The giant listened to the very end, pulling at his monstrous whiskers.
Then he said, "Listen, little one. I know more of the story than you,
for I can tell you that to-morrow morning your eldest brother is going

<span id="page_311">p. 311</span>

to marry your Princess. But there is no need for you to take on about
it. If you want to be there, I will carry you and set you down before
the house in time for the wedding. And a fine wedding it is like to be,
for your father thinks well of those brothers of yours bringing back all
those precious stones, and silver and gold enough to buy a kingdom."

And with that he picked up Ivan the Ninny and set him on his great
shoulders, and set off striding through the sea.

He went so fast that the wind of his going blew off Ivan's hat.

"Stop a moment," shouts Ivan; "my hat has blown off."

"We can't turn back for that," says the giant; "we have already left
your hat five hundred versts behind us." And he rushed on, splashing
through the sea. The sea was up to his armpits. He rushed on, and the
sea was up to his waist. He rushed on, and before the sun had climbed to
the top of the blue sky he was splashing up out of the sea with the
water about his ankles. He lifted Ivan from his shoulders and set him on
the ground.

"Now," says he, "little man, off you run, and you'll be in time for the
feast. But don't you dare to boast about riding on my shoulders.

<span id="page_312">p. 312</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> If you open your
mouth about that you'll smart for it, if I have to come ten thousand
thousand versts."

Ivan the Ninny thanked the giant for carrying him through the sea,
promised that he would not boast, and then ran off to his father's
house. Long before he got there he heard the musicians in the courtyard
playing as if they wanted to wear out their instruments before night.
The wedding feast had begun, and when Ivan ran in, there, at the high
board, was sitting the Princess, and beside her his eldest brother. And
there were his father and mother, his second brother, and all the
guests. And everyone of them was as merry as could be, except the
Princess, and she was as white as the salt he had sold to her father.

Suddenly the blood flushed into her cheeks. She saw Ivan in the doorway.
Up she jumped at the high board, and cried out, "There, there is my true
love, and not this man who sits beside me at the table."

"What is this?" says Ivan's father, and in a few minutes knew the whole
story.

He turned the two elder brothers out of doors, gave their ships to Ivan,
married him to the Princess, and made him his heir. And the

<span id="page_313">p. 313</span>

wedding feast began again, and they sent for the ancient old sailormen
to take part in it. And the ancient old sailormen wept with joy when
they saw Ivan and the Princess, like two sweet pigeons, sitting side by
side; yes, and they lifted their flagons with their old shaking hands,
and cheered with their old cracked voices, and poured the wine down
their dry old throats.

There was wine enough and to spare, beer too, and mead--enough to drown
a herd of cattle. And as the guests drank and grew merry and proud they
set to boasting. This one bragged of his riches, that one of his wife.
Another boasted of his cunning, another of his new house, another of his
strength, and this one was angry because they would not let him show how
he could lift the table on one hand. They all drank Ivan's health, and
he drank theirs, and in the end he could not bear to listen to their
proud boasts.

"That's all very well," says he, "but I am the only man in the world who
rode on the shoulders of a giant to come to his wedding feast."

The words were scarcely out of his mouth before there were a tremendous
trampling and a roar of a great wind. The house shook with the footsteps
of the giant as he strode up. The giant bent down over the courtyard and
looked in at the feast.

"Little man, little man," says he, "you promised not to boast of me. I

<span id="page_314">p. 314</span>

told you what would come if you did, and here you are and have boasted
already."

"Forgive me," says Ivan; "it was the drink that boasted, not I."

"What sort of drink is it that knows how to boast?" says the giant.

"You shall taste it," says Ivan.

And he made his ancient old sailormen roll a great barrel of wine into
the yard, more than enough for a hundred men, and after that a barrel of
beer that was as big, and then a barrel of mead that was no smaller.

"Try the taste of that," says Ivan the Ninny.

Well, the giant did not wait to be asked twice. He lifted the barrel of
wine as if it had been a little glass, and emptied it down his throat.
He lifted the barrel of beer as if it had been an acorn, and emptied it
after the wine. Then he lifted the barrel of mead as if it had been a
very small pea, and swallowed every drop of mead that was in it. And
after that he began stamping about and breaking things. Houses fell to
pieces this way and that, and trees were swept flat like grass. Every
step the giant took was followed by the crash of breaking timbers. Then
suddenly he fell flat on his back and slept. For three days and nights
he slept without waking. At last he opened his eyes.

<span id="page_315">p. 315</span>

"Just look about you," says Ivan, "and see the damage that you've done."

"And did that little drop of drink make me do all that?" says the giant.
"Well, well, I can well understand that a drink like that can do a bit
of bragging. And after that," says he, looking at the wrecks of houses,
and all the broken things scattered about--"after that," says he, "you
can boast of me for a thousand years, and I'll have nothing against
you."

And he tugged at his great whiskers, and wrinkled his eyes, and went
striding off into the sea.

That is the story about salt, and how it made a rich man of Ivan the
Ninny, and besides, gave him the prettiest wife in the world, and she a
Tzar's daughter.

<span id="img_31200"></span> ![](img/31200.jpg)

<span id="page_316">p. 316</span>

## THE CHRISTENING IN THE VILLAGE.

<span id="img_31300"></span> ![](img/31300.jpg)

This chapter is not one of old Peter's stories, though there are,
doubtless, some stories in it. It tells how Vanya and Maroosia drove to
the village to see a new baby.

Old Peter had a sister who lived in the village not so very far away
from the forest. And she had a plump daughter, and the daughter was
called Nastasia, and she was married to a handsome peasant called
Sergie, who had three cows, a lot of pigs, and a flock of fat geese. And
one day when old Peter had gone to the village to buy tobacco and sugar
and sunflower seeds, he came back in the evening, and said to the
children,--

"There's something new in the village."

"What sort of a something?" asked Vanya.

<span id="page_317">p. 317</span>

"Alive," said old Peter.

"Is there a lot of it?" asked Vanya.

"No, only one."

"Then it can't be pigs," said Vanya, in a melancholy voice. "I thought
it was pigs."

"Perhaps it is a little calf," said Maroosia.

"I know what it is," said Vanya.

"Well?"

"It's a foal. It's brown all over with white on its nose, and a lot of
white hairs in its tail."

"No."

"What is it then, grandfather?"

"I'll tell you, little pigeons. It's small and red, and it's got a bumpy
head with hair on it like the fluff of a duckling. It has blue eyes, and
ten fingers to its fore paws, and ten toes to its hind feet--five to
each."

"It's a baby," said Maroosia.

"Yes. Nastasia has got a little son, Aunt Sofia has got a grandson, you
have got a new cousin, and I have got a new great-nephew. Think of that!
Already it's a son, and a cousin, and a grandson, and a great-nephew,
and he's only been alive twelve hours. He lost no time in taking a
position for himself. He'll be a great man one of these days if he goes
on as fast as that."

<span id="page_318">p. 318</span>

The children had jumped up as soon as they knew it was a baby.

"When is the christening?"

"The day after to-morrow."

"O grandfather!"

"Well?"

"Who is going to the christening?"

"The baby, of course."

"Yes; but other people?"

"All the village."

"And us?"

"I have to go, and I suppose there'll be room in the cart for two little
bear cubs like you."

And so it was settled that Vanya and Maroosia were to go to the
christening of their new cousin, who was only twelve hours old. All the
next day they could think of nothing else, and early on the morning of
the christening they were up and about, Maroosia seeing that Vanya had
on a clean shirt, and herself putting a green ribbon in her hair. The
sun shone, and the leaves on the trees were all new and bright, and the
sky was pale blue through the flickering green leaves.

Old Peter was up early too, harnessing the little yellow horse into the
old cart. The cart was of rough wood, without springs, like a big box
fixed on long larch poles between two pairs of wheels. The larch

<span id="page_319">p. 319</span>

poles did instead of springs, bending and creaking, as the cart moved
over the forest track. The shafts came from the front wheels upwards to
the horse's shoulders, and between the ends of them there was a tall
strong hoop of wood, called a douga, which rose high over the shoulders
of the horse, above his collar, and had two little bells hanging from it
at the top. The wooden hoop was painted green with little red flowers.
The harness was mostly of ropes, but that did not matter so long as it
held together. The horse had a long tail and mane, and looked as untidy
as a little boy; but he had a green ribbon in his forelock in honour of
the christening, and he could go like anything, and never got tired.

When all was ready, old Peter arranged a lot of soft fresh hay in the
cart for the children to sit in. Hay is the best thing in the world to
sit in when you drive in a jolting Russian cart. Old Peter put in a
tremendous lot, so that the horse could eat some of it while waiting in
the village, and yet leave them enough to make them comfortable on the
journey back. Finally, old Peter took a gun that he had spent all the
evening before in cleaning, and laid it carefully in the hay.

"What is the gun for?" asked Vanya.

"I am to be a godparent," said old Peter, "and I want to give him a

<span id="page_320">p. 320</span>

present. I could not give him a better present than a gun, for he shall
be a forester, and a good shot, and you cannot begin too early."

Presently Vanya and Maroosia were tucked into the hay, and old Peter
climbed in with the plaited reins, and away they went along the narrow
forest track, where the wheels followed the ruts and splashed through
the deep holes; for the spring was young, and the roads had not yet
dried. Some of the deepest holes had a few pine branches laid in them,
but that was the only road-mending that ever was done. Overhead were the
tall firs and silver birches with their little pale round leaves; and
somewhere, not far away, a cuckoo was calling, while the murmur of the
wild pigeons never stopped for a moment.

They drove on and on through the forest, and at last came out from among
the trees into the open country, a broad, flat plain stretching to the
river. Far away they could see the big square sail of a boat, swelled
out in the light wind, and they knew that there was the river, on the
banks of which stood the village. They could see a small clump of trees,
and, as they came nearer, the pale green cupolas of the white village
church rising above the tops of the birches.

<span id="page_321">p. 321</span>

Presently they came to a rough wooden bridge, and crossed over a little
stream that was on its way to join the big river.

Vanya looked at it.

"Grandfather," he asked, "when the frost went, which was water
first--the big river or the little river?"

"Why, the little river, of course," said old Peter. "It's always the
little streams that wake first in the spring, and running down to the
big river make it swell and flood and break up the ice. It's always been
so ever since the quarrel between the Vazouza and the Volga."

"What was that?" said Vanya.

"It was like this," said old Peter.

The Vazouza and the Volga flow for a long way side by side, and then
they join and flow together. And the Vazouza is a little river; but the
Volga is the mother of all Russia, and the greatest river in the world.

And the little Vazouza was jealous of the Volga.

"You are big and noisy," she says to the Volga, "and terribly strong;
but as for brains," says she, "why, I have more brains in a single
ripple than you in all that lump of water."

<span id="page_322">p. 322</span>

Of course the Volga told her not to be so rude, and said that little
rivers should know their place and not argue with the great.

But the Vazouza would not keep quiet, and at last she said to the Volga:
"Look here, we will lie down and sleep, and we will agree that the one
of us who wakes first and comes first to the sea is the wiser of the
two."

And the Volga said, "Very well, if only you will stop talking."

So the little Vazouza and the big Volga lay and slept, white and still,
all through the winter. And when the spring came, the little Vazouza
woke first, brisk and laughing and hurrying, and rushed away as hard as
she could go towards the sea. When the Volga woke the little Vazouza was
already far ahead. But the Volga did not hurry. She woke slowly and
shook the ice from herself, and then came roaring after the Vazouza, a
huge foaming flood of angry water.

And the little Vazouza listened as she ran, and she heard the Volga
coming after her; and when the Volga caught her up--a tremendous foaming
river, whirling along trees and blocks of ice--she was frightened, and
she said,--

"O Volga, let me be your little sister. I will never argue with you

<span id="page_323">p. 323</span>

any more. You are wiser than I and stronger than I. Only take me by the
hand and bring me with you to the sea."

And the Volga forgave the little Vazouza, and took her by the hand and
brought her safely to the sea. And they have never quarrelled again. But
all the same, it is always the little Vazouza that gets up first in the
spring, and tugs at the white blankets of ice and snow, and wakes her
big sister from her winter sleep.

They drove on over the flat open country, with no hedges, but only
ditches to drain off the floods, and very often not even ditches to
divide one field from another. And huge crows, with gray hoods and
shawls, pecked about in the grass at the roadside or flew heavily in the
sunshine. They passed a little girl with a flock of geese, and another
little girl lying in the grass holding a long rope which was fastened to
the horns of a brown cow. And the little girl lay on her face and slept
among the flowers, while the cow walked slowly round her, step by step,
chewing the grass and thinking about nothing at all.

And at last they came to the village, where the road was wider; and
instead of one pair of ruts there were dozens, and the cart bumped worse
than ever. The broad earthy road had no stones in it; and in

<span id="page_324">p. 324</span>

places where the puddles would have been deeper than the axles of the
wheels, it had been mended by laying down fir logs and small branches in
the puddles, and putting a few spadefuls of earth on the top of them.

The road ran right through the village. On either side of it were little
wooden huts. The ends of the timbers crossed outside at the four corners
of the huts. They fitted neatly into each other, and some of them were
carved. And there were no slates or tiles on the roofs, but little thin
slips of wood overlapping each other. There was not a single stone hut
or cottage in the village. Only the church was partly brick,
whitewashed, with bright green cupolas up in the air, and thin gold
crosses on the tops of the cupolas, shining in the clear sky.

Outside the church were rows of short posts, with long rough fir timbers
nailed on the top of them, to which the country people tied their horses
when they came to church. There were several carts there already, with
bright-coloured rugs lying on the hay in them; and the horses were
eating hay or biting the logs. Always, except when the logs are quite
new, you can tell the favourite places for tying up horses to them,
because the timbers will have deep holes in them,

<span id="page_325">p. 325</span>

where they have been gnawed away by the horses' teeth. They bite the
timbers, while their masters eat sunflower seeds, not for food, but to
pass the time.

"Now then," said old Peter, as he got down from the cart, tied the
horse, gave him an armful of hay from the cart, and lifted the children
out. "Be quick. We shall be late if we don't take care. I believe we are
late already.--Good health to you, Fedor," he said to an old peasant;
"and has the baby gone in?"

"He has, Peter. And my health is not so bad; and how is yours?"

"Good also, Fedor, thanks be to God. And will you see to these two? for
I am a god-parent, and must be near the priest."

"Willingly," said the old peasant Fedor. "How they do grow, to be sure,
like young birch trees. Come along then, little pigeons."

Old Peter hurried into the church, followed by Fedor with Vanya and
Maroosia. They all crossed themselves and said a prayer as they went in.

The ceremony was just beginning.

The priest, in his silk robes, was standing before the gold and painted
screen at the end of the church, and there were the basin of holy water,
and old Peter's sister, and the nurse Babka Tanya, very

<span id="page_326">p. 326</span>

proud, holding the baby in a roll of white linen, and rocking it to and
fro. There were coloured pictures of saints all over the screen, which
stretches from one side of the church to the other. Some of the pictures
were framed in gilt frames under glass, and were partly painted and
partly metal. The faces and hands of the saints were painted, and their
clothes were glittering silver or gold. Little lamps were burning in
front of them, and candles.

A Russian christening is very different from an English one. For one
thing, the baby goes right into the water, not once, but three times.
Babka Tanya unrolled the baby, and the priest covered its face with his
hand, and down it went under the water, once, twice, and again. Then he
took some of the sacred ointment on his finger and anointed the baby's
forehead, and feet, and hands, and little round stomach. Then, with a
pair of scissors, he cut a little pinch of fluff from the baby's head,
and rolled it into a pellet with the ointment, and threw the pellet into
the holy water. And after that the baby was carried solemnly three times
round the holy water. The priest blessed it and prayed for it; and there
it was, a little true Russian, ready to be

<span id="page_327">p. 327</span>

carried back to its mother, Nastasia, who lay at home in her cottage
waiting for it.

When they got outside the church, they all went to Nastasia's cottage to
congratulate her on her baby, and to tell her what good lungs it had,
and what a handsome face, and how it was exactly like its father.

Nastasia smiled at Vanya and Maroosia; but they had no eyes except for
the baby, and for all that belonged to it, especially its cradle. Now a
Russian baby has a very much finer cradle than an English baby. A long
fir pole is fastened in the middle and at one end to the beams in the
ceiling of the hut, so that the other end swings free, just below the
rafters. From this end is hung a big basket, and on the ropes by which
the basket hangs are fastened shawls of bright colours. The baby is
tucked in the basket, the shawls closed round it; and as the mother or
the nurse sits at her spinning, she just kicks the basket gently now and
again, and it swings up and down from the end of the pole, as if it were
hung from the branch of a tree.

This baby had a fine new basket and a larch pole, newly fixed, white and
shining, under the dark beams of the ceiling. It had presents besides
old Peter's gun. It had a fine wooden spoon with a picture on

<span id="page_328">p. 328</span>

it of a cottage and a fish. It had a wooden bowl and a painted mug,
bought from one of the peddling barges that go up and down the rivers
selling chairs and crockery, just like the caravans that travel our
English roads. And also, although it was so young, it had a little
sacred picture, made of metal, a picture of St. Nikolai; because this
was St. Nikolai's day, and the baby was called Nikolai.

There was a samovar already steaming in the cottage, and a great cake of
pastry, and cabbage and egg and fish. And there were cabbage soup with
sour cream, and black bread and a little white bread, and red kisel
jelly and a huge jug of milk.

And everybody ate and drank and talked as if they were never going to
stop. The sun was warm, and presently the men went outside and sat on a
log, leaning their backs against the wall of the hut and making
cigarettes and smoking, or eating sunflower seeds, cracking the husks
with their teeth, taking out the white kernels, and blowing the husks
away. And the women sat in the hut, and now and then brought out glasses
of hot tea to the men, and then went back again to talk of what a fine
man the baby would be, and to remember other babies. And the old women
looked at the young mothers and laughed, and said that

<span id="page_329">p. 329</span>

they could remember the days when they were christened--when they were
babies themselves, no bigger than the little Nikolai who swung in the
basket and squalled, or slept proudly, just as if he knew that all the
world belonged to him because he was so very young. And Vanya and
Maroosia ate sunflower seeds too, and sometimes played outside the
cottage and sometimes inside; but mostly stood very quiet close to the
swinging cradle, waiting till old Babka Tanya, the nurse, should pull
the shawls a little way aside and let them see the pink, crumpled face
of the little Nikolai, and the yellow fluff, just like a duckling's,
which covered his bumpy pink head.

At last, towards evening, old Peter packed what was left of the hay into
the cart, and packed Vanya and Maroosia in with the hay. Everybody said
good-byes all round, and Peter climbed in and took up the rope reins.

"He'll be a fine man," he shouted through the door to Nastasia, "a fine
man; and God grant he'll be as healthy as he is good.--Till we meet
again," he cried out merrily to the villagers; and Vanya and Maroosia
waved their hands, and off they drove, back again to the hut in the
forest.

<span id="page_330">p. 330</span>

They were very much quieter on the way back than they had been when they
drove to the village in the morning. And the early summer day was quiet
as it came to its end. There was a corncrake rattling in the fields, and
more than once they saw frogs hop out of the road as they drove by in
the twilight. A hare ran before them through the dusk and disappeared.
And when they came to the wooden bridge over the stream, a tall gray
bird with a long beak rose up from the bank and flew slowly away,
carrying his long legs, like a thin pair of crutches, straight out
behind him.

"Who is that?" asked Vanya sleepily from his nest in the hay.

"That is Mr. Crane," said old Peter. "Perhaps he is on his way to visit
Miss Heron and tell her that this time he has really made up his mind,
and to ask her to let bygones be bygones."

"What bygones?" said Vanya.

Old Peter watched the crane's slow, steady flight above the low marshy
ground on either side of the stream, and then he said,--

"Why, surely you know all about that. It is an old story, little one,
and I must have told it you a dozen times."

"No, never, grandfather," said Maroosia. She was nearly as sleepy as

<span id="page_331">p. 331</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Vanya after the
day in the village, and the fuss and pleasure of the christening.

"Oh, well," said old Peter; and he told the tale of Mr. Crane and Miss
Heron as the cart bumped slowly along the rough road, while Vanya and
Maroosia looked out with sleepy eyes from their nest of hay and
listened, and the sky turned green, and the trees grew dim, and the
frogs croaked in the ditches.

Mr. Crane and Miss Heron lived in a marsh five miles across from end to
end. They lived there, and fed on the frogs which they caught in their
long bills, and held up in the air for a moment, and then swallowed,
standing on one leg. The marsh was always damp, and there were always
plenty of frogs, and life went well for them, except that they saw very
little company. They had no one to pass the time of day with. For Mr.
Crane had built his little hut on one side of the marsh, and Miss Heron
had built hers on the other.

So it came into the head of Mr. Crane that it was dull work living
alone. If only I were married, he thought, there would be two of us to
drink our tea beside the samovar at night, and I should not spend my
evenings in melancholy, thinking only of frogs. I will go to see Miss
Heron, and I will offer to marry her.

So off he flew to the other side of the marsh, flap, flap, with his

<span id="page_332">p. 332</span>

legs hanging out behind, just as we saw him to-night. He came to the
other side of the marsh, and flew down to the hut of Miss Heron. He
tapped on the door with his long beak.

"Is Miss Heron at home?"

"At home," said Miss Heron.

"Will you marry me?" said Mr. Crane.

"Of course I won't," said Miss Heron; "your legs are long and
ill-shaped, and your coat is short, and you fly awkwardly, and you are
not even rich. You would have no dainties to feed me with. Off with you,
long-bodied one, and don't come bothering me."

She shut the door in his face.

Mr. Crane looked the fool he thought himself, and went off home, wishing
he had never made the journey.

But as soon as he was gone, Miss Heron, sitting alone in her hut, began
to think things over and to be sorry she had spoken in such a hurry.

"After all," thinks she, "it is poor work living alone. And Mr. Crane,
in spite of what I said about his looks, is really a handsome enough
young fellow. Indeed at evening, when he stands on one leg, he is very
handsome indeed. Yes, I will go and marry him."

<span id="page_333">p. 333</span>

So off flew Miss Heron, flap, flap, over five miles of marsh, and came
to the hut of Mr. Crane.

"Is the master at home?"

"At home," said Mr. Crane.

"Ah, Mr. Crane," said Miss Heron, "I was chaffing you just now. When
shall we be married?"

"No, Miss Heron," said Mr. Crane; "I have no need of you at all. I do
not wish to marry, and I would not take you for my wife even if I did.
Clear out, and let me see the last of you." He shut the door.

Miss Heron wept tears of shame, that ran from her eyes down her long
bill and dropped one by one to the ground. Then she flew away home,
wishing she had not come.

As soon as she was gone Mr. Crane began to think, and he said to
himself, "What a fool I was to be so short with Miss Heron! It's dull
living alone. Since she wants it, I will marry her." And he flew off
after Miss Heron. He came to her hut, and told her,--

"Miss Heron, I have thought things over. I have decided to marry you."

"Mr. Crane," said Miss Heron, "I, too, have thought things over. I would
not marry you, not for ten thousand young frogs."

<span id="page_334">p. 334</span>

Off flew Mr. Crane.

As soon as he was gone Miss Heron thought, "Why didn't I agree to marry
Mr. Crane? It's dull alone. I will go at once and tell him I have
changed my mind."

She flew off to betroth herself; but Mr. Crane would have none of her,
and she flew back again.

And so they go on to this day--first one and then the other flying
across the marsh with an offer of marriage, and flying back with shame.
They have never married, and never will.

"Grandfather," whispered Maroosia, tugging at old Peter's sleeve, "Vanya
is asleep."

They drove on through the forest silently, except for the creaking of
the cart and the loud singing of the nightingales in the tops of the
tall firs. They came at last to their hut.

"Ah!" said old Peter, as he lifted them out, first one and then the
other; "it isn't only Vanya who's asleep." And he carried them in, and
put them to bed without waking them.

### THE END.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3"></span>[279:4](oprt21.htm#fr_4) The little man was
really one arshin high, and his beard was seven arshins long. An arshin
is 0.77 of a yard, so any one who knows decimals can tell exactly how
high the little man was and the precise length of his beard.

 
