[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends/Sagas](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oprt18)  [Next](oprt20.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1603123210/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002IKKL9K/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Old Peter's Russian Tales*, by Arthur Ransome, \[1916\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

### THE FIRE-BIRD, THE HORSE OF POWER, AND THE PRINCESS VASILISSA.

<span id="img_23900"></span> ![](img/23900.jpg)

Once upon a time a strong and powerful Tzar ruled in a country far away.
And among his servants was a young archer, and this archer had a
horse--a horse of power--such a horse as belonged to the wonderful men
of long ago--a great horse with a broad chest, eyes like fire, and hoofs
of iron. There are no such horses nowadays. They sleep with the strong
men who rode them, the bogatirs, until the time comes when Russia has
need of them. Then the great horses will thunder up from under the
ground, and the valiant men leap from the graves in the armour they have
worn so long. The strong men will sit those horses of power, and there
will be swinging of clubs and thunder of hoofs, and

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

the earth will be swept clean from the enemies of God and the Tzar. So
my grandfather used to say, and he was as much older than I as I am
older than you, little ones, and so he should know.

Well, one day long ago, in the green time of the year, the young archer
rode through the forest on his horse of power. The trees were green;
there were little blue flowers on the ground under the trees; the
squirrels ran in the branches, and the hares in the undergrowth; but no
birds sang. The young archer rode along the forest path and listened for
the singing of the birds, but there was no singing. The forest was
silent, and the only noises in it were the scratching of four-footed
beasts, the dropping of fir cones, and the heavy stamping of the horse
of power in the soft path.

"What has come to the birds?" said the young archer.

He had scarcely said this before he saw a big curving feather lying in
the path before him. The feather was larger than a swan's, larger than
an eagle's. It lay in the path, glittering like a flame; for the sun was
on it, and it was a feather of pure gold. Then he knew why there was no
singing in the forest. For he knew that the firebird had flown

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

that way, and that the feather in the path before him was a feather from
its burning breast.

The horse of power spoke and said,--

"Leave the golden feather where it lies. If you take it you will be
sorry for it, and know the meaning of fear."

But the brave young archer sat on the horse of power and looked at the
golden feather, and wondered whether to take it or not. He had no wish
to learn what it was to be afraid, but he thought, "If I take it and
bring it to the Tzar my master, he will be pleased; and he will not send
me away with empty hands, for no Tzar in the world has a feather from
the burning breast of the fire-bird." And the more he thought, the more
he wanted to carry the feather to the Tzar. And in the end he did not
listen to the words of the horse of power. He leapt from the saddle,
picked up the golden feather of the fire-bird, mounted his horse again,
and galloped back through the green forest till he came to the palace of
the Tzar.

He went into the palace, and bowed before the Tzar and said,--

"O Tzar, I have brought you a feather of the fire-bird."

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

The Tzar looked gladly at the feather, and then at the young archer.

"Thank you," says he; "but if you have brought me a feather of the
fire-bird, you will be able to bring me the bird itself. I should like
to see it. A feather is not a fit gift to bring to the Tzar. Bring the
bird itself, or, I swear by my sword, your head shall no longer sit
between your shoulders!"

The young archer bowed his head and went out. Bitterly he wept, for he
knew now what it was to be afraid. He went out into the courtyard, where
the horse of power was waiting for him, tossing its head and stamping on
the ground.

"Master," says the horse of power, "why do you weep?"

"The Tzar has told me to bring him the firebird, and no man on earth can
do that," says the young archer, and he bowed his head on his breast.

"I told you," says the horse of power, "that if you took the feather you
would learn the meaning of fear. Well, do not be frightened yet, and do
not weep. The trouble is not now; the trouble lies before you. Go to the
Tzar and ask him to have a hundred sacks of maize scattered

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

over the open field, and let this be done at midnight."

The young archer went back into the palace and begged the Tzar for this,
and the Tzar ordered that at midnight a hundred sacks of maize should be
scattered in the open field.

Next morning, at the first redness in the sky, the young archer rode out
on the horse of power, and came to the open field. The ground was
scattered all over with maize. In the middle of the field stood a great
oak with spreading boughs. The young archer leapt to the ground, took
off the saddle, and let the horse of power loose to wander as he pleased
about the field. Then he climbed up into the oak and hid himself among
the green boughs.

The sky grew red and gold, and the sun rose. Suddenly there was a noise
in the forest round the field. The trees shook and swayed, and almost
fell. There was a mighty wind. The sea piled itself into waves with
crests of foam, and the firebird came flying from the other side of the
world. Huge and golden and flaming in the sun, it flew, dropped down
with open wings into the field, and began to eat the maize.

The horse of power wandered in the field. This way he went, and that,

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

but always he came a little nearer to the fire-bird. Nearer and nearer
came the horse. He came close up to the firebird, and then suddenly
stepped on one of its spreading fiery wings and pressed it heavily to
the ground. The bird struggled, flapping mightily with its fiery wings,
but it could not get away. The young archer slipped down from the tree,
bound the fire-bird with three strong ropes, swung it on his back,
saddled the horse, and rode to the palace of the Tzar.

The young archer stood before the Tzar, and his back was bent under the
great weight of the fire-bird, and the broad wings of the bird hung on
either side of him like fiery shields, and there was a trail of golden
feathers on the floor. The young archer swung the magic bird to the foot
of the throne before the Tzar; and the Tzar was glad, because since the
beginning of the world no Tzar had seen the fire-bird flung before him
like a wild duck caught in a snare.

The Tzar looked at the fire-bird and laughed with pride. Then he lifted
his eyes and looked at the young archer, and says he,--

"As you have known how to take the fire-bird, you will know how to bring
me my bride, for whom I have long been waiting. In the land of Never, on
the very edge of the world, where the red sun rises in flame

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

from behind the sea, lives the Princess Vasilissa. I will marry none but
her. Bring her to me, and I will reward you with silver and gold. But if
you do not bring her, then, by my sword, your head will no longer sit
between your shoulders!"

The young archer wept bitter tears, and went out into the courtyard,
where the horse of power was, stamping the ground with its hoofs of iron
and tossing its thick mane.

"Master, why do you weep?" asked the horse of power.

"The Tzar has ordered me to go to the land of Never, and to bring back
the Princess Vasilissa."

"Do not weep--do not grieve. The trouble is not yet; the trouble is to
come. Go to the Tzar and ask him for a silver tent with a golden roof,
and for all kinds of food and drink to take with us on the journey."

The young archer went in and asked the Tzar for this, and the Tzar gave
him a silver tent with silver hangings and a gold-embroidered roof, and
every kind of rich wine and the tastiest of foods.

Then the young archer mounted the horse of power and rode off to the
land of Never. On and on he rode, many days and nights, and came at

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

last to the edge of the world, where the red sun rises in flame from
behind the deep blue sea.

On the shore of the sea the young archer reined in the horse of power,
and the heavy hoofs of the horse sank in the sand. He shaded his eyes
and looked out over the blue water, and there was the Princess Vasilissa
in a little silver boat, rowing with golden oars.

The young archer rode back a little way to where the sand ended and the
green world began. There he loosed the horse to wander where he pleased,
and to feed on the green grass. Then on the edge of the shore, where the
green grass ended and grew thin and the sand began, he set up the
shining tent, with its silver hangings and its gold embroidered roof. In
the tent he set out the tasty dishes and the rich flagons of wine which
the Tzar had given him, and he sat himself down in the tent and began to
regale himself, while he waited for the Princess Vasilissa.

The Princess Vasilissa dipped her golden oars in the blue water, and the
little silver boat moved lightly through the dancing waves. She sat in
the little boat and looked over the blue sea to the edge of the world,
and there, between the golden sand and the green earth, she saw the tent
standing, silver and gold in the sun. She dipped her oars,

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

and came nearer to see it the better. The nearer she came the fairer
seemed the tent, and at last she rowed to the shore and grounded her
little boat on the golden sand, and stepped out daintily and came up to
the tent. She was a little frightened, and now and again she stopped and
looked back to where the silver boat lay on the sand with the blue sea
beyond it. The young archer said not a word, but went on regaling
himself on the pleasant dishes he had set out there in the tent.

At last the Princess Vasilissa came up to the tent and looked in.

The young archer rose and bowed before her. Says he,--

"Good-day to you, Princess! Be so kind as to come in and take bread and
salt with me, and taste my foreign wines."

And the Princess Vasilissa came into the tent and sat down with the
young archer, and ate sweetmeats with him, and drank his health in a
golden goblet of the wine the Tzar had given him. Now this wine was
heavy, and the last drop from the goblet had no sooner trickled down her
little slender throat than her eyes closed against her will, once,
twice, and again.

"Ah me!" says the Princess, "it is as if the night itself had perched on
my eyelids, and yet it is but noon."

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

And the golden goblet dropped to the ground from her little fingers, and
she leant back on a cushion and fell instantly asleep. If she had been
beautiful before, she was lovelier still when she lay in that deep sleep
in the shadow of the tent.

Quickly the young archer called to the horse of power. Lightly he lifted
the Princess in his strong young arms. Swiftly he leapt with her into
the saddle. Like a feather she lay in the hollow of his left arm, and
slept while the iron hoofs of the great horse thundered over the ground.

They came to the Tzar's palace, and the young archer leapt from the
horse of power and carried the Princess into the palace. Great was the
joy of the Tzar; but it did not last for long.

"Go, sound the trumpets for our wedding," he said to his servants; "let
all the bells be rung."

The bells rang out and the trumpets sounded, and at the noise of the
horns and the ringing of the bells the Princess Vasilissa woke up and
looked about her.

"What is this ringing of bells," says she, "and this noise of trumpets?
And where, oh, where is the blue sea, and my little silver

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

boat with its golden oars?" And the Princess put her hand to her eyes.

"The blue sea is far away," says the Tzar, "and for your little silver
boat I give you a golden throne. The trumpets sound for our wedding, and
the bells are ringing for our joy."

But the Princess turned her face away from the Tzar; and there was no
wonder in that, for he was old, and his eyes were not kind.

And she looked with love at the young archer; and there was no wonder in
that either, for he was a young man fit to ride the horse of power.

The Tzar was angry with the Princess Vasilissa, but his anger was as
useless as his joy.

"Why, Princess," says he, "will you not marry me, and forget your blue
sea and your silver boat?"

"In the middle of the deep blue sea lies a great stone," says the
Princess, "and under that stone is hidden my wedding dress. If I cannot
wear that dress I will marry nobody at all."

Instantly the Tzar turned to the young archer, who was waiting before
the throne.

"Ride swiftly back," says he, "to the land of Never, where the red sun
rises in flame. There--do you hear what the Princess says?--a great
stone lies in the middle of the sea. Under that stone is hidden her

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

wedding dress. Ride swiftly. Bring back that dress, or, by my sword,
your head shall no longer sit between your shoulders!"

The young archer wept bitter tears, and went out into the courtyard,
where the horse of power was waiting for him, champing its golden bit.

"There is no way of escaping death this time," he said.

"Master, why do you weep?" asked the horse of power.

"The Tzar has ordered me to ride to the land of Never, to fetch the
wedding dress of the Princess Vasilissa from the bottom of the deep blue
sea. Besides, the dress is wanted for the Tzar's wedding, and I love the
Princess myself."

"What did I tell you?" says the horse of power. "I told you that there
would be trouble if you picked up the golden feather from the firebird's
burning breast. Well, do not be afraid. The trouble is not yet; the
trouble is to come. Up! into the saddle with you, and away for the
wedding dress of the Princess Vasilissa!"

The young archer leapt into the saddle, and the horse of power, with his
thundering hoofs, carried him swiftly through the green forests and over
the bare plains, till they came to the edge of the world, to the land of
Never, where the red sun rises in flame from behind the

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

deep blue sea. There they rested, at the very edge of the sea.

The young archer looked sadly over the wide waters, but the horse of
power tossed its mane and did not look at the sea, but on the shore.
This way and that it looked, and saw at last a huge lobster moving
slowly, sideways, along the golden sand.

Nearer and nearer came the lobster, and it was a giant among lobsters,
the Tzar of all the lobsters; and it moved slowly along the shore, while
the horse of power moved carefully and as if by accident, until it stood
between the lobster and the sea. Then, when the lobster came close by,
the horse of power lifted an iron hoof and set it firmly on the
lobster's tail.

"You will be the death of me!" screamed the lobster--as well he might,
with the heavy foot of the horse of power pressing his tail into the
sand. "Let me live, and I will do whatever you ask of me."

"Very well," says the horse of power; "we will let you live," and he
slowly lifted his foot. "But this is what you shall do for us. In the
middle of the blue sea lies a great stone, and under that stone is
hidden the wedding dress of the Princess Vasilissa. Bring it here."

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

The lobster groaned with the pain in his tail. Then he cried out in a
voice that could be heard all over the deep blue sea. And the sea was
disturbed, and from all sides lobsters in thousands made their way
towards the bank. And the huge lobster that was the oldest of them all
and the Tzar of all the lobsters that live between the rising and the
setting of the sun, gave them the order and sent them back into the sea.
And the young archer sat on the horse of power and waited.

After a little time the sea was disturbed again, and the lobsters in
their thousands came to the shore, and with them they brought a golden
casket in which was the wedding dress of the Princess Vasilissa. They
had taken it from under the great stone that lay in the middle of the
sea.

The Tzar of all the lobsters raised himself painfully on his bruised
tail and gave the casket into the hands of the young archer, and
instantly the horse of power turned himself about and galloped back to
the palace of the Tzar, far, far away, at the other side of the green
forests and beyond the treeless plains.

The young archer went into the palace and gave the casket into the hands
of the Princess, and looked at her with sadness in his eyes, and she
looked at him with love. Then she went away into an inner chamber,

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

and came back in her wedding dress, fairer than the spring itself. Great
was the joy of the Tzar. The wedding feast was made ready, and the bells
rang, and flags waved above the palace.

The Tzar held out his hand to the Princess, and looked at her with his
old eyes. But she would not take his hand.

"No," says she; "I will marry nobody until the man who brought me here
has done penance in boiling water."

Instantly the Tzar turned to his servants and ordered them to make a
great fire, and to fill a great cauldron with water and set it on the
fire, and, when the water should be at its hottest, to take the young
archer and throw him into it, to do penance for having taken the
Princess Vasilissa away from the land of Never.

There was no gratitude in the mind of that Tzar.

Swiftly the servants brought wood and made a mighty fire, and on it they
laid a huge cauldron of water, and built the fire round the walls of the
cauldron. The fire burned hot and the water steamed. The fire burned
hotter, and the water bubbled and seethed. They made ready to take the
young archer, to throw him into the cauldron.

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

"Oh, misery!" thought the young archer. "Why did I ever take the golden
feather that had fallen from the fire-bird's burning breast? Why did I
not listen to the wise words of the horse of power?" And he remembered
the horse of power, and he begged the Tzar,--

"O lord Tzar, I do not complain. I shall presently die in the heat of
the water on the fire. Suffer me, before I die, once more to see my
horse."

"Let him see his horse," says the Princess.

"Very well," says the Tzar. "Say good-bye to your horse, for you will
not ride him again. But let your farewells be short, for we are
waiting."

The young archer crossed the courtyard and came to the horse of power,
who was scraping the ground with his iron hoofs.

"Farewell, my horse of power," says the young archer. "I should have
listened to your words of wisdom, for now the end is come, and we shall
never more see the green trees pass above us and the ground disappear
beneath us, as we race the wind between the earth and the sky."

"Why so?" says the horse of power.

"The Tzar has ordered that I am to be boiled to death--thrown into that
cauldron that is seething on the great fire."

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

"Fear not," says the horse of power, "for the Princess Vasilissa has
made him do this, and the end of these things is better than I thought.
Go back, and when they are ready to throw you in the cauldron, do you
run boldly and leap yourself into the boiling water."

The young archer went back across the courtyard, and the servants made
ready to throw him into the cauldron.

"Are you sure that the water is boiling?" says the Princess Vasilissa.

"It bubbles and seethes," said the servants.

"Let me see for myself," says the Princess, and she went to the fire and
waved her hand above the cauldron. And some say there was something in
her hand, and some say there was not.

"It is boiling," says she, and the servants laid hands on the young
archer; but he threw them from him, and ran and leapt boldly before them
all into the very middle of the cauldron.

Twice he sank below the surface, borne round with the bubbles and foam
of the boiling water. Then he leapt from the cauldron and stood before
the Tzar and the Princess. He had become so beautiful a youth that all
who saw cried aloud in wonder.

"This is a miracle," says the Tzar. And the Tzar looked at the

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

beautiful young archer, and thought of himself--of his age, of his bent
back, and his gray beard, and his toothless gums. "I too will become
beautiful," thinks he, and he rose from his throne and clambered into
the cauldron, and was boiled to death in a moment.

And the end of the story? They buried the Tzar, and made the young
archer Tzar in his place. He married the Princess Vasilissa, and lived
many years with her in love and good fellowship. And he built a golden
stable for the horse of power, and never forgot what he owed to him.

<span id="img_25600"></span> ![](img/25600.jpg)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Hunter and His Wife](oprt20.md)
