[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rosa03)  [Next](rosa05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00295RH64/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Religion of the Samurai*, by Kaiten Nukariya, \[1913\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER II

## HISTORY OF ZEN IN JAPAN

1\. **The Establishment of the Rin Zai\[1\] School of Zen in
Japan**.--The introduction of Zen into the island empire is dated as
early as the seventh century;\[2\] but it was in 1191 that it was first
established by Ei-sai, a man of bold, energetic nature. He crossed the
sea for China at the age of twenty-eight in 1168, after his profound
study of the

\[1. The Lin Tsi school was started by Nan Yoh, a prominent disciple of
the Sixth Patriarch, and completed by Lin Tsi or Rin Zai.

2 Zen was first introduced into Japan by Do sha (629-700) as early as
653-656, at the time when the Fifth Patriarch just entered his
patriarchal career. Do-sho went over to China in 653, and met with Hüen
Tsang, the celebrated and great scholar, who taught him the doctrine of
the Dharma-laksana. It was Hüen Tsang who advised Do-sho to study Zen
under Hwui Man (E-man). After returning home, he built a Meditation Hall
for the purpose of practising Zen in the Gan-go monastery, Nara. Thus
Zen was first transplanted into Japan by Do-sho, but it took no root in
the soil at that time.

Next a Chinese Zen teacher, I Kung (Gi-ku), came over to Japan in about
810, and under his instruction the Empress Danrin, a most enthusiastic
Buddhist, was enlightened. She erected a monastery named Dan-rin-ji, and
appointed I Kung the abbot of it for the sake of propagating the faith.
It being of no purpose, however, I Kung went back to China after some
years.

Thirdly, Kaku-a in 1171 went over to China, where he studied Zen under
Fuh Hai (Buk-kai), who belonged to the Yang Ki (Yo-gi) school, and came
home after three years. Being questioned by the Emperor Taka-kura
(1169-1180) about the doctrine of Zen, he uttered no word, but took up a
flute and played on it. But his first note was too high to be caught by
the ordinary ear, and was gone without producing any echo in the court
nor in society at large.\]

whole Tripitaka\[1\] for eight years in the Hi-yei Monastery\[2\] the
then centre of Japanese Buddhism. After visiting holy places and great
monasteries, he came home, bringing with him over thirty different books
on the doctrine of the Ten-Dai Sect.\[3\] This, instead of quenching,
added fuel to his burning desire for adventurous travel abroad. So he
crossed the sea over again in 1187, this time intending to make
pilgrimage to India; and no one can tell what might have been the result
if the Chinese authorities did not forbid him to cross the border.
Thereon he turned his attention to the study of Zen, and after five
years' discipline succeeded in getting sanction for his spiritual
attainment by the Hü Ngan (Kio-an), a noted master of the Rin Zai
school, the then abbot of the monastery of Tien Tung Shan (Ten-do-san).
His active propaganda of Zen was commenced soon after his return in 1191
with splendid success at a newly built temple\[4\] in the province of
Chiku-zen. In 1202 Yori-iye, the Shogun, or the real governor of the
State at that time, erected the monastery of Ken-nin-ji in the city of
Kyo-to, and invited him to proceed to the metropolis. Accordingly he
settled himself down in that temple, and taught Zen with his
characteristic activity.

\[1. The three divisions of the Buddhist canon, viz.:

\(1\) Sutra-pitaka, or a collection of doctrinal books.  
(2) Vinaya-pitaka, or a collection of works on discipline.  
(3) Abhidharma-pitaka, or a collection of philosophical and expository
works.

2 The great monastery erected in 788 by Sai-cho (767-822), the founder
of the Japanese Ten Dai Sect, known as Den Gyo Dai Shi.

3 The sect was named after its founder in China, Chi 1 (538-597), who
lived in the monastery of Tien Tai Shan (Ten-dai-san), and was called
the Great Teacher of Tien Tai. In 804 Den-gyo went over to China by the
Imperial order, and received the transmission of the doctrine from Tao
Sui (Do-sui), a patriarch of the sect. After his return he erected a
monastery on Mount Hi-yei, which became the centre of Buddhistic
learning.

4 He erected the monastery of Sho-fuku-ji in 1195, which is still
prospering.\]

This provoked the envy and wrath of the Ten Dai and the Shin Gon\[1\]
teachers, who presented memorials to the Imperial court to protest
against his propagandism of the new faith. Taking advantage of the
protests, Ei-sai wrote a book entitled Ko-zen-go-koku-ron ('The
Protection of the State by the Propagation of Zen'), and not only
explained his own position, but exposed the ignorance 2 of the
protestants. Thus at last his merit was appreciated by the Emperor
Tsuchi-mikado (1199-1210), and he was promoted to So Jo, the highest
rank in the Buddhist priesthood, together with the gift of a purple robe
in 1206. Some time after this he went to the city of Kama-kura, the
political centre, being invited by Sane-tomo, the Shogun, and laid the
foundation of the so-called Kama-kura Zen, still prospering at the
present moment.

2\. **The Introduction of the So-To School\[3\] of Zen**.--Although the
Rin Zai school was, as mentioned above, established by Ei-sai, yet he
himself was not a pure Zen teacher, being a Ten Dai scholar as well as
an experienced practiser of Mantra. The first establishment of Zen in
its

\[1. The Shin Gon or Mantra Sect is based on
Mahavairocanabhi-sambodhi-sutra, Vajraçekhara-sutra, and other
Mantra-sutras. It was established in China by Vajrabodhi and his
disciple Amoahavajra, who came from India in 720. Ku kai (774-835), well
known as Ko Bo Dai Shi, went to China in 804, and received the
transmission of the doctrine from Hwui Kwo (Kei-ka), a, disciple of
Amoghavajra. In 806 he came back and propagated the faith almost all
over the country. For the detail see 'A Short History of the Twelve
Japanese Buddhist Sects' (chap. viii.), by Dr. Nanjo.

2 Sai-cho, the founder of the Japanese Ten Dai Sect, first learned the
doctrine of the Northern School of Zen under Gyo-hyo (died in 797), and
afterwards he pursued the study of the same faith under Siao Jan in
China. Therefore to oppose the propagation of Zen is, for Ten Dai
priests, as much as to oppose the founder of their own sect.

3 This school was started by Tsing-Yuen (Sei-gen), an eminent disciple
of the Sixth Patriarch, and completed by Tsing Shan (To-zan).\]

purest form was done by Do-gen, now known as Jo Yo Dai Shi. Like Ei-sai,
he was admitted into the Hi-yei Monastery at an early age, and devoted
himself to the study of the Canon. As his scriptural knowledge
increased, he was troubled by inexpressible doubts and fears, as is
usual with great religious teachers. Consequently, one day he consulted
his uncle, Ko-in, a distinguished Ten Dai scholar, about his troubles.
The latter, being unable to satisfy him, recommended him Ei-sai, the
founder of the new faith. But as Ei-sai died soon afterwards, he felt
that he had no competent teacher left, and crossed the sea for China, at
the age of twenty-four, in 1223. There he was admitted into the
monastery of Tien Tung Shan (Ten-do-san), and assigned the lowest seat
in the hall, simply because be was a foreigner. Against this affront he
strongly protested. In the Buddhist community, he said, all were
brothers, and there was no difference of nationality. The only way to
rank the brethren was by seniority, and he therefore claimed to occupy
his proper rank. Nobody, however, lent an ear to the poor new-comer's
protest, so he appealed twice to the Chinese Emperor Ning Tsung
(1195-1224), and by the Imperial order he gained his object.

After four years' study and discipline, he was Enlightened and
acknowledged as the successor by his master Jü Tsing (Nyo-jo died in
1228), who belonged to the Tsao Tung (So To) school. He came home in
1227, bringing with him three important Zen books.\[1\] Some three years
he did what Bodhidharma, the Wall-gazing Brahmin, had done seven hundred
years before him, retiring to a hermitage.

\[1. (1) Pao King San Mei (Ho-kyo-san-mai, 'Precious Mirror Samadhi'), a
metrical exposition of Zen, by Tüng Shan (To-zan, 806-869), one of the
founders of the So To school. (2) Wu Wei Hien Hüeh (Go-i-ken-ketsu.
'Explanation of the Five Categories'), by Tüng Shan and his disciple
Tsao Shan (So-zan). This book shows us how Zen was systematically taught
by the authors. (3) Pih Yen Tsih (Heki-gan-shu, 'A Collection and
Critical Treatment of Dialogues'), by Yuen Wu.\]

at Fuka-kusa, not very far from Kyo-to. Just like Bodhidharma,
denouncing all worldly fame and gain, his attitude toward the world was
diametrically opposed to that of Ei-sai. As we have seen above, Ei-sai
never shunned, but rather sought the society of the powerful and the
rich, and made for his goal by every means. But to the Sage of
Fuka-kusa, as Do-gen was called at that time, pomp and power was the
most disgusting thing in the world. Judging from his poems, be seems to
have spent these years chiefly in meditation; dwelling now on the
transitoriness of life, now on the eternal peace of Nirvana; now on the
vanities and miseries of the world; now listening to the voices of
Nature amongst the hills; now gazing into the brooklet that was, as he
thought, carrying away his image reflected on it into the world.

3\. **The Characteristics of Do-gen, the Founder of the Japanese So To
Sect**.--In the meantime seekers after a new truth gradually began to
knock at his door, and his hermitage was turned into a monastery, now
known as the Temple of Ko-sho-ji.\[1\] It was at this time that many
Buddhist scholars and men of quality gathered about him but the more
popular he became the more disgusting the place became to him. His
hearty desire was to live in a solitude among mountains, far distant
from human abodes, where none but falling waters and singing birds could
disturb his delightful meditation. Therefore he gladly accepted the
invitation of a feudal lord, and went to the

\[1. It was in this monastery (built in 1236) that Zen was first taught
as an independent sect, and that the Meditation Hall was first opened in
Japan. Do-gen lived in the monastery for eleven years, and wrote some of
the important books. Za-zen-gi ('The Method of Practising the
Cross-legged Meditation') was written soon after his return from China,
and Ben-do-wa and other essays followed, which are included in his great
work, entitled Sho-bo-gen-zo) ('The Eye and Treasury of the Right Law').

province of Echi-zen, where his ideal monastery was built, now known as
Ei-hei-ji.\[1\]

In 1247, being requested by Toki-yori, the Regent General (1247-1263),
he came down to Kama-kura, where he stayed half a year and went back to
Ei-hei-ji. After some time Toki-yori, to show his gratitude for the
master, drew up a certificate granting a large tract of land as the
property of Ei-hei-ji, and handed it over to Gen-myo, a disciple of
Do-gen. The carrier of the certificate was so pleased with the donation
that he displayed it to all his brethren and produced it before the
master, who severely reproached him saying: "O, shame on thee, wretch!
Thou art -defiled by the desire of worldly riches even to thy inmost
soul, just as noodle is stained with oil. Thou canst not be purified
from it to all eternity. I am afraid thou wilt bring shame on the Right
Law." On the spot Gen-myo was deprived of his holy robe and
excommunicated. Furthermore, the master ordered the 'polluted' seat in
the Meditation Hall, where Gen-myo was wont to sit, to be removed, and
the 'polluted' earth under the seat to be dug out to the depth of seven
feet.

In 1250 the ex-Emperor Go-sa-ga (1243-1246) sent a special messenger
twice to the Ei-hei monastery to do honour to the master with the
donation of a purple robe, but he declined to accept it. And when the
mark of distinction was offered for the third time, he accepted it,
expressing his feelings by the following verses:

"Although in Ei-hei's vale the shallow waters leap,  
Yet thrice it came, Imperial favour deep.  
The Ape may smile and laugh the Crane  
At aged Monk in purple as insane."

\[1. The monastery was built in 1244 by Yoshi-shige (Hatano), the feudal
lord who invited Do-gen. He lived in Ei-hei-ji until his death, which
took place in 1253. It is still flourishing as the head temple of the So
To Sect.\]

He was never seen putting on the purple robe, being always clad in
black, that was better suited to his secluded life.

4\. **The Social State of Japan when Zen was established by Ei-sai and
Do-gen**.--Now we have to observe the condition of the country when Zen
was introduced into Japan by Ei-sai and Do-gen. Nobilities that had so
long governed the island were nobilities no more. Enervated by their
luxuries, effeminated by their ease, made insipient by their debauchery,
they were entirely powerless. All that they possessed in reality was the
nominal rank and hereditary birth. On the contrary, despised as the
ignorant, sneered at as the upstart, put in contempt as the vulgar, the
Samurai or military class had everything in their hands. It was the time
when Yori-tomo\[1\] (1148-1199) conquered all over the empire, and
established the Samurai Government at Kama-kura. It was the time when
even the emperors were dethroned or exiled at will by the Samurai. It
was the time when even the Buddhist monks\[2\] frequently took up arms
to force their will. It was the time when Japan's independence was
endangered by Kublai, the terror of the world. It was the time when the
whole nation was full of martial spirit. It is beyond doubt that to
these rising Samurais, rude and simple, the philosophical doctrines of
Buddhism, represented by Ten Dai and Shin Gon, were too complicated and
too alien to their nature. But in Zen they could find something
congenial to their nature, something that touched their chord of
sympathy, because Zen was the doctrine of chivalry in a certain sense.

\[1. The Samurai Government was first established by Yoritomo, of the
Minamoto family, in 1186, and Japan was under the control of the
military class until 1867, when the political power was finally restored
to the Imperial house.

2 They were degenerated monks (who were called monk-soldiers), belonging
to great monasteries such as En-ryaku-ji (Hi-yei), Ko-fuku-ji (at Nara),
Mi-i-dera, etc.\]

5\. **The Resemblance of the Zen Monk to the Samurai**.--Let us point
out in brief the similarities between Zen and Japanese chivalry. First,
both the Samurai and the Zen monk have to undergo a strict discipline
and endure privation without complaint. Even such a prominent teacher as
Ei-sai, for example, lived contentedly in such needy circumstances that
on one occasion\[1\] he and his disciples had nothing to eat for several
days. Fortunately, they were requested by a believer to recite the
Scriptures, and presented with two rolls of silk. The hungry young
monks, whose mouths watered already at the expectation of a
long-looked-for dinner, were disappointed when that silk was given to a
poor man, who called on Ei-sai to obtain some help. Fast continued for a
whole week, when another poor follow came in and asked Ei-sai to give
something. At this time, having nothing to show his substantial mark of
sympathy towards the poor, Ei-sai tore off the gilt glory of the image
of Buddha Bheçajya and gave it. The young monks, bitten both by hunger
and by anger at this outrageous act to the object of worship, questioned
Ei-sai by way of reproach: "Is it, sir, right for us Buddhists to
demolish the image of a Buddha?" "Well," replied Ei-sai promptly,
"Buddha would give even his own life for the sake of suffering people.
How could he be reluctant to give his halo?" This anecdote clearly shows
us self-sacrifice is of first importance in the Zen discipline.

6\. **The Honest Poverty of the Zen Monk and the Samurai**.--Secondly,
the so-called honest poverty is a characteristic of both the Zen monk
and the Samurai. To get rich by an ignoble means is against the rules of
Japanese chivalry or Bushido. The Samurai would rather starve than to
live by some expedient unworthy of his dignity. There are many
instances, in the Japanese history, of

\[1. The incident is told by Do-gen in his Zui-mon-ki.\]

Samurais who were really starved to death in spite of their having a
hundred pieces of gold carefully preserved to meet the expenses at the
time of an emergency; hence the proverb: "The falcon would not feed on
the ear of corn, even if he should starve." Similarly, we know of no
case of Zen monks, ancient and modern, who got rich by any ignoble
means. They would rather face poverty with gladness of heart. Fu-gai,
one of the most distinguished Zen masters just before the Restoration,
supported many student monks in his monastery. They were often too
numerous to be supported by his scant means. This troubled his disciple
much whose duty it was to look after the food-supply, as there was no
other means to meet the increased demand than to supply with worse
stuff. Accordingly, one day the disciple advised Fu-gai not to admit new
students any more into the monastery. Then the master, making no reply,
lolled out his tongue and said: "Now look into my mouth, and tell if
there be any tongue in it." The perplexed disciple answered
affirmatively. "Then don't bother yourself about it. If there be any
tongue, I can taste any sort of food." Honest poverty may, without
exaggeration, be called one of the characteristics of the Samurais and
of the Zen monks; hence a proverb: " The Zen monk has no money, moneyed
Monto\[1\] knows nothing."

7\. **The Manliness of the Zen Monk and of the Samurai**.--Thirdly, both
the Zen monk and the Samurai were distinguished by their manliness and
dignity in manner, sometimes amounting to rudeness. This is due partly
to the hard discipline that they underwent, and partly to the mode of
instruction. The following story,\[2\] translated by Mr. D. Suzuki, a
friend of mine, may well exemplify our statement:

\[1. The priest belonging to Shin Shu, who are generally rich.

2\. *The Journal of the Pali Text Society*, 1906-1907.\]

When Rin-zai\[1\]was assiduously applying himself to Zen discipline
under Obak (Huang Po in Chinese, who died 850), the head monk recognized
his genius. One day the monk asked him how long he had been in the
monastery, to which Rin-zai replied: 'Three years.' The elder said:
'Have you ever approached the master and asked his instruction in
Buddhism?' Rin-zai said: 'I have never done this, for I did not know
what to ask.' 'Why, you might go to the master and ask him what is the
essence of Buddhism?'

"Rin-zai, according to this advice, approached Obak and repeated the
question, but before he finished the master gave him a slap.

"When Rin-zai came back, the elder asked how the interview went. Said
Rin-zai: 'Before I could finish my question the master slapped me, but I
fail to grasp its meaning.' The elder said: 'You go to him again and ask
the same question.' When he did so, he received the same response from
the master. But Rin-zai was urged again to try it for the third time,
but the outcome did not improve.

"At last he went to the elder, and said In obedience to your kind
suggestion, I have repeated my question three times, and been slapped
three times. I deeply regret that, owing to my stupidity, I am unable to
comprehend the hidden meaning of all this. I shall leave this place and
go somewhere else.' Said the elder: 'If you wish to depart, do not fail
to go and see the master to say him farewell.'

"Immediately after this the elder saw the master, and said: 'That young
novice, who asked about Buddhism three times, is a remarkable fellow.
When he comes to take leave of you, be so gracious as to direct him
properly. After a hard training, he will prove to be a great master,

\[1. Lin Tsi, the founder of the Lin Tsi school.\]

and, like a huge tree, he will give a refreshing shelter to the world.'

"When Rin-zai came to see the master, the latter advised him not to go
anywhere else. but to Dai-gu (Tai-yu) of Kaoan, for he would be able to
instruct him in the faith.

"Rin-zai went to Dai-gu, who asked him whence he came. Being informed
that he was from Obak, Dai-gu further inquired what instruction he had
under the master. Rin-zai answered: 'I asked him three times about the
essence of Buddhism, and he slapped me three times. But I am yet unable
to see whether I had any fault or not.' Dai-gu said: 'Obak was
tender-hearted even as a dotard, and you are not warranted at all to
come over here and ask me whether anything was faulty with you.'

"Being thus reprimanded, the signification of the whole affair suddenly
dawned upon the mind of Rin-zai, and he exclaimed: 'There is not much,
after all, in the Buddhism of Obak.' Whereupon Dai-gu took hold of him,
and said: 'This ghostly good-for-nothing creature! A few minutes ago you
came to me and complainingly asked what was wrong with you, and now
boldly declare that there is not much in the Buddhism of Obak. What is
the reason of all this? Speak out quick! speak out quick!' In response
to this, Rin-zai softly struck three times his fist at the ribs of
Dai-gu. The latter then released him, saying: 'Your teacher is Obak, and
I will have nothing to do with you.'

"Rin-zai took leave of Dai-gu and came back to Obak, who, on seeing him
come, exclaimed: 'Foolish fellow! what does it avail you to come and go
all the time like this?' Rin-zai said: 'It is all due to your doting
kindness.'

"When, after the usual salutation, Rin-zai stood by the side of Obak,
the latter asked him whence he had come this time. Rin-zai answered: "In
obedience to your kind instruction, I was with Dai-gu. Thence am I
come.'

And he related, being asked for further information, all that had
happened there.

"Obak said: 'As soon as that fellow shows himself up here, I shall have
to give him a good thrashing.' 'You need not wait for him to come; have
it right this moment,' was the reply; and with this Rin-zai gave his
master a slap on the back.

"Obak said: 'How dares this lunatic come into my presence and play with
a tiger's whiskers?' Rin-zai then burst out into a Ho,\[1\] and Obak
said: 'Attendant, come and carry this lunatic away to his cell.'"

8\. **The Courage and the Composure of Mind of the Zen Monk and of the
Samurai**.--Fourthly, our Samurai encountered death, as is well known,
with unflinching courage. He would never turn back from, but fight till
his last with, his enemy. To be called a coward was for him the
dishonour worse than death itself. An incident about Tsu Yuen (So-gen),
who came over to Japan in 1280, being invited by Toki-mune\[2\] (Ho-jo),
the Regent General, well illustrates how much Zen monks resembled our
Samurais. The event happened when he was in China, where the invading
army of Yuen spread terror all over the country. Some of the barbarians,
who crossed the border of the State of Wan, broke into the monastery of
Tsu Yuen, and threatened to behead him. Then calmly sitting down, ready
to meet his fate, he composed the following verses

"The heaven and earth afford me no shelter at all;  
I'm glad, unreal are body and soul.  
Welcome thy weapon, O warrior of Yuen! Thy trusty steel,  
That flashes lightning, cuts the wind of Spring, I feel."

\[1. A loud outcry, frequently made use of by Zen teachers, after
Rin-zai. Its Chinese pronunciation is 'Hoh,' and pronounced 'Katsu' in
Japanese, but 'tsu' is not audible.

2\. A bold statesman and soldier, who was the real ruler of Japan
1264-1283.\]

This reminds us of Sang Chao\[1\] (So-jo), who, on the verge of death by
the vagabond's sword, expressed his feelings in the follow lines:

"In body there exists no soul.  
The mind is not real at all.  
Now try on me thy flashing steel,  
As if it cuts the wind of Spring, I feel."

The barbarians, moved by this calm resolution and dignified air of Tsu
Yuen, rightly supposed him to be no ordinary personage, and left the
monastery, doing no harm to him.

9\. **Zen and the Regent Generals of the Ho-Jo Period**.--No wonder,
then, that the representatives of the Samurai class, the Regent
Generals, especially such able rulers as Toki-yori, Toki-mune, and
others noted for their good administration, of the Ho-jo period
(1205-1332) greatly favoured Zen. They not only patronized the faith,
building great temples\[2\] and inviting best Chinese Zen teachers.\[3\]

\[1. The man was not a pure Zen master, being a disciple of Kumarajiva,
the founder of the San Ron Sect. This is a most remarkable evidence that
Zen, especially the Rin Zan school, was influenced by Kumarajiva and his
disciples. For the details of the anecdote, see E-gen.

2\. To-fuku-ji, the head temple of a sub-sect of the Rin Zai under the
same name, was built in 1243. Ken-cho-ji, the head temple of a subsect
of the Rin Zai under the same name, was built in 1253. En-gaku ji, the
head temple of a sub-sect of the Rin Zai under the same name, was built
in 1282. Nan-zen-ji, the head temple of a sub-sect of the Rin Zai under
the same name, was erected in 1326.

3\. Tao Lung (Do-ryu), known as Dai-kaku Zen-ji, invited by Tokiyori,
came over to Japan in 1246. He became the founder of Ken-cho-ji-ha, a
sub-sect of the Rin Zai, and died in 1278. Of his disciples, Yaku-o was
most noted, and Yaku-o's disciple, Jaku-shitsu, became the founder of
Yo-genji-ha, another sub-sect of the Rin Zai. Tsu Yuen (So-gen), known
as Buk-ko-koku-shi, invited by Toki-mune, crossed the sea in 1280,
became the founder of En-gaku-ji-ha (a sub-sect of the Rin Zai), and
died in 1286. Tsing Choh (Sei-setsu), invited by Taka-toki, came in
1327, and died in 1339. Chu Tsun (So-shun) came in 1331, and died in
1336. Fan Sien (Bon-sen) came together with Chu Tsun, and died in 1348.
These were the prominent Chinese teachers of that time.\]

but also lived just as Zen monks, having the head shaven, wearing a holy
robe, and practising cross-legged Meditation. Toki-yori (1247-1263), for
instance, who entered the monastic life while be was still the real
governor of the country, led as simple a life, as is shown in his verse,
which ran as follows:

"Higher than its bank the rivulet flows;  
Greener than moss tiny grass grows.  
No one call at my humble cottage on the rock,  
But the gate by itself opens to the Wind's knock."

Toki-yori attained to Enlightenment by the instruction of Do-gen and
Do-ryu, and breathed his last calmly sitting cross-legged, and
expressing his feelings in the following lines:

"Thirty-seven of years,  
Karma mirror stood high;  
Now I break it to pieces,  
Path of Great is then nigh."

His successor, Toki-mune (1264-1283), a bold statesman and soldier, was
no less of a devoted believer in Zen. Twice he beheaded the envoys sent
by the great Chinese conqueror, Kublai, who demanded Japan should either
surrender or be trodden under his foot. And when the alarming news of
the Chinese Armada's approaching the land reached him, be is said to
have called on his tutor, Tsu Yuen, to receive the last instruction.
"Now, reverend sir," said. he, "an imminent peril threatens the land."
"How art thou going to encounter it?" asked the master. Then Toki-mune
burst into a thundering Ka with all his might to show his undaunted
spirit in encountering the approaching enemy. "O, the lion's roar!" said
Tsu Yuen.

"Thou art a genuine lion. Go, and never turn back." Thus encouraged by
the teacher, the Regent General sent out the defending army, and
successfully rescued the state from the mouth of destruction, gaining a
splendid victory over the invaders, almost all of whom perished in the
western seas.

10\. **Zen after the Downfall of the Ho-Jo Regency**.--Towards the end
of the Ho-Jo period,\[1\] and after the downfall of the Regency in 1333,
sanguinary battles were fought between the Imperialists and the rebels.
The former, brave and faithful as they were, being outnumbered by the
latter, perished in the field one after another for the sake of the
ill-starred Emperor Go-dai-go (1319-1338), whose

\[1. Although Zen was first favoured by the Ho-jo Regency and chiefly
prospered at Kama-kura, yet it rapidly began to exercise its influence
on nobles and Emperors at Kyo-to. This is mainly due to the activity of
En-ni, known as Sho-Ichi-Koku-Shi (1202-1280), who first earned Zen
under Gyo-yu, a disciple of Ei-sai, and afterwards went to China, where
he was Enlightened under the instruction of Wu Chun, of the monastery of
King Shan. After his return, Michi-iye (Fuji-wara), a powerful nobleman,
erected for him To-fuku-ji in 1243, and he became the founder of a
sub-sect of the Rin Zai, named after that monastery. The Emperor Go-saga
(1243-1246), an admirer of his, received the Moral Precepts from him,
One of his disciples, To-zan, became the spiritual adviser of the
Emperor Fushi-mi (1288-1298), and another disciple, Mu kwan, was created
the abbot of the monastery of Nan-zen-ji by the Emperor Kame-yama
(1260-1274), as the founder of a sub-sect of the Rin Zai under the same
name.

Another teacher who gained lasting influence on the Court is Nan-po,
known as Dai-O-Koku-Shi (1235-1308), who was appointed the abbot of the
monastery of Man-ju-ji in Kyo to by the Emperor Fushi-mi. One of his
disciples, Tsu-o, was the spiritual adviser to both the Emperor
Hana-zono (1308-1318) and the Emperor Go-dai-go. And another disciple,
Myo-cho, known as Dai-To-Koku-Shi (1282-1337), also was admired by the
two Emperors, and created the abbot of Dai-toku-ji, as the founder of a
sub-sect of the Rin Zai under the same name. It was for Myo-cho's
disciple, Kan-zan (1277 1360), that the Emperor Hana-zono turned his
detached palace into a monastery, named Myo-shin-ji, the head temple of
a sub-sect of the Rin Zai under the same name.\]

eventful life ended in anxiety and despair. It was at this time that
Japan gave birth to Masa-shige (Kusu-noki), an able general and
tactician of the Imperialists, who for the sake of the Emperor not only
sacrificed himself and his brother, but by his will his son and his
son's successor died for the same cause, boldly attacking the enemy
whose number was overwhelmingly great. Masa-shige's loyalty, wisdom,
bravery, and prudence are not merely unique in the history of Japan, but
perhaps in the history of man. The tragic tale about his parting with
his beloved son, and his bravery shown at his last battle, never fail to
inspire the Japanese with heroism. He is the best specimen of the
Samurai class. According to an old document,\[1\] this Masa-shige was
the practiser of Zen, and just before his last battle he called on Chu
Tsun (So-shun) to receive the final instruction. "What have I to do when
death takes the place of life?" asked Masa-shige. The teacher replied:

"Be bold, at once cut off both ties,  
The drawn sword gleams against the skies."

Thus becoming, as it were, an indispensable discipline for the Samurai,
Zen never came to an end with the Ho-jo period, but grew more prosperous
than before during the reign\[2\] of the Emperor Go-dai-go, one of the
most enthusiastic patrons of the faith.

\[1. The event is detailed at length in a life of So-shun, but some
historians suspect it to be fictitious. This awaits a further research.

2\. As we have already mentioned, Do-gen, the founder of the Japanese So
To Sect, shunned the society of the rich and the powerful, and led a
secluded life. In consequence his sect did not make any rapid progress
until the Fourth Patriarch of his line, Kei-zan (1268-1325) who, being
of energetic spirit, spread his faith with remarkable activity, building
many large monasteries, of which Yo-ko-ji, in the province of No-to,
So-ji-ji (near Yokohama), one of the head temples of the sect, are well
known. One of his disciples, Mei ho (1277-1350), propagated the faith in
the northern provinces; while another disciple, Ga-san (1275-1365),
being a greater character, brought up more than thirty distinguished
disciples, of whom Tai-gen, Tsu-gen, Mu-tan, Dai-tetsu, and Jip-po, are
best known. Tai-gen (died 1370) and big successors propagated the faith
over the middle provinces, while Tsu-gen (1332-1391) and his successors
spread the sect all over the north-eastern and south-western provinces.
Thus it is worthy of our notice that most of the Rin Zai teachers
confined their activities within Kamakura and Kyo-to, while the So To
masters spread the faith all over the country.\]

The Shoguns of the Ashi-kaga period (1338-1573) were not less devoted to
the faith than the Emperors who succeeded the Emperor Go-dai-go. And
even Taka-uji (1338-1357), the notorious founder of the Shogunate, built
a monastery and invited So-seki,\[1\] better known as Mu-So-Koku-Shi,
who was respected as the tutor by the three successive Emperors after
Go-dai-go. Taka-uji's example was followed by all succeeding Shoguns,
and Shogun's example was followed by the feudal lords and their vassals.
This resulted in the propagation of Zen throughout the country. We can
easily imagine how Zen was prosperous in these days from the splendid
monasteries\[2\] built at this period, such as the Golden Hall Temple
and the Silver Hall Temple that still adorn the fair city of Kyo-to.

11\. **Zen in the Dark Age**.--The latter half of the Ashikaga period
was the age of arms and bloodshed. Every day the sun shone on the
glittering armour of marching

\[1. So-seki (1276-1351) was perhaps the greatest Zen master of the
period. Of numerous monasteries built for him, E-rin-ji, in the province
of Kae, and Ten-ryu-ji, the head temple of a sub-sect of the Rin Zai
under the same name, are of importance, Out of over seventy eminent
disciples of his, Gi-do (1365-1388), the author of Ku-ge-shu; Shun-oku
(1331-1338), the founder of the monastery of So-koku-ji, the head temple
of a sub-sect of the Rin Zai under the same name; and Zek-kai
(1337-1405), author of Sho-ken-shu, are best known.

2 Myo-shin-ji was built in 1337 by the Emperor Hana-zono; Ten-ryu-ji was
erected by Taka-uji, the first Shogun of the period, in 1344; So-koku-ji
by Yosh-imitsu, the third Shogun, in 1385; Kin-Kaku-ji, or Golden Hall
Temple, by the same Shogun, in 1397; Gin-kaku-ji, or Silver Hall Temple,
by Yoshi-masa, the eighth Shogun, in 1480.\]

soldiers. Every wind sighed over the lifeless remains of the brave.
Everywhere the din of battle resounded. Out of these fighting feudal
lords stood two champions. Each of them distinguished himself as a
veteran soldier and tactician. Each of them was known as an experienced
practiser of Zen. One was Haru-nobu\[1\] (Take-da, died in 1573), better
known by his Buddhist name, Shin-gen. The other was Teru-tora\[2\]
(Uye-sugi, died in 1578), better known by his Buddhist name, Ken-shin.
The character of Shin-gen can be imagined from the fact that he never
built any castle or citadel or fortress to guard himself against his
enemy, but relied on his faithful vassals and people; while that of
Ken-shin, from the fact that he provided his enemy, Shin-gen, with salt
when the latter suffered from want of it, owing to the cowardly
stratagem of a rival lord. The heroic battles waged by these two great
generals against each other are the flowers of the Japanese war-history.
Tradition has it that when Shin-gen's army was put to rout by the
furious attacks of Ken-shin's troops, and a single warrior mounted on a
huge charger rode swiftly as a sweeping wind into Shin-gen's
head-quarters, down came a blow of the heavy sword aimed at Shin-gen's
forehead, with a question expressed in the technical terms of Zen: "What
shalt thou do in such a state at such a moment?" Having no time to draw
his sword, Shin-gen parried it with his war-fan, answering
simultaneously in Zen words: "A flake of snow on the red-hot furnace!"
Had not his attendants come to the rescue Shin-gen's life might have
gone as 'a flake of snow on the red-hot furnace.' Afterwards the
horseman was known to have been Ken-shin himself. This tradition

\[1. Shin-gen practised Zen under the instruction of Kwai-sen, who was
burned to death by Nobu-naga (O-da) in 1582. See Hon-cho-ko-so-den.

2 Ken-shin learned Zen under Shu-ken, a So Ta master. See
To-jo-ren-to-roku.\]

shows us how Zen was practically lived by the Samurais of the Dark Age.

Although the priests of other Buddhist sects had their share in these
bloody affairs, as was natural at such a time, yet Zen monks stood aloof
and simply cultivated their literature. Consequently, when all the
people grew entirely ignorant at the end of the Dark Age, the Zen monks
were the only men of letters. None can deny this merit of their having
preserved learning and prepared for its revival in the following
period.\[1\]

12\. **Zen under the Toku-gana Shogunate**.--Peace was at last restored
by Iye-yasu, the founder of the Toku-gana Shogunate (1603-1867). During
this period the Shogunate gave countenance to Buddhism on one hand,
acknowledging it as the state religion, bestowing rich property to large
monasteries, making priests take rank over common people, ordering every
householder to build a Buddhist altar in his house; while, on the other
hand, it did everything to extirpate Christianity, introduced in the
previous period (1544). All this paralyzed the missionary spirit of the
Buddhists, and put all the sects in dormant state. As for Zen\[2\] it
was

\[1. After the introduction of Zen into Japan many important books were
written, and the following are chief doctrinal works:
Ko-zen-go-koku-ron, by Ei-sai; Sho bo-gen-zo; Gaku-do-yo-zin-shu;
Fu-kwan-za-zen-gi; Ei-hei-ko-roku, by Do-gen; Za-zen-yo-zin-ki; and
Den-ko-roku, by Kei-zan.

2 The So To Sect was not wanting in competent teachers, for it might
take pride in its Ten-kei (1648-1699), whose religious insight was
unsurpassed by any other master of the age; in its Shi getsu, who was a
commentator of various Zen books, and died 1764; in its Men-zan
(1683-1769), whose indefatigable works on the exposition of So To Zen
are invaluable indeed; and its Getsu-shu (1618-1696) and Man-zan
(1635-1714), to whose labours the reformation of the faith is ascribed.
Similarly, the Rin Zai Sect, in its Gu-do (1579-1661); in its Isshi
(1608-1646); in its Taku-an (1573-1645), the favourite tutor of the
third Shogun, Iye-mitsu; in its Haku-in (1667-1751), the greatest of the
Rin Zai masters of the day, to whose extraordinary personality and
labour the revival of the sect is due; and its To-rei (1721-1792), a
learned disciple of Haku-in. Of the important Zen books written by these
masters, Ro-ji-tan-kin, by Ten-kei; Men-zan-ko-roku, by Men-zan;
Ya-sen-kwan-wa, Soku-ko-roku, Kwai-an-koku-go, Kei-so-doku-zui, by
Haku-in; Shu-mon-mu-jin-to-ron, by To-rei, are well known.\]

still favoured by feudal lords and their vassals, and almost all
provincial lords embraced the faith.

It was about the middle of this period that the forty-seven vassals of
Ako displayed the spirit of the Samurai by their perseverance,
self-sacrifice, and loyalty, taking vengeance on the enemy of their
deceased lord. The leader of these men, the tragic tales of whom can
never be told or heard without tears, was Yoshi-o (O-ishi died 1702), a
believer of Zen,\[1\] and his tomb in the cemetery of the temple of
Sen-gaku-ji, Tokyo, is daily visited by hundreds of his admirers.

Most of the professional swordsmen forming a class in these days
practised Zen. Mune-nori\[2\] (Ya-gyu), for instance, established his
reputation by the combination of Zen and the fencing art. The following
story about Boku-den (Tsuka-hara), a great swordsman, fully illustrates
this tendency:

"On a certain occasion Boku-den took a ferry to cross over the Yabase in
the province of Omi. There was among the passengers a Samurai, tall and
square-shouldered, apparently an experienced fencer. He behaved rudely
toward the fellow-passengers, and talked so much of his own dexterity in
the art that Boku-den, provoked by his brag, broke silence. 'You seem,
my friend, to practise the art in order to conquer the enemy, but I do
it in order not to be conquered,' said Boku-den. 'O monk,' demanded the
man, as Boku-den was clad like a Zen monk, 'what school of swordsmanship
do you belong to?' Well, mine is the

\[1. See "Zen Shu," No. 151.

2 He is known as Ta-jima, who practised Zen under Taku-an.\]

Conquering-enemy-without-fighting-school.' 'Don't tell a fib, old monk.
If you could conquer the enemy without fighting, what then is your sword
for?' 'My sword is not to kill, but to save,' said Boku-den, making use
of Zen phrases; 'my art is transmitted from mind to mind.' 'Now then,
come, monk,' challenged the man, 'let us see, right at this moment, who
is the victor, you or I.' The gauntlet was picked up without hesitation.
'But we must not fight,' said Boku-den, 'in the ferry, lest the
passengers should be hurt. Yonder a small island you see. There we shall
decide the contest.' To this proposal the man agreed, and the boat was
pulled to that island. No sooner had the boat reached the shore than the
man jumped over to the land, and cried: 'Come on, monk, quick, quick!'
Boku-den, however, slowly rising, said: 'Do not hasten to lose your
head. It is a rule of my school to prepare slowly for fighting, keeping
the soul in the abdomen.' So saying he snatched the oar from the boatman
and rowed the boat back to some distance, leaving the man alone, who,
stamping the ground madly, cried out: 'O, you fly, monk, you coward.
Come, old monk!' 'Now listen,' said Boku-den, 'this is the secret art of
the Conquering-enemy-without-fighting-school. Beware that you do not
forget it, nor tell it to anybody else.' Thus, getting rid of the
brawling fellow, Boku-den and his fellow-passengers safely landed on the
opposite shore."\[1\]

The O Baku School of Zen was introduced by Yin Yuen (In-gen) who crossed
the sea in 1654, accompanied by many able disciples.\[2\] The Shogunate
gave him a tract of land at Uji, near Kyo-to, and in 1659 he built there
a monastery

\[1. Shi-seki-shu-ran.

2 In-gen (1654-1673) came over with Ta-Mei (Dai-bi, died 1673), Hwui Lin
(E-rin died 1681), Tuh Chan (Doku-tan, died 1706), and others. For the
life of In-gen: see Zoku-ko-shu-den and Kaku-shu-ko-yo.\]

noted for its Chinese style of architecture, now known as O-baku-san.
The teachers of the same school\[1\] came one after another from China,
and Zen\[2\] peculiar to them, flourished a short while.

\[1. Tsih Fei (Soku-hi died 1671), Muh Ngan (Moku-an died 1684), Kao
Tsüen (Ko-sen died 1695), the author of Fu-so-zen-rin-so-bo-den,
To-koku-ko-so-den, and Sen-un-shu, are best known.

2 This is a sub-sect of the Rin Zai School, as shown in the following
table:

TABLE OF THE TRANSMISSION OF ZEN FROM CHINA. TO JAPAN.

<span id="img_rosa00"></span> ![](img/rosa00.jpg)

The O Baku School is the amalgamation of Zen and the worship of
Amitabha, and different from the other two schools. The statistics for
1911 give the following figures:

|                    |                       |                        |
|--------------------|-----------------------|------------------------|
|                    | The Number of Temples | The Number of Teachers |
| The So To School   | 14,255                | 9,576                  |
| The Rin Zai School | 6,128                 | 4,523                  |
| The O Baku School  | 546                   | 349                    |

\]

It was also in this period that Zen gained a great influence on the
popular literature characterized by the shortest form of poetical
composition. This was done through the genius of Ba-sho,\[1\] a great
literary man, recluse and traveller, who, as his writings show us, made
no small progress in the study of Zen. Again, it was made use of by the
teachers of popular \[2\] ethics, who did a great deal in the education
of the lower classes. In this way Zen and its peculiar taste gradually
found its way into the arts of peace, such as literature, fine art,
tea-ceremony, cookery, gardening, architecture, and at last it has
permeated through every fibre of Japanese life.

13\. **Zen after the Restoration**.--After the Restoration of the Mei-ji
(1867) the popularity of Zen began to wane, and for some thirty years
remained in inactivity; but since the Russo-Japanese War its revival has
taken place. And now it is looked upon as an ideal faith, both for a
nation full of hope and energy, and for a person who has to fight his
own way in the strife of life. Bushido, or the code of chivalry, should
be observed not only by the soldier in the battle-field, but by every
citizen in the struggle for existence. If a person be a person and not a
beast, then he must be a Samurai-brave, generous, upright, faithful, and
manly, full of self-respect and self-confidence, at the same time full
of the spirit of self-sacrifice. We can find an incarnation of Bushido
in the late General Nogi, the hero of Port

\[1. He (died 1694) learned Zen under a contemporary Zen master
(Buccho), and is said to have been enlightened before his reformation of
the popular literature.

2 The teaching was called Shin-gaku, or the 'learning of mind.' It was
first taught by Bai-gan (Ishi-da), and is the reconciliation of
Shintoism and Buddhism with Confucianism. Bai-gan and his successors
practised Meditation, and were enlightened in their own way. Do-ni
(Naka-zawa, died 1803) made use of Zen more than any other teacher.\]

Arthur, who, after the sacrifice of his two sons for the country in the
Russo-Japanese War, gave up his own and his wife's life for the sake of
the deceased Emperor. He died not in vain, as some might think, because
his simplicity, uprightness, loyalty, bravery, self-control, and
self-sacrifice, all combined in his last act, surely inspire the rising
generation with the spirit of the Samurai to give birth to hundreds of
Nogis. Now let us see in the following chapters what Zen so closely
connected with Bushido teaches us.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III: The Universe is the Scripture of Zen](rosa05.md)
