[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rosa08)  [Next](rosa10.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00295RH64/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Religion of the Samurai*, by Kaiten Nukariya, \[1913\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER VII

## LIFE

1\. **Epicureanism and Life.**--There are a good many people always
buoyant in spirit and mirthful in appearance as if born optimists. There
are also no fewer persons constantly crestfallen and gloomy as if born
pessimists. The former, however, may lose their buoyancy and sink deep
in despair if they are in adverse circumstances. The latter, too, may
regain their brightness and grow exultant if they are under prosperous
conditions. As there is no evil however small but may cause him to groan
under it, who has his heart undisciplined, so there is no calamity
however great but may cause him to despair, who has his feelings in
control. A laughing child would cry, a crying child would laugh, without
a sufficient cause. 'It can be teased or tickled into anything.' A
grown-up child is he who cannot hold sway over his passions.

He should die a slave to his heart, which is wayward and blind, if he be
indulgent to it. It is of capital importance for us to discipline the
heart,' otherwise it will discipline us. Passions are like legs. They
should be guided by the eye of reason. No wise serpent is led by its
tail, so no wise man is led by his passion. Passions that come first are
often treacherous and lead us astray. We must guard ourselves against
them. In order to gratify them there arise mean desires-the desires to
please sight, hearing, smell, taste, and touch. These five desires are
ever pursuing or,

\[1. Compare Gaku-do-yo-jin-shu, chap. i., and Zen-kwan-saku shin.\]

rather, driving us. We must not spend our whole lives in pursuit of
those mirage-like objects which gratify our sensual desires. When we
gratify one desire, we are silly enough to fancy that we have realized
true happiness. But one desire gratified begets another stronger and
more insatiable. Thirst allayed with salt water becomes more intense
than ever.

Shakya Muni compared an Epicurean with a dog chewing a dry bone,
mistaking the blood out of a wound in his mouth for that of the bone.
The author of Mahaparinirvana-sutra\[1\] has a parable to the following
effect: 'Once upon a time a hunter skilled in catching monkeys alive
went into the wood. He put something very sticky on the ground, and hid
himself among the bushes. By-and-by a monkey came out to see what it
was, and supposing it to be something eatable, tried to feed on it. It
stuck to the poor creature's snout so firmly that he could not shake it
off. Then he attempted to tear it off with both his paws, which also
stuck to it. Thereupon he strove to kick it off with both his hind-legs,
which were caught too. Then the hunter came out, and thrusting his stick
through between the paws and hind-legs of the victim, and thus carrying
it on his shoulder, went home.' In like manner an Epicurean (the
monkey), allured by the objects of sense (something sticky), sticks to
the five desires (the snout and the four limbs), and being caught by
Temptation (the hunter), loses his life of Wisdom.

We are no more than a species of monkeys, as evolutionists hold. Not a
few testify to this truth by their being caught by means of 'something
eatable.' We abolished slavery and call ourselves civilized nations.
Have we not, nevertheless, hundreds of life-long slaves to cigars among
us? Have we not thousands of life-long slaves to spirits among us? Have
we not hundreds of thousands of life-long

\[1. The sutra translated by Hwui Yen and Hwui Kwan, A.D. 424-453.\]

slaves to gold among us? Have we not myriads of lifelong slaves to
vanity among us? These slaves are incredibly loyal to, and incessantly
work for, their masters, who in turn bestow on them incurable diseases,
poverty, chagrin, and disappointment.

A poor puppy with an empty can tied to his tail, Thomas Carlyle wittily
observes, ran and ran on, frightened by the noise of the can. The more
rapidly he ran, the more loudly it rang, and at last he fell exhausted
of running. Was it not typical of a so-called great man of the world?
Vanity tied an empty can of fame to his tail, the hollow noise of which
drives him through life until he falls to rise no more. Miserable!

Neither these men of the world nor Buddhist ascetics can be optimists.
The latter rigorously deny themselves sensual gratifications, and keep
themselves aloof from all objects of pleasure. For them to be pleased is
equivalent to sin, and to laugh, to be cursed. They would rather touch
an adder's head than a piece of money.\[1\] They would rather throw
themselves into a fiery furnace than to come in contact with the other
sex. Body for them is a bag full of blood and pus;\[2\] life, an idle,
or rather evil, dream. Vegetarianism and celibacy are their holy
privileges. Life is unworthy of having; to put an end to it is their
deliverance.\[3\] Such a view of life is hardly worth our refutation.

2\. **The Errors of Philosophical Pessimists and Religious
Optimists.**--Philosophical pessimists\[4\] maintain that there are on
earth many more causes of pain than of pleasure;

\[1. Such is the precept taught in the Vinaya of Hinayanists.

2 See Mahasatiptthana Suttanta, 2-13.

3 This is the logical conclusion of Hinayanism.

4 Schopenhauer, 'The World as Will and Idea' (R. B. Haldane and J.
Kemp's translation, vol. iii., pp. 384-386); Hartman, 'Philosophy of the
Unconsciousness' (W. C. Coupland's translation, vol. iii., pp.
12-119).\]

and that pain exists positively, but pleasure is a mere absence of pain
because we are conscious of sickness but not of health; of loss, but not
of possession. On the contrary, religious optimists insist that there
must not be any evil in God's universe, that evil has no independent
nature, but simply denotes a privation of good--that is, evil is null,
is nought, is silence implying sound.'

No matter what these one-sided observers' opinion may be, we are certain
that we experience good as well as evil, and feel pain and pleasure as
well. Neither can we alleviate the real sufferings of the sick by
telling them that sickness is no other than the absence of health, nor
can we make the poor a whit richer by telling them that poverty is a
mere absence of riches. How could we save the dying by persuading them
that death is a bare privation of life? Is it possible to dispirit the
happy by telling them that happiness is unreal, or make the fortunate
miserable by telling them that fortune has no objective reality, or to
make one welcome evil by telling one that it is only the absence of
good?

You must admit there are no definite external causes of pain nor those
of pleasure, for one and the same thing causes pain at one time and
pleasure at another. A cause of delight to one person turns out to be
that of aversion to another. A dying miser might revive at the sight of
gold, yet a Diogenes would pass without noticing it. Cigars and wine are
blessed gifts of heaven to the intemperate,' but accursed poison to the
temperate. Some might enjoy a long life, but others would heartily
desire to curtail it. Some might groan under a slight indisposition,
while others would whistle away a life of serious disease. An Epicure
might be taken prisoner by poverty, yet an Epictetus would fearlessly
face and vanquish him. How, then, do you distinguish the real cause of
pain from that of pleasure?

\[1. The author of Han Shu (Kan Sho) calls spirits the gift of Heaven.\]

How do you know the causes of one are more numerous than the causes of
the other?

Expose thermometers of several kinds to one and the same temperature.
One will indicate, say, 60°, another as high as 100°, another as low as
15°. Expose the thermometers of human sensibilities, which are of
myriads of different kinds, to one and the same temperature of
environment. None of them will indicate the same degrees. In one and the
same climate, which we think moderate, the Eskimo would be washed with
perspiration, while the Hindu would shudder with cold. Similarly, under
one and the same circumstance some might be extremely miserable and
think it unbearable, yet others would be contented and happy. Therefore
we may safely conclude that there are no definite external causes of
pain and pleasure, and that there must be internal causes which modify
the external.

3\. **The Law of Balance.**--Nature governs the world with her law of
balance. She puts things ever in pairs,' and leaves nothing in
isolation. Positives stand in opposition to negatives, actives to
passives, males to females, and so on. Thus we get the ebb in opposition
to the flood tide; the centrifugal force to the centripetal; attraction
to repulsion; growth to decay; toxin to antitoxin; light to shade;
action to reaction; unity to variety; day to night; the animate to the
inanimate. Look at our own bodies: the right eye is placed side by side
with the left; the left shoulder with the right; the right lung with the
left; the left hemisphere of the brain with that of the right; and so
forth.

It holds good also in human affairs: advantage is always accompanied by
disadvantage; loss by gain; convenience by inconvenience; good by evil;
rise by fall; prosperity by adversity; virtue by vice; beauty by
deformity; pain by

\[1. Zenists call them 'pairs of opposites.'\]

pleasure; youth by old age; life by death. 'A handsome young lady of
quality,' a parable in Mahaparinirvana-sutra tells us, 'who carries with
her an immense treasure is ever accompanied by her sister, an ugly woman
in rags, who destroys everything within her reach. If we win the former,
we must also get the latter.' As pessimists show intense dislike towards
the latter and forget the former, so optimists admire the former so much
that they are indifferent to the latter.

4\. **Life Consists in Conflict.**--Life consists in conflict. So long
as man remains a social animal he cannot live in isolation. All
individual hopes and aspirations depend on society. Society is reflected
in the individual, and the individual in society. In spite of this, his
inborn free will and love of liberty seek to break away from social
ties. He is also a moral animal, and endowed with love and sympathy. He
loves his fellow-beings, and would fain promote their welfare; but he
must be engaged in constant struggle against them for existence. He
sympathizes even with animals inferior to him, and heartily wishes to
protect them; yet he is doomed to destroy their lives day and night. He
has many a noble aspiration, and often soars aloft by the wings of
imagination into the realm of the ideal; still his material desires drag
him down to the earth. He lives on day by day to continue his life, but
he is unfailingly approaching death at every moment.

The more he secures new pleasure, spiritual or material, the more he
incurs pain not yet experienced. One evil removed only gives place to
another; one advantage gained soon proves itself a disadvantage. His
very reason is the cause of his doubt and suspicion; his intellect, with
which he wants to know everything, declares itself to be incapable of
knowing anything in its real state; his finer sensibility, which is the
sole source of finer pleasure, has to experience finer suffering. The
more he asserts himself, the more he has to sacrifice himself. These
conflictions probably led Kant to call life "a trial time, wherein most
succumb, and in which even the best does not rejoice in his life." "Men
betake themselves," says Fichte, "to the chase after felicity. . . . But
as soon as they withdraw into themselves and ask themselves, 'Am I now
happy? the reply comes distinctly from the depth of their soul, ' Oh no;
thou art still just as empty and destitute as before!' . . . They will
in the future life just as vainly seek blessedness as they have sought
it in the present life."

It is not without reason that the pessimistic minds came to conclude
that 'the unrest of unceasing willing and desiring by which every
creature is goaded is in itself unblessedness,' and that 'each creature
is in constant danger, constant agitation, and the whole, with its
restless, meaningless motion, is a tragedy of the most piteous kind.' 'A
creature like the carnivorous animal, who cannot exist at all without
continually destroying and tearing others, may not feel its brutality,
but man, who has to prey on other sentient beings like the carnivorous,
is intelligent enough, as hard fate would have it, to know and feel his
own brutal living.' He must be the most miserable of all creatures, for
he is most conscious of his own misery. Furthermore, 'he experiences not
only the misfortunes which actually befall him, but in imagination he
goes through every possibility of evil.' Therefore none, from great
kings and emperors down to nameless beggars, can be free from cares and
anxieties, which 'ever flit around them like ghosts.'

5\. **The Mystery of Life.**--Thus far we have pointed out the
inevitable conflictions in life in order to prepare ourselves for an
insight into the depth of life. We are far from being pessimistic, for
we believe that life consists in confliction, but that confliction does
not end in confliction, but in a new form of harmony. Hope comes to
conflict with fear, and is often threatened with losing its hold on
mind; then it renews its life and takes root still deeper than before.
Peace is often disturbed with wars, but then it gains a still firmer
ground than ever. Happiness is driven out of mind by melancholy, then it
is re-enforced by favourable conditions and returns with double
strength. Spirit is dragged down by matter from its ideal heaven, then,
incited by shame, it tries a higher flight. Good is opposed by evil,
then it gathers more strength and vanquishes its foe. Truth is clouded
by falsehood, then it issues forth with its greater light. Liberty is
endangered by tyranny, then it overthrows it with a splendid success.

Manifoldness stands out boldly against unity; difference against
agreement; particularity against generality; individuality against
society. Manifoldness, nevertheless, instead of annihilating, enriches
unity; difference, instead of destroying agreement, gives it variety;
particularities, instead of putting an end to generality, increase its
content; individuals, instead of breaking the harmony of society,
strengthen the power of it.

Thus 'Universal Life does not swallow up manifoldness nor extinguish
differences, but it is the only means of bringing to its full
development the detailed content of reality; in particular, it does not
abolish the great oppositions of life and world, but takes them up into
itself and brings them into fruitful relations with each other.'
Therefore 'our life is a mysterious blending of freedom and necessity,
power and limitation, caprice and law; yet these opposites are
constantly seeking and finding a mutual adjustment.'

6\. **Nature Favours Nothing in Particular.**--There is another point of
view of life, which gave the present writer no small contentment, and
which he believes would cure one of pessimistic complaint. Buddha, or
Universal Life conceived by Zen, is not like a capricious despot, who
acts not seldom against his own laws. His manifestation as shown in the
Enlightened Consciousness is lawful, impartial, and rational. Buddhists
believe that even Shakya Muni himself was not free from the law of
retribution, which includes, in our opinion, the law of balance and that
of causation.

Now let us briefly examine how the law of balance holds its sway over
life and the world. When the Cakravartin, according to an Indian legend,
the universal monarch, would come to govern the earth, a wheel would
also appear as one of his treasures, and go on rolling all over the
world, making everything level and smooth. Buddha is the spiritual
Cakravartin, whose wheel is the wheel of the law of balance, with which
he governs all things equally and impartially. First let us observe the
simplest cases where the law of balance holds good. Four men can finish
in three days the same amount of work as is done by three men in four
days. The increase in the number of men causes the decrease in that of
days, the decrease in the number of men causes the increase in that of
days, the result being always the same. Similarly the increase in the
sharpness of a knife is always accompanied by a decrease in its
durability, and the increase of durability by a decrease of sharpness.
The more beautiful flowers grow, the uglier their fruits become; the
prettier the fruits grow, the simpler become their flowers. 'A strong
soldier is ready to die; a strong tree is easy to be broken; hard
leather is easy to be torn. But the soft tongue survives the hard
teeth.' Horned creatures are destitute of tusks, the sharp-tusked
creatures lack horns. Winged animals are not endowed with paws, and
handed animals are provided with no wings. Birds of beautiful plumage
have no sweet voice, and sweet-voiced songsters no feathers of bright
colours. The finer in quality, the smaller in quantity, and bulkier in
size, the coarser in nature.

Nature favours nothing in particular. So everything has its advantage
and disadvantage as well. What one gains on the one hand one loses on
the other. The ox is competent in drawing a heavy cart, but he is
absolutely incompetent in catching mice. A shovel is fit for digging,
but not for ear-picking. Aeroplanes are good for aviation, but not for
navigation. Silkworms feed on mulberry leaves and make silk from it, but
they can do nothing with other leaves. Thus everything has its own use
or a mission appointed by Nature; and if we take advantage of it,
nothing is useless, but if not, all are useless. 'The neck of the crane
may seem too long to some idle on-lookers, but there is no surplus in
it. The limbs of the tortoise may appear too short, but there is no
shortcoming in them.' The centipede, having a hundred limbs, can find no
useless feet; the serpent, having no foot, feels no want.

7\. **The Law of Balance in Life.**--It is also the case with human
affairs. Social positions high or low, occupations spiritual or
temporal, work rough or gentle, education perfect or imperfect,
circumstances needy or opulent, each has its own advantage as well as
disadvantage. The higher the position the graver the responsibilities,
the lower the rank the lighter the obligation. The director of a large
bank can never be so careless as his errand-boy who may stop on the
street to throw a stone at a sparrow; nor can the manager of a large
plantation have as good a time on a rainy day as his day-labourers who
spend it in gambling. The accumulation of wealth is always accompanied
by its evils; no Rothschild nor Rockefeller can be happier than a poor
pedlar.

A mother of many children may be troubled by her noisy little ones and
envy her sterile friend, who in turn may complain of her loneliness; but
if they balance what they gain with what they lose, they will find the
both sides are equal. The law of balance strictly forbids one's monopoly
of happiness. It applies its scorpion whip to anyone who is given to
pleasures. Joy in extremity lives next door to exceeding sorrow. "Where
there is much light," says Goethe, "shadow is deep." Age, withered and
disconsolate, lurks under the skirts of blooming youth. The celebration
of birthday is followed by the commemoration of death. Marriage might be
supposed to be the luckiest event in one's life, but the widow's tears
and the orphan's sufferings also might be its outcome. But for the
former the latter can never be. The death of parents is indeed the
unluckiest event in the son's life, but it may result in the latter's
inheritance of an estate, which is by no means unlucky. The disease of a
child may cause its parents grief, but it is a matter of course that it
lessens the burden of their livelihood. Life has its pleasures, but also
its pains. Death has no pleasure of life, but also none of its pain. So
that if we balance their smiles and tears, life and death are equal. It
is not wise for us, therefore, to commit suicide while the terms of our
life still remain, nor to fear death when there is no way of avoiding
it.

Again, the law of balance does not allow anyone to take the lion's share
of nature's gifts. Beauty in face is accompanied by deformity in
character. Intelligence is often uncombined with virtue. "Fair girls are
destined to be unfortunate," says a Japanese proverb, "and men of
ability to be sickly." "He makes no friend who never makes a foe."
"Honesty is next to idiocy." "Men of genius," says Longfellow, "are
often dull and inert in society; as the blazing meteor when it descends
to earth is only a stone." Honour and shame go hand in hand. Knowledge
and virtue live in poverty, while ill health and disease are inmates of
luxury.

Every misfortune begets some sort of fortune, while every good luck
gives birth to some sort of bad luck. Every prosperity never fails to
sow seeds of adversity, while every fall never fails to bring about some
kind of rise. We must not, then, despair in days of frost and snow,
reminding ourselves of sunshine and flowers that follow them; nor must
we be thoughtless in days of youth and health, keeping in mind old age
and ill health that are in the rear of them. In brief, all, from crowns
and coronets down to rags and begging bowls, have their own happiness
and share heavenly grace alike.

8\. **The Application of the Law of Causation to Morals.**--Although it
may be needless to state here the law of causation at any length, yet it
is not equally needless to say a few words about its application to
morals as the law of retribution, which is a matter of dispute even
among Buddhist scholars. The kernel of the idea is very simple-like
seed, like fruit; like cause, like effect; like action, like
influence--nothing more. As fresh air strengthens and impure air chokes
us, so good conduct brings about good consequence, and bad conduct does
otherwise.\[1\]

Over against these generalizations we raise no objection, but there are
many cases, in practical life, of doubtful nature. An act of charity,
for example, might do others some sort of damage, as is often the case
with the giving of alms to the poor, which may produce the undesirable
consequence of encouraging beggary. An act of love might produce an
injurious effect, as the mother's love often spoils her children.
Some\[2\] may think these are cases of good cause and bad effect. We
have, however, to

\[1. Zen lays much stress on this law. See Shu-sho-gi and Ei-hei-ka-kun,
by Do-gen.

2\. Dr. H. Kato seems to have thought that good cause may bring out bad
effect when he attacked Buddhism on this point.\]

analyze these causes and effects in order to find in what relation they
stand. In the first case the good action of almsgiving produces the good
effect of lessening the sufferings of the poor, who should be thankful
for their benefactor. The giver is rewarded in his turn by the peace and
satisfaction of his conscience. The poor, however, when used to being
given alms are inclined to grow lazy and live by means of begging.
Therefore the real cause of the bad effect is the thoughtlessness of
both the giver and the given, but not charity itself. In the second case
the mother's love and kindness produce a good effect on her and her
children, making them all happy, and enabling them to enjoy the pleasure
of the sweet home; yet carelessness and folly on the part of the mother
and ingratitude on the part of the children may bring about the bad
effect.

History is full of numerous cases in which good persons were so
unfortunate as to die a miserable death or to live in extreme poverty,
side by side with those cases in which bad people lived in health and
prosperity, enjoying a long life. Having these cases in view, some are
of the opinion that there is no law of retribution as believed by the
Buddhists. And even among the Buddhist scholars themselves there are
some who think of the law of retribution as an ideal, and not as a law
governing life. This is probably due to their misunderstanding of the
historical facts. There is no reason because he is good and honourable
that he should be wealthy or healthy; nor is there any reason because he
is bad that he should be poor or sickly. To be good is one thing, and to
be healthy or rich is another. So also to be bad is one thing, And to be
poor and sick is another. The good are not necessarily the rich or the
healthy, nor are the bad necessarily the sick or the poor. Health must
be secured by the strict observance of hygienic rules, and not by the
keeping of ethical precepts; nor can wealth ever be accumulated by bare
morality, but by economical and industrial activity. The moral conduct
of a good person has no responsibility for his ill health or poverty; so
also the immoral action of a bad person has no concern with his wealth
or health. You should not confuse the moral with the physical law, since
the former belongs only to human life, while the latter to the physical
world.

The good are rewarded morally, not physically; their own virtues,
honours, mental peace, and satisfaction are ample compensation for their
goodness. Confucius, for example, was never rich nor high in rank; he
was, nevertheless, morally rewarded with his virtues, honours, and the
peace of mind. The following account of him,\[1\] though not strictly
historical, well explains his state of mind in the days of misfortune:

"When Confucius was reduced to extreme distress between Khan and Zhai,
for seven days he had no cooked meat to eat, but only some soup of
coarse vegetables without any rice in it. His countenance wore the
appearance of great exhaustion, and yet be kept playing on his lute and
singing inside the house. Yen Hui (was outside) selecting the
vegetables, while Zze Lu and Zze Kung were talking together, and said to
him: 'The master has twice been driven from Lu; he had to flee from Wei;
the tree beneath which he rested was cut down in Sung; he was reduced to
extreme distress in Shang and Kau; he is held in a state of siege here
between Khan and Zhai; anyone who kills him will be held guiltless;
there is no prohibition against making him a prisoner. And yet he keeps
playing and singing, thrumming his lute without ceasing. Can a superior
man be without the feeling of shame to such an extent as this?' Yen Hui
gave them no reply, but went in and told (their words) to Confucius, who
pushed aside his

\[1. The account is given by Chwang Tsz in his book, vol. xviii., p.
17.\]

lute and said: 'Yu and Zhze are small men. Call them here, and I will
explain the thing to them.'

"When they came in, Zze Lu said: 'Your present condition may be called
one of extreme distress!' Confucius replied: 'What words are these? When
the superior man has free course with his principles, that is what we
call his success; when such course is denied, that is what we call his
failure. Now I hold in my embrace the principles of righteousness and
benevolence, and with them meet the evils of a disordered age; where is
the proof of my being in extreme distress? Therefore, looking inwards
and examining myself, I have no difficulties about my principles; though
I encounter such difficulties (as the present), I do not lose my virtue.
It is when winter's cold is come, and the hoar-frost and snow are
falling, that we know the vegetative power of the pine and cypress. This
distress between Khan and Zhai is fortunate for me.' He then took back
his lute so that it emitted a twanging sound, and began to play and
sing. (At the same time) Zze Lu hurriedly seized a shield and began to
dance, while Zze Kung said: 'I did not know (before) the height of
heaven nor the depth of earth!'"

Thus the good are unfailingly rewarded with their own virtue, and the
wholesome consequences of their actions on society at large. And the bad
are inevitably recompensed with their own vices, and the injurious
effects of their actions on their fellow-beings. This is the unshaken
conviction of humanity, past, present, and future. It is the pith and
marrow of our moral ideal. It is the crystallization of ethical truths,
distilled through long experiences from time immemorial to this day. We
can safely approve Edwin Arnold, as he Bays:

"Lo I as hid seed shoots after rainless years,  
So good and evil, pains and pleasures, hates  
And loves, and all dead deeds come forth again,  
Bearing bright leaves, or dark, sweet fruit or sour."

Longfellow also says:

"No action, whether foul or fair,  
Is ever done, but it leaves somewhere  
A record-as a blessing or a curse."

9\. **Retribution\[1\] in the Past, the Present, and the Future
Life.**--Then a question suggests itself: If there be no soul that
survives body (as shown in the preceding chapter), who will receive the
retributions of our actions in the present life? To answer this
question, we have to restate our conviction that life is one and the
same; in other words, the human beings form one life or one self--that
is to say, our ancestors in the past formed man's past life. We
ourselves now form man's present life, and our posterity will form the
future life. Beyond all doubt, all actions of man in the past have
brought their fruits on the present conditions of man, and all actions
of the present man are sure to influence the conditions of the future
man. To put it in another way, we now reap the fruits of what we sowed
in our past life (or when we lived as our fathers), and again shall reap
the fruits of what we now sow in our future life (or when we shall live
as our posterity).

There is no exception to this rigorous law of retribution, and we take
it as the will of Buddha to leave no action without being retributed.
Thus it is Buddha himself who kindles our inward fire to save ourselves
from sin and crimes. We must purge out all the stains in our hearts,
obeying Buddha's command audible in the innermost self of ours. It is
the great mercy of His that, however sinful, superstitious, wayward, and
thoughtless, we have still a light within us which is divine in its
nature. When that light shines forth, all sorts of sin are destroyed at
once. What is our sin, after all? It is nothing but illusion or

\[1. The retribution cannot be explained by the doctrine of the
transmigration of the soul, for it is incompatible with the fundamental
doctrine of non-soul. See Abhidharmamahavibhasa-çastra, vol. cxiv.\]

error originating in ignorance and folly. How true it is, as an Indian
Mahayanist declares, that 'all frost and the dewdrops of sin disappear
in the sunshine of wisdom!'\[1\] Even if we might be imprisoned in the
bottomless bell, yet let once the Light of Buddha shine upon us, it
would be changed into heaven. Therefore the author of
Mahakarunika-sutra\[2\] Says: "When I climb the mountain planted with
swords, they would break under my tread. When I sail on the sea of
blood, it will be dried up. When I arrive at Hades, they will be ruined
at once."

10\. **The Eternal Life as taught by Professor Münsterberg.**--Some
philosophical pessimists undervalue life simply because it is subject to
limitation. They ascribe all evils to that condition, forgetting that
without limitation life is a mere blank. Suppose our sight could see all
things at once, then sight has no value nor use for us, because it is
life's purpose to choose to see one thing or another out of many; and if
all things be present at once before us through sight, it is of no
purpose. The same is true of intellect, bearing, smell, touch, feeling,
and will. If they be limitless, they cease to be useful for us.
Individuality necessarily implies limitation, hence if there be no
limitation in the world, then there is no room for individuality. Life
without death is no life at all.

Professor Hugo Münsterberg finds no value, so it seems to me, in 'such
life as beginning with birth and ending with death.' He says:\[3\] "My
life as a causal system of physical and psychological processes, which
lies spread out in time between the dates of my birth and of my death,
will come to an end with my last breath; to continue it, to make it go
on till the earth falls into the sun, or a billion times longer, would
be without any value, as that

\[1. Samantabhadra-dhyana-sutra.

2\. Nanjo's Catalogue, No. 117.

3\. 'The Eternal Life,' p. 26.\]

kind of life which is nothing but the mechanical occurrence of
physiological and psychological phenomena had as such no ultimate value
for me or for you, or for anyone, at any time. But my real life, as a
system of interrelated-will-attitudes, has nothing before or after
because it is beyond time. It is independent of birth and death because
it cannot be related to biological events; it is not born, and will not
die; it is immortal; all possible thinkable time is enclosed in it; it
is eternal."

Professor Münsterberg tries to distinguish sharply life as the causal
system of physiological and psychological processes, and life as a
system of interrelated-will-attitudes, and denounces the former as
fleeting and valueless, in order to prize the latter as eternal and of
absolute value. How could he, however, succeed in his task unless he has
two or three lives, as some animals are believed to have? Is it not one
and the same life that is treated on the one hand by science as a system
of physiological and psychological processes, and is conceived on the
other by the Professor himself as a system of
interrelated-will-attitudes? It is true that science treats of life as
it is observed in time, space, and causality, and it estimates it of no
value, since to estimate the value of things is no business of science.
The same life observed as a system of interrelated-will-attitudes is
independent of time, space, and causality as he affirms. One and the
same life includes both phases, the difference being in the points of
view of the observers.

Life as observed only from the scientific point of view is bare
abstraction; it is not concrete life; nor is life as observed only in
the interrelated-will-attitude point of view the whole of life. Both are
abstractions. Concrete life includes both phases. Moreover, Professor
Münsterberg sees life in the relationship entirely independent-of time,
space, and causality, saying: "If you agree or disagree with the latest
act of the Russian Czar, the only significant relation which exists
between him and you has nothing to do with the naturalistic fact that
geographically 'an ocean lies between you; and if you are really a
student of Plato, your only important relation to the Greek philosopher
has nothing to do with the other naturalistic fact that biologically two
thousand years lie between you"; and declares life (seen from that point
of view) to be immortal and eternal. This is as much as to say that
life, when seen in the relationship independent of time and space, is
independent of time and space-that is, immortal and eternal. Is it not
mere tautology? He is in the right in insisting that life can be seen
from the scientific point of view as a system of physiological and
psychological processes, and at the same time as a system of
interrelated-will-attitudes independent of time and space. But he cannot
by that means prove the existence of concrete individual life which is
eternal and immortal, because that which is independent of time and
space is the relationship in which he observes life, but not life
itself. Therefore we have to notice that life held by Professor
Münsterberg to be eternal and immortal is quite a different thing from
the eternal life or immortality of soul believed by common sense.

11\. **Life in the Concrete.**--Life in the concrete, which we are
living, greatly differs from life in the abstract, which exists only in
the class-room. It is not eternal; it is fleeting; it is full of
anxieties, pains, struggles, brutalities, disappointments, and
calamities. We love life, however, -not only for its smoothness, but for
its roughness; not only for its pleasure, but for its pain; not only for
its hope, but for its fear; not only for its flowers, but for its frost
and snow. As Issai\[1\] (Sato) has aptly put it: "Prosperity is like

\[1. A noted scholar (1772-1859) and author, who belonged to the Wang
School of Confucianism. See Gen-shi-roku.\]

spring, in which we have green leaves and flowers wherever we go; while
adversity is like winter, in which we have snow and ice. Spring, of
course, pleases us; winter, too, displeases us not." Adversity is salt
to our lives, as it keeps them from corruption, no matter how bitter to
taste it way be. It is the best stimulus to body and mind, since it
brings forth latent energy that may remain dormant but for it. Most
people hunt after pleasure, look for good luck, hunger after success,
and complain of pain, ill-luck, and failure. It does not occur to them
that 'they who make good luck a god are all unlucky men,' as George
Eliot has wisely observed. Pleasure ceases to be pleasure when we attain
to it; another sort of pleasure displays itself to tempt us. It is a
mirage, it beckons to us to lead us astray. When an overwhelming
misfortune looks us in the face, our latent power is sure to be aroused
to grapple with it. Even delicate girls exert the power of giants at the
time of emergency; even robbers or murderers are found to be kind and
generous when we are thrown into a common disaster. Troubles and
difficulties call forth our divine force, which lies deeper than the
ordinary faculties, and which we never before dreamed we possessed.

12\. **Difficulties are no Match for the Optimist.**--How can we suppose
that we, the children of Buddha, are put at the mercy of petty troubles,
or intended to be crushed by obstacles? Are we not endowed with inner
force to fight successfully against obstacles and difficulties, and to
wrest trophies of glory from hardships? Are we to be slaves to the
vicissitudes of fortune? Are we doomed to be victims for the jaws of the
environment? It is not external obstacles themselves, but our inner fear
and doubt that prove to be the stumbling-blocks in the path to success;
not material loss, but timidity and hesitation that -ruin us for ever.

Difficulties are no match for the optimist, who does not fly from them,
but welcomes them. He has a mental prism which can separate the insipid
white light of existence into bright hues. He has a mental alchemy by
which he can produce golden instruction out of the dross of failure. He
has a spiritual magic which makes the nectar of joy out of the tears of
sorrow. He has a clairvoyant eye that can perceive the existence of hope
through the iron walls of despair.

Prosperity tends to make one forget the grace of Buddha, but adversity
brings forth one's religious conviction. Christ on the cross was more
Christ than Jesus at the table. Luther at war with the Pope was more
Luther than he at peace. Nichi-ren\[1\] laid the foundation of his
church when sword and sceptre threatened him with death. Shin-ran\[2\]
and Hen-en\[3\] established their respective faiths when they were
exiled. When they were exiled, they complained not, resented not,
regretted not, repented not, lamented not, but contentedly and joyously
they met with their inevitable calamity and conquered it. Ho-nen is said
to have been still more joyous and contented when be bad suffered from a
serious disease, because he had the conviction that his desired end was
at hand.

A Chinese monk, E Kwai by name, one day seated himself in a quiet place
among hills and practised Dhyana. None was there to disturb the calm
enjoyment of his meditation. The genius of the hill was so much stung by
his

\[1. The founder (1222-1282) of the Nichi Ren Sect, who was exiled in
1271 to the Island of Sado. For the history and doctrine of the Sect,
see I A Short History of the Twelve Japanese Buddhist Sects,' by B.
Nanjo, pp. 132-147.

2\. The founder (1173-1262) of the Shin Sect, who was banished to the
province of Eechigo in 1207. See Nanjo's 'History,' pp. 122-131.

3\. The founder (1131 1212) of the Jo Do Sect, who was exiled to the
Island of Tosa in 1207. See Nanjo's 'History,' pp. 104-113.\]

envy that he made up his mind to break by surprise the mental serenity
of the monk. Having supposed nothing ordinary would be effective, he
appeared all on a sudden before the man, assuming the frightful form of
a headless monster. E Kwai being disturbed not a whit, calmly eyed the
monster, and observed with a smile: "Thou hast no head, monster! How
happy thou shouldst be, for thou art in no danger of losing thy head,
nor of suffering from headache!"

Were we born headless, should we not be happy, as we have to suffer from
no headache? Were we born eyeless, should we not be happy, as we are in
no danger of suffering from eye disease? Ho Ki Ichi,\[1\] a great blind
scholar, was one evening giving a lecture, without knowing that the
light had been put out by the wind. When his pupils requested him to
stop for a moment, he remarked with a smile: "Why, how inconvenient are
your eyes!" Where there is contentment, there is Paradise.

13\. **Do Thy Best and Leave the Rest to Providence.**--There is another
point of view which enables us to enjoy life. It is simply this, that
everything is placed in the condition best for itself, as it is the sum
total of the consequences of its actions and reactions since the dawn of
time. Take, for instance, the minutest grains of dirt that are regarded
by us the worst, lifeless, valueless, mindless, inert matter. They are
placed in their best condition, no matter how poor and worthless they
may seem. They can never become a thing higher nor lower than they. To
be the grains of dirt is best for them. But for these minute microcosms,
which, flying in the air, reflect the sunbeams, we could have no azure
sky. It is they that scatter the

\[1. Hanawa (1746-1821), who published Gun-sho-rui-zu in 1782.\]

sun's rays in mid-air and send them into our rooms. It is also these
grains of dirt that form the nuclei of raindrops and bring seasonable
rain. Thus they are not things worthless and good for nothing, but have
a hidden import and purpose in their existence. Had they mind to think,
heart to feel, they should be contented and happy with their present
condition.

Take, for another example, the flowers of the morning glory. They bloom
and smile every morning, fade and die in a few hours. How fleeting and
ephemeral their lives are! But it is that short life itself that makes
them frail, delicate, and lovely. They come forth all at once as bright
and beautiful as a rainbow or as the Northern light, and disappear like
dreams. This is the best condition for them, because, if they last for
days together, the morning glory shall no longer be the morning glory.
It is so with the cherry-tree that puts forth the loveliest flowers and
bears bitter fruits. It is so with the apple-tree, which bears the
sweetest of fruits and has ugly blossoms. It is so with animals and men.
Each of them is placed in the condition best for his appointed mission.

The newly-born baby sucks, sleeps, and cries. It can do no more nor
less. Is it not best for it to do so? When it attained to its boyhood,
he goes to school and is admitted to the first-year class. He cannot be
put in a higher nor lower class. It is best for him to be the first-year
class student. When his school education is over, he may get a position
in society according to his abilities, or may lead a miserable life
owing to his failure of some sort or other. In any case he is in a
position best for his special mission ordained by Providence or the
Hum-total of the fruits of his actions and reactions since all eternity.
He should be contented and happy, and do what is right with might and
main. Discontent and vexation only make him more worthy of his ruin
Therefore our positions, no matter. how high or low, no matter how
favourable or unfavourable our environment, we are to be cheerful. "Do
thy best and leave the rest to Providence," says a Chinese adage.
Longfellow also says:

"Do thy best; that is best.  
Leave unto thy Lord the rest."

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII: The Training of the Mind and the Practice of
Meditation](rosa10.md)
