[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Yeats](../index)  [Celtic](../../celt/index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fip01)  [Next](fip03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

# INTRODUCTION

Dr. Corbett, Bishop of Oxford and Norwich, lamented long ago the
departure of the English fairies. "In Queen Mary's time" he wrote--

"When Tom came home from labour,  
  Or Cis to milking rose,  
Then merrily, merrily went their tabor,  
  And merrily went their toes."

But now in the times of James, they had all gone, for "they were of the
old profession", and "their songs were Ave Maries". In Ireland they are
still extant, giving gifts to the kindly, and plaguing the surly. "Have
you ever seen a fairy or such like?" I asked the old man in County
Sligo. "Amn't I annoyed with them," was the answer. "Do the fishermen
along here know anything of the mermaids?" I asked a woman of a village
in County Dublin. 'Indeed, they don't like to see them at all," she
answered, "for they always bring bad weather." "Here is a man who
believes in ghosts," said a foreign sea-captain, pointing to a pilot of
my acquaintance. "In every house over there," said the pilot, pointing
to his native village of Rosses, "there are several." Certainly that now
old and much respected dogmatist, the Spirit of the Age, has in no

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

manner made his voice heard down there. In a little while, for he has
gotten a consumptive appearance of late, he will be covered over
decently in his grave, and another will grow, old and much respected, in
his place, and never be heard of down there, and after him another and
another and another. Indeed, it is a question whether any of these
personages will ever be heard of outside the newspaper offices and
lecture-rooms and drawing-rooms and eel-pie houses of the cities, or if
the Spirit of the Age is at any time more than a froth. At any rate,
whole troops of their like will not change the Celt much. Giraldus
Cambrensis found the people of the western islands a trifle paganish.
"How many gods are there?" asked a priest, a little while ago, of a man
from the Island of Innistor. "There is one on Innistor; but this seems a
big place," said the man, and the priest held up his hands in horror, as
Giraldus had, just seven centuries before. Remember, I am not blaming
the man; it is very much better to believe in a number of gods than in
none at all, or think there is only one, but that he is a little
sentimental and impracticable, and not constructed for the nineteenth
century. The Celt, and his cromlechs, and his pillar-stones, these will
not change much-indeed, it is doubtful if anybody at all changes at any
time. In spite of hosts of deniers, and asserters, and wise-men, and
professors, the majority still are averse to sitting down to dine
thirteen at table, or being helped to salt, or walking under a ladder,
or seeing a single magpie flirting his chequered tail. There are, of
course, children of light who have set their faces against all this,
though even a newspaper man, if you entice him into a cemetery at
midnight, will believe in phantoms, for everyone is a visionary, if you
scratch him deep enough. But the Celt is a visionary without scratching.

Yet, be it noticed, if you are a stranger, you will not readily

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

get ghost and fairy legends, even in a western village. You must go
adroitly to work, and make friends with the children, and the old men,
with those who have not felt the pressure of mere daylight existence,
and those with whom it is growing less, and will have altogether taken
itself off one of these days. The old women are most learned, but will
not so readily be got to talk, for the fairies are very secretive, and
much resent being talked of; and are there not many stories of old women
who were nearly pinched into their graves or numbed with fairy blasts?

At sea, when the nets are out and the pipes are lit, then will some
ancient hoarder of tales become loquacious, telling his histories to the
tune of the creaking of the boats. Holy-eve night, too, is a great time,
and in old days many tales were to be heard at wakes. But the priest
have set their faces against wakes.

In the Parochial Survey of Ireland it is recorded how the story-tellers
used to gather together of an evening, and if any had a different
version from the others, they would all recite theirs and vote, and the
man who had varied would have to abide by their verdict. In this way
stories have been handed down with such accuracy, that the long tale of
Dierdre was, in the earlier decades of this century, told almost word
for word, as in the very ancient MSS. in the Royal Dublin Society. In
one case only it varied, and then the MS. was obviously wrong--a passage
had been forgotten by the copyist. But this accuracy is rather in the
folk and bardic tales than in the fairy legends, for these vary widely,
being usually adapted to some neighbouring village or local fairy-seeing
celebrity. Each county has usually some family, or personage, supposed
to have been favoured or plagued, especially by the phantoms, as the
Hackets of Castle Hacket, Galway, who had for their ancestor a fairy,

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

or John-o'-Daly of Lisadell, Sligo, who wrote "Eilleen Aroon", the song
the Scots have stolen and called "Robin Adair", and which Handel would
sooner have written than all his oratorios, <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) and the "O'Donahue of Kerry". Round these
men stories tended to group themselves, sometimes deserting more ancient
heroes for the purpose. Round poets have they gathered especially, for
poetry in Ireland has always been mysteriously connected with magic.

These folk tales are full of simplicity and musical occurrences, for
they are the literature of a class for whom every incident in the old
rut of birth, love, pain, and death has cropped up unchanged for
centuries: who have steeped everything in the heart: to whom everything
is a symbol. They have the spade over which man has leant from the
beginning. The people of the cities have the machine, which is prose and
a *parvenu*. They have few events. They can turn over the incidents of a
long life as they sit by the fire. With us nothing has time to gather
meaning, and too many things are occurring for even a big heart to hold.
It is said the most eloquent people in the world are the Arabs, who have
only the bare earth of the desert and a sky swept bare by the sun.
"Wisdom has alighted upon three things," goes their proverb; "the hand
of the Chinese, the brain of the Frank, and the tongue of the Arab."
This, I take it, is the meaning of that simplicity sought for so much in
these days by all the poets, and not to be had at any price.

The most notable and typical story-teller of my acquaintance is one
Paddy Flynn, a little, bright-eyed, old man, living in a leaky
one-roomed cottage of the village of B------, "The most gentle--*i.e.*,
fairy-place in the whole

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

of the County Sligo," he says, though others claim that honour for
Drumahair or for Drumcliff. A very pious old man, too! You may have some
time to inspect his strange figure and ragged hair, if he happen to be
in a devout humour, before he comes to the doings of the gentry. A
strange devotion! Old tales of Columkill, and what he said to his
mother. "How are you today, mother?" "Worse!" "May you be worse
tomorrow"; and on the next day, "How are you today, mother?" "Worse!"
"May you be worse tomorrow"; and on the next, "How are you today,
mother?" "Better, thank God." "May you be better tomorrow." In which
undutiful manner he will tell you Columkill inculcated cheerfulness.
Then most likely he will wander off into his favourite theme--how the
judge smiles alike in rewarding the good and condemning the lost to
unceasing flames. Very consoling does it appear to Paddy Flynn, this
melancholy and apocalyptic cheerfulness of the Judge. Nor seems his own
cheerfulness quite earthly--though a very palpable cheerfulness. The
first time I saw him he was cooking mushrooms for himself; the next time
he was asleep under a hedge, smiling in his sleep. Assuredly some joy
not quite of this steadfast earth lightens in those eyes--swift as the
eyes of a rabbit--among so many wrinkles, for Paddy Flynn is very old. A
melancholy there is in the midst of their cheerfulness--a melancholy
that is almost a portion of their joy, the visionary melancholy of
purely instinctive natures and of all animals. In the triple solitude of
age and eccentricity and partial deafness he goes about much pestered by
children.

As to the reality of his fairy and spirit-seeing powers, not all are
agreed. One day we were talking of the Banshee. "I have seen it", he
said, "down there by the

<span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span>

water 'batting' the river with its hands". He it was who said the
fairies annoyed him.

Not that the Sceptic is entirely afar even from these western villages.
I found him one morning as he bound his corn in a merest
pocket-handkerchief of a field. Very different from Paddy
Flynn--Scepticism in every wrinkle of his face, and a travelled man,
too!--a foot-long Mohawk Indian tattooed on one of his arms to evidence
the matter. "They who travel," says a neighbouring priest, shaking his
head over him, and quoting Thomas Á'Kempis, "seldom come holy." I had
mentioned ghosts to this Sceptic. "Ghosts," said he; "there are no such
things at all, at all, but the gentry, they stand to reason; for the
devil, when he fell out of heaven, took the weak-minded ones with him,
and they were put into the waste places. And that's what the gentry are.
But they are getting scarce now, because their time's over, ye see, and
they're going back. But ghosts, no! And I'll tell ye something more I
don't believe in--the fire of hell;" then, in a low voice, "that's only
invented to give the priests and the parsons something to do." Thereupon
this man, so full of enlightenment, returned to his corn-binding.

The various collectors of Irish folk-lore have, from our point of view,
one great merit, and from the point of view of others, one great fault.
They have made their work literature rather than science, and told us of
the Irish peasantry rather than of the primitive religion of mankind, or
whatever else the folk-lorists are on the gad after. To be considered
scientists they should have tabulated all their tales in forms like
grocers' bills-item the fairy king, item the queen. Instead of this they
have caught the very voice of the people, the very pulse of life, each
giving what was most noticed in his day.\[paragraph continues\]

<span id="page_xv">p. xv</span>

Croker and Lover, full of the ideas of harum-scarum Irish gentility, saw
everything humorised. The impulse of the Irish literature of their time
came from a class that did not--mainly for political reasons--take the
populace seriously, and imagined the country as a humorist's Arcadia;
its passion, its gloom, its tragedy, they knew nothing of. What they did
was not wholly false; they merely magnified an irresponsible type, found
oftenest among boatmen, carmen, and gentlemen's servants, into the type
of a whole nation, and created the stage Irishman. The writers of
'forty-eight, and the famine combined, burst their bubble. Their work
had the dash as well as the shallowness of an ascendant and idle class,
and in Croker is touched everywhere with beauty-a gentle Arcadian
beauty. Carleton, a peasant born, has in many of his stories--I have
been only able to give a few of the slightest--more especially in his
ghost stories, a much more serious way with him, for all his humour.
Kennedy, an old bookseller in Dublin, who seems to have had a something
of genuine belief in the fairies, came next in time. He has far less
literary faculty, but is wonderfully accurate, giving often the very
words the stories were told in. But the best book since Croker is Lady
Wilde's *Ancient Legends*. The humour has all given way to pathos and
tenderness. We have here the innermost heart of the Celt in the moments
he has grown to love through years of persecution, when, cushioning
himself about with dreams, and hearing fairy-songs in the twilight, he
ponders on the soul and on the dead. Here is the Celt, only it is the
Celt dreaming.

Besides these are two writers of importance, who have published, so far,
nothing in book shape--Miss Letitia Maclintock and Mr. Douglas Hyde.
Miss Maclintock writes accurately and beautifully the half Scottish
dialect of\[paragraph continues\]

<span id="page_xvi">p. xvi</span>

Ulster; and Mr. Douglas Hyde is now preparing a volume of folk tales in
Gaelic, having taken them down, for the most part, word for word among
the Gaelic speakers of Roscommon and Galway. He is, perhaps, most to be
trusted of all. He knows the people thoroughly. Others see a phase of
Irish life; he understands all its elements. His work is neither
humorous nor mournful; it is simply life. I hope he may put some of his
gatherings into ballads, for he is the last of our ballad-writers of the
school of Walsh and Callanan--men whose work seems fragrant with turf
smoke. And this brings to mind the chap-books. They are to be found
brown with turf smoke on cottage shelves, and are, or were, sold on
every hand by the pedlars, but cannot be found in any library of this
city of the Sassenach. "The Royal Fairy Tales", "The Hibernian Tales",
and "The Legends of the Fairies" are the fairy literature of the people.

Several specimens of our fairy poetry are given. It is more Eke the
fairy poetry of Scotland than of England. The personages of English
fairy literature are merely, in most cases, mortals beautifully
masquerading. Nobody ever believed in such fairies. They are romantic
bubbles from Provence. Nobody ever laid new milk on their doorstep for
them.

As to my own part in this book, I have tried to make it representative,
as far as so few pages would allow, of every kind of Irish folk-faith.
The reader will perhaps wonder that in all my notes I have not
rationalised a single hobgoblin. I seek for shelter to the words of
Socrates. <span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1)

"*Phædrus*. I should like to know, Socrates, whether the

<span id="page_xvii">p. xvii</span>

place is not somewhere here at which Boreas is said to have carried off
Orithyia from the banks of the Ilissus?

"*Socrates*. That is the tradition.

"*Phædrus*. And is this the exact spot? The little stream is
delightfully clear and bright; I can fancy that there might be maidens
playing near.

"*Socrates*. I believe the spot is not exactly here, but about a
quarter-of-a-mile lower down, where you cross to the temple of Artemis,
and I think that there is some sort of an altar of Boreas at the place.

"*Phædrus*. I do not recollect; but I beseech you to tell me, Socrates,
do you believe this tale?

"*Socrates*. The wise are doubtful, and I should not be singular if,
like them, I also doubted. I might have a rational explanation that
Orithyia was playing with Pharmacia, when a northern gust carried her
over the neighbouring rocks; and this being the manner of her death, she
was said to have been carried away by Boreas. There is a discrepancy,
however, about the locality. According to another version of the story,
she was taken from the Areopagus, and not from this place. Now I quite
acknowledge that these allegories are very nice, but he is not to be
envied who has to invent them; much labour and ingenuity will be
required of him; and when he has once begun, he must go on and
rehabilitate centaurs and chimeras dire. Gorgons and winged steeds flow
in apace and numberless other inconceivable and portentous monsters. And
if he is sceptical about them, and would fain reduce them one after
another to the rules of probability, this sort of crude philosophy will
take up all his time. Now, I have certainly not time for such inquiries.
Shall I tell you why? I must first know myself, as the Delphian
inscription says; to be curious about that which is not my

<span id="page_xviii">p. xviii</span>

business, while I am still in ignorance of my own self, would be
ridiculous. And, therefore, I say farewell to all this; the common
opinion is enough for me. For, as I was saying, I want to know not about
this, but about myself. Am I, indeed, a wonder more complicated and
swollen with passion than the serpent Typho, or a creature of gentler
and simpler sort, to whom nature has given a diviner and lowlier
destiny?"

I have to thank Messrs. Macmillan, and the editors of *Belgravia*, *All
the Year Round*, and *Monthly Packet*, for leave to quote from Patrick
Kennedy's *Legendary Fictions of the Irish Celts*, and Miss Maclintock's
articles respectively; Lady Wilde, for leave to give what I would from
her *Ancient Legends of Ireland* (Ward & Downey); and Mr. Douglas Hyde,
for his three unpublished stories, and for valuable and valued
assistance in several ways; and also Mr. Allingham, and other copyright
holders, for their poems. Mr. Allingham's poems are from *Irish Songs
and Poems* (Reeves and Turner); Fergusson's, from Sealey, Bryers, &
Walker's shilling reprint; my own and Miss O'Leary's from *Ballads and
Poems of Young Ireland*, 1888, a little anthology published by Gill &
Sons, Dublin.

W. B. YEATS

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[xii:1](fip02.htm#fr_0) He lived some time in
Dublin, and heard it then.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[xvi:1](fip02.htm#fr_1) *Phædrus*, Jowett's
translation (Clarendon Press).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Trooping Fairies](fip03)
