[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Yeats](../index)  [Celtic](../../celt/index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fip02)  [Next](fip04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# FAIRY AND FOLK TALES

### THE TROOPING FAIRIES.

The Irish word for fairy is *sheehogue* \[*sidheóg*\], a diminutive of
"shee" in banshee. Fairies are *deenee shee* \[*daoine sidhe*\] (fairy
people).

Who are they? "Fallen angels who were not good enough to be saved, nor
bad enough to be lost," say the peasantry. "The gods of the earth," says
the Book of Armagh. "The gods of pagan Ireland," say the Irish
antiquarians, "the Tuatha De Danān, who, when no longer worshipped and
fed with offerings, dwindled away in the popular imagination, and now
are only a few spans high."

And they will tell you, in proof, that the names of fairy chiefs are the
names of old *Danān* heroes, and the places where they especially gather
together, *Danān* burying-places, and that the *Tuath De Danān* used
also to be called the *slooa-shee* \[*sheagh sidhe*\] (the fairy host),
or *Marcra shee* (the fairy cavalcade).

On the other hand, there is much evidence to prove them fallen angels.
Witness the nature of the creatures, their caprice, their way of being
good to the good and evil to the evil, having every charm but
conscience--consistency. Beings so quickly offended that you must not
speak much about them at all, and never call them anything but the
"gentry", or else *daoine maithe*, which in English means good people,
yet so easily pleased, they will do their best to keep misfortune away
from you, if you leave a

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

little milk for them on the window-sill over night. On the whole, the
popular belief tells us most about them, telling us how they fell, and
yet were not lost, because their evil was wholly without malice.

Are they "the gods of the earth"? Perhaps! Many poets, and all mystic
and occult writers, in all ages and countries, have declared that behind
the visible are chains on chains of conscious beings, who are not of
heaven but of the earth, who have no inherent form but change according
to their whim, or the mind that sees them. You cannot lift your hand
without influencing and being influenced by hoards. The visible world is
merely their skin. In dreams we go amongst them, and play with them, and
combat with them. They are, perhaps, human souls in the crucible--these
creatures of whim.

Do not think the fairies are always little. Everything is capricious
about them, even their size. They seem to take what size or shape
pleases them. Their chief occupations are feasting, fighting, and making
love, and playing the most beautiful music. They have only one
industrious person amongst them, the *lepra-caun*--the shoemaker.
Perhaps they wear their shoes out with dancing. Near the village of
Ballisodare is a little woman who lived amongst them seven years. When
she came home she had no toes--she had danced them off.

They have three great festivals in the year--May Eve, Midsummer Eve,
November Eve. On May Eve, every seventh year, they fight all round, but
mostly on the "Plain-a-Bawn" (wherever that is), for the harvest, for
the best ears of grain belong to them. An old man told me he saw them
fight once; they tore the thatch off a house in the midst of it all. Had
anyone else been near they would merely have seen a great wind whirling
everything into the air as it passed. When the wind makes the straws and
leaves whirl as it passes, that is the fairies, and the peasantry take
off their hats and say, "God bless them".

On Midsummer Eve, when the bonfires are lighted on every hill in honour
of St. John, the fairies are at their gayest, and sometimes steal away
beautiful mortals to be their brides.

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

On November Eve they are at their gloomiest, for according to the old
Gaelic reckoning, this is the first night of winter. This night they
dance with the ghosts, and the *pooka* is abroad, and witches make their
spells, and girls set a table with food in the name of the devil, that
the fetch of their future lover may come through the window and eat of
the food. After November Eve the blackberries are no longer wholesome,
for the *pooka* has spoiled them.

When they are angry they paralyse men and cattle with their fairy darts.

When they are gay they sing. Many a poor girl has heard them, and pined
away and died, for love of that singing. Plenty of the old beautiful
tunes of Ireland are only their music, caught up by eavesdroppers. No
wise peasant would hum "The Pretty Girl milking the Cow" near a fairy
rath, for they are jealous, and do not like to hear their songs on
clumsy mortal lips. Carolan, the last of the Irish bards, slept on a
rath, and ever after the fairy tunes ran in his head, and made him the
great man he was.

Do they die? Blake saw a fairy's funeral; but in Ireland we say they are
immortal.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Fairies, by William Allingham](fip04)
