[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Yeats](../index)  [Celtic](../../celt/index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fip26)  [Next](fip28) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

# The Solitary Fairies

### THE POOKA

The Pooka, *rectè* Púca, seems essentially an animal spirit. Some derive
his name from *poc*, a he-goat; and speculative persons consider him the
forefather of Shakespeare's "Puck". On solitary mountains and among old
ruins he lives, "grown monstrous with much solitude," and is of the race
of the nightmare. "In the MS. story, called 'Mac-na-Michomhairle', of
uncertain authorship," writes me Mr. Douglas Hyde, "we read that 'out of
a certain hill in Leinster, there used to emerge as far as his middle, a
plump, sleek, terrible steed, and speak in human voice to each person
about November-day, and he was accustomed to give intelligent and proper
answers to such as consulted him concerning all that would befall them
until the November of next year. And the people used to leave gifts and
presents at the hill until the coming of Patrick and the holy clergy.'
This tradition appears to be a cognate one with that of the Púca." Yes!
unless it were merely an *augh-ishka* \[*each-uisgé*\], or Water-horse.
For these, we are told, were common once, and used to come out of the
water to gallop on the sands and in the fields, and people would often
go between them and the marge and bridle them, and they would make the
finest of horses if only you could keep them away from the sight of the
water; but if once they saw a glimpse of the water, they would plunge in
with their rider, and tear him to pieces at the bottom. It being a
November spirit, however, tells in favour of the Pooka, for November-day
is sacred to the Pooka. It is hard to realise that wild, staring phantom
grown sleek and civil.

He has many shapes--is now a horse, now an ass, now a bull, now a goat,
now an eagle. Like all spirits, he is only half in the world of form.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Piper and the Puca, by Douglas Hyde](fip28)
