[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Yeats](../index)  [Celtic](../../celt/index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fip34)  [Next](fip36) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

# GHOSTS

Ghosts. or as they are called in Irish, *Thevshi* or *Tash*
(*taidhbhse*, *tais*), live in a state intermediary between this life
and the next. They are held there by some earthly longing or affection,
or some duty unfulfilled, or anger against the living. "I will haunt
you", is a common threat; and one hears such phrases as, "She will haunt
him, if she has any good in her". If one is sorrowing greatly after a
dead friend, a neighbour will say, "Be quiet now, you are keeping him
from his rest; or, in the Western Isles, according to Lady Wilde, they
will tell you, "You are waking the dog that watches to devour the souls
of the dead". Those who die suddenly, more commonly than others, are
believed to become haunting Ghosts. They go about moving the furniture,
and in every way trying to attract attention.

When the soul has left the body, it is drawn away, sometimes, by the
fairies. I have a story of a peasant who once saw, sitting in a fairy
rath, all who had died for years in his village. Such souls are
considered lost. If a soul eludes the fairies, it may be snapped up by
the evil spirits. The weak souls of young children are in especial
danger. When a very young child dies, the western peasantry sprinkle the
threshold with the blood of a chicken, that the spirits may be drawn
away to the blood. A Ghost is compelled to obey the commands of the
living. 'The stable-boy up at Mrs. G-------'s there," said an old
countryman, "met the master going round the yards after he had been two
days dead, and told him to be away with him to the lighthouse, and haunt
that; and there he is far out to sea still, sir. Mrs. G------- was quite
wild about it, and dismissed

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

the boy." A very desolate lighthouse poor devil of a Ghost! Lady Wilde
considers it is only the spirits who are too bad for heaven, and too
good for hell, who are thus plagued. They are compelled to obey some one
they have wronged.

The souls of the dead sometimes take the shapes of animals. There is a
garden at Sligo where the gardener sees a previous owner in the shape of
a rabbit. They will sometimes take the forms of insects, especially
butterflies. If you see one fluttering near a corpse, that is the soul,
and is a sign of its having entered upon immortal happiness. The author
of the *Parochial Survey of Ireland*, 1814, heard a woman say to a child
who was chasing a butterfly, "How do you know it is not the soul of your
grandfather". On November eve the dead are abroad, and dance with the
fairies.

As in Scotland, the fetch is commonly believed in. If you see the
double, or fetch, of a friend in the morning, no ill follows; if at
night, he is about to die.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: A Dream, by William Allingham](fip36)
