[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Yeats](../index)  [Celtic](../../celt/index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fip54)  [Next](fip56) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LOUGHLEAGH (LAKE OF HEALING) <span id="fr_43"></span>[1](#fn_43)

"Do you see that bit of lake," said my companion, turning his eyes
towards the acclivity that overhung Loughleagh. "Troth, and as little as
you think of it, and as ugly as it looks with its weeds and its flags,
it is the most famous one in all Ireland. Young and ould, rich and poor,
far and near, have come to that lake to get cured of all kinds of scurvy
and sores. The Lord keep us our limbs whole and sound, for it's a
sorrowful thing not to have the use o' them. 'Twas but last week we had
a great grand Frenchman here; and, though he came upon crutches, faith
he went home sound as a bell; and well he paid Billy Reily for curing
him?"

"And, pray, how did Billy Reily cure him?"

"Oh, well enough. He took his long pole, dipped it down to the bottom of
the lake, and brought up on the top of it as much plaster as would do
for a thousand sores!"

"What kind of plaster?"

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

"What kind of plaster? why black plaster to be sure; for isn't the
bottom of the lake filled with a kind of black mud which cures all the
world?"

"Then it ought to be a famous lake indeed."

"Famous, and so it is," replied my companion, "but it isn't for its
cures neather that it is famous; for, sure, doesn't all the world know
there is a fine beautiful city at the bottom of it, where the good
people live just like Christians. Troth, it is the truth I tell you; for
*Shemus-a-sneidh* saw it all when he followed his dun cow that was
stolen."

"Who stole her?"

"I'll tell you about it:--Shemus was a poor gossoon, who lived on the
brow of the hill, in a cabin with his ould mother. They lived by hook
and by crook, one way and another, in the best way they could. They had
a bit of ground that gave 'em the preaty, and a little dun cow that gave
'em the drop o' milk; and, considering how times go, they weren't badly
off, for Shemus was a handy gossoon to boot; and, while minden the cow,
cut heath and made brooms, which his mother sould on a market-day, and
brought home the bit o' tobaccy, the grain of salt, and other
nic-nackeness, which a poor body can't well do widout. Once upon a time,
however, Shemus went farther than usual up the mountain, looken for long
heath, for townspeople don't like to stoop and so like long handles to
their brooms. The little dun cow was a'most as cunning as a Christian
sinner, and followed Shemus like a lap-dog everywhere he'd go, so that
she required little or no herden. On this day she found nice picken on a
round spot as green as a leek; and, as poor Shemus was weary, as a body
would be on a fine summer's day, he lay down on the grass to rest
himself, just as we're resten ourselves on the cairn here. Begad, he
hadn't long lain there, sure enough, when, what should he see but whole
loads of ganconers <span id="fr_44"></span>[1](#fn_44) dancing about

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

the place. Some o' them were hurlen, some kicking a football, and others
leaping a kick-step-and-a-lep. They were so soople and so active that
Shemus was highly delighted with the sport, and a little tanned-skinned
chap in a red cap pleased him better than any o' them, bekase he used to
tumble the other fellows like mushrooms. At one time he had kept the
ball up for as good as half-an-hour, when Shemus cried out, 'Well done,
my hurler! 'The word wasn't well out of his mouth when whap went the
ball on his eye, and flash went the fire. Poor Shemus thought he was
blind, and roared out, 'Mille murdher!' <span
id="fr_45"></span>[1](#fn_45) but the only thing he heard was a loud
laugh. 'Cross o' Christ about us,' says he to himself, 'what is this
for?' and afther rubbing his eyes they came to a little, and he could
see the sun and the sky, and, by-and-by, he could see everything but his
cow and the mischievous ganconers. They were gone to their rath or mote;
but where was the little dun cow? He looked and he looked, and he might
have looked from that day to this, bekase she wasn't to be found, and
good reason why--the ganconers took her away with 'em.

"Shemus-a-sneidh, however, didn't think so, but ran home to his mother.

"'Where is the cow, Shemus?' axed the ould woman.

"'Och, musha, bad luck to her,' said Shemus, 'I donna where she is!'

"'Is that an answer, you big blaggard, for the likes o' you to give your
poor ould mother?' said she.

"'Och, musha,' said Shemus, 'don't kick up saich a *bollhous* about
nothing. The ould cow is safe enough, I'll be bail, some place or other,
though I could find her if I put my eyes upon *kippeens*, <span
id="fr_46"></span>[2](#fn_46) and, speaking of eyes, faith, I had very
good luck o' my side, or I had naver a one to look after her.'

"'Why, what happened your eyes, agrah?' axed the ould woman.

"'Oh! didn't the ganconers--the Lord save us from all

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

hurt and harm!--drive their hurlen ball into them both! and sure I was
stone blind for an hour.'

"'And may be,' said the mother, 'the good people took our cow?'

"'No, nor the devil a one of them,' said Shemus, 'for, by the powers,
that same cow is as knowen as a lawyer, and wouldn't be such a fool as
to go with the ganconers while she could get such grass as I found for
her today.'

In this way, continued my informant, they talked about the cow all that
night, and next mornen both o' them set off to look for her. After
searching every place, high and low, what should Shemus see sticking out
of a bog-hole but something very like the horns of his little beast!

"Oh, mother, mother," said he, "I've found her!"

"Where, alanna?" axed the ould woman.

"In the bog-hole, mother," answered Shemus.

At this the poor ould creathure set up such a *pullallue* that she
brought the seven parishes about her; and the neighbours soon pulled the
cow out of the bog-hole. You'd swear it was the same, and yet it wasn't,
as you shall hear by-and-by.

Shemus and his mother brought the dead beast home with them; and, after
skinnen her, hung the meat up in the chimney. The loss of the drop o'
milk was a sorrowful thing, and though they had a good deal of meat,
that couldn't last always; besides, the whole parish *faughed* upon them
for eating the flesh of a beast that died without bleeden. But the
pretty thing was, they couldn't eat the meat after all, for when it was
boiled it was as tough as carrion, and as black as a turf. You might as
well think of sinking your teeth in an oak plank as into a piece of it,
and then you'd want to sit a great piece from the wall for fear of
knocking your head against it when pulling it through your teeth. At
last and at long run they were forced to throw it to the dogs, but the
dogs wouldn't smell to it, and so it was thrown into the ditch, where it
rotted. This misfortune cost poor Shemus many a salt tear, for he was
now obliged to work twice as hard as before, and be out cutten

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

heath on the mountain late and early. One day he was passing by this
cairn with a load of brooms on his back, when what should he see but the
little dun cow and two redheaded fellows herding her.

"That's my mother cow," said Shemus-a-sneidh.

"No, it is not," said one of the chaps.

"But I say it is," said Shemus, throwing the brooms on the ground, and
seizing the cow by the horns. At that the red fellows drove her as fast
as they could to this steep place, and with one leap she bounced over,
with Shemus stuck fast to her horns. They made only one splash in the
lough when the waters closed over 'em, and they sunk to the bottom. Just
as Shemus-a-sneidh thought that all was over with him, he found himself
before a most elegant palace built with jewels and all manner of fine
stones. Though his eyes were dazzled with the splendour of the place,
faith he had gomsh <span id="fr_47"></span>[1](#fn_47) enough not to let
go his holt, but in spite of all they could do he held his little cow by
the horns, He was axed into the palace, but wouldn't go.

The hubbub at last grew so great that the door flew open and out walked
a hundred ladies and gentlemen, as fine as any in the land.

"What does this boy want?" axed one o' them, who seemed to be the
masther.

"I want my mother's cow," said Shemus.

"That's not your mother's cow," said the gentleman.

"Bethershin!" <span id="fr_48"></span>[2](#fn_48) cried Shemus-a-sneidh;
"don't I know hex as well as I know my right hand?"

"Where did you lose her?" axed the gentleman. And so Shemus up and tould
him all about it how he was on the mountain--how he saw the good people
hurlen--how the ball was knocked in his eye, and his cow was lost.

"I believe you are right," said the gentleman, pulling out his purse,
"and here is the price of twenty cows for you."

"No, no," said Shemus, "you'll not catch ould birds wid chaff. I'll have
my cow and nothen else.'

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

"You're a funny fellow," said the gentleman; "stop here and live in a
palace."

"I'd rather live with my mother."

"Foolish boy!" said the gentleman; "stop here and live in a palace."

"I'd rather live in my mother's cabin."

"Here you can walk through gardens loaded with fruit and flowers."

"I'd rather," said Shemus, "be cutting heath on the mountain."

"Here you can eat and drink of the best."

"Since I've got my cow, I can have milk once more with the praties."

"Oh!" cried the ladies, gathering round him, "sure you wouldn't take
away the cow that gives us milk for our tea?"

"Oh!" said Shemus, "my mother wants milk as bad as anyone, and she must
have it; so there is no use in your palaver--I must have my cow."

At this they all gathered about him and offered him bushels of gould,
but he wouldn't have anything but his cow. Seeing him as obstinate as a
mule, they began to thump and beat him; but still he held fast by the
horns, till at length a great blast of wind blew him out of the place,
and in a moment he found himself and the cow standing on the side of the
lake, the water of which looked as if it hadn't been disturbed since
Adam was a boy--and that's a long time since.

Well, Shemus-a-sneidh drove home his cow, and right glad his mother was
to see her; but the moment she said 'God bless the beast', she sunk down
like the *breesha* <span id="fr_49"></span>[1](#fn_49) of a turf rick.
That was the end of Shemus-a-sneidh's dun cow.

"And, sure," continued my companion, standing up, "it is now time for me
to look after my brown cow, and God send the ganconers haven't taken
her!"

Of this I assured him there could be no fear; and so we parted.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_43"></span>[206:1](fip55.htm#fr_43) *Dublin and London
Magazine*, 1825.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[207:1](fip55.htm#fr_44) Ir.
*gean-canach*--*i.e.*, love-talker, a kind of fairy appearing in
lonesome valleys, a dudeen (tobacco-pipe) in his mouth, making love to
milk-maids, etc.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[208:1](fip55.htm#fr_45) A thousand murders.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[208:2](fip55.htm#fr_46) Ir. *cipin*--*i.e.*, a
stick, a twig.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[210:1](fip55.htm#fr_47) Otherwise "gumshun--"
*i.e.*, sense, cuteness.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[210:2](fip55.htm#fr_48) Ir. *B'édir
sin*--*i.e.*, "that is possible."

<span id="fn_49"></span>[211:1](fip55.htm#fr_49) Ir. *briseadh*--*i.e.*,
breaking.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hy-Brasail--The Isle of the Blest by Gerald Griffin](fip56)
