[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Yeats](../index)  [Celtic](../../celt/index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fip76)  [Next](fip78) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE JACKDAW.

Tom Moor was a linen draper in Sackville Street. His father, when he
died, left him an affluent fortune, and a shop of excellent trade.

As he was standing at his door one day a countryman came up to him with
a nest of jackdaws, and accosting him, says, "Master, will you buy a
nest of daws?" "No, I don't want any." "Master," replied the man, "I
will sell them all cheap; you shall have the whole nest for ninepence."
"I don't want them," answered Tom Moor, "so go about your business."

As the man was walking away one of the daws popped out his head, and
cried, "Mawk, mawk." "Damn it," says\[paragraph continues\]

<span id="page_304">p. 304</span>

Tom Moor, "that bird knows my name; halloo, countryman, what will you
take for the bird?" "Why, you shall have him for threepence." Tom Moor
bought him, had a cage made, and hung him up in the shop.

The journeymen took much notice of the bird, and would frequently tap at
the bottom of the cage, and say, "Who are you? who are you? Tom Moor of
Sackville Street."

In a short time the jackdaw learned these words, and if he wanted
victuals or water, would strike his bill against the cage, turn up the
white of his eyes, cock his head and cry, "Who are you? who are you? Tom
Moor of Sackville Street."

Tom Moor was fond of gaming, and often lost large sums of money; finding
his business neglected in his absence, he had a small hazard table set
up in one corner of his dining-room, and invited a party of friends to
play at it.

The jackdaw had by this time become familiar; his cage was left open,
and he hopped into every part of the house; some times he got into the
dining-room, where the gentlemen were at play, and one of them being a
constant winner, the others would say, "Damn it, how he nicks them." The
bird learned these words also, and adding them to the former, would
call, "Who are you? who are you? Tom Moor of Sackville Street. Damn it,
how he nicks them."

Tom Moor, from repeated losses and neglect of business failed in trade,
and became a prisoner in the Fleet; he took his bird with him, and lived
on the master's side, supported by friends, in a decent manner. They
would sometimes ask what brought you here? when he used to lift up his
hands and answer, "Bad company, by G--." The bird learned these
likewise, and at the end of the former words, would say, "What brought
you here? Bad company by G--."

Some of Tom Moor's friends died, others went abroad, and by degrees he
was totally deserted, and removed to the common side of the prison,
where the jail distemper soon attacked him; and in the last stage of
life, lying on a straw

<span id="page_305">p. 305</span>

bed; the poor bird had been for two days without food or water, came to
his feet, and striking his bill on the floor, calls out, "Who are you?
Tom Moor of Sackville Street; damn it, how he nicks them. What brought
you here? bad company, by G--, bad company, by G--."

Tom Moor, who had attended to the bird, was struck with his words, and
reflecting on himself, cried out, "Good God, to what a situation am I
reduced! my father, when he died, left me a good fortune and an
established trade. I have spent my fortune, ruined my business, and am
now dying in a loathsome jail; and to complete all, keeping that poor
thing confined without support. I will endeavour to do one piece of
justice before I die, by setting him at liberty."

He made a struggle to crawl from his straw bed, opened the casement, and
out flew the bird. A flight of jackdaws from the Temple were going over
the jail, and Tom Moor's bird mixed among them. The gardener was then
laying the plats of the Temple gardens, and as often as he placed them
in the day the jackdaws pulled them up by night. They got a gun and
attempted to shoot some of them, but, being cunning birds, they always
placed one as a watch in the stump of a hollow tree; who, as soon as the
gun was levelled cried "Mawk", and away they flew.

The gardeners were advised to get a net, and the first night it was
spread they caught fifteen; Tom Moor's bird was amongst them. One of the
men took the net into a garret of an uninhabited house, fastens the
doors and windows, and turns the birds loose. "Now," said he, "you black
rascals, I will be revenged of you." Taking hold of the first at hand,
he twists her neck, and throwing him down, cries, "There goes one." Tom
Moor's bird, who had hopped up to a beam at one comer of the room
unobserved, as the man lays hold of the second, calls out, "Damn it, how
he nicks them." The man alarmed, cries, "Sure I heard a voice, but the
house is uninhabited, and the door is fast; it could only be
imagination." On laying hold of

<span id="page_306">p. 306</span>

the third, and twisting his neck, Tom's bird again says, "Damn it, how
he nicks them." The man dropped the bird in his hand, and turning to
where the voice came from, seeing the other with his mouth open, cries
out, "Who are you?" to which the bird answered, "Tom Moor of Sackville
Street, Tom Moor of Sackville Street." "The devil you are; and what
brought you here." Tom Moor's bird, lifting up his pinions, answered,
"Bad company, by G--, bad company by G--." The fellow, frightened almost
out of his wits, opened the door, ran down stairs, and out of the house,
followed by all the birds, who by this means regained their liberty.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Story of Conn-eda, or the Golden Apples of Lough Erne, by
Abraham M'Coy, tr. by Nicholas O'Kearney](fip78)
