[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Yeats](../index)  [Celtic](../../celt/index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fip74)  [Next](fip76) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### MUNACHAR AND MANACHAR

Translated literally from the Irish by Douglas Hyde

There once lived a Munachar and a Manachar, a long time ago, and it is a
long time since it was, and if they were alive then they would not be
alive now. They went out together to pick raspberries, and as many as
Munachar used to pick Manachar used to eat. Munachar said he must go
look for a rod to make a gad (a withy band) to hang Manachar, who ate
his raspberries every one; and he came to the rod. "God save you," said
the rod. "God and Mary save you." "How far are you going?" "Going
looking for a rod, a rod to make a gad, a gad to hang Manachar, who ate
my raspberries every one."

"You will not get me," said the rod, "until you get an axe to cut me."
He came to the axe. "God save you," said the axe. "God and Mary save
you." "How far are you going?" Going looking for an axe, an axe to cut a
rod, a rod to make a gad to hang Manachar, who ate my raspberries every
one."

"You will not get me," said the axe, "until you get a flag to edge me."
He came to the flag. "God save you," says the flag. "God and Mary save
you." "How far are you going?" "Going looking for an axe, axe to cut a
rod,

<span id="page_297">p. 297</span>

a rod to make a gad, a gad to hang Manachar, who ate my raspberries
every one."

"You will not get me," says the flag. "till you get water to wet me." He
came to the water. "God save you," says the water. "God and Mary save
you." "How far are you going?" "Going looking for water, water to wet
flag to edge axe, axe to cut a rod, a red to make a gad, a gad to hang
Manachar, who ate my raspberries every one."

"You will not get me," said the water, "until you get a deer who will
swim me." He came to the deer. "God save you," says the deer. "God and
Mary save you." "How far are you going?" "Going looking for a deer, deer
to swim water, water to wet flag, flag to edge axe, axe to cut a rod, a
rod to make a gad, a gad to hang Manachar, who ate my raspberries every
one."

"You will not get me," said the deer, "until you get a hound who will
hunt me." He came to the hound. "God save you," says the hound. "God and
Mary save you." "How far are you going?" "Going looking for a hound,
hound to hunt deer, deer to swim water, water to wet flag, flag to edge
axe, axe to cut a rod, a rod to make a gad, a gad to hang Manachar, who
ate my raspberries every one."

"You will not get me," said the hound, "until you get a bit of butter to
put in my claw." He came to the butter. "God save you, says the butter.
"God and Mary save you." "How far are you going?" Going looking for
butter, butter to go in claw of hound, hound to hunt deer, deer to swim
water, water to wet flag, flag to edge axe, axe to cut a rod, a rod to
make a gad, a gad to hang Manachar, who ate my raspberries every one."

"You will not get me," said the butter, "until you get a cat who shall
scrape me." He came to the cat. "God save you," said the cat. "God and
Mary save you." "How far are you going?" "Going looking for a cat, cat
to scrape butter, butter to go in claw of hound, hound to hunt deer,
deer to swim water, water to wet flag, flag to edge axe, axe to cut a
rod, a rod to make a gad, a gad to hang Manachar, who ate my raspberries
every one."

<span id="page_298">p. 298</span>

"You will not get me," said the cat, "until you will get milk which you
will give me." He came to the cow. "God save you," said the cow. "God
and Mary save you." "How far are you going?" "Going looking for a cow,
cow to give me milk, milk I will give to the cat, cat to scrape butter,
butter to go in claw of hound, hound to hunt deer, deer to swim water,
water to wet flag, flag to edge axe, axe to cut a rod, a rod to make a
gad, a gad to hang Manachar, who ate my raspberries every one."

"You will not get any milk from me," said the cow, "until you bring me a
whisp of straw from those threshers yonder." He came to the threshers.
"God save you," said the threshers. "God and Mary save ye." "How far are
you going?" "Going looking for a whisp of straw from ye to give to the
cow, the cow to give me milk, milk I will give to the cat, cat to scrape
butter, butter to go in claw of hound, hound to hunt deer, deer to swim
water, water to wet flag, flag to edge axe, axe to cut a rod, a rod to
make a gad, a gad to hang Manachar, who ate my raspberries every one."

"You will not get any whisp of straw from us," said the threshers,
"until you bring us the makings of a cake from the miller over yonder."
He came to the miller. "God save you." "God and Mary save you." "How far
are you going?" "Going looking for the makings of a cake, which I will
give to the threshers, the threshers to give me a whisp of straw, the
whisp of straw I will give to the cow, the cow to give me milk, milk I
will give to the cat, cat to scrape butter, butter to go in claw of
hound, hound to hunt deer, deer to swim water, water to wet flag, flag
to edge axe, axe to cut a rod, a rod to make a gad, a gad to hang
Manachar, who ate my raspberries every one."

"You will not get any makings of a cake from me," said the miller, "till
you bring me the full of that sieve of water from the river over there."

He took the sieve in his hand and went over to the river, but as often
as ever he would stoop and fill it with water, the moment he raised it
the water would run out of

<span id="page_299">p. 299</span>

it again, and sure, if he had been there from that day till this, he
never could have filled it. A crow went flying by him, over his head.
"Daub! daub!" said the crow. "My soul to God, then," said Munachar, "but
it's the good advice you have," and he took the red clay and the daub
that was by the brink, and he rubbed it to the bottom of the sieve,
until all the holes were filled, and then the sieve held the water, and
he brought the water to the miller, and the miller gave him the makings
of a cake, and he gave the makings of the cake to the threshers, and the
threshers gave him a whisp of straw, and he gave the whisp of straw to
the cow, and the cow gave him milk, the milk he gave to the cat, the cat
scraped the butter, the butter went into the claw of the hound, the
hound hunted the deer, the deer swam the water, the water wet the flag,
the flag sharpened the axe, the axe cut the rod, and the rod made a gad,
and when he had it ready--I'll go bail that Manachar was far enough away
from him.

 

There is some tale like this in almost every language. It resembles that
given in that splendid work of industry and patriotism, Campbell's
*Tales of the West Highlands* under the name of *Moonachug and
Meenachug*. "The English House that Jack built," says Campbell, "has
eleven steps, the Scotch Old Woman with the Silver Penny has twelve, the
Novsk Cock and Hen A-nutting has twelve, ten of which are double. The
German story in Grimm has five or six, all single ideas." This, however,
is longer than any of them. It sometimes varies a little in the telling,
and the actors' names are sometimes *Suracha* and *Muracha*, and the
crow is sometimes a gull, who, instead of *daub! daub!* says *cuir cré
rua lesh*!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Donald and his Neighbours](fip76)
