[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Yeats](../index)  [Celtic](../../celt/index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fip88)  [Next](fip90) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE GANCONER OR GANCANAGH \[GEAN-CANACH\].--Page [207](fip55.htm#page_207).

O'Kearney, a Louthman, deeply versed in Irish lore, writes of the
*gean-cānach* (love-talker) that he is "another diminutive being of the
same tribe as the Lepracaun, but, unlike him, he personated love and
idleness, and always appeared with a dudeen in his jaw in lonesome
valleys, and it was his custom to make love to shepherdesses and
milkmaids. It was considered very unlucky to meet him, and whoever was
known to have ruined his fortune by devotion to the fair sex was said to
have met a *gean-cānach*. The dudeen, or ancient Irish tobacco

<span id="page_324">p. 324</span>

pipe, found in our raths, etc., is still popularly called a
*gean-cānach's* pipe."

The word is not to be found in dictionaries, nor does this spirit appear
to be well known, if known at all, in Connacht. The word is pronounced
*gánconâgh*.

In the MS. marked R.I.A. 23/E. 13, in the Roy' Ir. Ac., there is a long
poem describing such a fairy hurling-match as the one in the story, only
the fairies described as the *shiagh*, or host, wore plaids and bonnets,
like Highlanders. After the hurling the fairies have a hunt, in which
the poet takes part, and they swept with great rapidity through half
Ireland. The poem ends with the line-

"*'S gur shiubhail me na cûig cúig cûige's gan fúm acht buachallân
buidhe*",

\[paragraph continues\] "and I had travelled the five provinces with
nothing under me but a yellow bohalawn (rag-weed)". \[*Note by Mr.
Douglas Hyde*.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Father John O'Hart](fip90)
