[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Ancient Near
East](../../index)  [Records of the Past](../index.md) 
[Egypt](../../../egy/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](rp20423.md) 
[Next](rp20425.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Records of the Past, 2nd Series, Vol. IV* , ed. by A.H. Sayce,
\[1890\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

### THE DEDICATION OF THREE BABYLONIANS TO THE SERVICE OF THE SUN-GOD AT SIPPARA

#### <span class="smallcaps">Translated by the Editor</span>

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> text of the following curious
document has been published by Dr. Strassmaier in his *Inschriften von
Cambyses König von Babylon*, Part I, No. 273 (Leipzig, 1890). It has
unfortunately been injured in one or two places, though in each case the
reading can be restored with more or less probability. The text
describes the dedication of three young men by their mother,
Ummu-dhabat, to the service of the Sun-god of Sippara, and thus offers
an interesting parallel to the history of the dedication of Samuel by
his mother Hannah (1 Sam. i.) Samuel, however, was "brought unto the
house of the Lord in Shiloh" as soon as he had been weaned, whereas the
Babylonian mother waited until her sons were grown up and had been
"counted among the men," before she presented them to Samas the Sun-god.

They then became attached to "the house of the males" (*bit zikari*), of
which we hear several times in the tablets published by Dr. Strassmaier.

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Thus we are told
that on the 6th day of the month Iyyar, in the 5th year of Kambyses, a
large quantity of dates were conveyed from the *sutummu* or "storehouse"
of the king for the support of "the males" and their superintendant
Takh-Gula, on account of their ministry in the temple during the
preceding month of Nisan; while ten measures of dates were delivered to
a certain Arduya for their use in the service of the goddess Anunit
during the month of Iyyar. <span id="fr_415"></span>[1](#fn_412.md) So,
again, on the 21st day of the month Ab in the same year, sixty measures
of tribute (*makka´su*, Heb. *meke´s*, Numb. xxxi. 28) were registered
as having been provided for them and their superintendent on account of
the "daily sacrifice" during the month Elul. <span
id="fr_416"></span>[2](#fn_413.md) It would therefore seem that a
Babylonian temple had attached to it a sort of college of priests, who
lived together apart from women, under a head or president, and who were
called upon to perform certain religious functions in the services of
the temple. It is possible that the priests, who are specially
distinguished by the title of "males," were celibates. At all events
they could be dedicated to the service of the gods by their mothers,
just as Samuel was by Hannah.

The college or "house of the males" reminds us of the Roman *collegia*,
as well as of the cells inhabited by the celibate monks who were
attached to the Serapeum at Alexandria. It also reminds us of the

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

account given in the book of Daniel of the education of Daniel and his
three companions, though in their case it was a temporary isolation from
female society and not a perpetual dedication to divine worship, and
was, moreover, intended to fit them for the service of the king and not
of the gods.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_412"></span>[110:1](rp20424.htm#fr_415.md) Strassmaier *l.c.*
No. 274. The *sutummu*, over which an officer called the *satam*
presided, is the Egyptian *larit*, for which see *Records of the Past*,
new series, vol. iii. pp. 7 *sq*.

<span id="fn_413"></span>[110:2](rp20424.htm#fr_416.md) Strassmaier, No.
281.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Text](rp20425.md)
