[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Ancient Near
East](../../index)  [Records of the Past](../index) 
[Egypt](../../../egy/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](rp20407) 
[Next](rp20409) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Records of the Past, 2nd Series, Vol. IV* , ed. by A.H. Sayce,
\[1890\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

### THE SYNCHRONOUS HISTORY OF ASSYRIA AND <span class="smallcaps">Babylonia</span>

### <span class="smallcaps">Translated by the Editor</span>

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> so-called Synchronous History of
Assyria and Babylonia has been translated in part by myself in the
former series of *Records of the Past*, iii. pp. 29–36. I see no reason
for changing the translation given there; but as several new fragments
of the history have been discovered since its publication, it is
necessary that the document as we now have it should be placed before
the reader. Its historical importance is considerable; not only are
kings of Assyria and Babylonia mentioned in it with whose names we are
otherwise unacquainted, but the order in which they occur, as well as
their contemporaneity, is our only guide towards settling the chronology
of the earlier period of Assyrian history.

A translation of the document has lately been published by Dr. Peiser
and Dr. Winckler in the *Keilinschriftliche Bibliothek*, i. pp. 194–203.
They are doubtless right in holding that it is not a history in the
proper sense of the word, but a historical retrospect of the
arrangements made by the Assyrian

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

and Babylonian kings in regard to the disputed territory which lay
between the two kingdoms. It formed part, in fact, of a legal statement
of the case made on behalf of Assyria in the time of one of the
immediate successors of Rimmon-nirari III. Hence the absence of dates
which characterises it, as well as its reference only to those monarchs
who in war or peace concerned themselves with the territory in question.
The recently discovered tablets of Tel el-Amarna contain letters from
Assur-yuballidh of Assyria and Burna-buryas of Babylonia to the Egyptian
king, and they further show that the immediate predecessor of
Burna-buryas was not Kara-indas but Ris-takullima-Sin. Since Shalmaneser
I., whose date is fixed by an inscription of Sennacherib about 1300 B.C.
(see *Records of the Past*, new series, vol. ii. p. 3, note 2), was the
grandson of Pudil or Pediel, who was himself "the son of Bel-nirari the
son of Assur-yuballidh," we may consider the last-named to have reigned
about 1400 B.C.

The beginning of the document is lost, only the ends of the first eleven
lines being preserved. These read as follows:

1\. … to (?) Assyria (*or* Assur)

2\. … his….

3\. … before (?) him I speak

4\. …

5\. … for future days

6\. \[I have indited\] a memorial (tablet)

7\. … (of) the glory (and) power

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

8\. \[which the kings of Assyria have displayed\] in that they overcame
everything,

9\. … (and of) the former campaigns

10\. \[in which foreign lands\] were conquered

11\. \[and their spoil\] brought back, and

…

Another fragment of the text has also been found which Messrs. Peiser
and Winckler believe should be inserted between col. iii. l. 36, and
col. iv. l. 1. This reads:

1\. they fixed a common frontier

2\. … \[Merodach-baladh-’su-iq\]bi king of Kar-dunias

3\. … \[Samas-\]Rimmon king of Assyria

4\. \[defeated; Merodach-baladh-\]’su-iqbi he destroyed \[utterly\],

5\. \[with the bodies of\] his warriors he filled the field.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Text](rp20409)
