[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Ancient Near
East](../../index)  [Records of the Past](../index.md) 
[Egypt](../../../egy/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](rp20425.md) 
[Next](rp20427.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Records of the Past, 2nd Series, Vol. IV* , ed. by A.H. Sayce,
\[1890\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

### THE GREAT INSCRIPTION OF ARGISTIS ON THE ROCK OF VAN

#### <span class="smallcaps">Translated by the Editor</span>

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> following inscription is engraved in
cuneiform characters, but in the Vannic language, on the face of the
cliff on which stands the castle of Van in Armenia. It records the
conquests of Argistis, the son and successor of Menuas, who widely
extended the empire of Bianias or Van in the early part of the eighth
century B.C., at a time when Assyria was in a state of weakness. The
Vannic armies marched victoriously in all directions, and even
threatened the frontiers of Assyria. As will be seen from the Assyrian
Chronicle, of which a translation is given in the *Records of the Past*,
new series, ii. p. 12 3, the reign of Shalmaneser III was mainly spent
in war with Ararat or Armenia. His successor, Assur-dân, seems to be
referred to by Argistis in this inscription (No. ii. 52).

The inscriptions of which the text is composed are cut below the site of
the citadel built by Sarduris I, the founder of the Vannic monarchy
(B.C. 840). They begin to the right of a small chamber excavated

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

in the western face of the rock at the commencement of a flight of
twenty steps. Above the steps arc the three first inscriptions (I, II,
and III), which are divided from one another by vertical lines, and
should properly be regarded as the three columns of one and the same
inscription. Turning a corner at the end of the steps we reach the
entrance into a series of five sepulchral chambers. To the left of the
entrance are inscriptions IV, V, and VII, while above it is the
mutilated inscription VI, and on the right inscription VIII.

The inscriptions were first copied by Prof. F. E. Schulz, and published
in the *Journal Asiatique*, 3d series, ix. 52, in 1840. They were again
copied by Sir A. H. Layard in 1850, whose variant readings were
published by myself in 1882, and also by Dr. L. de Robert in 1876. The
copies of the latter, however, are not trustworthy. Squeezes of the
inscriptions have further been taken by M. Deyrolles, and are preserved
in the Louvre, where they have been examined by M. Stanislas Guyard.

The inscriptions were first deciphered by myself in 1882, and
translations published in my Memoir on "The Cuneiform inscriptions of
Van" in the *Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society*, xiv. 3, pp. 571–62
3. Corrections and improvements were subsequently made in the
translations by M. Stanislas Guyard, Prof. D. H. Müller, and myself, and
were embodied in a paper I contributed to the *Journal of the Royal
Asiatic Society*, xx. 1, in 1888. The

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

following version brings them up to the present level of our knowledge
of the ancient language of Van. For a description of the latter
reference may be made to the *Records of the Past*, new series, i. p.
163.

The great inscription of Argistis is the prototype of the similar
historical inscription carved by Darius Hystaspis on the rock of
Behistun, and may have suggested the latter to the Persian king. At all
events the bilingual inscription of Xerxes, which is engraved on the
south side of the cliff of Van, expressly states that it was his father
Darius who had originally intended to have it made.

The inscriptions which follow arc numbered XXXVII, XXXVIII, XXXIX, XL,
XLI, XLII, XLIII, and XLIV in my Memoir on the Vannic texts.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Text](rp20427.md)
