[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Ancient Near
East](../../index)  [Records of the Past](../index) 
[Egypt](../../../egy/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](rp20405) 
[Next](rp20407) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Records of the Past, 2nd Series, Vol. IV* , ed. by A.H. Sayce,
\[1890\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

### HYMN TO <span class="smallcaps">Osiris</span> ON THE STELE OF AMON-EM-HA

### <span class="smallcaps">Translated by D. Mallet</span>

<span class="smallcaps">This</span> hymn to Osiris is engraved on a
semi-circular stele of limestone which forms part of the collection of
the Bibliothèque Nationale at Paris. It comprises 28 lines of
hieroglyphics, in a very good state of preservation, excepting only that
the name of the god Amon, which once figured in several proper names,
has been carefully chiselled out, in the age of the so-called heretic
kings Khu-n-Aten (Amenophis IV) and his successors.

The text may have been sculptured on the stele in the time of the
eighteenth dynasty—Chabas has remarked that the wife of Amon-mes, the
father of Amon-em-ha, bore the same name as the favourite wife of
Amenophis I—but it reproduces a religious work of more ancient date,
which goes back at least to the epoch of the twelfth dynasty, as is
shown on the one hand by the small number of determinatives and on the
other by the use of certain formulæ, *e.g.* the position of the father's
name before that of the son: "Osiris son Horus" in the sense of "Horus

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

son of Osiris." The references of the monument to the cult of Osiris are
consequently very ancient, and they thus possess all the greater
importance for the history of the Egyptian religion.

The text has been reproduced for the first time and translated by Chabas
in the *Revue archéologique* (May-June 1857), from a squeeze furnished
him by Devéria. Chabas published a new translation, which differed
considerably from the first, in the first series of *Records of the
Past*, vol. vi. pp. 99 *sqq*.

The semicircular part of the stele is divided into two compartments. At
the top is the ring in the form of a seal, accompanied by the two sacred
eyes. The first compartment includes two scenes of unequal importance.
On the left, Amon-em-ha presents the table of offerings, filled with
provisions of all sorts, to his father and mother, seated side by side
in a large armchair, the wife resting the left hand, as usual, on the
shoulder of her husband. Behind the chair is a child, with a long lock
of hair, who puts his left hand to his mouth and holds a flower in the
right. Behind him runs a vertical inscription: "His son Amon-em-ua."
Above the two seated personages we read: "The superintendent of the oxen
Amon-mes; his wife, the mistress of the house, Nofri-t-ari." Above the
table of offerings is: "His son Amon-em-ha." On the right, a person
clothed in a panther's skin, the characteristic garb of the priests,
presents a seated lady, "the mistress Baki-t, deceased"—doubtless
another wife of Amon-mes—

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

with an incense-burner which has a long handle like an arm, while with
the other hand he pours out a libation of water over a double altar, and
the legend engraved before him runs: "The Khri-heb of Osiris, the son,
comes."

The second compartment is occupied by a series of six kneeling persons,
whose faces are turned to the right; their names are engraved in a
vertical direction in front of each of them:—"His son Si-t-Maut; his son
Amon-ken; his daughter Meri-t; his daughter Amon-bai-t; his daughter
Suten-Maut; his daughter Hui-em-nuter."

Next comes the hymn itself, which occupies the rest of the stele.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Text](rp20407)
