[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Ancient Near
East](../../index)  [Records of the Past](../index) 
[Egypt](../../../egy/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](rp20415) 
[Next](rp20417) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Records of the Past, 2nd Series, Vol. IV* , ed. by A.H. Sayce,
\[1890\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

### A VOTIVE INSCRIPTION OF ASSUR-NATSIR-PAL

#### <span class="smallcaps">Translated by S. Arthur Strong</span>

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> following inscription is on a tablet
of alabaster, which, with a duplicate copy, was found in a marble coffer
by Mr. Rassam in the course of his excavations at Balawât in 1878, and
is now in the British Museum. It begins with the genealogy of
Assur-natsir-pal and a short account of his conquering advance from east
to west, from beyond the Tigris to the Mediterranean, which is repeated
almost word for word from his great inscription. (Col. ii. lines
123–131. See *Records of the Past*, new series, vol. ii. p. 161.) The
king then records how he recaptured and brought once more within the
sphere of his dominion a town or fortress, to which he gave the name
Imgur-Bel or "Bel's Delight." The position of this place, which was not
far east of the ancient Kalah, is now marked by the mound of Balawât.
Here he built a temple to Makhir, whom we know only as the god of
dreams, but who doubtless possessed other and more important attributes
and functions. It was among the ruins of this temple

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

that the coffer containing the tablets was discovered. The inscription
closes with the usual appeal to the future king to respect the pious
memory of his predecessor, and to restore the building and replace the
tablet in the event of their removal or decay. To him who shall thus act
the blessing of Assur is promised; while, on the other hand, the curse
of Ishtar is invoked upon him who, with the tablet in view, should
insult the memory of Assur-natsir-pal. This work of construction and
restoration at Imgur-Bel, left unfinished by the great king at his death
in 858 B.C., was taken up and completed by his son and successor, a
ruler of kindred spirit, Shalmaneser II.

The tablets are in a state of good preservation, and the writing is
regular and clear. They are remarkable for the use made throughout by
the scribe of vertical lines of division between words or groups of
words, thus:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

*Assur-natsir-pal* \| *sarru rab-u* \| *sarru dan-nu* \|  
*sar kissati sar Assur* \|

</div>

Instances of such a use of dividing-lines are extremely rare in Assyrian
inscriptions, whereas on the Persian cuneiform monuments the words are
invariably separated, but by a wedge placed diagonally.

The lid of the coffer in which this text was found bears a somewhat
defaced inscription of the same character, which, however, ends with the
words of line 40 of the present translation.

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

The text has been published (with an introduction, transliteration, and
translation) by Mr. Budge in the seventh volume of the *Transactions of
the Society of Biblical Archæology*, p. 59, and in the fifth volume of
*The Cuneiform Inscriptions of Western Asia*, plates 69 and 70.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Text](rp20417)
