[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Ancient Near
East](../../index)  [Records of the Past](../index.md) 
[Egypt](../../../egy/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](rp20422.md) 
[Next](rp20424.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Records of the Past, 2nd Series, Vol. IV* , ed. by A.H. Sayce,
\[1890\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### I.—<span class="smallcaps">Rêmut Lends Money to his Needy Neighbours during a Time of Dearth</span>

This inscription, the writing of which is above the average, is divided
into four sections. The first gives the text of the transaction; the
second the names of

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

the witnesses; the third the name of the scribe, the place, and the
date; and the fourth the record of the famine. It is a remarkable text,
and possesses a value beyond the mere record, for it shows how great the
need of the people must have been. The tablet is numbered 81-11-3, 71.

#### TRANSLATION

5/6 of a mana of silver from Rêmut, son of …, unto Musêzib-Marduk, and
Kullâ, his wife, for necessities. In the day when the face of the land
sprouts (again), the money, 5/6 of a mana, in its full amount,
Musêzib-Marduk and Kullâ shall repay to Rêmut.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Witnesses: Ablâ, son of Arad-bît-Nergal; Sapik-zēri, son of
Musêzib-Marduk; Bêl-upakhkhir, son of Tullubu; Ugara, son of Sippê;
Nabû-sum-utsur, son of the potter;

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

and the scribe, Marduk-êdhir. Babylon, month Tebet, day 9th, year 19th,
Samas-sum-ukîn king of Babylon.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

At this time, in the city of Lamî*ma*, want and famine \[are\] in the
land. The people are dying for want of food. <span
id="fr_403"></span>[1](#fn_400.md)

 

This interesting text is a good proof of the unsettled state of
Babylonia at the time it was written.

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> It was in the year
648 B.C. Samas-sum-ukîn or Saosduchinos had been on the throne of
Babylonia, under the suzerainty of his brother, Assur-banî-apli, for 19
years, and the end of his rule, and his own tragic death, were nearing.
The Assyrian army, sent by his brother, was probably at that time
overrunning the land, and destroying everything wherever they passed.
Hence were the people overtaken by want and misery, such as often
happened to them in those days. If we want to know how the Babylonians
behaved towards each other during this trying time, the tablet here
translated depicts it to us clearly, and it is a picture worthy of
consideration. Rêmut, a man probably richer and more fortunate than his
neighbours, lends a sum of money which was hardly to be considered small
(5/6ths of a mana = 50 shekels) to Musêzib-Marduk and Kullâ, his wife,
without interest (for none is mentioned). This money is lent, not for a
week or a month, but *until the land brings forth again*, <span
id="fr_404"></span>[1](#fn_401.md) whenever that might be. All honour to
Rêmut. It is to be hoped that he and his friends passed happily through
this trying time when there was "want and famine in the land, and the
people were dying for want of food"; and well has Marduk-êdhir, the
scribe, done in recording the fact.

The name of the city mentioned in the last paragraph (Lamîma) is
doubtful. The last syllable may be *ra*, in which case we must read
Lamîra. There

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

is yet a third possibility, namely, that the characters are quite
correctly read, but that the final *ma* is the well-known enclitic
particle. If this be the case, we must read "At this time, in the city
of Lamî also, there is want and famine in the land." After the word
*makalê* there is a small piece of the tablet broken away, but this
seems to have contained no word of importance, if, indeed, it was
inscribed at all.

#### II.—<span class="smallcaps">A Testimony to Babylonian Overlordship in Tyre</span>

##### THE GOVERNOR OF KADESH MAKES A PLEDGE WITH REGARD TO SOME CATTLE

This little text, which is an ordinary contract-tablet of unbaked clay,
is important not only as giving the date of the Babylonian dominion so
far from Babylonia, but also for the names, some of which are clearly
Phoenician. The text is slightly damaged, but the wanting characters
can, in every case, be restored with perfect certainty. The number is
81–4–28, 88.

#### TRANSLATION

On the 15th day of the month Iyyar, Milki-idiri, Governor of Kidis, will
get *three* cows and their young, and will give them to Ablâ, son of
Nadin-âkhi, descendant of the priest of the Sungod. If he cannot get
(them), Milki-idiri will give to Ablâ, son of Nadin-âkhi, son of the
priest of the Sungod, 5 mana of silver.

Witnessing: Bunduti, son of Nabû-ukîn, descendant of Nabutu;
Musêzib-Marduk, son of Ablâ, descendant of the

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

fisherman (?); Marduk-sakin-sumi, son of Marduk-êdhir, descendant of
Êdheru; and the scribe, Pir’u, son of Sulâ. Tyre, month Tammuz, day 22d,
year 40th, Nebuchadnezzar, King of Babylon. <span
id="fr_405"></span>[1](#fn_402.md)

 

The cause of Milki-idiri taking the obligation here recorded upon
himself it is unfortunately impossible to determine. Judging, however,
from the fact that it is cattle that are given, and that only in event
of inability to get the animals money was to be substituted, it may be
inferred that he entered into the obligation by way of compensating Ablâ
for a loss for which he was in some way responsible. The contract gave
Milki-idiri nearly ten months in which to discharge the obligation (22d
of Tammuz, or June-July, to the 15th of Iyyar, or April-May).

Special interest centres in the name of the principal contracting party,
Milki-idiri, Governor of Kidis. His name forms an analogy with that of
Ben-Hadad, whose full name was Ben-Hadad-hidri, the meaning of which, as
I have elsewhere remarked, <span id="fr_406"></span>[2](#fn_403.md) was
probably "The Son of Hadad (is) my glory." <span
id="fr_407"></span>[3](#fn_404.md) The

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

most likely meaning of Milki-idiri (= Melech-heder(i) or Melek-hidri) is
therefore "Molech (is) my glory." As for the name of the place of which
he was governor, Kidis <span id="fr_408"></span>[1](#fn_405.md) (which was
probably pronounced Kedes or Kedesh), this is undoubtedly Kedesh
(Kadesh), on the lake of Homs, a site of considerable interest, in that
it was the scene of a conflict between Ramses II and the Kheta or
Hittites, and is supposed to be mentioned in 2 Samuel xxiv. 6, under the
name of Takhtim Khodshi, in the neighbourhood of Tyre and Sidon. <span
id="fr_409"></span>[2](#fn_406.md)

All the other personal names in this text are Babylonian, though it is
possible that at least some of the people who bore them were not
Babylonians.

About the beginning of July, therefore, in the year 564 B.C.,
Melek-hidri, Governor of Kadesh, visited Tyre for the purpose of
attending to his affairs.

#### III.—<span class="smallcaps">Neriglissar gives his Daughter Gigitum in Marriage to Nabû-sum-ukin, Priest of Nebo, and Director of E-zida</span>.

This tablet is one of the class of wedding-contracts, and is
unfortunately only a fragment. Such as it is,

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

however, it is a welcome addition to our knowledge, and it is greatly to
be hoped that a duplicate, completing the text, will some day be found.
The Museum number is 81–11–3, 222.

#### TRANSLATION

Nabû-sum-ukîn, priest of Nebo, director of E-zida, son of
Siriktum-Marduk, descendant of Isdē-îlāni-danan, said to Neriglissar,
king of Babylon: "Give Gigîtum, thy virgin daughter, to wifehood, and
let her be a wife." Neriglissar \[said\] to Nabû-sum-ukîn, priest of
Nebo, director of E-zida

…

About twenty-eight lines are wanting here, the text becoming again
legible at the end of the list of witnesses on the reverse:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

… son of Nabû-sum-lîsir . …

… ri, son of Nabu-sarra-utsur, the judge (??)  
Nabû-sum-utsur, the scribe, son of Assur …  
Babylon, month Nisan, day 1st, year 1st,  
\[Neriglis\]sar king of Babylon. Copy of E-zida. <span
id="fr_410"></span>[1](#fn_407.md)

</div>

Although this tablet is not by any means perfect, and the text does not,
in its present state, communicate to us the conclusion of the matter, it
may nevertheless

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

be regarded as tolerably certain that Neriglissar did give his daughter
Gigîtum in marriage to Nabû-sum-ukîn; for, had it been otherwise, there
would have been no need for this document, the importance attached to
which may be gathered from the fact that more than one copy was made,
the text preserved in the British Museum being that belonging to the
temple (E-zida, the Birs-Nimroud) of which Nabû-sum-ukîn was high-priest
and director.

As will be seen from the translation, Nabû-sum-ukîn does not use any
pronoun when making his request known to Neriglissar. He merely says,

"Give Gigîtum, thy virgin daughter, to wifehood, and let her be a wife,"
or "the wife." An examination of texts of a similar class shows that
this was the customary formula. The word for "wife" is written with the
usual ideogram, and is unaccompanied by any pronoun. A similar text in
the Liverpool Museum, however, spells the word out, and gives the same
form, *assati*, as is transcribed in the present article. It is
possible, therefore, that this terminal -*i* was always understood and
read as the possessive pronoun of the first person, even when not
written. Other examples of this grammatical usage exist.

The remainder of the tablet was probably taken up with the usual
conditions—the penalty on Nabû-sum-ukîn if he should divorce or abandon
his wife; the penalty on Gigîtum if she should disown or forsake her
husband; directions with regard to the

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

amount and disposal of her dowry, etc. It is here to be noted that
Herodotus was probably wrongly informed with regard to the compulsory
nature of the public prostitution of unmarried women practised in
ancient Babylonia, for the expressions found in these tablets point,
sometimes, as in the present case, to a belief, on the part of the
bridegroom, in the chastity of the woman chosen by him to be his wife.

Doubtless the priesthood of Babylon were highly elated that one of their
number had allied himself by marriage with the royal family of Babylon,
for this must have added greatly to their prestige and influence at the
time. The date is March-April, the Babylonian New-Year's Day, 560 B.C.

#### IV.—<span class="smallcaps">The Medes and Persians in Bactria.</span>

##### SAN-ABÛ-DUPPU SELLS HIS BACTRIAN SLAVE-GIRL.

This text, which is rather mutilated, is an ordinary sale-tablet. Its
importance, however, will be easily seen, for it is seldom that records
of battles and warlike expeditions are to be found on contract-tablets.
It is therefore one of the most interesting tablets of its class, and
even the names of the witnesses possess a special value. The tablet is
composed of three fragments, which were found by me to join some years
ago. The number is 82–9–18, 4215 + 4226.

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

#### TRANSLATION

Sa-Nabû-duppu, son of Nabû-sarra-utsur, with cheerfulness of heart, has
sold Nanâ-silim, his Bactrian slave, from the 5th battle of the sipiri
against *dursu*, whose right side and hand are inscribed with the name
of Dhîbtâ, daughter of Sin-êdhir, for \[… mana … shekels of silver\],
which is by the 1 shekel piece, coined, not standard, for the price
complete, to Issar-Taribi, son of Mur-êpus. \[N.\], son of
Sa-Nabû-duppu, takes the responsibility \[of defeasor, claimant\],
royal-handmaidship, (or) born-daughtership, which (may be) upon
Nanâ-silim. \[The money, … mana … shekels of silver\], which is by the 1
shekel piece, coined, not standard, \[the price of the slave\],
Sa-Nabû-duppu, son of Nabû-sarra-utsur, has received \[from the hands
of\] Issar-taribi, son of Mur-êpus.

Witnessing: Tsillâ, son of Akhume- ….; … son of Gamaryāwa (Gamariah);
Sa-pi- \[Bel? son of\] …; Barikîa (Berechiah), son of …; … son of Quddâ;
Samas-îriba, \[son of\] …; Ilāni-bakhâdi, son of…; and the scribe,
Marduka, son of Epes-îli. Sippar, month Iyyar, 18th day, 10th year,
Darîawush (Darius), king of Babylon and countries.

At the sitting of Dhîbtâ, daughter of Sin-êdhir, wife of Man- …
-Samas. <span id="fr_411"></span>[1](#fn_408.md)

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

One of the important points concerning this text is that, by the tenth
year of Darius, five battles had been fought with a Bactrian tribe; and
it is not unlikely that Sa-Nabû-duppu acquired Nanâ-silim (the
unfortunate woman had received a Babylonian name, in accordance with the
custom of the time) from the daughter of the man who captured her,
namely, Sin-êdhir. The remainder of the contract proper is of the usual
kind, and refers, like many others, to the taking of a duty or
responsibility by one of the contracting parties (in this case the son
of the seller), to guarantee the buyer against any claim hereafter on
the part of the seller, his kinsfolk, or the king.

In my first rendering I read the name of the slave as Nanā-khusi; and
Khupiri (which I regarded as the name of a Bactrian tribe) instead of
*sipiri*. Noting, however, that the *khu* in Akhume (see the list of
witnesses) was differently formed, it now seems to me better to read
these words as *Nanā-silim* and *sipiri*, which readings I have adopted
here. The *sipiri* was a Babylonian official attached to the household
of the king and princes of the blood. From our text it would seem that
this official also conducted military expeditions, at least in Persian
times. What is the meaning of the word *dursu*, against which the
*sipiri* seems to have gone, is uncertain. There is no determinative
prefix or suffix indicating that it is the name either of a person, a
place, or a river, though something of the kind might be expected.

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

Another point of interest is the names. Issar-taribi, the buyer, a
well-known tradesman of the time when the tablet was drawn up, <span
id="fr_412"></span>[1](#fn_409.md) bears one of the most interesting. About
the first element, Issar, there is some uncertainty, as it sometimes
appears as Istar. <span id="fr_413"></span>[2](#fn_410.md) This name
apparently means "The goddess Issar (Istar) has made increase." His
father's name, Mur-êpus, means "the windgod has made" or "created,"
Mur <span id="fr_414"></span>[3](#fn_411.md) being one of the names of the
windgod Rammānu or Addu (Rimmon or Hadad). To many, however, the two
witnesses, Gamar-yāwa (Gamar-Jahwa, "Jehovah has perfected" = Gamariah),
and Barikîa ("Jah has blessed" = Berechiah), both being probably—indeed,
almost certainly,—Jews, will be of even greater interest. Though Jewish
names are not uncommon on tablets of this class, it is to be noted that
Jews settled at Babylon had no objection to taking Babylonian names,
such as were given to Daniel and his companions. The name of the scribe
(though he is seemingly a Babylonian, and the name is a common one) is
not without interest, for Marduka is apparently for Mardukâa, "the
Merodachite" (worshipper of Merodach), the same as Mordecai, the name of
a well-known Israelite frequently mentioned in the book of Esther. It
must not be supposed, however, in the case of Mordecai,

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

that he was in any way favouring heathenism in accepting such a name as
this, for at that time, the word Marduk (Merodach) often meant simply
"god." A tablet I have recently copied, in mentioning the various gods,
explains them all as Marduk or Merodach; thus Nergal is "Marduk of
battle" (qablu), Zagaga is "Marduk of battle" (takhazi), Bel is "Marduk
of lordship and dominion (?)," Sin is "Marduk the illuminator of the
night," etc. etc.; and it is manifest that the word "god" may be
substituted for Marduk with a very acceptable improvement in the sense.
This use of Marduk in the sense of *îlu* is probably late.

It has been thought best, in the translation, for the sake of clearness,
to place the reference to the locality where the transaction was made at
the end. In the original (as will be seen from the transcription), it
comes between the list of witnesses and the name of the scribe.

All the above texts were excavated by Mr. Hormuzd Rassam, in 1881 and
1882 at Babylon and Sippara, the latter supposed to be the Sepharvaim of
the Bible.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_400"></span>[97:1](rp20423.htm#fr_403.md) The following is a
transcription of the text:—

Parap mana kaspi sa Rêmut mâr … ina êli Musêzib-Marduk, u Kul\[lâ\],
assati-su, ana khubuttu. Ina ûme pan mâti ittaptû, kaspā, parap mana,
ina qaqqadi-su, Musêzib-Marduk u Kullâ ana Rêmut inamdinnu.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Mukinnu: Ablā, mâr Arad-bît-Nergal; Sapik-zēri mâr Musêzib-Marduk;
Bel-upakhkhir mâr Tullubu; Ugarâ mâr Sippē; Nabû-sum-utsur mar pakhari.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

U rittu, Marduk-êdhir. Bâbîli, arakh Dhebeti, umu tisû, sattu
tisû-êsrit, Samas-sum-ukîn sar Bâbîli.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Ina ume su ina al Lamî*ma* (?) sunqu u dannatu ina mâti \[ibassî\]. Nêsi
ina la makalê imuttu.

<span id="fn_401"></span>[98:1](rp20423.htm#fr_404.md) Such is evidently
the meaning of the words "In the day when the face of the land sprouts"
(ittaptû). *Zēru taptû* (82–3–23, 775) is apparently "sprouting seed."

<span id="fn_402"></span>[100:1](rp20423.htm#fr_405.md) Transcription of
the Babylonian text:

\[Ad\]î ûmu khamisserit sa arakh Aari, *salsit* littê û mârē-sunu,
Milki-idiri, bêl pîkhāti sa al Kidis, ibbakamma ana Ablâ, abli-su sa
Nadin-âkhi, abil sangī Samas, inamdin. Kî la itabbakka, khamsit mana
kaspi Milki-idiri ana Ablâ, abli-su sa Nadin-âkhi, abil sangī Samas,
inamdin.

Mukinnu: Bunduti, abli-su sa Nabû-ukîn, abil Nabutu; Musêzib-Marduk,
abli-su sa Ablâ, abil ba’iri; Marduk-sakin-sumi, abli-su sa
Marduk-êdhir, abil Êdheru; u rittu, Pir’u, abli-su sa Sulâ. Al Tsurru,
ârakh Du’uzi, ûmu êsrâ-sanê, sattu irbaa, Nabû-kudurri-utsur, sar
Bâbîli.

The word "three" (*salsit*, line 2) is doubtful.

<span id="fn_403"></span>[100:2](rp20423.htm#fr_406.md) *Proceedings of the
Society of Biblical Archæology for February* 1883, pp. 71–74.

<span id="fn_404"></span>[100:3](rp20423.htm#fr_407.md) See Gesenius's
Hebrew Dictionary (Bagster and Sons), under ‏הֶדֶר‎ The Assyrian form of
the name Ben-hadad is Addu-idri (-’idri), for Bin-Addu-’idri
(Ben-Hadad-heder(i) or -hidri). It is difficult to say whether <span
id="page_101">p. 101</span> the Greek form *Ader* arises from a simple
(and easy) interchange of the letters *d* and *r*, or from the fact that
the last element of the name was *heder* (or *hidri*).

<span id="fn_405"></span>[101:1](rp20423.htm#fr_408.md) As I have elsewhere
pointed out, Qoph changes into Kaph in Assyrian before *e* and *i*,
hence Kidis (Kedes) for Qidis (Qedes).

<span id="fn_406"></span>[101:2](rp20423.htm#fr_409.md) See the Rev. H. G.
Tomkins's paper in the *Transactions of the Society of Biblical
Archæology*, vol. vii. p. 394.

<span id="fn_407"></span>[102:1](rp20423.htm#fr_410.md) The transcription
is as follows:—

Nabû-sum-utkîn, <span class="smallcaps">tu-mal</span> Nabû, satam
E-zida, abli-su sa Siriktu<sup>m</sup>-Marduk, abil Isdē-îlāni-danan,
ana Nergal-sarra-utsur, sar Bâbîli iqbî: Gigîtu<sup>m</sup>, mârāt-ka
batultu<sup>m</sup>, ana assutu binamma lû assati sî.
Nergal-sarra-utsur, sar Bâbîli, ana Nabû-sum-ukîn, <span
class="smallcaps">tu-mal</span> Nabû, satam E-zida \[iqbî?\]:

…

… mâru sa Nabû-sum-lîsir …; …-ri mâru sa Nabû-sarra-utsur, \[daanu\].

Nabû-sum-utsur, dupsarru, abil Assur … Bâbîli, arakh Nisannu, ûmu estin,
sattu estin, \[Nergal-sarra-\]utsur, sar Bâbîli. Gabri E-zida.

<span id="fn_408"></span>[105:1](rp20423.htm#fr_411.md) The following is a
transcription of the text:—

Sa-Nabû-duppu, abli-su sa Nabû-sarra-utsur, ina khud libbi-su
Nanā-silim, gallat-su (âl) Bakhtaru’iti, sa khamilta mikhkhiltum sa
sipiri ina mukhkhi dursu, sa imni-su u sitta-su ana sumu sa Dhîbtâ,
mârat-su sa Sinêdhir sadhdhirta ana \[… mana … siqli kaspi\], sa ina
estin siqli bitqa nukhutu, sa la ginnu ana sîmi gam\[rutu, ana
Is\]sar-taribi, abli-su sa Murêpus, iddin. But \[sikhi, pakirranu\],
âmat-sarrūtu, mâr\[at-banūtu\] sa ina mukhkhi Nanā-si\[lim\] … abli-su
sa Sa-Nabû-duppu, nasi. \[Kaspā, … mana . . siqli kaspi\], sa ina estin
siqli bitqa, nukhutu, sa la \[ginnu, sîmi amelutti\], Sa-Nabû-duppu,
abli-su sa Nabû-sarra-utsur, ina qatā\] Issar-taribi, abli-su sa
Mur-\[êpus\], edhir.

Mukin: Tsillâ, abli-su sa Ahume- …; … abli-su sa Gamaryāma; Sa-pi-Bêl
(?) …; Barikîa, abli-su sa …;…, abli-su sa Kuddâ; Samas-îriba \[abli-su
sa\] …; Ilāni-bakhâdi’, abli-su-sa …

Ina asabi sa Dhîbtâ, mârat-su sa Sin-êdhir, assat Man- … -Samas. U
rittu, Marduka, abil Epes-îli. Sippar, arakh Aari, ûmu \[samasserit\],
sattu esrit, Darîawus, sar Bâbîli u mâtāti.

<span id="fn_409"></span>[107:1](rp20423.htm#fr_412.md) See the articles by
Prof. E. and Dr. V. Revillout in the *Babylonian and Oriental Record*,
vol. i. p. 102, ff.; and vol. ii. p. 57, ff.

<span id="fn_410"></span>[107:2](rp20423.htm#fr_413.md) I have a faint
recollection of having seen the form Assur-taribi, but I could not find
this form again when I looked for it afterwards to quote the reference.

<span id="fn_411"></span>[107:3](rp20423.htm#fr_414.md) Also *Muru* and
*Mermer*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Introduction](rp20424.md)
