[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Ancient Near
East](../../index)  [Records of the Past](../index) 
[Egypt](../../../egy/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](rp20412) 
[Next](rp20414) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Records of the Past, 2nd Series, Vol. IV* , ed. by A.H. Sayce,
\[1890\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

### THE MONOLITH INSCRIPTION OF SHALMANESER II

#### COLUMN I

1\. <span class="smallcaps">Assur</span> the great lord, the king of all
the great gods; <span class="smallcaps">Anu</span> the king of the <span
class="smallcaps">Igigi</span> and <span
class="smallcaps">Anunnaki</span>, <span id="fr_263"></span>[1](#fn_261)
the master of the world; <span class="smallcaps">Bel</span> the father
of the gods, who determines destiny,

2\. who institutes the laws \[of heaven and earth\]; <span
class="smallcaps">Ea</span>, the wise, the king of the Abyss, the
discoverer of cunning arts; <span class="smallcaps">Sin</span> the
illuminator of heaven (and) earth, the illustrious god; <span
class="smallcaps">Shamash</span>

3\. the judge of the (four) zones, the director of mankind; <span
class="smallcaps">Ishtar</span> the lady of battles and combats, whose
delight (is) conflict; the great gods who love my royalty,

4\. my empire, my power, and my government have they magnified; a famous
name, an illustrious renown, above all the sovereigns (of the world)
have they bestowed on me in abundance!

5\. Shalmaneser, the king of the multitudes of men, the sovereign
pontiff of <span class="smallcaps">Assur</span>, the powerful king, the
king of <span class="smallcaps">Assyria</span>, the king of all the four
zones, the Sun-god <span id="fr_264"></span>[2](#fn_262) of the
multitudes of men,

6\. who governs all the world; the king who fears the gods, the
favourite <span id="fr_265"></span>[3](#fn_263) of <span
class="smallcaps">Bel</span>, the appointed vicar of <span
class="smallcaps">Assur</span>, the august prince, who has traversed

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

7\. easy paths and difficult roads, who has trodden the summits of the
mountains (and) all (their) ranges, who has received tribute and
presents

8\. from all regions, who has opened the mountains above and below;
before the onset of whose mighty battle the regions (of the world) have
yielded,

9\. the world has trembled to its foundations before his warlike fury;
the male hero who has marched under the protection of <span
class="smallcaps">Assur</span> (and) <span
class="smallcaps">Shamash</span>,the gods his allies;

10\. who has no rival among the kings of the four zones (of the world);
the royal despot of the world, who has traversed difficult roads, (and)
has advanced over mountains and seas;

11\. the son of Assur-natsir-pal, the vicegerent of <span
class="smallcaps">Bel</span>, the priest of <span
class="smallcaps">Assur</span>, whose priesthood has been pleasing to
the gods, and who has subjected to his feet all lands; the illustrious
descendant of Tukulti-Adar <span id="fr_266"></span>[1](#fn_264)

12\. who subjugated all his foes, and swept them like the tempest, when
<span class="smallcaps">Assur</span> the great lord in the determination
of his \[heart\] had turned upon me his illustrious eyes, and

13\. had called me to the government <span
id="fr_267"></span>[2](#fn_265) of <span
class="smallcaps">Assyria</span>; had given me to hold the mighty weapon
which overthrows the rebellious; had \[invested\] me with the \[sacred\]
crown; the lordship over all lands

14\. had granted me; had strongly urged me to conquer and subjugate: in
those days at the beginning of my reign, in the first of my (regnal)
years, <span id="fr_268"></span>[3](#fn_266)

15\. (when) I had seated myself in state on the throne of royalty, I
summoned my chariots (and) armies; into the defiles of the country of
<span class="smallcaps">Simesi</span> I entered; to <span
class="smallcaps">Aridu</span> the fortified city

16\. of Ninni I approached. The city I besieged, I captured; its
numerous soldiers I slew; its spoil I

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

carried away. I erected a pyramid of heads at the entrance of his city.

17\. Their youths and maidens I delivered to the flames. <span
id="fr_269"></span>[1](#fn_267) While I remained in <span
class="smallcaps">Aridu</span> the tribute of the people of <span
class="smallcaps">Kharga</span>, <span
class="smallcaps">Kharmasa</span>,

18\. <span class="smallcaps">Simesi</span>, <span
class="smallcaps">Simera</span>, <span class="smallcaps">Sirisha</span>,
(and) <span class="smallcaps">Ulmania</span>, horses trained to the
yoke, oxen, sheep, (and) wine I received. From <span
class="smallcaps">Aridu</span>

19\. I departed; difficult paths (and) inaccessible mountains whose
peaks rose to the sky like the point of an iron sword I cut with axes of
bronze (and) copper. The chariots

20\. (and) troops I caused to cross (them). To the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Khupushkia</span> I approached. <span
class="smallcaps">Khupushkia</span> with 100 towns which (were)
dependent on it I burned with fire. Kakia

21\. a king of the country of <span class="smallcaps">Nairi</span> and
the rest of his troops trembled before the splendour of my arms, and
occupied the strong mountains. After them I ascended the mountains,

22\. I fought a hard battle in the midst of the mountains (and) utterly
destroyed them. I brought back from the mountains chariots, troops,
(and) horses trained to the yoke. The terror of the glory

23\. of <span class="smallcaps">Assur</span> my lord overwhelmed them;
they descended (and) took my feet. Taxes and tribute I imposed upon
them. From the city of <span class="smallcaps">Khupushkia</span> I
departed.

24\. To <span class="smallcaps">Sugunia</span> the stronghold of Arame
of <span class="smallcaps">Ararat</span> <span
id="fr_270"></span>[2](#fn_268) I approached. The city I besieged, I
captured; their numerous soldiers I slew.

25\. Its spoil I carried away. I erected a pyramid of heads at the
entrance of his city; 14 towns which (were) dependent on it I burned
with fire. From <span class="smallcaps">Sugunia</span>

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

26\. I departed; to the sea of the country of <span
class="smallcaps">Nairi</span> <span id="fr_271"></span>[1](#fn_269) I
descended. I purified my weapons in the sea; I sacrificed victims to my
gods. In those days an image of my person

27\. I made; I inscribed upon it the glory of <span
class="smallcaps">Assur</span> the great lord, my lord, and the
mightiness of my empire; I erected (it) overlooking the sea. On my
return

28\. from the sea I received the tribute of Asû of the land of <span
class="smallcaps">Guzan</span> in abundance, horses, oxen, sheep, wine,
(and) two camels with two humps;

29\. to my city of <span class="smallcaps">Assur</span> I brought
(them).—In the month Iyyar, on the 13th day, <span
id="fr_272"></span>[2](#fn_270) I departed from <span
class="smallcaps">Nineveh</span>. I crossed the <span
class="smallcaps">Tigris</span>. I passed through the mountains <span
id="fr_273"></span>[3](#fn_271) Of <span
class="smallcaps">Khasamu</span> and <span
class="smallcaps">Dikhnunu</span>.

30\. To <span class="smallcaps">La’la’te</span> <span
id="fr_274"></span>[4](#fn_272) a city of Akhuni the son of Adini I
approached. The terror of the glory of <span
class="smallcaps">Assur</span> my lord overwhelmed \[them, to the
mountains …\]

31\. they ascended. The city I threw down, dug up (and) burned with
fire. From <span class="smallcaps">La’la’te</span> I departed. \[To
<span class="smallcaps">Ki … qa</span> the stronghold\]

32\. of Akhuni the son of Adini I approached. Akhuni the son of Adini to
the multitude \[of his troops trusted, and to make\] combat and battle
\[came against\] me. Under the protection of <span
class="smallcaps">Assur</span>

33\. and the great gods, my lords, I fought with him; I utterly defeated
him. I shut him up in his city. From the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Ki … qa</span> I departed;

34\. to <span class="smallcaps">Bur-mar’âna</span> <span
id="fr_275"></span>[5](#fn_273) a city of Akhuni the son of Adini \[I
approached. The city\] I besieged, I captured. I destroyed with my
weapons 300 of his fighting-men. A pyramid of heads

35\. I erected \[at the entrance to his city\]. The tribute of

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> <span
class="smallcaps">Khapini</span> <span id="fr_276"></span>[1](#fn_274)
of <span class="smallcaps">Til-abna</span>, <span
id="fr_277"></span>[2](#fn_275) of Ga’uni of <span
class="smallcaps">Sa\[llu\]</span>, … of Giri-Dadda <span
id="fr_278"></span>[3](#fn_276)

36\. \[of <span class="smallcaps">Assu</span>\], silver, gold, oxen,
sheep, (and) wine I received. From the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Bur-mar’âna</span> I departed; in boats of seal-skin
the <span class="smallcaps">Euphrates</span>

37\. I crossed. The tribute of Qata-zilu of <span
class="smallcaps">Kummukh</span>, <span id="fr_279"></span>[4](#fn_277)
silver, gold, oxen, sheep, (and) wine I received. To the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Paqarrukhbuni</span> <span
id="fr_280"></span>[5](#fn_278)

38\. (and) the cities of Akhuni the son of Adini on the farther bank of
the <span class="smallcaps">Euphrates</span> I approached. I utterly
destroyed the country. Its cities to ruins

39\. I reduced. I filled the broad plain with the corpses of his
warriors; 1300 of his fighting-men I slew with weapons.

40\. From the city <span class="smallcaps">Paqarrukhbuni</span> I
departed; to the cities of Mutalli <span id="fr_281"></span>[6](#fn_279)
of the city of the <span class="smallcaps">Gamgumians</span> I
approached. The tribute

41\. of Mutalli of the city of the <span
class="smallcaps">Gamgumians</span>, silver, gold, oxen, sheep, wine,
(and) his daughter with a large dowry I received. From the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Gamgumê</span>

42\. I departed; <span class="smallcaps">Lutibu</span> the stronghold of
Khânu of the country of the <span class="smallcaps">Sam’alians</span> I
approached. Khânu of the country of the <span
class="smallcaps">Sam’alians</span>, Sapalulme <span
id="fr_282"></span>[7](#fn_280)

43\. of the country of the <span
class="smallcaps">Patinians</span>, <span
id="fr_283"></span>[8](#fn_281) Akhuni the son of Adini, Sangara of the
country of the <span class="smallcaps">Carchemishians</span>, trusted to
their mutual alliance and prepared for

44\. battle; they came against me to fight. By the supreme

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

power of <span class="smallcaps">Nergal</span> who marches before me,
with the forceful weapons

45\. which <span class="smallcaps">Assur</span> the lord has granted
(me) I fought with them, I utterly defeated them. Their combatants

46\. I slew with weapons; like <span
class="smallcaps">Hadad</span> <span id="fr_284"></span>[1](#fn_282) I
poured the deluge upon them, I heaped them up in the ditches; with the
bodies

47\. of their warriors I filled the broad plain; with their blood I dyed
the mountains like wool. (His) many chariots \[and troops\], (and)
horses

48\. trained for the yoke I took from him. <span
id="fr_285"></span>[2](#fn_283) I erected a pyramid of heads at the
entrance to his city. His cities I threw down, dug up (and) burned with
fire.

49\. In those days I celebrated the greatness of the great gods; I
proclaimed for ever the valour of <span class="smallcaps">Assur</span>
and <span class="smallcaps">Shamash</span>. A great image of my royalty

50\. I made; I inscribed upon it the exploits of my valour (and) the
deeds of my glory. At the source of the river <span
class="smallcaps">Saluara</span>

51\. at the foot of mount <span class="smallcaps">Amanus</span> I
erected (it). From mount <span class="smallcaps">Amanus</span> I
departed; the <span class="smallcaps">Orontes</span> <span
id="fr_286"></span>[3](#fn_284) I crossed; to <span
class="smallcaps">Alimush</span> <span id="fr_287"></span>[4](#fn_285)

52\. the stronghold of Sapalulme the <span
class="smallcaps">Patinian</span> I approached. Sapalulme the <span
class="smallcaps">Patinian</span> to save

53\. his life \[called to his aid\] Akhuni the son of Adini, Sangara the
<span class="smallcaps">Carchemishian</span>, Khayânu the <span
class="smallcaps">Sam’alian</span>, Kate-\[zilu the <span
class="smallcaps">Komagenian</span>\], …

54\. the <span class="smallcaps">Quan</span>, <span
id="fr_288"></span>[5](#fn_286) Pikhirim the <span
class="smallcaps">Cilician</span>, <span id="fr_289"></span>[6](#fn_287)
Bur-anate the <span class="smallcaps">Yasbukian</span>, Ada … the
country of <span class="smallcaps">Assyria</span>

#### COLUMN II

1\. …

2\. … I shattered \[his forces\]; the city I besieged, I captured. …

3\. … his numerous chariots (and) horses trained to the yoke … I carried
away …

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

4\. \[His fighting-men\] I slew \[with\] weapons. In the midst of this
battle Bur-anate

5\. … my hands captured. The great cities of the <span
class="smallcaps">Patinian</span> I in\[vested. The countries\]

6\. of the Upper \[Sea\] <span id="fr_290"></span>[1](#fn_288) of <span
class="smallcaps">Syria</span> <span id="fr_291"></span>[2](#fn_289) and
of the sea of the setting sun I swept like a mound under a storm.

7\. The tribute of the kings of the sea-coast I received. On the shores
of the broad sea, straight before me, victoriously

8\. I marched. An image of my majesty I made to perpetuate my name for
ever, overlooking the sea I e\[rected it\].

9\. To the mountains of <span class="smallcaps">Amanus</span> I
ascended. Logs of cedar and thuya I cut. To the mountains

10\. of mount <span class="smallcaps">Atalur</span> where the image of
Assur-irbi <span id="fr_292"></span>[3](#fn_290) was set up I marched. I
erected an image by the side of his image. From the sea I went \[down\];

11\. the cities of <span class="smallcaps">Taya</span> …, <span
class="smallcaps">Khazazu</span>, <span id="fr_293"></span>[4](#fn_291)
<span class="smallcaps">Nulia</span> (and) <span
class="smallcaps">But-âmu</span> belonging to the <span
class="smallcaps">Patinian</span> I captured; 2800 fighting-men

12\. I slew; 14,600 prisoners I carried away. The tribute of Arame the
son of Gusi, <span id="fr_294"></span>[5](#fn_292) silver, gold, oxen,

13\. sheep, wine, (and) couches of gold and silver I received.—In the
year of my own eponymy, <span id="fr_295"></span>[6](#fn_293) on the
13th day of the month Iyyar from \[<span
class="smallcaps">Nineveh</span>\]

14\. I departed; the <span class="smallcaps">Tigris</span> I crossed,
the mountains <span id="fr_296"></span>[7](#fn_294) of <span
class="smallcaps">Khasamu</span> and <span
class="smallcaps">Dikhnunu</span> I traversed. To <span
class="smallcaps">Til-Bursip</span> <span
id="fr_297"></span>[8](#fn_295) the stronghold of Akhuni

15\. the son of Adini I approached. Akhuni the son of

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Adini trusted to
the multitude of his troops and came to meet me. I utterly defeated him.
In \[his city\]

16\. I shut him up. From <span class="smallcaps">Til-Bursip</span> I
departed; in boats of seal-skin the <span
class="smallcaps">Euphrates</span> at its flood I crossed. <span
class="smallcaps">Al</span> (?) … <span class="smallcaps">gâ</span>,
<span class="smallcaps">Tagi</span> …

17\. <span class="smallcaps">Sûrunu</span>, <span
class="smallcaps">Paripa</span>, <span
class="smallcaps">Til-Basherê</span> <span
id="fr_298"></span>[1](#fn_296) (and) <span
class="smallcaps">Dabigu</span>, six strongholds of Akhuni the son of
Adini I \[besieged\], I captured. His numerous fighting-men

18\. I slew: their spoil I carried away; 200 towns which (were)
dependent on them I threw down, dug up (and) burned with fire. \[From\]
<span class="smallcaps">Dabigu</span> I (departed);

19\. to <span class="smallcaps">Sazabê</span> the stronghold of Sangara
the <span class="smallcaps">Carchemishian</span> I approached. The city
I besieged, I captured. Their numerous fighting-men I slew;

20\. their spoil I carried away. The towns which (were) dependent on him
I threw down, dug up (and) burned with fire. The kings of the country
\[of the <span class="smallcaps">Hittites</span>\] all of them,

21\. trembled before the splendour of my powerful weapons and my violent
onset, and they took my feet. From … shun <span
id="fr_299"></span>[2](#fn_297) the <span
class="smallcaps">Patinian</span>

22\. 3 talents of gold, 100 talents of silver, 300 talents of copper,
300 talents of iron, i000 vases of copper, i000 vestments of embroidered
stuff (and) linen, his daughter

23\. with her abundant dowry, 20 talents of blue purple, 300 oxen, (and)
5000 sheep, I received. A talent of gold, 2 talents of blue purple,
(and) 100 logs of cedar

24\. I imposed upon him as tribute; each year I receive (it) in my city
of <span class="smallcaps">Assur</span>. From Khayânu the son

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

of Gabbaru who (dwells) at the foot of mount <span
class="smallcaps">Amanus</span> 10 talents of silver, 90 talents

25\. of copper, 30 talents of iron, 300 vestments of embroidered stuff
(and) linen, 300 oxen, 3000 sheep, 200 logs of cedar … 2 *homers* of
cedar-resin

26\. (and) his daughter with her dowry I received. I laid upon him as
tribute 10 manehs of silver, 200 logs of cedar, (and) a *homer* of
cedar-resin; each year

27\. I receive (it). From Aramu the son of Agûsi 10 manehs of gold, 6
talents of silver, 500 oxen, (and) s000 sheep I received. From Sangara
the <span class="smallcaps">Carchemishian</span> 2 talents

28\. of gold, 70 talents of silver, 30 talents of copper, 100 talents of
iron, 20 talents of blue purple, 500 weapons, his daughter with a dowry,
and 100 daughters of his nobles,

29\. 500 oxen, (and) 5000 sheep, I received. I laid upon him as tribute
a maneh of gold, a talent of silver, (and) 2 talents of blue purple;
each year I receive (it). From Qata-zilu

30\. the <span class="smallcaps">Komagenian</span> I receive each year
20 manehs of silver (and) 300 logs of cedar.—In the eponymy of
Assur-bel-kain, <span id="fr_300"></span>[1](#fn_298) on the 13th day of
the month Tammuz, I departed from <span
class="smallcaps">Nineveh</span>;

31\. the <span class="smallcaps">Tigris</span> I crossed; the mountains
of <span class="smallcaps">Khasamu</span> and <span
class="smallcaps">Dikhnunu</span> I traversed. At <span
class="smallcaps">Til-Barsip</span> the stronghold of Akhuni the son of
Adini I arrived. Akhuni

32\. the son of Adini, before the splendour of my powerful weapons and
my violent onset, to save his life, crossed \[to the western bank\] of
the <span class="smallcaps">Euphrates</span>;

33\. to other countries he passed over. By the command of <span
class="smallcaps">Assur</span> the great lord, my lord, the cities of
<span class="smallcaps">Til-Barsip</span> (and) <span
class="smallcaps">Aligu</span> \[I occupied. The city of\] … <span
class="smallcaps">Shaguqa</span> as my royal city

34\. I chose. I settled men of <span class="smallcaps">Assyria</span>
within (it). I founded palaces within it for the habitation of my

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

majesty. To <span class="smallcaps">Til-Barsip</span> the name of <span
class="smallcaps">Kar-Shalmaneser</span>, <span
id="fr_301"></span>[1](#fn_299)

35\. to <span class="smallcaps">Nappigu</span> the name of <span
class="smallcaps">Lita-Assur</span>, <span
id="fr_302"></span>[2](#fn_300) to <span class="smallcaps">Aligu</span>
the name of <span class="smallcaps">Atsbat-la-kunu</span>, <span
id="fr_303"></span>[3](#fn_301) to <span
class="smallcaps">Ruguliti</span> the name of <span
class="smallcaps">Qibit-\[Assur\]</span> <span
id="fr_304"></span>[4](#fn_302) I gave. In those days

36\. the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Ana-Assur-utir-atsbat</span>, <span
id="fr_305"></span>[5](#fn_303) which the <span
class="smallcaps">Hittites</span> call <span
class="smallcaps">Pitru</span>, <span id="fr_306"></span>[6](#fn_304)
which (is) upon the river <span class="smallcaps">Sagura</span> on the
farther side of the <span class="smallcaps">Euphrates</span>,

37\. and the city of <span class="smallcaps">Mutkînu</span> which is
upon the hither side of the <span class="smallcaps">Euphrates</span>,
which Tiglath-Pileser, <span id="fr_307"></span>[7](#fn_305) the royal
forefather who went before me had \[captured\] (and which) in the time
of Assur-Irbi (?), <span id="fr_308"></span>[8](#fn_306)

38\. the king of <span class="smallcaps">Assyria</span>, the king of the
country of <span class="smallcaps">Aram</span> <span
id="fr_309"></span>[9](#fn_307) had taken away by force, these cities I
restored to their (former) position, I settled men of <span
class="smallcaps">Assyria</span> in them.

39\. While I was staying in the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Kar-Shalmaneser</span> the tribute of the kings of the
sea-coast and of the kings of the banks of <span
class="smallcaps">Euphrates</span>, silver, gold, lead, copper,

40\. vases of copper, oxen, sheep, (and) embroidered and linen vestments
I received. From <span class="smallcaps">Kar-Shalmaneser</span> I
departed; mount <span id="fr_310"></span>[10](#fn_308) <span
class="smallcaps">Sumu</span> I traversed.

41\. Into the country of <span class="smallcaps">Bit-Zamâni</span> I
descended. From <span class="smallcaps">Bit-Zamâni</span> I departed;
the mountains <span id="fr_311"></span>[11](#fn_309) of <span
class="smallcaps">Namdanu</span> (and) <span
class="smallcaps">Merkhisu</span> I traversed. Difficult paths (and)
mountains

42\. inaccessible whose peaks rose to the sky like the point

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

of a sword I cut with axes of bronze. I caused chariots (and) troops to
pass (them). Into the country of <span
class="smallcaps">Enzite</span> <span id="fr_312"></span>[1](#fn_310) in
mount <span class="smallcaps">Shua</span> <span
id="fr_313"></span>[2](#fn_311)

43\. I descended. My hand conquered the country of <span
class="smallcaps">Enzite</span> throughout its extent. Their cities I
threw down, dug up and burned with fire. Their spoil, their goods, their
riches without number

44\. I carried away. A great image of my majesty I made; I inscribed
upon it the glory of <span class="smallcaps">Assur</span> the great
lord, my lord, and the power of my empire; I set (it) up (in) the city
of <span class="smallcaps">Saluria</span> *at the foot* (?) of <span
class="smallcaps">Qirêqi</span>.

45\. From the country of <span class="smallcaps">Enzite</span> I
departed; the river <span class="smallcaps">Arsania</span> <span
id="fr_314"></span>[3](#fn_312) I crossed. To the country of <span
class="smallcaps">Sukhme</span> I approached. <span
class="smallcaps">Uashtal</span> its stronghold I captured. The \[land\]
of <span class="smallcaps">Sukhme</span> throughout its extent

46\. I overthrew, dug up (and) burned with fire. Sua their governor with
my hand I captured. From the country of <span
class="smallcaps">Sukhme</span> I departed; into the country of <span
class="smallcaps">Dayaeni</span> <span id="fr_315"></span>[4](#fn_313) I
descended. The city of <span class="smallcaps">Dayaeni</span>

47\. with all its territory I conquered. Their cities I threw down, dug
up (and) burned with fire. Their spoil, their goods (and) abundant
wealth I took. From the country of <span
class="smallcaps">Dayaeni</span> I departed;

48\. to <span class="smallcaps">Arzasku</span> <span
id="fr_316"></span>[5](#fn_314) the royal city of Arrame of <span
class="smallcaps">Ararat</span> I approached. Arramu of <span
class="smallcaps">Ararat</span> before the splendour of my powerful
weapons

49\. and my violent onset trembled and abandoned his city; to the
mountains of <span class="smallcaps">Adduri</span> he ascended.

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> After him I
ascended the mountains. A hard battle in the mountains I fought; 3400

50\. of his soldiers I slew with weapons. Like <span
class="smallcaps">Hadad</span> <span id="fr_317"></span>[1](#fn_315) I
poured a deluge upon them. (With) their blood I dyed (the mountains)
like wool. His camp I took from him;

51\. his chariots, his litters (?), his horses, his colts, (his) calves,
his riches, his spoil, (and) his abundant goods I brought back from the
mountains. <span class="smallcaps">Arramu</span>, to save

52\. his life ascended the inaccessible mountains. In the energy of my
manhood I trampled on his country like a wild bull; I reduced his cities
to ruins. <span class="smallcaps">Arzasku</span> together with the towns

53\. which (were) dependent on it I threw down, dug up (and) burned with
fire. I erected pyramids of heads at the entrance of his great gate.
\[Some of the survivors\] alive within

54\. \[the pyramids I immured\]; others I impaled on stakes round about
the pyramids. From <span class="smallcaps">Arzasku</span> I departed; to
the mountains

55\. \[of <span class="smallcaps">Eritia</span> I ascended\]. A great
image of my majesty I made. The glory of <span
class="smallcaps">Assur</span> my lord and the mighty deeds of my empire
which I had wrought in the land of <span class="smallcaps">Ararat</span>
upon it

56\. \[I inscribed. On the mountains of <span
class="smallcaps">Eri\]tia</span> I set (it) up. From mount <span
class="smallcaps">Eritia</span> I departed; the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Aramale</span> <span id="fr_318"></span>[2](#fn_316) I
approached. Its towns I threw down, dug up (and) burned with fire.

5 7. From <span class="smallcaps">Aramale</span> I departed; to the city
of <span class="smallcaps">Zanziuna</span> \[I approached\], … he
trembled; he took my feet.

58\. Horses trained to the yoke, oxen (and) sheep I received from him. I
granted pardon to \[him\] … \[On\] my \[return?\], to the sea

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

59\. of the country of <span class="smallcaps">Nairi</span> <span
id="fr_319"></span>[1](#fn_317) I descended; I purified the forceful
weapons of <span class="smallcaps">Assur</span> in the sea. \[I
sacrificed\] victims. \[An image of my majesty\] I made; the glory

60\. of <span class="smallcaps">Assur</span> the great lord, my lord,
the exploits of my valour and the deeds of my renown I inscribed upon
it. \[From the sea\] I departed; to the country of <span
class="smallcaps">Guzan</span>

61\. I approached. Asâu the king of the country of <span
class="smallcaps">Guzan</span> with his brothers (and) his sons came
forth to meet me \[and took the feet\] of my majesty. Horses

62\. trained to the yoke, oxen, sheep, wine (and) 7 camels with two
humps I received from him. A great image of my majesty I made. The glory
of <span class="smallcaps">Assur</span> the great lord, my lord,

63\. and the illustrious deeds of my empire which I had wrought in the
land of <span class="smallcaps">Nairi</span> I inscribed upon it; in the
middle of his city, in his temple, I set (it) up. From the country of
<span class="smallcaps">Guzan</span> I departed;

64\. to <span class="smallcaps">Shilaya</span> the stronghold of Kâki
the king of the city of <span class="smallcaps">Khupushkia</span> I
approached. The city I besieged, I captured. Their numerous fighting men
I slew; 3000 of them as prisoners, their oxen,

65\. their sheep, horses, colts, (and) calves to a countless number I
carried away; to my city of <span class="smallcaps">Assur</span> I
brought (them). The defiles of the country of <span
class="smallcaps">Enzite</span> I entered; by the defiles of the country
of <span class="smallcaps">Kirruri</span>

66\. which commands <span id="fr_320"></span>[2](#fn_318) the city of
<span class="smallcaps">Arbela</span> I came out.—As for Akhuni the son
of Adini, who with the permission of the kings my fathers had acquired
power and strength, in the beginning of my reign, in the eponymy

67\. of the year called after my own name I departed from <span
class="smallcaps">Nineveh</span>, <span
class="smallcaps">Til-Barsip</span> his stronghold I besieged, I

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

surrounded him with my soldiers, I fought a battle in the midst of it,

68\. I cut down his plantations, I rained upon him arrows (and)
javelins, before the splendour of my weapons (and) the glory of <span
class="smallcaps">Assur</span> he trembled and abandoned his city,

69\. to save his life he crossed the <span
class="smallcaps">Euphrates</span>,—(again) in the second year in the
eponymy of Assur-bunâya-utsur <span id="fr_321"></span>[1](#fn_319) I
pursued after him; <span class="smallcaps">Shitamrat</span>, a mountain
peak on the bank of the <span class="smallcaps">Euphrates</span>,

70\. which hangs from the sky like a cloud, he made his stronghold. By
the command of Assur the great lord, my lord, and <span
class="smallcaps">Nergal</span> who marches before me, I approached the
mountain of <span class="smallcaps">Shitamrat</span>,

71\. within which none of the kings my fathers had penetrated. In three
days a soldier scaled the mountain, a hero whose heart led (him) to the
fray, (who) climbed up on his feet. The mountain

72\. I stormed. Akhuni trusted to the multitude of his troops and came
forth to meet me; he drew up (his) array. I launched among them the
weapons of <span class="smallcaps">Assur</span> my lord; I utterly

73\. defeated them. I cut off the heads of his soldiers and dyed the
mountains with the blood of his fighting-men. Many of his (people) flung
themselves against the rocks of the mountains. A hard battle in the
midst of his city

74\. I fought. The terror of the glory of <span
class="smallcaps">Assur</span> my lord overwhelmed them; they descended
(and) took my feet. Akhuni with his troops, chariots, his *litters* (?)
and the many riches of his palace,

75\. whose weight could not be estimated, I caused to be brought before
me; I transported (them) across the <span
class="smallcaps">Tigris</span>; I carried (them) to my city of <span
class="smallcaps">Assur</span>. As men of my own country I counted the
inhabitants.—In this same year I marched against the country of <span
class="smallcaps">Mazamua</span>. <span id="fr_322"></span>[2](#fn_320)
Into the defiles

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

76\. of the country of <span class="smallcaps">Bunais</span> (?) <span
id="fr_323"></span>[1](#fn_321) I entered: the cities of Nikdime (and)
Nigdera <span id="fr_324"></span>[2](#fn_322) I approached. They
trembled before the splendour of my powerful weapons and violent onset,
and

77\. took refuge on the sea <span id="fr_325"></span>[3](#fn_323) in
coracles of willow. In boats of seal-skin I followed after them. A hard
battle I fought in the middle of the sea (and) utterly defeated them.

78\. The sea with their blood I dyed like wool.—In the eponymy of
Dayan-Assur, <span id="fr_326"></span>[4](#fn_324) on the 14th day of
the month Iyyar, I departed from <span class="smallcaps">Nineveh</span>;
the <span class="smallcaps">Tigris</span> I crossed; to the cities

79\. of Giammu on the river <span class="smallcaps">Balikh</span> I
approached. (Before) the fear of my lordship (and) the splendour of my
forceful weapons they trembled and with their own weapons Giammu their
lord

80\. they slew. Into the cities of <span
class="smallcaps">Kitlala</span> <span id="fr_327"></span>[5](#fn_325)
and <span class="smallcaps">Til-sa-Turakhi</span> <span
id="fr_328"></span>[6](#fn_326) I entered. I introduced my gods into his
palaces; I made a feast in his palaces.

81\. I opened (his) treasury; I saw his stored-up wealth; his riches
(and) his goods I carried away; to my city of <span
class="smallcaps">Assur</span> I brought (them). From <span
class="smallcaps">Kitlala</span> I departed; to the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Kar-Shalmaneser</span>

82\. I approached. In boats of seal-skin for the second time I crossed
the <span class="smallcaps">Euphrates</span> at its flood. The tribute
of the kings of the farther <span id="fr_329"></span>[7](#fn_327) bank
of the <span class="smallcaps">Euphrates</span>, of Sangar

83\. of the city of <span class="smallcaps">Carchemish</span>, of
Kundashpi of the city of <span class="smallcaps">Kummukh</span>, <span
id="fr_330"></span>[8](#fn_328) of Arame the son of Gusi, of Lalli of
the city of <span class="smallcaps">Melid</span>, <span
id="fr_331"></span>[9](#fn_329) of Khayanu the son of Gabaru,

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

84\. of Girparuda of the country of the <span
class="smallcaps">Patinians</span>, (and) of Girparuda of the country of
the <span class="smallcaps">Gamgumians</span>, silver, gold, lead,
copper (and) vases of copper

85\. in the city of <span class="smallcaps">Assur-utir-atsbat</span> on
the farther side of the <span class="smallcaps">Euphrates</span>, which
(is) upon the river <span class="smallcaps">Saguri</span>, which the
<span class="smallcaps">Hittites</span>

86\. call <span class="smallcaps">Pitru</span>, I received. From the
banks of the <span class="smallcaps">Euphrates</span> I departed; to the
city of <span class="smallcaps">Khalman</span> <span
id="fr_332"></span>[1](#fn_330) I approached. They were afraid to fight
(and) took my feet.

87\. Silver (and) gold as their tribute I received. I offered sacrifices
before <span class="smallcaps">Dadda</span> <span
id="fr_333"></span>[2](#fn_331) the god of <span
class="smallcaps">Khalman</span>. From <span
class="smallcaps">Khalman</span> I departed. To the cities

88\. of Irkhulêni the <span class="smallcaps">Hamathite</span> I
approached. The cities of <span class="smallcaps">Adennu</span>, <span
id="fr_334"></span>[3](#fn_332) <span
class="smallcaps">Mashgâ</span> <span id="fr_335"></span>[4](#fn_333)
(and) <span class="smallcaps">Argana</span> his royal city I captured.
His spoil, his goods,

89\. (and) the riches of his palaces I removed; his palaces I delivered
to the flames. From the city of <span class="smallcaps">Argana</span> I
departed; to the city of <span class="smallcaps">Qarqara</span> I
approached.

90\. <span class="smallcaps">Qarqara</span> his royal city I threw down,
dug up (and) burned with fire; 1200 chariots, 1200 *litters* (?) (and)
20,000 men from Dadda-idri

91\. of the \[country\] of <span class="smallcaps">Damascus</span>, 700
chariots, 700 *litters* (?) (and) 10,000 men from Irkhulêni the <span
class="smallcaps">Hamathite</span>, woo chariots (and) 10,000 men from
Ahab

92\. the <span class="smallcaps">Israelite</span>; <span
id="fr_336"></span>[5](#fn_334) 500 men from the <span
class="smallcaps">Guans</span>; <span id="fr_337"></span>[6](#fn_335)
1000 men from the <span class="smallcaps">Egyptians</span>; 10 chariots
(and) 10,000 men from the <span
class="smallcaps">Irqanatians</span>; <span
id="fr_338"></span>[7](#fn_336)

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

93\. 200 men from Matinu-ba’al the <span
class="smallcaps">Arvadite</span>; 200 men from the <span
class="smallcaps">Usanatians</span>; <span
id="fr_339"></span>[1](#fn_337) 30 chariots (and) 10,000 men

94\. from Adunu-ba’al the <span class="smallcaps">Shianian</span>; <span
id="fr_340"></span>[2](#fn_338) 1000 camels from Gindibu’i the <span
class="smallcaps">Arabian</span>; <span id="fr_341"></span>[3](#fn_339)
(and) … 00 men

95\. from Ba’asha, the son of Rukhubi <span
id="fr_342"></span>[4](#fn_340) of the country of <span
class="smallcaps">Ammon</span> <span
id="fr_343"></span>[5](#fn_341)—these 12 kings <span
id="fr_344"></span>[6](#fn_342) he took to his assistance; to \[offer\]

96\. battle and combat they came against me. With the mighty forces
which <span class="smallcaps">Assur</span> the lord has given (me), with
the powerful weapons which <span class="smallcaps">Nergal</span> who
goes before me

97\. has granted (me), I fought with them; from the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Qarqara</span> to the city of <span
class="smallcaps">Kirzau</span> I utterly defeated them; 14,000

98\. of their fighting-men I slew with weapons. Like <span
class="smallcaps">Hadad</span> I rained a deluge upon them (and)
*exterminated* (?) them.

99\. I filled the face of the plain with their wide-spread troops, with
(my) weapons I covered with their blood the whole district;

100\. (the soil) ceased to give food to its inhabitants; in the broad
fields was no room for their graves; with (the bodies of) their men

101\. as with a bridge I bound together (the banks of) the <span
class="smallcaps">Orontes</span>. In this battle their chariots, their
litters(?)

102\. (and) their horses bound to the yoke I took from them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_261"></span>[55:1](rp20413.htm#fr_263) The spirits of
heaven and earth.

<span id="fn_262"></span>[55:2](rp20413.htm#fr_264) \[The identification
of the king with the Sun-god is frequent in the cuneiform tablets of Tel
el-Amarna, where it is an imitation of an Egyptian usage. It is probable
that the application of the term to the Assyrian king was due to the
early influence of Egypt.—<span class="smallcaps">Ed.</span>\]

<span id="fn_263"></span>[55:3](rp20413.htm#fr_265) \[Literally "the
pupil of the eyes."—<span class="smallcaps">Ed.</span>\]

<span id="fn_264"></span>[56:1](rp20413.htm#fr_266) Or Tiglath-Uras.

<span id="fn_265"></span>[56:2](rp20413.htm#fr_267) Literally "had
called me as a prophet (*nabium*) to the shepherding."

<span id="fn_266"></span>[56:3](rp20413.htm#fr_268) B.C. 858.

<span id="fn_267"></span>[57:1](rp20413.htm#fr_269) \[Literally, "I
burned for a holocaust." There seems to be a reference to human
sacrifice; cf. 2 Kings iii. 27.—<span class="smallcaps">Ed.</span>\]

<span id="fn_268"></span>[57:2](rp20413.htm#fr_270) \[In the time of
Shalmaneser the kingdom of Ararat, with its capital near Lake Van, was
distinguished from Nairi, with its centre at Khubuskia. See *Records of
the Past*, new series, i. p. 106, note 7.—<span
class="smallcaps">Ed.</span>\]

<span id="fn_269"></span>[58:1](rp20413.htm#fr_271) Lake Van.

<span id="fn_270"></span>[58:2](rp20413.htm#fr_272) B.C. 857. The events
of the year are summed up in the annals of the Black Obelisk, lines
26–31.

<span id="fn_271"></span>[58:3](rp20413.htm#fr_273) \[Or
"countries."—<span class="smallcaps">Ed.</span>\]

<span id="fn_272"></span>[58:4](rp20413.htm#fr_274) \[Lahlahte.—<span
class="smallcaps">Ed.</span>\]

<span id="fn_273"></span>[58:5](rp20413.htm#fr_275) \[Perhaps an Aramaic
name signifying "the son of our lord."—<span
class="smallcaps">Ed.</span>\]

<span id="fn_274"></span>[59:1](rp20413.htm#fr_276) Called Khabini by
Assur-natsir-pal and on the Black Obelisk.

<span id="fn_275"></span>[59:2](rp20413.htm#fr_277) \["The mound of
stones."—<span class="smallcaps">Ed.</span>\]

<span id="fn_276"></span>[59:3](rp20413.htm#fr_278) \[Or perhaps
Ki-giri-Dadda: he is called Giri-Dadi by Assur-natsir-pal, *Records of
the Past*, new series, ii. p. 173, note 1.—<span
class="smallcaps">Ed.</span>\]

<span id="fn_277"></span>[59:4](rp20413.htm#fr_279) Komagênê.

<span id="fn_278"></span>[59:5](rp20413.htm#fr_280) Called Paqarkhubuna
on the Black Obelisk, line 90.

<span id="fn_279"></span>[59:6](rp20413.htm#fr_281) \[The name of
Mutalli is the same as that of the Hittite king Mutal, formerly read
Mautenar, who is mentioned in the Egyptian copy of the treaty concluded
between Ramses II, the Egyptian monarch, and the Hittites of
Kadesh.—<span class="smallcaps">Ed.</span>\]

<span id="fn_280"></span>[59:7](rp20413.htm#fr_282) \[Or Sapa-lulve, the
Saplil of the Egyptian texts.—<span class="smallcaps">Ed.</span>\]

<span id="fn_281"></span>[59:8](rp20413.htm#fr_283) Between the Afrin
and the gulf of Antioch, extending southwards to the sources of the
Orontes.

<span id="fn_282"></span>[60:1](rp20413.htm#fr_284) Rimmon.

<span id="fn_283"></span>[60:2](rp20413.htm#fr_285) That is, Akhuni.

<span id="fn_284"></span>[60:3](rp20413.htm#fr_286) *Arantu*.

<span id="fn_285"></span>[60:4](rp20413.htm#fr_287) Or Alizir.

<span id="fn_286"></span>[60:5](rp20413.htm#fr_288) Twenty-five years
later the king of Que was Kate or Katî; see Black Obelisk, line 132.

<span id="fn_287"></span>[60:6](rp20413.htm#fr_289) *Khilukâ*.

<span id="fn_288"></span>[61:1](rp20413.htm#fr_290) The Mediterranean.

<span id="fn_289"></span>[61:2](rp20413.htm#fr_291) Literally, "the
country of the west."

<span id="fn_290"></span>[61:3](rp20413.htm#fr_292) \[The Assyrian king
Assur-irbi is otherwise unknown, but he probably reigned in the interval
between Samsi-Rimmon I, B.C. 1070, and Tiglath-pileser II, B.C. 950. For
his identification with Assur-rab-buri, see note on line 37.—<span
class="smallcaps">Ed.</span>\]

<span id="fn_291"></span>[61:4](rp20413.htm#fr_293) \[The modern ’Azaz,
about twenty-two miles north-west of Aleppo.—<span
class="smallcaps">Ed.</span>\] .

<span id="fn_292"></span>[61:5](rp20413.htm#fr_294) \[Called Agûsi in
line 27, and on the Black Obelisk.—<span class="smallcaps">Ed.</span>\]

<span id="fn_293"></span>[61:6](rp20413.htm#fr_295) B.C. 856; Black
Obelisk, lines 32–35.

<span id="fn_294"></span>[61:7](rp20413.htm#fr_296) Or countries.

<span id="fn_295"></span>[61:8](rp20413.htm#fr_297) \[Probably meaning
in Aramaic "Mound of the Son of ’Sip," a name which must be identified
with that of Saph in 2 Sam. xxi. 18. Til-Bur´sip is also written
Til-Bur´saip and Til-Bar´sip.—<span class="smallcaps">Ed.</span>\]

<span id="fn_296"></span>[62:1](rp20413.htm#fr_298) \[Probably the
modern Tel Basher; see *Records of the Past*, new series, i. p. 109,
note 5, and ii. p. 166, note 3. The printed text of the inscription has
to be corrected here.—<span class="smallcaps">Ed.</span>\]

<span id="fn_297"></span>[62:2](rp20413.htm#fr_299) \[This king must
have been the successor of Sapalulve mentioned in Column I, and the
predecessor of Girparuda mentioned in Column n, line 84.—<span
class="smallcaps">Ed.</span>\]

<span id="fn_298"></span>[63:1](rp20413.htm#fr_300) B.C. 856. Black
Obelisk, lines 35 *sq*.

<span id="fn_299"></span>[64:1](rp20413.htm#fr_301) "The Fortress of
Shalmaneser."

<span id="fn_300"></span>[64:2](rp20413.htm#fr_302) "The Glory of
Assur."

<span id="fn_301"></span>[64:3](rp20413.htm#fr_303) "I have taken; (it
is) not yours."

<span id="fn_302"></span>[64:4](rp20413.htm#fr_304) "The Command of
Assur."

<span id="fn_303"></span>[64:5](rp20413.htm#fr_305) "To Assur I have
restored, I have taken."

<span id="fn_304"></span>[64:6](rp20413.htm#fr_306) \[The Pethor of the
Old Testament, from which Balaam came. We learn from this and parallel
passages that it stood on the eastern side of the Sagura, the modern
Sajur, not far from the junction of this river with the Euphrates.—<span
class="smallcaps">Ed.</span>\]

<span id="fn_305"></span>[64:7](rp20413.htm#fr_307) \[Tiglath-pileser I,
B.C. 1100. The name may be a modified form of that of Mitanni, for which
see *Records of the Past*, new series, i. p. 113.—<span
class="smallcaps">Ed.</span>\]

<span id="fn_306"></span>[64:8](rp20413.htm#fr_308) \[The reading of the
name is doubtful, the characters being partly obliterated. George Smith
read Assur-rab-buri.—ED\].

<span id="fn_307"></span>[64:9](rp20413.htm#fr_309) *Arumu*.

<span id="fn_308"></span>[64:10](rp20413.htm#fr_310) Or "country of
Sumu."

<span id="fn_309"></span>[64:11](rp20413.htm#fr_311) Or "countries."

<span id="fn_310"></span>[65:1](rp20413.htm#fr_312) \[For Enzite, the
Anzitênê of classical geography, see *Records of the Past*, new series,
i. p. 103, note 2.—<span class="smallcaps">Ed.</span>\]

<span id="fn_311"></span>[65:2](rp20413.htm#fr_313) \[Or "belonging to
the country of Isua." See the inscription of Tiglath-pileser I, Column
III, line 91.—<span class="smallcaps">Ed.</span>\]

<span id="fn_312"></span>[65:3](rp20413.htm#fr_314) The Arsanias of
classical geography, now called the Murad-Su.

<span id="fn_313"></span>[65:4](rp20413.htm#fr_315) \[The Diyaveni or
kingdom of the son "of Diaus" of the Vannic texts, which lay upon the
Murad-Su in the neighbourhood of Melasgerd. One of its cities, Quais, is
now represented by Yazlu-tash.—<span class="smallcaps">Ed.</span>\]

<span id="fn_314"></span>[65:5](rp20413.htm#fr_316) \[Also called
Arzaskun. The destruction of Arzasku and the defeat of Arrame seem to
have led to the overthrow of his dynasty. Immediately afterwards
Sarduris I, the son of Lutipris, built the citadel of Van, and founded a
new kingdom on the shores of Lake Van.—<span
class="smallcaps">Ed.</span>\]

<span id="fn_315"></span>[66:1](rp20413.htm#fr_317) Or Rimmon.

<span id="fn_316"></span>[66:2](rp20413.htm#fr_318) \[*Aramalis* would
be a Vannic adjective, formed by a suffix *li*, and signifying
"belonging to Arama." It had evidently been built by King Aramas or
Aramis.—<span class="smallcaps">Ed.</span>\]

<span id="fn_317"></span>[67:1](rp20413.htm#fr_319) Lake Van.

<span id="fn_318"></span>[67:2](rp20413.htm#fr_320) Literally "at the
head of."

<span id="fn_319"></span>[68:1](rp20413.htm#fr_321) B.C. 856.

<span id="fn_320"></span>[68:2](rp20413.htm#fr_322) See *Records of the
Past*, new series, p. 149, note 6.

<span id="fn_321"></span>[69:1](rp20413.htm#fr_323) \[The reading of the
last syllable is doubtful; we should perhaps read Bunae. See my "Memoir
on the Vannic Inscriptions," *Jrl. R.A.S.*, xiv. 3, p. 396.—<span
class="smallcaps">Ed.</span>\]

<span id="fn_322"></span>[69:2](rp20413.htm#fr_324) Called Nigdiara on
the Black Obelisk, line 51.

<span id="fn_323"></span>[69:3](rp20413.htm#fr_325) Lake Van.

<span id="fn_324"></span>[69:4](rp20413.htm#fr_326) \[B.C. 854.
According to the Black Obelisk (ll. 54 *sq*.), however, the events here
recorded took place two years later in B.C. 852, during the eponymy of
Samas-bela-utsur.—<span class="smallcaps">Ed.</span>\]

<span id="fn_325"></span>[69:5](rp20413.htm#fr_327) Or Lillala.

<span id="fn_326"></span>[69:6](rp20413.htm#fr_328) Or Til-sa-Balakhi,
"The mound of the Balikh."

<span id="fn_327"></span>[69:7](rp20413.htm#fr_329) That is, western.

<span id="fn_328"></span>[69:8](rp20413.htm#fr_330) Komagene.

<span id="fn_329"></span>[69:9](rp20413.htm#fr_331) The modern
Malatiyeh.

<span id="fn_330"></span>[70:1](rp20413.htm#fr_332) \[Or Khalvan,
Aleppo. Compare Helam in 2 Sam. x. 17.—<span
class="smallcaps">Ed.</span>\]

<span id="fn_331"></span>[70:2](rp20413.htm#fr_333) \[According to K
2100. i. 7, 16, 17, Addu and Dadu were the names given to Rimmon in
Syria, Adad or Hadad being a further name by which the god was known in
Assyria. Besides Dadu we also find the forms Dadda and Dadi. In
Hadad-Rimmon (Zech. xii. II) the two names of the Air-god are united,
while a comparison of 2 Sam. viii. to with 1 Chr. xviii. 9 (Jo-ram and
Hado-ram) shows that at Hamath Hado or Addu was identified with the
national god of Israel. In the Babylonian contract-tablets the name of
the Syrian god Ben-Hadad appears as Bin-Addu.—<span
class="smallcaps">Ed.</span>\]

<span id="fn_332"></span>[70:3](rp20413.htm#fr_334) \[Probably the Eden
of Amos i. 5.—<span class="smallcaps">Ed.</span>\]

<span id="fn_333"></span>[70:4](rp20413.htm#fr_335) Or Bargâ.

<span id="fn_334"></span>[70:5](rp20413.htm#fr_336) *Akhabbu mat
’Sir’alâ*.

<span id="fn_335"></span>[70:6](rp20413.htm#fr_337) Probably the same as
the Que.

<span id="fn_336"></span>[70:7](rp20413.htm#fr_338) \[The "Arkite" of
Gen. x. 17. The city is called Irqatu in the tablets of Tel
el-Amarna.—<span class="smallcaps">Ed.</span>\]

<span id="fn_337"></span>[71:1](rp20413.htm#fr_339) \[Us’û is referred
to, the Ushâ of the Talmud, which, as Delitzsch has shown, was not far
from Acre.—<span class="smallcaps">Ed.</span>\]

<span id="fn_338"></span>[71:2](rp20413.htm#fr_340) \[The printed text
has *Si-za-na-â* in mistake for *Si-a-na-a*. Probably "the Sinite" of
Gen. x. 17 is meant.—<span class="smallcaps">Ed.</span>\]

<span id="fn_339"></span>[71:3](rp20413.htm#fr_341) *Arbâ*.

<span id="fn_340"></span>[71:4](rp20413.htm#fr_342) Baasha the son of
Rehob.

<span id="fn_341"></span>[71:5](rp20413.htm#fr_343) *Amanâ*.

<span id="fn_342"></span>[71:6](rp20413.htm#fr_344) Only eleven are
mentioned. It seems probable that the scribe has omitted the name of one
of the confederates.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Introduction](rp20414)
