[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Ancient Near
East](../../index)  [Records of the Past](../index) 
[Egypt](../../../egy/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](rp20417) 
[Next](rp20419) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Records of the Past, 2nd Series, Vol. IV* , ed. by A.H. Sayce,
\[1890\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

### INSCRIPTION OF RIMMON-NIRARI III

#### <span class="smallcaps">Translated by S. Arthur Strong</span>

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> following inscription is on a
pavement slab found at Nimrud, the ancient Calah, and now in the British
Museum. It has been published in the first volume of *The Cuneiform
Inscriptions of Western Asia*, p. 35, No. 3, as well as (from an
incomplete duplicate) by Layard on p. 70 of his volume of *Cuneiform
Inscriptions*, and Bonomi in his work on Nineveh, p. 339. It has been
translated by Sayce in the first volume of the former series of *Records
of the Past*, and (into German) by Abel in the first volume of
Schrader's *Keilinschriftliche Bibliothek*.

It contains the genealogy of Rimmon-nirari III, whose reign lasted from
811 to 783 B.C., during which time he was ceaselessly occupied in
consolidating and extending the conquests of his predecessors. In fact,
on the eponym list for this period there is not a single year not marked
by a campaign. Among other exploits he subdued Damascus, and forced its
king to pay tribute. His empire extended from the borders of Elam on the
south-east to the Mediterranean on the west, and included as
vassal-states

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Tyre, Sidon, Edom,
Philistia, and Israel. After his death the Assyrian power of the first
epoch, having reached its furthest limits, began to decline.

One of the most striking events of his reign was the revival in Assyria
of the worship of Nebo. The latter had not been unknown to the
Assyrians, but his cult was not so important with them as with the
Babylonians, as is shown by the fact that up to the time of
Rimmon-nirari his name rarely enters into the composition of proper
names. Rimmon-nirari built a new temple for him at Calah, which, as we
learn from the eponym list, he entered in the year 787.

From the concluding words of the inscription on the statue of Nebo in
the British Museum (*W. A. I.*, 35, 2) it might even appear as if it had
been intended that the worship of Nebo should dominate, or actually
supersede, that of all other gods: "Put thy trust in Nebo; trust in no
other god!" But if this was the project, it was not successful.

The inscription here translated is remarkable from the fact that
Rimmon-nirari, after tracing his descent back to his great-grandfather,
Assur-natsir-pal, begins again, as it were, at a point still more
remote, and boasts himself the descendant of Tiglath-adar, son of
Shalmaneser I., behind whom again there stand the mysterious forms of
the otherwise unknown Belkap-kapi and ’Sulili.

But the rendering of the latter part of the inscription is put forward
only provisionally, to be contradicted or confirmed by future
researches.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Text](rp20419)
