[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Ancient Near
East](../../index)  [Records of the Past](../index.md) 
[Egypt](../../../egy/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](rp20413.md) 
[Next](rp20415.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Records of the Past, 2nd Series, Vol. IV* , ed. by A.H. Sayce,
\[1890\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

### THE INSCRIPTION OF SHALMANESER II ON THE GATES OF BALAWÂT

#### <span class="smallcaps">Translated by the Rev. V. Scheil</span>

<span class="smallcaps">In</span> 1877 Mr. Hormuzd Rassam discovered the
remains of some very interesting Assyrian buildings in a small mound
called Balawât, about fifteen miles to the east of Mosul and nine miles
from the mounds of Nimrûd. They consisted of the enclosure of a palace,
within which was a chapel dedicated to Makhir, the god of dreams. The
temple had been built and the palace restored by Assur-natsir-pal, who
named the place Imgur-Bel. The palace was further embellished by
Shalmaneser II, the son of Assur-natsir-pal. He furnished it with two
folding gates of great size, each of which was ornamented with seven
horizontal bands of bronze. The bronze bands not only ran across the
faces of the wooden gates, but also round one side of the bronze posts
to which the gates were attached. The bands are covered with *repoussé*
work, representing the various countries and cities conquered by
Shalmaneser in the course of his campaigns. Each band contains two lines
of such representations; over each of the

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

pictures is an explanatory inscription, and on either side of the band
is a border of rosettes. The bronze plates were fastened to the gates by
nails driven through the centre of the rosettes.

The inscriptions, so far as they are still legible, have been published
and translated by Mr. Pinches in the *Transactions of the Society of
Biblical Archæology*, vii. 1 (1880), and in *The Bronze Ornaments of the
Palace Gates of Balawât* (1880–81). The translation which follows will
be found to represent the progress that has been made in Assyrian
decipherment since the publication of Mr. Pinches.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Text](rp20415.md)
