[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Islam](../../index) 
[Bukhari](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bh4_59)  [Next](bh4_61) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Hadith 4:61

*Narrated Anas:*

My uncle Anas bin An-Nadr was absent from the Battle of Badr. He said,
"O Allah's Apostle! I was absent from the first battle you fought
against the pagans. (By Allah) if Allah gives me a chance to fight the
pagans, no doubt. Allah will see how (bravely) I will fight." On the day
of Uhud when the Muslims turned their backs and fled, he said, "O Allah!
I apologize to You for what these (i.e. his companions) have done, and I
denounce what these (i.e. the pagans) have done." Then he advanced and
Sad bin Muadh met him. He said "O Sad bin Muadh ! By the Lord of
An-Nadr, Paradise! I am smelling its aroma coming from before (the
mountain of) Uhud," Later on Sad said, "O Allah's Apostle! I cannot
achieve or do what he (i.e. Anas bin An-Nadr) did. We found more than
eighty wounds by swords and arrows on his body. We found him dead and
his body was mutilated so badly that none except his sister could
recognize him by his fingers." We used to think that the following Verse
was revealed concerning him and other men of his sort: "Among the
believers are men who have been true to their covenant with
Allah.........." (33.23)

His sister Ar-Rubbaya' broke a front tooth of a woman and Allah's
Apostle ordered for retaliation. On that Anas (bin An-Nadr) said, "O
Allah's Apostle! By Him Who has sent you with the Truth, my sister's
tooth shall not be broken." Then the opponents of Anas's sister accepted
the compensation and gave up the claim of retaliation. So Allah's
Apostle said, "There are some people amongst Allah's slaves whose oaths
are fulfilled by Allah when they take them."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4:62: Kharija bin Zaid: Zaid bin Thabit said, When the Quran was
compiled from various ...](bh4_61)
