[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [ ](../../index)
[ ](../index) [ ](index) [ ](bh4_95)

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Hadith 4:95

*Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:*

Allah's Apostle ascended the pulpit and said, "Nothing worries me as to
what will happen to you after me, except the temptation of worldly
blessings which will be conferred on you." Then he mentioned the worldly
pleasures. He started with the one (i.e. the blessings) and took up the
other (i.e. the pleasures). A man got up saying, "O Allah's Apostle! Can
the good bring about evil?" The Prophet remained silent and we thought
that he was being inspired divinely, so all the people kept silent with
awe. Then the Prophet wiped the sweat off his face and asked, "Where is
the present questioner?" "Do you think wealth is good?" he repeated
thrice, adding, "No doubt, good produces nothing but good. Indeed it is
like what grows on the banks of a stream which either kills or nearly
kills the grazing animals because of gluttony except the
vegetation-eating animal which eats till both its flanks are full (i.e.
till it gets satisfied) and then stands in the sun and defecates and
urinates and again starts grazing. This worldly property is sweet
vegetation. How excellent the wealth of the Muslim is, if it is
collected through legal means and is spent in Allah's Cause and on
orphans, poor people and travelers. But he who does not take it legally
is like an eater who is never satisfied and his wealth will be a witness
against him on the Day of Resurrection."

------------------------------------------------------------------------
