[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Islam](../../index) 
[Bukhari](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bh4_312) 
[Next](bh4_314) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Hadith 4:309

*Narrated Abaya bin Rifaa:*

My grandfather, Rafi said, "We were in the company of the Prophet at
DhulHulaifa, and the people suffered from hunger. We got some camels and
sheep (as booty) and the Prophet was still behind the people. They
hurried and put the cooking pots on the fire. (When he came) he ordered
that the cooking pots should be upset and then he distributed the booty
(amongst the people) regarding ten sheep as equal to one camel then a
camel fled and the people chased it till they got tired, as they had a
few horses (for chasing it). So a man threw an arrow at it and caused it
to stop (with Allah's Permission). On that the Prophet said, 'Some of
these animals behave like wild beasts, so, if any animal flee from you,
deal with it in the same way." My grandfather asked (the Prophet ), "We
hope (or are afraid) that we may meet the enemy tomorrow and we have no
knives. Can we slaughter our animals with canes?" Allah's Apostle
replied, "If the instrument used for killing causes the animal to bleed
profusely and if Allah's Name is mentioned on killing it, then eat its
meat (i.e. it is lawful) but won't use a tooth or a nail and I am
telling you the reason: A tooth is a bone (and slaughtering with a bone
is forbidden ), and a nail is the slaughtering instrument of the
Ethiopians."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4:310: Qais: Jarir bin 'Abdullah said to me, Allah's Apostle said
to me, 'Won't ...](bh4_314)
