[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Islam](../../index) 
[Bukhari](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bh4_112) 
[Next](bh4_114) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Hadith 4:112

*Narrated Abu Huraira:*

Allah's Apostle said, " Horses are kept for one of three purposes; for
some people they are a source of reward, for some others they are a
means of shelter and for some others they are a source of sins. The one
for whom they are a source of reward, is he who keeps a horse for
Allah's Cause (i.e. Jihad) tying it with a long tether on a meadow or in
a garden with the result that whatever it eats from the area of the
meadow or the garden where it is tied will be counted as good deeds for
his benefit, and if it should break its rope and jump over one or two
hillocks then all its dung and its foot marks will be written as good
deeds for him; and if it passes by a river and drinks water from it even
though he had no intention of watering it, even then he will get the
reward for its drinking. As for the man for whom horses are a source of
sins, he is the one who keeps a horse for the sake of pride and pretense
and showing enmity for Muslims: such a horse will be a source of sins
for him. When Allah's Apostle was asked about donkeys, he replied,
"Nothing has been revealed to me about them except this unique,
comprehensive Verse: "Then anyone who does an atom's (or a small ant's)
weight of good shall see it; And anyone who does an atom's (or a small
ant's) weight of evil, shall see it.' (101.7-8)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4:113: Muslim from Abu Aqil from Abu Al-Mutawakkil An-Naji: I
called on Jabir bin 'Abdullah Al-Ansari and said to him, Relate to
...](bh4_114)
