[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Islam](../../index) 
[Bukhari](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bh4_363) 
[Next](bh4_365) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Hadith 4:360

*Narrated Marwan bin Al-Hakim and Miswar bin Makhrama:*

When the Hawazin delegation came to Allah's Apostle after they had
embraced Islam and requested him to return their properties and war
prisoners to them, Allah's Apostle said, "To me the best talk is the
truest, so you may choose either of two things; the war prisoners or the
wealth, for I have delayed their distribution." Allah's Apostle had
waited for them for over ten days when he returned from Ta'if. So, when
those people came to know that Allah's Apostle was not going to return
to them except one of the two things the said, "We choose our war
Prisoners 'Allah's Apostle stood up amongst the Muslims, and after
glorifying Allah as He deserved, he said, "Now then, these brothers of
yours have come to us with repentance, and I see it logical that I
should return their captives to them, so whoever of you likes to do that
as a favor then he can do it, and whoever amongst you likes to stick to
his share, let him give up his prisoners and we will compensate him from
the very first Fai' (i.e. war booty received without fight) which Allah
will give us." On that, all the people said. 'O Allah's Apostles We have
agreed willingly to do so (return the captives)" Then Allah's Apostle
said to them "I do not know who amongst you has agreed to this and who
has not. You should return and let your leaders inform me of your
agreement." The people returned and their leaders spoke to them, and
then came to Allah's Apostle and said, "All the people have agreed
willingly to do so and have given the permission to return the war
prisoners (without Compensation)" (Az-Zuhri, the sub-narrator states)
This is what has been related to us about the captives of Hawazin.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4:361: Zahdam: Once we were in the house of Abu Musa who
presented a meal containing ...](bh4_365)
