[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](mrci10)  [Next](mrci12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*A Mission Record of the California Indians*, by A.L. Kroeber, \[1908\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### *San Antonio*. <span id="fr_46"></span>[46](#fn_46)

Two distinct languages spoken by the Indians are known: the predominant
language, that of the site of the mission, which is understood to the
east, south, and north and the circumference of the west; and the less
important, which those speak who are called 'beach people' (playanos),
on account of having come from the bays of the ocean. These are few in
number, and not only understand the predominant language but also speak
it perfectly.

 

They were as easily married as unmarried. For the former, nothing more
was required than that the suitor should ask the

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

bride from her parents, and at times it sufficed that she of herself
should consent to join herself to the man, though more often verbal
communication or agreement (trato) preceded. Many of them did not keep
their wives. Some, when their wife was pregnant or had given birth,
changed their residence without taking leave, and married another.
Others were married with two, three, or even more women. It is certain
that there are many who have come \[to the mission\] from the mountains
already married, and who could serve as an example to the most religious
men.

 

There were some few who set out food for the dead.

 

From their native condition they still preserve a flute which is played
like the dulce. It is entirely open from top to bottom, and is five
palms in length. Others are not more than about three palms. It produces
eight tones (puntos) perfectly. They play various tunes (tocatas),
nearly all in one measure, most of them merry. These flutes have eleven
\[sic\] stops; some more, and some less. They have another musical
instrument, a string instrument, which consists of a wooden bow to which
a string of sinew is bound, producing a note. They use no other
instruments. In singing they raise and lower the voice to seconds,
thirds, fourths, fifths, and octaves. They never sing in parts, except
that when many sing together some go an octave higher than the rest. Of
their songs most are merry, but some are somewhat mistes in parts. In
all these songs they do not make any statement (proposicion), but only
use fluent words, naming birds, places of their country, and so
on. <span id="fr_47"></span>[47](#fn_47)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_46"></span>[18:46](mrci11.htm#fr_46) San Antonio is the
northernmost of the two missions in Salinan territory. The missionaries
there who might have contributed to this report were Pedro Cabot and
Juan Bautista Sancho.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[19:47](mrci11.htm#fr_47) The description of the
flute accords well with specimens that have been collected from Indians
of other parts of California, except that it is very doubtful whether
any such flute could produce eight tones or had as many as eleven stops.
The California flute ordinarily has either three or four stops. The
"string instrument" is the musical bow, played with the mouth as a
resonance chamber, and reported also from the Maidu and Yokuts. When it
is said that some sing an octave higher than others when they sing
together, it is probable that women are meant. The use of disjointed
words or names, many times repeated in songs, is frequent in California.
On the other hand there are instances of songs containing several
complete sentences, as among the Yokuts songs published in Volume II of
this series.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: San Carlos](mrci12)
