[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](mrci11)  [Next](mrci13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*A Mission Record of the California Indians*, by A.L. Kroeber, \[1908\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

#### *San Carlos*. <span id="fr_48"></span>[48](#fn_48)

At this mission there are seven nations of Indians. They are called
Excelen and Egeac, Rumsen, SargentaRuc, Sanconeños, Guachirron and
Calendo Ruc. The first two are from inland. They have one and the same
language or speech, but this is totally distinct from that of the other
five, who speak a common tongue. <span id="fr_49"></span>[49](#fn_49)

In the native state they ordinarily lived at war with one another.

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

The languages which there are among these seven nations are two, one
called Rumsen, and the other Excelen, entirely different. For instance
in Rumsen they say, muxina muguiant jurriquimo igest oyh laguan eje uti
maigin. In Excelen, egenoch lalucuimxs talogpami ege salegua lottos
tahezapami laxlachis. Both of these examples mean: "The men who shoot
well with a bow are esteemed and well liked." <span
id="fr_50"></span>[50](#fn_50)

 

The principal Indians are their chiefs or kings. Each nation has one.
They obey and respect him all their lives. The position is inherited by
succession, or in case of want of direct succession it goes to the
nearest relative. In the native condition such a captain was the only
one in his nation who could have and leave various unmarried women. If
he had children from any one of them, she was the best beloved and he
lived with her forever. However he had the privilege of going with
unmarried women whenever he desired. The whole nation rendered him
vassalage. He went ahead in war, furnishing bows and arrows and
animating his people. He was regularly an excellent marksman with the
bow.

 

There is a custom among the men of entering daily a subterranean oven
which is called temescal. Into this they bring fire. When it is
sufficiently heated, they go in undressed. Then they sweat profusely, so
that when they come out they look as if they had been bathing. It is
known that this is very beneficial to them. For some time the
\[sweat-houses\] were forbidden, and many itches, tumors, and other
epidemics were found among the men. On the \[sweat-houses\] being given
back to them, hardly a

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

man with the itch could be discovered, and this is a disease common
among the women and children, who do not use such sweat-baths. The women
who have recently given birth employ another method of sweating. They
make a hole inside of the house, put wood into it, light this, and put
many heavy stones upon it. When the stones are hot, they cover them with
much green verdure which makes a sort of a mattress. The woman who has
given birth lies down on this with the baby. The mother sweats much and
the child is kept warm. <span id="fr_51"></span>[51](#fn_51) They do
this for six or seven days, and then are as agile as if they had not
given birth, and this although their broths and foods are very poor.

 

They use a split stick like a distaff which serves them to beat the
measure for their songs, <span id="fr_52"></span>[52](#fn_52) which,
whether happy or sad, are all in the same time (tonata). For instance
they sing as follows to the lively tunes, in which they mention their
seeds or their asañas: *Bellota—a—a, bellota; mucha semilla—a—a, mucha
semilla*. If the song is one of vengeance or bad wishes, which is very
often, and from which many fights result, they sing, and dance to the
same time, speaking evil of that nation with which they are on bad
terms, thus: *Manco—o—o*, *manco*, or other words or defects which they
know concerning the nation or person which they are comparing
(contrapuesta).

 

The kind of idolatry which has been found among these natives is that
they sometimes smoke, blowing the smoke to the sun, the moon, and to
certain people who they believe live in the sky; and with this they say:
"Here goes this smoke in order that you will give me good weather
to-morrow." Thus also of the seeds which they gather and of which they
make pinole or flour. Of these they throw a handful to the sun, the
moon, or the sky, saying: "I send you this so that another year you will
give me greater abundance." Thus they recognize in the sun and the

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

moon influences bearing upon their necessities, and recognize also that
in the sky there is another people which sends them what they wish, and
for this reason they offer them flour, seeds, and tobacco smoke.

They have often been asked if they have heard tell anything of the place
of their origin. To this all answer that they do not know. And this
ignorance is not strange, for these natives hold it for the greatest
affront that one should speak of their dead parents and relatives; to
such a degree, that a boy whose parents should die while he is quite
small, would have no one who would tell him how his deceased father,
grandfather, and other kindred were called. <span
id="fr_53"></span>[53](#fn_53) If they quarrel among one another, they
say in order to be more vituperative: "Your father is dead (a ti se te
murio tu padre)" and then they become more angry. <span
id="fr_54"></span>[54](#fn_54) On account of these practices they have
no way of retaining a recollection of their ancestors, the more so since
when anyone dies, they burn all his clothing and property, and if he has
animals, like chickens, dogs, or a horse, they kill them, and pull up
his plants. If they are asked the reason, they say that it is in order
that they may no longer remember the dead. <span
id="fr_55"></span>[55](#fn_55)

 

Some of them gain a reputation as a doctor (curandero). The sick person
calls such a one and lets him suck the part which is paining. Presently
the doctor extracts a stone which he has hidden in his mouth, and says:
"Look. This was the cause of your sickness. Inside of you was this
stone." They receive pay for this deceit and the patient does not become
well front it. Others sing and dance before the sick person. Others, old
women, say that it is they who make fruits and seeds grow, and for this
presents are made to them; and if by chance the year is barren in
fruits, the old woman pretends that she is angered, making

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

them believe that she has not wished to give them fruits; wherefore they
feel themselves compelled to make her more presents in order to allay
her displeasure and make her give them seeds the next year. If indeed
this next year is a fruitful one, the old woman receives their
contentment and approval and all humor her.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_48"></span>[20:48](mrci12.htm#fr_48) The mission of San
Carlos, near Monterey, is so far as known the only one to which Indians
of the Esselen family were brought, except perhaps that of Soledad. San
Carlos is one of seven missions, extending from Soledad to San
Francisco, founded in Costanoan territory. The following report, which
is one of the most detailed and careful in the entire series of replies,
appears to have been written either by Father Juan Amoros or by Father
Vincente de Sarria.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[20:49](mrci12.htm#fr_49) The seven ''nations"
are village communities. On account of unusual size or prominence, the
names of these seem to have come to be chosen to designate somewhat
larger groups that had no political organization or real coherence
except possibly a distinct dialect. The first two, "from inland," who
have the same speech, distinct from that of the others, belong to the
Esselen family; the other five, who "speak a common tongue," are
Costanoan. Excelen is evidently the same name as Esselen, which appears
also in the forms Eslen, Ecclemach, Ecselen, Escelen, and Ensen.
Originally probably only the name of a village-site, extended by the
Spaniards to cover a group of people, it has come to be the recognized
name of an entire linguistic family. This family was never large since
known to history, and is the only stock in California to have become
entirely extinct. However, only the lives of a few individuals separate
several other families from the same condition, so that there is nothing
peculiar in the fate of the Esselen. Egeac is the Ekgiagan given by
Alexander Taylor as a village of the Chalone of Soledad, who, however,
were Costanoan; -gan seems to be an ending, as it appears also in
Eslanagan, Yumanagan, and Aspasniagan. The writer in 1902 was told by
the Costanoan Indians at Monterey that Ekkheya was a former village-site
in the mountains to the south. This accords with what is known of the
Esselen territory. Rumsen or Rumsien is the name which has come to be
used for the Costanoan Indians of the vicinity of Monterey. The few
survivors state that it was applicable to the people, or a district,
along Carmel river in the mountains south of Monterey. Rumsen and Eslen
are the most commonly mentioned "tribes" at Monterey, which have by
some, writing at a distance, been extended so as to divide a large part
of California between them. In this more general sense they are about
equivalent to "Costonoan and Esselen Indians at San Carlos mission."
SargentaRuc is Sirkhintaruk, or Sirkhinta, also called Kakonta, a former
Costanoan village at Point Sur. Kakon means chicken-hawk; ta is the
locative ending *at*; and ruk, literally house, means village, or people
of; or, as the writer's informants put it, Kakonta is Sur, Kakontaruk
the Sureños, the ''gente" of Sur. Guachirron is several times mentioned,
as by Taylor, who speaks of the Goatcharones with the Ekgiagan. The
writer's Monterey informants placed the Huacharones beyond Ekkheya.
Calendo Rue, finally, is Kalindaruk, a Costanoan village near the mouth
of Salinas river. Like most the other terms in this list, it has
generally been used to include the people of the surrounding district.
Kalin is ocean, ta is at, and ruk, house, as in Sirkhintaruk. The name
has also been written Calendaruc and Kathlendaruc.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[21:50](mrci12.htm#fr_50) The Esselen language
is extinct. All that is known of it is collected in a paper on the
Languages of the Coast of California South of San Francisco, issued in
the second volume of the present series of publications. The sentence
here added is therefore a welcome contribution, even though it does not
yet yield to analysis. Egenoch is man and lottos arrow, according to the
vocabularies. The mx in lalucuimxs is doubtful in the manuscript, also
the g in ege, and the z in tahezapami, for which taherapami should
perhaps be read. The Costanoan dialect of San Carlos and Monterey has
been briefly discussed, under the name of Rumsen, in the publication
just mentioned. Mukiamk is man, uti is they, ekhe is much, very, lauwan
is bow, ins or iwis, not discernible in the sentence above, is like,
love, tepek, also without parallel, is to shoot; -st and -n are verbal
endings. Igest should perhaps be read iyest, and the end of maigin is
not clear in the manuscript.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[22:51](mrci12.htm#fr_51) This method of
sweating used by women who have recently given birth, suggests the
Luiseño and Diegueño practice at the girls’ puberty ceremony, as
described by Boscana and in an article by H. N. Rust in the American
Anthropologist for 1906.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[22:52](mrci12.htm#fr_52) The split stick is the
clap-stick or rattle that has been previously mentioned. It is the
dancing rattle of central California, as compared with the cocoon rattle
used by the shamans of the same tribes.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[23:53](mrci12.htm#fr_53) This might be
literally true.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[23:54](mrci12.htm#fr_54) Some such statement is
the usual form which a deadly insult or curse takes among the California
Indians, from the Yurok of the extreme northwest to the Mohave of the
southeast.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[23:55](mrci12.htm#fr_55) The reason here given
for the destruction of the property of the dead, and the avoidance of
his name, is the one usually obtained upon inquiry among the present
Indians of California. That there were also other motives, appears from
the preceding statement from San Fernando. The matter has been discussed
in Notes on California Folk-Lore in the Journal of American Folk-Lore
for 1906.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: San Juan Bautista](mrci13)
