[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](mrci04)  [Next](mrci06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*A Mission Record of the California Indians*, by A.L. Kroeber, \[1908\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### *San Gabriel*. <span id="fr_25"></span>[26](#fn_25)

In this mission four distinct idioms are spoken according to the four
directions of its establishment. One is called Kokomcar, another
Guiguitamcar, the third Corbonamga, and the last Sibanga. <span
id="fr_26"></span>[27](#fn_26)

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

Notwithstanding that in general they are ignorant of their origin, there
have not been wanting some who declared that they had knowledge that the
first Indians populating this country came from the north, whence they
were conducted to these lands by a great chief (capitan general), who
they say still exists on an island, and they make him be without
beginning or end. This one distributed to each tribe its
territory. <span id="fr_27"></span>[28](#fn_27)

 

When a celebrated captain dies, they summon the nearest villages, even
if they are remote, and make a great festival, which consists of dancing
and eating. They either bury the body, or burn it and bury its ashes.
The dance and feast continue for a space of three days, after which the
deceased remains in eternal oblivion. <span
id="fr_28"></span>[29](#fn_28)

 

They are not acquainted with any other musical instrument than a whistle
made from the bone of the foreleg of a deer, and a wooden fife
(pifano). <span id="fr_29"></span>[30](#fn_29)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_25"></span>[11:26](mrci05.htm#fr_25) The Indians of Mission
San Gabriel were closely related in dialect to those of San Fernando.
The two constituted a dialectic group which has been called the
Gabrielino, and which is distinct from the other Shoshonean linguistic
groups of Southern California. As will be seen, there were however other
Indians at San Gabriel besides the true Gabrielino. The fathers in
charge of this mission in 1811 were Jose de Miguel and Jose Maria
Zalvidea.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[11:27](mrci05.htm#fr_26) The four dialects
spoken by the Indians assembled at this mission can be partially
identified. Sibanga is the name of the site of San Gabriel itself. It is
a local, not a tribal appellation, as is shown by the locative ending
-nga. Hugo Reid in his account of the Indians of Los Angeles county,
printed in the Los Angeles Star in 1852 and reprinted by Alexander
Taylor in the California Farmer, gives Sibagna as the native name of San
Gabriel. Guiguitamcar, or Guiquitamcar, is a good Spanish spelling of
Gikidan-um, with the suffix -car substituted for the plural ending -um.
Gikidanum is a variant obtained by the author for Gitanemuk, the name of
the Shoshoneans on upper Tejon creek, at the southernmost end of the San
Joaquin valley. These Indians speak a Serrano dialect. Their neighbors
south of the Tehachapi range, that is towards San Gabriel, are also
Serrano. A vocabulary of this dialect has been given in Volume IV of the
present series of publications. The Kokomcar are unknown. The ending
which this name shares with Guiguitamcar makes it seem that these people
were also Serrano. Corbonamga is also unidentified. The ending may be
the Gabrielino locative -nga. There is a possibility that either this
term or the last is a copyist's misread spelling of the name Cucamonga.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[12:28](mrci05.htm#fr_27) The great "capitan
general" is no doubt the Gabrielino equivalent of the Juaneño and
Luiseño deity Ouiot or Wiyot, who according to tradition led the people
from the north and divided them into tribes.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[12:29](mrci05.htm#fr_28) It is probable that
cremation was the usual practice in pre-mission times. That the dead
should be forgotten and their names never mentioned, is a universal
custom of the California Indians. The accounts below from San Fernando
and San Carlos give different explanations of the motive for the
practice.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[12:30](mrci05.htm#fr_29) The bone whistle is of
the kind which may still occasionally be found in ceremonial use among
the modern Indians of California. Many have been unearthed in
archaeological explorations in Southern California. The "wooden fife" is
no doubt the open-ended flute made by all the Indians of California, and
more accurately described in the accounts from other missions below.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: San Fernando](mrci06)
