[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](mrci00)  [Next](mrci02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*A Mission Record of the California Indians*, by A.L. Kroeber, \[1908\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# A MISSION RECORD OF THE CALIFORNIA INDIANS

## *From a Manuscript in the Bancroft Library*.

###### BY

### <span class="smallcaps">A. L. Kroeber</span>.

#### \[1908\]

In 1811 the Spanish viceregal government of Mexico sent to Alta
California a list of questions regarding the Indians at the missions,
their customs and disposition in their native state, and their condition
under missionary influence. This "interrogatorio" was answered at the
various missions, the replies collected, and prefaced by the president
of the missions with a short general statement or abstract of the
answers received to each question. The compilation was presumably
forwarded to Mexico, and a copy retained in the Archives of the mission
Santa Barbara. There a copy was made in 1877 by E. F. Murray for Mr. H.
H. Bancroft. On the acquisition of the Bancroft Library by the
University of California, this copy became available for study. Through
the courtesy of Professor Henry Morse Stephens, and the Commission on
the Bancroft Library, the writer is enabled to present the following
translation of extracts from this document. <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0)

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

In the original, the various statements are not arranged primarily
according to missions, but under the questions of the interrogatorio to
which they are replies. A geographical order is however more convenient
for ethnological uses and is here followed. The replies vary much in
length, spirit, and value. Some of the missionaries evidently regarded
compliance with the instructions of the questionnaire as an official
requirement which was perfunctorily performed. In many cases no answers
were given various questions at certain of the missions. Other fathers
wrote more fully, but were more interested in the condition of the
converted Indians than in their wild brethren or the customs of their
fathers. Some, in answering those questions of the list that an
ethnologist would be specially interested in, display lack of knowledge,
for the replies are brief or vague and general; but others, notably the
fathers at San Luis Rey, San Fernando, and San Carlos, show an exactness
of knowledge that argues not only a long acquaintance but an interest in
the Indian as such. It is of such replies that the extracts here given
largely consist. They are only a minor part of the entire document.
Other passages, dealing with the converted Indians, belong more properly
to the realm of the historian of the missions than of the ethnologist;
and the remainder would be of no great interest to either. In regard to
what is presented, it must be admitted that many of the replies from
different missions are practical duplications, and that but few are
answered as a modern ethnologist would answer them; but all are
truthful, some discriminating, and few prejudiced; and above all we have
here, put down by observers on the spot more than eighty years ago, what
the best ethnologist of today could not obtain more than fragments or
traces of. Back of San Diego and San Luis Rey there are still Indians
who preserve memory of the past; but in the remainder of the mission
region, from San Juan Capistrano to San Francisco, the Indians are gone,
nearly gone, or civilized and Christianized into a state of oblivion of
ancient customs and beliefs. How little that is specific do we know of
the Chumash and Costanoan and Esselen Indians! How much less of those of
Salinan stock, whose former life has vanished with scarcely a trace! It
is for this reason that these replies of the Franciscan fathers, however
unconnected, and however incomplete, are of value.

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

The Spanish of some of the missionaries was not always above reproach.
They used provincialisms and terms now obsolete. Their spelling was at
times more phonetic than orthographic, and hasty punctuation has made
some interminable sentences. One and all they wrote as they thought,
simply, truthfully, and without regard to style. The copyist, or
several, through whose hands their unvarnished statements are at present
preserved at the University, have evidently at times added to the
difficulties of the manuscript and contributed their share toward an
occasional sentence that it is hard to make much sense of. Thanks are
due Professor J. T. Clark for assistance in unravelling some of the more
difficult passages.

The Bancroft Library is without a systematic catalogue, and it has not
yet been possible to provide any arrangement by which a given work or
volume can be readily found at will. This condition renders it difficult
to use the many valuable books in the Library, and almost impossible to
carry on extended work with the still more valuable manuscripts. There
is little doubt that the Library contains among its buried treasures a
number of unpublished manuscripts that will prove to be of importance to
the ethnology of California and the Pacific Coast. It is hoped that the
present contribution may stimulate interest in this important
collection, and may call attention to the larger opportunities for the
increase of knowledge that will be furnished when it shall be possible
to equip the Library with that indispensable key to its usefulness that
at present it lacks—a complete catalogue.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[1:1](mrci01.htm#fr_0) The copy at the University
of California is in the Archives of the Mission Santa Barbara,
Miscellaneous Papers, volume VII, beginning at page 112, as this series
of documents is at present bound and paged, and is entitled:
*Contestation al Interrogatorio del año de 1811 por el Presidente de las
Misiones de esta Alta California, y los Padres de la Misiones de San
Miguel, San Antonio, Soledad*, etc. The heading of the document itself
is: *Interrogatorio dirigido al Il<sup>mo</sup> S<sup>or</sup> Obispo de
Sonora, a 6 de Octubre del año 1811, por el Ex<sup>mo</sup>
S<sup>or</sup> D<sup>n</sup> Ciriaco Gonzales Carvajal, S<sup>rio</sup>
inter<sup>o</sup> de la gobernacion del Reyno de Ultramar, y circulado
por mi, de or<sup>n</sup> del S<sup>or</sup> B<sup>n</sup> D<sup>n</sup>
José Joaquin Calvo, Gobernador de la expresada sagrada Mitra, y de los
padres ministros de las misiones de San Miguel*, etc.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: San Diego](mrci02)
