[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc03060)  [Next](cc03062) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 3: Harmony of the Law, Part I*, tr. by John
King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.ii"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p1"></span>PASSAGES WHICH HAVE REFERENCE  
TO THE EXPOSITION OF THIS COMMANDMENT

<span id="vi.ii.i"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.i-p1"></span><span id="vi.ii.i-p1.1"></span>[Deut.
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#004),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#013),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#016)<span id="vi.ii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.i-p2"></span>**4.** Hear, O Israel; The Lord our God
*is* one Lord.

<span id="vi.ii.i-p3"></span>**4.** Audi, Israel, Jehova Deus noster
Deus unus est.

<span id="vi.ii.i-p4"></span>**13.** Thou shalt fear the Lord thy God,
and serve him.

<span id="vi.ii.i-p5"></span>**13.** Jehovam Deum tuum timebis, et ipsum
solum coles.

<span id="vi.ii.i-p6"></span>**16.** Ye shall not tempt the Lord your
God, as ye tempted *him* in Massah.

<span id="vi.ii.i-p7"></span>**16.** Non tentabitis Jehovam Deum
vestrum, sicut tentastis in Masa.

<span id="vi.ii.i-p8"></span><span id="vi.ii.i-p8.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
10:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#020)<span id="vi.ii.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.i-p9"></span>**20.** Thou shalt fear the Lord thy God;
him shalt thou serve, and to him shalt thou cleave.

<span id="vi.ii.i-p10"></span>**20.** Jehovam Deum tuum timebis, eum
coles, eique adhaerebis.

<span id="vi.ii.i-p11"></span><span id="vi.ii.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.i-p12"></span>**4.** *Hear, O Israel.* When Moses
proclaims that God is One, the statement is not confined to His sole
essence, which is incomprehensible, but must be also understood of His
power and glory, which had been manifested to the people; as though he
had said, that they would be guilty of rebellion unless they abode in
the One God, who had laid them under such obligations to Himself.
Therefore he not only calls him Jehovah, but at the same time infers
that He is the God of that people whom he addresses, “Thy God.” Thus all
other deities are brought to nought, and the people are commanded to fly
and detest whatever withdraws their minds from the pure knowledge of
Him; for although His name may be left to Him, still He is stripped of
His majesty, as soon as He is mixed up with a multitude of others. Thus
He says by Ezekiel, (<span id="vi.ii.i-p12.1"></span>[Eze
20:39](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#039)<span
id="vi.ii.i-p12.1"></span>,) “Go ye, serve ye every one his idols;” in
which words He not only repudiates all mixed worship, but testifies that
He would rather be accounted nothing than not be worshipped undividedly.
The orthodox Fathers aptly used this passage against the Arians;  <span
id="fr_279"></span>[280](#fn_279) because, since Christ is everywhere
called God, He is undoubtedly the same Jehovah who declares Himself to
be the One God; and this is asserted with the same force respecting the
Holy Spirit.

<span id="vi.ii.i-p14"></span><span id="vi.ii.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.i-p15"></span>**13.** *Thou shalt fear the Lord thy
God.* Hence it is more evident why He has just declared that there is
One God, viz., that He alone may be undividedly worshipped; for unless
our minds are fixed on Him alone, religion is torn, as it were, into
divers parts, and this is soon followed by a labyrinth of errors. But,
first, he calls for reverence, and then for the worship which may
testify and demonstrate it. “Fear” contains in it the idea of
subjection, when men devote themselves to God, because His terrible
majesty keeps them in their proper place. Hence results worship, which
is the proof of piety. But we must observe that the fear enjoined in
this passage is voluntary, so that men influenced by it desire nothing
more than to obey God. When I stated, therefore, that God brings us
under the yoke by a sense of His power and greatness, I did not
understand that a violent and servile obedience is extorted from us; I
only wished to affirm that men cannot be induced to obey God, before
they have been subdued by fear; because their innate corruption always
carries with it a contempt for religion, and a spirit of licentiousness.
Therefore, in Jeremiah (<span id="vi.ii.i-p15.1"></span>[Jer
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#022)<span id="vi.ii.i-p15.1"></span>),
in order to exhort men to fear, He sets forth His terrible power in
restraining the strength of the sea; but this fear leads on His true
worshippers further. In the other passage which we have subjoined from
<span id="vi.ii.i-p15.2"></span>[Deuteronomy
10](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#000)<span id="vi.ii.i-p15.2"></span>,
the word *cleave* again confirms the truth, that as soon as men decline
from God in the least degree, His worship is corrupted. For this is the
meaning of that union with Himself to which He calls His worshippers,
that they should be, as it were, glued to Him, and should not look
elsewhere.

<span id="vi.ii.i-p16"></span><span id="vi.ii.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.i-p17"></span>**16.** *Ye shall not tempt the Lord.*
Since the doctrine here should undoubtedly be referred to the First
Commandment, we gather from it that this is the main foundation of
piety, to give to Him what is His own, and to diminish nothing from the
prerogative which He claims. As we have already seen, unbelief was the
fountain and cause of the tempting in Massah, for when the people
neither relied on God’s providence nor rested on His paternal love, they
burst forth into impatience, and at length advanced so far as to think
that God was not with them, unless He complied with their wicked lusts.
We perceive, then, that God cannot be rightly worshipped unless when He
has His peculiar attributes acknowledged. Whence, also, it appears that
true piety cannot be dissevered from faith, because, if we confess that
every desirable good dwells in Him, we shall expect and seek for all
things from Him; we shall also patiently and contentedly allow ourselves
to be governed by His will, and, in a word, give up ourselves and our
lives into His hands.

<span id="vi.ii.ii"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p1"></span><span id="vi.ii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Leviticus
19](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#000)<span id="vi.ii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p2"></span><span id="vi.ii.ii-p2.1"></span>[Lev.
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#002)<span id="vi.ii.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p3"></span>**1.** And the Lord spake unto Moses,
saying,

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p4"></span>**1.** Loquutus est Jehova ad Mosen,
dicendo:

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p5"></span>2. Speak unto all the congregation of the
children of Israel, and say unto them, Ye shall be holy: for I the Lord
your God am holy.

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p6"></span>2. Loquere ad universum coetum filiorum
Israel, et dic eis, Sancti estote, quia ego sanctus Jehova Deus vester.

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p7"></span><span id="vi.ii.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p8"></span>**1.** *And the Lord spake.* This is the
object of the exhortation: first, that they should not measure the
service of God by their own conceits, but rather by His nature; and
secondly, that they should begin by studying  <span
id="fr_280"></span>[281](#fn_280) to be holy. For nothing is harder than
for men to divest themselves of their carnal affections to prepare for
imitating God. Besides, they willingly lie slumbering in their own
filthiness, and seek to cloak it by the outward appearance of religion.
Here, then, they are recalled to the imitation of God, who, in adopting
them, desired that they should bear His image, just as good and
undegenerate children resemble their father. If any should pretend to
equal God, his emulation would be madness; but although the most perfect
come very far short even of the angels, yet the weakness of the very
humblest does not prevent him from aspiring after the example of God. To
this point did all the ceremonies tend, whereby God exercised His
ancient people unto holiness, as we shall hereafter see. Although this
declaration does not occur once only, yet because it is annexed in other
places to special precepts in order to their confirmation, let it
suffice at present to apprehend the general doctrine it contains.

<span id="vi.ii.iii"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.iii-p1"></span><span
id="vi.ii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
6](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#000)<span id="vi.ii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.iii-p2"></span><span id="vi.ii.iii-p2.1"></span>[Deut.
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#015)<span id="vi.ii.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.iii-p3"></span>**14.** Ye shall not go after other gods,
of the gods of the people which *are* round about you;

<span id="vi.ii.iii-p4"></span>**14.** Non ambulabitis post deos alienos
e diis populorum qui undique circum vos sunt:

<span id="vi.ii.iii-p5"></span>**15.** (For the Lord thy God *is* a
jealous God among you;) lest the anger of the Lord thy God be kindled
against thee, and destroy thee from off the face of the earth.

<span id="vi.ii.iii-p6"></span>**15.** Quoniam Deus zelotes Jehova Deus
tuus in medio tui est: ne forte irascatur furor Jehovae Dei tui in to,
et disperdat te e superficie terrae.

<span id="vi.ii.iii-p7"></span><span id="vi.ii.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.iii-p8"></span>**14.** *Ye shall not go after.* In this
passage Moses commands the people not to turn away from the simple
service of God, although examples of superstition may present themselves
to their sight on every side. For this was a very destructive
temptation, that none could be anywhere found who subscribed to the
doctrine of the Law, although the respective nations had some religion,
or at any rate the name of it existing among them. Since, therefore,
these various forms of worship were so many temptations to forsake the
right way, it was needful to provide against the danger betimes, and so
to establish the authority of the One God, that the Jews might have
courage to despise the common belief of all the Gentiles. A threat is
added, that vengeance would not be far off if they should fall away into
these superstitions, since *God is a jealous God,* and dwelling *among
them.* As to the former epithet, I am about to say more under the Second
Commandment. Meanwhile, let my readers observe that God is called
jealous, because He permits no rivalry which may detract from His glory,
nor does He suffer the service which is due to Him alone to be
transferred elsewhere. When He reminds the people that he dwells among
them, it is partly to inspire terror by reason of His presence, and
partly to reprove indirectly their ingratitude, if they should forsake
Him, and seek for themselves gods who are afar of.

<span id="vi.ii.iv"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p1"></span><span
id="vi.ii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
18](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#000)<span id="vi.ii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p2"></span><span
id="vi.ii.iv-p2.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
18:9-14](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#009)<span
id="vi.ii.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p3"></span>**9.** When thou art come into the land
which the Lord thy God giveth thee, thou shalt not learn to do after the
abominations of those nations.

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p4"></span>**9.** Quum tu ingressus fueris in terram
quam Jehova Deus tuus dat tibi, ne discas ad faciendum secundum
abominationes gentium istarum.

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p5"></span>**10.** There shall not be found among you
*any one* that maketh his son or his daughter to pass through the fire,
or that useth divination, *or* an observer of times, or an enchanter, or
a witch,

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p6"></span>**10.** Non inveniatur in medio tui qui
tradueat filium suum, *(ad verbum,* Transire faciat,) vel filiam suam
per ignem, qui divinet divinationes, augur, magus, et incantator,

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p7"></span>**11.** Or a charmer, or a consulter with
familiar spirits, or a wizard, or a necromancer.

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p8"></span>**11.** Colligans colligationes, consulens
Pythonem, prognostes, *(vel,* ariolus,) et qui sciscitatur a mortuis.

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p9"></span>**12.** For all that do these things *are*
an abomination unto the Lord: and because of these abominations the Lord
thy God doth drive them out from before thee.

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p10"></span>**12.** Abominatio enim est Jehovae
quisquis facit haec, et propter abo. minationes istas evellit cos Jehova
Deus tuus a facie tua.

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p11"></span>**13.** Thou shalt be perfect with the
Lord thy God.

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p12"></span>**13.** Integer eris cum Jehova Deo tuo.

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p13"></span>**14.** For these nations, which thou
shalt possess, hearkened unto observers of times, and unto diviners: but
as for thee, the Lord thy God hath not suffered thee so *to do.*

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p14"></span>**14.** Nam gentes istae quas tu
obtinebis attentae sunt ad prognostas *(vel,* ariolos) et ad divinos:
quod ad to, non ita permisit tibi Jehova Dens tuus.

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p15"></span><span id="vi.ii.iv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p16"></span>**9.** *When thou art come.* It is too
well known from experience how eagerly the human race lays hold of bad
examples, and how prone it is to imitate them. Especially those who come
into a foreign land, accustom themselves readily to its manners and
customs. This is the reason why God expressly commands the Israelites to
beware, lest, when they come into the land of Canaan, they should catch
any infection from its inhabitants. The doctrine, indeed, is universal
in its application; but there was a necessity for providing against the
danger which immediately impended. Moreover, Moses explains clearly in
this passage what it is to have other gods, viz., to mix up the worship
of God with things profane, since its purity is only thus maintained by
banishing from it all uncongenial superstitions. The sum, therefore, is,
that the people of God should abstain from all the inventions of men,
whereby pure and simple religion is adulterated. In general, God wished
to deter His worshippers from every fallacy whereby, from the beginning,
Satan has deluded and fascinated miserable men; but He enumerates
certain particular points, which by usage and custom had obtained the
greatest prevalence. But in order that God’s purpose may be more
apparent, it is expedient to observe what it is that displeases Him in
these vices which He condemns. Since men have a natural desire after
knowledge, even in the superstitious this has always proceeded from a
good principle, inasmuch as God has implanted it in the minds of all,
when He would distinguish our race from the lower animals. Neither in
this was there anything to be reprehended, that men, being conscious of
their own ignorance, conceived that they were to obtain knowledge in no
other way than by consulting God. Now this was the sole object of the
Gentiles when they inquired of their magicians and sorcerers, to seek
from heaven that knowledge of which they perceived themselves to be
destitute. Thus they undoubtedly confessed themselves to be overwhelmed
with darkness, and that the light of understanding was the special gift
of God. Whence also came the name of divination, because they were
persuaded that secret things were not within the compass of human
apprehension, but that this knowledge must come from divine inspiration.
But since by his machinations the devil perverts what is right in
itself, these principles implanted in us, as I have said, by nature,
have been corrupted by two errors, for both an immoderate desire of
knowing more than is lawful has crept into our minds, and then we have
had recourse to illicit means of knowledge. From these sources, viz.,
foolish curiosity and unrestrained temerity or audacity, all the
superstitions and errors have flowed whereby the world has been
assailed. Therefore does God, by forbidding magical arts, introduce a
remedy for these two diseases, which arts were perversely invented that
they might search out and bring to light things which He had chosen to
conceal. For the best rule of knowledge is sobriety, that it may suffice
us to know as much as is expedient for us. The lust of men has carried
them deeper, so that they have desired to penetrate into all the most
profound secrets. But the second error on which I have touched is much
worse, that they should have sought by improper means to discover hidden
things. We shall soon see that God also has foretold things to come by
his servants; but no further than He knew to be profitable, and only
with this object, to make it manifest that He exercises special care for
His church. But since men’s curiosity is insatiable, they do not
consider what is useful for them, but, like Adam, desire to “be as
gods,” and to know all things without exception. When God indulges not
these improper desires, they address themselves to the devil, the father
of lies, still, however, as I have stated, under the false disguise of
God’s name. This is the origin of all the vanities whereby the world has
ever been entangled. I now descend to particulars.

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p17"></span><span id="vi.ii.iv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p18"></span>**10.** *There shall not be found among
you.* <span id="vi.ii.iv-p18.1"></span>This horrible and altogether
monstrous infatuation, whereby the Gentiles had been possessed,
afterwards invaded the Jews <span id="vi.ii.iv-p18.2"></span>also, that
they should immolate and even burn their children in honor of the gods
to which they had devoted themselves; although it is probable that the
greater part of them were not inflamed by such an excess of madness, but
satisfied their superstition more easily, by merely making their
children to pass through the fire. This was with them a kind of
lustration to purge away all filthiness. But their cruel zeal impelled
many of them even to murder, so as not even to spare their own flesh and
blood. Yet in this they pleaded the example of Abraham, as if there were
any similarity between the obedience of that holy man who, led by God’s
command, was ready to slay his son Isaac, and this barbarous act of
violence in people who, though God prohibited and gainsaid, murdered
their children. Yet in this horrible spectacle we perceive how much more
fervently men engage in impious rites which their own temerity has
dictated, than in efforts to worship God aright, when He openly and
expressly enjoins them the thing that is good. This, indeed, ought to be
the first care of parents to consecrate their children to God; but the
only rite of initiation for the Jews was circumcision, and with this
they should have been content. <span id="vi.ii.iv-p18.4"></span>Moses
then enumerates the various kinds of divination to which the heathen
nations were addicted, in order to satisfy their foolish desire to know
more than was lawful. I do not, however, disapprove of the view which
some prefer,  <span id="fr_281"></span>[282](#fn_281) <span
id="vi.ii.iv-p19.10"></span> that the generic term is first used, and
the various species are then subjoined. I shall explain these briefly,
and not waste time in refuting particular opinions, although it is
evident that even some of the rabbis are grossly mistaken about them.
The word <span id="vi.ii.iv-p19.11"></span>מעונן*,*  <span
id="fr_282"></span>[283](#fn_282) *magnonen,* <span
id="vi.ii.iv-p20.12"></span>I willingly admit to be derived from (a word
signifying) *clouds*<span id="vi.ii.iv-p20.13"></span>; and therefore it
may properly mean *augurs,* <span id="vi.ii.iv-p20.14"></span>or
judicial astrologers. There are some who are rather of opinion that its
root is <span id="vi.ii.iv-p20.15"></span>מגון*, magnon,* <span
id="vi.ii.iv-p20.16"></span>which in Hebrew means *a place;* <span
id="vi.ii.iv-p20.17"></span>and this etymology would not badly suit the
fanatics who divine all things from the position of the stars, and
assign their stations both to the planets and the signs of the zodiac
for their respective aspects. At any rate this is fully agreed, that
auguries, as well as frivolous observations of the stars, are here
condemned, when men, in their preposterous curiosity, suppose all events
and circumstances to be under the dominion of the stars. The word which
follows <span id="vi.ii.iv-p20.18"></span>מנחש*,*  <span
id="fr_283"></span>[284](#fn_283) *menachesh,* <span
id="vi.ii.iv-p21.10"></span>means a *diviner* <span
id="vi.ii.iv-p21.11"></span>or *soothsayer, (ariolum,)* <span
id="vi.ii.iv-p21.12"></span>which sufficiently appears from <span
id="vi.ii.iv-p21.13"></span>[Ge
44:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#005)<span
id="vi.ii.iv-p21.13"></span><span id="vi.ii.iv-p21.14"></span>, where
Joseph pretends that he divined by his cup, because it was commonly
believed that he possessed the art of soothsaying; and hence the name
has been given to serpents on account of their subtlety. Some interpret
the word <span id="vi.ii.iv-p21.15"></span>מכשף<span
id="vi.ii.iv-p21.16"></span>,  <span id="fr_284"></span>[285](#fn_284)
*mekasheph,* <span id="vi.ii.iv-p22.4"></span>a *juggler,
(praestigiatorem,)* <span id="vi.ii.iv-p22.5"></span>one who dazzles and
deceives the eyes by optical illusions. Next follows the fifth  <span
id="fr_285"></span>[286](#fn_285) <span id="vi.ii.iv-p23.6"></span>
term, which I have translated *“tying knots,” (colligans
colligationes,)* <span id="vi.ii.iv-p23.7"></span>whereby some
understand enchanters, who by magic arts gather together serpents into
one place. But this, in my judgment, is a poor explanation, and I,
therefore, rather agree with those who conceive the calling together of
evil spirits to be alluded to. But since it may be correctly translated
“collecting, or gathering an assembly,” I do not altogether reject the
opinion of others, that it relates to those imaginary assemblies, to
which unhappy men, whom the devil has bewitched, fancy themselves to be
transported to feast and dance together, and to join in wicked
conspiracies, and which are commonly called “synagogues.” In the sixth
word there is no ambiguity, whereby the people are forbidden to consult
a spirit of Python; for thus may we properly render the Hebrew <span
id="vi.ii.iv-p23.8"></span>אוב<span id="vi.ii.iv-p23.9"></span>,  <span
id="fr_286"></span>[287](#fn_286) *ob,* <span
id="vi.ii.iv-p24.14"></span>as St. Luke, a faithful and competent
interpreter, has done, when he relates that a spirit of Python was cast
out of the damsel at the command of Paul, (<span
id="vi.ii.iv-p24.15"></span>[Ac
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#016)<span
id="vi.ii.iv-p24.15"></span><span id="vi.ii.iv-p24.16"></span>;) and
sometimes the Scripture calls these by the name of <span
id="vi.ii.iv-p24.17"></span>אובות<span id="vi.ii.iv-p24.18"></span>,
*oboth,* <span id="vi.ii.iv-p24.19"></span>who allure evil spirits to
give replies, of which deception a remarkable example is given in sacred
history, (<span id="vi.ii.iv-p24.20"></span>[1Sa
28:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#007)<span
id="vi.ii.iv-p24.20"></span><span id="vi.ii.iv-p24.21"></span>,) in the
case of the witch *(Pythonissa)* <span id="vi.ii.iv-p24.22"></span>who
shewed Saul Samuel, although dead. The Greeks have translated the word
Python, because the delusions of Apollo Pythius were particularly
famous. The seventh class (Ang., wizards) is <span
id="vi.ii.iv-p24.23"></span>ידעני<span id="vi.ii.iv-p24.24"></span>,
 <span id="fr_287"></span>[288](#fn_287) *yadgnoni,* <span
id="vi.ii.iv-p25.12"></span>which may correctly be translated gnostics,
or knowers; for I make no doubt that they adopted this honorable name
for purposes of deceit, which is by no means an uncommon practice with
impostors. Thus the Genethliacs, and others like them, vaunted
themselves to be mathematicians. This is the craft of Satan to steal the
respectable names of virtues and good things, and to make them a
covering for his lies, as, for instance, he gave the name of wise men to
the Chaldean and Egyptian impostors; and thus, since the Prophets are
called seers, he set against them the vain prognostications of false
prophets, to astonish the minds of the simple.  <span
id="fr_288"></span>[289](#fn_288) <span id="vi.ii.iv-p26.1"></span>For
to derive, as some do, this word from a certain bird, is too childish a
conjecture; and I wonder that in such a plain matter they have been led
so utterly astray, whilst they waste their acuteness upon nothing.
Finally, necromancy  <span id="fr_289"></span>[290](#fn_289) <span
id="vi.ii.iv-p27.5"></span> is condemned, *i.e.,* <span
id="vi.ii.iv-p27.6"></span>the deceitful and delusive science of
prophesying upon the answers of the dead, which some improperly restrict
to those who sleep among tombs, in order to hear in their sleep the dead
speaking, because foolish men have in many ways endeavored to obtain
communications from the dead. But, let us learn from this passage, with
how many monstrous and ridiculous fascinations Satan, whenever God
loosens the chain by which he is bound, is able to bewitch unhappy men;
and how great, power to deceive the father of lies obtains from the just
vengeance of God, for the purpose of blinding unbelievers. As to the
notion which some conceited persons entertain, that all these things are
fabulous and absurd, it arises from inconsideration and presumption,
because they do not reflect how severe a judgment is merited by those
who wilfully extinguish the light and enwrap themselves in darkness. For
God’s truth is too precious to Him, for Him to suffer it to be rejected
with impunity. Certainly it would be an impudent blasphemy to deny that
magical arras were ever practiced, since thus would God be accused of
inadvertency, as though He had legislated  <span
id="fr_290"></span>[291](#fn_290) <span id="vi.ii.iv-p28.1"></span>
respecting things which did not exist. The objection that is made of its
being absurd thus too highly to extol the power of Satan, as if he had
the control of prophecies, which God claims for Himself alone, and as if
he could cause the living to converse with the dead and change the forms
of things, admits of an easy solution. With respect to vaticinations,
there is no necessity for a subtle discussion as to how Satan can
foreknow secret things, (on which point, as it seems to me, Augustine
troubled himself too anxiously,) for this is a labor of supererogation,
if we recollect that by God’s just judgment a certain kind of
vaticination is permitted to the devils, in order more and more to
deceive unbelievers, as will be more fully treated of elsewhere.
Meanwhile, we know that unbelievers were mocked with  <span
id="fr_291"></span>[292](#fn_291) <span id="vi.ii.iv-p29.1"></span>
ambiguous responses by all the oracles of false gods, and at length
discovered from the event that they had been beguiled by deadly
artifices; and, therefore, in <span id="vi.ii.iv-p29.2"></span>[Isa
41:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#023)<span
id="vi.ii.iv-p29.2"></span><span id="vi.ii.iv-p29.3"></span>, God justly
charges every idol with ignorance of futurity. Yet this does not prevent
Satan from revealing certain hidden matters, by the prediction of which
he may ensnare, as by a bait, the reprobate. I admit, indeed, that in
progress of time the Roman augurs abandoned the study of their art, and
abused the credulity of the lower orders by nothing but gross fictions;
but if in former times Satan had not led even the most sharp-sighted
into error by this artifice, Xenophon,  <span
id="fr_292"></span>[293](#fn_292) <span id="vi.ii.iv-p30.1"></span> the
disciple of Socrates, would not have so often mentioned among the chief
praises of Cyrus,  <span id="fr_293"></span>[294](#fn_293) <span
id="vi.ii.iv-p31.3"></span> that he was devoted to augury, and had
learnt to be so from his father. Finally, the experience of all ages
teaches us that men of depraved curiosity have often received from
Satan, by means of magicians, a knowledge of things which could not have
been obtained naturally. As to the actual operations of Satan, whether
he raises the dead, or bewitches men and beasts, or invests any
substances with new forms through enchantment, we must consider that
whatever miracles he appears to work are mere delusions; and, since he
is the father of darkness, it is clear he has no power except upon
unbelievers, whose minds are darkened, so as not to distinguish black
from white. Yet we have already seen how Pharaoh’s magicians rivalled
Moses in their miracles. Wherefore we need not wonder if, by God’s
permission, he should disturb the elements, or afflict the reprobate
with diseases and other evils, or present phantoms to their sight. On
this account we should more earnestly implore of God to restrain from us
an enemy armed against us with so many destructive arts.

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p32"></span><span id="vi.ii.iv-p32.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p33"></span>**12.** *For all that do these things are
an abomination.* First, he would have the authority of God act as a rein
to guide them; and then sets before them that vengeance which they were
soon about to see inflicted upon the heathen, nay, of which they were
themselves to be the executioners and ministers. For since it could not
be a matter of the slightest doubt, but that the inhabitants of the land
of Canaan were rooted out from their peaceful habitations only by God’s
hand, he assigns as the cause of this destruction that they had polluted
themselves and their country by these blasphemous and abominable
superstitions. By this striking example, then, he deters them from
imitating the sins which facts themselves shewed to be thus severely
punished. Thus Paul admonishes believers to seek diligently to avoid the
sins which provoke God’s wrath against the disobedient. (<span
id="vi.ii.iv-p33.1"></span>[Eph
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#006)<span id="vi.ii.iv-p33.1"></span>.)

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p34"></span><span id="vi.ii.iv-p34.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p35"></span>**13.** *Thou shalt be perfect.* He
refers to the mutual obligation of that holy covenant whereby as on the
one side He had pledged Himself to the Jews, so on the other He had made
them His debtors, not to prostitute themselves to idols, or to hanker
after strange religions, whereby men’s minds are led astray. This
*perfectness,* then, is opposed to all those mixtures or corruptions
which withdraw us from the sincere worship of the one true God; because
the simplicity which retains us in obedience to heavenly teaching, is
that spiritual chastity which God requires in His Church. The context of
the passage proves this with sufficient clearness, viz., that God would
restrain the Jews from all licentiousness, so that being devoted to His
service, they should not look this way or that way, nor be carried away
by vanity and instability, but constantly abide in the pure worship
which He had prescribed to them. For this reason Paul declares that he
is jealous for Christ; and because he had “espoused” the Corinthians to
Christ, he feared “lest by any means, as the serpent beguiled Eve,
through his subtlety,” so being ensnared by the wiles of impostors, they
should fall “from the simplicity that is in Christ.” (<span
id="vi.ii.iv-p35.1"></span>[2Co
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#002)<span
id="vi.ii.iv-p35.1"></span>.)

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p36"></span><span id="vi.ii.iv-p36.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p37"></span>**14.** *For these nations.* <span
id="vi.ii.iv-p37.1"></span>As God had just before been setting before
them the punishment He was about to inflict upon these nations, in order
to alarm and warn them, so now does he admonish them that the
inheritance was handed over to them on this condition, that they should
be mindful of so great a benefit, and beware of all pollutions; and that
they succeeded the former inhabitants of the land, with a view to their
being separate from them; for whence was this change, except that God
might acquire to Himself a new people, and purify the land from all its
defilements? Although He only mentions two classes of superstitions, yet
thus, by *synecdoche,* <span id="vi.ii.iv-p37.2"></span>He indicates
them all. The sum is, that they should not be like the nations in vices
and corruptions, which had been the cause of their destruction; since
God had not only exterminated the men themselves, but their abominable
rites also. Some divide the latter part of the verse into two clauses,
“but thou shalt not do so;” and then, “Jehovah <span
id="vi.ii.iv-p37.3"></span>gives you the land,” which last word they
supply. But I do not hesitate to think that the pronoun <span
id="vi.ii.iv-p37.4"></span>אתה*, athah,* <span
id="vi.ii.iv-p37.5"></span>must be thus rendered, “But as for thee;” and
then I think it must be read continuously, “God hath not suffered thee
to do so,” for the word <span id="vi.ii.iv-p37.6"></span>נתן<span
id="vi.ii.iv-p37.7"></span>, *nathan,* <span
id="vi.ii.iv-p37.8"></span>is of extensive signification. The tendency
of the whole is, that the prohibition of God should be of more weight
with them than the example of the nations.

<span id="vi.ii.v"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p1"></span><span id="vi.ii.v-p1.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
18:15-18](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#015)<span
id="vi.ii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p2"></span>**15.** The Lord thy God will raise up unto
thee a Prophet from the midst of thee, of thy brethren, like unto me;
unto him ye shall hearken;

<span id="vi.ii.v-p3"></span>**15.** Prophetam e medio tui, ex fratribus
tuis, sicut me, suscitabit tibi Jehova Deus tuns: illum audietis.

<span id="vi.ii.v-p4"></span>**16.** According to all that thou
desiredst of the Lord thy God in Horeb, in the day of the assembly,
saying, Let me not hear again the voice of the Lord my God, neither let
me see this great fire any more, that I die not.

<span id="vi.ii.v-p5"></span>**16.** Secundum omnia quae petiisti a
Jehova Deo tuo in Horeb, in die conventus, dicendo, Non adjiciam audire
vocem Jehovae Dei mei, et ignem hunc magnum non videbo amplius, ne
moriar.

<span id="vi.ii.v-p6"></span>**17.** And the Lord said unto me, They
have well *spoken that* which they have spoken.

<span id="vi.ii.v-p7"></span>**17.** Et dixit Jehovah ad me, Bene
egerunt in eo quod loquuti sunt.

<span id="vi.ii.v-p8"></span>**18.** I will raise them up a Prophet from
among their brethren, like unto thee, and will put my words in his
mouth; and he shall speak unto them all that I shall command him.

<span id="vi.ii.v-p9"></span>**18.** Prophetam suscitabo illis e medio
fratrum suorum sicut to, ponamque verba mea in ore ejus: loqueturque ad
eos quaecunque ei mandavero.

<span id="vi.ii.v-p10"></span><span id="vi.ii.v-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p11"></span>**15.** *The Lord thy God will raise up.*
This is added by anticipation, lest the Israelites should object that
they were more hardly dealt with than the rest of the nations of the
world; for it was always most justly considered an extraordinary
blessing to hold communication with God; and indeed there can be nothing
more to be desired. But an opinion had obtained currency, that men
approached more closely to God by means of magical arts, by the oracles
of Pythonic spirits, and by the study of augury. The people of Israel,
then, would have complained of being badly treated, if they had been
shut out from all prophecies and revelations. Moses meets this complaint
or objection by announcing, that their access to God would be not less
familiar than as if He should Himself openly come down from heaven; if
only they kept the right way, and were contented with that rule which He
deemed best for them. He, therefore, commands that, instead of all the
imaginations of the Gentiles, the doctrine of the Prophets should alone
have force among them. Thus He signifies that although God should not
openly come down from heaven, yet that His will, as far as was
expedient, should be surely and clearly made known to them, since He
would faithfully teach them by His servants the Prophets. On this ground
when, in Isaiah, He has mocked at the prophecies of false gods, He calls
the Israelites His “witnesses,” (<span id="vi.ii.v-p11.2"></span>[Isa
43:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#001)<span
id="vi.ii.v-p11.2"></span>,) as having made them the depositaries of His
secrets and of the treasures of divine wisdom. We see, then, the way
pointed out in which God would have His people inquire concerning the
things necessary to salvation; and this is more plainly declared in
<span id="vi.ii.v-p11.3"></span>[Isa.
8:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#019),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#020)<span id="vi.ii.v-p11.3"></span>,

<span id="vi.ii.v-p12"></span>“And when they shall say unto you, Seek
unto them that have familiar spirits, and unto wizards that peep and
that mutter: should not a people seek unto their God? for the living to
the dead? To the law and to the testimony.”

<span id="vi.ii.v-p13"></span>Nor is there any doubt that Isaiah took
this doctrine from the passage before us, when he first condemns the
errors which men by their curiosity invent for themselves, and then
enjoins the faithful simply to give attention to the Law, and to be
content with this form of instruction, unless they desired to be
miserably misled. Hence we conclude that the expression, “a Prophet,” is
used by *enallage* for a number of Prophets. For it is altogether
absurd, as some do, to restrict it to Joshua or Jeremiah; since Moses is
here treating of the continual manner of the Church’s government, and is
not speaking of what God would do within a short time. Not at all more
correct is their opinion, who apply it strictly to Christ alone; for it
is well to bear in mind what I have said respecting God’s intention,
viz., that no excuse should be left for the Jews, if they turned aside
to familiar spirits *(Pythones)* or magicians, since God would never
leave them without Prophets and teachers. But if He had referred them to
Christ alone, the objection would naturally arise that it was hard for
them to have neither Prophets nor revelations for two thousand years.
Nor is there any strength in those two arguments on which some insist,
that the Prophet, of whom Moses bears witness, must be more excellent
than him who proclaimed him; and that the eulogium that he should be
“like unto” Moses could not be applied to the ancient Prophets, since it
is said elsewhere that “there arose not a Prophet since like unto” him.
(<span id="vi.ii.v-p13.2"></span>[De
34:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#010)<span
id="vi.ii.v-p13.2"></span>.) For he does not at all detract from his own
dignity, by recommending that whosoever might be sent by God should be
hearkened to, whether they were his equals or his inferiors; and, as to
the comparison, this particle translated *like (sicut)* does not always
denote equality. Therefore it is true that there was no Prophet like
Moses, that is to say, similar to him in every respect, or in whom so
many gifts were displayed; yet it is no less true, that they were all
like Moses; because God set over His Church a continual succession of
teachers, to execute the same office as he did. This is referred to in
the words, “For all the prophets and the law prophesied until John,”
(<span id="vi.ii.v-p13.3"></span>[Mt
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#013)<span id="vi.ii.v-p13.3"></span>,
and <span id="vi.ii.v-p13.4"></span>[Lu
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#016)<span
id="vi.ii.v-p13.4"></span>,) where we see others united as colleagues
with Moses in the government of the Church, until the coming of Christ.
Yet Peter aptly and elegantly accommodates this testimony to Christ,
(<span id="vi.ii.v-p13.5"></span>[Ac
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#022)<span id="vi.ii.v-p13.5"></span>,)
not to the exclusion of others of God’s servants, but in order to warn
the Jews that in rejecting Christ they are at the same time refusing
this inestimable benefit of God; for the gift of prophecy had so
flourished among His ancient people, and teachers had so been constantly
appointed to succeed each other, that nevertheless there should be some
interruption before the coming of Christ. Hence, in that sad dispersion
which followed the return from the Babylonish captivity, the faithful
complain in <span id="vi.ii.v-p13.6"></span>[Ps
74:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#009)<span id="vi.ii.v-p13.6"></span>,
“We see not our signs; there is no more any prophet.” On this account
Malachi exhorts the people to remember the Law given in Horeb; and
immediately after adds, “Behold I send you Elijah the prophet,” etc.,
(<span id="vi.ii.v-p13.7"></span>[Mal.
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#005)<span id="vi.ii.v-p13.7"></span>;)
as much as to say, that the time was at hand in which a more perfect
doctrine should be manifested, and a fuller light should shine. For the
Apostle says truly, that

<span id="vi.ii.v-p14"></span>“God, who at sundry times and in divers
manners spake unto the fathers by the prophets, hath in these last days
spoken unto us by his Son,” (<span id="vi.ii.v-p14.1"></span>Hebrew 1:1,
2;)

<span id="vi.ii.v-p15"></span>and, in fact, by the appearing of the
doctrine of the Gospel, the course of the prophetic doctrine was
completed; because God thus fully exhibited what was promised by the
latter. And this was so generally understood that even the Samaritan
woman said that Messias was coming, who would tell all things. (<span
id="vi.ii.v-p15.1"></span>[Joh
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#025)<span id="vi.ii.v-p15.1"></span>.)
To this, then, what I have lately quoted as to the transition from the
Law and the Prophets to the Gospel refers; and hence it is made out,
that this passage was most appropriately expounded by Peter as relating
to Christ; for unless the Jews chose to accuse God of falsehood, it was
incumbent upon them to look to Christ, at whose hand was promised both
the confirmation of doctrine and the restoration of all things. They had
been for a long time destitute of Prophets, of whom Moses had testified
that they should never be wanting to them, and whom he had promised as
the  <span id="fr_294"></span>[295](#fn_294) lawful ministers for
retaining the people in allegiance, so that they should not turn aside
to superstitions; they had, therefore, either no religion, or else that
greatest of Teachers was to be expected, who in his own person *(unus)*
would present the perfection of the prophetic office. But we must remark
the peculiar circumstances whereby God restrains the evil affections of
the Jews. It was no common act of His indulgence, that He should take to
himself Prophets from among that people, so that they should have no
need to run about to a distance in search of revelations, and at the
same time that they might be taught familiarly according to their
capacity. But with regard to the comparison which Moses makes between
himself and other prophets, its effect is to raise their teaching in
men’s estimation. They had been long accustomed to this mode of
instruction, viz., to hear God speaking to them by the mouth of a man;
and the authority of Moses was so fully established, that they were
firmly persuaded that they were under the divine government, and that
all things necessary to salvation were revealed to them.

<span id="vi.ii.v-p17"></span><span id="vi.ii.v-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p18"></span>**16.** *According to all that thou
desiredst.* He pronounces them to be guilty of ingratitude if they did
not quietly submit themselves to their Prophets, since on this point God
had complied with their own request. For in order that the prophetic
office might be more reverenced and beloved by them, and lest it should
fall into disrepute through their beholding the Prophet to be but a
mortal, God had extracted the confession from them that nothing could be
better than that He should make choice of human interpreters. At the
promulgation of the Law, the visible majesty of God had shone forth, and
the people, terrified at the sight, had voluntarily desired that Moses
should be given to them as a teacher, and as the proclaimer of the
heavenly voice. We have already seen how useful was this terror to
recommend the teaching which is delivered by the mouth of man. We have
abundant experience that our minds are often carried away by vain
speculations. Thus we should wish to bring down God from heaven as often
as any doubt creeps into them. It was necessary, therefore, that the
Israelites should be convinced of their weakness, lest they should go
beyond their due bounds, and that they might be led to ask for that as a
great blessing which God had foreseen to be for their good, and at the
same time might abandon that proud curiosity which would always have
been exciting them, had it not been corrected betimes by the application
of this remedy. But it would have been anything but excusable in them to
have grown weary of that gift which they had judged to be so good for
themselves. The sum is, that God had appeared once to obtain credit and
authority for His Prophets; but that He had established that order for
the government of His Church, and for the declaration of His will, which
the people themselves had known by experience to be most highly
advantageous to themselves.

<span id="vi.ii.v-p19"></span><span id="vi.ii.v-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p20"></span>**17.** *They have well spoken.* Moses
relates how this desire of the people was approved by the judgment and
the voice of God. Not as if whatever the foolish caprice of men may have
urged them absurdly to ask, ought therefore to be immediately granted;
but when God’s consent and, so to speak, His vote coincides with it,
then whatever He shews to be pleasing to Him ought to stand firm and
inviolable. Hence it follows that God, in sending the Prophets, provided
for the salvation of men as was most expedient. Moreover, He asserts
that when pious teachers arise, who faithfully shew the way of
salvation, it is an extraordinary proof of His favor, and He takes to
Himself the praise when He repeats it again,  <span
id="fr_295"></span>[296](#fn_295)

<span id="vi.ii.v-p22"></span>“I will raise them up a Prophet.” (<span
id="vi.ii.v-p22.1"></span>[De
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#018)<span
id="vi.ii.v-p22.1"></span>.)

<span id="vi.ii.v-p23"></span>Thus also Paul teaches, —

<span id="vi.ii.v-p24"></span>“And how shall they preach except they be
sent?”  
(<span id="vi.ii.v-p24.2"></span>[Ro
10:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#015)<span
id="vi.ii.v-p24.2"></span>.)

<span id="vi.ii.v-p25"></span>The same Apostle, too, bears witness that
none will be found sufficient for this office, and that the power of
teaching aright is received from God. (<span
id="vi.ii.v-p25.1"></span>[2Co
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#014)<span id="vi.ii.v-p25.1"></span>,
and 4:1.) Hence it follows that God, by a certain evidence of His
presence, declares His favor towards us as often as He enlightens with
the gifts of His Spirit, and raises up faithful and true teachers. Moses
afterwards reminds them that God so governs His Church by the hands and
the operation of men as not to derogate from Himself; for He retains
this as His attribute, to suggest to the mouth, as it were, of His
Prophets what they are to say; neither does He permit them to say or
advance more than He has commanded. We perceive, then, that pastors were
from the first appointed, not that they should themselves rule, or
subject the Church to their imaginations, but only to be the organs of
the Holy Spirit. And those who in these days usurp a greater power,
ought to be altogether deposed from their sacrilegious despotism.

<span id="vi.ii.vi"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p1"></span><span
id="vi.ii.vi-p1.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
13](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#000)<span id="vi.ii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p2"></span><span
id="vi.ii.vi-p2.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
13:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#001)<span id="vi.ii.vi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p3"></span>**1.** If there arise among you a prophet,
or a dreamer of dreams, and giveth thee a sign or a wonder,

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p4"></span>**l.** Quum surrexerit in medio tui
propheta, vel qui somnium somniabit, et dederit tibi signum vel
portentum.

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p5"></span>**2.** And the sign or the wonder come to
pass, whereof he spake unto thee, saying, Let us go after other gods,
which thou hast not known, and let us serve them;

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p6"></span>**2.** Eveneritque tibi signum et
portentum quod dixerat tibi, dicendo, Eamus post deos alienos quos non
nosti, et colamus eos.

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p7"></span>**3.** Thou shalt not hearken unto the
words of that prophet, or that dreamer of dreams: for the Lord your God
proveth you, to know whether ye love the Lord your God with all your
heart, and with all your soul.

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p8"></span>**3.** Non obedies verbis prophetae
illius, aut somnium somniantis: quia tentat vos Jehova Deus rester, ut
sciat an diligatis Jehovam Deum vestrum toto corde vestro, et tota anima
vestra.

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p9"></span>**4.** Ye shall walk after the Lord your
God, and fear him, and keep his commandments, and obey his voice, and ye
shall serve him, and cleave unto him.

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p10"></span>**4.** Post Jehovam Deum vestrum
ambulabitis, illumque timebitis, ac praecepta ejus custodietis: voci
ejus obedietis, et eum coletis, eique ad-haerebitis.

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p11"></span><span id="vi.ii.vi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p12"></span>After having restrained the Israelites
from the strange delusions of the Gentiles, Moses now forbids them from
being too credulous if false teachers should arise from among
themselves, and warns them diligently to beware of all novel inventions,
and not to turn aside in the very least degree from the Law, at the
instigation of any one. For there is peril to be apprehended, not only
from professed and manifest enemies, or from foreign superstitions, but
Satan plots also by means of intestine deceits, and abuses the holy name
of God in order to betray us. Therefore it behoves that the faith of the
godly should not only be externally fortified and protected by the
ramparts of the word, lest corruption should creep in from without, but
also that it should be garrisoned within by the same word, lest novel
imaginations should secretly insinuate themselves and destroy the purity
of doctrine. Moreover, we gather from this prohibition that there is
such certainty in the divine doctrines as to prevent our faith from
being undermined or shaken, provided it has put forth into them living
roots, and is firmly grounded upon them. For it would be vain for God to
warn us against giving admission to false teachers, unless He, at the
same time, shewed the means by which they were to be guarded against.
And assuredly nothing can be more improbable than that religion should
be ambiguous; and since the rule and definition of it is faithfully
prescribed and set forth in the Law, justly does God require of His
people that they should not waver, but constantly persist in the truth
delivered to them. For truly does Isaiah declare respecting the Law,
that in it it has not been said in vain to the seed of Jacob, that they
should seek God’s face.  <span id="fr_296"></span>[297](#fn_296) (<span
id="vi.ii.vi-p13.3"></span>[Isa
45:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#019)<span
id="vi.ii.vi-p13.3"></span>.) But, in seeking God, it would not be
sufficient to teach what is right, unless men’s minds are established in
it; it is requisite, therefore, that religion should be sure and firm,
or it will not be duly ordered. Nor is there any doubt that what Paul
witnesses of the Gospel was true also of the Law, viz., that it armed
its disciples against all the storms of temptation, that they “should be
no more children, tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind
of doctrine, by the sleight of men,” etc. (<span
id="vi.ii.vi-p13.4"></span>[Eph
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#014)<span
id="vi.ii.vi-p13.4"></span>.) But the words before us, when examined
more closely and regularly, will shew, with greater clearness, the aim
of the matter.

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p14"></span>**1.** *If there arise among you.* We
already perceive that the question is not respecting the falsities and
errors which Satan had spread throughout the world, but respecting those
which were to appear in the very bosom of the Church, as if it had been
said that the Law was not only given in order to separate the Israelites
from heathen nations, but to keep themselves in the purity and integrity
of the faith; for just as now-a-days Christ betroths the Church to
Himself by the preachers of the Gospel, (<span
id="vi.ii.vi-p14.1"></span>[2Co
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#002)<span
id="vi.ii.vi-p14.1"></span>,) that she may devote herself as a chaste
virgin to His obedience, and not allow herself to be withdrawn from the
simplicity of the faith by any seductions; so of old God espoused His
ancient people to Himself, and bade them close their ears against
impostors, who are, as it were, the seducers of Satan tempting them to
violate that sacred and special bond of marriage whereby God would be
united with His people. We shall speedily see wherefore God would have
His Church exposed to this evil. Meanwhile it is useful to admonish
believers of their danger, that they may be constantly watching against
the snares of Satan; for this abomination did not only prevail in that
particular age, but it will have its evil influence even to the end of
the world. We must remember what Peter says, that “as there were false
prophets among” the Jews of old, so also in the kingdom of Christ

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p15"></span>“there shall be false teachers who
privily shall bring in damnable heresies.” (<span
id="vi.ii.vi-p15.1"></span>[2Pe
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#001)<span id="vi.ii.vi-p15.1"></span>.)

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p16"></span>Moses, however, does not merely speak of
domestic enemies, but, of such as shall assume the title of Prophets in
order that they may deceive with greater license and impunity. From
hence we infer that it is not enough to have an honorable position, or a
plausible name, whether pastor, or prophet, or priest, unless it be
allied to sincerity in accordance with our calling; for who are the
persons whom God here commands to be avoided and held in abomination?
Just those who boasted themselves to be Prophets, but who, when
carefully inquired into, were obliged to drop their mask, and driven to
confusion. A particular appellation is subjoined to their general one,
since the same individual is spoken of as “a dreamer of dreams,” because
God of old time manifested Himself to the Prophets sometimes in visions
and sometimes in dreams. Either of these, then, was an honorable pretext
for conciliating favor. But the temptation which follows was still more
dangerous, viz., if such an one should have commended himself by a
successful prediction; for who would despise a prophecy authenticated by
events, especially when Isaiah declares this to be the attribute of God
alone? (<span id="vi.ii.vi-p16.1"></span>[Isa
45:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#021)<span
id="vi.ii.vi-p16.1"></span>.) And the difficulty here is still
increased, because in chap. 18, God appears to distinguish false
Prophets from true ones by this very test.  <span
id="fr_297"></span>[298](#fn_297) Thus I resolve the difficulty, God’s
claiming to Himself the glory of foretelling events does not prevent Him
from occasionally conferring even on the ministers of Satan the power of
prophecy respecting some particular point. Balaam was worse than any
hireling crier, wishing as he did to frustrate the eternal decrees of
God, and yet we know that his tongue was directed by the divine
inspiration of the Spirit so as to be the proclaimer of that grace which
he had been hired to quench. There is, therefore, no inconsistency in
this, that a man should be a perfidious impostor, and still endowed at
the same time with a particular gift of prophecy, not so as always to
deliver true revelations, (as, for instance, Caiaphas, who prophesied
correctly once, was not always veracious,) but in so far as by God’s
permission it shall be given him to foreknow this or that, so that one
example of truth-telling may be the cloak for many falsehoods. Fitly,
then, and properly, in the other passage, does God, by Moses, reprove
the vanity of those rash spirits who promise what is not fulfilled. For
we must take into consideration His intention. Many are there who bring
themselves into notice by clandestine acts, and at length boldly burst
forth and boast themselves to be prophets, whilst the people are in
doubt whether they ought so to consider them. But since it most
frequently happens that the folly of such men is betrayed by marks of
infamy and disgrace inflicted upon them from above, so that the world
may see that they have spoken falsely, justly does God declare that the
event of their predictions is to be regarded, lest the Israelites should
promiscuously and unreflectingly receive whatever they may hear. The
principle, therefore, is established, that those speak in God’s name who
predict what really comes to pass; for they could not declare the truth
respecting things unknown to man unless God Himself should dictate it to
them. This is the tendency of the answer of Jeremiah to Hananiah, —

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p18"></span>“The prophets that have been before me
and before thee of old, prophesied both against many countries, and
against great kingdoms, of war, and of evil, and of pestilence. The
prophet which prophesieth of peace, when the word of the prophet shall
come to pass, then shall the prophet be known, that the Lord hath truly
sent him.” (<span id="vi.ii.vi-p18.1"></span>[Jer.
28:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer028.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/jer028.htm#009)<span id="vi.ii.vi-p18.1"></span>.)

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p19"></span>Hananiah promised that the war should end
prosperously; but Jeremiah, knowing that he lied, brings him to an
experimental proof of his falsehood, in case the facts should not
correspond with what he had said. Thus far there is no inconsistency in
our statement, that all true prophesies must proceed from God, and yet
that the same Prophet who has predicted the truth may, in other points,
be a deceiver And especially let us remark the admonition of Paul, that

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p20"></span>“because they (the reprobate) receive not
the love of the truth, that they may be saved; for this cause God sends
them strong delusion, that they should believe a lie; that they all
might be damned who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness.”  
(<span id="vi.ii.vi-p20.2"></span>[2Th
2:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#010)<span
id="vi.ii.vi-p20.2"></span>,)

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p21"></span><span id="vi.ii.vi-p21.1"></span>Hence we
are taught that not only are the reins of Satan loosed in order that he
may do injury, but that he is armed with power effectively to drag on
the reprobate to final tied struction. Moses here teaches the same
thing, for there are no reasonable grounds for the differences between
Hebrew commentators as to the word *sign.*  <span
id="fr_298"></span>[299](#fn_298) <span id="vi.ii.vi-p22.3"></span>It is
unquestionable that signs were sometimes used in order to obtain credit
for prophesies, as when Isaiah walked naked, (<span
id="vi.ii.vi-p22.4"></span>[Isa
20:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa020.htm#002)<span
id="vi.ii.vi-p22.4"></span><span id="vi.ii.vi-p22.5"></span>,) and
Jeremiah wore a yoke on his neck, (<span id="vi.ii.vi-p22.6"></span>[Jer
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#010)<span
id="vi.ii.vi-p22.6"></span><span id="vi.ii.vi-p22.7"></span>;) it is
also unquestionable that Satan often deceives by magical incantations;
but I have no doubt that by the words signifying *the sign and the
wonder,* <span id="vi.ii.vi-p22.8"></span>Moses here means anything
incredible and unexpected, for the purpose of vaticination. The Hebrews
use the word <span id="vi.ii.vi-p22.9"></span>מופתים*, mophethim,* <span
id="vi.ii.vi-p22.10"></span>to express miracles whereby God portends
anything future, as if He spoke from heaven. The word <span
id="vi.ii.vi-p22.11"></span>אות*, oth,* <span
id="vi.ii.vi-p22.12"></span>is more general, and is sometimes used for a
banner, or a watchword, or signal, *(symbolum.)* <span
id="vi.ii.vi-p22.13"></span>Both are here put for extraordinary signs
which testify the power of God, as if it were present; in this sense,
Christ warns His disciples to beware of signs and lying prodigies.
(<span id="vi.ii.vi-p22.14"></span>[Mt
24:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#011)<span
id="vi.ii.vi-p22.14"></span><span id="vi.ii.vi-p22.15"></span>.) But
although Satan dazzles the eyes with his illusions, so as in his false
rivalry to win to himself the glory of God, yet have we shewn from St.
Paul, and Moses has before declared, that impostors in their working of
miracles are the ministers of God’s vengeance, in order that the
reprobate may be taken in their snares. Should any object that signs
would be useless, which may be as well dangerous deceptions as
confirmations of the truth, I reply, that such license has never been
accorded to the devil, as that the light of God should not in the end
shine forth from the midst of the darkness. It will happen, therefore,
that the true power of God may be obscured for a time, (as we have seen
before in the history of the magicians,) but that it will never be
overwhelmed. Thus in the miracles, whereby the Law was ratified, the
glory of God so shone forth that they might obtain credit without any
hesitation from the godly. Such, without controversy, are the miracles
which authenticate the Gospel, because they present evidences inscribed
upon them by God by which all suspicion of deceit is fully removed. And,
indeed, since men’s minds are involved in dull stupidity, and are blind
even to the ordinary course of God’s dealings, so also they are almost
always mistaken with respect to miracles, unless His word enlightens
them to dispel the darkness. In order, therefore, that we may duly
profit by signs, an inseparable connection must be established between
them and doctrine; and Moses rightly teaches that they must be
repudiated who shall endeavor to pervert piety under the pretext of
signs, because they impiously and wickedly divide things which God has
joined together, and improperly divert to a contrary use the signs which
only serve as aids to righteous doctrine. But after the religion of the
Jews had been sealed by sure and evident signs, it was wrong for them to
attend to accidental signs, and not altogether without base ingratitude.
We now arrive at the sum of this passage, viz., that they must persevere
in the worship of the one God, so that not even prodigies should have
any force to shake the people’s minds. The clause, therefore, “which
thou hast not known,” must be observed; whereby Moses signifies that the
glory of the God which they serve was so certainly testified that their
levity in turning this way or that would be inexcusable; and thus the
knowledge which ought to be firmly implanted in their hearts, and to
abide therein, is opposed to all the artifices of the devil, which only
affect unstable minds.

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p23"></span><span id="vi.ii.vi-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p24"></span>**3.** *For the Lord your God proveth
you.* (Latin, *tentat vos.)* Whenever this word, which means *to tempt,*
is applied to God, it is not used in a bad sense, for “to take by
guile,” or, “to lay snares of deceit to entrap the unwary,” but only for
“to prove or examine.” Now, God proves men’s hearts, not that He may
learn what was before unknown, but to lay open what was before
concealed. The expression, “to know,” therefore, refers to experimental
knowledge only. The explanation of Augustine is tame and involved,
 <span id="fr_299"></span>[300](#fn_299) “That He may know, *i.e.,* that
He may cause you to know.” But, since it is so very common for human
feelings to be attributed to God, where is the use of twisting words,
which signify no more than that God makes trial, so that what might have
been otherwise doubtful, should be actually displayed? Thus God tempted
Abraham, when in an important matter He made trial of his faith or
obedience. (<span id="vi.ii.vi-p25.1"></span>[Ge
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#001)<span
id="vi.ii.vi-p25.1"></span>.) Nor is what I have lately touched upon,
and which we often read of, at all contradictory to this, viz., that God
uses the instrumentality of Satan and of wicked men, in order to tempt
men; because we must take into consideration the object to which He
directs these trials, whereby it will be manifest that His design is
very different from the malice and wiles of Satan. The reason here given
is worthy of remark, because it removes the difficulty by which weak
minds might have been easily disturbed. For nothing is less probable
than that Satan should insult God and involve heaven and hell in war, or
that he should assume to himself with impunity an attribute of God.
Lest, then, such a discussion should trouble and weary the good, or keep
them in perplexity, Moses thus anticipates it, by reminding them, that
God does not meanwhile lie idle or asleep, having abandoned the care of
His Church;  <span id="fr_300"></span>[301](#fn_300) but that He
designedly brings the truly pious to the proof, in order to distinguish
them from the hypocrites; and this takes place, when they constantly
persevere in the true faith against the assaults of their temptations,
and do not fall from their standing. The Apostle declares the same thing
also with regard to heresies, that they must needs arise in the Church,
“that they which are approved may be made manifest.” (<span
id="vi.ii.vi-p26.1"></span>[1Co
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#019)<span
id="vi.ii.vi-p26.1"></span>.) Wherefore we must not be impatient, nor
murmur against God, if He chooses that the firmness of our faith, which
is more precious than silver or gold, should be tried in the fiery
furnace; but it behoves us humbly to acquiesce in His justice and
wisdom. If any should still object, that, since the weakness of mankind
is only too notorious, God deals with them somewhat unkindly, when He
subjects them to these dangerous temptations, an answer may be readily
given. I acknowledge indeed that, since our carnal sense is tender, this
may seem hard, and inconsistent with the fatherly kindness of God; for,
surely, when a miracle presents itself before our eyes, it is difficult
not to submit to it. But, since the temptation injures none but those
whose impiety, which it lays bare, was already convicted and condemned,
whilst the sincere worshippers of God are preserved free from injury,
how unjust would it be to take away from God this liberty of plucking
the mask from treachery and deceit? Whosoever loves God with a pure
heart is armed with the invincible power of the Divine Spirit, that he
should not be ensnared by falsehoods; God thus rewards true and not
fictitious piety, so that whosoever are of a true heart, should be
protected by his faithful guardianship, and never feel the deadly wound.
Meanwhile, why should He not devote to just destruction those who
wilfully desire to perish? Nor need we be surprised at what He elsewhere
declares, that it is He who deceives false prophets,  <span
id="fr_301"></span>[302](#fn_301) that by them he may inflict just
vengeance on the reprobate, who eagerly go in search of their
destructive deceits. Since, then, all the good are sure to overcome, so
that the wiles of Satan are to them nothing but the exercises of their
virtue; why should God be blamed, because the malice of Satan and of the
wicked prepares for them the grounds of their victory and triumph? Only
let us cleave to this axiom, that all, who heartily love and reverence
God, will always be sure and safe under the protection of God. It is
true, I confess, that integrity of heart is a peculiar gift of God and
the fruit of His secret election; but, since their own consciences
reproach the reprobate with their contempt of God, their hypocrisy,
pride, or depravity, the blame of the iniquity that dwells in them is
unjustly laid upon God. This, then, is sufficient to refute all carnal
and perverse reasonings and blasphemies, viz., that whosoever are right
in heart are guarded by the aid of the Spirit from the poisonous
influence of Satan, and that no one perishes against his will. And thus
we come to the conclusion, that all who, having once seemed to embrace
the doctrines of salvation, afterwards reject and deny them, had never
possessed anything more than the disguise of a false profession,
because, if they sincerely loved God, they would remain firm in heart in
the midst of all things tending to disturb them. It will indeed
sometimes happen that the pious also will fall into errors, and will be
seduced by the wicked; but it will only be in some respects and for a
time; so that they never fall from the foundation, and presently recover
themselves, *(resipiscant.)* And then, it must also be observed, they
pay the penalty of their negligence, or instability, because they have
not been sufficiently attentive to God’s Word, or have not sufficiently
devoted themselves to religious pursuits. Hence we further gather, that
whilst many turn away professedly from the doctrines of religion, on the
ground of their seeing so many contentions and disputes to distract
them, it is a mere vain excuse to cover their profane neglect or hatred
of God. It is true that there are great discrepancies of opinion, and
very warm contentions; but whosoever in a teachable and gentle spirit
shall seek after truth, and shall give himself over and submit himself
as the disciple of God, he will never be without the spirit of judgment
and discretion. But, since some listen disdainfully, some supremely
despise it, some wish that God’s Word were altogether destroyed, others
think lightly of it, the saying of the Prophet holds good, “that that
dieth, let it die;” (<span id="vi.ii.vi-p27.2"></span>[Zec
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#009)<span
id="vi.ii.vi-p27.2"></span>;) and what Paul after him declares, “But if
any man be ignorant, let him be ignorant.” (l Corinthians 14:38.) Since
it has always been the case that God’s truth was never hidden from
anybody, except him whose mind the God of this world has blinded. (<span
id="vi.ii.vi-p27.3"></span>[2Co
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#004)<span id="vi.ii.vi-p27.3"></span>.)
And this especially takes place  <span id="fr_302"></span>[303](#fn_302)
when light has shone from heaven, which suffers none to go astray but
those who shut their eyes. The remedy, therefore, is immediately
subjoined, “Ye shall walk after the Lord your God;” as if Moses had
said, it was sufficient for their preservation, that they had God to
guide them in the right way, who had already prevented them by His
gratuitous bounty. But, since numbers respond not to God’s call, and
regard Him not when He points out the way to them, the words “and fear
him” are added; because “the fear of God is the beginning of wisdom.”
(<span id="vi.ii.vi-p28.1"></span>[Ps
111:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa111.htm#010)<span
id="vi.ii.vi-p28.1"></span>.) Finally, Moses again inculcates that, if
men are only resolved to obey God, they will be sufficiently taught by
His voice what they ought to do. By the word “cleave,” perseverance is
denoted, and titus he indirectly reproves the instability of those who
forsake and forget God, and go astray after empty imaginations.

<span id="vi.ii.vii"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.vii-p1"></span><span
id="vi.ii.vii-p1.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
18](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#000)<span id="vi.ii.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.vii-p2"></span><span id="vi.ii.vii-p2.1"></span>[Deut.
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#021),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#022)<span id="vi.ii.vii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.vii-p3"></span>**21.** And if thou say in thine heart,
How shall we know the word which the Lord hath not spoken?

<span id="vi.ii.vii-p4"></span>**21.** Quia si dixeris in corde tuo,
Quomodo cognoscemus verbum quod non loquutus fuerit Jehova?

<span id="vi.ii.vii-p5"></span>**22.** When a prophet speaketh in the
name of the Lord, if the thing follow not, nor come to pass, that *is*
the thing which the Lord hath not spoken, *but* the prophet hath spoken
it presumptuously: thou shalt not be afraid of him.

<span id="vi.ii.vii-p6"></span>**22.** Quando loquetur propheta in
nomine Jehovah, et non extiterit res illa, neque evenerit: sermo est
quem non loquutus est Jehova, per superbiam enim loquutus est propheta
ille: ne timeas ab eo.

<span id="vi.ii.vii-p7"></span><span id="vi.ii.vii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.vii-p8"></span>**21.** *And if thou say in thy heart.*
<span id="vi.ii.vii-p8.1"></span>This exception has reference to the
prohibition, which we have already noticed in this same chapter. God, in
His appointment of Prophets to be His substitutes in teaching the
people, had invested them with no common authority, enjoining obedience
to be paid to their precepts. But those, upon whom the office of
teaching is conferred, do not alwayduly fulfill it; and hence the doubt
naturally arises, how the people shall determine when they are addressed
as by Gods mouth, so as to distinguish the true from the false. There
is, therefore, no question expressed in words, but God anticipates the
secret scruples which might otherwise keep men’s minds in suspense; for
to “say <span id="vi.ii.vii-p8.2"></span>in the heart” is equivalent to
doubting in one’s self when any danger is perceived. Now, to remove this
difficulty, He does not enumerate all the marks of distinction; because
He does not indeed allude to doctrine, but only to prophecies. But,
speaking popularly, as to evil and ignorant persons, He commands them to
observe whether those, who pretend to the name of Prophet, foretell the
truth. But although, as we have lately seen, false teachers also rival
in this respect the servants of God, and are found to be veracious in
some particular prophecy; yet it is sufficient as the touchstone of
their truth, to set down what happens for the most part, (<span
id="vi.ii.vii-p8.3"></span>ἐπὶ τὸ πολὺ<span
id="vi.ii.vii-p8.4"></span>;) just as God himself chooses to be
distinguished and separated from idols by the same test. Nor does Moses
affirmatively pronounce that credit must be given to prophets, whenever
events correspond with their predictions; but only admonishes them,
that, if they consider attentively, they cannot be deceived, because God
will speedily expose the false prophets to ridicule, and will confound
their folly. Thus Jeremiah prudently accommodates this passage to the
circumstances of his own times, in order that it may be manifested how
rashly and falsely Hananiah spoke in promising impunity for those sins
over which God’s vengeance impended. (<span
id="vi.ii.vii-p8.5"></span>[Jer
28:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer028.htm#006)<span
id="vi.ii.vii-p8.5"></span><span id="vi.ii.vii-p8.6"></span>.) In sum,
Moses means nothing more than that the people would not be exposed to
the danger of going astray, if they endeavored heartily to obey God;
because it would come to pass by His just judgment, that the temerity of
all who have falsely abused His holy name should be made to appear, and
thus they should be unmasked.

<span id="vi.ii.vii-p9"></span><span id="vi.ii.vii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.vii-p10"></span>**22.** *The prophet hath spoken it
presumptuously.* He not only condemns the folly and vanity of those who
advance their own inventions in the place of God’s commands, but also
their arrogance; since doubtless, this is impious and intolerable
audacity, to set forth the offspring of man’s earthly brain as if it
were a divine revelation. And on this ground it is that their impiety is
detestable, who fill the air with the fumes of their revelations in
order to alarm the simple. Wherefore, he adds, that they should “not be
afraid” of such a prophet; because, as nothing can be more arrogant than
the ministers of Satan, they confidently utter their boastings, by which
we may be easily moved and even overwhelmed, unless we had this buckler
to protect us, viz., that their terrific noise may be safely despised.
This doctrine is now-a-days very useful for us. We know how insolently
the Papists boast of the Catholic Church; of the Apostolic See; how
fiercely they rage in Peter’s name; how impetuously they fulminate their
curses and anathemas; but, when it is ascertained that whatever they put
forward as revelations of the Spirit are but the empty figments of men,
it will be easy to dispel those terrors which flow from this same
fountain of presumption.

<span id="vi.ii.viii"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.viii-p1"></span><span
id="vi.ii.viii-p1.1"></span>[Leviticus
18](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#000)<span id="vi.ii.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.viii-p2"></span><span
id="vi.ii.viii-p2.1"></span>[Leviticus
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#021)<span
id="vi.ii.viii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.viii-p3"></span>**21.** And thou shalt not let any of
thy seed pass through *the fire* to Molech, neither shalt thou profane
the name of thy God: I am the Lord.

<span id="vi.ii.viii-p4"></span>**21.** E semine tuo non dabis quod
trajiciatur coram Moloch: neque profanabis nomen Dei tui: Ego Jehova.

<span id="vi.ii.viii-p5"></span><span
id="vi.ii.viii-p5.1"></span>[Leviticus
19](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#000)<span id="vi.ii.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.viii-p6"></span><span id="vi.ii.viii-p6.1"></span>[Lev.
19:26](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#026),
[31](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#031)<span id="vi.ii.viii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.viii-p7"></span>**26.** Neither shall ye use
enchantment, nor observe times.

<span id="vi.ii.viii-p8"></span>**26.** Non augurabimini, neque
divinationi eritis intenti.

<span id="vi.ii.viii-p9"></span>**31.** Regard not them that have
familiar spirits, neither seek after wizards, to be defiled by them: I
*am* the Lord your God.

<span id="vi.ii.viii-p10"></span>**31.** Non respicietis post Pythones,
et ariolos non inquiretis: ut polluamini in ipsis. Ego Jehova Dens
vester.

<span id="vi.ii.viii-p11"></span><span id="vi.ii.viii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.viii-p12"></span>**18:21.** *Thou shalt not let any of
thy seed.* In these three precepts Moses more lightly touches on what we
have lately seen set forth at greater length in Deuteronomy; for there
he condemns impious offerings, as well as the responses of familiar
spirits, magical arts, and enchantments. He now in the first place
adverts to adulterous sacrifices, especially to that impure and
detestable service of consecrating their children to Moloch, as they
called him, the idol of the Gentiles; and then adds a prohibition, that
they should give no heed to false revelations. But in these two passages
of Leviticus he only enumerates two classes,  <span
id="fr_303"></span>[304](#fn_303) viz., to use auguries and divinations,
and to seek responses from familiar spirits, and to consult magicians or
enchanters; yet he includes all the others of which we have previously
spoken. And, lest they should think the crime a light one, he says that
all they are “defiled” who devote themselves to this kind of curiosity.
The confirmation, which is added at the end of both clauses, has
relation to the sum of the First Commandment; for when God declares
Himself to be “Jehovah, and the God of Israel,” he both claims the
worship which is due to Him alone, and also condemns all the
superstitions whereby pure religion is adulterated. There is also an
*antithesis* implied, in which God contrasts Himself with all fictitious
idols; and therefore the words may be thus paraphrased, — Since I am the
eternal God, and separated from all others which the Gentiles foolishly
make to themselves, and since I have chosen you to myself as my peculiar
people, I would have you, as you ought to be, pure and separated from
all defilements.

<span id="vi.ii.ix"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.ix-p1"></span><span
id="vi.ii.ix-p1.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
12](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#000)<span id="vi.ii.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.ix-p2"></span><span
id="vi.ii.ix-p2.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
12:29-32](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#029)<span
id="vi.ii.ix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.ix-p3"></span>**29.** When the Lord thy God shall cut
off the nations from before thee, whither thou goest to possess them,
and thou succeedest them, and dwellest in their land;

<span id="vi.ii.ix-p4"></span>**29.** Quum exciderit Jehova Deus tuns
gentes ad quas tu venis possidendas a facie tua, et eas possederis, et
habitaveris in terra ipsarum.

<span id="vi.ii.ix-p5"></span>**30.** Take heed to thyself that thou be
not snared by following them, after that they be destroyed from before
thee; and that thou enquire not after their gods, saying, How did these
nations serve their gods? even so will I do likewise.

<span id="vi.ii.ix-p6"></span>**30.** Cave tibi ne to illaquees post
ipsas, postquam deletae fuerint a facie tua: et ne inquiras ad deos
earum, dicendo, Quomodo servierunt gentes istae diis suis, sic etiam ego
faciam.

<span id="vi.ii.ix-p7"></span>**31.** Thou shalt not do so unto the Lord
thy God: for every abomination to the Lord which he hateth have they
done unto their gods; for even their sons and their daughters they have
burnt in the fire to their gods.

<span id="vi.ii.ix-p8"></span>**31.** Non facies sic Jehovae Deo tuo:
quia quicquid abominatio est Jehovae, et quod odit, fecerunt diis suis:
quinetiam filios suos et filias suas combusserunt igni diis suis.

<span id="vi.ii.ix-p9"></span>**32.** What thing soever I command you,
observe to do it: thou shalt not add thereto, nor diminish from it.

<span id="vi.ii.ix-p10"></span>**32.** Omne igitur verbum quod ego
praecipio vobis, observabitis ad faciendum: non adjicies super illud,
neque minues quicquam ex eo.

<span id="vi.ii.ix-p11"></span><span id="vi.ii.ix-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.ix-p12"></span>**29.** *When the Lord thy God shall cut
off.* This passage has some affinity to that in the eighteenth chapter
of Deuteronomy, which we have already remarked on. For inasmuch as it
was easy for the people to lapse into the imitation of the Gentiles, and
to worship their false gods, under whose protection the inhabitants
boasted their land to be, all inquiry respecting them is also strictly
forbidden.  <span id="fr_304"></span>[305](#fn_304) For this is the
origin of idolatry, when the genuine simplicity of God’s worship is
known, that people begin to be dissatisfied with it, and curiously to
inquire whether there is anything worthy of belief in the figments of
men; for men’s minds are soon attracted by the snares of novelty, so as
to pollute, with various kinds of leaven, what has been delivered in
God’s word. Nor does he only withdraw and restrain them from the desire
of inquiry, but expressly commands them to “take heed to” themselves, or
to keep themselves; because men are naturally disposed to this wanton
curiosity, and take much delight in it. Therefore God encloses His
people with barriers, which may keep them back from all hurtful desires;
nay, He would have them so abominate the practice of superstitions, as
to fly even from the infection of hearing of them. We must briefly
observe respecting the words, which we have translated “to possess the
nations,” that Moses does not mean that they were to become their prey,
so as to be their slaves by right of capture, but that he refers to the
land. Therefore he says, “thou shalt possess them before thy face;”
*i.e.,* when they are destroyed, the land will be vacant for you to
possess it. In the *Hiphil* conjugation this word signifies to expel, as
we have already seen; and to this meaning Moses perhaps makes allusion.
The word  <span id="fr_305"></span>[306](#fn_305) which I have
translated *“illa-queare,”* to snare, some interpreters render to
*stumble,* and others to be *carried away,* which would be more
agreeable to the construction, “lest you should be carried away after
them;” yet I have been unwilling to depart from the generally received
opinion, when the metaphor of “ensnaring” is very appropriate; as if he
had said, that all the perversities of the Gentiles were so many nets or
snares to entrap men, if they come too near them; for it presently
follows, “after that they be destroyed,” which some also thus render,
“lest you should perish after them,” as if He would awaken their fears
by holding forth the example of their destruction.

<span id="vi.ii.ix-p16"></span><span id="vi.ii.ix-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.ix-p17"></span>**31.** *Thou shalt not do so.* From
these words we may gather what it is not to make to one’s self the gods
of others, viz., to bid farewell to all the inventions of men, and to
pay attention to this one thing — what God commands. For why does God
desire to be worshipped by His elect people, otherwise than the nations
were in the habit of serving their gods, except because there ought to
be a notable distinction, so that religion may not be confused? And
surely unless men cleave to God’s word, so as resolutely to determine
that nothing else is permitted to them except what is there taught, they
will not only be vacillating, but. they will receive indiscriminately
whatever comes in their way. We must then hold fast to this, “Thou shalt
not do so;” and our minds must be restrained by this curb, lest any
superstition which may defile the service of God should insinuate or
establish itself. He adds, that God not only repudiates these strange
worships, but even abominates them; and in order to impress this the
more, he adduces one form of superstition, in which its absurdity was
unusually manifest; for it is a foul barbarity that innocent children
should be burnt by their parents.

<span id="vi.ii.ix-p18"></span><span id="vi.ii.ix-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.ix-p19"></span>**32.** *What thing soever I command.* In
this brief clause he teaches that no other service of God is lawful,
except that of which He has testified His approval in His word, and that
obedience is as it were the mother of piety; as if he had said that all
modes of devotion are absurd and infected with superstition, which are
not directed by this rule. Hence we gather, that in order to the keeping
of the First Commandment, a knowledge of the true God is required,
derived from His word, and mixed with faith. By forbidding the addition,
or diminishing of anything, he plainly condemns as illegitimate whatever
men invent of their own imagination; whence it follows that they, who in
worshipping God are guided by any rule save that which He Himself has
prescribed, make to themselves false gods; and, therefore, horrible
vengeance is denounced by Him against those who are guilty of this
temerity, through Isaiah,

<span id="vi.ii.ix-p20"></span>“Forasmuch as this people draw near me,
etc., by the precept of men; therefore, behold I will proceed to do a
marvellous work and a wonder: for the wisdom of their wise men shall
perish,” etc. (<span id="vi.ii.ix-p20.1"></span>[Isa.
29:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#014)<span id="vi.ii.ix-p20.1"></span>.)

<span id="vi.ii.ix-p21"></span>Now, since all the ceremonies of the
Papal worship are a mass of superstitions, no wonder that all her chief
rulers and ministers should be blinded with that stupidity wherewith God
has threatened them.  <span id="fr_306"></span>[307](#fn_306)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_279"></span>[280](cc03061.htm#fr_279) <span
id="vi.ii.i-p12.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.i-p13"></span> *Vide* St. Ath. Or. 3, *contra* At. sec.
7, 8. Jones of Nayland’s “Cath. Doctrine of Trinity,” chap. 4:2, sums up
the argument concisely and well.

<span id="fn_280"></span>[281](cc03061.htm#fr_280) <span
id="vi.ii.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p9"></span> “Pour le servir deuement, ils commencent
par ce bout, de se purifier de toutes souillures;” in order to serve Him
duly, they should begin by purifying themselves from all uncleanness —
*Fr.*

<span id="fn_281"></span>[282](cc03061.htm#fr_281) <span
id="vi.ii.iv-p18.5"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p19"></span><span id="vi.ii.iv-p19.1"></span> In
observing that some choose to say that Moses first uses a general term
for all soothsayers, and then proceeding to describe particular classes
of them, *C*<span id="vi.ii.iv-p19.2"></span>. is following *S.
M’s*<span id="vi.ii.iv-p19.3"></span> note on <span
id="vi.ii.iv-p19.4"></span>קסם קסמים<span id="vi.ii.iv-p19.5"></span>;
where the latter has said, “Alii putant esse generale vocabulum ad
omnium divinationum species.” The verb seems to be so used in <span
id="vi.ii.iv-p19.6"></span>[1Sa
28:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#008)<span
id="vi.ii.iv-p19.6"></span><span id="vi.ii.iv-p19.7"></span>, where *A.
V.* <span id="vi.ii.iv-p19.8"></span>renders it *divine.* <span
id="vi.ii.iv-p19.9"></span>— *W.*

<span id="fn_282"></span>[283](cc03061.htm#fr_282) <span
id="vi.ii.iv-p19.12"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p20"></span><span id="vi.ii.iv-p20.1"></span> The
next term, <span id="vi.ii.iv-p20.2"></span>מעונן<span
id="vi.ii.iv-p20.3"></span>, *S. M.*<span id="vi.ii.iv-p20.4"></span>
has explained as derived from <span id="vi.ii.iv-p20.5"></span>ענן<span
id="vi.ii.iv-p20.6"></span>, a cloud, or its radical verb. Some have
chosen to regard it rather as derived from <span
id="vi.ii.iv-p20.7"></span>ענן<span id="vi.ii.iv-p20.8"></span>, to
watch; but *C.*<span id="vi.ii.iv-p20.9"></span> must have learnt from
some other source that there are critics who derive it from <span
id="vi.ii.iv-p20.10"></span>מעון<span id="vi.ii.iv-p20.11"></span>, a
place of habitation. — *W*

<span id="fn_283"></span>[284](cc03061.htm#fr_283) <span
id="vi.ii.iv-p20.19"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p21"></span> <span
id="vi.ii.iv-p21.1"></span>מנהש<span id="vi.ii.iv-p21.2"></span>. That
this term here means some kind of diviner is certain; but the root is
used in an inoffensive sense for *making diligent search;* <span
id="vi.ii.iv-p21.3"></span>and the best critics are now generally agreed
that it ought to have been so understood and rendered in <span
id="vi.ii.iv-p21.4"></span>[Ge
44:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#005)<span
id="vi.ii.iv-p21.4"></span><span id="vi.ii.iv-p21.5"></span>, where *S.
M.*<span id="vi.ii.iv-p21.6"></span> has acknowledged (in his note on
the present passage)that it is used for *sciscitari rem occultam,* <span
id="vi.ii.iv-p21.7"></span>notwithstanding his having there rendered it
*auguratur.* <span id="vi.ii.iv-p21.8"></span>— <span
id="vi.ii.iv-p21.9"></span>W.

<span id="fn_284"></span>[285](cc03061.htm#fr_284) <span
id="vi.ii.iv-p21.17"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p22"></span> <span
id="vi.ii.iv-p22.1"></span>מכשף<span id="vi.ii.iv-p22.2"></span>. The
explanation here given is from *S. M.*<span id="vi.ii.iv-p22.3"></span>
— W.

<span id="fn_285"></span>[286](cc03061.htm#fr_285) <span
id="vi.ii.iv-p22.6"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p23"></span> <span id="vi.ii.iv-p23.1"></span>חבר
חבר<span id="vi.ii.iv-p23.2"></span>. The root signifies to join, or
combine. How it came to mean *enchanting,* <span
id="vi.ii.iv-p23.3"></span>which it does in Syriac and Arabic, as well
as in Hebrew, remains disputable. The explanation disliked by *C.*<span
id="vi.ii.iv-p23.4"></span> he had found in *S. M.;*<span
id="vi.ii.iv-p23.5"></span> that which follows is his own. — *W*

<span id="fn_286"></span>[287](cc03061.htm#fr_286) <span
id="vi.ii.iv-p23.10"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p24"></span> <span id="vi.ii.iv-p24.1"></span>שאל
אוב<span id="vi.ii.iv-p24.2"></span>, *S.M.,*<span
id="vi.ii.iv-p24.3"></span> Consulens pythonem. By saying that the
Greeks have rendered <span id="vi.ii.iv-p24.4"></span>אוב<span
id="vi.ii.iv-p24.5"></span>, Pythonem, *C*<span
id="vi.ii.iv-p24.6"></span>. would naturally lead his readers to suppose
that the LXX. had done so, whereas, both in the Pentateuch and in <span
id="vi.ii.iv-p24.7"></span>[I Samuel
28](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#000)<span id="vi.ii.iv-p24.7"></span>,
where the Hebrew has *an interrogator of* <span
id="vi.ii.iv-p24.8"></span>אוב*,* <span id="vi.ii.iv-p24.9"></span>the
LXX. has <span id="vi.ii.iv-p24.10"></span>ἐγγαστρίμυθος<span
id="vi.ii.iv-p24.11"></span>, a ventriloquist. The word <span
id="vi.ii.iv-p24.12"></span>אוב<span id="vi.ii.iv-p24.13"></span> is
allowed to mean properly a water-bottle, and its gurgling sound; and,
from this last, a ventriloquist. It is obvious that Luke cannot be
correctly spoken of as translating a Hebrew phrase when he was relating
in Greek what the Greeks said of a person possessed by an evil spirit. —
*W*

<span id="fn_287"></span>[288](cc03061.htm#fr_287) <span
id="vi.ii.iv-p24.25"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p25"></span> <span
id="vi.ii.iv-p25.1"></span>ידעני<span id="vi.ii.iv-p25.2"></span>, from
<span id="vi.ii.iv-p25.3"></span>ידע<span id="vi.ii.iv-p25.4"></span>,
he knew. This word had previously been used by Moses in <span
id="vi.ii.iv-p25.5"></span>[Le
20:27](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#027)<span
id="vi.ii.iv-p25.5"></span><span id="vi.ii.iv-p25.6"></span>, where *S.
M.*<span id="vi.ii.iv-p25.7"></span> has said the Jews affirm that there
were conjurers who put between their teeth the mouth of a certain animal
called <span id="vi.ii.iv-p25.8"></span>ידוע<span
id="vi.ii.iv-p25.9"></span>, and speak wonderful things through it. They
add a wonderful fable, etc. The LXX. has <span
id="vi.ii.iv-p25.10"></span>ἐπάοιδος<span id="vi.ii.iv-p25.11"></span>,
an enchanter, in Leviticus, and its equivalent here. — *W*

<span id="fn_288"></span>[289](cc03061.htm#fr_288) <span
id="vi.ii.iv-p25.13"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p26"></span> Omitted in *Fr*. “The Hebrews describe
him thus, that ‘he put into his mouth a bone of a certain bird called
Jaduaugh, and burned incense, and did other works, until he fell down as
with shame, (or, modestie,) and spake with his mouth things that were to
come to *pass’* — *Maim. Treat. of Idolatry,.*ch, 6, sect. 2.”
*Ainsworth in loco.*

<span id="fn_289"></span>[290](cc03061.htm#fr_289) <span
id="vi.ii.iv-p26.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p27"></span> <span id="vi.ii.iv-p27.1"></span>דרש
אל-המתים<span id="vi.ii.iv-p27.2"></span>, one who seeks to the dead,
(compare last clause of <span id="vi.ii.iv-p27.3"></span>[Isa
8:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#019)<span
id="vi.ii.iv-p27.3"></span><span id="vi.ii.iv-p27.4"></span>;) a
necromancer.

<span id="fn_290"></span>[291](cc03061.htm#fr_290) <span
id="vi.ii.iv-p27.7"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p28"></span> “Fait des loix frivoles et superflues;”
passed frivolous and superfluous laws. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_291"></span>[292](cc03061.htm#fr_291) <span
id="vi.ii.iv-p28.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p29"></span> “Par circuits et responses a deux
ententes;” by circuitous and ambiguous answers. — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_292"></span>[293](cc03061.htm#fr_292) <span
id="vi.ii.iv-p29.4"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p30"></span> Homme de *jugement.* — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_293"></span>[294](cc03061.htm#fr_293) <span
id="vi.ii.iv-p30.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p31"></span><span id="vi.ii.iv-p31.1"></span> See,
for example, at the end of the 1st Book of the Cyropaedia, the advice of
Cyaxares: <span id="vi.ii.iv-p31.2"></span>Μάθε δὲ μς, ὦ παῖ, καὶ τάδε,
ἔφη, τὰ μέγιςα· Παρὰ γὰρ ἱερὰ, καὶ οἰωνοὺς μήτ ᾿ ἐν σαυτῷ μηδέποτε μηδ ᾿
ἐν τὣ στρατιᾷ κινδυνεῦσὟς, κατανοὼν ὡς ἄνθρωποι μὲν αἱροῦνται πράξεις
εἰκάβοντες, εἰδότες δὲ οὐδὲν ἀπὸ ποίας ἔςαι αὐτοῖς τἀγαθόν· κ. τ. λ.

<span id="fn_294"></span>[295](cc03061.htm#fr_294) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p15.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p16"></span> Ordinaires. — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_295"></span>[296](cc03061.htm#fr_295) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p21"></span> *S. M.* says, in his note on this verse,
“Some of the Hebrews understand by that Prophet, Joshua, who succeeded
Moses as ruler; others think Jeremiah must be meant, who rebuked the
people in the same terms as Moses had done. But Christians who devoutly
assert that this passage speaks of Christ, confute the Jews by referring
to what is said in the last chap. of Deut., — ‘There arose not a prophet
since in Israel like unto Moses,’ etc. This passage must be prophetic of
some other remarkable Prophet who should not be inferior to Moses,
especially as the text says, *like thee,* ‘that as thou didst deliver
the people from corporal bondage, so shall the prophet whom I will raise
up for them deliver them from the bondage of sin.’” — *W*.

<span id="fn_296"></span>[297](cc03061.htm#fr_296) <span
id="vi.ii.vi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p13"></span> See note on <span
id="vi.ii.vi-p13.2"></span>[Deuteronomy
30:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#011)<span
id="vi.ii.vi-p13.2"></span>, *ante.*

<span id="fn_297"></span>[298](cc03061.htm#fr_297) <span
id="vi.ii.vi-p16.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p17"></span> Addition in *Fr*., “disant, Que si le
cas n’advient, le Prophete s’est ingere par presomption;” saying, that
if the thing does not come to pass, the Prophet has meddled with it
presumptuously.

<span id="fn_298"></span>[299](cc03061.htm#fr_298) <span
id="vi.ii.vi-p21.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p22"></span> *C.* found in *S. M.’s* note on this
verse that some of them understood the word *signs* to refer to such a
sign as Jeremiah was to exhibit, (<span id="vi.ii.vi-p22.1"></span>[Jer
27:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#002)<span
id="vi.ii.vi-p22.1"></span>,) the like to which was done by the false
Prophet Zedekiah, (<span id="vi.ii.vi-p22.2"></span>[1Ki
22:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#012)<span
id="vi.ii.vi-p22.2"></span>;) whilst others thought that the text spoke
of what magicians might do by their art, as Moses had witnessed in
Pharaoh’s presence. — *W*.

<span id="fn_299"></span>[300](cc03061.htm#fr_299) <span
id="vi.ii.vi-p24.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p25"></span> Aug. *de Genesi,* lib. 1:34. “Sic
dicetur etiam illud, ‘Tentat vos Dominus Deus vester, ut sciat si
diligitis eum;’ non enim ut sciat ipse, quem nihil latet, sed ut scire
nos faciat, quantum in ejus dilectione profecerimus, tentari nos
permittit.” See also *Tractatus* 43, *in Johannem,* 5, 6.

<span id="fn_300"></span>[301](cc03061.htm#fr_300) <span
id="vi.ii.vi-p25.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p26"></span> Addition in French, “quand les
seducteurs brouillent tout;” when seducers confuse everything.

<span id="fn_301"></span>[302](cc03061.htm#fr_301) <span
id="vi.ii.vi-p26.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p27"></span> I presume that there is an allusion here
to <span id="vi.ii.vi-p27.1"></span>[Eze
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#009)<span id="vi.ii.vi-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_302"></span>[303](cc03061.htm#fr_302) <span
id="vi.ii.vi-p27.4"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p28"></span> “Cela se verifie et demonstre
principalement;” and this verifies and demonstrates itself principally.
— *Fr.*

<span id="fn_303"></span>[304](cc03061.htm#fr_303) <span
id="vi.ii.viii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.viii-p13"></span> “Il en raconte seulement *quatre*
especes; mais il y comprend toutes celles que nous avons veus par
ci-devant;” he mentions *only four* sorts, but comprehends in them all
those which we have before observed. — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_304"></span>[305](cc03061.htm#fr_304) <span
id="vi.ii.ix-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.ix-p13"></span> Addition in French, “de peur que de l’un
ils ne vienent a l’autre;” for fear that they should pass from one to
the other.

<span id="fn_305"></span>[306](cc03061.htm#fr_305) <span
id="vi.ii.ix-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.ix-p14"></span> <span
id="vi.ii.ix-p14.1"></span>תנקש<span id="vi.ii.ix-p14.2"></span>, 2.
fut. pass. of <span id="vi.ii.ix-p14.3"></span>נקש<span
id="vi.ii.ix-p14.4"></span>. The Chaldee paraphrast is cited by *S.
M.*<span id="vi.ii.ix-p14.5"></span> as explaining it by a word
equivalent to *thou stumble.* <span id="vi.ii.ix-p14.6"></span>It does
not appear who has rendered it *be carried away.* <span
id="vi.ii.ix-p14.7"></span>— *W.*

<span id="vi.ii.ix-p15"></span>Pol. Syn. gives “aberres,” as the Syriac
version, and “ne captarts,” as that of Malvenda.

<span id="fn_306"></span>[307](cc03061.htm#fr_306) <span
id="vi.ii.ix-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.ix-p22"></span> Addition in French, “avoit menace les
anciens Sacrificateurs.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Institution of the Passover](cc03062)
