[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc03047)  [Next](cc03049) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 3: Harmony of the Law, Part I*, tr. by John
King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.xxiii"></span>

<span id="v.xxiii-p1"></span>DEUTERONOMY 8

<span id="v.xxiii-p2"></span><span id="v.xxiii-p2.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
8:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#001)<span id="v.xxiii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxiii-p3"></span>**1.** All the commandments which I command
thee this day shall ye observe to do, that ye may live, and multiply,
and go in and possess the land which the Lord sware unto your fathers.

<span id="v.xxiii-p4"></span>**1.** Omne praeceptum quod ego praecipio
tibi hodie, custodietis ut faciatis, ut vivatis, et multiplicemini, et
ingrediamini ut possideatis terram de qua juravit Jehova patribus
vestris.

<span id="v.xxiii-p5"></span>**2.** And thou shalt remember all the way
which the Lord thy God led thee these forty years in the wilderness, to
humble thee, *and* to prove thee, to know what *was* in thine heart,
whether thou wouldest keep his commandments, or no.

<span id="v.xxiii-p6"></span>**2.** Meminerisque totius vim per quam
deduxit to Jehova Deus tuus jam quadraginta annis in deserto, ut
affligeret to ac tentaret to, ut sciret quid haberes in corde tuo, utrum
observaturus esses praecepta ejus, annon.

<span id="v.xxiii-p7"></span>**3.** And he humbled thee, and suffered
thee to hunger, and fed thee with manna, which thou knewest not, neither
did thy fathers know; that he might make thee know that man doth not
live by bread only, but by every *word* that proceedeth out of the mouth
of the Lord doth man live.

<span id="v.xxiii-p8"></span>**3.** Et afflixit te, ac esurire te fecit,
postea pavit te Man, quod non noveras, neque noverant patres tui: ut
scire faceret te quod non in pane solo vivet homo, sed omni eo quod
egreditur ex ore Jehovae vivet homo.

<span id="v.xxiii-p9"></span>**4.** Thy raiment waxed not old upon thee,
neither did thy foot swell, these forty years.

<span id="v.xxiii-p10"></span>**4.** Vestimentum tuum ne quaquam
veteravit super re, neque pes tuus intumuit jam quadraginta annis.

<span id="v.xxiii-p11"></span>**5.** Thou shalt also consider in thine
heart, that, as a man chasteneth his son, *so* the Lord thy God
chasteneth thee.

<span id="v.xxiii-p12"></span>**5.** Sciasque in corde tuo quod
quemadmodum erudit homo filium suum, sic Jehova Deus tuus erudit re.

<span id="v.xxiii-p13"></span>**6.** Therefore thou shalt keep the
commandments of the Lord thy God, to walk in his ways, and to fear him.

<span id="v.xxiii-p14"></span>**6.** Et custodies praecepta Jehovae Dei
tui, ut ambules per vias ejus, et timeas eum.

<span id="v.xxiii-p15"></span><span
id="v.xxiii-p15.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
11](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#000)<span id="v.xxiii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxiii-p16"></span><span id="v.xxiii-p16.1"></span>[Deut.
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#009)<span id="v.xxiii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxiii-p17"></span>**8.** Therefore shall ye keep all the
commandments which I command you this day, that ye may be strong, and go
in and possess the land whither ye go to possess it;

<span id="v.xxiii-p18"></span>**8.** Custodite ergo omne praeceptum quod
ego praecipio vobis hodie, ut roboremini, et ingrediamini,
possideatisque terram ad quam vos transitis ut possideatis cam.

<span id="v.xxiii-p19"></span>**9.** And that ye may prolong *your* days
in the land which the Lord sware unto your fathers to give unto them,
and to their seed, a land that floweth with milk and honey.

<span id="v.xxiii-p20"></span>**9.** Atque ut prolongetis dies super
terram quam juravit Jehova patribus vestris se daturum illis et semini
eorum, terram fluentem lacte et melle.

<span id="v.xxiii-p21"></span><span id="v.xxiii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxiii-p22"></span>**1.** *All the commandments.* Although
the first verse might have been included among the promises, whereby, as
we shall hereafter see, the Law was ratified by Moses, because he here
exhorts and incites the Israelites to obedience by proposing to them the
hope of reward; still it appeared to me that I might conveniently insert
it here, since the design of Moses was simply this, to attract them by
the sweetness of the promised inheritance to receive the doctrines of
the Law. This sentence, then, may be justly counted among those whereby
their minds were prepared to submit themselves to God with the
gentleness and docility that became them; as though he had said, because
the land of Canaan is now not far from you, its very nearness ought to
encourage you to take upon you God’s yoke more cheerfully; for the same
God, who this day declares to you His law, invites you to the enjoyment
of that land, which He promised with an oath to your fathers. And
certainly it is evident from this latter clause of the verse, that Moses
did not simply promise them a reward if they should keep the law; but
rather set before them the previous favor, wherewith God had
gratuitously prevented them, in order that they might, on their part,
shew themselves grateful for it Moses calls the commandments *his,* not
(as we have already seen) because he had invented them himself, but
because he faithfully handed them down from the dictation of God’s own
mouth. And this we may also more fully gather from the following verse,
wherein he recounts the mercies of the time past, and at the same time
calls to their recollection by how many proofs God had instructed them,
to form and accustom them to obedience. In the first place, he bids them
remember generally the dealings of God, which they had seen for forty
years, and then descends to particulars, viz., that God had proved them
by afflictions, “to know what was in their heart;” for thus may the
expressions be paraphrased, “to humble thee, and to prove thee, to know
what was in thine heart;” in which words he admonishes them, that they
were painfully tried by many troubles and difficulties not without very
good reason, viz., because they had need of such trial. Yet, at the same
time, he indirectly reproves their obstinacy, which was then detected;
since otherwise, if all things had gone prosperously with them, it would
have been easy for them to pretend great fear of God, though, as was
actually discovered, it did not really exist.

<span id="v.xxiii-p23"></span><span id="v.xxiii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxiii-p24"></span>**3.** *And he humbled thee, and suffered
thee to hunger.* Inasmuch as they were sometimes made to suffer hunger
in the wilderness, he proves the advantage of this discipline, because
they thus learnt that the human race does not live by bread and wine
alone, but by the secret power of God. For though all confess that it is
through God’s goodness that the earth is fruitful, still their senses
are so tied to the meat and drink, that they rise no higher, and do not
acknowledge God as their Father and nourisher, but rather bind Him down
to the outward means to which they are attached, as if His hand, of
itself, and without instruments, could not effect or supply anything.
Their perception, therefore, that the fruits of the earth are produced
by God, is but a cold notion, which speedily vanishes, and does not
cling to their memory. The power of God, as well as His goodness, is
indeed abundantly manifested in the use of His creatures, which we
naturally enjoy; but the depravity of the human mind causes that the
testimonies of it act like a veil to obscure that bright light. Besides,
the majority of mankind think of God as if banished afar off, and
dwelling in inactivity as if He had resigned His office in heaven and
earth; and hence it arises, that trusting in their present abundance,
they implore not His favor, nay, that they pass it by as needless; and,
when deprived of their accustomed supplies, they altogether despair, as
if God’s hand alone were insufficient for their succor. Since, then, men
do not sufficiently profit by the guidance and instruction of nature,
but rather are blinded in their view of God’s works, it was desirable
that in this miracle (of the manna) a standing and manifest proof should
be given, that men do not only live upon God’s bounty, when they eat
bread and drink wine, but even when all supplies fail them. Although
there be some harshness in the words, yet the sense is clear, that men’s
life consists not in their food, but that God’s inspiration suffices for
their nourishment. And we must remember, that the eternal life of the
soul is not here referred to, but that we are simply and solely taught
that although bread and wine fail, our bodies may be sustained and
invigorated by God’s will alone. Let it then be regarded as settled,
that this is improperly, however acutely, referred to the spiritual
life, and a relation imagined in its doctrine to faith; as if the grace,
which is offered in the promises, and received by faith, gave life to
our souls; since it is simply stated, that the animating principle
*(vigor),* which is diffused by the spirit of God for sustenance,
proceeds out of His mouth. In <span id="v.xxiii-p24.1"></span>[Ps
104:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#030)<span
id="v.xxiii-p24.1"></span>, there is an exact repetition of what was
before said here by Moses, “Thou sendest forth thy Spirit, they are
created: and thou renewest the face of the earth.” The word translated
“not only,” seems to have been expressly added, lest, if Moses had
altogether excluded the bread which is destined for our food, he should
not do justice to God. Thus, then, does he guard his words, as much as
to say, that although bread sustains man’s life, still this support
would be too weak, unless the hidden power of God occupied the first
place; and that this intrinsic virtue, as it is called, which He of
Himself inspires, would suffice, even although all other aids should
fail. And this doctrine, first of all, arouses us to gratitude,
referring to God Himself whatever by His creatures He supplies to us for
the nourishment and preservation of our lives, whilst it teaches us that
although all the instruments of this world should fail, still we may
hope for life from Himself alone. There is no ordinary wisdom in
recollecting both these points. Christ admirably applied this passage to
its true and genuine practical use; for when the devil would persuade
him to command the stones to be made bread for the satisfaction of His
hunger, He answered, “Man shall not live by bread alone,” etc., (<span
id="v.xxiii-p24.2"></span>[Mt 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#004)<span
id="v.xxiii-p24.2"></span>,) as if he had said, There is in God’s hands
another remedy, for even although He supply not food, He is still able
to keep men in life by His will alone. But I touch upon this the more
briefly, because I have more fully treated it in my Commentaries on “the
Harmony of the Gospels.”  <span id="fr_256"></span>[257](#fn_256) With
the same object he adds, that their raiment was not worn out in so long
a time, and that their shoes remained whole; viz., that they might be
fully convinced, that whatever concerns the preservation of human life
and man’s daily wants is so entirely in God’s hands, that not only its
enjoyment, but even its continuance and being, depend upon His blessing.

<span id="v.xxiii-p26"></span><span id="v.xxiii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxiii-p27"></span>**5.** *Thou shalt also consider in thine
heart.* <span id="v.xxiii-p27.1"></span>He concludes <span
id="v.xxiii-p27.2"></span>that in the constant tenor of God’s acts, from
the time the Israelites were brought out of Egypt, His paternal care for
their instruction might be recognised <span
id="v.xxiii-p27.3"></span>For the word <span
id="v.xxiii-p27.4"></span>יסר<span id="v.xxiii-p27.5"></span>,  <span
id="fr_257"></span>[258](#fn_257) *yasar,* <span
id="v.xxiii-p28.3"></span>is taken by some in too restricted a sense for
“to chastise,” whereas it comprehends the whole process of a proper
education; as if he had said, that unless they were hereafter
submissive, and disposed to be dutiful, they would be something more
than intractable, since they had been duly taught and kept under the
best discipline, and that God had omitted nothing which could be
required from the father of a family. Hence it follows, that long ago,
and by much instruction, they were accustomed to embrace the teaching of
the Law, just as it becomes children to be obedient to their father’s
voice. And this he explains more clearly in the next verse; again
concluding, that therefore they were to observe the Law, and to walk in
the commandments of God. Whereon also we may shortly observe, that the
fear of God, as I have already stated elsewhere, is the foundation of
due obedience to the Law. The passage which I have interwoven from <span
id="v.xxiii-p28.4"></span>[Deuteronomy
11](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#000)<span id="v.xxiii-p28.4"></span> may
also be counted among the promises, for God allures in it His people to
obedience <span id="v.xxiii-p28.5"></span>by the hope of His blessing;
and since the possession of the land, which was then in sight, is set
before them, the words appeared to me to fit in not badly here; because
God had no other intention in this eulogium of it, but to prepare the
minds of the people for keeping the Law.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_256"></span>[257](cc03048.htm#fr_256) <span
id="v.xxiii-p24.3"></span>

<span id="v.xxiii-p25"></span> See Calvin Society Translation, *in
loco.*

<span id="fn_257"></span>[258](cc03048.htm#fr_257) <span
id="v.xxiii-p27.6"></span>

<span id="v.xxiii-p28"></span> See note on <span
id="v.xxiii-p28.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#002)<span id="v.xxiii-p28.1"></span>,
*ante,* p. 383.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy 29:2-9](cc03049)
