[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc03033)  [Next](cc03035) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 3: Harmony of the Law, Part I*, tr. by John
King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.ix"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p1"></span>DEUTERONOMY 7

<span id="v.ix-p2"></span><span id="v.ix-p2.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
7:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#006)<span id="v.ix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p3"></span>**6.** For thou *art* an holy people unto the
Lord thy God: the Lord thy God hath chosen thee to be a special people
unto himself— above all people that *are* upon the face of the earth.

<span id="v.ix-p4"></span>**6.** Nam populus sanctus es Jehovae Deo tuo:
te elegit Jehova Deus tuus— ut sis illi populus peculiaris ex omnibus
populis qui sunt in superficie terrae.

<span id="v.ix-p5"></span>**7.** The Lord did not set his love upon you—
nor choose you— because ye were more in number than any people; (for ye
*were* the fewest of all people;)

<span id="v.ix-p6"></span>**7.** Non quia plures essetis prae omnibus
populis— amavit vos Jehova— et elegit vos: (vos enim eratis pauciores
omnibus populis.)

<span id="v.ix-p7"></span>**8.** But because the Lord loved you— and
because he would keep the oath which he had sworn unto your fathers—
hath the Lord brought you out with a mighty hand— and redeemed you out
of the house of bond-men— from the hand of Pharaoh king of Egypt.

<span id="v.ix-p8"></span>**8.** Sed quia diligebat vos Jehova— et
custodire volebat juramentum quod juraverat patribus vestris— eduxit vos
Jehova in manu forti— et redemit vos e manu Pharaonis regis Aegypti.

<span id="v.ix-p9"></span><span id="v.ix-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p10"></span>**6.** *For thou art a holy people.* <span
id="v.ix-p10.1"></span>He explains more distinctly what we have lately
seen respecting God’s gratuitous love; for the comparison of the fewness
of the people with the whole world and all nations, illustrates in no
trifling degree the greatness of God’s grace; and this subject is
considerably enlarged upon. Almost the same expressions will very soon
be repeated, and also in the Song of Moses; but there by way of reproof,
whilst here it is directed to a different object, as is plain from the
context, viz., that they might be, by so great a blessing, laid under
obligation to devote themselves and their services to God. He begins by
declaring the end of their election, viz., that God had deigned to
bestow this peculiar honor upon them that He might acquire unto Himself
a holy people, pure from all pollutions, and then, by adding the
circumstance I have adverted to, he magnifies the excellence of the
benefit. From his argument drawn from their dignity, that they ought
therefore to labor after holiness, we gather, that in proportion to the
abundance of grace with which any one is endued, he is solemnly bound to
live piously and justly. For God does not wish the gifts he bestows upon
us to lie idle, but to produce their appropriate fruits; and we must
especially remember that when He adopts us, and gathers us into His
Church, we are not “called to uncleanness,” but to purity of life, and
to shew forth the praises of him who hath called us out of darkness into
his marvellous light.” (<span id="v.ix-p10.2"></span>[1Th
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#007)<span id="v.ix-p10.2"></span><span
id="v.ix-p10.3"></span>, and <span id="v.ix-p10.4"></span>[1Pe
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#009)<span id="v.ix-p10.4"></span><span
id="v.ix-p10.5"></span>.) The Hebrew word <span
id="v.ix-p10.6"></span>סגלה<span id="v.ix-p10.7"></span>, *segullah,*
<span id="v.ix-p10.8"></span>which we translate *“peculiaris,” special,*
<span id="v.ix-p10.9"></span>some understand to mean a *“treasure,”*
<span id="v.ix-p10.10"></span>or a precious and desirable thing, as was
stated on <span id="v.ix-p10.11"></span>[Exodus
19](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#000)<span id="v.ix-p10.11"></span>.
Undoubtedly it appears from many passages that gold, silver, pearls, and
the like, are designated by this word; but substantially it is agreed
that this title is given to the elect people, because God delights
Himself in them; and herein His incomparable goodness shines forth, that
He so highly esteems such miserable and worthless creatures,
*(homunciones.)* <span id="v.ix-p10.12"></span>Hence, too, it appears
that by His holy calling He, as it were, creates out of nothing “things
which are not,” <span id="v.ix-p10.13"></span>that they may excel every
earthly being.

<span id="v.ix-p11"></span><span id="v.ix-p11.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p12"></span>**7.** *The Lord did not set his love upon
you.* He proves it to be of God’s gratuitous favor, that He has exalted
them to such high honor, because He had passed over all other nations,
and deigned to embrace them alone. For an equal distribution of God’s
gifts generally casts obscurity upon them in our eyes; thus the light of
the sun, our common food, and other things, which all equally enjoy,
either lose their value, or, at any rate, do not obtain their due honor;
whilst what is peculiar is more conspicuous. Moreover, Moses takes it
for granted, that there was nothing naturally in the people to cause
their condition to be better or more distinguished; and hence infers,
that there was no other reason why God should choose them, except His
mere choice of them. We have elsewhere observed, that by this His love,
whatever men would bring of their own is excluded or annihilated. It
follows, therefore, that the Israelites could never be sufficiently
grateful to God, since they had been thus liberally dealt with by Him,
without any desert of their own.

<span id="v.ix-p13"></span><span id="v.ix-p13.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p14"></span>**8.** *Because he would keep the oath.* The
love of God is here referred back from the children to the fathers; for
he addressed the men of his own generation, when he said that they were
therefore God’s treasure, because He loved them; now he adds that God
had not just begun to love them for the first time, but that He had
originally loved their fathers, when He chose to adopt Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob. But although he more clearly proves that the descendants of
Abraham had deserved nothing of the kind, because they are God’s
peculiar people only by right of inheritance, still it must be remarked
that God was induced to be kind to Abraham by no other cause than mere
generosity. A little further on, therefore, he will say that those who
then survived were dear to God, because He had already loved their
fathers. But now he still further commends the goodness of God, because
He had handed down His covenant from the fathers to the children, to
shew that He is faithful and true to His promises. At the end of the
verse, he teaches that the deliverance of the people was both an effect
and a testimony of that grace.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy 10:14-17](cc03035)
