[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc03001)  [Next](cc03003) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 3: Harmony of the Law, Part I*, tr. by John
King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii"></span>

<span id="iii-p1"></span>THE PREFACE OF JOHN CALVIN

<span id="iii-p2"></span>TO THE FOUR LAST BOOKS OF MOSES;

<span id="iii-p3"></span>Arranged By Him In Form Of A Harmony,  
And Illustrated By Commentaries.

<span id="iii-p4"></span>If I do not at once begin by stating my reasons
for the plan I have adopted in the composition of this Work, it will
undoubtedly incur the censures of many. Nor will it be attacked only by
the malevolent and the envious, (a matter of little consequence,) but
some will perhaps be found, who, with no other cause of disapproval, and
without any malignity, will still think that I have inconsiderately, and
therefore unnecessarily, altered the order which the Holy Spirit himself
has prescribed to us. Now, there cannot be a doubt that what was
dictated to Moses was excellent in itself, and perfectly adapted for the
instruction of the people; but what he delivered in Four Books, it has
been my endeavor so to collect and arrange, that, at first sight, and
before a full examination of the subject, it might seem I was trying to
improve upon it, which would be an act of audacity akin to sacrilege. I
pass by those critics with indifference whose object is to frame causes
of detraction out of nothing, and whose greatest pleasure it is to
invent occasions of railing; but there will be no difficulty in
conciliating those who are only unfavorable through misunderstanding, if
they will but listen calmly to the course I have pursued. For I have had
no other intention than, by this arrangement, to assist unpracticed
readers, so that they might more easily, more commodiously, and more
profitably acquaint themselves with the writings of moses; and whosoever
would derive benefit from my labors should understand that I would by no
means withdraw him from the study of each separate Book, but simply
direct him by this compendium to a definite object; lest he should, as
often happens, be led astray through ignorance of any regular plan.

<span id="iii-p5"></span>These four books are made up of two principal
parts, viz., the Historical Narrative and the Doctrine, by which the
Church is instructed in true piety, (including faith and prayer,) as
well as in the fear and worship of God; and thus the rule of a just and
holy life is laid down, and individuals are exhorted to the performance
of their several duties.  <span id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1) This
distinction Moses does not observe in his Books, not even relating the
history in a continuous form, and delivering the doctrine unconnectedly,
as opportunity occurred. I admit, indeed, that whatever refers to the
regulation of the conduct is comprehended in the ten commandments; but,
since all have not sufficient intelligence to discern the tendency of
what is elsewhere taught, or to reduce the different precepts to their
proper class, there is nothing to prevent such assistance being afforded
them, as, by setting before them the design of the holy Prophet, may
enable them to profit more by his writings.

<span id="iii-p7"></span>Moreover, the use and application of the
narrative in the four Books is twofold; for the deliverance of his
ancient people reflects, as in a bright mirror, the incomparable power,
as well as the boundless mercy, of God in raising up, and as it were
engendering his Church. But that the most gracious Father should have
followed up this same people with his continual bounty even unto the
end, and have so contended with their gross impiety, their detestable
iniquity, and foul ingratitude, as not to cease to be more than liberal
towards the unthankful and the evil, is a manifest proof of his
inestimable loving-kindness; whilst we may perceive in his constant
government of them, how unwearied is the course of his grace in
cherishing, defending, honoring, and preserving those whom he has once
embraced with his love. Hence may we obtain a source of confidence;
hence, too, may we learn to be bold in prayer; while, lest we should be
in doubt whether these exertions of God’s grace, which Israel
experienced as well in their original calling as in their successive
history, have any relation to ourselves also, Moses has stated their
cause to have been that gratuitous adoption, which is common to us with
them, from the times that the only-begotten Son, having “broken down the
middle wall of partition,” vouchsafed to become our head. On the other
hand, the terrible and memorable punishments, which are everywhere
recounted, instruct us in reverence towards God, and inspire our hearts
with awe, lest we should falsely boast ourselves to be his children,
whilst indulging in the liberty of sin. For, since God so severely
punished idolatry, evil affections and lusts, rebellion and other
crimes, we may learn that he nowhere more evidently inflicts his
judgments than upon his Church, and thus we may appropriate to the
deceivers of our own day whatever happened to the hypocritical Jews.

<span id="iii-p8"></span>**I.** The doctrine is divided into four
principal Heads. In order to prepare their minds for its reception,
Moses commends the authority of the Law by many eulogies. Whatever
statements, therefore, occur as to the Dignity of the Law are set down
by way of *Preface*,  <span id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2) that God may be
duly reverenced. Consequently, they precede in order the precepts of the
Law, and will occupy the *first* place.

<span id="iii-p10"></span>**II.** The Ten Commandments follow, in which
God has briefly, but comprehensively summed up the Rule of a Just and
Holy Life; yet so as not to separate from them those interpretations
which the Lawgiver has added unconnectedly. For many Precepts, which are
not found in the Two Tables, yet differ not at all from them in sense;
so that due care must be taken to affix them to their respective
Commandments in order to present the Law as a whole.

<span id="iii-p11"></span>**III.** The Third Head Of Doctrine consists
of  <span id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3) Supplements; by which word I mean,
with respect to the First Table, the Ceremonies and the outward
Exercises of Worship; with respect to the Second Table, the Political
Laws, for the object of both these parts is merely to aid in the
observance of the Moral Law; and it is not a little important, that we
should understand that the Ceremonies and the Judicial Ordinances
neither change nor detract from the rule laid down in the Ten
Commandments; but are only helps, which, as it were, lead us by the hand
to the due Worship of God, and to the promotion of justice towards men.
We are aware that of old there was a constant controversy of the
Prophets against the Jewish people; because, whilst strenuously devoting
themselves to Ceremonies, as if True Religion and Holiness were
comprised in them, they neglected real righteousness.

<span id="iii-p13"></span>Therefore, God protests that he never enjoined
anything with respect to the Sacrifices: and he pronounces all External
Rites but vain and trifling, if the very least value be assigned to them
apart from the Ten Commandments. Whence we more certainly arrive at the
conclusion to which I have adverted, viz., that they are not, to speak
correctly, of the substance of the law, nor avail of themselves in the
Worship of God, nor are required by the Lawgiver himself as necessary,
or even as useful, unless they sink into this inferior position. In
fine, they are appendages, which add not the smallest completeness to
the Law, but whose object is to retain the pious in the Spiritual
Worship of God, which consists of Faith and Repentance, of Praises
whereby their gratitude is proclaimed, and  <span
id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4) even of the endurance of the Cross. As to
all the Political Ordinances, nothing will obviously be found in them,
which at all adds to the perfection of The Second Table: therefore it
follows, that nothing can be wanted as the rule of a good and upright
life beyond the Ten Commandments.

<span id="iii-p15"></span>**IV.** The Last Part shews the end and use of
the Law; and thence its usefulness is very extensive. For how would it
profit us to be instructed in righteousness of life, unless the
perception of our guilt and iniquity induced us to seek after the
remedy? But when God allures us so gently and kindly by his promises,
and again pursues us with the thunders of his curse, it is partly to
render us inexcusable, and partly to shut us up deprived of all
confidence in our own righteousness, so that we may learn to embrace his
Covenant of Grace, and flee to Christ, who is the end of the law. This
is the intention of The Promises, in which he declares that he will be
merciful, since there is forgiveness ready for the sinner, and when he
offers the spirit of Regeneration. On this depends that sentence of St.
Paul, that *Christ is the end of the Law* Still I do not so distinguish
this class from the foregoing, as if it had nothing in common with them.
For, before arriving at it, it will be often necessary to refer both to
the terrible ruin of the human race, as well as to the peculiar blessing
of Adoption, and to that increasing flow of fatherly love which God
extends to his people. For all the expiations have no other meaning than
that God will be always merciful, as often as the sinner shall flee to
the refuge of his pardon. But how needful this division is will be best
understood as we proceed.

<span id="iii-p16"></span>The song of Moses and his death will be the
conclusion of the Four Books.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1"></span>[2](cc03002.htm#fr_1) <span id="iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii-p6"></span> The whole of this passage, to the end of the
paragraph, is omitted in the French Translation.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[3](cc03002.htm#fr_2) <span id="iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii-p9"></span> “Afin qu’elle (i.e., la Loy) ait envers nous
telle reverence qu’elle merite;” — In order that the Law may receive
from us the reverence it, deserves. — *French Trans*.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[4](cc03002.htm#fr_3) <span
id="iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii-p12"></span> “Appendices.” — *Lat*. “*Dependances*.” —
*Fr*.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[5](cc03002.htm#fr_4) <span
id="iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii-p14"></span> “Et aussi de s’humilier pour porter en
patience toutes afflictions;” and also in humbling themselves to bear
patiently all afflictions. — *Fr*. *Trans*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: History](cc03003)
