[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc03054)  [Next](cc03056) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 3: Harmony of the Law, Part I*, tr. by John
King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.xxx"></span>

<span id="v.xxx-p1"></span><span id="v.xxx-p1.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
30](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#000)<span id="v.xxx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxx-p2"></span><span id="v.xxx-p2.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
30:11-14](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#011)<span id="v.xxx-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxx-p3"></span>**11.** For this commandment, which I command
thee this day, it *is* not hidden from thee, neither *is* it far off:

<span id="v.xxx-p4"></span>**11.** Praeceptum hoc quod praecipio tibi
hodie, non est absconditam a to, nec procul remotum.

<span id="v.xxx-p5"></span>**12.** It *is* not in heaven, that thou
shouldest say, Who shall go up for us to heaven, and bring it unto us,
that we may hear it, and do it?

<span id="v.xxx-p6"></span>**12.** Non est in coelis ut dicas, Quis
nobis ascendet in coelum, ut deferat illud ad nos, et annuntiet nobis,
ut ipsum faciamus?

<span id="v.xxx-p7"></span>**13.** Neither *is* it beyond the sea, that
thou shouldest say, Who shall go over the sea for us, and bring it unto
us, that we may hear it, and do it?

<span id="v.xxx-p8"></span>**13.** Nec est ultra mare, ut dicas, Quis
nobis trajiciet mare ut deferat iliud ad nos, et annuntiet nobis, ut
ipsum faciamus?

<span id="v.xxx-p9"></span>**14.** But the word *is* very nigh unto
thee, in thy mouth, and in thy heart, that thou mayest do it.

<span id="v.xxx-p10"></span>**14.** Certe valde propinquns est tibi
sermo in ore tuo, et in corde tuo, ut facias ipsum.

<span id="v.xxx-p11"></span><span id="v.xxx-p11.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxx-p12"></span>**11.** *For this commandment, which I
command thee.* This declaration is like the preceding, and tends to the
same end; for Moses commends in it the Law, on account of its easiness;
because God does not propound to us obscure enigmas to keep our minds in
suspense, and to torment us with difficulties, but teaches familiarly
whatever is necessary, according to the capacity, and consequently the
ignorance of the people. Therefore, in <span
id="v.xxx-p12.1"></span>[Isa
45:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#019)<span id="v.xxx-p12.1"></span> He
reproves the Jews for having wandered in darkness through their own
depravity and folly; because He had *not spoken* to them in *secret, nor
said in vain*  <span id="fr_274"></span>[275](#fn_274) *to the seed of
Jacob, Seek ye me.* But Moses here invites them to learn, because they
had an easy and clear method of instruction set before their eyes, and
would not lose their labor; for we know that it is very often made an
excuse for idleness, if great labor without much profit is to be applied
to deep and difficult studies. Moses, therefore, declares that the Law
is not hard to be understood, so as to demand inordinate fatigue in its
study; but that God there speaks distinctly and explicitly, and that
nothing is required of them but diligent application. More-over, he thus
takes away from them every pretext for ignorance, since, with so much
light, they cannot err, except by wilfully blinding themselves, or
shutting their eyes. Whence, also, we gather, how impious are the
babblings of the Papists that the Scripture is beset by thick darkness,
and how wicked is their driving away the people from approaching it, as
if it were some labyrinth. Surely they thus must needs accuse the Holy
Spirit of falsehood, who so abundantly asserts its comprehensibleness,
*(claritatem,)* or else they malign itself by their blasphemous taunts.
But if the ancient people were left without excuse*,* unless they kept
in the right way, when they had the Law for their mistress and director,
our stupidity must be worthy of double and triple condemnation, if we do
not make progress in the Gospel, wherein God has opened all the
treasures of His wisdom, as far as is sufficient for salvation. The
Sophists  <span id="fr_275"></span>[276](#fn_275) improperly and
ignorantly wrest this passage to prove the freedom of the will. (They
allege  <span id="fr_276"></span>[277](#fn_276) ) that Moses here
declares the precepts of the Law not to be above our reach. What? Does
he state that the keeping of them is within the compass of our strength?
Surely the words convey nothing of the sort; neither can this sense be
elicited from them, if his intention be duly weighed. For he merely
encourages the Jews, and commands them to be diligent disciples of the
Law, because they will easily understand whatever is enjoined by God
therein. But the power of performance is a very different thing from
understanding. Besides, Paul, with very good reason, accommodates this
passage to the Gospel, (<span id="v.xxx-p15.1"></span>[Ro
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#008)<span id="v.xxx-p15.1"></span>;)
because it would profit nothing to comprehend the doctrine itself in the
mind, unless reverence and a serious disposition to obey be superadded.
But he takes it for granted, that to have a good will is so far from
being in our own power, that we are not even competent to think aright.
Hence it follows, that what is here stated falls to the ground as
frivolous, and spoken to no purpose, if it be applied simply to the Law.
Paul also considers another thing, viz., that because the Law requires a
perfect righteousness, it cannot be received by any mortal fruitfully;
for however any one may study to obey God, yet he will still be far from
perfection; and, therefore, it is necessary to come to the Gospel,
wherein that rigorous requirement is relaxed, because, through the
interposition of pardon, the will to obey is pleasing to God instead of
perfect obedience. For Paul insists on the latter verse, “The word is
nigh in the mouth, and in the heart, that the people may do it.” Now, it
is clear that men’s hearts are strongly and obstinately opposed to the
Law; and that in the Law itself is contained only a dead and deadly
letter; how then could the literal doctrine have a place in the heart?
But if God, by the Spirit of regeneration, corrects the depravity of the
heart and softens its hardness, this is not the property of the Law, but
of the Gospel. Again, because in the children of God, even after they
are regenerated, there always abide the remainders of carnal desires, no
mortal will be found who can perform the Law. But in the Gospel God
receives, with fatherly indulgence, what is not absolutely perfect. The
word of God, therefore, does not begin to penetrate into the heart, and
to produce its proper fruit in the lips, until Christ shines upon us
with His Spirit and gratuitous pardon. Wherefore Paul most truly
concludes that this is *the word of faith* which is preached in the
Gospel; both because the Law does not efficaciously lead men to God, and
because the keeping of it is impossible, on account of its extreme
rigor. But this is the peculiar blessing of the new covenant, that the
Law is written on men’s hearts, and engraven on their inward parts;
whilst that severe requirement is relaxed, so that the vices under which
believers still labor are no obstacle to their partial and imperfect
obedience being pleasant to God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_274"></span>[275](cc03055.htm#fr_274) <span
id="v.xxx-p12.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxx-p13"></span> In *A. V.,* it will be remembered, the
words, “in vain,” are connected with “Seek ye me.” “I said not unto the
seed of Jacob, Seek ye me in vain.”

<span id="fn_275"></span>[276](cc03055.htm#fr_275) <span
id="v.xxx-p13.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxx-p14"></span> Les Theologiens de la Papaute. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_276"></span>[277](cc03055.htm#fr_276) <span
id="v.xxx-p14.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxx-p15"></span> Added from the French.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus 27:34; Deuteronomy 29:1](cc03056)
