[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc03039)  [Next](cc03041) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 3: Harmony of the Law, Part I*, tr. by John
King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.xv"></span>

<span id="v.xv-p1"></span>deuteronomy 6

<span id="v.xv-p2"></span>REPETITION OF THE SAME COMMAND

<span id="v.xv-p3"></span>deuteronomy 6:6-9

<span id="v.xv-p4"></span>**6.** And these words, which I command thee
this day, shall be in thine heart;

<span id="v.xv-p5"></span>**6.** Erunt verba haec quae ego praecipio
tibi hodie, in corde tuo.

<span id="v.xv-p6"></span>**7.** And thou shalt teach them diligently
unto thy children, and shalt talk of them when thou sittest in thine
house, and when thou walkest by the way, and when thou liest down, and
when thou risest up.

<span id="v.xv-p7"></span>**7.** Et iterabis *(vel,* acues) ea filiis
tuis, et disseres de ipsis sedens domi tuae, iter faciens, jacens in
lecto, et surgens.

<span id="v.xv-p8"></span>**8.** And thou shalt bind them for a sign
upon thine hand, and they shall be as frontlets between thine eyes.

<span id="v.xv-p9"></span>**8.** Et ligabis ea in signum in manu tua: et
erunt in frontalia inter oculos tuos.

<span id="v.xv-p10"></span>**9.** And thou shalt write them upon the
posts of thy house, and on thy gates

<span id="v.xv-p11"></span>**9.** Scribes quoque ea in postibus domus
tuae, et in portis tuis.

<span id="v.xv-p12"></span><span id="v.xv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="v.xv-p13"></span>**6.** *And these words.* <span
id="v.xv-p13.1"></span>In these four next verses God again commands (as
before) the study of His Law. And first, indeed, He would have it
implanted in their hearts, lest forgetfulness of it should ever steal
over them; and by the word “heart” He designates the memory and other
faculties of the mind; as though He had said that this was so great a
treasure, that there was good cause why they should hide it in their
hearts, or so fix this doctrine deeply in their minds that it should
never escape. Afterwards He enjoins that constant conversation should be
held about it with their children, in order that fathers should
diligently attend and apply themselves to the duty of instruction. The
word <span id="v.xv-p13.2"></span>שנן  <span
id="fr_233"></span>[234](#fn_233) *shanan,* <span
id="v.xv-p14.1"></span>which Moses uses, means properly “to <span
id="v.xv-p14.2"></span>whet.” Commentators think that it is employed
metaphorically for “to <span id="v.xv-p14.3"></span>reiterate,” or “to
repeat constantly,” because, when the heavenly doctrine is inculcated,
it will scarcely even thus be duly impressed on their hearts; but, since
it is here used in the conjugation *Piel,* <span
id="v.xv-p14.4"></span>its signification may be transitive, viz., that
they should cause it to penetrate their minds, as if they should prick
them with the point of a sword; for the other translation does not seem
consistent. But it is sufficient for me to state my opinion, lest any
should be offended by its novelty. Lastly, he exhorts them to exercise
themselves in its meditation both publicly and privately, in order to
stimulate their want of energy. But, although he may seem to speak
hyperbolically, yet if any one will carefully consider how slow and
careless men are in learning, and how forgetful they are when they seem
to have made some progress, he will readily acknowledge that Moses does
not urge them so strongly on insufficient grounds, but that it was
highly necessary for him to be thus rigid in exacting their attention.
For this reason the Prophet in <span id="v.xv-p14.5"></span>[Ps
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#002)<span id="v.xv-p14.5"></span><span
id="v.xv-p14.6"></span>, pronounces them to be blessed who meditate in
God’s law “day and night.” He leaves, then, no portion of time
unoccupied with meditation on the Law; whether they are at home, or
abroad, or when they retire to rest, or when they rise in the morning.
To this precept David appears to allude in <span
id="v.xv-p14.7"></span>[Ps 119:62](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#062)<span
id="v.xv-p14.7"></span><span id="v.xv-p14.8"></span>, where he says, “At
midnight I will rise to give thanks unto thee because of thy righteous
judgments;” and again, <span id="v.xv-p14.9"></span>[Ps
119:148](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#148)<span
id="v.xv-p14.9"></span><span id="v.xv-p14.10"></span>, “Mine <span
id="v.xv-p14.11"></span>eyes prevent the night-watches, that I might
meditate in thy word.” But still, by the expression “talk of them,”
Moses does not urge the people to empty talkativeness, to which many are
too much inclined, but he would have them severally thus establish
themselves and be teachers of each other. He enumerates these various
engagements, lest that change of occupation by which the mind is wont to
be distracted should withdraw the godly from the right path, as though
he commanded them to make this their chief aim in whatever business they
might be engaged. For the same reason he desires bracelets and frontlets
to be made of the precepts of the Law, contrasting doubtless this
spiritual ornament with chains  <span id="fr_234"></span>[235](#fn_234)
<span id="v.xv-p15.1"></span> of gold, as much as to say that they would
more properly take delight in the pious recollection of the Law, than in
those trifling ornaments which attract men’s senses. The Jews
understanding this literally, accounted this external ostentation a mark
of holiness, so as to think that they had almost done all they needed,
when they wore the Law on their arms and foreheads. Thence their
mistaken zeal proceeded still further, so that, as each desired to be
thought better than others, they widened their phylacteries in
proportion, for so they denominated the borders of their garments, on
which were written certain sentences of the Law, as safeguards. This
error our Lord severely reproves in the Scribes and Pharisees, (<span
id="v.xv-p15.2"></span>[Mt 23:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#005)<span
id="v.xv-p15.2"></span><span id="v.xv-p15.3"></span>,) because it was a
mere mockery of this admonition, and a profanation of its doctrine. The
intention of God sufficiently appears in the passage from Exodus, which
I have subjoined, and in which they are simply commanded to be diligent
in keeping the Law. But there is good reason why diligence should be
required, not only on account of the matter being highly important, but
because, through our vanity, we are apt to relax our exertions, unless
our slowness of heart is stimulated.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_233"></span>[234](cc03040.htm#fr_233) <span
id="v.xv-p13.3"></span>

<span id="v.xv-p14"></span> Margin of *A.V.,* to whet, or sharpen. —
*W.*

<span id="fn_234"></span>[235](cc03040.htm#fr_234) <span
id="v.xv-p14.12"></span>

<span id="v.xv-p15"></span> A tous joyaux, affiquets, et parures. —
*Fr*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy 11:18-20](cc03041)
