[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc03052)  [Next](cc03054) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 3: Harmony of the Law, Part I*, tr. by John
King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.xxviii"></span>

<span id="v.xxviii-p1"></span><span id="v.xxviii-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
23](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#000)<span id="v.xxviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxviii-p2"></span><span id="v.xxviii-p2.1"></span>[Exodus
23:20-23](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#020)<span
id="v.xxviii-p2.1"></span>, 25-31

<span id="v.xxviii-p3"></span>**20.** Behold, I send an Angel before
thee, to keep thee in the way, and to bring thee into the place which I
have prepared.

<span id="v.xxviii-p4"></span>**20.** Ecce, ego mitre Angelum coram to,
ut custodiat to in via, et introducat to in locum quem praeparavi.

<span id="v.xxviii-p5"></span>**21.** Beware of him, and obey his voice,
provoke him not; for he will not pardon your transgressions: for my name
*is* in him.

<span id="v.xxviii-p6"></span>**21.** Cave a facie ejus, *(ad verbum,*
custodias to; *vel* custoditus sis,) et obtempera voci ejus, ne
exacerbes eum, neque enim parcet transgressioni vestrae: nomen meum
intra ipsum.

<span id="v.xxviii-p7"></span>**22.** But if thou shalt indeed obey his
voice, and do all that I speak; then I will be an enemy unto thine
enemies, and an adversary unto thine adversaries.

<span id="v.xxviii-p8"></span>**22.** Si autem audiendo audieris vocem
ejus, et feceris omnia quae loquor, inimicus ere inimicis tuis, et
affligam affligentes te.

<span id="v.xxviii-p9"></span>**23.** For mine Angel shall go before
thee, and bring thee in unto the Amorites, and the Hittites, and the
Perizzites, and the Canaanites, the Hivites, and the Jebusites; and I
will cut them off.

<span id="v.xxviii-p10"></span>**23.** Nam praecedet Angelus meus faciem
tuam, et introducet tead Emorrhaeum, Hitthaeum, et Perezaeum,
Chananaeum, Hivaeum, et Jebusaeum: et exterminabo illos.

<span id="v.xxviii-p11"></span>**25.** And ye shall serve the Lord your
God, and he shall bless thy bread, and thy water; and I will take
sickness away from the midst of thee.

<span id="v.xxviii-p12"></span>**25.** Coletis Jehovam Deum vestrum, et
benedicet pani tuo, et aquis tuis: auferamque infirmitatem e medio tui.

<span id="v.xxviii-p13"></span>**26.** There shall nothing cast their
young, nor be barren, in thy land: the number of thy days I will
fulfill.

<span id="v.xxviii-p14"></span>**26.** Non erit abortum faciens et
sterilis in terra tua: numerum dierum tuorum complebo.

<span id="v.xxviii-p15"></span>**27.** I will send my fear before thee,
and will destroy all the people to whom thou shalt come; and I will make
all thine enemies turn their backs unto thee.

<span id="v.xxviii-p16"></span>**27.** Terrorem mittam coram to, et
interficiam omnem populum ad quem venies, et dabo omnes hostes tuos
tergum.

<span id="v.xxviii-p17"></span>**28.** And I will send hornets before
thee, which shall drive out the Hivite, the Canaanite, and the Hittite,
from before thee.

<span id="v.xxviii-p18"></span>**28.** Mittam crabronem ante to, qui
expellat Hivaeum, Chananaeum, et Hitthaeum a facie tua.

<span id="v.xxviii-p19"></span>**29.** I will not drive them out from
before thee in one year; lest the land become desolate, and the beast of
the field multiply against thee.

<span id="v.xxviii-p20"></span>**29.** Non ejiciam ilium a facie tua
anno uno, ne sit terrae desolatio, et multiplicetur contra to bestia
agri.

<span id="v.xxviii-p21"></span>**30.** By little and little I will drive
them out from before thee, until thou be increased, and inherit the
land.

<span id="v.xxviii-p22"></span>**30.** Paulatim paulatim ejiciam illum a
facie tua, donec crescas et haereditate accipias terram.

<span id="v.xxviii-p23"></span>**31.** And I will set thy bounds from
the Red sea even unto the sea of the Philistines, and from the desert
unto the river: for I will deliver the inhabitants of the land into your
hand; and thou shalt drive them out before thee.

<span id="v.xxviii-p24"></span>**31.** Ponam autem terminum tuum a mari
rubro usque ad Philistin, et a deserto usque ad fluvium, ham dabo in
manus vestras habitatores terrae.

<span id="v.xxviii-p25"></span><span id="v.xxviii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxviii-p26"></span>**20.** *Behold, I send an Angel before
thee.* <span id="v.xxviii-p26.1"></span>God here reminds the Israelites
that their wellbeing is so connected with the keeping of the Law, that,
by neglecting it, they would sorely suffer. For He says that He will be
their leader by the hand of an angel, which was a token of His fatherly
love for them; but, on the other hand, He threatens that they would not
be unpunished if they should despise such great mercy and follow their
own lusts, because they will not escape the sight of the angel whom He
had appointed to be their guardian. Almost all the Hebrew rabbins,
 <span id="fr_266"></span>[267](#fn_266) <span
id="v.xxviii-p27.1"></span> with whom many others agree, too hastily
think that this is spoken of Joshua, but the statements, which we shall
consider more fully just beyond, by no means are reconcilable with his
person. But their mistake is more than sufficiently refuted by this,
first of all, that if we understand it of Joshua, the people would have
been without the angel as their leader as long as they wandered in the
desert; and, besides, it was afterwards said to Moses, “Mine Angel shall
go before *thee,”* <span id="v.xxviii-p27.2"></span>(<span
id="v.xxviii-p27.3"></span>[Ex
32:34](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#034)<span
id="v.xxviii-p27.3"></span><span id="v.xxviii-p27.4"></span>;) and
again, “And <span id="v.xxviii-p27.5"></span>I will send an Angel before
thee,” <span id="v.xxviii-p27.6"></span>(<span
id="v.xxviii-p27.7"></span>[Ex
33:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#002)<span
id="v.xxviii-p27.7"></span><span id="v.xxviii-p27.8"></span>.) Moses,
too, elsewhere enlarges on this act of God’s goodness, that He should
have led forth His people by the hand of an angel. (<span
id="v.xxviii-p27.9"></span>[Nu
20:16](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#016)<span
id="v.xxviii-p27.9"></span><span id="v.xxviii-p27.10"></span>.) But what
need is there of a long discussion, since already mention has been so
often made of the angel of their deliverance? This point ought now to be
deemed established, that there is no reference here to a mortal man; and
what we have already said should be remembered, that no common angel is
designated, but the chief of all angels, who has always been also the
Head of the Church. In which matter the authority of Paul should be
sufficient for us, when he admonishes the Corinthians not to tempt
Christ as their fathers tempted Him in the desert. (<span
id="v.xxviii-p27.11"></span>[1Co
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#009)<span
id="v.xxviii-p27.11"></span><span id="v.xxviii-p27.12"></span>.) We
gather this, too, from the magnificent attribute which Moses immediately
afterwards assigns to Him, that “the <span
id="v.xxviii-p27.13"></span>name of God should be in him.” <span
id="v.xxviii-p27.14"></span>I deem this to be of great importance,
although it is generally passed over lightly. But let us consider it
particularly. When God declares that He will send His angel “to keep
them in the way,” He makes a demand upon them for their willing
obedience, for it would be too base of them to set at nought, or to
forget Him whose paternal care towards them they experience. But in the
next verse, He seeks by terror to arouse them from their listlessness,
where He commands them to beware of His presence, since He would take
vengeance on their transgressions;  <span
id="fr_267"></span>[268](#fn_267) <span
id="v.xxviii-p28.1"></span>wherein, also, there is a delicate allusion
to be observed in the ambiguous meaning of the word employed. For, since
<span id="v.xxviii-p28.2"></span>שמר<span id="v.xxviii-p28.3"></span>,
*shamar,* <span id="v.xxviii-p28.4"></span>in Hebrew signifies “to <span
id="v.xxviii-p28.5"></span>guard,” after He has said that an angel shall
be their guardian, He warns them, on the other hand, that they should
guard themselves. Herein the Angel is exalted above the rank of a human
being, since He is appointed to be their judge, if the Israelites should
offend in any respect; not in the way that judgment is deputed to the
Prophets with reference to their doctrine, the power of which is
supreme, but because nothing shall be hidden from Him. For Scripture
assigns to God alone as His peculiar attribute, that we should walk
<span id="v.xxviii-p28.6"></span>before His face. What follows is to the
same effect, “provoke him not,” which is everywhere spoken <span
id="v.xxviii-p28.7"></span>of God. But, as I have just said, this seems
to me to be of most importance, that the name of God was to be in Him,
or in the midst of Him, which is equivalent to this, that in Him shall
reside my majesty and glory; and, therefore, He shall possess both the
knowledge of hearts, as well as dominion, and the power of judgment.
Besides, we have already said that there is no absurdity in designating
Christ by the name of the Angel, because He was not yet the Incarnate
Mediator, but as often as He appeared to the ancient people He gave an
indication of His future mission.

<span id="v.xxviii-p29"></span><span id="v.xxviii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxviii-p30"></span>**22.** *But if thou shalt indeed obey.*
He moderates the terror with which He had inspired them for two reasons,
— *first,* that He may rather gently attract them than force them by the
fear of punishment; *secondly,* lest, if they imagine that the Angel is
formidable to them, the anxiety conceived in their minds should deaden
their perception of His mercy and layout. Now, although I postpone to
another place the promises whereby their obedience to the Law was
confirmed, I have thought it right to include this among the
exhortations or eulogiums whereby the dignity of the Law is enhanced,
because it relates to the time past, for thus is the expression to be
paraphrased, “Take heed that ye respond to God who deals so liberally
with you. The promises which He made to your fathers as to the
inheritance of the land, He is now ready to perform, unless your
iniquity should stand in the way. Make room, then, for His grace, that,
by the hand of the Angel, He may lead you into His rest.” In order to
stimulate them still more, He points out to them their need of His aid,
as though He had said that nothing, could be more miserable than their
case, unless they were protected from so many enemies by His defense,
for He enumerates several most important nations to which they would be
by no means a match unless they should fight under the guidance of the
Angel. He says, therefore, that if they only obey His Law, there is no
occasion for them to be afraid, for that He will destroy by His own
power alone all that shall rise against them to resist them.

<span id="v.xxviii-p31"></span><span id="v.xxviii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxviii-p32"></span>**25.** *And ye shall serve the Lord your
God.* It is true that this promise is very similar to others, to which I
have assigned a peculiar place, but it has this difference, that, in
inviting the people to be zealous in keeping the Law, it sets before
their eyes the effect of the covenant already made with their fathers,
in order that they may more cheerfully receive the Law. Therefore there
was good reason for my saying just before that the promises which refer
to the past have their appropriate place here, where their minds are
prepared to obey God and keep His Law, because the race of Abraham God
had chosen to Himself, that tie may continually visit them with His
favor. He therefore promises them His blessing on their bread and water
and bodily health, for on these three things depend the condition of our
present life. Two other things He adds — fecundity in generation, and
length of days. The sum is, that they had been prevented by God’s
loving-kindness, in order that they might willingly honor Him, and that
now all He had promised them was close at hand, if only they responded
to His grace. But, although the fertility of the land was great, and its
productions various and abundant, no mention is here made, as in other
places, of wine or oil, but only of simple food, as if He had said that
the necessary supports of life should not be wanting to them.

<span id="v.xxviii-p33"></span><span id="v.xxviii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxviii-p34"></span>**27.** *I will send my fear before
thee.* It is very clear from these words that God’s fatherly love
towards the people is magnified, to prepare their minds to submit
themselves to the yoke of the Law. Therefore their reward, if they
should keep the Law, is not so much set before them here, as shame is
denounced upon them if they should be ungrateful to God their deliverer,
who was soon after about to give them the enjoyment of the promised
land. Moreover, God is said to sent forth His fear, when by His secret
inspiration He depresses men’s hearts. Whence we gather that fear, as
well as courage, is in His hand. Of this no doubtful examples exist in
every history, if only God obtained His due rights amongst men. It will
often happen that the courage of brave men gives way to alarm, and on
the other hand, that the timid and cowardly awake to sudden bravery.
Where the cause is not discovered, the profane have recourse to the
hidden dominion of fortune to account for it, or imagine that men’s
minds have been stupified by Pan or the Satyrs.  <span
id="fr_268"></span>[269](#fn_268) Let us however learn, that it is in
God’s power to bend men’s hearts either way, so as both to cast down the
courageous with terror, as well as to animate the timid. From this
passage what we read in <span id="v.xxviii-p35.1"></span>[Ps.
44:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#003)<span id="v.xxviii-p35.1"></span>,
is taken, —

<span id="v.xxviii-p36"></span>“Thou didst drive out the heathen with
thine hand, and plantedst them, *(our fathers.)* For they got not the
land in possession by their own sword, neither did their own arm save
them,” etc.

<span id="v.xxviii-p37"></span>Moreover, Rahab, who was both a harlot
and belonged to an unbelieving nation, still acknowledged this, when she
said to the spies,

<span id="v.xxviii-p38"></span>“our hearts did melt; for the Lord your
God is God in heaven above, and in the earth beneath.” (<span
id="v.xxviii-p38.1"></span>[Jos
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#011)<span
id="v.xxviii-p38.1"></span>.)

<span id="v.xxviii-p39"></span>She does not, indeed, express what we
have here, that they were smitten from heaven with internal fear, but
only says that their terror came from a sense of God’s power; still she
admits that it is no human cause which makes them thus to tremble. Moses
ascends higher, that God puts to flight or routs their enemies not only
by setting before them external objects of terror, but that He works
also inwardly in their hearts, that they may fly in confusion and alarm;
as it follows in the end of the verse, “I will make them turn their
backs,” as much as to say, that He would cause them immediately to
retreat, and not even to sustain the sight of the people.

<span id="v.xxviii-p40"></span><span id="v.xxviii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxviii-p41"></span>**28.** *And I will send hornets.*
Although that secret terror, of which He had made mention, would be
sufficient to put their enemies to flight, He states that there would
also be other ready means, to rout them without any danger, or much
difficulty to His people. Yet He does not threaten to send great and
powerful warriors, but only insects and hornets; as much as to say, that
God would be so entirely propitious to His people that He would prepare
and arm even the smallest animals to destroy their enemies.  <span
id="fr_269"></span>[270](#fn_269) Thus is the easiness of their victory
shewn; because, without the use of the sword, hornets alone would
suffice to rout and exterminate their enemies. He adds, however, an
exception, lest the Israelites should complain, if the land should not
immediately lie open to them empty and cleared of its old inhabitants;
and He reminds them that it would be advantageous to them that He should
consume their enemies by degrees. Although, therefore, God might at
first sight seem to perform less than He had promised, and thus to
retract or diminish somewhat from His grace; yet Moses shews that in
this respect also He was considering their welfare, lest the wild beasts
should rush in upon the bare and desert land, and prove more troublesome
than the enemies themselves. It came to pass indeed, through the
people’s slackness, that they were long mixed with their enemies,
because they executed with too little energy the vengeance of God; yea,
His menace against them by the mouth of Joshua was then fulfilled,

<span id="v.xxviii-p43"></span>“if ye cleave unto the remnant of these
nations, know for a certainty that the Lord your God will no more drive
out any of these nations from before you; but they shall be snares and
traps unto you, and scourges in your sides, and thorns in your eyes,
until ye perish from off this good land, which the Lord your God hath
given you.” (<span id="v.xxviii-p43.1"></span>[Josh.
23:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#013)<span id="v.xxviii-p43.1"></span>.)

<span id="v.xxviii-p44"></span>The fact, therefore, that it was later
and at the end of David’s reign that these wicked and heathen nations
were exterminated so as to deliver up to the people the quiet possession
of the land, must be attributed to their own fault, since unbelief and
ingratitude rendered them inactive, and disposed to indulge their ease.
But, if no such inactivity had delayed the fulfillment of the promise,
they would have found that the final destruction of the nations by God
would have been delayed no longer than was good for them.

<span id="v.xxviii-p45"></span><span id="v.xxviii-p45.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxviii-p46"></span>**31.** *And I will set thy bounds.*
There is no question that He confirms here the covenant which he had
made with Abraham in somewhat different words. More briefly had it been
said to Abraham,

<span id="v.xxviii-p47"></span>“Unto thy seed have I given this land,
from the river of Egypt unto the great river, the river Euphrates.”
(<span id="v.xxviii-p47.1"></span>[Ge
15:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#018)<span
id="v.xxviii-p47.1"></span>.)

<span id="v.xxviii-p48"></span>Here the four cardinal points of the
compass are enumerated, and, instead of the Nile, the other sea is
mentioned, which is opposite to the sea of Tarshish.  <span
id="fr_270"></span>[271](#fn_270) Nor is it anything new which the
Israelites are commanded to expect; but they are reminded of what they
had heard of by tradition even from the time of Abraham. Hence what I
have already said is more clearly perceived, viz., that the ancient
covenant is set before them, in order that they may respond to God’s
gratuitous favor, and on their part honor and worship Him, who had
already anticipated them with His mercy. Furthermore, when they had
robbed themselves of this blessing, God applied a remedy to their
iniquity, by raising up a new condition of things under David, to whom
this promise is repeated, as is seen in <span
id="v.xxviii-p49.1"></span>[Ps 72](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#000)<span
id="v.xxviii-p49.1"></span> Therefore, although even up to that time
their inheritance was in a measure incomplete *(truncata),*  <span
id="fr_271"></span>[272](#fn_271) yet, under this renovated condition,
they reached its full and solid enjoyment. But since that prosperity and
extension of the kingdom was not lasting, but after Solomon’s death
began to fail, and at last its dignity was destroyed; therefore
Zechariah uses the same words in declaring its ultimate and perfect
restoration. (<span id="v.xxviii-p50.1"></span>[Zec
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#010)<span
id="v.xxviii-p50.1"></span>.) Thence we gather that by the coming of
Christ this prophecy at length obtained its perfect accomplishment; not
that the race of Abraham then began to bear rule within the bounds here
laid down, but inasmuch as Christ embraced the four quarters of the
globe under His dominion, from the east even to the west, and from the
north even to the south. Meanwhile the power of David was the prototype
of this boundless reign, when he acquired the sovereignty of the
promised land. We ought not to think it unreasonable that the ancient
people should be kept out of some portion of that inheritance which was
to be expected by them in accordance with the covenant; but rather does
God’s incredible goodness display itself, in that, when they had
altogether disinherited themselves, He still combated their iniquity,
and failed not to shew practically His faithfulness. We may see the same
thing in the calling of the Gentiles; for, if the Jews had continued
faithful, the Gentiles would have been joined with them, as it had been
said,

<span id="v.xxviii-p51"></span>“In those days it shall come to pass that
ten men shall take hold of the skirt of him that is a Jew,” (<span
id="v.xxviii-p51.1"></span>[Zec
8:23](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#023)<span
id="v.xxviii-p51.1"></span>;)

<span id="v.xxviii-p52"></span>but their rebellion brought it about,
that God only gathered from among them the first-fruits of His Church,
and afterwards the Gentiles were substituted in the place which they had
left empty. In this way neither did this people retain their right of
primogeniture, neither did God’s truth cease to stand firm, as Paul more
fully explains in the eleventh chapter of Romans.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_266"></span>[267](cc03053.htm#fr_266) <span
id="v.xxviii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxviii-p27"></span> For this opinion, *Corn. a Lapide*
quotes *Justin.* contra Tryphon. fol. 58; and *Eusebius,* lib. 4,
Demonstr. Evang. 28, and *Raban.*

<span id="fn_267"></span>[268](cc03053.htm#fr_267) <span
id="v.xxviii-p27.15"></span>

<span id="v.xxviii-p28"></span> In the *Fr.* the following paragraphs
are omitted.

<span id="fn_268"></span>[269](cc03053.htm#fr_268) <span
id="v.xxviii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxviii-p35"></span> “Les phantomes ou tritons.” — *Fr.* “De
Panicis terroribus prudentissima doctrina proponitur: Natura enim rerum
omnibus viventibus indidit metum, ac formidinem, vitro atque essentim
suae conservatricem, ac mala ingruentia vitantem, et depellentem:
veruntamen eadem natura modum tenere nescia est; sed timoribus
salutaribus semper vanos, et inanes admiscet, adeo ut omnia (si intus
conspici darentur) Panicis terroribus plenissima sint; praesertim
humana, quae superstitione (quae vere nihil aliud, quam Panicus terror
est) in immensum laborant: maxime temporibus duris, et trepidis, et
adversis.” — *Bacon, de Sapientia Veterum.*

<span id="fn_269"></span>[270](cc03053.htm#fr_269) <span
id="v.xxviii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxviii-p42"></span> Few historical conjectures can be more
striking than that of Dr. Hales, quoted in the Illustrated Commentary on
<span id="v.xxviii-p42.1"></span>[Jos
24:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#012)<span
id="v.xxviii-p42.1"></span>, who supposes the “arma Jovis,” by which
Virgil represents Saturn as having been driven to Italy, to have been
the hornets here spoken of, and identifies the fugitive monarch with one
of the Amorite kings, expelled before the armies of Joshua.

<span id="fn_270"></span>[271](cc03053.htm#fr_270) <span
id="v.xxviii-p48.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxviii-p49"></span> Corn. a Lapide thus explains these
boundaries, — “God here gives the boundaries of the promised land with
respect to the cardinal points; for it has the Red Sea as its southern
limit; on the west, the sea of the Palestini, or the Mediterranean,
whose shores are inhabited by the Philistines; (whence Scripture often
speaks of ‘the Sea’ to express the west;) on the east, it has the
Arabian Desert, lying between it and Egypt; and, finally, to the north
it has the River Euphrates, which is called *par excellence*
(autonomasian) the River.”

<span id="fn_271"></span>[272](cc03053.htm#fr_271) <span
id="v.xxviii-p49.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxviii-p50"></span> “Quand Dieu a establi son Eglise;” when
God established His (Church. — *Fr*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy 29:29](cc03054)
