[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc03038)  [Next](cc03040) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 3: Harmony of the Law, Part I*, tr. by John
King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.xiv"></span>

<span id="v.xiv-p1"></span>NUMBERS 15

<span id="v.xiv-p2"></span><span id="v.xiv-p2.1"></span>[Numbers
15:37-41](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#037)<span id="v.xiv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.xiv-p3"></span>**37.** And the Lord spake unto Moses,
saying,

<span id="v.xiv-p4"></span>**37.** Dixit Jehova ad Mosen, dicendo:

<span id="v.xiv-p5"></span>**38.** Speak unto the children of Israel,
and bid them that they make them fringes in the borders of their
garments, throughout their generations, and that they put upon the
fringe of the borders a ribband of blue:

<span id="v.xiv-p6"></span>**38.** Alloquere filios Israel, et dic eis
ut faciant sibi fimbrias in angulis vestimentorum suorum, per
generationes suas, et ponant in fimbria anguli filum hyacinthinum.

<span id="v.xiv-p7"></span>**39.** And it shall be unto you for a
fringe, that ye may look upon it, and remember all the commandments of
the Lord, and do them; and that ye seek not after your own heart, and
your own eyes, after which ye use to go a whoring:

<span id="v.xiv-p8"></span>**39.** Et erit vobis instar fimbriarum,
videbitisque eam, et recordabimini omnium praeceptorum Jehovae, ut
faciatis ea: et non aspicietis post cor vestrum, et oculos vestros, post
quos vos fornicamini.

<span id="v.xiv-p9"></span>**40.** That ye may remember, and do all my
commandments, and be holy unto your God.

<span id="v.xiv-p10"></span>**40.** Ut recordemini, *inquam,* et
faciatis omnia praecepta, et sitis sancti Deo vestro.

<span id="v.xiv-p11"></span>**41.** I *am* the Lord your God, which
brought you out of the land of Egypt, to be your God: I *am* the Lord
your God.

<span id="v.xiv-p12"></span>**41.** Ego Jehova Deus vester, qui eduxi
vos e terra Aegypti, ut essem vobis in Deum: ego, *inquam,* Jehova Dens
rester.

<span id="v.xiv-p13"></span>exodus 23

<span id="v.xiv-p14"></span>exodus 23:13

<span id="v.xiv-p15"></span>**13.** And in all *things* that I have said
unto you be circumspect: and make no mention of the name of other gods,
neither let it be heard out of thy mouth.

<span id="v.xiv-p16"></span>**13.** In omnibus quae praecepi vobis,
cauti eritis.

<span id="v.xiv-p17"></span><span id="v.xiv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="v.xiv-p18"></span>**38** *Speak unto the children of Israel.*
A little farther on I will explain the object of this precept more
fully: although it is plain from the next verse that God had no other
object but to exercise the Jews in constant meditation upon the Law. For
there was no religion contained in the fringes themselves, nor had that
material texture any value in itself; but since men are lazy and
forgetful in the cultivation of piety, God would by this aid make a
provision for their infirmity. For when He says that they should “look
upon it and remember,” He hints that they have need of these coarse
rudiments, which may strike even their outward senses; and again, that,
unless their memory was kept awake, nothing was more likely than that
forgetfulness should steal upon them. But he presently adds, that God
has no satisfaction in mere empty knowledge, but that He demands serious
affections and practical performance. In the latter part of the verse he
points out another requirement, viz., not only that their sluggishness
should be stimulated, but also their wantonness restrained; for when he
says “that ye seek not after your own heart,” he intimates that, unless
God should restrain their wandering senses, they would be too much
inclined to all kinds of superstitions and errors. And, first of all, by
contrasting “the hearts and eyes” of men with His Law, he shews that He
would have His people contented with that one rule which He prescribes,
without the admixture of any of their own imaginations; and again, He
denounces the vanity of whatever men invent for themselves, and however
pleasing any human scheme may appear to them, He still repudiates and
condemns it. And this is still more clearly expressed in the last word,
when he says that men “go a whoring” whenever they are governed by their
own counsels. This declaration is deserving of our especial observation,
for whilst they have much self-satisfaction who worship God according to
their own will, and whilst they account their zeal to be very good and
very right, they do nothing else but pollute themselves by spiritual
adultery. For what by the world is considered to be the holiest
devotion, God with his own mouth pronounces to be fornication. By the
word “eyes” he unquestionably means man’s power of discernment.

<span id="v.xiv-p19"></span><span id="v.xiv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="v.xiv-p20"></span>**41** *I am the Lord your God.* Having at
the end of the last verse commanded them to be holy unto their God, he
now confirms this command by a reason, viz., that it was for this end
that God redeemed them, that he might be their God, *i.e.,* that He
might be solemnly honored. He asserts God’s right, then, as founded upon
the blessing of their deliverance, which would have been misplaced
unless they devoted themselves to His service. The repetition at the
conclusion is intended for confirmation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy 6:6-9](cc03040)
