[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc03046)  [Next](cc03048) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 3: Harmony of the Law, Part I*, tr. by John
King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.xxii"></span>

<span id="v.xxii-p1"></span><span id="v.xxii-p1.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
11](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#000)<span id="v.xxii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxii-p2"></span><span id="v.xxii-p2.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
11:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#001)<span id="v.xxii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxii-p3"></span>**1.** Therefore thou shalt love the Lord
thy God— and keep his charge— and his statutes— and his judgments— and
his commandments— alway.

<span id="v.xxii-p4"></span>**1.** Dilige igitur Jehovam Deum tuum— et
custodi custodiam ejus— et statuta ejus— et judicia ejus— et praecepta
ejus omnibus diebus.

<span id="v.xxii-p5"></span>**2.** And know ye this day: for *I* *speak*
not with your children which have not known— and which have not seen the
chastisement of the Lord your God— his greatness— his mighty hand— and
his stretched-out arm—

<span id="v.xxii-p6"></span>**2.** Et scitote hodie— non enim cure
filiis vestris loquor— qui non noverunt— neque viderunt eruditionem
Jehovae Dei vestri— magnitudinem ejus— manum ejus validam— et brachium
ejus extentum—

<span id="v.xxii-p7"></span>**3.** And his miracles— and his acts— which
he did in the midst of Egypt unto Pharaoh the king of Egypt— and unto
all his land;

<span id="v.xxii-p8"></span>**3.** Et signa ejus— et opera ejus quae
fecit in medio Aegypti— ipsi Pharaoni regi Aegypti— et universae terrae
ejus.

<span id="v.xxii-p9"></span>**4.** And what he did unto the army of
Egypt— unto their horses— and to their chariots: how he made the water
of the Red sea to overflow them— as they pursued after you— and *how*
the Lord hath destroyed them unto this day;

<span id="v.xxii-p10"></span>**4.** Et quae fecit exercitui Aegyptiorum—
equis ejus et curribus ejus: qui inundare fecit aquas maris rubri super
fades eorum— dum vos persequerentur: et perdidit eos Jehova usque in
hanc diem.

<span id="v.xxii-p11"></span>**5.** And what he did unto you in the
wilderness— until ye came into this place;

<span id="v.xxii-p12"></span>**5.** Quae praeterea fecit vobis in
deserto donec veniretis usque ad locum istum.

<span id="v.xxii-p13"></span>**6.** And what he did unto Dathan and
Abiram— the sons of Eliab— the son of Reuben: how the earth opened her
mouth— and swallowed them up— and their households— and their tents— and
all the substance that *was* in their possession— in the midst of all
Israel.

<span id="v.xxii-p14"></span>**6.** Et quae fecit Datham et Abiram
filiis Eliab filii Ruben— quando aperuit terra os suum— deglutivit eos—
domosque eorum ac tabernacula eorum— atque universam substantiam quae
erat in pedibus eorum— in medio totius Israelis.

<span id="v.xxii-p15"></span>**7.** But your eyes have seen all the
great acts of the Lord which he did.

<span id="v.xxii-p16"></span>**7.** Quandoquidem oculi vestri viderunt
omnia opera Jehovae magna quae fecit.

<span id="v.xxii-p17"></span><span id="v.xxii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxii-p18"></span>**1.** *Therefore thou shalt love the Lord
thy God.* <span id="v.xxii-p18.1"></span>The whole address has this
scope, that the people should testify their gratitude by their
obedience, and thus being allured by God’s bounties, should reverently
embrace His Law. On this account also, he requires them to love God,
before he exhorts them to obey the Law itself. For, although he might
have imperiously and menacingly commanded them, he preferred to lead
them gently to obedience, by setting before them the sweetness of His
grace. In sum, he exhorts them that, being invited by God’s love, they
should love him in return. Meanwhile, it is well to observe that free
affection is the foundation and beginning of duly obeying the Law, for
what is drawn forth by constraint, or servile fear, cannot please God.
He designates the precepts of the Law by various names, in order that
they may zealously and attentively apply themselves to listen to God,
who has omitted nothing calculated to regulate their life; for, by this
variety of words, he signifies that God had familiarly and perfectly
taught whatever was required. As to the three latter words, “his
statutes, and judgments, and commandments,” <span
id="v.xxii-p18.2"></span>what I have observed in Genesis and in the
Psalms may be referred to. The word <span
id="v.xxii-p18.3"></span>משמות<span id="v.xxii-p18.4"></span>,  <span
id="fr_253"></span>[254](#fn_253) *meshamroth,* <span
id="v.xxii-p19.5"></span>or guards, *(custodiae,)* <span
id="v.xxii-p19.6"></span>which here stands first, is spoken in
commendation of the Law on this ground, that it fences in our life, as
it were, with rails, lest it should be exposed to errors on the right
hand and on the left,. At the end of the verse he exhorts them to
perseverance, because it was not allowable for the recollection <span
id="v.xxii-p19.7"></span>of their deliverance ever to cease.

<span id="v.xxii-p20"></span><span id="v.xxii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxii-p21"></span>**2.** *And know ye this day.*<span
id="v.xxii-p21.1"></span> He again confirms the preceding sentence;
because they <span id="v.xxii-p21.2"></span>had been more than
sufficiently taught by the illustrious acts of God, how great was His
power and how remarkable His mercy toward themselves. Two meanings may
be given to the words; for some connect them thus, “Know <span
id="v.xxii-p21.3"></span>ye this day the chastisement of the Lord,” and
include in a parenthesis the clause, “for I speak not with your
children, which have not known, and have not seen;” <span
id="v.xxii-p21.4"></span>but others read the word of exhortation “know
ye” separately, and  <span id="fr_254"></span>[255](#fn_254) <span
id="v.xxii-p22.1"></span> without any connection. The latter view
pleases me best; although it little affects the substance of the matter
which exposition we follow. For Moses admonishes them, that, if they
only pay attention to the works of God, His glory, which may instruct
them to fear Him, may be clearly beheld in them. In order, however, to
urge them more vehemently, he adds, that he does not speak to posterity,
to which the fame of these miracles would reach, but that he addresses
eye-witnesses, who need no proof of them, having been assured of them by
certain experience. He celebrates in many expressions of eulogy these
miracles, whereby God had testified to them His power and goodness, lest
they should lightly pass by what was worthy of their most earnest
attention, and constant meditation. I forbear now to speak of other
points, which I have elsewhere commented on. The word <span
id="v.xxii-p22.2"></span>מוסר  <span id="fr_255"></span>[256](#fn_255)
*musar,* <span id="v.xxii-p23.7"></span>which stands first, is general,
and extends to all the specific terms that follow; some, therefore,
improperly render it “chastisement.” Where it is said at the end of
verse 4, that the Egyptians were “destroyed <span
id="v.xxii-p23.8"></span>unto that day,” <span
id="v.xxii-p23.9"></span>we must understand that the effects of the
slaughter, wherewith God destroyed them, were felt as if still present.

<span id="v.xxii-p24"></span><span id="v.xxii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxii-p25"></span>**5.** *And what he did unto you.* These
things will be spoken of in their proper place in the regular course of
the history, from which my method of teaching has compelled me to wander
a little. For Moses, to heighten the authority of the Law, sets before
them compendiously the circumstances which had occurred in the desert,
partly in order that God’s judgments might alarm them by their severity,
and partly that His mercies might draw their minds towards Him by their
graciousness. Finally, he concludes by saying that he does not speak of
unknown things, but that he merely recalled to their recollection the
works of God whereof they had been themselves spectators.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_253"></span>[254](cc03047.htm#fr_253) <span
id="v.xxii-p18.5"></span>

<span id="v.xxii-p19"></span> <span id="v.xxii-p19.1"></span>משמרת*. A.
V., charge.* <span id="v.xxii-p19.2"></span>The LXX. keeps closest to
the Hebrew idiom, <span id="v.xxii-p19.3"></span>φυλάξη τὰ φυλάγματα
ἄυτου<span id="v.xxii-p19.4"></span>. — W.

<span id="fn_254"></span>[255](cc03047.htm#fr_254) <span
id="v.xxii-p21.5"></span>

<span id="v.xxii-p22"></span> Tellement que tont le reste va son train.
— *Fr*.

<span id="fn_255"></span>[256](cc03047.htm#fr_255) <span
id="v.xxii-p22.3"></span>

<span id="v.xxii-p23"></span> <span id="v.xxii-p23.2"></span>מוסר
*S.M.*<span id="v.xxii-p23.3"></span> has rendered this word
*castigatio. V*<span id="v.xxii-p23.4"></span>., disciplina. The root is
<span id="v.xxii-p23.5"></span>יסר<span id="v.xxii-p23.6"></span>; and
both the root and noun meaning to correct and correction, will sometimes
mean to chastise, etc. — *W*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy 8:1-6; 11:8,9](cc03048)
