[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc03026)  [Next](cc03028) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 3: Harmony of the Law, Part I*, tr. by John
King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.ii"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p1"></span><span id="v.ii-p1.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
5](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#000)<span id="v.ii-p1.1"></span><span
id="v.ii-p1.2"></span>[Deuteronomy
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#020)<span id="v.ii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p2"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p3"></span><span id="v.ii-p3.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
5:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#001)<span id="v.ii-p3.1"></span>,
<span id="v.ii-p3.2"></span>[Deuteronomy
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#020)<span id="v.ii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p4"></span>**1.** And Moses called all Israel, and said
unto them, Hear, O Israel, the statutes and judgments which I speak in
your ears this day, that ye may learn them, and keep and do them.

<span id="v.ii-p5"></span>**1.** Vocavitque Moses universum Israelem, et
dixit eis, Audi Israel statuta et judicia, quae ego hodie loquor in
auribus vestris, ut discatis ea et custodiatis ad praestandum.

<span id="v.ii-p6"></span>**2.** The Lord our God made a covenant with
us in Horeb.

<span id="v.ii-p7"></span>**2.** Jehova Deus noster percussit nobiscum
foedus in Horeb.

<span id="v.ii-p8"></span>**3.** The Lord made not this covenant with
our fathers, but with us, even us, who are all of us here alive this
day.

<span id="v.ii-p9"></span>**3.** Non cum patribus nostris percussit Deus
foedus hoc, sed nobiscum, qui ipsi hodie omnes vivimus.

<span id="v.ii-p10"></span>**4.** The Lord talked with you face to face
in the mount, out of the midst of the fire,

<span id="v.ii-p11"></span>**4.** Facie ad faciem loquutus est Jehova
nobiscum in monte:

<span id="v.ii-p12"></span>**5.** (I stood between the Lord and you at
that time, to show you the word of the Lord; for ye were afraid by
reason of the fire, and went not up into the mount,) saying,

<span id="v.ii-p13"></span>**5.** (Ego stabam inter Jehovam et inter vos
tempore illo ad annuntiandum vobis sermonem Jehovae: quia timuistis a
facie ignis, et non ascendistis in montem:) dicendo,

<span id="v.ii-p14"></span>**6.** I am the Lord thy God, which brought
thee out of the land of Egypt, from the house of bondage.

<span id="v.ii-p15"></span>**6.** Ego Jehova Deus tuus qui eduxi te e
terra Aegypti, e domo servorum.

<span id="v.ii-p16"></span>**20.** But the Lord hath taken you, and
brought you forth out of the iron furnace, even out of Egypt, to be unto
him a people of inheritance, as. ye are this day.

<span id="v.ii-p17"></span>**20.** Vos autem tulit Jehova, et eduxit vos
e fornace ferrea ex AEgypto, ut sitis ei in populum haereditatis, sicut
die hac.

<span id="v.ii-p18"></span><span id="v.ii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p19"></span>**1.** *And Moses called all Israel.* Since
the plan and order of exposition which I have adopted required that this
same preface, as it is repeated word. for word in Deuteronomy, should
here also be read together, I have thought fit also to insert the five
verses, which in this place precede it. In the first verse, Moses
exhorts the people to hear the judgments and statutes of God, which he
sets before them. He likewise states the object of this, that they
should keep  <span id="fr_221"></span>[222](#fn_221) to do them; as much
as to say, that he was not offering them mere empty speculations, which
it was enough to understand with the mind, and to talk about, but that
the rule for the ordering of their lives was also contained in his
teaching; and, therefore, that it demands imperatively their serious
meditation.

<span id="v.ii-p21"></span><span id="v.ii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p22"></span>**2.** *The Lord our God.* In these words he
commends the Law; because it must be accounted a peculiar blessing, and
a very high honor to be taken into covenant by God. Wherefore, that they
may anxiously prepare themselves to embrace the Law, he says that what
was above all things to be desired had been freely offered to them,
viz., that they should be united in covenant with God. In the next verse
he still further magnifies this advantage by comparison; because God had
given more to them than to their fathers. Thence is all excuse taken
from them, unless, for the sake of manifesting their gratitude, they
give themselves up entirely to God, and in return worship with sincere
affection Him whom they have experienced to be so bountiful a Father.
Those who would paraphrase this sentence, “Not only with our fathers,
but also with us,” pervert its proper meaning; the grounds of their
mistake being, that God had formerly made a covenant with Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob. But this may be easily refuted; because the name of
“fathers” does not refer to these, but he means by it such as had died
in Egypt during the last 200 years; to whose case he justly prefers that
of the surviving people, with whom the ancient covenant had been
renewed. Now, this reference to time was in no slight degree calculated
to stimulate and arouse them to obedience; for it would have been
disgraceful in them not to acknowledge that they were honored more than
their fathers by this especial privilege, in order that they should
excel them in their earnest zeal for God’s service. Christ uses the same
argument with His disciples, Blessed are the eyes which see the things
that ye see: and the ears which hear the things that ye hear, etc.,
 <span id="fr_222"></span>[223](#fn_222) (<span
id="v.ii-p23.1"></span>[Mt 13:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#016)<span
id="v.ii-p23.1"></span>, and <span id="v.ii-p23.2"></span>[Lu
10:23](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#023)<span id="v.ii-p23.2"></span>,)
“many Prophets and kings have desired,” etc. The sum is, that the more
bountifully God deals with us, the more heinous and intolerable is the
crime of ingratitude, unless we willingly come to Him when He calls us,
and submit ourselves to His instruction.

<span id="v.ii-p24"></span><span id="v.ii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p25"></span>**4.** *Face to face.* Again he commends the
Law by mentioning their certainty about it; for, when God openly
manifested Himself, there could be no doubt of the author from whom it
proceeded. To speak “face to face,” is equivalent to discoursing openly
and familiarly; and in point of fact God had spoken with them, as
mortals and friends communicate with each other in their mutual
dealings. Moreover, lest any doubt should still remain, God set before
their eyes a visible manifestation of His glory, by appearing in the
fire; for no other voice but that of God Himself could proceed out of
fire. In the next verse a kind of explanation is added, when he says
that he was the interpreter, who laid before them the commands he
received from God. And thus he reconciles two things which seem at first
sight to be contradictory, viz., that God spoke in person, and yet by a
mediator; since they themselves having heard God’s voice petitioned in
their fear that He should not continue to speak in the same way. Hence
it follows that they were convinced, by a sense of the divine glory and
majesty, that it was not allowable for them to doubt the authority of
the law. But I only slightly glance at this, because it has been more
fully treated of before.

<span id="v.ii-p26"></span>**<span id="v.ii-p26.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#020)<span id="v.ii-p26.1"></span>.**
*But the Lord hath taken you.* He argues that, from the period of their
deliverance, they have been wholly devoted to God, since He has
purchased them for His own peculiar possession. Hence it follows that
they are under His jurisdiction and dominion; because it would be foul
and wicked ingratitude in them to shake off the yoke of their redeemer.
And, in order to strengthen the obligation, he extols the greatness of
the favor, because nothing could be more wretched than they were, when
God stretched forth His hand to deliver them. Their bondage is therefore
called metaphorically, a “furnace,” nay, an “iron” one; and, then, their
present far different condition is compared with it; for this was solid
and most desirable happiness, that they should be translated into God’s
peculiar inheritance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_221"></span>[222](cc03027.htm#fr_221) <span
id="v.ii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p20"></span> So in margin *A.V.*

<span id="fn_222"></span>[223](cc03027.htm#fr_222) <span
id="v.ii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p23"></span> The quotation here appears to have been made
from memory.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus 19:36,37; 20:8](cc03028)
