[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc03050)  [Next](cc03052) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 3: Harmony of the Law, Part I*, tr. by John
King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.xxvi"></span>

<span id="v.xxvi-p1"></span><span id="v.xxvi-p1.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
6](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#000)<span id="v.xxvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxvi-p2"></span><span id="v.xxvi-p2.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
6:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#001)<span id="v.xxvi-p2.1"></span>,
17-19

<span id="v.xxvi-p3"></span>**1.** Now these *are* the commandments, the
statutes, and the judgments, which the Lord your God commanded to teach
you, that ye might do *them* in the land whither ye go to possess it;

<span id="v.xxvi-p4"></span>**1.** Istud autem est praeceptum, statuta
et judicia quae praecepit Jehova Deus vester ut docerem vos, ut faciatis
illa in terra ad quam vos transitis ut possideatis:

<span id="v.xxvi-p5"></span>**2.** That thou mightest fear the Lord thy
God, to keep all his statutes, and his commandments, which I command
thee; thou, and thy son, and thy son’s son, all the days of thy life,
and that thy days may be prolonged.

<span id="v.xxvi-p6"></span>**2.** Ut timeas Jehovam Deum tuum,
custodiendo omnia statuta ejus et praecepta ejus, quae ego praecipio
tibi, tu et filius tuus, et filius tilii tui, omnibus diebus vitae tuae:
et ut prolongentur dies tui.

<span id="v.xxvi-p7"></span>**3.** Hear therefore, O Israel, and observe
to do *it;* that it may be well with thee, and that ye may increase
mightily, as the Lord God of thy fathers hath promised thee, in the land
that floweth with milk and honey.

<span id="v.xxvi-p8"></span>**3.** Audias ergo o Israel, et custodias ut
facias, ut bene tibi sit, utque multiplicemini valde, quemadmodum dixit
Jehova Deus patrum tuorum tibi in terra, quae fluit lacte et melee.

<span id="v.xxvi-p9"></span>**17.** Ye shall diligently keep the
commandments of the Lord your God, and his testimonies, and his
statutes, which he hath commanded thee.

<span id="v.xxvi-p10"></span>**17.** Custodiendo custodietis praecepta
Jehovae, Dei vestri, et testimonia ejus, et statuta ejus quae praecepit
tibi.

<span id="v.xxvi-p11"></span>**18.** And thou shalt do *that which is*
right and good in the sight of the Lord; that it may be well with thee,
and that thou mayest go in and possess the good land which the Lord
sware unto thy fathers,

<span id="v.xxvi-p12"></span>**18.** Faciesque quod rectum et bonum est
in oculis Jehovae, ut bene sit tibi, et ingrediaris possideasque terram
bonam, quam juravit Jehova patribus tuis.

<span id="v.xxvi-p13"></span>**19.** To cast out all thine enemies from
before thee, as the Lord hath spoken.

<span id="v.xxvi-p14"></span>**19.** Ut expellat omnes hostes tuos a
facie tua, sieur loquutus est Jehova.

<span id="v.xxvi-p15"></span><span id="v.xxvi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxvi-p16"></span>**1.** *Now these are the commandments.* In
these three verses he repeats what we have already seen in many previous
passages; since God deals so liberally with the Israelites, they would
be too perverse, unless such great kindness should allure them to love
the law. We must remember too what I have already touched on, that,
although I have postponed to another place the promises, whereby Moses
urged the people to endeavor to keep the Law, still I have designedly
put before my exposition of the Law those passages, in which, by setting
the promised land as it were before the people’s eyes, he prepares their
minds for submission, and renders the rule of so bountiful a Father
pleasant and delightful. Since, then, they were appointed to inherit the
land, Moses, when he invites them to its enjoyment, commands them gladly
to embrace the doctrine, for the sake of which they were adopted; and to
devote themselves, on their side, to obedience to God, by whose
gratuitous goodness they had been prevented. As in chapters 8 and 11 he
praised the richness of the land, so does he now confirm the same
statement; or rather afterwards more fully explains what he slightly
touches upon here. They all agree in this, that the happy state of life
which was before their eyes ought to awaken the people’s gratitude, lest
such notable beneficence should be expended on them in vain. Moses
therefore declares, that he had presented to them laws and statutes, by
which they might be instructed in the fear of God; at the same time, he
reminds them how base in them it would be not to be ravished to the love
of God and of His law by the delightfulness and abundance of the land. I
pass over what I have already explained, viz., that he taught nothing of
himself, but was the faithful interpreter of God; and also that he
commands the doctrine to be handed down to their posterity, so that it
may never be lost. Whence it appears how difficult it is for men to be
duly prepared for keeping the law, since God does not in vain so often
stimulate their indolence; for there is a silent reproof conveyed either
of their indolence or instability, when God does not cease to insist on
what it would have been sufficient to have pointed out in a single word.
We must also remark the definition of righteousness, that they should
*do what is right in the sight of the Lord;* in opposition to the reason
and judgment of the flesh.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy 8:11-18](cc03052)
