<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dlms08)  [Next](dlms10.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Dore Lectures on Mental Science*, by Thomas Troward, \[1909\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f07"></span>

THE GREAT AFFIRMATIVE.

The Great Affirmative appears in two modes, the cosmic and the
individual. In its essence it is the same in both, but in each it works
from a different standpoint. It is always the principle of Being—that
which is, as distinguished from that which is not; but to grasp the true
significance of this saying we must understand what is meant by "that
which is not." It is something more than mere non-existence, for
obviously we should not trouble ourselves about what is non-existent. It
is that which bath is and is not at the same time, and the thing that
answers to this description is "Conditions." The little affirmative is
that which affirms particular conditions as all that it can grasp, while
the great affirmative grasps a wider conception, the conception of that
which gives rise to conditions. Cosmically it is that power of Spirit
which sends forth the whole creation as its expression of itself, and it
is for this reason that I have drawn attention in the preceding lectures
to the idea of the creation ex nihilo of the whole visible universe. As
Eastern and Western Scriptures alike tell us it is the breathing-forth
of Original Spirit; and if you have followed what I have said regarding
the reproduction of this Spirit in the individual—that by the very
nature of the creative process the human mind must be of the same
quality with the Divine Mind—then we find that a second mode of the
Originating Spirit becomes possible, namely that of operation through
the individual mind. But whether acting cosmically or personally it is
always the same Spirit and therefore cannot lose its inherent character
which is-that of the Power which creates ex nihilo. It is the direct
contradiction of the maxim "ex nihilo nihil fit"—nothing can be made out
of nothing; and it is the recognition of the presence in ourselves of
this power, which can make something out of nothing, that is the key to
our further progress. As the logical outcome of the cosmic creative
process, the evolutionary work reaches a point where the Originating
Power creates an image of itself; and thus affords a fresh point of
departure from which it can work specifically, just as in the cosmic
process it works generically. From this new standpoint it does not in
any way contradict the laws of the cosmic order, but proceeds to
specialize them, and thus to bring out results through the individual
which could not be otherwise attained.

Now the Spirit does this by the same method as  in the Original
Creation, namely by creating em nihilo; for otherwise it would be bound
by the limitations necessarily inherent in the cosmic form of things,
and so no fresh creative starting point would have been attained. This
is why the Bible lays such stress on the principle of Monogenesis, or
creation from a single power instead of from a pair or syzegy; and it is
on this account that we are told that this One-ness of God is the
foundation of all the commandments, and that the "Son of God" is
declared to be "monogenes" or one-begotten, for that is the correct
translation of the Greek word. The immense importance of this principle
of creation from a single power will become apparent as we realize more
fully the results proceeding from the assumption of the opposite
principle, or the dualism of the creative power; but as the discussion
of this great subject would require a volume to itself, I must, at
present, content myself with saying that this insistence of the Bible
upon the singleness of the Creative Power is based upon a knowledge
which goes to the very root of esoteric principles, and is therefore not
to be set aside in favour of dualistic systems, though superficially the
latter may appear more consonant to reason.

If, then, it is possible to put the Great Affirmation into words it is
that God is ONE and that this ONE finds centre in ourselves; and if the
full meaning of this statement is realized, the logical result will be
found to be a new creation both in and from ourselves. We shall realize
in ourselves the working of a new principle whose distinguishing feature
is its simplicity. It is ONE-ness and is not troubled about any second.
Hence what it contemplates is not how its action will be modified by
that of some second principle, something which will compel it to work in
a particular manner and so limit it; but what it contemplates is its own
Unity. Then it perceives that its Unity consists in a greater and a
lesser movement, just as the rotation of the earth on its axis does not
interfere with its rotation round the sun but are both motions of the
same unit, and are definitely related to each other. In like manner we
find that the Spirit is moving simultaneously in the macrocosm of the
universe and in the microcosm of the individual, and the two movements
harmonize because they are that of the same Spirit, and the latter is
included in the former and pre-supposes it. The Great Affirmation,
therefore, is the perception that the "I AM" is ONE, always harmonious
with itself, and including all things in this harmony for the simple
reason that there is no second creative power; and when the individual
realizes that this always-single power is the root of his own being, and
therefore has centre in himself and finds expression through him, he
learns to trust its singleness and the consequent harmony of its action
in him with what it is doing AROUND him. Then he sees that the
affirmation "I and my Father are ONE" is a necessary deduction from a
correct apprehension of the fundamental principles of being; and then,
on the principle that the less must be included in the greater, he
desires that harmonious unity of action be maintained by the adaptation
of his own particular movement to the larger movement of the Spirit
working as the Creative Principle through the great whole. In this way
we become centres through which the creative  forces find specialization
by the development of that personal factor on which the specific
application  of general laws must always depend. A specific sort of 
individuality is formed, capable of being the link between  the great
Spiritual Power of the universal and the manifestation of the relative
in time and space because it consciously partakes of both; and because
the individual of this class recognizes the singleness of the Spirit as
the starting  point of all things, he endeavours to withdraw his mind
from all arguments derived from external conditions, whether past or
present, and to fix it upon the forward movement of the Spirit which he
knows to be always identical both in the universe and in himself. He
ceases the attempt to dictate to the Spirit, because he does not see in
it a mere blind force, but reveres it as the Supreme Intelligence: and
on the other hand he does not grovel before it in doubt and fear,
because he knows it is one with himself and is realizing itself through
him, and therefore cannot have any purpose antagonistic to his own
individual welfare. Realizing this he deliberately places his thoughts
under the guidance of the Divine Spirit, knowing that his outward acts
and conditions must thereby be brought into harmony with the great
forward movement of the Spirit, not only at the stage he has now
reached, but at all future stages. He does not at all deny the power of
his own thought as the creative agent in his own personal world,—on the
contrary it is precisely on the knowledge of this fact that his
perception of the true adjustment between the principles of Life is
based; but for this very reason he is the more solicitous to be led by
that Wisdom which can see what he cannot see, so that his personal
control over the conditions of his own life may be employed to its
continual increase and development.

In this way our affirmation of the "I am" ceases to be the petulant
assertion of our limited personality and becomes the affirmation that
the Great I AM affirms its own I AM-ness both in us and through us, and
thus our use of the words becomes in very truth the Great Affirmative,
or that which is the root of all being as distinguished from that which
has no being in itself but is merely externalized by being as the
vehicle for its expression. We shall realize our true place as
subordinate creative centres, perfectly independent of existing
conditions because the creative process is that of monogenesis and
requires no other factor than the Spirit for its exercise, but at the
same time subordinate to the Divine Spirit in the greatness of its
inherent forward movement because there is only ONE Spirit and it cannot
from one centre antagonize what it is doing from another. Thus the Great
Affirmation makes us children of the Great King, at once living in
obedience to that Power which is above us, and exercising this same
power over all that world of secondary causation which is below us.

Thus in our measure and station each one of us will receive the mission
of the I AM.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Christ the Fulfilling of the Law](dlms10.md)

</div>
