<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dlms06)  [Next](dlms08) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Dore Lectures on Mental Science*, by Thomas Troward, \[1909\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f05"></span>

ALPHA AND OMEGA.

Alpha and Omega, the First and the Last. What does this mean? It means
the entire series of causation from the first originating movement to
the final and completed result. We may take this on any scale from the
creation of a cosmos to the creation of a lady's robe. Everything has
its origin in an idea, a thought; and it has its completion in the
manifestation of that thought in form. Many intermediate stages are
necessary, but the Alpha and Omega of the series are the thought and the
thing. This shows us that in essence the thing already existed in the
thought. Omega is already potential in Alpha, just as in the Pythagorean
system all numbers are said to proceed from unity and to be resolvable
back again into it. Now it is this general principle of the already
existence of the thing in the thought that we have to lay hold of, and
as we find it true in an architect's design of the house that is to be,
so we find it true in the great work of the Architect of the Universe.
When we see this we have realized a general principle, which we find at
work everywhere. That is the meaning of a general principle: it can be
applied to any sort of subject; and the use of studying general
principles is to give them particular application to anything we may
have to deal with. Now what we have to deal with most of all is
ourselves, and so we come to the consideration of Alpha and Omega in the
human being. In the vision of St. John, the speaker of the words, "I am
Alpha and Omega, the First and the Last," is described as "Like unto a
son of man"—that is, however transcendent the appearance in the vision,
it is essentially human, and thus suggests to us the presence of the
universal principle at the human level. But the figure in the
apocalyptic vision is not that of man as we ordinarily know him. It is
that of Omega as it subsists enshrined in Alpha: it is the ideal of
humanity as it subsists in the Divine Mind which was manifested in
objective form to the eyes of the seer, and therefore presented the
Alpha and Omega of that idea in all the majesty of Divine glory.

But if we grasp the truth that the thing is already existent in the
thought, do we not see that this transcendent Omega must be already
existent in the Divine ideal of every one of us? If on the plane of the
absolute time is not, then does it not follow that this glorified
humanity is a present fact in the Divine Mind? And if this is so, then
this fact is eternally true regarding every human being. But if it is
true that the thing exists in the thought, it is equally true that the
thought finds form in the thing; and since things exist under the
relative conditions of time and space, they are necessarily subject to a
law of Growth, so that while the subsistence of the thing in the thought
is perfect ab initio, the expression of the thought in the thing is a
matter of gradual development. This is a point which we must never lose
sight of in our studies; and we must never lose sight of the perfection
of the thing in the thought because we do not yet see the perfection of
the thought in the thing. Therefore we must remember that man, as we
know him now, has by no means reached the ultimate of his evolution. We
are only yet in the making, but we have now reached a point where we can
facilitate the evolutionary process by conscious co-operation with the
Creative Spirit. Our share in this work commences with the recognition
of the Divine ideal of man, and thus finding the pattern by which we are
to be guided. For since the person to be created after this pattern is
ourself, it follows that, by whatever processes the Divine ideal
transforms itself into concrete reality, the place where those processes
are to work must be within ourselves; in other words, the creative
action of the Spirit takes place through the laws of our own mentality.
If it is a true maxim that the thing must take form in the thought
before the thought can take form in the thing, then it is plain that the
Divine Ideal can only be externalized in our objective life in
proportion as it is first formed in our thought; and it takes form in
our thought only to the extent to which we apprehend its existence in
the Divine Mind. By the nature of the relation between the individual
mind and the Universal Mind it is strictly a case of reflection; and in
proportion as the mirror of our own mind blurs or clearly reflects the
image of the Divine ideal, so will it give rise to a correspondingly
feeble or vigorous reproduction of it in our external life.

This being the rationale of the matter, why should we limit our
conception of the Divine ideal of ourselves? Why should we say, "I am
too mean a creature ever to reflect so glorious an image"—or "God never
intended such a limitless ideal to be reproduced in human beings." In
saying such things we expose our ignorance of the whole Law of the
Creative Process. We shut our eyes to the fact that the Omega of
completion already subsists in the Alpha of conception, and that the
Alpha of conception would be nothing but a lying illusion if it was not
capable of expression in the Omega of completion. The creative process
in us is that we become the individual reflection of what we realize God
to be relatively to ourselves, and therefore if we realize the Divine
Spirit as the INFINITE potential of all that can constitute a perfected
human being, this conception must, by the Law of the Creative Process,
gradually build up a corresponding image in our mind, which in turn will
act upon our external conditions.

This, by the laws of mind, is the nature of the process and it shows us
what St. Paul means when he speaks of Christ being formed in us (Gal.
iv. 19) and what in another place he calls being renewed in knowledge
after the image of Him that created us (Col. iii. 10). It is a
thoroughly logical sequence of cause and effect, and what we require is
to see more clearly the Law of this sequence and use it
intelligently—that is why St. Paul says it is being "renewed in
knowledge": it is a New Knowledge, the recognition of principles which
we had not previously apprehended. Now the fact which, in our past
experience, we have not grasped is that the human mind forms a new point
of departure for the work of the Creative Spirit; and in proportion as
we see this more and more clearly, the more we shall find ourselves
entering into a new order of life in which we become less and less
subject to the old limitations. This is not a reward arbitrarily
bestowed upon us for holding dogmatically to certain mere verbal
statements, but it is the natural result of understanding the supreme
law of our own being. On its own plane it is as purely scientific as the
law of chemical reaction; only here we are not dealing with the
interaction of secondary causes but with the Self-originating action of
Spirit. Hence a new force has to be taken into account which does not
occur in physical science, the power of Feeling. Thought creates form,
but it is feeling that gives vitality to thought. Thought without
feeling may be constructive as in some great engineering work, but it
can never be creative as in the work of the artist or musician; and that
which originates within itself a new order of causation is, so far as
all pre-existing forms are concerned, a creation ex nihilo, and is
therefore Thought expressive of Feeling. It is this indissoluble union
of Thought and Feeling that distinguishes creative thought from merely
analytical thought and places it in a different category; and therefore
if we are to afford a new starting-point for carrying on the work of
creation it must be by assimilating the feeling of the Originating
Spirit as part and parcel of its thought—it is that entering into the
Mind of the Spirit of which I spoke in the first address.

Now the images in the Mind of the Spirit must necessarily be GENERIC.
The reason for this is that by its very nature the Principle of Life
must be prolific, that is, tending to Multiplicity, and therefore the
original Thought-image must be fundamental to whole races, and not
exclusive to particular individuals. Consequently the images in the Mind
of the Spirit must be absolute types of the true essentials of the
perfect development of the race, just what Plato meant by architypal
ideas. This is the perfect subsistence of the thing in the thought.
Therefore it is that our evolution as centres of CREATIVE activity, the
exponents of new laws, and through them of new conditions, depends on
our realizing in the Divine Mind the architype of mental perfection, at
once as thought and feeling. But when we find all this in the Divine
Mind, do we not meet with an infinite and glorious Personality? There is
nothing lacking of all that we can understand by Personality, excepting
outward form; and since the very essence of telepathy is that it
dispenses with the physical presence, we find ourselves in a position of
interior communion with a Personality at once Divine and Human. This is
that Personality of the Spirit which St. John saw in the apocalyptic
vision, and which by the very conditions of the case is the Alpha and
Omega of Humanity.

But, as I have said, it is simply GENERIC in itself, and it becomes
active and specific only by a purely personal relation to the
individual. But once more we must realize that nothing can take place
except according to Law, and therefore this specific relation is nothing
arbitrary, but arises out of the generic Law applied under specific
conditions. And since what makes a law generic is precisely the fact
that it does not supply the specific conditions, it follows that the
conditions for the specializing of the Law must be provided by the
individual. Then it is that his recognition of the originating creative
movement, as arising from combined Thought and Feeling, becomes a
practical working asset. He realizes that there is a Heart and Mind of
the Spirit reciprocal to his own heart and mind, that he is not dealing
with a filmy abstraction, nor yet with a mere mathematical sequence, but
with something that is pulsating with a Life as warm and vivid and full
of interest as his own—nay, more so, for it is the Infinite of all that
he himself is. And his recognition goes even further than this, for
since this specialization can only take place through the individual
himself, it logically follows that the Life, which he thus specializes,
become HIS OWN life. Quoad the individual it does not know itself apart
from him. But this self-recognition through the individual cannot in any
way change the inherent nature of the Creative Spirit, and therefore to
the extent to which the individual perceives its identification with
himself, he places himself under its guidance, and so he becomes one of
those who are "led by the Spirit." Thus he begins to find the Alpha and
Omega of the Divine ideal reproduced in himself—in a very small degree
at present, but containing the principle of perpetual growth into an
infinite expansion of which we can as yet form no conception.

St. John sums up the whole of this position in his memorable
words:—"Beloved now are we the Sons of God, and it doth not yet appear
what we SHALL be; but we know that when He shall appear (i.e., become
clear to us) we shall be like Him; for (i.e., the reason of all this) we
shall see Him as He is" (I. John iii. 2).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Creative Power of Thought](dlms08)

</div>
