<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dlms10)  [Next](dlms12.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Dore Lectures on Mental Science*, by Thomas Troward, \[1909\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f09"></span>

THE STORY OF EDEN.

The whole Bible and the whole history of the world, past, present and
future, are contained in embryo in the story of Eden, for they are
nothing else than the continuous unfolding of certain great principles
which are there allegorically stated. That this is by no means a new
notion is shown by the following quotation from Origen:—"Who is there so
foolish and without common-sense as to believe that God planted trees in
the Garden of Eden like a husbandman; and planted therein the tree of
life perceptible to the eyes and to the senses, which gave life to the
eater; and another tree which gave to the eater a knowledge of good and
evil? I believe that everybody must regard these as figures under which
a recondite sense is concealed." Let us, then, follow up the suggestion
of this early Father of the Church, and enquire what may be the
"recondite sense" concealed under this figure of the two trees. On the
face of the story there are two roots, one of Life and the other of
Death, two fundamental principles bringing about diametrically opposite
results. The distinctive mark of the latter is that it is the knowledge
of good and evil, that is to say, the recognition of two antagonistic
principles, and so requiring a knowledge of the relations between them
to enable us to continually make the needful adjustments to keep
ourselves going. Now, in appearance this is exceedingly specious. It
looks so entirely reasonable that we do not see its ultimate
destructiveness; and so we are told that Eve ate the fruit because she
"saw that the tree was pleasant to the eyes." But careful consideration
will show us in what the destructive nature of this principle consists.
It is based on the fallacy that good is limited by evil, and that you
cannot receive any good except through eliminating the corresponding
evil by realizing it and beating it back. In this view life becomes a
continual combat against every imaginable form of evil, and after we
have racked our brains to devise precautions against all possible evil
happenings, there remains the chance, and much more than the chance,
that we have by no means exhausted the category of negative
possibilities, and that others may arise which no amount of foresight on
our part could have imagined. The more we see into this position the
more intolerable it becomes, because from this stand-point we can never
attain any certain basis of action, and the forces of possible evil
multiply as we contemplate them. To set forth to out-wit all evil by our
own knowledge of its nature is to attempt a task the hopelessness of
which becomes apparent when we see it in its true light.

The mistake is in supposing that Life can be generated in ourselves by
an intellectual process; but, as we have seen in the preceding lectures,
Life is the primary movement of the Spirit, whether in the cosmos or in
the individual. In its proper order intellectual knowledge is
exceedingly important and useful, but its place in the order of the
whole is not that of the Originator. It is not Life in itself, but is a
function of life; it is an effect and not the cause. The reason why this
is so is because intellectual study is always the study of the various
laws which arise from the different RELATIONS of things to one another;
and it therefore presupposes that these things together with their laws
are already in existence. Consequently it does not start from the truly
creative stand-point, that of creating something entirely new, creation
ex nihilo as distinguished from CONSTRUCTION, or the laying-together of
existing materials, which is what the word literally means. To recognize
evil as a force to be reckoned with is therefore to give up the creative
stand-point altogether. It is to quit the plane of First Cause and
descend into the realm of secondary causation and lose ourselves amid
the confusion of a multiplicity of relative causes and effects without
grasping any unifying principle behind them.

Now the only thing that can release us from the inextricable confusion
of an infinite multiplicity is the realization of an underlying unity,
and at the back of all things we find the presence of one Great
Affirmative principle without which nothing could have existence. This,
then, is the Root of Life; and if we credit it with being able, not only
to supply the power, but also the form for its manifestation we shall
see that we need not go beyond this SINGLE Power for the production of
anything. It is Spirit producing Substance out of its own essence, and
the Substance taking Form in accordance with the movement of the Spirit.
What we have to realize is, not only that this is the way in which the
cosmos is brought into existence, but also that, because the Spirit
finds a new centre in ourselves, the same process is repeated in our own
mentality, and therefore we are continually creating ex nihilo whether
we know it or not. Consequently, if we look upon evil as a force to be
reckoned with, and therefore requiring to be studied, we are in effect
creating it; while on the other hand if we realize that there is only
ONE force to be considered, and that absolutely good, we are by the law
of the creative process bringing that good into manifestation. No doubt
for this affirmative use of our creative power it is necessary that we
start from the basic conception of a SINGLE originating power which is
absolutely good and life-giving; but if there were a self-originating
power which was destructive then no creation could ever have come into
existence at all, for the positive and negative self-originating powers
would cancel each other and the result would be zero. The fact,
therefore, of our own existence is a sufficient proof of the singleness
and goodness of the Originating Power, and from this starting-point
there is no second power to be taken into consideration, and
consequently we do not have to study the evil that may arise out of
existing or future circumstances, but require to keep our minds fixed
only upon the good which we intend to create. There is a very simple
reason for this. It is that every new creation necessarily carries its
own law with it and by that law produces new conditions of its own. A
balloon affords a familiar illustration of my meaning. The balloon with
its freight weighs several hundredweight, yet the introduction of a new
factor, the gas, brings with it a law of its own which entirely alters
the conditions, and the force of gravity is so completely overcome that
the whole mass rises into the air. The Law itself is never altered, but
we have previously known it only under limiting conditions. These
conditions, however, are no part of the Law itself; and a clearer
realization of the Law shows us that it contains in itself the power of
transcending them. The law which every new creation carries with it is
therefore not a contradiction of the old law but its specialization into
a higher mode of action.

Now the ultimate Law is that of production ex nihilo by the movement of
the Spirit within itself, and all subordinate laws are merely the
measurements of the relations which spontaneously arise between
different things when they are brought into manifestation, arid
therefore, if an entirely new thing is created it must necessarily
establish entirely new relations and so produce entirely new laws. This
is the reason why, if we take the action of pure unmanifested Spirit as
our starting-point, we may confidently trust it to produce
manifestations of law which, though perfectly new from the stand-point
of our past experience, are quite as natural in their own way as any
that have gone before. It is on this account that in these addresses I
lay so much stress on the fact that Spirit creates ex nihilo, that is,
out of no pre-existing forms, but simply by its own movement within
itself. If, then, this idea is clearly grasped, it logically follows
from it that the Root of Life is not to be found in the comparison of
good and evil, but in the simple affirmation of the Spirit as the
All-creating power of Good. And since, as we have already seen, this
same all-creating Spirit finds a centre and fresh starting-point of
operation in our own minds, we can trust it to follow the Law of its own
being there as much as in the creation of the cosmos.

Only we must not forget that it is working through our own minds. It
thinks through our mind, and our mind must be made a suitable channel
for this mode of its operation by conforming itself to the broad generic
lines of the Spirit's thinking. The reason for this is one which I have
sought to impress throughout these lectures, namely, that the
specialization of a law is never the denial of it, but on the contrary
the fuller recognition of its basic principles; and if this is the case
in ordinary physical science it must be equally so when we come to
specialize the great Law of Life itself. The Spirit can never change its
essential nature as the essence of Life, Love, and Beauty; and if we
adopt these characteristics, which constitute the Law of the Spirit, as
the basis of our own thinking, and reject all that is contrary to them,
then we afford the broad generic conditions for the specialized thinking
of the Spirit through our own minds: and the thinking of the Spirit is
that INVOLUTION, or passing of spirit into form, which is the whole
being of the creative process.

The mind which is all the time being thus formed is our own. It is not a
case of control by an external individuality, but the fuller expression
of the Universal through an organized mentality which has all along been
a less perfect expression of the Universal; and therefore the process is
one of growth. We are not losing our individuality, but are coming into
fuller possession of ourselves by the conscious recognition of our
personal share in the great work of creation. We begin in some slight
measure to understand what the Bible means when it speaks of our-being
"partakers of the Divine nature" (II. Peter i. 4) and we realize the
significance of the "unity of the Spirit" (Ephesians iv. 3). Doubtless
this will imply changes in our old mode of thinking; but these changes
are not forced upon us, they are brought about naturally by the new
stand-point from which we now see things. Almost imperceptibly to
ourselves we grow into a New Order of Thought which proceeds, not from a
knowledge of good and evil, but from the Principle of Life itself. That
is what makes the difference between our old thought and our new
thought. Our old thought was based upon a comparison of limited facts:
our new thought is based upon a comprehension of principles. The
difference is like that between the mathematics of the infant, who
cannot count beyond the number of apples or marbles put before him, and
that of the senior wrangler who is not dependent upon visible objects
for his calculations, but plunges boldly into the unknown because he
knows that he is working by indubitable principles. In like manner when
we realize the infallible Principle of the Creative Law we no longer
find we need to see everything cut and dried beforehand, for if so, we
could never get beyond the range of our old experiences; but we can move
steadily forward because we know the certainty of the creative principle
by which we are working, or rather, which is working through us, and
that our life, in all its minutes" details, is its harmonious
expression. Thus the Spirit thinks through our thought only its thought
is greater than ours. It is the paradox of the less containing the
greater. Our thought will not be objectless or unintelligible to
ourselves. It will be quite clear as far as it goes. We shall know
exactly what we want to do and why we want to do it, and so will act in
a reasonable and intelligent manner. But what we do not know is the
greater thought that is all the time giving rise to our smaller thought,
and which will open out from it as our lesser thought progresses into
form. Then we gradually see the greater thought which prompted our
smaller one and we find ourselves working along its lines, guided by the
invisible hand of the Creative Spirit into continually increasing
degrees of livingness to which we need assign no limits, for it is the
expansion of the Infinite within ourselves.

This, as it appears to me, is the hidden meaning of the two trees in
Eden, the Garden of the Soul. It is the distinction between a knowledge
which is merely that of comparisons between different sorts of
conditions, and a knowledge which is that of the Life which gives rise
to and therefore controls conditions. Only we must remember that the
control of conditions is not to be attained by violent self-assertion
which is only recognizing them as substantive entities to be battled
with, but by conscious unity with that All-creating Spirit which works
silently, but surely, on its own lines of Life, Love, and Beauty.

"Not by might, nor by power, but by My Spirit, saith the Lord of Hosts."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Worship of Ishi](dlms12.md)

</div>
