<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dlms01)  [Next](dlms03.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Dore Lectures on Mental Science*, by Thomas Troward, \[1909\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f00"></span>

FOREWORD.

The addresses contained in this volume were delivered by me at the Dore
Gallery, Bond Street, London, on the Sundays of the first three months
of the present year, and are now published at the kind request of many
of my hearers, hence their title of "The Dore Lectures." A number of
separate discourses on a variety of subjects necessarily labours under
the disadvantage of want of continuity, and also under that of a
liability to the frequent repetition of similar ideas and expressions,
and the reader will, I trust, pardon these defects as inherent in the
circumstances of the work. At the same time it will be found that,
although not specially so designed, there is a certain progressive
development of thought through the dozen lectures which compose this
volume, the reason for which is that they all aim at expressing the same
fundamental idea, namely that, though the laws of the universe can never
be broken, they can be made to work under special conditions which will
produce results that could not be produced under the conditions
spontaneously provided by nature. This is a simple scientific principle
and it shows us the place which is occupied by the personal factor,
that, namely, of an intelligence which sees beyond the present limited
manifestation of the Law into its real essence, and which thus
constitutes the instru-mentality by which the infinite possibilities of
the Law can be evoked into forms of power, usefulness, and beauty.

The more perfect, therefore, the working of the personal factor, the
greater will be the results developed from the Universal Law; and hence
our lines of study should be two-fold—on the one hand the theoretical
study of the action of Universal Law, and on the other the practical
fitting of ourselves to make use of it; and if the present volume should
assist any reader in this two-fold quest, it will have answered its
purpose.

The different subjects have necessarily been treated very briefly, and
the addresses can only be considered as suggestions for lines of thought
which the reader will be able to work out for himself, and he must
therefore not expect that careful elabora-tion of detail which I would
gladly have bestowed had I been writing on one of these subjects
exclusively. This little book must be taken only for what it is, the
record of somewhat fragmentary talks with a very indulgent audience, to
whom I gratefully dedicate the volume.

JUNE 5, 1909.

T.T.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Entering Into the Spirit of It](dlms03.md)

</div>
