[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Legends &
Sagas](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](hoe1-24) [Next](hoe1-26)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

## CANTO XX <span class="small">ARMAGEDDON</span>

T<span class="small">HE</span> news of the invasion had brought the
feast to a sudden end, and the Kalevide consulted with his friends, and
proposed to bury his treasure, thinking it might otherwise be insecure.
So at dead of night the Kalevide, Alevide, and Sulevide dug a deep pit
in a secret place. Then the Kalevide solemnly delivered over the
treasure to Taara’s protection, and declared that no one should obtain
it but the son of a pure mother, who should come to the spot on St.
John’s Eve, and should sacrifice three black animals without a white
hair upon them—a black cock with a curled comb, a black dog or cat, and
a mole. Then he murmured secret spells over the treasure; but the man is
not yet born who shall raise it.

 When the morning dawned, the son of Kalev took his spear and sword,
mounted his war-horse, and <span id="page_136">p. 136</span> ordered the
Alevide to follow him as his shield-bearer. Then he blew his horn, and
set his forces in battle array. The sound of the horn echoed through
city and forest, and was heard in every province of Esthonia,<span
id="page_136_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_136_note_1) and the people flocked
to the king at the summons. The women wept and lamented, but their
husbands, sons, brothers, and lovers went forth to the war. The Kalevide
assembled his army in the sacred oak-forest of Taara, and a bird advised
him to sharpen his sword and spear before the fight. By the fifth
evening the last stragglers had come in, and the Kalevide allowed his
men two days’ longer rest. On the third day thereafter the battle began
in earnest, and the Kalevide fought against the mailed warriors for half
a day, when his horse was killed under him.

 Hundreds were slain on both sides, and at last the Sulevide fell
severely wounded. The soothsayer was summoned hastily, and adjured the
blood to cease flowing:<span
id="page_136_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_136_note_2)

<table data-align="center" data-cellpadding="10">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><span class="small">Quickly came the man of wisdom,<br />
Who should charm the blood from flowing<br />
And should still the pain by magic.<br />
<span id="page_137">p. 137</span> “Flow thou not, O blood, like water;<br />
Still thee, blood, of life the honey;<br />
Wherefore thus thy source o’erflowing,<br />
Breaking thus the bonds that hold thee?<br />
Let the blood as stone be hardened,<br />
Firm as oak-tree let it stiffen;<br />
In the stone-like veins around it,<br />
Let the blood be stanched, O Taara!”<br />
</span></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

 But the blood continued to flow, and then the magician used stronger
spells, pressed his fingers on the wound to stop the bleeding, and tied
up the limb with red thread, afterwards applying healing herbs.

 Meantime the Kalevide had routed the enemy and dispersed them over the
plain in flight, the dead being piled up in heaps behind them. But the
hero was weary and overcome with heat and thirst, and went to a lake,
which he drained to the last drop, leaving only the mud at the bottom.

 Three days were given to the burial of the dead and the care of the
wounded, and then the Kalevide set out in pursuit of the enemy. Olev
built a bridge over the Vōhanda according to the Kalevide’s directions,
and presently the army fell in with a murderous host of Tartars, Poles,
and Letts, who were ravaging the neighbourhood of Pleskau.

 Another great battle was fought, and the Kalevide <span
id="page_138">p. 138</span> slaughtered his enemies till their bodies
lay in heaps a fathom high about the field, and the blood was five spans
deep. The battle lasted for seven days, and many notable chiefs were
slain, among whom was the son of Sulev, who had been so severely wounded
in a previous battle. The Tartars and Poles had now been slain or put to
flight, and the Kalevide gathered together the remnants of his army to
attack the Vends, and ordered the Alevide to break their centre.

 The fight with the Vends lasted two days longer, and again vast numbers
were slain on both sides. A great mound was raised on the battlefield
over the grave of the Sulevide in memory of the fallen hero. The three
remaining heroes, the Kalevide, the Alevide, and Olev, stood like towers
against the attacks of the mailed warriors; but at last they were
overcome by thirst, and went to a lake in a valley, with steep high
banks, to drink. The Alevide, who was very weary, stooped down to drink,
when his foot slipped, and he fell into the water, and was drowned
before his friends could recover his body. In the bright sunshine his
huge iron helmet and his three-edged sword may still be seen gleaming at
the bottom of the water.

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

 The Kalevide was so overcome with grief at this last misfortune that he
abandoned his kingdom, abdicating in favour of Olev, and retired to the
pine-forests on the banks of the river Koiva, where he built a cottage
and thought to dwell in peace and retirement. Here he lived alone,
supporting himself on fish and crayfish. One day a party of armed men
found their way to his hermitage, and invited him to join company with
them. He turned his back on them contemptuously, when he saw in the
water the reflection of one of them advancing with his sword drawn to
murder him.<span id="page_139_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_139_note_1) He
turned angrily on his foes with an indignant exclamation, and seizing
one of them by the helmet, whirled him round, and the air sounded as if
disturbed by the rush of the Northern eagle. Then he dashed him down so
that he sank to his waist in the ground. He seized the second by the
hand, and swung him round till the forest was shaken as if by a tempest,
and him he sank to the cheeks in the ground. The third he seized in the
same way, and drove him so far into the ground that nothing could <span
id="page_140">p. 140</span> be seen of him but the hole where he had
disappeared.

 Another time the Kalevide was troubled by a messenger sent by the
merchants on the coast to invite him to visit them. After listening to
his talk for some time, he told him to pull up the rod which he had
baited for crayfish, and after he had eaten, they might discuss the
matter further. The youth went down to the river bank, and found, to his
amazement, that the rod was a tall fir-tree, which the Kalevide had torn
up by the roots, but which the youth could not even move. Then the
Kalevide lifted the rod with one hand, and showed the youth that it was
baited with the whole carcass of a dead mare; and sent him about his
business, telling him to report what he had seen.

 These intrusions vexed the Kalevide, and he wandered away from his
hermitage through the forests, and three days afterwards he reached Lake
Peipus, without remembering that he had ever travelled the same way
before. Singing gaily, he came to the brook Käpä, and waded in. The hero
had laid an injunction on his lost sword which he had intended to apply
to the sorcerer who had robbed him of it; but the understanding <span
id="page_141">p. 141</span> of the sword was confused by the curse which
the Finnish smith had previously laid upon it, and it reflected that now
was the time for vengeance. So without more ado the great sword raised
itself, and cut off both the hero’s legs at the knee. He cried out for
help, and dragged himself with his hands to the shore, where he lay down
bleeding, his legless body covering a whole acre of ground.

 The cries of the dying Kalevide rose above the clouds and ascended to
heaven. The heavenly powers assembled round the hero, and vainly tried
to salve his wounds and soothe his pain. Presently he expired, and his
soul, like a joyful bird, took its flight to the halls of Taara in
heaven. There he sat in the firelight among the heroes of Taara, resting
his cheek on his hand, and listening to the bards as they sang of his
great deeds.

 But the old father of the gods knew that so great a hero, who had
conquered all his enemies in battle, and had bound even the prince of
Pōrgu in chains, could not remain idle in heaven. So he summoned all the
gods in secret conclave to consider what work they should assign to the
Kalevide, and the debate lasted for many days and nights. At last they
determined that he <span id="page_142">p. 142</span> should keep watch
and ward at the gates of Pōrgu, so that Sarvik should never be able to
free himself from his bonds.

 So the soul of the Kalevide flew down from heaven like a bird, and was
bidden to reanimate his body; but the might of all the gods, and even
the divine wisdom of Taara, could not put his legs on again. Then they
mounted him on a white charger,<span
id="page_142_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_142_note_1) and sent him to the post
which had been assigned to him at the gates of Pōrgu.

 When the Kalevide reached the rocky portal, a voice was heard from
heaven, “Strike the rock with thy fist!” He did so, and clove open the
rock, and his right hand was caught in the cleft. <span id="page_143">p.
143</span> Here he sits now on his horse at the gates of Pōrgu, watching
the bonds of others while bound himself. The demons attempt unceasingly
to soften their chains by heaping up charcoal fagots around them, but
when the cock crows at dawn their fetters grow thicker again. From time
to time, too, the Kalevide struggles to free his hand from the wall of
rock, till the earth trembles and the sea foams; but the hand of
Mana<span id="page_143_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_143_note_1) holds him,
that the warder shall never depart from his post. But one day a vast
fire will break out on both sides of the rock and melt it, when the
Kalevide will withdraw his hand, and return to earth to inaugurate a new
day of prosperity for the Esthonians.<span
id="page_143_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_143_note_2)

 

<span class="small">END OF THE KALEVIPOEG.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](hoe1-26)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_136">p. 136</span>

<span id="page_136_note_1"></span>[1](#page_136_fr_1) Here we have a
reminiscence of the Giallar horn of Heimdall, and of the horn of Roland
(or Orlando).

<span id="page_136_note_2"></span>[2](#page_136_fr_2) Compare the much
longer story in the 9th Runo of the *Kalevala*.

<span id="footnotes_page_139">p. 139</span>

<span id="page_139_note_1"></span>[1](#page_139_fr_1) A similar
adventure happened to the naturalist Macgillivray in the Solomon Islands
during the voyage of the *Herald*. He turned round and shot the savage
dead.

<span id="footnotes_page_142">p. 142</span>

<span id="page_142_note_1"></span>[1](#page_142_fr_1) There is a curious
variant relating how the Kalevide waded across Lake Peipus with a bridle
in his hand to look for a horse, and the water threatened to rise above
his boots, when he said, “Don’t think to drown this man.” Then the devil
brought him first his daughter and then his son in the shape of horses;
but they both broke down under him. Then the devil brought him his
mother, in her usual shape of a white mare, and she galloped away with
the hero, and he could not rein her in. Then a voice from heaven cried,
“Godson, godson, strike your hand into the oak!” The hero seized a great
oak-tree as they were passing, when it came away in his hand, roots and
all. Then the mare rushed to Pōrgu, and the voice again bade the hero
strike his hand into the doorpost. He did so, and his hand was caught
fast, and the mare galloped away to hell from between his legs, and left
him hanging there.

<span id="footnotes_page_143">p. 143</span>

<span id="page_143_note_1"></span>[1](#page_143_fr_1) The God of Death.

<span id="page_143_note_2"></span>[2](#page_143_fr_2) The guardian hero
of every nation is looked for to return in a similar manner; even
William Tell.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
