[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Legends &
Sagas](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](hoe1-23) [Next](hoe1-25)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

## CANTO XIX <span class="small">THE LAST FEAST OF THE HEROES</span>

A<span class="small">FTER</span> this the Kalevide and Sarvik engaged in
a terrific wrestling-match, which lasted for seven days and nights, with
varying success. At length the shade of Linda, who was looking on, took
her distaff, swung it ten times round her head, and dashed it to the
ground. The hint was not lost on her son. He seized Sarvik by the
garters, whirled him ten times round, and then hurled him down, set his
knee on his chest, and seized his throat and tried to strangle him. Then
he took his belt, bound Sarvik firmly, and dragged him to the iron
chamber, where he bound him hand and foot with chains. A third chain he
fastened round his neck, and a fourth round his body, and drove the ends
into the walls of rock. He rolled a great stone, as large as a house,
against the door, and fixed the chains to this also, so that Sarvik
could hardly move.

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

 The Kalevide washed the traces of the struggle away, and Sarvik tried
to obtain some concessions from him, but failing this he began to curse
and swear. The Kalevide then went to pack up a store of treasures, but
was warned by a mouse not to overload himself. So he contented himself
with taking two sacks on each shoulder, and then set out on his homeward
journey, and the iron bridge thundered beneath his footsteps, while
Sarvik shouted curses after him.

 At last the Kalevide struggled up to daylight, and sank down exhausted
by the side of the son of Alev, who had been waiting anxiously for his
friend, and had heard faint sounds of conflict far below. When his
friend had fetched him some water, and he had recovered a little from
his fatigue, he asked how long he had been absent, and learned that he
had been away about three weeks. The Kalevide remarked that where he had
been there was no means of distinguishing day and night or measuring
time, and he then related his adventures.

 The Alevide then slaughtered a great ox, a feat which no one else had
been able to accomplish. The blood filled a hundred vats and the flesh a
thousand barrels. They sat down to supper, and <span id="page_131">p.
131</span> the Kalevide ate till he was ready to burst, and then laid
down to sleep, while the son of Alev seated himself on the
treasure-sacks. The Kalevide slept for two days and nights, and did not
wake till the third morning was well advanced. While he slept, his
snoring resounded for miles, and the great trees shook as if they were
saplings. About noon on the third day they set out homeward. The son of
Alev carried one sack of treasure, and the Kalevide the other three.

 After the Kalevide’s return from his journey, he resided at Lindanisa,
occupying himself with schemes for the good of his people. Olev had
built three more cities, in the north, west, and south of the country.
His friends advised the Kalevide to seek a bride in Kungla, and he
replied that they would first build a beautiful fortified city and rear
a magnificent house, and then he would follow their advice.

 One day the Kalevide sat at a feast with his friends, and a harper sang
the adventures of Siuru, the blue bird,<span
id="page_131_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_131_note_1) the daughter of Taara.

 The Kalevide invited his friends to drink, and sang a song relating how
he had gone down to <span id="page_132">p. 132</span> the beach where
two trees, the apple of fortune and the oak of wisdom, grew in the sea.
Here he found some girls who told him that his little brother had fallen
into the water. He waded into the water to look for him, and saw a naked
sword at the bottom, which he was just about to grasp, when his sister
called from the shore to tell him that his father, mother, brothers, and
sisters were all dead or dying. He hurried home, but it proved to be a
hoax, for they were all alive and well.

 The son of Sulev next sang a ditty relating an adventure with four coy
maidens, and the drinking and mirth continued.

 And now messengers arrived in great haste, announcing that hostile
armies of Letts, Vends, and Poles had invaded the kingdom on all sides.
But the Kalevide bade his comrades empty their cups, while he himself
quietly gave general orders, and declared that to-morrow he would take
the field in person. Then he sang a song about two lovers.

 While the Kalevide was thus drinking and singing, Varrak the Laplander
entered and embraced his knees. He called down blessings from Ukko on
<span id="page_133">p. 133</span> the hero, and then requested to
receive the reward which had been promised him, as he intended to set
sail for home on the morrow. The Kalevide asked him what he wished for;
and he answered that he had found a chained book in an iron cover, which
he wished to possess.

 The Kalevide could not read the book, which nevertheless contained all
the priceless wisdom which his father had recorded; and he willingly
gave it to Varrak, notwithstanding the loud protests of the sons of
Sulev and Olev. The book was fastened with three chains and three locks,
and the keys could not be found. Varrak knew very well where they were,
but he kept his knowledge to himself. So the Kalevide ordered the wall
to be broken down to release the book, which was then laid on a waggon,
and dragged by a yoke of oxen to the boat, which Varrak had already
loaded with bags of gold.<span
id="page_133_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_133_note_1)

 Meantime a troop of fugitives came flying to the city, bringing word
that the war was close at hand, <span id="page_134">p. 134</span> and
that the axes of the youths were useless against the swords of the
mail-clad warriors.<span id="page_134_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_134_note_1)
The Kalevide ordered the weary men to be fed and comfortably housed, and
white they slept he repaired to his father’s grave. But there was no
voice nor counsel; there was no sound but the sighing of the wind and
the moaning of the distant sea, and the clouds shed sad tears. The hero
returned home sorrowful and uneasy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](hoe1-25)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_131">p. 131</span>

<span id="page_131_note_1"></span>[1](#page_131_fr_1) This song will be
included in a later section of the book.

<span id="footnotes_page_133">p. 133</span>

<span id="page_133_note_1"></span>[1](#page_133_fr_1) Some of the
commentators regard this book as a palladium on which the independence
of Esthonia depended; and the thoughtlessness of the Kalevide in parting
with the book which contained the wisdom of his father as a sacrilegious
action which precipitated his ruin.

<span id="footnotes_page_134">p. 134</span>

<span id="page_134_note_1"></span>[1](#page_134_fr_1) These are
identified by the commentators with the Teutonic Knights of the Sword,
who conquered Esthonia in the eleventh century.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
