[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Legends &
Sagas](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](hoe1-01) [Next](hoe1-03)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

## PREFACE

W<span class="small">HEN</span> I took up the study of the *Kalevala*
and Finnish literature, with the intention of publishing a critical
English edition of the poem, on which I am still engaged, the
accumulation of the necessary materials led me to examine the literature
of the neighbouring countries likewise. I had expected to find the
*Kalevipoeg* an Esthonian variant of the *Kalevala*; but I found it so
dissimilar, and at the same time so interesting, when divested of the
tedious and irrelevant matter that has been added to the main story,
that I finally decided to publish a full account of it in prose,
especially as nothing of the kind has yet been attempted in English,
beyond a few casual magazine articles.

 The Esthonian folk-tales are likewise of much interest, and in many
cases of an extremely original character; and these also have never
appeared in an English dress. I have, therefore, selected a <span
id="page_x">p. x</span> sufficiently representative series, and have
added a few ballads and short poems. This last section of the work,
however, amounts to little more than an appendix to the *Kalevipoeg*,
though it is placed at the end of the book. Esthonian ballad literature
is of enormous extent, and only partially investigated and published at
present, even in the original; and it would therefore be premature to
try to treat of it in detail here, nor had I time or space to attempt
it. I had, however, intended to have included a number of poems from
Neus’ *Ehstnische Volkslieder* in the present volumes, but found that it
was unnecessary, as Latham has already given an English version of most
of the best in his “Nationalities of Europe.”

 The Introduction and Notes will, it is hoped, be sufficiently full to
afford all necessary information for the intelligent comprehension of
the book, without overloading it; and it has been decided to add a
sketch-map of this little known country, including some of the places
specially referred to. But Esthonian folk-literature, even without the
ballads, is a most extensive study, and I do not pretend to do more than
offer a few specimens culled from some of the most easily accessible
sources. My professional work does not allow me time to attempt <span
id="page_xi">p. xi</span> more at present; and it is from the same cause
that my work on the *Kalevala* has been delayed so long.

 In outlying parts of Europe like Finland and Esthonia, which were not
Christianised till long after the southern and western countries,
primitive literature has survived to a much greater extent than
elsewhere; and the publication of the *Kalevala* and the *Kalevipoeg*
during the present century furnishes a striking example before our very
eyes of the manner in which the Iliad and the Odyssey grew up among the
Greeks, before these poems were edited in the form in which they have
come down to us, by order of Pisistratus.

 The principal books used in the preparation of this work are mentioned
in the short Bibliography. The names of others quoted or referred to
will be found in the Index, which has also been drawn up in such a
manner as to form a general glossary.

W. F. KIRBY. 

 <span class="small">C<span class="small">HISWICK</span>, *September*
1894.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](hoe1-03)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
