[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Legends &
Sagas](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](hoe1-21) [Next](hoe1-23)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

## CANTO XVII <span class="small">THE HEROES AND THE DWARF</span>

O<span class="small">LEV</span> had now built a magnificent city,
fortified with towers and ditches, around the burial-mound of Kalev.
Large numbers of people flocked to it, and the Kalevide named it
Lindanisa, in memory of his mother.<span
id="page_119_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_119_note_1) Other fortified cities
were founded by the Alevide and the Sulevide.

 But news came that hostile troops were landing on the coast, and the
Kalevide mounted his warhorse. The king wore a golden helmet, gold
spurs, and a silver belt, and carried a shield of gold, and the steed
was all caparisoned with gold and silver and pearls, while the maidens
of the country looked on with admiration.

 The Kalevide and his three friends fought a pitched battle with the
countless forces of the enemy on the plains of Esthonia. Their heads
<span id="page_120">p. 120</span> fell before him like autumn leaves,
and their scattered limbs were strewn about in heaps like straw or
rushes. His horse waded in blood and bones to the belly; for the
Kalevide slaughtered his enemies by tens of thousands, and would have
utterly annihilated them, but, as he was pursuing the fugitives over
hill and dale, his horse lost his footing in a bog, and was engulfed in
the morass.

 As the Kalevide was unable to continue the pursuit after the loss of
his horse, he recalled his troops and divided the booty. Then he sent
his soldiers to carry news of the victory to the towns and villages
throughout the country, and he and his three friends set out on a
journey across the plains and swamps, and through primeval forests,
making a pathway for others as they advanced. At length they came to a
place where smoke and flames were shooting up into the air, and when
they reached the spot they found an old woman sitting at the mouth of a
cave and stirring the fire under a pot. The Alevide asked what she was
cooking, and she answered, “Cabbage for my sons and for myself.” Then
the son of Sulev said they were hungry travellers, and asked her to give
them some, and to take a rest while they <span id="page_121">p.
121</span> finished the cookery. The old woman consented, but warned
them, if a strange youth asked to be allowed to taste the broth, to take
good care that he did not empty the pot and leave them nothing. Three of
the heroes at once volunteered to take turns to watch the pot, but the
Kalevide said nothing. Then the old woman crept into the bushes, and hid
herself in a wolf’s den.

 The Alevide took the first watch, and his companions lay down by the
fire to sleep. He had not been long sitting there, and throwing fresh
faggots on the fire, when one of the little dwarf race stole up
stealthily and timidly through the long grass. He was about three spans
high, and had a gold bell<span
id="page_121_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_121_note_1) hanging to his neck. He
had small horns behind the ears, and a goat’s beard under his chin. He
asked humbly to be allowed to taste the soup, and the hero gave him
leave, but warned him to take care not to drown himself in it.

 The dwarf replied that he would like to taste the soup without a spoon,
and jumped on the edge of the pot; but he grew up in an instant to <span
id="page_122">p. 122</span> the height of a pine-tree, and then to the
clouds, rising to the height of seventy fathoms and more. Then he
vanished like a mist, and the Alevide found the pot as empty as if the
contents had been scraped out.<span
id="page_122_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_122_note_1) So he refilled the pot
with water, put in some fresh cabbage, and roused the Olevide, but said
nothing of what had happened. Then he lay down and went to sleep,
leaving his companion on guard. But presently the dwarf reappeared, and
neither the Olevide nor the Sulevide, who took the third watch, fared
any better than their companion.

 The watch now fell to the Kalevide, but he would not allow the dwarf to
taste the soup until he gave him his gold bell as a pledge of good
faith. As soon as he had received it, he playfully gave the dwarf a
fillip on the forehead, when there was a tremendous crash of thunder,
and the dwarf sank into the earth and disappeared from the sight of the
hero. The other heroes and the old woman then assembled round the fire
to hear what had happened. They sat down to their supper, after which
the Kalevide advised his companions to lie down and rest for <span
id="page_123">p. 123</span> the remainder of the night, and to return
home to their wives and children in the morning. During the night the
daughters of the Meadow Queen danced and sported, and sang to the
Kalevide of his approaching adventures and journey.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](hoe1-23)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_119">p. 119</span>

<span id="page_119_note_1"></span>[1](#page_119_fr_1) Linda’s bosom now
Revel.

<span id="footnotes_page_121">p. 121</span>

<span id="page_121_note_1"></span>[1](#page_121_fr_1) The bells of the
dwarfs are often of great importance in Northern fairy mythology.

<span id="footnotes_page_122">p. 122</span>

<span id="page_122_note_1"></span>[1](#page_122_fr_1) This incident is
common in Esthonian tales.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
