[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Legends &
Sagas](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](hoe1-14) [Next](hoe1-16)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

## CANTO X <span class="small">THE HEROES AND THE WATER-DEMON</span>

 As the Kalevide was wandering through Esthonia, he arrived one day at
the swamp of Kikerpärä. Two demon brothers had settled themselves in the
swamp, and were fighting for its possession, and when the hero appeared
they referred their dispute to him. As he could not stay to attend to
the matter himself, he requested his friend, the son of Alev, who was
with him, to measure out the swamp fairly. So the Alevide began to drive
piles into the bed of the river at a place called Mustapall, to fasten
his measuring lines to, when the wretched old water-demon<span
id="page_64_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_64_note_1) raised his head from the
river, and asked what he was doing. The hero replied that he was damming
up the river; but the demon, who had lived under the water for many
years, and <span id="page_65">p. 65</span> did not like to be turned out
of his comfortable home, offered him a reward to desist. So the Alevide
asked him to fill his old felt hat for him with bright silver coins;
which he promised to do on the morrow, the hero declaring that he would
hold him to his bargain in the words of the proverb:<span
id="page_65_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_65_note_1)

<table data-align="center" data-cellpadding="10">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><span class="small">By the horns the ox we grapple,<br />
By his word the man is fastened.<br />
</span></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

 Then the demon dived back into the water, while the son of Alev, who
was a cousin of the Kalevide, got a friend to help him to dig a hole in
the ground during the night, a fathom in depth and broad at the bottom,
but with an opening at the top just wide enough for the top of the hat
to fit into; but the hat was cut at the sides, so that the heavy money
should fall through into the pit.

 Before daybreak the stupid demon brought a lapful of roubles,<span
id="page_65_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_65_note_2) which he poured into the
hat. He brought a second and a third, and afterwards brought money by
the hogshead, but the hat still remained empty. Presently his coffers,
purses, and <span id="page_66">p. 66</span> pockets were all exhausted.
He then begged for time; but the Alevide declared that if he did not
keep his promise, and fill his hat with bright silver coins, he should
begin his work again.

 Then the demon thought of appealing to his mother to help him; but
first he asked the Alevide to come with him to receive his money
himself, hoping to circumvent him. But the hero knew that it was only a
trick to get him away from the hat, so he refused to budge, but sent the
Kalevide’s cupbearer, the smallest of the company, to help to carry the
money.

 The boy was ready at once; but his heart failed him as the demon
preceded him to the under-world,<span
id="page_66_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_66_note_1) leading him by paths that
no living man had ever trodden before, and through an utterly unknown
country, where the sun and moon never shone, and where the only light
came from the torches that flared on both sides of their way. When they
reached the palace of the demon, his sons came to the door, and invited
the guest to take his place at the table, which was loaded with gold and
silver plate, and eat and drink. But the <span id="page_67">p. 67</span>
boy could touch nothing from terror, for sparks of fire flew from the
dishes and viands, and blue flames played over the beakers.

 Then the water-demons began to titter, and to whisper to each other in
their own language, which sounded just like Lettish,<span
id="page_67_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_67_note_1) and which their guest
could not understand. The boy began to reproach his avaricious friend in
his thoughts for having thus sent him to Pōrgu without thinking of what
might happen to him; but presently the younger demons seized upon him,
and began to toss him from one to another like a ball, sometimes from
one side of the room to the other, and sometimes up to the ceiling.

 The boy begged them to let him rest a little, and presently they
allowed him to do so. Then he drew a cord from his pocket, and pretended
to measure the length and breadth of the room. Presently he came to the
door, and seized the opportunity to bolt, and was fortunate enough to
make his way back to daylight, where the demon had no more power to
interfere with him.

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

 As he passed the gates, the guards whispered to him to turn to the
right to avoid the many snares in his path. He did not escape without a
good fright; for only strong men can go where they please, like the
birds, while the weak man is exposed to a thousand terrors. On the boy’s
way he met a small bitch<span
id="page_68_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_68_note_1) accompanied by two
puppies; and this was the mother of the demons, just returning from the
bath-house. The boy now remembered the warning he had received, and
turned aside to the right, and the three ran past without noticing him.

 When the boy reached the place where he had left the Alevide, he found
that both his friend and the money had disappeared. Presently the
water-demon came up, and asked him jestingly whether he had burnt
himself, or whether he had been stung by a gadfly, that he ran away like
that, instead of helping him to carry the heavy money-bags. He then
proposed that they should look for a good place where they might
wrestle. He thought he could easily overcome the boy by strength, if not
by craft, and the boy consented.

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

 Before they had gone far, they met the sons of Kalev and Alev, who had
hidden their treasure, walking arm-in-arm. The Kalevide asked, “Whence
did you bring that Lettish comrade, and to what queer race does he
belong?” His cousin answered that he was the same who had promised to
fill his hat with silver, and hadn’t kept his word. Then the boy said
that they were going to engage in a contest, and the Kalevide answered,
“You must grow a little taller, my lad, before you engage in a serious
struggle, for you are only a child at present.”

 So the Kalevide, laughing, stuck the boy in his trouser-pocket to grow,
and took over the challenge himself, and they all went to a mountain
where the contest was to take place; and first they began with hurling
stones. The demon took up a rock, which he balanced for an hour in his
clumsy fingers, and at last swung it round more than ten times before he
loosed it. The stone fell ten paces from the sandy shore of Lake Virts,
and it lies there now, conspicuous by its size, for it is at least as
big as a bath-house.

 Then the Kalevide took up a rock in his hand, and threw it without more
ado. They heard it rushing through the air for a long time, and at <span
id="page_70">p. 70</span> last it fell on the shore of Lake Peipus, and
anyone who visits the lake can see it there. Then they engaged in a
wrestling match, and the Kalevide soon lifted the demon from his feet
and flung him into the air. When he came to the ground, he rolled seven
versts, and then fell down a little hill among the bushes, where he lay
stunned for seven days, hardly able to open his eyes or lift his head,
or even to move a limb.

 At this the Kalevide and his companions laughed till the hills shook,
and the cup-bearer loudest of all. Then the Alevide told his story; but
when he came to mention the proverb, it reminded the son of Kalev that
he had not yet paid the debt which he owed to the smith in Finland for
his sword. So the Kalevide asked his cousin to take the goods across to
Finland, and he himself laid down to rest under a tree, and pondered on
how he could provide for the safety of the people during the war. He
decided to improve and beautify the towns as well as to fortify them,
and to make an excursion to survey the country while his cousin was away
in Finland. Presently the Kalevide felt in his pocket, and pulled out
the boy, with whom he began to jest; but soon their conversation became
more serious, <span id="page_71">p. 71</span> and the Kalevide ordered
him to wait for the expected messengers, while he himself should proceed
to Lake Peipus, where he had important business.

 As the Kalevide proceeded on his journey, he passed a well in a lonely
place, where the Air-Maiden,<span
id="page_71_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_71_note_1) the fair daughter of the
Thunder-God, sat bewailing the loss of her ring, which had dropped into
it.<span id="page_71_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_71_note_2) When the hero saw
the blue-eyed, golden-haired maiden in tears, he asked the cause of her
trouble, and when he heard it he plunged into the well to look for the
ring. A party of young sorcerers quickly gathered round, thinking that
the mouse was in the trap, and they flung a great millstone after him.
But he searched in the mud and water for some time, and presently sprang
out of the water with the millstone on his finger, which he offered to
the maiden, saying that he had not been able to find anything else in
the mud, and that she would not need a larger finger-ring.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](hoe1-16)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_64">p. 64</span>

<span id="page_64_note_1"></span>[1](#page_64_fr_1) The Esthonian demons
are often represented as contemptible creatures, very easily outwitted.
Later in the present canto the personage in question is distinctly
called a water-demon.

<span id="footnotes_page_65">p. 65</span>

<span id="page_65_note_1"></span>[1](#page_65_fr_1) A common proverb in
Esthonian tales. We also find it in Italian, in almost the same words.

<span id="page_65_note_2"></span>[2](#page_65_fr_2) The money is
sometimes called roubles, and sometimes thalers.

<span id="footnotes_page_66">p. 66</span>

<span id="page_66_note_1"></span>[1](#page_66_fr_1) Visits to Hades or
Hell (Pōrgu) are common in the *Kalevipoeg* and in the popular tales,
some of which we shall afterwards notice.

<span id="footnotes_page_67">p. 67</span>

<span id="page_67_note_1"></span>[1](#page_67_fr_1) The term “Lett,”
which the Kalevide himself afterwards applies to the demon, seems to be
used in contempt; otherwise the passage in the text might have been
taken as equivalent to our old-fashioned expression, “It’s all Greek to
me.”

<span id="footnotes_page_68">p. 68</span>

<span id="page_68_note_1"></span>[1](#page_68_fr_1) Usually the devil’s
mother (or grandmother) is represented as a white mare. Compare Canto 14
of the *Kalivepoeg*, and also the story of the Grateful Prince.

<span id="footnotes_page_71">p. 71</span>

<span id="page_71_note_1"></span>[1](#page_71_fr_1) This Air-Maiden, who
seems to be only a mischievous sprite, must not be confounded with
Ilmatar, the creatrix of the world in the first Runo of the *Kalevala*.

<span id="page_71_note_2"></span>[2](#page_71_fr_2) Finn, the Irish
hero, was once entrapped by a sorceress on a similar pretext into
plunging into an enchanted lake, which changed him into an old man. (See
Joyce’s *Old Celtic Romances*, “The Chase of Slieve Cullin.”) The story
is also related in one of Kenealy’s ballads.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
