[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Legends &
Sagas](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](hoe1-19) [Next](hoe1-21)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

## CANTO XV <span class="small">THE MARRIAGE OF THE SISTERS</span>

T<span class="small">HE</span> Kalevide had not gone far on his homeward
journey when he found that Tühi himself was pursuing him with a band of
his followers. Then the youngest sister took the wishing-rod, and called
upon it to flood the whole country, a bridge rising before them for the
hero, while water flowed behind between him and his enemies. The demons
stopped in confusion, and Tühi shouted to the Kalevide to ask if he was
carrying off his adopted daughters? “It looks like it,” answered the
hero.<span id="page_105_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_105_note_1) Then Tühi
asked again, “Dear brother, did you wrestle with my good brother-in-law
in his own enclosure, and then drive him into the ground like a post?”
“Likely enough,” retorted the hero; “but it’s not my fault if his bones
are <span id="page_106">p. 106</span> still sound.” Then the demon asked
again, “My dear brother, son of Kalev, did you lock up our old mother in
the kitchen just like a mouse in a trap, while she was baking cakes?” “O
yes,” said the hero; “and I suppose she roared, and made up a bed among
the boxes of peas, and for aught I know she may be sleeping there still,
unless a flea has woke her up.” “Have you stolen Sarvik’s good sword?”
asked Tühi again. “Perhaps I may have taken the weapon too, dear
brother,” answered the hero. “Who can separate a man and his sword? One
is worth nothing without the other.” Then Tühi asked if he had taken the
hat. “I think so,” said the hero; “but Sarvik will never put it on his
head again, for I threw it into the fire and burned it to ashes, which
have blown away in the wind.” Tühi then asked if he had plundered his
brother’s treasures. “Yes, my dear sir,” answered the hero; “I took a
little gold and silver, but not much. Ten horses could drag such a load,
and twenty oxen easily; but you may depend upon it I didn’t carry away
any copper.” Tühi’s next question was whether he had stolen the
bridge-builder, the wishing-rod. The hero replied, “I <span
id="page_107">p. 107</span> suppose some brown-eyed maiden stole it, for
no stronger person would have troubled about such a thing.” Tühi next
inquired how he had treated the maidens; and to this the hero replied
that he’d tell him another time. “Won’t you come back again, dear
brother, and pay your debts?” asked Tühi at last. “Who knows, dear
brother?” said the hero; “if I ever find myself short of money, I may
perchance come back to fetch some more gold and silver, and repay my old
debts with new ones.” And upon this Tühi and his seventy people decamped
in the greatest haste, as if they had been on fire, or as if they were
pursued by gadflies.

 Strong as was the Kalevide, his back was weary and chafed with his
heavy load, and he threw it off and lay down to rest; but while he slept
he was in danger of being carried away by a sudden flood from the
mountains, raised against him by a sorceress.<span
id="page_107_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_107_note_1) After stemming it with
some trouble, on resuming his journey, he met a stranger who <span
id="page_108">p. 108</span> asked him what he was going to do with the
planks. The stranger proved to be the son of Olev, the great
master-builder, and to him was intrusted the task of building the cities
and fortifications.

 When the Kalevide learned that he had lost seven weeks in a magic
sleep, he gave the three sisters to the charge of the son of Alev, who
married the youngest. The son of Sulev married the eldest, but the
second sister found no lover, and while the others were talking together
of their wedded happiness she stole apart weeping; and at length she was
carried away by a famous sorcerer, and her strong brothers-in-law went
in search of her. On the third evening they came upon her track, when
the sorcerer spread out a great lake to impede their passage. But the
Alevide had brought with him the wishing-rod, which quickly provided
them with a bridge. They rushed across, broke the locks, and burst open
the doors, slew the sorcerer, released the captive, and then sent the
red cock on the roof.<span
id="page_108_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_108_note_1)

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

 Then the son of Olev took the second sister to wife; and thus all the
three sisters whom the Kalevide had released from the regions of Sarvik
were happily married, and many great tribes derived their origin from
them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](hoe1-21)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_105">p. 105</span>

<span id="page_105_note_1"></span>[1](#page_105_fr_1) Compare the
similar scene in the story of “Slyboots,” later in this volume.

<span id="footnotes_page_107">p. 107</span>

<span id="page_107_note_1"></span>[1](#page_107_fr_1) This incident
resembles an adventure attributed to Thor. In the legends of all
countries, sorcerers or fugitives are represented as raising magic
floods, either to sweep away their enemies or to baffle pursuit. There
are three instances in this very canto.

<span id="footnotes_page_108">p. 108</span>

<span id="page_108_note_1"></span>[1](#page_108_fr_1) This is the usual
Esthonian euphemism for setting a house on fire. I understand that there
is also some connection between red cocks and fire in Scottish
folk-lore; and in Scandinavian mythology two of the three cocks which
are to crow befare Ragnarok are red. May they not have same connection
with the fire of Surtur?

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
