[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Legends &
Sagas](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](hoe1-33) [Next](hoe1-35)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 In the story of “The Orphan’s Handmill” (Kreutzwald), a compassionate
magician from Finland in the guise of a beggar enables an ill-used and
overworked orphan girl to obtain a wonderful handmill in a chest, which
he forbids her to open, but which grinds an the corn poured into it,
without any labour on her part. Her mistress sends her to church,
intending to discover the secret of the chest, and then to drive her
away and keep the chest; but when she raises the lid, a bright flame
bursts from the chest which burns her to ashes. Shortly afterwards, the
girl’s master marries the orphan, when the chest, having done its work,
vanishes, leaving no trace, it having been carried away to the
underground kingdom from which the girl had brought it in a vision, with
the aid of the white horse (or mare), which always figures as an
inhabitant of Pōrgu.

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

## THE ORPHAN BOY AND THE HELL-HOUNDS.<span id="page_261_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_261_note_1) (K<span class="small">REUTZWALD.</span>)

O<span class="small">NCE</span> upon a time there lived a poor labourer
and his wife, who dragged on a wretched existence from day to day. They
had three children, but only the youngest survived. He was a boy of nine
years old when he buried first his father and then his mother, and he
had no other resource than to beg his bread from door to door. A year
afterwards he happened to come to the house of a rich farmer just when
they wanted a herdboy. The farmer himself was not such a bad man to deal
with, but his wife had control of everything, and she was a regular
brute. It may easily be imagined how much the poor orphan boy suffered.
The blows that he received daily were three times more than sufficient,
but he never got enough bread to eat. But as the orphan had nothing
<span id="page_262">p. 262</span> better to look forward to, he was
forced to endure his misery.

 One day the poor boy had the misfortune to lose a cow from the herd. He
ran about the forest till sundown from one place to another, but could
not find the lost cow; and although he well knew what awaited him when
he reached home, he was at last obliged to gather the herd together
without the missing cow. The sun had not set long when he already heard
the voice of his mistress shouting, “You lazy dog, where are you
dawdling with the herd?” He could not wait longer, but was forced to
hurry home to the stick. lt was already growing dusk when the herd
arrived at the gate, but the sharp eyes of the mistress had already
discovered that one cow was missing. Without saying a word, she snatched
the first stake from the fence, and began to belabour the boy, as if she
would beat him to a jelly. She was in such a rage that she would
certainly have beaten him to death, or made him a cripple for life, if
the farmer, hearing his cries and sobs, had not compassionately come to
his aid. But as he knew the temper of the furious woman, he would not
venture to interfere directly, but sought to <span id="page_263">p.
263</span> soften her, and said beseechingly, “Don’t beat the boy quite
to pieces, or he won’t be able to look for the lost cow. We shall get
more profit out of him if you don’t quite kill him.” “True enough,” said
the woman, “his carrion won’t be worth as much as the good beef.” Then
she gave him a few more good whacks, and packed him off to look for the
cow, saying, “If you come back without the cow, I’ll beat you to death.”
The boy ran from the door sobbing and crying, and went back to the
forest where he had been with the herd in the daytime, and searched all
night, but could not find a trace of the cow anywhere. But when the sun
rose next morning, he made up his mind what to do. “Whatever may happen
to me,” he said, “I won’t go back again.” Then he made a start, and ran
straight forward at one stretch, till he had left the house far behind
him. He himself could not tell how far he ran before his strength
failed, and he sank down half dead when it was already almost noon. When
at length he awoke from a long heavy sleep, he felt something cool in
his mouth, and on opening his eyes, he saw a little old man with a long
grey beard putting <span id="page_264">p. 264</span> the ladle back into
a milk-can. “Please give me a little more to drink,” said the boy. “You
have had enough for to-day,” answered the old man. “If I had not been
passing this way by accident, you would have slept your last sleep, for
you were already half dead when I found you.” Then the old man asked the
boy whence he came and whither he was going. The boy related everything
that had happened to him, as far back as he could remember, down to last
night’s beating. The old man listened attentively to the story, but
without interrupting, and after a while he remarked, “My dear child, you
have fared neither better nor worse than many others whose dear friends
and protectors lie beneath the sod. As you have run away, you must seek
your fortune elsewhere in the world. But as I have neither house nor
farm, nor wife nor child, I cannot do anything to help you but give you
good advice gratis. Sleep here quietly through the night, and to-morrow
morning note carefully the exact spot where the sun rises. You must
proceed in that direction, so that the sun shines in your face every
morning, and on your back every evening. Every day you will feel
stronger, and after seven years you will see a <span id="page_265">p.
265</span> great mountain before you, so high that its summit reaches to
the clouds. There you will find your future fortune. Take my wallet and
my flask, and you will find as much food and drink in them as you
require each day. But take care always to leave a crumb of bread and a
drop of liquid untouched, or else your store of food will fail you.<span
id="page_265_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_265_note_1) You may give freely to a
hungry bird or to a thirsty animal, for God is pleased when one of His
creatures is kind to another. You will find a folded plantain-leaf at
the bottom of the wallet, which you must take the greatest care of. When
you come to a river or lake on your journey, spread the leaf on the
water, and it will immediately change into a boat which will carry you
over to the other side. Then fold the leaf together again, and put it
into your wallet.” After thus speaking, he gave the wallet and the flask
to the boy, and said, “God bless <span id="page_266">p. 266</span> you!”
The next moment he had vanished from the boy’s eyes.

 The boy would have supposed it to be all a dream, if he had not held
the wallet and flask in his hand to convince him that it was a reality.
He then looked into the wallet, where he found half a loaf, a small case
of salt herrings, another of butter, and a nice piece of bacon. When the
boy had eaten enough, he lay down to sleep, with the wallet and flask
under his head, so that no thief should be able to take them from him.
Next morning at sunrise he awoke, refreshed himself with food and drink,
and then set out on his journey. It was strange that he felt no
weariness, and only hunger made him aware that it was nearly noon. He
ate the good fare with relish, took a nap, and travelled on. He found
that he had taken the right course when the sun set behind his back. He
travelled for many days in the same direction, when he arrived on the
bank of a small lake. Now he had an opportunity of testing the
properties of the leaf. All befell as the old man had foretold, for a
small boat with oars lay before him on the water. He stepped in, and a
few good strokes of the oars <span id="page_267">p. 267</span> landed
him on the other side. Then the boat changed back into a leaf, and he
put it into his wallet.

 Thus the boy travelled for several years, without the provisions in his
flask and wallet failing. Seven years may well have passed, for he had
now become a strong youth, when one day he beheld afar off a lofty
mountain which seemed to reach the clouds. But a whole week more passed
before he could reach its foot. Then he sat down to rest, and to see
whether the predictions of the old man would be accomplished. He had not
sat there very long when a strange hissing fell upon his ear, and
immediately afterwards an enormous serpent appeared, at least twelve
fathoms long, which came quite close to the young man. Horror seized
him, and he was unable to move, but the serpent passed by him in a
moment. Then all was still awhile, but afterwards it seemed to him as if
something heavy was moving along in sudden leaps. This proved to be a
great toad,<span id="page_267_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_267_note_1) as
large as a foal of two years old. This ugly creature also passed by
without taking any notice of the youth. Then he heard a rushing <span
id="page_268">p. 268</span> noise above him, as if a great storm had
arisen, and when he looked up, he saw a great eagle flying over his head
in the direction which the serpent and the toad had taken. “These are
queer things to bring me good fortune,” thought the youth. Suddenly he
beheld a man on a black horse riding towards him. The horse seemed to
have wings to his feet, for he flew like the wind. When the man saw the
youth sitting at the foot of the mountain, he reined in his horse and
asked, “Who has passed by here?” The youth answered, “First of all a
great serpent, perhaps twelve fathoms long, then a toad as large as a
two-year-old foal, and lastly a great eagle high above my head. I could
not guess at his size, but the sound of his wings was like that of a
tempest.” “You have seen well,” answered the stranger. “These are my
worst enemies, and I am now in pursuit of them. I might take you into my
service, if you have nothing better in view. Climb over the mountain,
and you will come straight to my house. I shall be there as soon as you,
if not sooner.” The young man promised to come, and the stranger rode
away like the wind.

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

 The youth did not find it easy to climb the mountain. It was three days
before he could reach the summit, and three days more before he reached
the foot of the mountain on the opposite side. His new acquaintance was
standing in front of his house, and he informed him that he had
succeeded in killing the serpent and the toad, but that he had not been
able to reach the eagle. Then he asked the young man if he was willing
to engage himself as his servant. “You can have as much good food as you
want every day, and I will give you liberal wages too, if you will do
your duty faithfully.” The bargain was struck, and the master took his
new servant into the house, and showed him what he had to do. A cellar
was hewn in the rock, and closed with threefold doors of iron. “My
savage dogs are chained in this cellar,” said the master, “and you must
take care that they do not dig their way out under the door with their
paws. For know that if one of these savage dogs got loose, it would no
longer be possible to restrain the others, for each would follow the
other and destroy everything which lives upon the earth. If the last dog
should break out, the end of the world would come, and the <span
id="page_270">p. 270</span> sun would have shone for the last time.”
Then he led his servant to a hill which was not created by God, but
heaped together by human hands from immense blocks of stone.

 “These stones,” said the master, “have been heaped together so that a
fresh stone can always be rolled up as often as the dogs dig out a hole.
I will show you the oxen which drag the stones, in the stall, and
instruct you about everything else which you have to attend to.”

 In the stall were a hundred black oxen, each of which had seven horns,
and they were fully as large as the largest oxen of the Ukraine.<span
id="page_270_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_270_note_1) “Six yoke of oxen
harnessed before the waggon will drag a stone easily away. I will give
you a crowbar, and when you touch the stone with it, it will roll into
the waggon of itself. You see that your work is not very laborious, but
your vigilance must be great in proportion. You must look to the door
three times during the day, and once at night, lest any misfortune
should happen, for the mischief might be much greater than you would be
able to answer for to me.”

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

 Our friend soon comprehended his duties, and his new occupation was
just to his taste. Each day he had the best of everything to eat and
drink that a man could wish for. After two or three months the dogs had
scratched a hole under the door large enough to put their tails out; but
a stone was immediately rolled against the breach, and the dogs were
forced to begin their work afresh.

 Many years passed by, and the young man had accumulated a good store of
money. Then the desire awoke in him to mingle with other men again, for
it was so long since he had seen any human face except his master’s.
Although his master was kind, the young man found the time terribly
long, especially when his master took the fancy to have a long sleep. At
such times he slept for seven weeks at a stretch, without interruption,
and without showing himself.

 It chanced that the master had fallen into one of his deep slumbers,
when one day a great eagle descended on the hill of stones and began to
speak. “Are you not a great fool to sacrifice your pleasant life to good
living? The money which you have saved is quite useless to you, for
<span id="page_272">p. 272</span> there are no men here who require it.
Take your master’s swift horse from the stable, bind your bag of money
to his neck, leap on his back, and ride away in the direction in which
the sun sets, and after some weeks you will again find yourself among
men. But you must bind the horse fast with an iron chain, so that he
cannot run away, or he would return to his usual haunts, and your master
would come to fight with you; but if he is without the horse, he cannot
leave the place.” “But who will watch the dogs here, if I go away while
my master sleeps?” asked the young man. “A fool you are, and a fool you
will remain,” replied the eagle. “Are you not yet aware that God has
created him for the express purpose of guarding the hell-hounds? It is
from sheer laziness that he sleeps for seven weeks at a stretch. When he
has no stranger as a servant, he will be obliged to rouse himself and do
his own work himself.”

 This advice delighted the young man. He followed the counsel of the
eagle, took the horse, bound the bag of gold on his neck, leaped on his
back, and rode away. He had not ridden very far from the mountain when
he heard his master <span id="page_273">p. 273</span> calling after him,
“Stop, stop! Take your money and begone in God’s name, but leave me my
horse!” The youth paid no heed, but rode away, and after some weeks he
found himself once more among mortal men. Then he built himself a nice
house, married a young wife, and lived happily as a rich man. If he is
not dead, he must be still living, but the wind-swift horse died long
ago.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](hoe1-35)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_261">p. 261</span>

<span id="page_261_note_1"></span>[1](#page_261_fr_1) The original title
of this story is, “How an orphan made his fortune unexpectedly.” Some
commentators identify the keeper of the hounds with Othin. In the
Scandinavian mythology the breaking loose of the monsters, the most
terrible of whom is Garm, the watch-dog of Helheim, precedes the
cataclysms of Ragnarök.

<span id="footnotes_page_265">p. 265</span>

<span id="page_265_note_1"></span>[1](#page_265_fr_1) This is the usual
condition attached to such gifts, as in the Swiss story of a
chamois-hunter who received an inexhaustible cheese from a
mountain-spirit. But in the case of the magic saddlebags of the Moor in
the story of Joodar (*Thousand and One Nights*), it was a condition that
all the dishes should be put back empty. The Jews, too, were forbidden
to leave anything over from the Passover Feast.

<span id="footnotes_page_267">p. 267</span>

<span id="page_267_note_1"></span>[1](#page_267_fr_1) Or frog: the word
is the same.

<span id="footnotes_page_270">p. 270</span>

<span id="page_270_note_1"></span>[1](#page_270_fr_1) Either the extinct
urus or the nearly extinct aurochs must be here intended.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
