[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Legends &
Sagas](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](hoe1-07) [Next](hoe1-09)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

## CANTO III <span class="small">THE FATE OF LINDA</span>

O<span class="small">NE</span> hot day, the youngest son of Kalev was
sitting on the top of a cliff watching the clouds and waves. Suddenly
the sky became overcast, and a terrific storm arose, which lashed the
breakers into foam. Aike,<span
id="page_24_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_24_note_1) the Thunder-God, was
driving his brazen-wheeled chariot over the iron bridges of the sky, and
as he thundered above, the sparks flew from the wheels, and he hurled
down flash after flash of lightning from his strong right hand against a
company of wicked demons of the air, who plunged from the rocks into the
sea, dodged the thunderbolts among the waves, <span id="page_25">p.
25</span> and mocked and insulted the god. The hero was enraged at their
audacity, and plunging into the water, dragged them from their
hiding-places like crabs, and filled a whole sack with them. He then
swam to the shore, and cast them out on the rocks, where the bolts of
the angry god soon reduced them to a disgusting mass that even the
wolves would not touch.

 Another day, the three sons of Kalev went hunting in the forest with
their three dogs.<span id="page_25_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_25_note_1) The
dogs killed a bear among the bushes, an elk in the open country, and a
wild ox in the fir-wood. Next they encountered a pack of wolves and
another of foxes, numbering five dozen of each, and killed them all. All
this game the youngest brother bound together and carried on his back;
and on the way home they found the rye-fields full of hares, of which
they likewise secured five dozen.<span
id="page_25_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_25_note_2)

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

 Meantime the Finnish sorcerer had been watching Kalev’s house from his
boat, where he remained in hiding among the rocks a little way from the
shore, till he saw that the three young heroes had left the house and
wandered far into the forest, leaving their home unprotected. The
sorcerer then steered boldly to the shore, hid his boat, and made his
way by devious and unfrequented paths to the house of Kalev, where he
climbed over the low gate into the enclosure, and went to the door, but
he looked cautiously round when he reached the threshold. Linda was just
boiling soup over the fire when he rushed in, and, without saying a
word, seized her by the girdle and dragged her away to his boat. She
resisted him with tooth and nail, but he muttered spells which unnerved
her strength and overpowered her feeble efforts, and her prayers and
cries for help were unheard by men. But she cried to the gods for
protection, and the Thunder-God himself came to her aid.

 Just as the sorcerer was about to push off from the shore, Pikker
darted a bolt from the clouds. His chariot thundered over the iron
bridges of the sky, scattering flames around it, and the sorcerer was
struck down senseless. Linda fled; but the <span id="page_27">p.
27</span> gods spared her further sorrow and outrage by transforming her
into a rock on Mount Iru.

 It was a long time before the sorcerer woke from his swoon, when he sat
up, rubbing his eyes, and wondering what had become of his prey; but he
could discover no trace of her. The rock is now called “Iru’s
Stepmother;” and old people relate that when it was once rolled down
into the valley, it was found next morning in its original place on the
mountain.

 The sons of Kalev were now making the best of their way home, sometimes
along well-trodden paths or across the plains, sometimes wading through
deep sand or mossy bogs, and then through forests of pine, oak, birch,
and alder. The pine forest was called the King’s Wood; the oak forest
was sacred to the God Taara; the forest where the slender birch-trees
grew was called the Maidens’ Wood, and the alder-wood was sacred to
mourners, and was called the Wood of the Poor Orphans.

 As they passed through the pine forest which was called the King’s
Wood, the eldest brother sat down under a tree and began to sing a song.
He sang till the leaves on the trees shone brighter than ever, and the
needles on the fir-trees turned to <span id="page_28">p. 28</span>
silken tassels, and the fir-cones gleamed purple in the sunshine. Acorns
sprouted on the oaks, tender catkins on the birch-trees, and other trees
were covered with sweet-scented snow-white flowers, which shone in the
sunshine and glimmered in the moonlight, while the woods re-echoed with
his singing, and the tones were heard far over the heaths and meadows,
and the daughter of the king of Kungla wept tears of rapture.<span
id="page_28_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_28_note_1)

 The second brother sat down in the birch-wood under a weeping
birch-tree, and began to sing a song. As he sang, the buds unfolded and
the flowers bloomed, the golden ears of corn swelled, and the apples
reddened, the kernels formed in the nuts, the cherries ripened, red
berries grew on the hills and blue berries in the marshes, while black
berries grew at the edges of the swamps, yellow ones on the mossy
hillocks, and the elder-trees were covered with rich purple grapes,
while the woods re-echoed with the song, and its notes spread far over
the heaths and meadows till the little water-nymphs shed tears of
rapture.

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

 The third brother sat down under a magnificent oak in the sacred
oak-forest of Taara, and began to sing a song. As he sang, the wild
beasts of the neighbouring woods and heaths gathered round him, and the
cuckoos, doves, magpies, larks, nightingales, and swallows joined in the
concert. The swans, geese, and ducks swam towards the sound, the waves
of the sea beat on the rocks, and the crowns of the trees bowed down.
The green hills trembled, and the clouds parted to permit the sky to
listen to the singing, while the forest-king’s daughter, the slender
wood nymphs, and the yellow-haired water-nymphs wept tears of rapture
and glowed with longing for the handsome singer.

 Evening now approached, and the heroes made the best of their way
homewards, the youngest, as before, loading himself with all the game.
They looked out anxiously for the smoke of their home and the glow of
the kitchen-fire, but they could discover nothing.

 They quickened their pace as they crossed the deep sand of the heath,
but no smoke nor fire nor steam from the kettle could be seen. They
rushed into the house, but the fire was out and the hearth was cold.
Again and again they shouted to their <span id="page_30">p. 30</span>
mother, but there was no answer save the echo. The evening became darker
and stiller, and the brothers went out to search in different
directions. The youngest went down to the beach, where he found such
traces of his mother’s presence that he concluded that she had been
carried off by her disappointed suitor, the Finnish sorcerer.

 The eldest brother proposed that they should eat their supper and go to
sleep, hoping that a dream might show them where to seek for their
mother. The second assented, hoping that Ukko would send them a vision;
but the youngest was unwilling to put off till to-morrow what might be
done to-day, and finally determined to repair to his father’s
grave.<span id="page_30_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_30_note_1)

<table data-align="center" data-cellpadding="10">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><span class="small">From his grave there spoke the father—<br />
“Who upon the sand is treading,<br />
With his feet the grave disturbing?<br />
In my eyes the sand is running,<br />
On my eyelids grass is pressing.”<br />
</span></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

 The youth told his father who he was, and all his trouble, and implored
him to rise and help him. But his father answered that he could not
rise, for the rocks lay on his breast, lilies of the <span
id="page_31">p. 31</span> valley on his eyelids, harebells on his eyes,
and red flowers on his cheeks. But he prayed the wind to show his son
the right path, and a gentle zephyr to guide him on the way pointed out
by the stars of heaven. So the young hero returned to the sea-shore and
followed his mother’s footprints till they were lost in the sea. He
gazed over the sea and shore, but could detect no further traces of her,
nor was any boat in sight. There he sat till it grew quite dark, and the
moon and stars appeared in the sky; but winds and waves, sea and sky,
moon and stars, alike were silent, and brought him no tidings of his
mother.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](hoe1-09)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_24">p. 24</span>

<span id="page_24_note_1"></span>[1](#page_24_fr_1) The Esthonian
Thunder-God goes by a variety of names, but is usually called Pikker or
Pikne, evidently the Perkunas of the Lithuanians. He resembles Thor in
driving about in a chariot, waging war with the evil demons; but one of
his attributes, not appertaining to Thor, is his flute (or bagpipe, as
some critics regard it). It will be seen in many places that the
Esthonians, like all other peoples among whom the belief in fairies,
demons, &c., survives, do not share the absurd modern notion that such
beings must necessarily be immortal.

<span id="footnotes_page_25">p. 25</span>

<span id="page_25_note_1"></span>[1](#page_25_fr_1) Peter, in the story
of the Lucky Rouble, is also attended by three black dogs. The dogs of
the sons of Kalev were named Irmi, Armi, and Mustukene; the last name
means Blackie, not Throttler, as Reinthal translates it.

<span id="page_25_note_2"></span>[2](#page_25_fr_2) In the
*Maha-Bharata* Bhima is represented as carrying enormous loads, and in
one passage Yudhishthira is searching for his brother in the Himalayas,
when he comes to a place where slaughtered lions and tigers are lying
about by thousands, which convinces him that he is on the right track.

<span id="footnotes_page_28">p. 28</span>

<span id="page_28_note_1"></span>[1](#page_28_fr_1) This passage would
seem to indicate that the daughter of the king of Kungla was sometimes
looked upon rather as a fairy than as a human princess.

<span id="footnotes_page_30">p. 30</span>

<span id="page_30_note_1"></span>[1](#page_30_fr_1) Visits to a father’s
grave for counsel are very common in the literature of Northern Europe.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
