[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Legends &
Sagas](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](hoe1-04) [Next](hoe1-06)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## ARGUMENT OF THE “KALEVIPOEG”

 <span class="small">*Canto I*.—Three brothers travel in various
directions, one of whom, Kalev,<span
id="page_2_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_2_note_1) is carried by an eagle to
Esthonia, where he becomes king. A widow finds a hen, a grouse’s egg,
and a young crow. From the two first spring the fair maidens, Salme and
Linda, and from the last a slave-girl. Salme chooses the Youth of the
Stars, and Linda the young giant-king Kalev, as their respective
husbands, with whom they depart.</span>

 <span class="small">*Canto II*.—Death and burial of Kalev; birth of his
posthumous son, the Kalevipoeg.</span>

 <span class="small">*Canto III*.—The Kalevipoeg and his brothers go
hunting in the forest. During their absence Linda is carried off by a
Finnish sorcerer whose suit she has despised. She escapes from him
through the interference of the gods, who afterwards change her into a
rock. Return of the <span id="page_3">p. 3</span> brothers; the Kalevide
seeks help and counsel at his father’s grave.</span>

 <span class="small">*Canto IV*.—The Kalevide throws himself into the
sea to swim to Finland. In the evening he lands on an island where he
meets a maiden whom he seduces. When she hears his name, she is
horrified, and falls into the sea. he plunges after her, but being
unable to save her, swims onwards on his journey. The parents rake the
sea, and find an oak and a fir and other things, but not their daughter.
Song of a maiden who was enticed into the sea by a man of copper.</span>

 <span class="small">*Canto V*.—The planting of the great oak-tree on
the island. The Kalevide arrives in Finland and slays the
sorcerer.</span>

 <span class="small">*Canto VI*.—The Kalevide visits a famous smith,
from whom he buys a huge sword, which was bespoken by his father Kalev.
A great drinking-bout is held in his honour, during which he slays the
smith’s eldest son in a fit of drunken fury, and the smith curses him.
The felling of the great oak-tree on the island.</span>

 <span class="small">*Canto VII*.—The Kalevide finds the sorcerer’s
boat, and sails homeward. The three brothers relate their adventures,
and the eldest proposes that they should now decide which of them shall
settle in the country as his father’s heir. The Kalevide again visits
his father’s grave.</span>

 <span class="small">*Canto VIII*.—The three sons of Kalev journey to
the shores of a lake, and try their strength în hurling rocks across it.
The youngest makes the best cast, and the other two leave the country.
The Kalevide ploughs the land, and one day while he is sleeping his
horse is devoured by wolves.</span>

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

 <span class="small">*Canto IX*.—The Kalevide slaughters the wolves.
News of war. The visit of Taara. The Finnish Bridge.</span>

 <span class="small">*Canto X*.—In order to settle a dispute between two
water-demons, the Kalevide’s cousin, the Alevide, begins to drain a
swarnp. The water-demon begs the hero to desist, and the latter tricks
the demon out of his treasures. Visit of the Kalevide’s cup-bearer to
the water-demon’s palace, and his escape. The Kalevide overcomes the
demon in hurling and wrestling. He decides to build fortified towns, and
sets out to Lake Peipus to fetch timber. Meeting with the Air-maiden at
a well.</span>

 <span class="small">*Canto XI*.—The Kalevide wades through Lake Peipus.
A sorcerer steals his sword and sinks it in the brook Käpä, where the
Kalevide leaves it, after enjoining it to cut off the legs of him who
had brought it there; meaning the sorcerer. He encounters a man of
ordinary stature in a forest, whom he puts in his wallet. The man
relates his adventure with two giants and their mother.</span>

 <span class="small">*Canto XII*.—The Kalevide is attacked by three sons
of the sorcerer, and beats them off with the boards, which are
destroyed. Adventure with the hedgehog. The Kalevide finds to his grief
that the man in his wallet has been killed by a chance blow during the
fight. He falls asleep, and the sorcerer casts a spell upon him which
throws him into a deep sleep for seven weeks. Vision of Ilmarine’s
workshop. The Kalevide wakes, and sets out on his return. Adventures of
two poor boys.</span>

 <span class="small">*Canto XIII*.—On his return journey the Kalevide
finds some demons cooking at the entrance to a cave. He enters the
cavern, which leads him to the door of the palace of <span
id="page_5">p. 5</span> Sarvik,<span
id="page_5_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_5_note_1) which he breaks open. In the
antechamber, he finds three maidens.</span>

 <span class="small">*Canto XIV*.—Next day the maidens show the Kalevide
over Sarvik’s palace. Sarvik surprises them, and wrestles with the
Kalevide in the enclosure, but is overcome and vanishes. The Kalevide
and the sisters escape from the palace.</span>

 <span class="small">*Canto XV*.—The fugitives are pursued by the
demons, but the youngest sister raises a flood between them. The leader,
Tühi, questions the Kalevide, who answers him sarcastically, and the
demons take to flight. The three sisters are married to the Kalevide’s
kinsmen.</span>

 <span class="small">*Canto XVI*.—The Kalevide projects a voyage to the
end of the world. Building of the ship Lennuk. Voyage to Finland and
Lapland. Meeting with Varrak, the Laplander. Voyage to the Island of
Fire. The Giant’s Daughter. The Northern Lights. The Dog-men. Homeward
voyage.</span>

 <span class="small">*Canto XVII*.—The fortified cities. Great battle
with invaders. Land journey of the Kalevide and his friends. Encounter
with Sarvik disguised as a dwarf. The daughters of the
Meadow-Queen.</span>

 <span class="small">*Canto XVIII*.—The gates of Pōrgu.<span
id="page_5_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_5_note_2) The Kalevide enters the
cavern, notwithstanding every obstacle fights his way across an iron
bridge, and enters Sarvik’s palace.</span>

 <span class="small">*Canto XIX*.—The Kalevide overcomes Sarvik in a
wrestling match, and loads him with chains. He returns to the upper
world, and finds the Alevide waiting for him <span id="page_6">p.
6</span> at the entrance to the cavern. Return of the Kalevide to
Lindanisa.<span id="page_6_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_6_note_1) Great feast
and songs. News of a formidable invasion. Departure of Varrak for
Lapland. Arrival of fugitives.</span>

 <span class="small">*Canto XX*.—The Kalevide buries his treasure.
Terrible battles, in which his cousin the Sulevide is slain. Drowning of
the Alevide. The Kalevide abdicates in favour of his surviving cousin,
the Olevide, and retires to live in seclusion on the bank of a river.
Being annoyed by occasional visitors, he wanders away towards Lake
Peipus, and steps into the brook Käpä, when his sword cuts off his legs.
His soul takes flight to the halls of Taara,<span
id="page_6_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_6_note_2) but is bidden by the gods to
reanimate his body. He is mounted on a horse, and stationed at the gates
of Pōrgu, to keep watch and ward on Sarvik and his hosts.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](hoe1-06)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_2">p. 2</span>

<span id="page_2_note_1"></span>[1](#page_2_fr_1) The names of the
others are not mentioned, but later in the poem we meet with three
heroes, the sons of Alev, Olev, and Sulev respectively, associated with
the son of Kalev, and spoken of as his cousins. Alev and Sulev may have
been the brothers of Kalev.

<span id="footnotes_page_5">p. 5</span>

<span id="page_5_note_1"></span>[1](#page_5_fr_1) The Prince of Hades,
literally Hornie.

<span id="page_5_note_2"></span>[2](#page_5_fr_2) Hades or Hell.

<span id="footnotes_page_6">p. 6</span>

<span id="page_6_note_1"></span>[1](#page_6_fr_1) Linda’s Bosom, the
Kalevide’s capital, named in honour of his mother; now Revel.

<span id="page_6_note_2"></span>[2](#page_6_fr_2) Ukko, the principal
god of the Finns and Esthonians, is frequently called Taara in the
*Kalevipoeg*. This name is not used in Finnish; but Tora is the name of
God among the Chuvash of Kasan.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
