[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Legends &
Sagas](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](hoe2-49) [Next](hoe2-51)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## THE BLACK POOL. (J<span class="small">ANNSEN.</span>)

I<span class="small">N</span> time of war, a rich lord tried to escape
from the country with his family and goods in a coach drawn by six
horses. In their haste, the horses swerved from the path, and all were
lost in a deep lake of black water. Since that time it has been haunted,
and sometimes a black dog tries to entice boys in, or cats and birds are
seen about it. One day a man was walking by the pool when his leg was
seized, and he was dragged down, but he contrived to seize a bush of
juniper, and saved <span id="page_147">p. 147</span> himself.<span
id="page_147_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_147_note_1). Then he saw some
maidens sporting in the water like white swans; but presently they
vanished. One day a fisherman caught a black tail-less pike, when the
voice of the old nobleman was heard asking, “Are all the swine safe?”
And another voice answered, “The old tail-less boar is missing.” Many
people, too, have seen a great hoop from a coach-wheel, as sharp as the
edge of an axe, rise from the water.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](hoe2-51)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_147">p. 147</span>

<span id="page_147_note_1"></span>[1](#page_147_fr_1) Dreadful stories
are told in many countries of the fiends inhabiting the undrained
swamps. Monsters as terrible as those described in “Beowulf” are
popularly believed to have haunted the English fens almost to the
present day. Aino, in the *Kalevala* (Runo 4), was lured into a lake by
the sight of some maidens bathing; and it is said that it is unsafe for
sensitive people to venture near the banks of some of the Irish lakes in
the evening, lest they should be lured into the water by the singing of
the water-nymphs. In this connection, we may refer to the oft-quoted
passage from the notes to Heywood’s *Hierarchies of the Blessed Angels*
(1635): “In Finland there is a castle, which is called the New Rock,
moated about with a river of unsounded depth, the water black, and the
fish therein very distasteful to the palate. In this are spectres often
seen, which foreshow either the death of the Governor, or of some prime
officer belonging to the place; and most often it appeareth in the shape
of a harper, sweetly singing and dallying and playing under the
water.”—See Southey’s *Donica*.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
