[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Legends &
Sagas](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](hoe2-34) [Next](hoe2-36)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 The following short stories relate to different classes of spirits of
the air.

 

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

## THE SPIRITS OF THE NORTHERN LIGHTS. (J<span class="small">ANNSEN.</span>)<span id="page_107_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_107_note_1)

A <span class="small">CERTAIN</span> nobleman was in the habit of
driving away from his mansion every Thursday during hard winters, and
not returning till towards morning. But he had strictly forbidden all
his people to accompany him, or to receive him on his return. He himself
harnessed the horse to the sledge, and unharnessed him when he returned.
But no one was permitted to see the horse and carriage, and he
threatened every one with death who should venture into his secret
stable in the evening. During the day he carried the stable key in his
bosom, and at night he hid it under his pillow.

 But the nobleman’s coachman heeded not the strict prohibition of his
master, for he was much too anxious to know where his master went every
Thursday, and what the horse and carriage were like. So he contrived one
Thursday to get into the stable, and he hid himself in a dark corner
near the door.

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

 He had not long to wait before his master came and opened the door. All
at once it became as light as if many candles had been kindled in the
great stable. The coachman crouched together in his corner like a
hedgehog, for if his master had seen him, he would certainly have
suffered the threatened punishment.

 Then the master pushed the sledge forward, and it shone like a red-hot
anvil.

 But while the master went to fetch the horse, the coachman crept under
the sledge.

 The noble man harnessed the horse, and threw cloths over the horse and
the sledge, that the people about the yard should not see the wonderful
radiance.

 Then the coachman crept quietly from under the sledge, and hid himself
behind on the runners, where by good luck his master did not notice him.

 When all was ready, the nobleman sprang into the sledge, and they went
off so rapidly that the runners of the sledge resounded, always due
north. After some hours, the coachman saw that the cloths were gone from
the horse and sledge, which shone again like fire.

 Now, too, he perceived that ladies and gentlemen <span id="page_109">p.
109</span> were driving up from all directions with similar sledges and
horses. That was a rush and rattle! The drivers rushed past each other
as though it was for a very heavy wager, or as if they were on their
wedding journey. At last the coachman perceived that their course lay
above the clouds, which stretched below them like smooth lakes.

 After a time, the racers fell more and more behind, and the coachman’s
master said to his nearest companion, “Brother, the other spirits of the
Northern Lights are departing. Let us go too!”

 Then the master and coachman drove fast home. Next day people said they
had never seen the Northern Lights so bright as the night before.

 The coachman held his tongue, and trusted no one with the story of his
nocturnal journey. But when he was old and grey he told the story to his
grandson, and so it became known to the people. And it was said that
such spirits still exist, and that when the Northern Lights flame in the
heavens in winter they hold a wedding in the sky.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](hoe2-36)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_107">p. 107</span>

<span id="page_107_note_1"></span>[1](#page_107_fr_1) In Canto xvi. of
the *Kalevipoeg*, the spirits of the Northern Lights are described as
carrying on mimic combats in the air.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
