[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Legends &
Sagas](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](hoe2-52) [Next](hoe2-54)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 In our next story we shall see the Devil and his <span id="page_159">p.
159</span> companions overreaching themselves in a manner worthy of the
*Ingoldsby Legends*, while in the Polyphemus story already referred to
under Cosmopolitan Tales we find the Devil blinded and perishing
miserably.

 

## THE MOON-PAINTER. (J<span class="small">ANNSEN.</span>)

W<span class="small">HEN</span> the Lord God had created the whole
world, the work did not turn out so complete as it ought to have done,
for there was an insufficiency of light. In the daytime the sun pursued
his course through the firmament, but when he sank at evening, when the
evening glow faded into twilight, and all grew dark, thick darkness
covered heaven and earth, until the morning redness took the dawn from
the hand of the evening glow and heralded a new day. There was neither
moonlight nor starlight, but darkness from sunset to sunrise.

 The Creator soon perceived the deficiency, and sought to remedy it. So
he ordered Ilmarine<span id="page_159_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_159_note_1)
to <span id="page_160">p. 160</span> see that it should be light on
earth by night as well as by day. Ilmarine listened to the command, and
went to his forge, where he had already forged the firmament. He threw
in silver, and cast it into a large round ball. He covered it with thick
gold, lighted a bright fire inside, and ordered it to proceed on its
course across the sky. Then he forged innumerable stars, covered them
thinly with gold, and fixed each in its place in the firmament.

 Now began a new life for the earth. The sun had hardly set, and was
borne away by the evening glow, when the golden moon arose from the
borders of the sky, set out on his blue path, and illuminated the
darkness of night just as the sun illumines the day. Around him twinkled
the innumerable host of stars, and accompanied him like a king, until at
length he reached the other side of the heavens. Then the stars retired
to rest, the moon quitted the firmament, and the sun was conducted by
the <span id="page_161">p. 161</span> morning redness to his place, in
order that he should give light to the world.

 After this, ample light shone upon the earth from above both by day and
by night; for the face of the moon was just as clear and bright as that
of the sun, and his rays diffused equal warmth. But the sun often shone
so fiercely by day that no one was able to work. Thus they preferred to
work under the light of the nocturnal keeper of the heavens, and all men
rejoiced in the gift of the moon.

 But the Devil was very much annoyed at the moon, because he could not
carry on his evil practices in his bright light. Whenever he went out in
search of prey, he was recognised a long way off, and was driven back
home in disgrace. Thus it came about that during all this time he only
succeeded in bagging two souls.

 So he sat still day and night pondering on what he could do to better
his prospects. At last he summoned two of his companions, but they could
not give him any good advice. So the three of them consulted together in
care and trouble, but nothing feasible occurred to them. On the seventh
day they had nothing left to eat, and they sat there <span
id="page_162">p. 162</span> sighing, rubbing their empty stomachs, and
racking their brains with thought. At last a lucky idea occurred to the
Devil himself.

 “Comrades,” he exclaimed, “I know what we can do. We must get rid of
the moon, if we want to save ourselves. If there’s no moon in the sky,
we shall be just as valiant heroes as before. We can carry out our great
undertakings by the dim starlight.”

 “Shall we pull down the moon from heaven?” asked his servants.

 “No,” said the Devil, “he is fixed too tight, and we can’t get him
down. We must do something more likely to succeed. The best we can do is
to take tar and smear him with it till he’s black. He may then run about
the sky as he pleases, but he can’t give us any more trouble. The
victory then rests with us, and rich booty awaits us.”

 The fiendish company approved of the plan of their chief, and were all
anxious to get to work. But it was too late at the time, for the moon
was just about to set, and the sun was rising. But they worked zealously
at their preparations all day till late in the evening. The Devil went
out and stole a barrel of tar, which he carried to his accomplices <span
id="page_163">p. 163</span> in the wood. Meantime, they had been engaged
in making a long ladder in seven pieces, each piece of which measured
seven fathoms. Then they procured a great bucket, and made a mop of
lime-tree bast, which they fastened to a long handle.

 Then they waited for night, and as soon as the moon rose, the Devil
took the ladder and the barrel on his shoulder and ordered his two
servants to follow him with the bucket and the mop. When they reached a
suitable spot, they filled the bucket with tar, threw a quantity of
ashes into it, and dipped in the mop. Just at this moment the moon rose
from behind the wood. They hastily raised the ladder, and the Devil put
the bucket into the hand of one of his servants, and told him to make
haste and climb up, while he stationed the other under the ladder.

 Now the Devil and his servant were standing under the ladder to hold
it, but the servant could not bear the weight, and it began to shake.
The other servant who had climbed up missed his footing on a rung of the
ladder, and fell with the bucket on the Devil’s neck. The Devil began to
pant and shake himself like a bear, and swore frightfully. He paid no
more attention to the ladder, and <span id="page_164">p. 164</span> let
it go, so it fell on the ground with a thundering crash, and broke into
a thousand pieces.

 When the Devil found that his work had prospered so ill, and that he
had tarred himself all over instead of the moon, he grew mad with rage
and fury. He washed and scoured and scraped himself, but the tar and
soot stuck to him so tight that he keeps his black colour to the present
day.

 But although the first experiment had failed, the Devil would not give
up his plan. Next day he stole seven more ladders, bound them firmly
together, and carried them to the edge of the wood where the moon stands
lowest. In the evening, when the moon rose, the Devil planted the ladder
firmly on the ground, steadied it with both hands, and sent the other
servant up to the moon, cautioning him to hold very tight and beware of
slipping. The servant climbed up as quickly as possible with the bucket,
and arrived safely at the last rung of the ladder. Just then the moon
rose from behind the wood in regal splendour. Then the Devil lifted up
the whole ladder, and carried it hastily to the moon. What a great piece
of luck! It was really just so long that its end reached the moon.

 Then the Devil’s servant set to work in earnest. <span id="page_165">p.
165</span> But it’s not an easy task to stand on the top of such a
ladder and to tar the moon’s face over with a mop. Besides, the moon
didn’t stand still at one place, but went on his appointed course
steadily. So the servant tied himself to the moon with a rope, and being
thus secure from falling, he took the mop from the bucket, and began to
blacken the moon first on the back. But the thick gilding of the pure
moon would not suffer any stain. The servant painted and smeared, till
the sweat ran from his forehead, until he succeeded at last, with much
toil, in covering the back of the moon with tar. The Devil below gazed
up at the work with his mouth open, and when he saw the work half
finished he danced with joy, first on one foot, and then on the other.

 When the servant had blackened the back of the moon, he worked himself
round to the front with difficulty, so as to destroy the lustre of the
guardian of the heavens on that side also. He stood there at last,
panted a little, and thought, when he began, that he would find the
front easier to manage than the other side. But no better plan occurred
to him, and he had to work in the same way as before.

 Just as he was beginning his work again, the <span id="page_166">p.
166</span> Creator woke up from a little nap. He was astonished to see
that the world had become half black, though there was not a cloud in
the sky. But, when he looked more sharply into the cause of the
darkness, he saw the Devil’s servant perched on the moon, and just
dipping his mop into the bucket in order to make the front of the moon
as black as the back. Meantime the Devil was capering for joy below the
ladder, just like a he-goat.

 “Those are the sort of tricks you are up to behind my back!” cried the
Creator angrily. “Let the evil-doers receive the fitting reward of their
offences. You are on the moon, and there you shall stay with your bucket
for ever, as a warning to all who would rob the earth of its light. My
light must prevail over the darkness, and the darkness must flee before
it. And though you should strive against it with all your strength, you
would not be able to conquer the light. This shall be made manifest to
all who gaze on the moon at night, when they see the black spoiler of
the moon with his utensils.”

 The Creator’s words were fulfilled. The Devil’s servant still stands in
the moon to this day with his bucket of tar, and for this reason the
moon <span id="page_167">p. 167</span> does not shine so brightly as
formerly. He often descends into the sea to bathe, and would like to
cleanse himself from his stains, but they remain with him eternally.
However bright and clear he shines, his light cannot dispel the shadows
which he bears, nor pierce through the black covering on his back. When
he sometimes turns his back to us, we see him only as a dull opaque
creature, devoid of light and lustre. But he cannot bear to show us his
dark side long. He soon turns his shining face to the earth again, and
sheds down his bright silvery light from above; but the more he waxes,
the more distinct becomes the form of his spoiler, and reminds us that
light must always triumph over darkness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](hoe2-54)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_159">p. 159</span>

<span id="page_159_note_1"></span>[1](#page_159_fr_1) Ilmarine or
Ilmarinen is the Vulcan of the Finnish and Esthonian legends. He is
represented in the *Kalevala* as a young and handsome hero, but
deficient in courage. In Esthonian tales he generally <span
id="footnotes_page_160">p. 160</span> appears as a demigod. In the
*Kalevala* he plays a part second only to that of Väinämöinen himself,
but fails in many of his undertakings; for though he is said to have
forged the sky, he cannot confer speech or warmth on the bride of gold
and silver whom he forges for himself after his first wife has been
given to the wolves and bears by Kullervo; and when he forges a new sun
and moon, after the old ones have been stolen by Louhi, they turn out
miserable failures.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
