[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Legends &
Sagas](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](hoe2-86)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_299">p. 299</span>

# BIBLIOGRAPHY

T<span class="small">HE</span> present list contains only books and
papers which have been used or specially consulted in the preparation of
this work, or which have been published in England on Esthonian tales
and poems. Other books quoted are referred to in the Index and Glossary.

B<span class="small">LUMBERG</span>, G. *Quellen und Realien des
Kalewipoeg, nebst Varianten und Ergänzungen*. Dorpat, 1869. An important
work, including a map, from which we have borrowed some particulars.

B<span class="small">OECLER</span>, J. M. *Der Ehsten abergläubische
Gebräuche, Weisen, und Gewohnheiten, von Johann Wolfgang Boecler,
weiland Pastor zu Kusal in Ehstland und des Consistorii in Reval
Assessor. Mit auf die Gegenwart bezüglichen Anmerkungen beleuchtet von
Dr. F. R. Kreutzwald*. St. Petersburg, 1854.

B<span class="small">OUQUET</span> *from the Baltic. All the Year
Round*, IV. pp. 80-83 (Nov. 3, 1860), Relates to some of the legends of
Vanemuine, the *Kalevipoeg*, and Koit and Aemmerik.

D<span class="small">IDO</span>, A. *Littérature orale des Estoniens,
Bibliographie des principales Publications de l’Estonie, et en
particulier celle du Dr. Frédéric Reinhold Kreutzwald*, 1804-1882.
*Revue des Traditions Populaires*, VIII. pp. 353-365, 424-428, 485-495
(1893). Contains an account, <span id="page_300">p. 300</span> more or
less detailed, of the longer tales in Kreutzwald’s collection, a few
being fully translated.

D<span class="small">IDO</span>, A. *Kalewipoeg, Épopée nationale
Estonienne*. Op. cit. IX. pp. 137-155 (1894). Contains an analysis of
the poem.

D<span class="small">ONNER</span>, A. *Kalevipoeg jumalaistarulliselta
ja historialliselta kannalta katsottuna*. Suomi, ser. 2, vol. 5 (1866).
Discusses the mythological and historical character of the *Kalevipoeg*,
and its relations to the *Kalevala*, especially as regards the episode
of Kullervo.

E<span class="small">STHONIA</span>. *Encyclopædia Britannica* (ed.
IX.), vol. viii. pp. 561-563 (1878).

G<span class="small">OULD</span>, S. B. *The Kalewipoeg. Fraser’s
Magazine*, vol. 78, pp. 534-544 (Oct. 1868). A fragmentary account of
the poem, containing some curious errors, such as “Sarwik” being
translated “Hell;” but with useful comments, especially on the
Kalevide’s voyage to the North Pole. We cannot see, however, that the
Esthonian writings exhibit the melancholy character of a depressed
nation, as Mr. Baring-Gould imagines.

G<span class="small">ROSSE</span>, J<span class="small">ULIUS</span>.
*Die Abenteuerdes Kalewiden: Esthnisches Volksmärchen*. Leipzig, 1875.
An abstract of the story in hexameters.

I<span class="small">SRAEL</span>, C. C<span class="small">HR</span>.
*Kalewipoeg, oder die Abenteuer des Kalewiden. Eine estnische Sage frei
nach dem Estnischen bearbeitet*. Frankfort-on-Main, 1873. A good prose
abstract of the poem, somewhat rearranged.

J<span class="small">ANNSEN</span>, H<span class="small">ARRY</span>.
*Märchen und Sagen des estnischen Volkes*. Two Parts. Dorpat, 1881, and
Riga, 1888. A selection of tales from various sources, some few being
from Kreutzwald’s collection. Valuable notes are appended to Part ii.

— *Esthnische Märchen. Veckenstedt’s Zeitschrift für Volkskunde*, i. pp.
314-317 (1889). Contains three <span id="page_301">p. 301</span>
stories: “The Devil’s Visit,” “The Talking Trees” (Christian variant),
and “The Officious Flies.” Jannsen states that the first has already
been printed in the original, and that the other two are from his own
collections.

K<span class="small">ALEWIPOEG</span>, *Üks ennemuistene Eesti jut*.
Kuopio, 1862. An earlier edition was published at Dorpat with the German
translation; but this is the one which I have consulted in the
preparation of this work.

K<span class="small">ALEWIPOEG</span>, *eine estnische Sage,
zusammengestellt von F. R. Kreutzwald, verdeutscht von C. Reinthal und
Dr. Bertram*. Dorpat, 1857-61.

K<span class="small">IRBY</span>, W. F. *On the Progress of Folk-lore
Collections in Esthonia, with special reference to the work of Pastor
Jacob Hurt. Papers and Transactions of International Folk-lore
Congress*, 1892, pp- 427-429. Based on information published by, or
received from, Prof-Kaarle Krohn of Helsingfors.

K<span class="small">REUTZWALD</span>, F. R. *Eestirahwa ennemuisted
jutud. Rahwa suust korjanud ja üleskirjutanud*. Helsingfors, 1866. One
of the first and best collections of Esthonian tales, but without notes.
I believe that several later editions have been published at Dorpat.

— *Ehstnische Märchen, aufgezeichnet von Friedrich Kreutzwald. Aus dem
Ehstnischen übersetzt von F. Löwe, ehem. Bibliothekar a. d. Petersb.
Akad. d. Wissenschaften. Nebst einem Vorwort von Anton Schiefner, und
Anmerkungen von Reinhold Köhler und Anton Schiefner*. Halle, 1869.
Includes a very close translation of most of the longer tales in
Kreutzwald’s collection. The notes, too, are valuable.

K<span class="small">REUTZWALD</span>, Fr., und N<span
class="small">EUS</span>, H. *Mythische und Magische Lieder der Ehsten*.
St. Petersburg, 1854. In Esthonian and German.

<span id="page_302">p. 302</span>

K<span class="small">ROHN</span>, K<span class="small">AARLE</span>.
*Die geographische Verbreitung Estnischer Lieder*. Kuopio, 1892. This
paper is noted in “Folk-Lore,” IV. p. 19 (March, 1893).

L<span class="small">ATHAM</span>, R. *Nationalities of Europe*. 2 vols.
London, 1863. Vol. i. includes translations of fourteen of the principal
poems from Neus’ *Ehstntsche Volkslieder*.

L<span class="small">ÖWE</span>, F. *See* K<span
class="small">REUTZWALD</span>.

N<span class="small">EUS</span>, H. *Ehstnische Volkslieder. Urschrift
und Uebersetzung*. Reval, 1850-52. A collection of 119 poems in
Esthonian and German, with notes.

O<span class="small">XENFORD</span>, J<span class="small">OHN</span>.
*The Esthonian Hercules. Macmillan’s Magazine*, vol. 30, pp. 263-272
(July 1874). An outline of the story of the *Kalevipoeg*, based on
Israel’s little book.

P<span class="small">OPULAR</span> P<span class="small">OETRY</span> *of
the Esthonians*. Varieties of Literature from Foreign Literary Journals
and Original MSS., now first published. London, 1795, pp. 22-44
(reprinted in “Folk-Lore Journal,” iii. pp. 156-169, 1885). Contains
twelve specimens of lyric poetry, undoubtedly based on some German
publication. The anonymous compiler makes the strange mistake of
regarding the Esthonians as “Sclavonians.”

S<span class="small">CHIEFNER</span>, A. *Ueber die ehstnische Sage vom
Kalewipoeg. Bulletin de l’Académie Imperiale des Sciences de St.
Petersburg*, ii. pp. 273-297 (1860). Contains an analysis of the first
thirteen cantos of the *Kalevipoeg*, with reference to Finnish,
Scandinavian, and Classical parallels.

S<span class="small">CHOTT</span>. *Ueber finnische und estnische
Heldensagen, Monatsbericht d. k.k. Akademie der Wissenschaft zu Berlin*,
1866, pp. 249-260.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

I <span class="small">AM</span> indebted to Mr. Sydney Hartland for
kindly calling my attention to one or two papers which I might otherwise
have overlooked.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Legends & Sagas](../index) [Index](index)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
