[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Legends &
Sagas](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](hoe2-46) [Next](hoe2-48)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## THE LAKE AT EUSEKÜLL. (J<span class="small">ANNSEN.</span>)

I<span class="small">N</span> former times there was no lake at
Euseküll, for it was carried there from the district of Oiso in
Esthonia. One day a great black cloud <span id="page_143">p. 143</span>
like a sack rolled up from the north, and drew up all the water from the
lake of Oiso. Before the cloud ran a black bull bellowing angrily, and
above in the cloud flew an old man crying incessantly, “Lake, go to
Euseküll!” When the bull came to Euseküll, where the tavern now stands,
he dug his horns into the ground, and formed two deep trenches, which
any one may still see to the right of the path which leads to the tavern
at Kersel.

 Then the cloud rolled on farther, till it reached the district of
EuseküIl. All the people were making hay in the meadow, and when they
saw the black cloud, they hastened with their work, to bring the hay
under cover. Presently the cloud stood above them. First a great knife
with a wooden handle fell down, and next all kinds of fish, and then it
began to rain heavily.

 The people hurried from the field to take shelter. But one girl who had
left her string of beads on a haycock, and wanted to save it, neglected
to escape. Suddenly the waves of the lake fell from above, and buried
her beneath them. Since that time the lake at Euseküll has been
inhabited by a water-nymph, who requires the offering of a human life
every year.

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

 There are several other Esthonian tales of lakes moving from one spot
to another.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](hoe2-48)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
