[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Legends &
Sagas](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](hoe2-07) [Next](hoe2-09)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## THE GIFTED BROTHERS. (K<span class="small">REUTZWALD.</span>)

T<span class="small">HIS</span> familiar story appears in the form of
Swiftfoot, Quickhand, and Sharpeye. It begins with the lamentation of a
rich but childless wife, who is consoled by a pretty little girl,<span
id="page_12_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_12_note_1) who suddenly appeared, and
directed her to boil three eggs of a black hen for her husband’s supper,
and then to send him to bed, but to walk in the open air herself before
retiring. In due course, three strong boys were born, and the fairy came
to see them in their cradles. She took a ball of red thread from her
pocket, and tied threads round the ankles of one boy, the wrists of
another, and the temples of the third. She directed the mother not to
disturb <span id="page_13">p. 13</span> the threads till the children
were taken to the christening, and then to burn the threads, collect the
ashes in a spoon, and moisten them with milk from her breast; and as
soon as the children were brought home from the christening, to give
each two drops of the mixture on his tongue. Of course one boy was
gifted with great swiftness, and another with great strength and skill
in handiwork, and another with great sharpness of sight.

 When they grew up, the youths separated to seek their fortunes,
agreeing to meet at home in three years’ time, and Swiftfoot went
eastwards, and entered into the service of a king as groom, and made
himself famous in that capacity.

 Quickhand, who went southwards, could take up any trade without
learning it, and could turn out twenty coats or pairs of shoes in a day,
better made than the best tailor or shoemaker. He too made himself
famous by supplying a whole army with a full outfit at the shortest
notice, when all the workmen in the kingdom were unable to do so by the
time required.

 The adventures of Sharpeye may be given more in detail.

 Sharpeye, the third brother, set out westwards. <span id="page_14">p.
14</span> He wandered about for a long time from one place to another
without meeting with any profitable employment. He could easily earn
enough anywhere for his daily expenses as a good shot, but what could he
make in this way to bring home? At length he reached a large city, where
everybody was talking about a misfortune which had befallen the king
thrice already, but which no one was able to comprehend or guard
against. The king had a valuable tree in his garden, which bore golden
apples, many of which were as large as a great ball of thread, and might
have been worth many thousand roubles. It may be imagined that such
fruit was not left uncounted, and that guards were stationed around
night and day to prevent any attempt at robbery. Nevertheless one of the
largest apples, valued at six thousand roubles, had been stolen every
night for three nights running. The guards had neither seen the thief
nor been able to discover any trace of him. It immediately occurred to
Sharpeye that there must be some very strange trick in the affair, which
his piercing sight might perhaps enable him to discover. He thought that
if the thief did not approach the tree incorporeally and invisibly, he
would never be able <span id="page_15">p. 15</span> to escape his sharp
eyes. He therefore asked the king to allow him to visit the garden to
make his observations without the knowledge of the guards. On receiving
permission, he prepared himself a place of concealment in the summit of
a tree not far from the golden apple-tree, where no one could see him,
while his sharp eyes could pierce everywhere, and see everything that
happened. He took with him a bag of bread and a bottle of milk, so that
there would be no need for him to leave his hiding-place. He now kept
close watch on the golden apple-tree, and on everything around it. The
guards were posted round the tree in three rows, so close that not a
mouse could have crept between them unobserved. The thief must have
wings, for he could not reach the tree by the ground. But Sharpeye could
detect nothing all day which looked like a thief. Towards sunset a
little yellow moth fluttered round the tree, and at last settled on a
branch which bore a very fine apple. Everybody could understand just as
well as Sharpeye that a little moth could not carry a golden apple away
from the tree, but as he could see nothing bigger, he kept his eyes
fixed upon it. The sun had set long ago, and the last traces <span
id="page_16">p. 16</span> of twilight were fading from the horizon, but
the lanterns round the tree gave so much light that he could see
everything distinctly. The yellow moth still sat motionless on the
branch. It was about midnight when the eyes of the watchman in the tree
closed for a moment. How long he dozed, he could not tell, but when his
eyes fell next upon the apple-tree, he saw that the yellow moth was no
longer sitting on the branch, and was still more startled to discover
that the beautiful golden apple on that branch had also disappeared. He
could not doubt that a theft had been committed, but if the concealed
watchman had related the affair, people would have thought him mad, for
even a child might know that a moth could not carry away a golden apple.
In the morning there was again a great uproar when it was discovered
that another apple was missing without any of the guards having seen a
trace of the thief. But Sharpeye went to the king again and said, “It is
true that I have seen as little of the thief as your guards; but if
there is a skilful magician in or near the town, let me know, and I hope
with his aid to catch the thief to-night.” As soon as he learned where
the magician lived, he <span id="page_17">p. 17</span> went straight to
him. The two men consulted what was best to be done, and at length
Sharpeye cried out, “I have hit upon a plan. Can you make a woven net so
strong by magic that the thread will hold the most powerful creature
fast, and then we can chain up the thief so that he cannot escape
again?” The magician said it was possible, and took three large spiders,
which he made so strong by sorcery that no creature could escape from
their meshes, and put them in a little box, which he gave to Sharpeye,
saying, “Place these spiders wherever you like, and point with your
finger where they shall spin their net, and they will immediately spin a
cage round the prisoner, which only Mana’s<span
id="page_17_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_17_note_1) power can loosen; and I
will come to your aid myself, if needful.”

 Sharpeye hid the box in his bosom, and crept back to his tree to wait
the upshot of the affair. He saw the yellow moth fluttering round the
apple-tree at the same time as the day before; but it waited much longer
before settling on a branch which bore a large golden apple. Sharpeye
immediately slid down from his tree, went up to the golden apple-tree,
set a ladder against it, and climbed <span id="page_18">p. 18</span> up
carefully, so as not to scare the moth, and set each of his small
weavers on separate branches. One spider was a few spans above the moth,
a second to the right, and a third to the left, and then Sharpeye drew
lines with his finger backwards and forwards round the moth, which sat
motionless with raised wings. At sunset the watcher was back in his
hiding-place in the tree, from whence he saw to his joy that his three
weavers had woven a net round the moth on all sides, from which it could
not hope to escape, if the magician possessed the power which he
pretended. The man in the tree did his best to keep awake, but
nevertheless his eyes closed all at once. How long he slept he knew not,
but he was roused up by a great noise. When he looked round, he saw that
the soldiers on guard were running about the apple-tree like ants, and
shouting, and in the tree sat an old grey-bearded man with a golden
apple in his hand in an iron net. Sharpeye jumped hastily from his tree,
but before he reached the apple-tree the king himself arrived. He had
sprung from his bed at the shouts of the guards, and hurried to see what
unusual event was happening in the garden. There sat the thief in the
tree, and could not get away. <span id="page_19">p. 19</span> “Most
noble king,” said Sharpeye, “you can now go quietly to rest again, and
sleep till to-morrow morning, for the thief cannot now escape us. If he
was as strong again as he is, he could not break the magic meshes of his
cage.” The king thanked him, and ordered the greater part of the
soldiers to retire to rest also, leaving only a few on guard under the
tree. Sharpeye, who had kept watch for two nights and two days, also
went away to sleep.

 Next morning the magician went to the king’s palace. He was glad when
he saw the thief in the cage, and would not let him out till the fellow
showed himself in his real form. At last he cut off half his beard under
his chin, called for a light and began to singe the hairs.<span
id="page_19_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_19_note_1) Oh, how the bird in the
iron cage suffered now! He shrieked pitifully and beat himself with
pain, but the magician went on singeing fresh hairs to make the thief
manageable. At last he said, “Confess who you are.” The fellow answered,
“I am the servant of the sorcerer Piirisilla,<span
id="page_19_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_19_note_2) who sent me here to
steal.” The magician <span id="page_20">p. 20</span> began again to
singe the hairs. “Ow! Ow!” shouted the sorcerer; “give me time and I
will confess. I am not the servant, but the sorcerer’s son.” Again they
singed his hairs, when the prisoner yelled out, “I’m the sorcerer
Piirisilla himself.” “Show yourself in your proper form or I’ll singe
you again,” said the mighty magician. Then the little man in the cage
began to expand, and grew in a few minutes to the size of an ordinary
man, who could have carried off a golden apple easily. He was taken down
from the tree in the cage, and asked where the stolen apples were
hidden. He offered to show the place himself, but Sharpeye begged the
king not to let the thief out of the cage, or he would become a moth
again, and escape. They were obliged to singe his hair many times before
he would give up all the stolen property; and at last, when all the
golden apples had been recovered, the thief was burned in the cage, and
his ashes scattered to the winds.

 There was great rejoicing when the three brothers returned home at the
end of the term agreed upon. Shortly afterwards, hearing that the <span
id="page_21">p. 21</span> daughter of a rich king in the North was
destined as the bride of any one who could perform three wonderful
feats, they set out to the court of her father.

 The first feat was to watch a swift reindeer cow for a whole day, and
bring her back to the stable at night; the second to bolt the palace
door in the evening; and the third was to shoot an arrow straight
through the middle of an apple, which a man, standing on the top of a
high hill, held in his mouth by the stalk.

 The three brothers were so much alike that as each could accomplish one
of the feats only, they decided to personate the same man, which was not
difficult, when they trimmed their beards to exactly the same pattern.

 Swiftfoot went first to the king, and the princess peeped at him
through the crack of the door, and fell in love with him, wishing she
could hobble the reindeer’s feet that the handsome man might win her.
However, he found that he was easily a match for the reindeer, though
she could have run across the world in a single day. In the evening he
brought the cow back to her stable, and after supper returned to his
brothers.

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

 Next day, Quickhand dressed himself up like his brother, and went to
the court, where every one took him for Swiftfoot. The princess again
peeped at him, and wished she could drive away the witch from the palace
door. This witch was accustomed to change herself into the iron door
bar, and if any one climbed a ladder to close it, she would grasp his
hand, and set the folding doors swinging backwards and forwards till
morning, while the man swung helpless in her grasp. But Quickhand
ordered an iron hand to be made,<span
id="page_22_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_22_note_1) which he heated red hot,
and mounting the ladder, held it out to the witch, and shot the bolt at
the moment that she grasped it; and the door remained bolted till the
king rose in the morning. Quickhand spent that day with the king, and
returned to his brothers in the evening.

 Next day, Sharpeye went to the palace, and it was arranged that the
shooting feat should come off on the following morning; and the princess
declared that she would part with all she possessed to ensure his
success. The man who held the apple on the mountain looked no bigger
than a crow, and fearing for his own safety, did not hold <span
id="page_23">p. 23</span> the apple by the stalk, but in his mouth,
thinking that the marksman would be more likely to shoot the arrow at a
safe distance from him. But Sharpeye struck the apple precisely in the
middle, carrying away a bit of flesh from each cheek of the holder with
it.

 Sharpeye declined the king’s proposal to betroth him to his daughter
immediately, and he returned to his brothers, when they rejoiced in
their success like children, and then cast lots<span
id="page_23_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_23_note_1) for the princess.<span
id="page_23_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_23_note_2) The lot fell to Sharpeye,
who married the princess, while his two brothers returned home, when
they bought large estates and lived like princes.

 The brothers are once spoken of as “Swedes,” for what reason does not
appear. Another story on similar lines is that of the Swift-footed
Princess (Kreutzwald); but here the various feats, including the race
against the princess, who will not marry <span id="page_24">p. 24</span>
unless she is worsted in a foot-race, are performed by the gifted
servants in the train of the prince who seeks her in marriage.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](hoe2-09)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_12">p. 12</span>

<span id="page_12_note_1"></span>[1](#page_12_fr_1) The word used means
a little girl or a doll; Löwe translates it “doll,” which seems to be
incorrect in this place.

<span id="footnotes_page_17">p. 17</span>

<span id="page_17_note_1"></span>[1](#page_17_fr_1) The God of Death.

<span id="footnotes_page_19">p. 19</span>

<span id="page_19_note_1"></span>[1](#page_19_fr_1) Combings or cuttings
of hair are never burned or allowed to be blown about in the air in
Esthonia, but carefully buried; otherwise the owner would suffer from
violent headache.

<span id="page_19_note_2"></span>[2](#page_19_fr_2) This word would have
no apparent meaning as a proper name; <span id="footnotes_page_20">p.
20</span> but Löwe suggests that it might be a corruption of Virgilius,
which, though not impossible, seems rather far fetched.

<span id="footnotes_page_22">p. 22</span>

<span id="page_22_note_1"></span>[1](#page_22_fr_1) Compare vol. i. p.
176.

<span id="footnotes_page_23">p. 23</span>

<span id="page_23_note_1"></span>[1](#page_23_fr_1) Their good faith and
absence of envy is as conspicuous as in the case of the sons of Kalev
(vol. i. p. 58).

<span id="page_23_note_2"></span>[2](#page_23_fr_2) When the five
Pandavas, the heroes of the Maha-Bharata, were returning victorious from
an expedition during which Arjuna had won the princess Draupadi in a
contest with the bow, their mother, hearing them coming, but not knowing
what had happened, cried out, “Share equally what you have brought.”
Upon which it was arranged that she should become the joint wife of the
five brother princes.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
