[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Legends &
Sagas](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](hoe2-12) [Next](hoe2-14)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## THE MAIDEN AT THE VASKJALA BRIDGE. (K<span class="small">REUTZWALD.</span>)

O<span class="small">N</span> a beautiful and quiet summer evening many
years ago, a pious maiden went to the Vaskjala<span
id="page_34_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_34_note_1) Bridge to bathe and
refresh herself after the heat of the day. The sky was clear, and the
song of the nightingale re-echoed from the neighbouring alder thicket.
The Moon ascended to his heavenly pavilion, and gazed down with friendly
eyes on the wreath of the maiden with the golden hair and rosy cheeks.
The maiden’s heart was pure and innocent, and modest and clear as the
waters of the spring <span id="page_35">p. 35</span> to its very depths.
Suddenly she felt her heart beat faster, and a strange longing seized
her, and she could no longer turn her eyes away from the face of the
Moon. For because she was so good and pure and innocent, she had won the
love of the Moon, who desired to fulfil her secret longings and the wish
of her heart. But the pious maiden cherished but one wish in her heart,
which she could not venture to express or to ask the Moon to fulfil, for
she longed to depart from this world and to dwell for ever beneath the
sky with the Moon, but the Moon knew the unexpressed thoughts of her
heart.

 It was again a lovely evening. The air was calm and peaceful, and again
the song of the nightingale resounded through the night. The Moon gazed
down once more into the depths at the bottom of the river near the
Vaskjala Bridge, but no longer alone as before. The fair face of the
maiden gazed down with him into the depths, and has ever since been
visible in the Moon. Above in the far sky she lives in joy and
contentment, and only desires that other maidens might share her
happiness. So on moonlight nights her friendly eyes gaze down on her
mortal sisters, and she seeks to invite them <span id="page_36">p.
36</span> as her guests. But none among them is so pure and modest and
innocent as herself, and therefore none is worthy to ascend to her in
the Moon. Sometimes this troubles the maiden in the Moon, and she hides
her face sorrowfully in a black veil. Yet she does not abandon all hope,
but trusts that on some future day one of her earthly sisters may be
found sufficiently pious and pure and innocent for the Moon to call her
to share this blessed life. So from time to time the Moon-maiden gazes
down on the earth with increasing hope and laughing eyes, with her face
unveiled, as on the happy evening when she first looked down from heaven
on the Vaskjala Bridge. But the best and most intelligent of the
daughters of earth fall into error and wander into by-paths, and none
among them is pious and innocent enough to become the Moon’s companion.
This makes the heart of the pious Moon-maiden sorrowful again, and she
turns her face from us once more, and hides it under her black veil.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](hoe2-14)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_34">p. 34</span>

<span id="page_34_note_1"></span>[1](#page_34_fr_1) According to
Jannsen, the forest which once surrounded the river Vaskia, which flows
through a village of the same name near Revel, was formerly sacred to a
goddess named Vaskia.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
