[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Legends &
Sagas](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](hoe2-77) [Next](hoe2-79)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_282">p. 282</span>

## WHY THE DOG AND CAT AND THE CAT AND MOUSE ARE ENEMIES.

I<span class="small">N</span> former days all animals dwelt together in
peace; but then it befell that the dogs killed and devoured hares and
other game in the open fields. The other animals complained, and when
God called the dogs to account, they objected that they had nothing to
eat. Their plea was admitted, and leave was granted them to eat fallen
animals. The dogs requested and received a written license to that
effect, which was intrusted to the sheep-dog, as the largest and most
reliable among them. But in autumn the sheep-dog was very busy, and
could neither carry it about with him nor find a dry place for it, so he
intrusted it to the care of his friend the tom-cat, who had always a
safe room, or sat on the stove. The cat arched his back, and rubbed it
against his friend’s foot, as a promise of fidelity, and the document
was laid on the stove, where it was supposed to be safe.

 One day the dogs found a pony in the wood which had fallen, so they
fell upon it, and killed and devoured it. The animals complained again,
<span id="page_283">p. 283</span> and the dogs were pronounced guilty;
but they appealed to the license, in which it was not stated whether the
fallen animals should be dead or alive. When the sheep-dog and the cat
sought for the document, they could not find it, for the mice had
nibbled it away.

 The cats were so angry with the mice that they began to kill and eat
them, and have done so ever since; but the dogs likewise became enemies
of the cats, as they are at present.

 The sheep-dog did not venture to return to his fellows without the
license. They waited for him in vain, and at last followed him, and
sought for him everywhere, but could not find him. So whenever a dog
sees another he runs to ask him whether he has not got the missing
document with him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](hoe2-79)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
