[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Legends &
Sagas](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](hoe2-51) [Next](hoe2-53)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## THE SON OF THE THUNDER-GOD.<span id="page_149_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_149_note_1) (K<span class="small">REUTZWALD.</span>)

O<span class="small">NCE</span> upon a time the son of the Thunder-God
made a compact with the Devil. It was agreed that the <span
id="page_150">p. 150</span> Devil was to serve him faithfully for seven
years, and to do everything which his master required of him, after
which he was to receive his master’s soul as a reward. The Devil
fulfilled his part of the bargain faithfully. He never shirked the
hardest labour nor grumbled at poor living, for he knew the reward he
had to expect. Six years had already passed by, and the seventh had
begun; but the Thunderer’s son had no particular inclination to part
with his soul so easily, and looked about for some trick by which he
could escape the necessity of fulfilling his share of the bargain. He
had already tricked the Devil when the compact was signed, for instead
of signing it with his own blood, he had signed it with cock’s blood,
and his short-sighted adversary had not noticed the difference. Thus the
bond which the Devil thought perfectly secure was really a very doubtful
one. The end of the time was approaching, and the Thunderer’s son had
not yet attempted to regain his freedom, when it happened one day that a
black cloud arose in the sky, which <span id="page_151">p. 151</span>
foreboded a violent thunderstom. The Devil immediately crept down
underground, having made himself a hiding-place under a stone for that
purpose. “Come, brother,” said he to his master, “and keep me company
till the tempest is over.” “What will you promise me if I fulfil your
request?” said the Thunderer’s son. The Devil thought they might settle
this down below, for he did not like to talk over matters of business
just then, when the storm was threatening to break over them at any
moment. The Thunderer’s son thought, “The Old Boy seems quite dazed with
terror to-day, and who knows whether I may not be able to get rid of him
after all?” So he followed him into the cave. The tempest lasted a long
time, and one crash of thunder followed another, till the earth quaked
and the rocks trembled. At every peal the Old Boy pushed his fists into
his ears and screwed up his eyes tight; a cold sweat covered his shaking
limbs, and he was unable to utter a word. In the evening, when the storm
was over, he said to the Thunderer’s son, “If your old dad did not make
such a noise and clatter now and then, I could get along with him very
well, for his arrows could not hurt me underground. But this horrible
clamour upsets me so <span id="page_152">p. 152</span> much that I am
ready to lose my senses, and hardly know what I am about. I should be
willing to offer a great reward to any one who would release me from
this annoyance.” The Thunderer’s son answered, “The best plan would be
to steal the thunder-weapon from my old dad.”<span
id="page_152_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_152_note_1) “I’d do it if it were
possible,” answered the Devil, “but old Kōu is always on the alert. He
keeps watch on the thunder-weapon day and night; and how is it possible
to steal it?” But the Thunderer’s son still maintained that the feat was
possible. “Ay, if you would help me,” cried the Devil, “we might perhaps
succeed, but I can’t manage it by myself.” The Thunderer’s son promised
to help him, but demanded no less a reward than that the Devil should
abandon his claim to his soul. “You may keep the soul with all my
heart,” cried the Devil delighted, “if you will only release me from
this shocking worry and anxiety.” Then the Thunderer’s son began to
explain how he thought the business might be managed, if they both
worked well together. “But,” he added, “we must wait till my old dad
again tires himself out so much as to fall into a <span id="page_153">p.
153</span> sound sleep, for he generally sleeps with open eyes, like the
hares.”

 Some time after this conversation, another violent thunderstorm broke
out, which lasted a great while. The Devil and the Thunderer’s son again
retreated to their hiding-place under the stone. Terror had so stupefied
the Old Boy, that he could not hear a word of what his companion said.
In the evening they both climbed a high mountain, when the Old Boy took
the Thunderer’s son on his shoulders, and began to stretch himself out
by his magic power higher and higher, singing—

<table data-align="center" data-cellpadding="10">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><span class="small">“Higher, brother, higher,<br />
To the Cloudland nigher,”<br />
</span></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

till he had grown up to the edge of the clouds. When the Thunderer’s son
peeped over the edge of the clouds, he saw his father Kōu sleeping
quietly, with his head resting on a pillow of clouds, but with his right
hand resting across the thunder-instrument. He could not seize the
weapon, for he would have roused the sleeper by touching his hand. The
Thunderer’s son now crept from the Devil’s shoulder along the clouds as
stealthily as a cat, and taking a louse from behind his own ear, he set
it on his father’s nose. The old man raised his hand to <span
id="page_154">p. 154</span> scratch his nose, when his son grasped the
thunder-weapon, and jumped from the clouds on to the back of the Devil,
who ran down the mountain as if fire was burning behind him, and he did
not stop till he reached Pōrgu. Here he hid the stolen property in an
iron chamber secured by seven locks,<span
id="page_154_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_154_note_1) thanked the Thunderer’s
son for his friendly aid, and relinquished all claims upon his soul.

 But now a misfortune fell upon the world and men which the Thunderer’s
son had not foreseen, for the clouds no longer shed a drop of moisture,
and everything withered away with drought.<span
id="page_154_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_154_note_2) “If I have thoughtlessly
brought this unexpected misery on the people,” thought he, “I must try
to repair the mischief as best I can.” So he travelled north to the
frontiers of Finland, where a noted sorcerer lived, and told him the
whole story, and where the thunder-weapon was now hidden. Then said the
sorcerer, “First of all, you must tell your old father Kōu where the
thunder-weapon is hidden, and he will be able to find means for
recovering his property himself.” And he sent the Eagle of <span
id="page_155">p. 155</span> the North to carry the tidings to the old
Father of the Clouds. Next morning Kōu himself called upon the sorcerer
to thank him for having put him on the track of the stolen property.
Then the Thunderer changed himself into a boy, and offered himself to a
fisherman as a summer workman. He knew that the Devil often came to the
lake to catch fish, and he hoped to encounter him there. Although the
boy Pikker watched the net day and night, it was some time before he
caught sight of his enemy. It often happened to the fisherman that when
he left his nets in the lake at night, they had been emptied before the
morning, but he could not discover the cause. The boy knew very well who
stole the fish, but he would not say anything about it till he could
show his master the thief.

 One moonlight night, when the fisherman and the boy came to the lake to
examine the nets, they found the thief at work. When they looked into
the water over the side of their boat, they saw the Old Boy taking the
fishes from the meshes of the net and putting them into a bag over his
shoulder. Next day, the fisherman went to a celebrated sorcerer and
asked him to use his magic to cause the thief to fall into the net, and
to enchant him so that he could <span id="page_156">p. 156</span> not
escape without the owner’s consent. This was arranged just as the
fisherman wished. Next day, when the net was drawn up, they drew up the
Devil to the surface and brought him ashore. And what a drubbing he
received from the fisherman and his boy; for he could not escape from
the net without the consent of the sorcerer. The fisherman gave him a
ton’s weight of blows on the body, without caring where they fell. The
Devil soon presented a piteous sight, but the fisherman and his boy felt
no pity for him, but only rested awhile, and then began their work
afresh. Entreaties were useless, and at last the Devil promised the
fisherman the half of all his goods if he would only release him from
the spell. But the enraged fisherman would listen to nothing till his
own strength failed so completely that he could no longer move his
stick. At length, after a long discussion, it was arranged that the Old
Boy should be released from the net with the sorcerer’s aid, and that
the fisherman and his boy should accompany the Devil to receive his
ransom. No doubt he hoped to get the better of them by some stratagem.

 A grand feast was prepared for the guests in the hall of Pōrgu, which
lasted for a whole week, and <span id="page_157">p. 157</span> there was
plenty of everything. The aged host exhibited his treasures and precious
hoards to his visitors, and made his players perform before the
fisherman in their very best style. One morning the boy Pikker said to
the fisherman, “If you are again feasted and fêted to-day, ask for the
instrument which is in the iron chamber behind seven locks.” The
fisherman took the hint, and in the middle of the feast, when everybody
was half-seas over, he asked to see the instrument in the secret
chamber. The Devil was quite willing, and he fetched the instrument, and
tried to play upon it himself. But although he blew into it with all his
strength, and shifted his fingers up and down the pipe, he was not able
to bring a better tone from it than the cry of a cat when she is seized
by the tail, or the squeaking of a decoy-pig at a wolf-hunt. The
fisherman laughed, and said, “Don’t give yourself so much trouble for
nothing. I see well enough that you’ll never make a piper. My boy can
manage it much better.” “Oho,” said the Devil, “you seem to think that
playing this instrument is like playing the flageolet, and that it is
mere child’s play. Come, friend, try it; but if either you or your boy
can bring anything like a tune out of the <span id="page_158">p.
158</span> instrument, I won’t be prince of hell any longer. Only just
try it,” said he, handing the instrument to the boy. The boy Pikker took
the instrument, but when he put it to his mouth and blew into it, the
walls of hell shook, and the Devil and his company fell senseless to the
ground and lay as if dead. In place of the boy the old Thunder-god
himself stood by the fisherman, and thanked him for his aid, saying, “In
future, whenever my instrument is heard in the clouds, your nets will be
well filled with fish.” Then he hastened home again.

 On the way his son met him, and fell on his knees, confessing his
fault, and humbly asking pardon. Then said Father Kōu, “The frivolity of
man often wars against the wisdom of heaven, but you may thank your
stars, my son, that I have recovered the power to annihilate the traces
of the suffering which your folly has brought on the people.” As he
spoke, he sat down on a stone, and blew into the thunder-instrument till
the rain-gates were opened, and the thirsty earth could drink her fill.
Old Kōu took his son into his service, and they live together still.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](hoe2-53)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_149">p. 149</span>

<span id="page_149_note_1"></span>[1](#page_149_fr_1) There is a variant
of this story (Pikne’s Trumpet: Kreutzwald) in which Tühi himself steals
the trumpet white Pikne is asleep. Pikne <span
id="footnotes_page_150">p. 150</span> is afraid to apply for aid to the
Old Father, for fear of being punished for losing it, but recovers it by
an artifice similar to that employed in the present story. This is
interesting as showing Pikne to be only a subordinate deity. Löwe
considers the Thunderer’s musical instrument to be a bagpipe.

<span id="footnotes_page_152">p. 152</span>

<span id="page_152_note_1"></span>[1](#page_152_fr_1) He does not call
his father Vanaisa, which would identify him with the Supreme God, but
uses another term, *Vana taat*.

<span id="footnotes_page_154">p. 154</span>

<span id="page_154_note_1"></span>[1](#page_154_fr_1) As Louhi, in the
Kalevala, secures the magic mill, the Sampo.

<span id="page_154_note_2"></span>[2](#page_154_fr_2) This story is
probably connected with the Finnish and Esthonian legends of the theft
of the sun and moon by sorcerers.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
