[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Legends &
Sagas](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](hoe2-26) [Next](hoe2-28)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 The next story, that of the Devil being pounded in a sack, is current
in various forms throughout Northern Europe.

 

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

## THE SOLDIER AND THE DEVIL. (J<span class="small">ANNSEN.</span>)

T<span class="small">HE</span> Devil encountered a soldier outside the
town, and said to him, “Good friend, please help me to get through the
town. I can’t go alone, though I should be very glad to do so, for the
two-eyed dogs<span id="page_76_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_76_note_1) would
surround me in every street. They attack me as soon as I enter the
town.”

 “I’d be glad to help you,” said the soldier, “but one can’t do any
business without money.” “What do you want then?” said the Devil.

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

 “Not a great deal,” returned the soldier, “for you’ve plenty of money.
If you’ll fill my gauntlet, I shall be quite satisfied.”

 “I’ve as much as that in my pocket,” said the Devil, and filled the
glove to the brim.

 The soldier reflected, and said, “I really don’t know where to put you.
Stop! just creep into my knapsack; you’ll be safer there than anywhere.”

 “That’ll do! But your knapsack has three straps. Don’t buckle the
third, or it might be bad for me.”<span
id="page_77_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_77_note_1)

 “All right! Squeeze in.”

 So the Devil crept into the knapsack.

 But the soldier was one of those people who don’t keep their word as
they ought. As soon as the devil was in the knapsack, he buckled all
three straps tight, saying, “A soldier mustn’t go through the town with
loose straps. Do you think that the corporal would excuse me on your
account if he saw me so untidy?”

 But the soldier had a friend on the other side of the town who was a
smith. He marched straight <span id="page_78">p. 78</span> off to him
with the Devil in his knapsack, and said, “Old friend, please beat my
knapsack soft on your anvil. The corporal always scolds me because he
says that my knapsack is as hard and angular as a dry bast shoe.”

 “Pitch it on the anvil,” said the smith.

 And he hammered away at the knapsack till the wool flew from the hide.

 “Won’t that do?” asked he after a while.

 “No,” said the soldier, “harder still.”

 And again the blows hailed on the knapsack.

 “That’s enough,” said the soldier at last. “I’ll come to you again, if
it’s necessary.”

 Then he took the knapsack on his shoulder, and went back to the town,
where he pitched the Devil out of the knapsack in the middle of the
street.

 The Devil was crushed as flat as a mushroom. He could hardly stand on
his legs. It had never gone so ill with him before; but the soldier had
money enough and to spare, and there was some left over for his heirs.

 When he died and arrived in the other world, he went to hell and
knocked at the door.

 The Devil peeped through the door to see who it was, and yelled out,
“No, no, you scamp, you’re <span id="page_79">p. 79</span> not wanted
here; you may go wherever you like, but you won’t get in here.”

 So the soldier went to the Old God, and told him how it had fared with
him. He replied, “Stay here now; there’s plenty of room for soldiers.”

 Since that time the Devil has admitted no more soldiers into hell.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](hoe2-28)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_76">p. 76</span>

<span id="page_76_note_1"></span>[1](#page_76_fr_1) Odd stories are told
in many countries about the relations between various animals and the
Devil. In Esthonia the wolf and the dog are peculiarly hostile to the
Devil. In the East it is the ass, concerning which Lane quotes the
following amusing explanation in a note to the story of the “Peacock and
Peahen,” &c. (*Thousand and One Nights*, notes to Chap. ix. of Lane’s
translation):—“The last animal that entered with Noah into the ark was
the ass, and Iblees (whom God curse!) clung to his tail. The ass had
just entered the ark, and began to be agitated, and could not enter
further into the ark, whereupon Noah said to him, ‘Enter, woe to thee!’
But the ass was still agitated, and was unable to advance. So Noah said,
‘Enter, though the Devil be with thee!’ And the ass entered, and Iblees
(whom God curse!) entered with him. And Noah said, ‘O enemy of God, who
introduced thee into the ark?’ He answered, ‘Thou; thou saidst unto the
ass, “Enter, though the Devil be with thee.”’ So it is said that this is
the reason why the ass when he seeth the Devil brayeth.”

<span id="footnotes_page_77">p. 77</span>

<span id="page_77_note_1"></span>[1](#page_77_fr_1) Jannsen remarks that
the *third* strap would form a cross, and that the *three* straps might
be an allusion to the Trinity.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
