[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Legends &
Sagas](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](hoe2-16) [Next](hoe2-18)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## SNOWWHITE, THE GLASS MOUNTAIN, AND THE DESPISED YOUNGEST SON.

W<span class="small">E</span> have these tales combined in the story of
the “Princess who slept for seven years” (Kreutzwald).

 A princess falls into a deep sleep, and is placed by a magician in a
glass coffin. A glass mountain is prepared, on which the coffin is
fixed. Up the <span id="page_41">p. 41</span> glass mountain the
successful suitor must ride when seven years and seven days have
expired, when the princess will awake and give him a ring.

 Meanwhile an old peasant dies, leaving his house and property to his
two elder sons, and charging them to take care of the third, who is
considered rather lazy and stupid, but who has a good heart.<span
id="page_41_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_41_note_1) He charges his three sons
to watch, one each night, by his grave; but the elder ones excuse
themselves, leaving the duty to the youngest son. The eldest brother
proposes to turn the youngest out of the house, but is dissuaded by the
other, who thinks it would look too bad.

 When the king promises his daughter to whoever can climb the glass
mountain,<span id="page_41_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_41_note_2) the two
elder brothers dress themselves in fine clothes, and set off, leaving
the youngest at home, lest he should disgrace them by his shabby
appearance. But he receives from his father a bronze horse and bronze
armour, and rides a third of the way up the mountain. On the second day
he receives a silver steed <span id="page_42">p. 42</span> and silver
armour, and rides more than half-way up; and on the third day he
receives a golden steed and golden armour, and rides to the summit. Then
the lid of the glass case flies open, the maiden raises herself and
gives the knight a ring, and he rides down with her to her father.

 Next day it is proclaimed that whoever can produce the ring shall marry
the princess; and, to the astonishment of the two elder brothers, the
youngest claims the prize. The magician explains to the king that the
young man is in reality the son of a powerful monarch, but was stolen
away in infancy and brought up as a peasant, and the king accepts him as
his son-in-law. His indolence was not an inherent defect, but had been
imposed upon him by the witch who had stolen him. On Sunday he appeared
before the people in his golden armour and mounted on his golden horse,
but his reputed brothers died of rage and envy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](hoe2-18)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_41">p. 41</span>

<span id="page_41_note_1"></span>[1](#page_41_fr_1) There are several
very similar stories in Finnish.

<span id="page_41_note_2"></span>[2](#page_41_fr_2) Compare the story of
“Princess Helena the Fair” (Ralston’s *Russian Folk-Tales*, p. 256).

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
