<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [William Morris](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](chc36)  [Next](chc38) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Child Christopher and Goldilind the Fair*, by William Morris, \[1895\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f36"></span>

CHAPTER XXXVI.

KING CHRISTOPHER COMES TO OAKENHAM.

But on the morrow the first man who came to the King was the man-at-arms
aforesaid; and he told that he had done the King's errand, and ridden a
five miles on the road to Oakenham before he had left the horse with his
felon load, and that he had found nought stirring all that way when he
had passed through their own out-guards, where folk knew him and let him
go freely.  "And," quoth he, "it is like enough that this gift to
Oakenham, Lord King, has by now come to the gate thereof."  Then the
King gave that man the gold which he had promised, and he kissed the
King's hand and went his ways a happy man.

Thereafter sent Christopher for Jack of the Tofts, and told him in few
words what had betid, and that Rolf the traitor was dead.  Then spake
Jack:  "King and fosterling, never hath so mighty a warrior as thou
waged so easy a war for so goodly a kingdom as thou hast done; for
surely thy war was ended last night, wherefore will we straight to
Oakenham, if so thou wilt.  But if it be thy pleasure I will send a
chosen band of riders to wend on the spur thereto, and bid them get
ready thy kingly house, and give word to the Barons and the Prelates,
and the chiefs of the Knighthood, and the Mayor and the Aldermen, and
the Masters of the Crafts, to show themselves of what mind they be
towards thee.  But I doubt it not that they will deem of thee as thy
father come back again and grown young once more."

Now was Christopher eager well nigh unto weeping to behold his people
that he should live amongst, and gladly he yea-said the word of Jack of
the Tofts.  So were those riders sent forward; and the host was ordered,
and Christopher rode amidst it with Goldilind by his side; and the sun
was not yet gone down when they came within sight of the gate of
Oakenham, and there before the gate and in the fields on either side of
it was gathered a very great and goodly throng, and there went forth
from it to meet the King the Bishop of Oakenham, and the Abbot of St. 
Mary's and the Priors of the other houses of religion, all fairly clad
in broidered copes, with the clerks and the monks dight full solemnly;
and they came singing to meet him, and the Bishop blessed him and gave
him the hallowed bread, and the King greeted him and craved his
prayers.  Then came the Burgreve of Oakenham, and with him the Barons
and the Knights, and they knelt before him, and named him to king, and
the Burgreve gave him the keys of the city.  Thereafter came the Mayor
and the Aldermen, and the Masters of the Crafts, and they craved his
favour, and warding of his mighty sword; and all these he greeted kindly
and meekly, rather as a friend than as a great lord.

Thereafter were the gates opened, and King Christopher entered, and
there was no gainsaying, and none spake a word of the Traitor Rolf.

But the bells of the minster and of all the churches rang merrily, and
songs were sung sweetly by fair women gloriously clad; and whereas King
Christopher and Queen Goldilind had lighted down from their horses and
went afoot through the street, roses and all kinds of sweet flowers were
cast down before the feet of them all the way from the city gate to the
King's High House of Oakenham.

There then in the great hall of his father's house stood Christopher the
King on the dais, and Goldilind beside him. And Jack of the Tofts and
the chiefest of the Captains, and the Bishop, and the greatest lords of
the Barons, and the doughtiest of the Knights, and the Mayor and the
Aldermen, and the Masters of the Crafts, sat at the banquet with the
King and his mate; they brake bread together and drank cups of renown,
till the voidee cup was borne in.  Then at last were the King & the
Queen brought to their chamber with string-play and songs and all kinds
of triumph; and that first night since he lay in his mother's womb did
Child Christopher fall asleep in the house which the fathers had builded
for him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXVII. Of Child Christopher's Dealings with his Friends
and His Folk](chc38)

</div>
