<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [William Morris](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](chc32)  [Next](chc34.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Child Christopher and Goldilind the Fair*, by William Morris, \[1895\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f32"></span>

CHAPTER XXXII.

OF GOLDILIND AND CHRISTOPHER.

Now Jack of the Tofts said a word to one of his men, and he rode
straightway up into the field under the wood, and spake to three of the
captains of the folk, and they ranked a hundred of the men, of those who
were best dight, and upraised amongst them the banner of Oakenrealm, and
led all them down to the river bank; and with these must needs go
Goldilind; and when they came down thither, Christopher and Jack were
there on the bank to hail them, and they raised a great shout when they
saw their King and their Earl standing there, and the shout was given
back from the wood-side; and then the men of Brimside took it up, for
they had heard the bidding of their Lord, and he was now in a pavilion
which they had raised for him on the mead, and the leeches were looking
to his hurts; and they feared him, but rather loved than hated him, and
he was more to them than the King in Oakenrealm and they were all ready
to do his will.

But as to Goldilind, her mind it had been, as she was going down the
meadow, that she would throw herself upon Christopher's bosom and love
him with glad tears of love; but as she came and stood over against him,
she was abashed, and stood still looking on him, and spake no word; and
he also was ashamed before all that folk to say the words whereof his
heart was full, and longed for the night, that they might be alone
together.

But at last he said:  "Lady and Queen, thou seest that we be
well-beloved that they rejoice so much in a little deed of mine."  And
still she spake nought, and held hand in hand.

But Jack of the Tofts spake and said:  "By St. Hubert! the deed may be
little, though there be men who would think no little of overcoming the
biggest man and the fellest fighter of Oakenrealm, but at least great
things shall come thereof. King, thy strokes of this day have won thee
Oakenrealm, or no man I know in field, and many a mother's son have they
saved from death.  For look thou yonder over the river, Goldilind, my
Lady, and tell me what thou seest."  She turned to him and said:  "Lord
Earl, I see warriors a many."

"Yea," said Jack, "and stout fellows be they for the more part; and hard
had been the hand-play had we met, ere they had turned their backs; but
now, see thou, we shall wend side by side toward Oakenrealm, for our
Lord there hath won them to his friends; and doubt thou not that when
they see him and thee anigh, they shall be friends indeed. What! dost
thou weep for this? Or is it because he hath done the deed and not thou?
or rather, because thine heart is full for the love of him?"

She smiled kindly on Jack, but even therewith she felt two hands laid on
her shoulders, and Christopher kissed her without any word.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXIII. A Council of Captains: The Host Comes to
Broadlees, and Makes for Woodwall](chc34.md)

</div>
