[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sotu13)  [Next](sotu15.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00086EZJI/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Secret of the Universe*, by Nathan R. Wood, \[1932\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

### VIII. THE SECRET OF THE UNIVERSE AND THE PROBLEM OF REALITY, OR THE TRUE

 <span id="fr_5"></span>[\*](#fn_5.md)<span class="small">How the mind sees
things—Why things are universals and particulars and
things-as-related-to-others—Which one is real?—The forms of pure reason.
Why they are what they are—Forms of thought versus outer realities—Which
are more real? The mighty answer.</span>

This Triunity underlies the forms of reality.

Human reason sees things as percepts,—that means as existences
perceived, as things as they simply are, as things in themselves.

It sees them also in a second way, as concepts, as general types.

Then still further it sees the things as related to other things.

It sees, for instance, the individual man. It sees, in addition,
humanity in general in him. It sees, finally, the man as related to
others.

Reason sees, for further instance, the particular tree, simply as a
tree, the thing in itself. It sees also the universal idea or type or
fact of tree nature. It sees also the tree in its environment, as
related to other trees, to other things, and to all the universe.

We have clearly three things here. First, the percept, the particular
thing which we see. Second, the general nature or type, of which the
particular thing seen by us is an embodiment. Third, that particular
thing as it is related to other things.

Why do things exist in these three ways? Or, if the reason for it is not
in the thing seen, but in the mind,

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

why are our minds such that we must see all things in exactly these
three ways? Whether they are the forms of reality as they exist in
themselves apart from us, or o only the forms of reality as we see them,
why are they as they are? What is the underlying basis of them?

And which is the more real,—the thing in itself?—or the universal type
of which that thing is a particular embodiment?—or the thing as related
to other things which it touches and to all other things?

This is the third great problem of thought through the centuries,
beginning with the most ancient days of Greek philosophy.

 

It is very plain that these three things,—the thing in itself, the
general type and the thing as related to others,—coincide with the three
distinctions in the universal triunity in human existence, or in matter,
or in time.

The person is the particular thing which I see and know. Then on the one
hand there is the nature of which the person is the embodiment, an
individual nature, but shared with all other human beings as a universal
human nature. And on the other hand there is the personality, which is
the person as related to others.

Or we may, before we go further, put it in the triune order of human
existence: first, the universal human nature, of which the individual
person is the embodiment; second, the particular or individual person;
third, the personality, the person as related to others. That is:—the
universal type or nature, the particular embodiment or thing, the thing
as related to others.

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

So also of matter. Energy is the universal, the source, the unseen. The
particular motion is the embodiment of that energy. Phenomena are that
particular motion in contact with other existences.

So it is also of time. The future is the universal source, the
potentiality. The present is the particular realization, the embodiment,
of the future. It is the thing we know and touch. The past is that
present as soon as it has related itself to other things.

All of this is very clear. The progress from nature to person, from
energy to motion, from future to present, from source to embodiment, *is
a progress from the universal to the particular*. The progress from
person to personality, from motion to phenomena, from present to past,
*is a progress from the thing in itself to the thing as related to
others*.

We have then this triunity: 1. The universal. 2. The particular thing.
3. The thing as related to others.

#### *Why Things Are Universals and Particulars and Things-as-Related-to-Others*

What is the basis of these realities? Why do things exist as universals
and particulars and things as related to others?

Because they are nature, person and personality. Because they are
energy, motion and phenomena. Because they are future, present and past.
Because they are triunity.

*Because they exist in the image of the Triune Reality and Ground of the
universe*.

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

#### *Which One is Real?*

Which then is reality? the universal? or the particular thing? or the
thing as related to others?

That is indeed a much debated question. And the conclusion of the debate
depends upon the angle from which one looks upon the question. One comes
out where one went in. One may be an idealist, and emphasize the
universal. One may be a realist, and emphasize the particular thing. One
may be a pragmatist, and emphasize the thing as related to others.

But in the light of the triune reality of the three, the answer is clear
at once.

"Which is more real? the universal? or the particular thing? or the
thing as related to others?"

Each is real, in that triune reality, and each is dependent upon the
other two for its reality.

The nature is real, but not apart from its embodiment.

The embodiment is real, but it cannot exist without its nature which it
embodies.

The embodiment, the thing in itself, is real, but it cannot be real
without coming into contact with other things and becoming the thing as
related to others.

If the embodiment cannot be real without the thing as related to others,
clearly the nature, which cannot be real without its embodiment, cannot
be real without the thing as related to others.

And manifestly the thing as related to others cannot exist unless it is
first the thing in itself, and, back of that, the nature.

Each is real. Each requires the other two for its reality. Each is the
whole. *All are real, in the light of* 

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

*the triune reality, in the image of the supreme Triune Reality and
Ground of the universe*.

#### *The Forms of Pure Reason. Why They Are What They Are*

The strict forms of pure reason, the formal expressions of reality,
which we call deductive logic, are equally an expression of the same
underlying triunity. We have only to examine the syllogism to see that
in all its forms it is what it is because of that universal pattern.

The major premise is the universal. It is the source. Out of it the
syllogism grows. It is the fundamental truth. If it is not fundamental
it cannot be a major premise. It is the nature of the thing under
discussion.

The minor premise is the embodiment in a particular form of the general
nature, the universal principle, in the major premise. It sets forth
that universal principle in a specific, particular form.

The conclusion proceeds from the minor premise. It proceeds from the
major premise through the minor premise. It brings both major premise
and minor premise, both the universal principle and its particular
embodiment, into contact with the things under discussion. It applies
the syllogism to life and conduct and environment.

The nature or universal, the major premise,—the embodiment or
particular, the minor premise, the conclusion, or application of the
major and minor premises, of the nature and the embodiment, to the
things of life and conduct,—these are the three invariable

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

factors. The syllogism, the forms of pure reason, are identical with
triunity. They are what they are because triunity in the likeness of the
Three in One is the structure of the universe.

#### *Forms of Thought versus Outer Realities*

We are ready then to answer in the light of Triunity the essential
question about these things.

Are the universal and the particular and the thing-,
as-related-to-others forms of outward reality which exist apart from our
thinking? Or are they simply mental forms under which our minds conceive
reality? Are they forms of reality, or forms of thought? Thinking,
ancient and modern, sways to and fro upon that question.

The same question comes in regard to space and time. Are space and time
simply mental forms under which we conceive reality? Or are they
themselves realities of the outer world?

Ancient philosophy held that space and time are outward realities.
Modern philosophy, following Kant, tends to see space and time as forms
of thought, through which we conceive the outer world. The modern
philosophy which desires to transform itself into psychology is very
sure of this. It sees space and time as purely products of the mind.

*They are surely forms of thought*. We cannot think of the outer world
at all without conceiving things in terms of extension, or space, and of
consecutiveness, or time.

We can think only in universals, and particulars or
things-in-themselves, and things as related to others.

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

We can reason only in major premises, and minor premises, and
conclusions, in some of their myriad forms.

They are necessary forms of thought.

*And they are outward realities*. For motion, which we all acknowledge
to be a universal outward reality if there is any outward reality at
all, apparently cannot take place except in actual space. But if that be
doubted, we see motion now definitely, in this new world of triunity, as
the result of space. We see it as the motion of space, the outspreading
of power, emerging through energy into motion. Motion is not a reality
unless space, the outspreading of power, is real. And on the other hand
motion cannot take place without generating time.

And as for universals and particulars and things as related to others,
we have seen that they are bound up in one reality. We cannot take out
one of the three, and say "This one, and this one alone, is real." In
their triune relationship and existence, all are real.

Space and time, then, and universals, and particulars, and things as
related to others, are both mental forms and outer realities. They all
exist in the image of the Triune God who is the Reality and Ground of
the inner universe and of the outer universe.

#### *Which Are More Real? The Mighty Answer*

Which is more real, the inner world with its forms of thought, or the
outer world with its motion and substance? That question, great as it
is, loses its meaning in the light of the Triune Reality. For both the
inner world of thought and the outer world of

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

motion and substance are based on the supreme Triune Reality.

In which then are space and time more truly realities? To which do space
and time more truly belong? The question disappears in the light of the
Fact of triunity. When we see space and time in their most fundamental
aspect, as reflections of the Creator, and see the soul also, and all
its forms of thought, as the exact reflection of the same Creator, it
makes little difference to which space and time most belong. *In both
the outer world and the inner soul they are the one image of the Triune
Creator*.

What is true of space and time is true of universals and particulars and
things-as-related-to-others. How largely do these forms of reality exist
apart from us, and how largely are they the forms in which the mind
works in seeing reality? The answer is truly clear. We can be sure that
they are with equal certainty forms of outward reality and forms of
thought. For both the world of outward reality and the mind with its
forms of thought are made in the reflection of the Triune God.

What is the relation between the mental conception and the outer
reality?

Does the outer world suggest Space and Time to the mind?

Or does the mind project Space and Time upon the outer world?

There is a greater answer. *The Triune Creator suggests and projects
Space and Time upon both the outer world and the mind, and together the
outer reality and the inner conception form one operation of the
Triune* 

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *God who forever
creates both world and mind in His own triune likeness*.

In this is the unity of the mind with the outer world. For He made both
in His own likeness.

In this is the reason that the forms of reality and the forms of thought
exactly fit each other. For He made both in His own likeness.

This is why the mind can know the universe around it. For He made both
in His own likeness.

For both together in all these things are one great image of the Triune
God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5"></span>[194:\*](sotu14.htm#fr_5.md) The general reader may,
if he so prefers, omit this chapter, which is unavoidably technical in
much of its language, and may continue the reading with the beginning of
Chapter 9, on page [203](sotu15.htm#page_203.md).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IX. The Secret of the Universe and the Problem of Aesthetics, or
the Beautiful](sotu15.md)
