[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sotu00)  [Next](sotu02.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00086EZJI/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Secret of the Universe*, by Nathan R. Wood, \[1932\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

### INTRODUCTION

<span class="smallcaps">When</span> the Hebrew Singer, marvelling at the
fact of which he had no doubt, that man is visited by God, exclaimed
"When I consider Thy Heavens," he was undoubtedly comparing the apparent
littleness of man with the vastness of the universe of which he was
conscious. The expression "Thy heavens" included for him that universe
whose existence was demonstrated by the "Moon and the stars." Evidently
it was a song composed at night. Like all inspired expressions it was
inclusive. How much it included, the Singer certainly did not know. How
vast the universe is, we even now do not know. But to-day we know its
vastness far better than David did. Science bewilders us with its
affirmations as to its extent. This enlargement of apprehension does but
accentuate for thinking minds the wonder of it, and creates what we now
often describe, borrowing Haeckel's words, as "The Riddle of the
Universe." To recognize a riddle, is to postulate a solution. Finally,
somewhere, somehow, there must be a whole, which resolves all parts into
itself. Perhaps we should say—that is the conviction of faith, which is
the last word of reason. The mind of man has been seeking ever for a
statement of that Whole in terms which include all the parts, in other
words asking "What is the Secret of the Universe?" For every suggestion
which Philosophy has made we are grateful, for its blunders which have

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

needed correction and so have helped us, as well as for its recognitions
of principles and laws which abide.

To that great Quest President Nathan Wood has made a contribution in
this book. To me it is more than a Quest, it is a Conquest. In bulk this
book is small. In reach it is as vast as the Universe. I could describe
it as "The Philosophy of the Universe." The Author probably would prefer
to call it "A Philosophy of the Universe." Whether "The," with its
suggestion of finality, or "A," calling for further investigation, it is
Philosophy, and must make an appeal to all who are seeking light on the
fascinating mystery.

Personally when Dr. Wood did me the honour of allowing me to peruse the
manuscript, I read it with growing amazement, at the final inclusiveness
of its outlook, and the clear and cogent statement of its examination of
those parts which interpret the whole. The first three parts of the book
are as fascinating as a Fairy Story. That perhaps is an unfortunate
figure of speech as it may suggest something fanciful. I employ it
rather in the sense that truth is stranger than fiction. The final part
requires more careful, or shall I say slower reading, as the Author
gives us a keen and penetrative analysis of the Universe.

It is not the work of an introduction to give away a "secret." That must
be discovered by the reader of the book. At least I do not hesitate to
say here is a book, startling, challenging, scholarly, sane, courteous;
and it must make its appeal to the consideration of those who are not
content to drift through life taking things as they are, but desire to
challenge life, not only in its passing hours, and nearest dust, but in
its vastness and entirety. In this age, when Philosophy

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

has really had nothing new to say for many generations, but has been
satisfied with garbing in new terminology the thinking of other days,
here is a book which will surely make men stop-look-and-listen. I would
like to put a copy first in the hands of every theological student, and
then also in the hands of every student who is endeavoring to "beat his
music out."

<span class="small">G. CAMPBELL MORGAN.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](sotu02.md)
