[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Ancient Near
East](../../index)  [Records of the Past](../index) 
[Egypt](../../../egy/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](rp20111) 
[Next](rp20113) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Records of the Past, 2nd series, Vol. I*, ed. by A. H. Sayce, \[1888\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

### THE INSCRIPTIONS OF TELLOH

#### <span class="smallcaps">By M. Arthur Amiaud</span>

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> names of Telloh and of the French
Consul M. de Sarzec are no longer strange to the Orientalist of to-day.
The situation of the mounds, which have hidden and preserved to our day
the ruins of one of the most ancient centres of civilisation, is well
known. The history of the excavations has been often written, and I
shall not dwell upon it. Nor shall I discuss the results of these
excavations front the point of view of art or archæology. This work has
been undertaken by a master hand in the *Découvertes en Chaldée*. <span
id="fr_109"></span>[1](#fn_108) At present I shall only essay to follow
in the steps of Dr. Oppert by making the monuments of stone and brick
tell their own tale, and by questioning them summarily on the geography,
history, politics, and religion of their age and country. <span
id="fr_110"></span>[2](#fn_109)

I. The first question one thinks of asking is what was the name of that
flourishing city of ancient Chaldæa which the Bedouin now knows only as

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Telloh?
Considering that all the princes whose names occur on the monuments are
entitled "kings" or "patesis" of *Shirpurla-ki*, it was generally
answered at first: This city was Shirpurla. <span
id="fr_111"></span>[1](#fn_110) As often happens, the first impression
has proved to be correct. I was wrong in questioning the identification
in an article in the *Zeitschrift für Keilschriftforschung* (i. p. 151).
I had remarked that except in the title of the kings and patesis the
name of Shirpurla-ki appeared very rarely in the inscriptions of Telloh,
and that whenever a prince mentioned the site where a temple was erected
he gave it another name—Girsu-ki, Uru-azagga, Ninâ-ki, Gishgalla-ki. I
now believe, and shall attempt to prove, that Telloh really represents
the ruins of Shirpurla; that it was the general name of a great centre
of population, of which Girsu-ki, Uru-azagga, Ninâ-ki, and Gishgalla-ki
were only divisions or quarters.

Let us first remove a hypothesis which could present itself to the mind.
Might not Shirpurla be the name of a country, of which Girsu-ki and the
three other cities mentioned above were the chief places? This
supposition is forbidden by the inscription of the statue F of Gudea,
which states formally that Shirpurla was the beloved "city" of the
goddess Gatumdug (col. i., cases 15, 16). It is also forbidden

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

by W.A.I., ii. 61, 2, 37, where we learn that a temple otherwise unknown
was situated in Shirpurla-ki.

The list of temples given in this passage might open the door to another
hypothesis, which must be removed in its turn, for it would be
inconsistent with the relations existing between Shirpurla and the four
other towns. In lines 34 and 35 two temples are named as temples of
Girsu-ki. If Girsu-ki had been only a quarter of Shirpurla, would there
not be some inconsistency on the part of the Assyrian scribe in saying:
Such and such temples belong to Girsu-ki, such another to Shirpurla-ki?
Might one not conclude that Shirpurla and the four other towns were
separate cities?

Now it is certain that Gudea tells us (in the inscription on statue C)
that he has constructed the temple of E-anna for the goddess Ninni or
Istar in Girsu-ki (col. 3, cases 11, 12). We further know that the same
Istar, the presiding deity of Erech, had a celebrated temple in that
city which also bore the name of E-anna. Moreover, certain texts of
Gudea and Dungi, which mention the construction of temples in Girsu-ki,
come, it is believed, from other sites than Telloh, some from Warka or
Erech, others from Babylon, from Zerghul and from Tel-Eed. But this
proves nothing in favour of Erech, and still less against Telloh. From
the fact that Istar had a temple named E-anna at Erech, we cannot infer
that the same goddess had not a temple of the same name in another city.
We know that Nebo had a temple called

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> E-Zida in
Borsippa, and there were at least two others of the same name at Babylon
and Calah.

We cannot look for Ninâ-ki, any more than Girsu-ki, outside Telloh, or
identify it with the Assyrian Nineveh. <span
id="fr_112"></span>[1](#fn_111) As for the inscription cited by Dr.
Hommel in support of the contrary view, the Museum of the Louvre
possesses several similar ones discovered by M. de Sarzec at Telloh. If
the text translated by Dr. Hommel does not come from Telloh, it must
have been moved from its original place, like the tablet of black stone,
with a Semitic inscription of Dungi, believed to have been found at
Nineveh, and accordingly quoted by Dr. Hommel to show that the empire of
the kings of Ur extended as far as that city. The text itself of the
inscription, imperfectly copied by Lenormant, proves that its primitive
resting-place was Cutha. <span id="fr_113"></span>[2](#fn_112) But yet
more. Two princes of Shirpurla, Uru-Kagina in his barrel-inscription,
and Gudea in the cylinder-inscription A, state that they have worked
upon a canal, Ninâ-ki-tum-a, "the favourite river of the goddess Ninâ."
In order to find this canal I believe it will be useless to ascend as
far as the Khausser, the river of Nineveh, if we compare with the
context these lines of M. de Sarzec: "In going from the Shatt-el-Haï to
the ruins, at 500 metres from the *enceinte* of Telloh we meet with the
bed of an immense canal, still visible, though filled with sand, running
from N.W. to S.E. It is possibly the

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

original channel of the Shatt-el-Haï, possibly also some canal derived
from that great artery, and intended to supply the city with
water." <span id="fr_114"></span>[1](#fn_113)

Uru-azagga and Gishgalla-ki still remain. The first must be sought near
Telloh, if not in Telloh itself, since M. de Sarzec has found in the
ruins: (1) at least one brick commemorating the erection by Gudea of a
temple of the goddess Gatumdug situated in Uru-azagga; <span
id="fr_115"></span>[2](#fn_114) (2) the forepart of a lion or griffon of
calcareous stone, which bears the same inscription as the brick of
Gudea, some insignificant variants excepted; <span
id="fr_116"></span>[3](#fn_115) (3) a doorstep of the patesi Nammaghâni,
intended for the temple of the goddess Bau, which the inscriptions on
several statues of Gudea place in Uru-azagga; <span
id="fr_117"></span>[4](#fn_116) (4) a buttress of the patesi Entena
intended for the temple of the goddess Gatumdug in Uru-azagga. <span
id="fr_118"></span>[5](#fn_117) As for Gishgalla-ki, which is known only
from two passages in the inscription on the statue of Ur-Bau, one
of-which calls the patesi "servant of the divine king of Gishgalla-ki,"
and the other places in Gishgalla-ki a temple of the goddess Ninni, its
name even remains an obscure problem. It must have been some locality in
Telloh or its immediate vicinity. Otherwise the inscription of Ur-Bau
would offer us the only example in our texts of a foreign temple
constructed by the princes of Shirpurla, and the sole

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

example also of the title of "servant" of a foreign god assumed by one
of them.

It will now be easy for me to show that the four centres, Girsu-ki,
Uru-azagga, Ninâ-ki, and Gishgalla-ki, were only quarters. of a large
city, which bore the name of Shirpurla-ki. Whenever the princes who have
reigned at Telloh wished to indicate the whole of their capital or their
domain, we shall see that they called it Shirpurla-ki. Only when they
preferred to mark the extent of their domain by means of its extreme or
most important points, or when they wanted to indicate a particular
spot, they employed the names Girsu-ki, Uru-azagga, Ninâ-ki, and
Gishgalla-ki.

It is thus that all call themselves "kings" or "patesis" of
Shirpurla-ki. There is but one exception, and only in one of the three
inscriptions he has left us; Uru-Kagina entitles himself on his cylinder
"king of Girsu-ki." This exception can be easily explained, since
Girsu-ki was without doubt the most important quarter of Shirpurla. It
is thus again that Gudea, wishing to inform us what were the distant
countries from which he derived the materials necessary for the
buildings of his capital, expresses himself as follows: "By the power of
Ninâ and Nin-girsu, to Gudea who holds his sceptre from Nin-Girsu, the
countries of Mâgan, Melughgha, Gubi, and Nituk, rich in trees of every
species, have sent him at Shirpurla-ki ships laden with all sorts of
trees" (statue D, col. 4). Thus, too, if I understand the passage
rightly, after

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

having enumerated the reforms which followed his accession to the
throne, he describes the peace resulting therefrom to his country: "On
the territory of Shirpurla-ki no one has sued him who has right on his
side; a brigand has entered the house of no one" (statue B, col. 5).

But if the same Gudea wants to insist on the peace which he has given
his country, and to prove that no part of his city was excluded from his
care, he tells us: "Gudea, patesi of Shirpurla-ki, has proclaimed peace
from Girsu-ki to Uru-azagga" (statue G, col. 2). So, too, in describing
the position of a temple, the princes of Telloh never say that it was
situated in Shirpurla, but more precisely in Girsu-ki, in Uru-azagga, in
Ninâ-ki, or in Gishgalla-ki.

It is very difficult at present to determine the approximate situation
in Telloh of these different quarters. I will, however, make some
suggestions in regard to them.

The four *tels* or mounds on the west side of Telloh perhaps represent
the site of Ninâ-ki. From one of them M. de Sarzec has recovered the
beautiful bull and the tablet of black stone which bear the name of
Dungi, and mention the erection of the temple of the goddess Ninâ. All
the other *tels*, including the great *tel* on which stood the palace,
appear to have formed part of Girsu-ki. It is in this region that
bronzes and votive tablets have been discovered with the names of the
god Nin-Girsu and of his sons Gal-alim and Dun-shagâna; now we cannot
doubt, though we

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

are not directly assured of it, that the temples of these three gods
were situated in Girsu-ki. As for Uru-azagga, it is not certain that it
lay in the part of Telloh excavated by M. de Sarzec. With the exception
of some statues, which have certainly not been found . in their original
position, the monuments intended, according to their inscriptions, for
this quarter of Shirpurla-ki are little numerous; and some, if not all,
appear to have been displaced, and, to use the expression of M. Heuzey,
to have been replaced by the successive occupants of Telloh, which was
still inhabited in the Parthian epoch. Nothing can be said concerning
Gishgalla-ki, which is mentioned only on the statue of Ur-Bau.

II\. We now possess the names of twelve or thirteen princes of
Shirpurla, four or five of whom bear the title of "king," and eight the
title of "patesi." M. Heuzey has shown by arguments derived from the
more archaic character of their monuments and writing that the most
ancient of these princes were the kings. He has also established that
among the patesis the group comprising Entena and En-anna-tumma was the
oldest. The script used by these patesis is still linear like that of
the kings, and not yet cuneiform like that of the later princes. Of
course I refer only to the inscriptions engraved on hard materials,
bronze or stone. For we possess a clay cylinder of the king Uru-Kagina,
where the wedge already appears as distinctly as on the bricks and
cylinders of Gudea. We know that it is just by

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

the form of the stylus employed by the scribes when writing upon soft
clay that the wedge which characterises the cuneiform script is
explained. It is by imitation only that it has passed from writing on
clay to writing on stone.

The dynasties of Telloh were the following:

\(1\) Kings of Shirpurla-ki:—

The earliest king known is perhaps Ur-Ninâ, "the man of Ninâ," of whom
we have three inscriptions. This prince was the son of a personage
called Nini-ghal-gin (the reading Ghal-gin being uncertain). It is
doubtful whether Nini-ghal-gin had himself been king, since his son
never gives him the. title of sovereign.

After Ur-Ninâ, according to the "Stêlê of the Vultures," his son,
A-Kurgal ("the son of Bel"?) reigned.

Another passage in the Stêlê of the Vultures appears to mention a
certain Igi-ginna ("he who goes before") as king of Shirpurla.

So far as we can judge from the writing, it was after these monarchs
that Uru-kagina reigned, <span id="fr_119"></span>[1](#fn_118) whose
three inscriptions have come down to us. Two of them call him "king of
Shirpurla"; in a third, on a clay cylinder, he bears, as was first
recognised by Dr. Oppert, the title of "king of Girsu-ki." <span
id="fr_120"></span>[2](#fn_119)

\(2\) Patesis of Shirpurla-ki:—

The first series comprises three patesis, whose succession

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

cannot at present be exactly determined. The museum of the Louvre
possesses a portion of a buttress inscribed with the name of a patesi
Entena, who does not record the name of his father, and another block
bearing the name of a patesi En-anna-tumma, son of a patesi Entena. As
the British Museum possesses a block inscribed by a patesi Entena, son
of a patesi En-anna-tumma, we have a choice of two hypotheses. Either
the patesi Entena of the British Museum is the same as the patesi Entena
of the Louvre, in which case the succession will be: En-anna-tumma I,
Entena, and En-anna-tumma II; or else the Entena of the British Museum
is the grandson of that of the Louvre, the order of the patesis being
Entena I, En-anna-tumma, Entena II.

Later in date than this family of princes comes the patesi Ur-Bau ("man
of Bau") whose statue is in the Louvre, together with a number of
monuments of less importance.

A short time after Ur-Bau comes Gudea ("the elect"), followed by his son
and probable successor Ur-Nin-girsu ("man of Nin-girsu"). <span
id="fr_121"></span>[1](#fn_120) It is of Gudea that the larger and more
important part of the monuments of Telloh preserve the memory: eight
statues, two large cylinders of clay, and hundreds of fragments or small
texts. Of his successor we have a few bricks and a small object of
uncertain use.

Here must be placed, I believe, the patesi Nammaghâni

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

("His supremacy") whose reign is assigned by Dr. Hommel to a period
before Ur-Bau. But his monuments are too few (only a door-step and some
bricks) to allow us to determine with certainty his relative date.

M. Heuzey has also made us acquainted with another patesi, Luka-ni ("His
glory"). <span id="fr_122"></span>[1](#fn_121) His son Ghalalamma, who
does not, like his father, take the title of patesi, offers homage in an
inscription on the fragment of a statue to Dungi, king of Ur. <span
id="fr_123"></span>[2](#fn_122)

It is difficult to determine, even approximately, to what remote epoch
the dynasties of Telloh must be referred. We gather but little from the
fact that the son of one of the last patesis of Shirpurla was the
contemporary of Dungi. For we cannot yet fix the age of the early kings
of Ur. Let me, however, hazard a hypothesis, in consideration of any
light it may throw on the dark problem of Chaldean chronology.

I have already had occasion to cite an inscription of Gudea (on statue
D) in which this patesi tells us that he received from "the countries of
Mâgan, Melughgha, Gubi, and Nituk," vessels laden with all sorts of
trees. The situation of Nituk is known. It was the Isle of Tilmun <span
id="fr_124"></span>[3](#fn_123) in the Persian Gulf. It is not

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

possible, in my opinion, to look for Mâgan and Melughgha anywhere else
than in the vicinity of the Sinaitic Peninsula. <span
id="fr_125"></span>[1](#fn_124) Gubi, sometimes written Gubin, alone
remains, which Dr. Hommel would identify with Byblos in Phœnicia, the
Gapuna of the hieroglyphic texts. I should, however, prefer to see in
Gubi a name of Egypt, and more precisely the name of Coptos, the ancient
Qubti. Gudea would thus in his list of names have followed the route of
his vessels, starting from the most distant points to the north of the
Red Sea, coasting along Egypt and turning round Arabia. If the
identification of Gubi or Gubin with Qubti meets with the approval of
Egyptologists and Assyriologists, the reign of Gudea might perhaps be
placed in the interval between the sixth Egyptian dynasty, when the
monuments of Pepi seem already to testify to the commercial importance
of Coptos, <span id="fr_126"></span>[2](#fn_125) and the eleventh, when
the cities of Upper Egypt obtained political supremacy. No one of course
will dream of bringing the reign of Gudea down to a later date.

How must we explain the fact that the last princes of Shirpurla
contented themselves with the title of "patesi," while the most ancient
took that of "king"? I believe that it is difficult not to see in this
fact an indication of the loss of its earlier independence on

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

the part of Shirpurla and of its subjection to some other city, probably
Ur. All the other instances we have of the use of the title of "patesi,"
lend it the sense of "lieutenant" before the name of a country, of
"vicar" before a divine name. <span id="fr_127"></span>[1](#fn_126) We
possess inscriptions in which the patesis of Nipur and of Ishkun-Sin
acknowledge their dependency on the kings of Ur. Nebuchadnezzar II calls
himself the patesi of the god Merodach, Sargon the patesi of the god
Assur. The title of the earliest sovereigns of Assyria, "patesi of the
god Assur," defines their power as being that either of a kingdom
predominantly religious, or of a viceroyalty under a suzerain, who was
without doubt Babylonian. It always implies the idea of lieutenant or
dependant. Why should we admit an exception in the case of Shirpurla? It
is true that Gudea comes before us as a powerful prince. In one of his
inscriptions (statue B) he boasts of having overthrown the city of
Anshan in the land of Elam. But for aught we know he may have made this
expedition in the company of his suzerain. Dependence, moreover, admits
of degrees, and it can even be purely nominal. France has known powerful
vassals who have resisted royalty.

III\. The campaign of Gudea in Elam, in the course of which the city of
Anshan was captured, is the only fact of military history of which we
know. We have a little better information, thanks to two inscriptions

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

of the same patesi (those of statue B and cylinder A), concerning the
commercial relations of his country. Unfortunately it is always very
difficult to identify the geographical names recorded in the texts.

From a passage cited above it appears that Shirpurla enjoyed commercial
intercourse with the countries of Nituk, Gubi or Gubin, Mâgan, and
Melughgha. These four countries furnished Chaldæa with wood for
building. But Melughgha also furnished gold, and Mâgan a hard stone,
diorite, which was employed by the sculptors. Chaldæa was also in
connection with the country of Martu, that is to say, with Phœnicia and
Syria. From a mountain which seems to have been Amanus, it derived
cedars and other trees; from two other mountains of Martu—Susalla and
Tidanum <span id="fr_128"></span>[1](#fn_127)—two species of stones. It
is stones again that were imported from a mountain of Barsip, which I
should look for in the neighbourhood of the Syrian city of Til-Barsip.
For I believe that it is the same country as that which appears in
W.A.I., ii. 53, *a* 3, under the varying forms of Barsip-ki and
Bursip-ki. We know that the name of Til-Barsip was also written
Til-Bursip. The inscription of statue B, moreover, tells us that the
stones coming from Barsip were conveyed in vessels which, according to
my view, would have had only to descend the Euphrates. I am greatly
tempted to ascend still farther to the north, towards the sources of
this river, in order to find two other countries—

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

the city of Ursu-ki, in the mountains of Ibla (or rather, Tilla <span
id="fr_129"></span>[1](#fn_128)), which furnished wood, and Shamalum, or
Shamanum, in the mountains of Menua, which furnished stones. But I can
suggest nothing in regard to three other geographical names which I
shall confine myself to mentioning: the mountain of Ghaghum, from whence
Gudea procured gold; the city of Abullat or Abulla-Abishu ("the great
gate of his fathers"), situated in the mountains of Ki-mash, <span
id="fr_130"></span>[2](#fn_129) whence he procured copper; and the
country or city of Madga, in the mountains of the river Gurruda
(?), <span id="fr_131"></span>[3](#fn_130) from whence he procured a
product whose precise nature I am unable to determine.

Certain cities of Babylonia are mentioned in our texts. They are the
three ancient cities of Eridu (*Nun-ki*), Larrak (*Barbar-ki*), and the
unknown city of Kinunir-ki. They always appear to figure as sacred
cities, and the last of the three only after the name of a goddess,
Duzi-abzu, "the mistress of Kinunir."

The names of the Euphrates and Tigris frequently occur on the two
cylinders of Gudea. I believe I have also found in them the names of
Shumer and Accad—"Kiengi" and "Ki-burbur." But it is not

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

yet possible for me to translate the passages where they are found.

The inscription of statue B mentions two seas. "After he had caused the
temple of Nin-girsu to be built, Nin-girsu, the lord beloved by him, has
forcibly opened for him the roads from the sea of the highlands to the
lower sea." The "sea of the highlands " is evidently the Persian Gulf,
and it is impossible to doubt that by the "lower sea" is intended the
Mediterranean.

IV\. For a knowledge of the pantheon of Shirpurla-ki we possess a
document of a very great value. This is the list of divinities at the
commencement of the imprecatory formula in the inscription on statue B
of Gudea. The following are the names of the divinities, which it is
important to give in the order, evidently sacred, in which they are
enumerated in the inscription:—

Anna, the Sky-god, the Anu of the Semites; Ellilla or Bel, "the lord of
the mountain of the world," <span id="fr_132"></span>[1](#fn_131) where
the seat of the gods was placed, as well as the habitation of the dead,
also called "the father of the gods;" Nin-gharsag or Belit, "the
mistress of the mountain," the wife of Ellilla, and mother of the gods;
En-ki or Ea, "the lord of the earth" and the waters;

En-zu, or Sin, the Moon-god, the eldest son of Ellilla; Nin-girsu or
Ninib, the Chaldean Hercules, the son and warrior of Ellilla; Ninâ, the
daughter of Ea, who has the same titles as Nin-dara, and may

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

therefore be regarded as the consort of this god; Nin-dara, who is the
god Ninib <span id="fr_133"></span>[1](#fn_132) under another name;
Gatumdug, the daughter of Anna, who is the goddess Bau under another
name; Bau, daughter of Anna and wife of Nin-girsu; Ninni or Nanâ, the
Ishtar of the Semites, another daughter of Anna; Shamash, the Sun-god,
the son of En-ki or Ea; Pasagga, the Ishum of the Semites, who is
undoubtedly only another form of Gibil, the Fire-god, the son of En-id
or Ea;

Gal-alim, the son of Nin-girsu; Dun-shagâna, another son of Nin-girsu;
Nin-mar-ki, the eldest daughter of Nina;

Duzi-abzu, "lady of Kinunir-ki;" Nin-gish-zida, the god of Gudea.

It will be observed that this list arranges the divinities in three
generations. In the first come the four great gods, including a goddess,
distinguished also by the later Assyro-Babylonian religious systems, and
from whom all the other gods proceed. Next are placed the sons and
daughters of these deities. Lastly come the grandchildren. I have been
obliged to put Duzi-abzu and Nin-gish-zida by themselves, since no text
has as yet given us any information concerning them. <span
id="fr_134"></span>[2](#fn_133) But we may believe that one of
them—Nin-gish-zida—must be mentioned at the end of the

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

list, whatever may have been his rank in the divine family, since, as we
shall see, he was the special deity of Gudea and his intercessor with
the other gods.

The preceding list does not give all the gods mentioned in the texts of
Telloh; some even are absent who had their temples in Shirpurla. Without
pretending to be complete, I may further enumerate the god Nin-âgal, who
is only another form of En-ki; the god Shidlamta-êna, another name of
Nin-girsu, and the Nergal of the Semites; the god Nin-sar, yet another
name of Nergal; the goddess Nin-tu, another designation of Nin-gharsag;
the god Uru-ki or Sin; the god Nirba; perhaps the god Nin-shagh,
Pap-sukal; a god called the "king" of Gishgalla-ki; a goddess Kû-anna; a
god Dun-sir (?)-anna; seven sons of Bau, who are termed Zazaru (or
Zazauru), Im-ghud-êna, Ur-un-ta-êna (or Gim-nun-ta-êna), Ghi-gir-nunna,
Ghi-shaga, Gurmu, and Zarmu.

In a learned article in the *Zeitschrift für Assyriologie* (ii. pp. 179
*seq*.), Prof. Tiele has shown that at Babylon, by the side of the local
god Bel-Merodach and even in his temple of Ê-shagil, his wife and son
Zarpanit and Nebo were also adored; that at Borsippa, by the side of the
supreme god Nebo and in his temple of Ê-Zida, his consort Nanâ was
worshipped. If we remember that other temples existed at Babylon
dedicated to various other deities, we shall readily admit that the cult
rendered to these gods was offered by reason of their being the mother,
the brothers, or the sisters of the principal divinity. We

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

may remark, moreover, that the supreme god of the national or local
pantheon was hardly ever one of the primordial deities. The latter,
indeed, appear to me to have been born after their sons, in consequence
of the need experienced by the mind of man to establish for his god a
family analogous to his own, with parents, wife, and children. The two
exceptions which may be instanced from Nipur and Eridu are not certain.
Dr. Hommel has remarked that one text at all events names Ninib and not
Bel as the chief divinity of Nipur. As for Eridu, I do not feel sure
that the principal deity there was really Ea. This god had certainly a
temple in Eridu, just as he had at Shirpurla-ki, but in both cities it
was under the title of the divine father that he was adored. The very
interesting inscription on a brick of a patesi of Eridu, named Idadu,
which is unfortunately still unpublished, would lead us to suppose that
the chief god of the place was Nin-Eridu, possibly a name of
Merodach. <span id="fr_135"></span>[1](#fn_134)

The supreme god of Shirpurla was Nin-girsu, whose consort was the
goddess Bau. Both were worshipped under different titles. Besides the
temples in which he was invoked as Nin-girsu, he had others in Girsu-ki,
where he was known as Nin-dara and Shidlamta-êna. Similarly the goddess
was not only adored as Bau, but she was also worshipped in Uru-azagga as
Gatumdug and in Ninâ-ki as Ninâ. Three at least of the parent gods had
sanctuaries in Shirpurla,—

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Ellilla (called
specially "the father of Nin-girsu"), En-ki, and "the mother of the
gods," Nin-gharsag. Temples were even dedicated to En-ki under his two
titles of En-ki and Nin-âgal. We may question whether it was in virtue
of her being his wife or his sister that Ninni possessed a temple in
Girsu-ki and another in Gishgalla-ki; and also whether Nin-gish-zida, in
his special temple at Girsu-ki, was worshipped as being a brother of the
god or as being the god himself under a fourth manifestation. It is
certain, on the other hand, that Gal-alim and Dun-shâgana had each a
temple because they were the sons of Nin-girsu, and that Nin-mar-ki had
one because she was the daughter of Ninâ. We do not know at present what
were the grounds of relationship which caused temples to be erected in
Girsu-ki to the goddesses Kû-anna <span id="fr_136"></span>[1](#fn_135)
and Duzi-abzu. It is possible that some of these numerous temples were
only chapels situated in Ê-ninnû, the favourite sanctuary of Nin-girsu;
those, for example, which belonged to the sons of the god.

While regarding Nin-girsu as the supreme object of his cult, as "his
king," to use the stereotyped expression, each prince of Shirpurla-lei
selected also a special deity from among the divine family, who acted as
his intercessor with Nin-girsu. <span id="fr_137"></span>[2](#fn_136) We
are acquainted with the deities of five of these princes. That of
Uru-Kagina

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

was perhaps Nin-shagh or Pap-sukal—though the reading is doubtful; that
of Entena and En-anna-tumma was Dun-sir(?)-anna; that of Ur-Bau was
Nin-âgal; that of Gudea, Nin-gish-zida.

We have not yet succeeded in ascertaining the exact sense of the various
appellations of Nin-girsu and his wife Bau; it is consequently
impossible to define with precision the character and personality of
these divinities. We may admit, however, that Nin-girsu was a solar
deity, personifying more particularly the sun when veiled in clouds;
hence the combative and military aspect of the god. Like Apollo, with
whom he would be more fitly compared than with Hercules, he was at once
an avenger and a saviour, a huntsman, and perhaps a shepherd. As for
Bau, who was termed "the mother" *par excellence*, and to whom were
given the titles of "good lady," "Mistress of Abundance," she was a
terrestrial divinity, resembling in many points the Demeter of the
Greeks. It is even possible that like Demeter she presided also over
Hades, and not only over the living and fertile earth. Two of our texts
mention a festival of Bau, which occurred, if I understand the passage
aright, at the commencement of the year; and it appears to result from
another inscription that the chief festival of Nin-girsu took place at
the same time. Indeed it is probable that it was at the beginning of the
year, at the vernal equinox, that the cities of Babylonia and Assyria
alike celebrated the festivals of their gods.

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

The following translations comprise almost all the texts hitherto
brought from Telloh, with the exception of the inscription on the
so-called Stélé of the Vultures and those on the two large cylinders of
Gudea.

Restorations of the text are indicated by brackets—\[\]. Words placed in
parentheses—()—have been added in order to render the sense more
intelligible.

Certain of the inscriptions have been published in *Découvertes en
Chaldée*, par E. de Sarzec, edited by L. Heuzey, of which the first two
parts have appeared in 1884 and 1887.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_108"></span>[42:1](rp20112.htm#fr_109) See also M. Léon
Heuzey's *Un Palais Chaldéen* (Paris, Leroux, 1888).

<span id="fn_109"></span>[42:2](rp20112.htm#fr_110) On all these points,
see Hommel's *Geschichte Babyloniens and Assyriens* (Berlin, 1885-87).

<span id="fn_110"></span>[43:1](rp20112.htm#fr_111) According to Mr.
Pinches (*Guide to the Kouyunjik Gallery*, London, 1885, p. 7, note 2),
Shir-pur-la-ki would be an ideographic mode of writing the word Lagash.
We should then perhaps have to compare W.A.I., ii. 52, *a* 60, which
seems to connect a city Lagashu-ki with Urama or "Ur" (?).

<span id="fn_111"></span>[45:1](rp20112.htm#fr_112) The pronunciation of
the name of the goddess Ninâ and of the city called after her is still
problematical.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[45:2](rp20112.htm#fr_113) See the Zeitschrift
für Assyriologie, iii., p. 94.

<span id="fn_113"></span>[46:1](rp20112.htm#fr_114) *Découvertes en
Chaldée*, p. 12.

<span id="fn_114"></span>[46:2](rp20112.htm#fr_115) Not yet published.

<span id="fn_115"></span>[46:3](rp20112.htm#fr_116) I owe my knowledge
of this fact, as well as of several others, to the kindness of M.
Heuzey.

<span id="fn_116"></span>[46:4](rp20112.htm#fr_117) *Découvertes en
Chaldée*, pl. 27, 1.

<span id="fn_117"></span>[46:5](rp20112.htm#fr_118) Not yet published.

<span id="fn_118"></span>[50:1](rp20112.htm#fr_119) See Heuzey: "Un
nouveau roi de Tello," in the *Revue Archéologique* of 1884.

<span id="fn_119"></span>[50:2](rp20112.htm#fr_120) It would seem that a
prince more ancient than Uru-Kagina and perhaps as ancient as Ur-Ninâ
bore the title of "patesi" and not of "king." But his name still remains
unknown. See below, [p. 67](rp20114.htm#page_67).

<span id="fn_120"></span>[51:1](rp20112.htm#fr_121) Cf. Ledrain:
*Communication à l’Académie des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres*, 12th
July 1882.

<span id="fn_121"></span>[52:1](rp20112.htm#fr_122) "Le Roi Dounghi" in
the *Revue Archéologique*, April 1886.

<span id="fn_122"></span>[52:2](rp20112.htm#fr_123) I omit a patesi of
Shirpurla, En-anna, made known to us by George Smith in his *Early
History of Babylonia*, and two other patesis whose names are quoted by
Dr. Hommel from some seals (*Geschichte Bab. und Ass.*, pp. 290, 293).
The text translated by George Smith has not yet been published, and the
reading of the inscriptions on the seals does not seem absolutely
certain.

<span id="fn_123"></span>[52:3](rp20112.htm#fr_124) \[Identified with
the Tylos of classical geography by Dr. Oppert, and with the modern
Bahrein by Sir H. Rawlinson, though Professor Delitzsch <span
id="page_53">p. 53</span> considers it to form part of the delta which
has accumulated at the mouth of the Euphrates.—*Ed*.\]

<span id="fn_124"></span>[53:1](rp20112.htm#fr_125) This is the opinion
long ago maintained by Messrs. Lenormant, Oppert, and Sayce. M. Delattre
has ably defended it in the memoir *L’Asie occidentale dans les
Inscriptions Assyriennes*, pp. 149 Seq.

<span id="fn_125"></span>[53:2](rp20112.htm#fr_126) See Maspero:
*Histoire ancienne* (4th edit.), p. 81.

<span id="fn_126"></span>[54:1](rp20112.htm#fr_127) \[I should rather
render it "High-Priest." See my *Lectures on the Religion of the Ancient
Babylonians*, pp. 59-60.—*Ed*.\]

<span id="fn_127"></span>[55:1](rp20112.htm#fr_128) The reading Susalla
is uncertain. Dr. Hommel has compared Tidanum with Tidnu, the Sumerian
equivalent of Akharru (the Semitic term for Syria).

<span id="fn_128"></span>[56:1](rp20112.htm#fr_129) Dr. Hommel has
proposed to read Dalla.

<span id="fn_129"></span>[56:2](rp20112.htm#fr_130) \[Ki-mash seems to
be "the country of Mas," or Arabia Petræa; comp. the Mash of Genesis x.
23. The Babylonians derived a name for "copper," *kemassu*, from its
Sumerian appellation.—*Ed*.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[56:3](rp20112.htm#fr_131) Can the river
Gurruda have been the Dead Sea, and can the product derived from the
neighbouring district have been bitumen, as Dr. Hommel has conjectured?
It is not probable that all the bitumen required for the buildings of
Babylonia was exclusively provided by the little river of Hit. (See Hdt.
i. 199.)

<span id="fn_131"></span>[57:1](rp20112.htm#fr_132) In an abbreviated
form, "the lord of the world."

<span id="fn_132"></span>[58:1](rp20112.htm#fr_133) \[Or Uras.—*Ed*.\]

<span id="fn_133"></span>[58:2](rp20112.htm#fr_134) If our Duzi-abzu is
a goddess—and her title of "lady of Kinunir-ki" does not allow us to
doubt it—it is clear that we cannot identify her with the god Duzi-abzu
who is named in W.A.I., ii. 56, 33-38, as one of the six sons of Ea. It
is necessary to understand six sons in this passage, and not six
children, since the following line names "a daughter" of Ea.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[60:1](rp20112.htm#fr_135) See George Smith in
the *Transactions of the Society of Biblical Archæology*, i. p. 32.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[61:1](rp20112.htm#fr_136) Consort of the god
Martu, according to the *Collection de Clercq*, cyl. 114. Cf. W.A.I.,
iii. 67, *b* 35.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[61:2](rp20112.htm#fr_137) See more especially
the last lines of inscription No. 1 of King Uru-Kagina. M. Heuzey has
drawn my attention to the lines, which have been translated for the
first time by Dr. Oppert.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I. The Inscriptions Of King Ur-Nina](rp20113)
