[Intangible Textual Heritage](../index)  [Shinto](index.md)  
[Complete etext of the Kojiki, Chamberlain tr](kj/index.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

THE KOJIKI

\[B.H. Chamberlain, translator 1882\]

 

PART I.- THE BIRTH OF THE DEITIES

 

THE BEGINNING OF HEAVEN AND EARTH

 

The names of the deities that were born in the Plain of High Heaven when
the Heaven and Earth began were the deity
Master-of-the-August-Center-of-Heaven; next, the
High-August-Producing-Wondrous deity; next, the
Divine-Producing-Wondrous deity. These three deities were all deities
born alone, and hid their persons. The names of the deities that were
born next from a thing that sprouted up like unto a reed-shoot when the
earth, young and like unto floating oil, drifted about medusa-like, were
the Pleasant-Reed-Shoot-Prince-Elder deity, next the
Heavenly-Eternally-Standing deity. These two deities were likewise born
alone, and hid their persons.

The five deities in the above list are separate Heavenly deities.

 

THE SEVEN DIVINE GENERATIONS

 

The names of the deities that were born next were the
Earthly-Eternally-Standing deity; next, the Luxuriant-Integrating-Master
deity. These two deities were likewise deities born alone, and hid their
persons. The names of the deities that were born next were the deity
Mud-Earth-Lord; next, his Younger sister the deity -Mud-Earth-Lady;
next, the Germ-Integrating deity; next, his younger sister the
Life-Integrating-Deity; next, the deity of Elder-of-the-Great-Place;
next, his younger sister the deity Elder-Lady-of-the-Great-Place; next,
the deity Perfect-Exterior; next, his younger sister the deity
Oh-Awful-Lady; next, the deity Izanagi or the Male-Who-Invites; next,
his younger sister Izanami or the deity the Female-Who-Invites.

From the Earthly-Eternally-Standing deity down to the deity the
Female-Who-Invites in the previous list are what are termed the Seven
Divine Generations.

 

THE ISLAND OF ONOGORO

 

Hereupon all the Heavenly deities commanded the two deities His
Augustness the Male-Who-Invites and Her Augustness the
Female-Who-Invites, ordering them to "make, consolidate, and give birth
to this drifting land." Granting to them a heavenly jeweled spear, they
thus deigned to charge them. So the two deities, standing upon the
Floating Bridge of Heaven pushed down the jeweled spear and stirred with
it, whereupon, when they had stirred the brine till it went
curdle-curdle, and drew the spear up, the brine that dripped down from
the end of the spear was piled up and became an island. This is the
Island of Onogoro.

 

COURTSHIP OF THE DEITIES THE MALE-WHO-INVITES AND THE FEMALE-WHO-INVITES

 

Having descended from Heaven on to this island, they saw to the erection
of a heavenly august pillar, they saw to the erection of a hall of eight
fathoms. Then Izanagi, the Male-Who-Invites, said to Izanami, the
Female-Who-Invites, "We should create children"; and he said, "Let us go
around the heavenly august pillar, and when we meet on the other side
let us be united. Do you go around from the left, and I will go from the
right." When they met, Her Augustness, the Female-Who-Invites, spake
first, exclaiming, "Ah, what a fair and lovable youth!" Then His
Augustness said, "Ah what a fair and lovable maiden!" But afterward he
said, " It was not well that the woman should speak first!" The child
which was born to them was Hiruko (the leech-child), which when three
years old was still unable to stand upright. So they placed the
leech-child in a boat of reeds and let it float away. Next they gave
birth to the island of Aha. This likewise is not reckoned among their
children.

Hereupon the two deities took counsel, saving: "The children to whom we
have now given birth are not good. It will be best to announce this in
the august place of the Heavenly deities." They ascended forthwith to
Heaven and inquired of Their Augustnesses the Heavenly deities. Then the
Heavenly deities commanded and found out by grand divination, and
ordered them, saying: "they were not good because the woman spoke first.
Descend back again and amend your words." So thereupon descending back,
they again went round the heavenly august pillar. Thereupon his
Augustness the Male-who-Invites spoke first: " Ah! what a fair and
lovely maiden!" Afterward his younger sister Her Augustness the
Female-Who-Invites spoke: " Ah! what a fair and lovely youth! " Next
they gave birth to the Island of Futa-na in Iyo. This island has one
body and four faces, and each face has a name. So the Land of Iyo is
called Lovely-Princess; the Land of Sanuki is called
Princess-Good-Boiled-Rice; the Land of Aha is called the
Princess-of-Great-Food, the Land of Tosa is called Brave-Good-Youth.
Next they gave birth to the islands of Mitsu-go near Oki, another name
for which islands is Heavenly-Great-Heart-Youth. This island likewise
has one body and four faces, and each face has a name. So the Land of
Tsukushi is called White-Sun-Youth; the Land of Toyo is called
Luxuriant-Sun-Youth; the Land of Hi is called
Brave-Sun-Confronting-Luxuriant-Wondrous-Lord-Youth; the Land of Kumaso
is called Brave-Sun-Youth. Next they gave birth to the Island of Iki,
another name for which is Heaven's One-Pillar. Next they gave birth to
the Island of Tsu, another name for which is
Heavenly-Hand-Net-Good-Princess. Next they gave birth to the Island of
Sado. Next they gave birth to
Great-Yamato-the-Luxuriant-Island-of-the-Dragon-fly, another name for
which is Heavenly-August-Sky-Luxuriant-Dragon-fly-Lord-Youth. The name
of "Land-of-the-Eight-Great-Islands" therefore originated in these eight
islands having been born first. After that, when they had returned, they
gave birth to the Island of Koo-zhima in Kibi, another name for which
island is Brave-Sun-Direction-Youth. Next they gave birth to the Island
of Adzuki, another name for which is Oho-Nu-De-Hime. Next they gave
birth to the Island of Oho-shima, another name for which is
Oho-Tamaru-Wake. -Next they gave birth to the Island of Hime, another
name for which is Heaven's-One-Root. Next they gave birth to the Island
of Chika, another name for which is Heavenly-Great-Male. Next they gave
birth to the islands of Futa-go, another name for which is Heaven's
Two-Houses. (Six islands in all from the Island of Ko in Kibi to the
Island of Heaven's-Two-Houses.)

 

BIRTH OF THE VARIOUS DEITIES

 

When they had finished giving birth to countries, they began afresh
giving birth to deities. So the name of the deity they gave birth to was
the deity Great-Male-of-the-Great-Thing; next, they gave birth to the
deity Rock-Earth-Prince; next, they gave birth to the deity
Rock-Nest-Princess; next, they gave birth to the deity
Great-Door-Sun-Youth; next, they gave birth to the deity
Heavenly-Blowing-Male; next, they gave birth to the deity
Great-House-Prince; next, they gave birth to the deity
Youth-of-the-Wind-Breath-the-Great-Male; next, they gave birth to the
sea-deity, whose name is the deity Great-Ocean-Possessor next, they gave
birth to the deity of the Water-Gates, whose name is the deity
Prince-of-Swift-Autumn ; next they gave birth to his younger sister the
deity Princess-of-Swift-Autumn. (Ten deities in all from the deity
Great-Male-of-the-Great-Thing to the deity Princess-of-Autumn.) The
names of the deities given birth to by these two deities
Prince-of-Swift-Autumn and Princess-of-Swift-Autumn from their separate
dominions of river and sea were: the deity Foam-Calm; next, the deity
Foam-Waves; next the deity Bubble-Calm; next, the deity Bubble-Waves;
next the deity Heavenly-Water-Divider; next, the deity
Earthly-Water-Divider; next, the deity
Heavenly-Water-Drawing-Gourd-Possessor; next, the deity
Earthly-Water-Drawing-Gourd-Possessor. (Eight deities in all from the
deity Foam-Prince to the deity Earthly-Water-Drawing-Gourd-Possessor.)
Next, they gave birth to the deity of Wind, whose name is the deity
Prince-of-Long-Wind. Next, they gave birth to the deity of Trees, whose
name is deity Stem-Elder; next, they gave birth to the deity of
Mountains, whose name is the deity Great-Mountain-Possessor. Next, they
gave birth to the deity of Moors, whose name is the deity
Thatch-Moor-Princess, another name for whom is the deity Moor-Elder.
(Four deities in all from the deity Prince-of-long-wind to Moor-Elder.)
The names of the deities given birth to by these two deities, the deity
Great-Mountain-Possessor and the deity, Moor-Elder from their separate
dominions of mountain and moor were: the deity Heavenly-Elder-of-the
Passes; next, the deity Earthly-Elder-of-the-Passes; next, the deity
Heavenly-Pass-Boundary; next, the deity Earthly-Pass-Boundary; next, the
deity Heavenly-Dark-Door; next, the deity Earthly-Dark-Door next, the
deity Great-Vale-Prince; next, the deity Great-Vale-Princess. (Eight
deities in all from the deity Heavenly-Elder-of-the-Passes to the deity
Great-Vale-Princess.) The name of the deity they next gave birth to was
the deity Bird's-Rock-Camphor-tree-Boat, another name for whom is the
Heavenly-Bird-Boat. Next, they gave birth to the deity
Princess-of-Great-Food. Next, they gave birth to the
Fire-Burning-Swift-Male deity, another name for whom is the deity
Fire-Shining-Prince, and another name is the deity Fire-Shining-Elder.

 

RETIREMENT OF HER AUGUSTNESS THE PRINCESS-WHO-INVITES

 

Through giving birth to this child her august private parts were burned,
and she sickened and lay down. The names of the deities born from her
vomit were the deity Metal-Mountain-Prince and, next, the deity
Metal-Mountain-Princess. The names of the deities that were born from
her feces were the deity Clay-Viscid-Prince and, next, the deity
Clay-Viscid-Princess. The names of the deities that were next born from
her urine were the deity Mitsubanome and, next, the
Young-Wondrous-Producing deity. The child of this deity was called the
deity Luxuriant-Food-Princess. So the deity the Female-Who-Invites,
through giving birth to the deity of Fire, at length divinely retired.
(Eight deities in all from the Heavenly-Bird-Boat to the deity
Luxuriant-Food-Princess.) The total number of islands given birth to
jointly by the two deities the Male- Who-Invites and the
Female-Who-Invites was fourteen, and of deities thirty-five. (These are
such as were given birth to before the deity the Princess-Who-Invites
divinely retired. Only the Island of Onogoro was not given birth to and,
moreover, the Leech-Child and the Island of Aha are not reckoned among
the children.)

So then His Augustness the Male-Who-Invites said: " Oh! Thine Augustness
my lovely younger sister' Oh! that I should have exchanged thee for this
single child! " And as he crept round her august pillow, and as he crept
round her august feet and wept, there was born from his august tears the
deity that dwells at Konomoto, near Unewo on Mount Kagu, and whose name
is the Crying-Weeping-Female deity. So he buried the divinely retired
deity the Female-Who-Invites on Mount Hiba, at the boundary of the Land
of Idzumo and the Land of Hahaki.

 

TIIE SLAYING OF TIIE FIRE-DEITY

 

Then His Augustness the Male-Who-Invites, drawing the ten-grasp saber
that was augustly girded on him, cut off the head of his child the deity
Shining-Elder. Hereupon the names of the deities that were born from the
blood that stuck to the point of the august sword and bespattered the
multitudinous rock-masses were: the deity Rock-Splitter; next, the deity
Root-Splitter; next, the Rock-Possessing-Male deity. The names of the
deities that were next born from the blood that stuck to the upper part
of the august sword and again bespattered the multitudinous rock-masses
were: the Awfully-Swift deity; next, the Fire-Swift deity; next, the
Brave-Awful-Possessing-Male deity, another name for whom is the
Brave-Snapping deity, and another name is the Luxuriant-Snapping deity.
The names of the deities that were next born from the blood that
collected on the hilt of the august sword and leaked out between his
fingers were: the deity Kura-okami and, next, the deity Kura-mitsuba.

All the eight deities in the above list, from the deity Rock-Splitter to
the deity Kura-mitsuha, are deities that were born from the august
sword.

The name of the deity that was born from the bead of the deity
Shining-Elder, who bad been slain, was the deity
Possessor-of-the-True-Pass-Mountains. The name of the deity that was
next born from his chest was the deity Possessor-of-Descent--Mountains.
The name of the deity that was next born from his belly was the deity
Possessor-of-the-Innermost Mountains. The name of the deity that was
next born from his private parts was the deity
Possessor-of-the-Dark-Mountains. The name of the deity that was next
born from his left hand was the deity
Possessor-of-the-Densely-Wooded-Mountains. The name of the deity that
was next born from his right hand was the deity
Possessor-of-the-Outlying-Mountains. The name of the deity that was next
born from his left foot was the deity
Possessor-of-the-Moorland-Mountains. The name of the deity that was next
born from his right foot was the deity
Possessor-of-the-Outer--Mountains. (Eight deities in an from the deity
Possessor-of-the-True-Pass-Mountains to the deity
Possessor-of-the-Outer--Mountains.) So the name of the sword with which
the -Male-Who-Invites cut off his son's head was
Heavenly-Point-Blade-Extended, and another name was
Majestic-Point-Blade-Extended.

 

THE KOJIKI

 

PART II.- THE QUARREL OF IZANAGA AND IZANAMI

 

THE LAND OF HADES

 

Thereupon His Augustuess the Male-Who-Invites, wishing to meet and see
his younger sister Her Augustness the FemaleWho-Invites, followed after
her to the Land of Hades. So when from the palace she raised the door
and came out to meet him, His Augustness the Male-Who-Invites spoke,
saying: "Thine Augustness, my lovelv younger sister! the lands that I
and thou made are not yet finished making; so come back! " Then Her
Augustness the Female-Who-Invites answered, saying: " Lamentable indeed
that thou camest not sooner! I have eaten of the furnace of Hades.
Nevertheless, as I reverence the entry here of Thine Augustness, my
lovely elder brother, I wish to return. Moreover, I will discuss it
particularly with the deities of Hades. Look not at me!" Having thus
spoken, she went back inside the palace; and as she tarried there very
long, he could not wait. So having taken and broken off one of the
end-teeth of the multitudinous and close-toothed comb stuck in the
august left bunch of his hair, he lit one light and went in and looked.
Maggots were swarming, and she was rotting, and in her head dwelt the
Great-Thunder, in her breast dwelt the Fire-Thunder, in her left hand
dwelt the Young-Thunder, in her right hand dwelt the Earth-Thunder, in
her left foot dwelt the Rumbling-Thunder, in her right foot dwelt the
Couchant-Thunder -- altogether eight Thunder-deities had been born and
dwelt there. Hereupon His Augustness the Male-Who-Invites, overawed at
the sight, fled back, whereupon his younger sister, "Her Augustness the
Female-Who-Invites, said: "Thou hast put me to shame," and at once sent
the Ugly-Female-of-Hades to pursue him. So His Augustness the
Male-Who-Invites took his black august head-dress and cast it down, and
it instantly turned into grapes. While she picked them up and ate them,
he fled on; but as she still pursued him, he took and broke the
multitudinous and close-toothed comb in the right bunch of his hair and
cast it down, and it instantly turned into bamboo-sprouts. While she
pulled them up and ate them, he fled on. Again, later, his younger
sister sent the eight Thunder-deities with a thousand and five hundred
warriors of Hades to pursue him. So he, drawing the ten-grasp saber that
was augustly girded on him, fled forward brandishing it in his back
hand;" and as they still pursued, he took, on reaching the base of the
Even-Pass-of-Hades, three peaches that were growing at its base, and
waited and smote his pursuers therewith, so that they all fled back.
Then His Augustness the Male-Who-Invites announced to the peaches: "Like
as ye have helped me, so must ve help all living people in the Central
Land of Reed-Plains when they shall fall into troublous circumstances
and be harassed! "- and he gave to the peaches the designation of Their
Augustnesses Great-Divine-Fruit. Last of all, his younger sister, Her
Augustness the Princess-Who-Invites, came out herself in pursuit. So he
drew a thousand-draught rock, and with it blocked up the
Even-Pass-of-Hades, and placed the rock in the middle; and they stood
opposite to one another and exchanged leave-takings ; and Her Augustness
the Female-Who-Invites said: "My lovely elder brother, thine Augustness!
If thou do like this, I will in one day strangle to death a thousand of
the folk of thy land." Then His Augustness the Male-Who-Invites replied:
"My lovely younger sister, Thine Augastness! If thou do this, I will in
one day set up a thousand and five hundred parturition-house. In this
manner each day a thousand people would surely be born." So Her
Augustness the Female-Who-Invites is called the Great-Deity-of-Hades.
Again it is said that, owing to her having pursued and reached her elder
brother, she is called the Road-Reaching-Great deity."' Again, the rock
with which he blocked up the Even-Pass-of-Hades is called the
Great-Deity-of-the-Road-Turning-back, and again it is called the
Blocking-Great-Deity-of-the-Door-of-Hades. So what was called the
Even-Pass-of-Hades is now called the Ifuya-Pass in the Land of Idzumo.

 

THE PURIFICATION OF THE AUGUST PERSON

 

Therefore the great deity the Male-Who-Invites said: "Nay! hideous! I
have come to a hideous and polluted land - I have! So I will perform the
purification of my august person." So he went out to a plain covered
with altagi, at a small river-mouth near Tachibana in Himuka in the
island of Tsukushi, and purified and cleansed himself. So the name of
the deity that was born from the august staff which he threw down was
the deity Thrust-Erect-Come-Not-Place. The name of the deity that was
born from the august girdle which he next threw down was the deity
Road-Long-Space. The name of the deity that was born from the august
skirt which he next threw down was the deity Loosen-Put. The name of the
deity that was born from the august upper garment which he next threw
down was the deity Master-of-Trouble. The name of the deity that was
born from the august trousers which be next threw down was the Road-Fork
deity. The name of the deity that was born from the august hat which he
next threw down was the deity Master-of-the-Open-Mouth. The names of the
deities that were born from the bracelet of his august left hand which
he next threw down were the deity Offing-Distant, next, the deity
Wash-Prince-of-the-Offing; next, the deity
Intermediate-Direction-of-the-offing. The names of the deities that were
born from the bracelet of his august right hand which he next threw down
were: the deity Shore-Distant; next, the deity Wash-Prince-of-the-Shore;
next, the deity Intermediate-Direction-of-the-Shore.

The twelve deities mentioned in the foregoing list from the deity
Come-Not-Place down to the deity Intermediate-Direction-of-the-Shore are
deities that were born from his taking off the things that were on his
person.

Thereupon saying: "The water in the upper reach is too rapid; the water
in the lower reach is too sluggish," he went down and plunged in the
middle reach; and, as he washed, there was first born the
Wondrous-Deity-of-Eighty-Evils, and next the
Wondrous-Deity-of-Great-Evils. These two deities are the deities that
were born from the filth he contracted when he went to that polluted,
hideous land. The names of the deities that were next born to rectify
those evils were: the Divine-Rectifying-Wondrous deity; next, the
Great-Rectictifying-Wondrous deity; next, the Female-Deity-Idzu. The
names of the deities that were next born as be bathed at the bottom of
the water were: the deity Possessor-of-the-Ocean-Bottom and, next, His
Augustness Elder-Male-of-the-Bottom. The names of the deities that were
born as he bathed in the middle of the water were: the deity
Possessor-of-the-Ocean-Middle and, next, His Augustness
Elder-Male-of-the-Middle. The names of the deities that were born as lie
bathed at the top of the water were the deity
Possessor-of-the-Ocean-Surface and, next, His Augustness
Elder--Male-of-the-Surface. These three Ocean-Possessing deities are the
deities held in reverence as their ancestral-deities by the Chiefs of
Adzumi. So the Chiefs of Adzumi are the descendants of His Augustness
Utsushi-hi-gana-saku, a child of these Ocean-possessing deities. These
three deities His Augustness Elder-Male-of-the-Bottom, His Augustness
Elder-Male-of-the-Middle, and His Augustness Elder-Male-of-the-Surface
are the three great deities of the Inlet of Sumi. The name of the deity
that was born as he thereupon washed his left august eye was the
Heaven-Shining-Great-August deity. The name of the deity that was next
born as he washed his right august eye was His Augustness
Moon-Night-Possessor. The name of the deity that was next born as he
washed his august nose was His Brave-Swift-Impetuous-Male-Augustness.

The fourteen deities in the foregoing list from the
Wondrous-Deity-of-Eighty-Evils down to His
Swift-Impetuous-Male-Augustness are deities born from the bathing of his
august person.

 

THE KOJIKI

 

PART III. AMATERASU, THE SUN-GODDESS, AND THE STORM-GOD

 

INVESTITURE OF THE THREE DEITIES, THE ILLUSTRIOUS AUGUST CHILDREN

 

At this time His Augustness the Male-Who-Invites greatly rejoiced,
saying: "I, begetting child after child, have at my final begetting
gotten three illustrious children." With which words, at once jinglingly
taking off and shaking the jewel-string forming his august necklace, be
bestowed it on Amaterasu, the Heaven-Shining-Great-August deity. saying:
"Do Thine Augustness rule the Plain-of-High-Heaven." With this charge he
bestowed it on her. Now the name of this august necklace was the
August-Storehouse-Shelf deity. Next he said to His Augustness
Moon-Night-Possessor: "Do Thine Augustness rule the Dominion of the
Night." Thus he charged him. Next he said to
His-Brave-Swift-Impetuous-Male-Augustness: "Do Thine Augustness rule the
Sea-Plain."

 

THE CRYING AND WEEPING OF HIS IMPETUOUS-MALE-AUGUSTNESS

 

So while the other two deities each assumed his and her rule according
to the command with which her father had deigned to charge them, the
Storm-God, His-Swift-Impetuous-Male-Augustness, did not assume the rule
of the dominion with which he had been charged, but cried and wept till
his eight-grasp beard reached to the pit of his stomach. The fashion of
his weeping was such as by his weeping to wither the green mountains
into withered mountains, and by his weeping to dry up all the rivers and
seas. For this reason the sound of bad deities was like unto the flies
in the fifth moon as they all swarmed, and in all things every portent
of woe arose. So the Great August deity the Male-Who-Invites said to His
Swift-Impetuous-Male-Augustness: "How is it that, instead of ruling the
land with which I charged thee, thou dost wail and weep?" He replied,
saying: "I wail because I wish to depart to my deceased mother's land,
to the Nether Distant Land." Then the Great August deity the
Male-Who-Invites was very angry and said: If that be so,, thou shalt not
dwell in this land, and forthwith expelled him with a divine expulsion.
So the great deity the Male-Who-Invites dwells at Taga in Afumi.

 

THE AUGUST OATH

 

So thereupon His-Swift-Impetuous-Male-Augustness said: if that be so I
will take leave of the Heaven-Shining-Great-August deity, and depart."
With these words he forthwith went up to Heaven, whereupon all the
mountains and rivers shook, and every land and country quaked. So the
Heaven-Shining-Great-August deity, alarmed at the noise, said: " The
reason of the ascent hither of His Augustness my elder brother is surely
of no good intent. It is only that he wishes to wrest my land from me."
And she forthwith, unbinding her august hair, twisted it into august
bunches; and both into the left and into the right august bunch, as
likewise into her august head-dress and likewise on to her left and her
right august arm, she twisted an augustly complete string of curved
jewels eight feet long, of five hundred jewels, and, slinging on her
back a quiver holding a thousand arrows, and adding thereto a quiver
holding five hundred arrows, she likewise took and slung at her side a
mighty and high sounding elbow-pad, and brandished and stuck her bow
upright so that the top shook, and she stamped her feet into the hard
ground up to her opposing thighs, kicking away the earth like rotten
snow, and stood valiantly like unto a mighty man, and, waiting, asked:
"Wherefore ascendest thou hither?" Then
His-Swift-Impetuous-Male-Augustness replied, saying: "I have no evil
intent. It is only that when the Great August deity our father spoke,
deigning to inquire the cause of my wailing and weeping, I said: 'I wail
because I wish to go to my deceased mother's land' -- whereupon the
Great-August deity said: 'Thou shalt not dwell in this land,' and
deigned to expel me with a divine expulsion. It is therefore solely with
the thought of taking leave of thee and departing, that I have ascended
hither. I have no strange intentions." Then the
Heaven-Shining-Great-August deity said: " If that be so, whereby shall I
know the sincerity of thine intentions? " Thereupon
His-Swift-Impetuous-Male-Augustness replied, saying: "Let each of us
swear and produce children." So as they then swore to each other from
the opposite banks of the Tranquil River of Heaven, the august names of
the deities that were born from the mist of her breath when, having
first begged His-Swift-Impetuous-Male-Augustness to hand her the
ten-grasp saber which was girded on him, and broken it into three
fragments, and with the jewels making a jingling sound, having
brandished and washed them in the True-Pool-Well of Heaven, and having
crunchingly crunched them, the Heaven-Shining-Great deity blew them
away, were Her Angustness Torrent-Mist-Princess, another august name for
whom is Her Augustness Princess-of-the-Island-of-the-Offing; next Her
Augustness Lovely-Island-Princess another august name for whom is Her
Augustness Good-Princess; next Her Augustness Princess-of-the-Torrent.
The august name of the deity that was born from the mist of his breath
when, having begged the Heaven-Shining-Great-August deity to hand him
the augustly complete string of curved jewels eight feet long - of five
hundred jewels - that was twisted in the left august bunch of her hair,
and with the jewels making a jingling sound having brandished and washed
them in the True-Pool-Well of Heaven, and having cruncbingly crunched
them, His-Swift-Impetuous-Male-Augustness blew them away, was His
Augustness
Truly-Conqueror-I-Conqueror-Conquering-Swift-Heavenly-Great-Great-Ears.
The august name of the deity that was born from the mist of his breath
when again, having begged her to hand him the jewels that were twisted
in the right august bunch of her hair, and having crunchingly crunched
them, he blew them away, was His Augustness Ame-no-hohi. The august name
of the deity that was born from the mist of his breath when again,
having begged her to hand him the jewels that were twisted in her august
head-dress, and having crunchingly crunched them, he blew them away, was
His Augustness Prince-Lord-of-Heaven. The august name of the deity that
was born from the mist of his breath when again, having begged her to
hand him the jewels that were twisted on her left august arm, and having
crunchingly crunched them, he blew them away, was His Augustness
Prince-Lord-of-Life. The august name of the deity that was born from the
mist of his breath when again, having begged her to band him the jewels
that were twisted on her right august arm, and having crunchingly
crunched them,, be blew them away was His-Wondrous-Augustness-of-Kumanu.
( Five deities in all.)

 

THE AUGUST DECLARATION OF THE DIVISION OF THE AUGUST MALE CHILDREN A.ND
THE AUGUST FEMALE CHILDREN

 

Hereupon the Heavenly Shining-Great-August deity said to
His-Swift-Impetuous-Male-Augustness: "As for the seed of the five male
deities born last, their birth was from things of mine; so undoubtedly
they are my children. As for the seed of the three female deities born
first, their birth was from a thing of thine; so doubtless they are thy
children." Thus did she declare the division. So Her Augustness
Torrent-Mist-Princess, the deity born first, dwells in the inner temple
of Munakata. The next, Her Augustness Lovely-Island-Princess, dwells in
the middle temple of Munakata. The next, Her Augustness
Princess-of-the-Torrent, dwells in the outer temple of Munakata. These
three deities are of the three great deities held in reverence by the
dukes of Munakata. So His Augustuess Brave-Rustic-Illuminator, child of
His Augustness Ame-no-hohi, one of the five children born afterward.
This is the ancestor of the rulers of the land of Idzumo, of the rulers
of the land of Muzashi, of the rulers of the upper land of Unakami, of
the rulers of the lower land of Unakami, of the rulers of the land of
lzhimu, of the departmental suzerains of the Island of Tsu and of the
rulers of the land of Tobo-tsu-Afumi. The next, His Augustness
Prince-Lord-of-Heaven, is the ancestor of the rulers of the land of
Ofushi-kafuchi, of the chiefs of Nukatabe-no-yuwe, of the rulers of the
land of Ki, of the suzerains of Tanaka in Yamato, of the rulers of the
land of Yamashiro, of the rulers of the land of Umaguta, of the rulers
of the land of Kine in Michi-no-Shiri, of the rulers of the land of
Suhau, of the rulers of Amuchi, in Yamato, of the departmental suzerains
of Takechi, of the territorial lords of Kamafu, and of the rulers of
Sakikusabe.

 

THE AUGUST RAVAGES OF HIS-IMPETUOUS-MALE-AUGUSTNESS

 

Then His-Swift-Impetuous-Male-Augustness said to the
Heaven-Shining-Great-August deity: "Owing to the sincerity of my
intentions I have, in begetting children, gotten delicate females.
Judging from this I have undoubtedly gained the victory." With these
words, and impetuous with victory, he broke down the divisions of the
rice-fields laid out by the Heaven-Shining-Great-August deity filled up
the ditches, and moreover strewed excrements in the palace where she
partook of the great food. So, though he did thus, the
Heaven-Shining-Great-August deity upbraided him not, but said: "What
looks like excrements must be something that His Augustness mine elder
brother has vomited through drunkenness. Again, as to his breaking down
the divisions of the rice-fields and filling up the ditches, it must be
because be grudges the land they occupy that His Augustness mine elder
brother acts thus." But notwithstanding these apologetic words, he still
continued his evil acts, and was more and more violent. As the
Heaven-Shining-Great-August deity sat in her awful weaving-hall seeing
to the weaving of the august garments of the deities, he broke a hole in
the top of the weaving-hall, and through it let fall a heavenly piebald
horse which he had flayed with a backward flaying, at whose sight the
women weaving the heaveijy garments were so much alarmed they died of
fear.

 

THE DOOR OF THE HEAVENLY ROCK-DWELLING

 

So thereupon the Heaven-Shining-Great-August deity, terrified at the
sight, closed behind her the door of the Heavenly Rock-Dwelling, made it
fast and retired. Then the whole Plain of High Heaven was obscured and
all the Central Land of Reed-Plains darkened. Owing to this, eternal
night prevailed. Hereupon the voices of the myriad deities were like
unto the flies in the fifth moon as they swarmed, and a myriad portents
of woe all arose. Therefore did the eight hundred myriad deities
assemble in a divine assembly in the bed of the Tranquil River of
Heaven, and bid the deity Thought-Includer, child of the
High-August-Producing-Wondrous deity, think of a plan, assembling the
long-singing birds of eternal night and making them sing, taking the
hard rocks of Heaven from the river-bed of the Tranquil River of Heaven,
and taking the iron from the Heavenly Metal-Mountains, calling in the
smith Ama-tsu-ma-ra, charging Her Augtsness I-shi-ko-ri-do-me to make a
mirror, and charging His Augustness Jewel-Ancestor to make an augustly
complete string of curved jewels eight feet long - of five hundred
jewels - and summoning His Augustness Heavenly-Beekoning-Ancestor-Lord
and His Augustness Great-Jewel, and causing them to pull out with a
complete pulling the shoulder-blade of a true stag from the Heavenly
Mount Kagu, and take cherry-bark from the Heavenly Mount Kagu, and
perform divination, and pulling up by pulling its roots a true cleyera
japonica with five hundred branches from the Heavenly Mount Kaga, and
taking and putting upon its upper branches the augustly complete string
of curved jewels eight feet long - of five hundred jewels - and taking
and tying to the middle branches the mirror eight feet long, and taking
and hanging upon its lower branches the white pacificatory offerings and
the blue pacificatory offering His Augustness Grand-Jewel taking these
divers things and holding them together with the grand august offerings,
and His Augustness Heavenly-Beckoning-Ancestor-Lord prayerfully reciting
grand liturgies, and the Heavenly Hand-Strength-Male deity standing
hidden beside the door, and Her Augustness Heavenly-Alarming-Female
banging round her the heavenly clubmoss the Heavenly -Mount Kagu as a
sash, and making the heavenly spindle-tree her head-dress and binding
the leaves of the bamboo-grass of the Heavenly -Mount-Kagu in a posy for
her hands, and laying a sounding-board before the door of the Heavenly
Rock-Dwelling and stamping, till she made it resound and doing as if
possessed by a deity, and pulling out the nipples of her breasts,
pushing down her skirt-string "usque ad privates partes". Then the Plain
of High Heaven shook, and the eight hundred myriad deities laughed
together.

Hereupon the Heaven-Shining-Great-August deity was greatly amazed, and,
slightly opening the door of the Heavenly Rock-Dwelling, spoke thus from
the inside: "Methought that owing to my retirement the Plain of Heaven
would be dark, and likewise the Central Land of Reed-Plains would all be
dark: how then is it that the Heavenly-Alarming-Female makes merry, and
that likewise the eight hundred myriad deities all laugh? "Then the
Heavenly-Alarming-Female spoke, saving: "We rejoice and are glad because
there is a deity more illustrious than Thine Augustness." While she was
thus speaking, His Augustness Heavenly-Beckoning-Ancestor-Lord and His
Augustness Grand-Jewel pushed forward the mirror and respectfully showed
it to the Heaven-Shining-Great-August deity, whereupon the
Heaven-Shining-Great-August deity, more and more astonished, gradually
came forth from the door and gazed upon it, whereupon the
Heavenly-Hand-Strength-Male deity, who was standing hidden, took her
august hand and drew her out, and then His Augustness Grand-Jewel drew
the bottom-tied rope along at her august back, and spoke, saving: "Thou
must not go back further in than this"! So when the
Heaven-Shining-Great-August deity had come forth, both the Plain of High
Heaven and the Central-Land-of-Reed-Plains of course again became light.

 

THE AUGUST EXPULSION OF HIS IMPETUOUS-MALE-AUGUSTNESS

 

Thereupon the eight hundred myriad deities took counsel together, and
imposed on High-Swift-Impetuous-Male-Augustness a fine of a thousand
tables, and likewise cut his beard, and even caused the nails of his
fingers and toes to be pulled out, and expelled him with a divine
expulsion. Again he begged food of the deity Princess-of-Great-Food.
Then the Princess-of-Great-Food took out all sorts of dainty things from
her nose, her mouth, and her fundament, and made them up into all sorts
of dishes, which she offered to him. But
His-Swift-Impetuous-Male-Augustness watched her proceedings, considered
that she was offering up to him filth, and at once killed the deity
Princess-of-Great-Food. So the things that were born in the body of the
deity who had been killed were as follows: in her head were born
silkworms, in her two eyes were born rice-seeds, in her two ears was
born millet, in her nose were born small beans, in her private parts was
born barley, in her fundament were born large beans. So His Augustness
the Deity-Producing-Wondrous-Ancestor caused them to be taken and used
as seeds.

 

THE EIGHT-FORKED SERPENT

So, having been expelled, His-Swift-Impetuous-Male-Augustness descended
to a place called Tori-kami at the headwaters of the River Hi in the
Land of Idzumo. At this time some chopsticks came floating down the
stream. So His Swift-Impetuous-Male-Augustness, thinking that there must
be people at the head-waters of the river, went up it in quest of them,
when he came upon an old man and an old woman - two of them - who had a
young girl between them, and were weeping. Then he deigned to ask: "Who
are ye?" So the old man replied, saving: "I am an Earthly deity, child
of the deity Great-Mountain-Possessor. I am called by the name of
Foot-Stroking-Elder, my wife is called by the name of
Hand-Stroking-Elder, and my daughter is called by the name of
Wondrous-Inada-Princess." Again he asked: "What is the cause of your
crying?" The old man answered, saying: "I had originally eight young
girls as daughters. But the eight-forked serpent of Koshi has come every
year and devoured one, and it is now its time to come, wherefore we
weep." Then he asked him: "What is its form like?" The old man answered,
saving: " Its eyes are like akakagachi, it has one body with eight heads
and eight tails. Moreover, on its body grows moss, and also
chamaecyparis and cryptomerias. Its length extends over eight valleys
and eight hills, and if one look at its belly, it is all constantly
bloody and inflamed." (What is called here akakagachi is the modern
hohodzuki.) Then His-Swift-Impetuous-Male-Augstness said to the old man:
"If this be tby daughter, wilt thou offer her to me?" He replied,
saying: "With reverence, but I know not thine august name." Then be
replied, saving: I am elder brother to the Heaven-Shining-Great-August
deity. So I have now descended from Heaven." Then the deities
Foot-Stroking-Elder and Hand-Stroking-Elder said: "If that be so, with
reverence will we offer her to thee." So
His-Swift-Impetuous-Male-Augustness, at once taking and changing, the
young girl into a multitudinous and close-toothed comb which he stuck
into his august hair-bunch, said to the deities Foot-Stroking-Elder and
Hand-Stroking-Elder: " Do you distil some eightfold refined liquor. Also
make a fence round about, in that fence make eight gates, at each gate
tie together eight platforms, on each platform put a liquor-vat, and
into each vat pour the eightfold refined liquor, and wait." So as they
waited after having thus prepared everything in accordance with his
bidding the eight-forked serpent came truly as the old man had said, and
immediately dipped a head into each vat, and drank the liquor. Thereupon
it was intoxicated with drinking, and all the heads lay down and slept.
Then His-Swift-Impetuous-Male-Augustness drew the ten-grasp saber, that
was augustly girded on him, and cut the serpent in pieces, so that the
River Hi flowed on changed into a river of blood. So when he cut the
middle tail, the edge of his august sword broke. Then, thinking it
strange, he thrust into and split the flesh with the point of his august
sword and looked, and there was a great sword within. So he took this
great sword, and, thinking it a strange thing, he respectfully informed
the Heaven-Shining-Great-August deity. This is the Herb-Quelling Great
Sword.

 

THE PALACE OF SUGA

 

So thereupon His Swift-Impetuous-.Male-Augustness sought in the land of
Idzumo for a place where he might build a palace. Then he arrived at a
place called Suga, and said:

On coming to this place my august heart is pure" - and in that place he
built a palace to dwell in. So that place is now called Suga. When this
great deity, first built the palace of Suga, clouds rose up thence. Then
he made an august song. That song said:

 

"Eight clouds arise. The eightfold fence of Idzumo makes an eightfold
fence for the spouses to retire within. Oh! that eightfold fence."

 

\[This difficult song has been rather differently rendered by Mr. Aston
in the Second Appendix to his " Grammar of the Japanese Written
Language." Mr. Aston translates it thus:

 

Many clouds arise:

The clouds which come forth are a manifold fence:

For the husband and wife to retire within

They have formed a manifold fence:

Oh! that manifold fence!"\]

 

THE KOJIKI

PART IV.- THE BEAST-LEGENDS

THE WHITE HARE OF INABA

 

From His Swift-Impetuous-Male-Augustness was descended the deity
Master-of-the-Great-Land. He had eighty deities his brethren; but they
all left the land to the deity Master-of-the-Great-Land. The reason for
their leaving it was this: Each of these eighty deities had in his heart
the wish to marry the Princess of Yakami in Inaba, and they went
together to Inaba, putting their bag on the back of the deity
Great-Name-Possessor, whom they took with them as an attendant.
Hereupon, when they arrived at Cape Keta, thev found a naked hare lying
down. Then the eighty deities spoke to the hare, saying: "What thou
shouldest do is to bathe in the sea-water here, and lie on the slope of
a high mountain exposed to the blowing of the wind." So the hare
followed the instructions of the eighty deities, and lay down. Then, as
the sea-water dried, the skin of its body all split with the blowing of
the wind, so that it lay weeping with pain. But the deity
Great-Name-Possessor, who came last of all, saw the hare, and said: "Why
liest thou weeping? " The hare replied, saving: "I was in the Island of
Oki, and wished to cross over to this land, but had no means of crossing
over. For this reason I deceived the crocodiles of the sea, saying: '
Let you and me compete, and compute the numbers of our respective
tribes. So do you go and fetch every member of your tribe, and make them
all lie in a row across from this island to Cape Keta. Then I will tread
on them, and count them as I run across. Hereby shall we know whether it
or my tribe is the larger.' Upon my speaking thus, they were deceived
and lay down in a row, and I trod on them and counted them as I came
across, and was just about to get on land, when I said: 'You have been
deceived by me.' As soon as I had finished speaking, the crocodile who
lay the last of all seized me and stripped off all my clothing. As 1 was
weeping and lamenting for this reason, the eighty deities who went by
before thee commanded and exhorted me, saying: 'Bathe in the salt water,
and lie down exposed to the wind.' So, on my doing as they had
instructed me, my whole body was hurt." Thereupon the deity
Great-Name-Possessor instructed the hare, saying: " Go quickly now to
the river-mouth, wash thy body with the fresh water, then take the
pollen of the sedges growing at the river-mouth, spread it about, and
roll about upon it, whereupon thy body will certainly be restored to its
original state." So the bare did as it was instructed, and its body
became as it bad been originally. This was the White Hare of Inaba. It
is now called the Hare deity. So the hare said to the deity
Great-Name-Possessor: "These eighty deities shall certainly not get the
Princess of Yakami. Though thou bearest the bag, Thine Augustness shall
obtain her."

 

MOUNT TEMA

 

Thereupon the Princess of Yakami answered the eighty deities, saving: "I
will not listen to your words. I mean to marry the deity Great-Name-
Possessor." So the eighty deities, being enraged, and wishing to slay
the deity Great-Name-Possessor, took counsel together, on arriving at
the foot of Tema in the land of Hahaki, and said to him: "On this
mountain there is a red boar. So when we drive it down, do thou wait and
catch it. If thou do not wait and catch it, we will certainly slay
thee." Having thus spoken, they took fire, and burned a large stone like
unto a boar, and rolled it down. Then, as they drove it down and he
caught it, be got stuck to and burned by the stone, and died. Thereupon
Her Augustness his august parent cried and lamented, and went up to
Heaven, and entreated His Divine-Producing-Wondrous-Augustness, who at
once sent Princess Cockle-Shell and Princess Clam to bring him to life.
Then Princess Cockle-Shell triturated and scorched her shell, and
Princess Clam carried water and smeared him as with mother's milk,
whereupon he became a beautiful young man, and wandered off. Hereupon
the eighty deities, seeing this, again deceived him, taking him with
them into the mountains, where they cut down a large tree, inserted a
wedge in the tree and made him stand in the middle, whereupon they took
away the wedge and tortured him to death. Then on Her Augustness his
august parent again seeking him with cries, she perceived him, and at
once cleaving the tree, took him out and brought him to life, and said
to him: "If thou remain here, thou wilt at last be destroyed by the
eighty deities." Then she sent him swiftly off to the august place of
the deity Great-House-Prince in the land of Ki. Then when the eighty
deities searched and pursued till they came up to him, and fixed their
arrows in their bows, he escaped by dipping under the fork of a tree,
and disappeared.

 

THE NETHER-DISTANT-LAND

 

The deity Great-House-Prince spoke to him, saying: Thou must set off to
the Nether-Distant-Land where dwells His Impetuous-Male-Augustness. That
great deity will certainly counsel thee." So on his obeying her commands
and arriving at the august place of His Impetuous-Male-Augustness, the
latter's daughter the Forward-Princess came out, and saw him, and they
exchanged glances and were married, and she went in again, and told her
father, saying: " A very beautiful deity has come." Then the great deity
went out and looked, and said: " This is the
Ugly-Male-Deity-of-the-Reed-Plains," and at once calling him in, made
him sleep in the snake-house. Hereupon his wife, Her Augustness the
Forward-Princess, gave her husband a snake-scarf, saying: " When the
snakes are about to bite thee, drive them away by waving this scarf
thrice." So, on his doing as she bad instructed, the snakes became
quiet, so that he came forth after calm slumbers. Again on the night of
the next day the Impetuous--Male deity put him into the centipede and
wasp-house; but as she again gave him a centipede and wasp-scarf, and
instructed him as before, he came forth calmly. Again the Impetuous-Male
deity shot a whizzing barb into the middle of a large moor, and sent him
to fetch the arrow, and, when be bad entered the moor, at once set fire
to the moor all round. Thereupon, while he stood knowing no place of
exit, a mouse came and said: " The inside is hollow-hollow; the outside
is narrow-narrow." Owing to its speaking thus, he trod on the place,
whereupon he fell in and hid himself, during which time the fire burned
past. Then the mouse brought out in its mouth and presented to him the
whizzing barb. The feathers of the arrow were brought in their months by
all the mouse's children. Hereupon his wife the Forward-Princess came
bearing mourning implements, and crying. Her father the great deity,
thinking that the deity Great-Name-Possessor was already dead and done
for, went out and stood on the moor, whereupon the deity
Great-Name-Possessor brought the arrow and presented it to him, upon
which the great deity, taking him into the house and calling him into an
eight-foot spaced large room, made him take the lice off his head. So,
on looking at the head, be saw that there were many centipedes there.
Thereupon, as his wife gave to her husband berries of the muku tree and
red earth, he chewed the berries to pieces, and spat them out with the
red earth which he held in his mouth, so that the great deity believed
him to be chewing up and spitting out the centipedes, and, feeling fond
of him in his heart, fell asleep. Then the deity Great-Name-Possessor,
grasping the great deity's hair, tied it fast to the various rafters of
the house, and, blocking up the floor of the house with a five-hundred
draught rock, and taking his wife the Forward-Princess on his back, then
carried off the great deity's great life-sword and life-bow-and-arrows,
as also his heavenly speaking-lute, and ran out. But the heavenly
speaking-lute brushed against a tree, and the earth resounded. So the
great deity, who was sleeping, started at the sound, and pulled down the
house. But while he was disentangling his hair which was tied to the
rafters, the deity Great-Name-Possessor fled a long way. So then,
pursuing after him to the Even-Pass-of-Hades, and gazing on him from
afar, be called out to the deity Great-Name-Possessor, saying: "With the
great life-sword and the life-bow-and-arrows which thou carriest, pursue
thy half-brethren till they crouch on the august slopes of the passes,
and pursue them till they are swept into the reaches of the rivers, and
do thou, wretch! become the deity Master-of-the-Great-Land; and
moreover, becoming the deity Spirit-of-the-Living-Land, and making my
daughter the Forward-Princess thy consort, do thou make stout the
temple-pillars at the foot of Mount Uka in the nethermost rock-bottom,
and make high the crossbeams to the Plain-of-High-Heaven, and dwell
there, thou villain! So when, bearing the great sword and bow, he
pursued and scattered the eighty deities, be did pursue them till they
crouched on the august slope of every pass, he did pursue them till they
were swept into every river, and then he began to make the land.

 

THE WOOING OF THE DEITY-OF-EIGHT-THOUSAND-SPEARS

 

This Deity-of-Eight-Thousand-Spears, when he went forth to woo the
Princess of Nuna-kaha, in the land of Koshi, on arriving at the house of
the Princess of Nunakaha sang, saying:

 

"I, The Augustness the Deity-of-Eight-Thousand-Spears, having been
unable to find a spouse in the Land of the Eight Islands, and having
heard that in the far-off Land of Koshi there is a wise maiden, having
heard that there is a beauteous maiden, I am standing here to truly woo
her, I am going backward and forward to woo her. Without having yet
untied even the cord of my sword, without having yet untied even my
veil, I push back the plank-door shut by the maiden; while I am standing
here, I pull it forward. While I am standing here, the nuye sings upon
the green mountain, and the voice of the true bird of the moor, the
pheasant, resounds; the bird of the yard, the cock, crows. Oh! the pity
that the birds should sing! Oh! these birds! Would that I could beat
them till they were sick! Oh! swiftly flying heaven-racing messenger,
the tradition of the thing, too, this!"

 

Then the Princess of Nuna-kaba, without yet opening the door, sang from
the inside, saying:

 

Thine Augustness, the Deity-of-Eight-Thousand-Spears! Being maiden like
a drooping plant, my heart is just a bird on a sand-bank by the shore;
it will now indeed be a dotterel. Afterward it will be a gentle bird; so
as for thy life, do not deign to die. Oh! swiftly flying heaven-racing
messenger! the tradition of the thing, too, this!

 

Second Song of the Princess

 

When the sun shall hide behind the green mountains, in the night black
as the true jewels of the moor will I come forth. Coming radiant with
smiles like the morning sun, thine arms white as rope of
paper-mulberry-bark shall softly pat my breast soft as the melting snow;
and patting each other interlaced, stretching out and pillowing
ourselves on each other's jewel-arms - true jewel-arms - and with
outstretched legs, will we sleep. So speak not too lovingly, Thine
Augustness the Deity-of-Eight-Thousand-Spears! The tradition of the
thing, too, this!"

 

THE CUP PLEDGE

 

Again this deity's Chief Empress, Her Augustness the Forward-Princess,
was very jealous. So the deity her husband, being distressed, was about
to go up from Idzumo to the Land of Yamato; and as he stood attired,
with one august hand on the saddle of his august horse and one august
foot in the august stirrup, he sang, saying:

 

When I take and attire myself so carefully in my august garments black
as the true jewels of the moor, and, like the birds of the offing, look
at my breast -though I raise my fins, I say that these are not good, and
cast them off on the waves on the beach. When I take and attire myself
so carefully in my august garments green as the kingfisher, and, like
the birds of the offing, look at my breast -though I raise my fins, I
say that these, too, are not good, and cast them off on the waves on the
beach. When I take and attire myself so carefully in my raiment dyed in
the sap of the dye-tree, the pounded madder sought in the mountain
fields, and, like the birds of the offing, look at my breast though I
raise my fins, I say that they are good. My dear young sister, Thine
Augustness! Though thou say that thou wilt not weep - if like the
Rocking birds, I flock and depart, if, like the led birds, I am led away
and depart, thou wilt hang down thy head like a single eulalia upon the
mountain and thy weeping shall indeed rise an the mist of the morning
shower. Thine Augustness my spouse like the young herbal The tradition
of the thing, too, this!"

 

Then his Empress, taking a great august liquor-cup, and drawing near and
offering it to him, sang, saying:

 

"Oh I Thine Augustness the Deity-of-Eight-Thousand-Spears! Thou, my dear
Master-of-the-Great-Land indeed, being a man, probably best on the
various island-headlands that thou seest, and on every beach headland
that thou lookest on, a wife like the young herbs. But as for me alas!
being a woman, I have no man except thee; I have no spouse except thee.
Beneath the fluttering of the ornamented fence, beneath the softness of
the warm coverlet, beneath the rustling of the cloth coverlet, thine
arms white as rope of paper-mulberry bark softly patting my breast soft
as the melting snow, and patting each other interlaced, stretching out
and pillowing ourselves on each otber's arms-true jewel-arms, and with
outstretched legs, will we sleep. Lift up the luxuriant august liquor!"

 

She having thus sung, they at once pledged each other by the cup with
their hands on each other's necks, and are at rest till the present
time. These are called divine words.

 

THE KOJIKI

 

THE CHAMPION OF JAPAN

 

YAMATO-TAKE SLAYS HIS ELDER BROTHER

 

The Heavenly Sovereign said to His Augustness Wo-usu: "Why does not
thine elder brother come forth to the morning and evening great august
repasts? Be thou the one to take the trouble to teach him his duty."
Thus he commanded; but for five days after, still the prince came not
forth. Then the Heavenly Sovereign deigned to ask His Augustness Wo-usu,
saying: "Why is thine elder brother so long of coming? Hast thou
perchance not yet taught him his duty?" He replied, saying: "I have been
at that trouble." Again the Heavenly Sovereign said: "How didst thou
take the trouble?" He replied, saying: " In the early morning when he
went into the privy, I grasped hold of him and crushed him, and, pulling
off his limbs, wrapped them in matting and flung them away.

 

YAMATO-TAKE SLAYS THE KUMASO BRAVOES

 

Thereupon the Heavenly Sovereign, alarmed at the valor and ferocity of
his august child's disposition, commanded him, saying: " In the West
there are two Kumaso Bravoes - unsubmissive and disrespectful men. So
take them "-and with this command he sent him off. It happened that at
this time his august hair was bound at the brow. Then His Augustness
Wo-usu was granted by his aunt Her Augustness Yamato-himeo her august
upper garment and august skirt; and, with a saber hidden in his august
bosom, he went forth. So, on reaching the house of the Kumaso braves, he
saw that near the house there was a threefold belt of warriors, who had
made a cave to dwell in. Hereupon they, noisily discussing a rejoicing
for the august cave, were getting food ready. So Prince Wo-usu sauntered
about the neighborhood, waiting for the day of the rejoicing. Then when
the day of the rejoicing came, having combed down after the manner of
girls his august hair which was bound up, and having put on his aunt's
august upper garment and august skirt, he looked quite like a young
girl, and, standing amidst the women, went inside the cave. Then the
elder brother and the younger brother, the two Kumaso bravoes, delighted
at the sight of the maiden, set her between them, and rejoiced
exuberantly. So, when the feast was at its height, His Augustness
Wo-usu, drawing the saber from his bosom, and catching Kumaso by the
collar of his garment, thrust the saber through his chest, whereupon,
alarmed at the sight, the younger bravo ran out. But pursuing after and
reaching him at the bottom of the steps of the cave, and catching him by
the back, Prince Wo-usu thrust the saber through his buttock. Then the
Kumaso bravo spoke, saying: "Do not move the sword; I have something to
say." Then His Augustness Wo-usu, respited him for a moment, holding him
down as he lay prostrate. Hereupon the bravo said: " Who is Thine
Augustness?" Then he said: " I am the august child of
Obo-tarashi-hiko-oshiro-wake, the Heavenly Sovereign who, dwelling in
the palace of Hishiro at Makimuku, rules the Land of the Eight Great
Islands; and my name is King Yamata-woguna. Hearing that you two
fellows, the Kumaso bravoes, were unsubmissive and disrespectful, the
Heavenly Sovereign sent me with the command to take and slay you." Then
the Kumaso bravo said: " That must be true. There are no persons in the
West so brave and strong as we two. Yet in the Land of Great Yamato
there is a man braver than we two-tbere is. Therefore will I offer thee
an august name. From this time forward it is right that thou be praised
as the August Child Yamato-take." As soon as he had finished saying
this, the Prince ripped him up like a ripe melon, and slew him. So
thenceforward he was praised by being called by the august name of his
Augustness Yamato-take. When he returned up to the capital after doing
this, he subdued and pacified every one of the deities of the mountains
and of the deities of the rivers and likewise of the deities of Anado,
and then went up to the capital.

 

YAMATO-TAKE SLAYS THE IDZUMO BRAVO

 

Forthwith entering the land of Idzumo, and wishing to slay the Idzumo
bravo, he, on arriving, forthwith bound himself to him in friendship.
So, having secretly made the wood of an oak-tree into a false sword and
augustly girded it, he went with the bravo to bathe in the River Hi.
Then, His Augustness Yamato-take getting out of the river first, and
taking and girding on the sword that the Idzumo bravo bad taken off and
laid down, said: " Let us exchange swords! " So afterward the Idzumo
bravo, getting out of the river, girded on His Augustness Yamato-take's
false sword. Hereupon His Augustness Yamato-take, suggested, saying:
"Come on! let us cross swords." Then on drawing his sword, the Idzumo
bravo could not draw the false sword. Forthwith His Augustness
Yamato-take drew his sword and slew the lclzumo bravo. Then he sang
augustly, saying:

 

"Alas that the sword girded on the Idzumo bravo, and wound round with
many a creeper, should have had no true blade!"

 

So having thus extirpated the bravoes and made the land orderly, he went
up to the capital and made his report to the Heavenly Sovereign.

 

YAMATO-TAKE IS SENT TO SUBDUE THE EAST AND VISITS HIS AUNT AT ISE

 

Then the Heavenly Sovereign again urged a command on His Augustness
Yamato-take, saying: "subdue and pacify the savage deities and likewise
the unsubmissive people of the twelve roads of the East"; and when he
sent him off, joining to him Prince -Mi-suki-tomo-mimi-take, ancestor of
the Grandees of Kibi, he bestowed on him a holly-wood spear eight
fathoms long. So when he had received the imperial command and started
off, he went into the temple of the Great August Deity of Ise, and
worshiped the deity's court, forthwith speaking to his aunt, Her
Augustness Yamato-hine, saving: " It must surely be that the Heavenly
Sovereign thinks I may die quickly - for after sending me to smite the
wicked people of the West, I am no sooner come up again to the capital
than, without bestowing on me an army, he now sends me off afresh to
pacify the wicked people of the twelve circuits of the East.
Consequently I think that he certainly thinks I shall die quickly." When
he departed with lamentations and tears, Her Augustness Yamato-hine
bestowed on him the "Herb-Quelling-Saber," and likewise bestowed on him
an august bag, and said: "If there should be an emergency, open the
mouth of the bag."

 

YAMATO-TAKE SLAYS THE RULERS OF SAGAMU

 

So reaching the land of Wohari, he went into the house of Princess
Miyadzu, ancestress of the rulers of Wohari, and forthwith thought to
wed her; but thinking again that he would wed her when he should return
up toward the capital, and having plighted his troth, he went on into
the Eastern lands, and subdued and pacified all the savage deities and
unsubmissive people of the mountains and rivers. So then, when he
reached the land of Sagamu, the ruler of the land lied, saying: "In the
middle of this moor is a great lagoon, and the deity that dwells in the
middle of the lagoon is a very violent deity." Hereupon Yamato-take
entered the moor to see the deity. Then the ruler of the land set fire
to the moor. So, knowing that he had been deceived, he opened the mouth
of the bag which his aunt, Her Augustness Yamato-hine had bestowed on
him, and saw that inside of it there was a fire-striker. Hereupon he
first mowed away the herbage with his august sword, took the
fire-striker and struck out fire, and, kindling a counter-fire, burned
the herbage and drove back the other fire and returned forth, and killed
and destroyed all the rulers of that land, and forthwith set fire to and
burned them. So that place is now called Yakidzu.

 

YAMATO-TAKE'S EMPRESS STILLS THE WAVES

 

When be thence penetrated on, and crossed the sea of Hashiri-midzu, the
deity of that crossing raised the waves, tossing the ship so that it
could not proceed across. Then Yamato-take's Empress, whose name was Her
Augustness Princess Oto-tachibana, said:" Iwill enter the sea instead of
the august child. The august child must complete the service on which he
has been sent, and take back a report to the Heavenly Sovereign." When
she was about to enter the sea, she spread eight thicknesses of sedge
rugs, eight thicknesses of skin rugs, and eight thicknesses of silk rugs
on the top of the waves, and sat down on the top of them. Thereupon the
violent waves at once went down, and the august ship was able to
proceed. Then the Empress sang, saving:

 

"Ah I thou whom I inquired of, standing in the midst of the flames of
the fire burning on the little moor of Sagamu, where the true peak
pierces!"

 

So seven days afterward the Empress's august comb drifted on to the
sea-beach - which comb was forthwith taken and placed in an august
mausoleum which was made.

 

YAMATO-TAKE SLAYS THE DEITY OF THE ASHIGARA PASS

 

When, having thence penetrated on and subdued all the savage Yemisi
\[Ainu\] and likewise pacified all the savage deities of the mountains
and rivers, he was returning up to the capital, he, on reaching the foot
of the Ashigara Pass, was eating his august provisions, when the deity
of the pass, transformed into a white deer, came and stood before him.
Then forthwith, on his waiting and striking the deer with a scrap of
wild chive, the deer was hit in the eye and struck dead. So, mounting to
the top of the pass, he sighed three times and spoke, saying: " Adzuma
ha ya!" \[My Wife!\] So that land is called by the name of Adzuma.

 

YAMATO-TAKE WOOS PRINCESS MIYAZU

 

When, forthwith crossing over from that land out into Kahi, he dwelt in
the palace of Sakawori, he sang, saying:

 

"How many nights have I slept since passing Nihibari and Tsukuha?"

 

Then the old man, who was the lighter of the august fire, completed the
august song, and sang, saying:

 

"Oh! having put the days in a row, there are of nights nine nights, and
of days ten days!"

 

Therefore Yamato-take praised the old man, and forthwith bestowed on him
the rulership of the Eastern lands.

Having crossed over from that land into the land of Shinanu and subdued
the deity of the Shinanu pass, he came back to the land of Wohari, and
went to dwell in the house of Princess Miyazu, to whom he had before
plighted his troth. Hereupon, when presenting to him the great august
food, Princess Miyazu lifted up a great liquor-cup and presented it to
him.

After this, placing in Princess Miyazu's house his august sword "the
Grass-Quelling Saber," he went forth to take the deity of Mount Ibuki.

 

YAMATO-TAKE MEETS THE DEITY OF MOUNT IBUKI

 

Hereupon he said: "As for the deity of this mountain, I will simply take
him empty-handed"-- and was ascending the mountain, when there met him
on the mountainside a white boar whose size was like unto that of a
bull. Then he lifted up words, and said: "This creature that is
transformed into a white boar must be a messenger from the deity. Though
I slay it not now, I will slay it when I return"-- and so saying,
ascended. Thereupon the deity caused heavy ice-rain to fall, striking
and perplexing His Augustness Yamato-take. (This creature transformed
into a white boar was not a messenger from the deity, but the very deity
in person. Owing to the lifting up of words, he appeared and misled
Yamato-take.) So when, on descending back, he reached the fresh spring
of Tamakura-be and rested there, his august heart awoke somewhat. So
that fresh spring is called by the name of the fresh spring of Wi-same.

 

YAMATO TAKE SICKENS AND DIES

 

When he departed thence and reached the moor of Tagi, he said: " Whereas
my heart always felt like flying through the sky, my legs are now unable
to walk. They have become rudder-shaped." So that place was called by
the name of Tagi. Owing to his being very weary with progressing a
little farther beyond that place, be leaned upon an august staff to walk
a little. So that place is called by the name of the Tsuwetsuki pass. On
arriving at the single pine-tree on Cape Wotsu, an august sword, which
he had forgotten at that place before when augustly eating, was still
there, not lost. Then he augustly sang, saying:

 

"O mine elder brother, the single pine-tree that art on Cape Wotsu which
directly faces Wohari! If thou, single pine-tree! wert a person, I would
gird my sword upon thee, I would clothe thee with my garments - O mine
elder brother, the single pine-tree!"

 

When he departed thence and reached the village of Mihe, he again said:
" My legs are like threefold crooks, and very weary." So that place was
called by the name of Mihe. When he departed thence and reached the moor
of Nobe, he regretting his native land, sang, saying:

 

"As for Yamato, the most secluded of land - Yamato, retired behind Mount
Awogaki encompassing it with its folds, is delightful."

 

Again he sang, saying:

 

"Let those whose life may be complete stick in their hair as a headdress
the leaves of the bear-oak from Mount Heguri -those children!"

 

This song is a land-regretting song. Again he sang, saying:

 

"How sweet! ah! from the direction of home clouds are rising and
coming!"

 

This is an incomplete song. At this time, his august sickness very
urgent. Then he sang augustly, saying:

 

The saber-sword which I placed at the maiden's bedside, alas! that
sword!"

 

As soon as he had finished singing, he died. Then a courier was
dispatched to the Heavenly Sovereign.

 

YAMATO-TAKE TURNS INTO A WHITE BIRD

 

Thereupon his Empresses and likewise his august children, who dwelt in
Yamato, all went down and built an august mausoleum, and, forthwith
crawling hither and thither in the rice fields encompassing the
mausoleum, sobbed out a song, saying:

 

The Dioscorea quinqueloba crawling hither and thither among the among
the rice-stubble in the rice-fields encompassing the Mausoleum.."

 

Thereupon the dead prince, turning into a white dotterel eight fathoms
long, and soaring up to Heaven, flew off toward the shore. Then the
Empress and likewise the august children, though they tore their feet
treading on the stubble of the bamboo-grass, forgot the pain, and
pursued him with lamentations. At that time they sang, saying:

 

"Our loins are impeded in the plain overgrown with short bamboo-grass.
We are not going through the sky, but oh! we are on foot."

 

Again when they entered the salt sea, and suffered as they went, they
sang, saying:

 

"As we go through the sea, our loins are impeded -tottering in the sea
like herbs growing in a great river-bed."

 

Again when the bird flew and perched on the seaside, they sang, saying:

 

"The dotterel of the beach goes not on the beach, but follows the
seaside."

 

These four songs were all sung at Yamato-take's august interment. So to
the present day these songs are sung at the great interment of a
Heavenly Sovereign. So the bird flew off from that country, and stopped
at Shiki in the land of Kafuchi. So they made an august mausoleum there,
and laid Yamato-take to rest. Forthwith that august mausoleum was called
by. the name of the "August-Mausoleum of the White-Bird." Nevertheless
the bird soared up thence to heaven again and flew away.
