[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](kort27)  [Next](kort29) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

# 24. Kĭlu' and Monster-Man.

Yini'a-ñawġut and her sister went out for a walk. Yini'a-ñawġut looked
ahead and espied something. "What is there? Look at it!" Kĭlu' looked,
and it fell down. "Just now you said, 'What is coming there?' And it
fell down again."

They came home and made a fire. Then there was a clattering at the
entrance, Monster-Being, came there. He sat down on Kĭlu''s side. Oh,
she pushed her cousin toward him. "You saw him first! Then be at his
side!" As soon as her cousin went to sleep (with him), Kĭlu' ran away
out of the house. Even all her clothes were torn to shreds. They caught
on the trees, and she pulled at them with violence. So, when she carne
to the river, she had on no clothes at all. The trees were catching even
at her eyes. She pulled with violence, and even bled from the nostrils.

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

Then she came to the village, and the people laughed at her. "What has
happened to you?"--"Indeed a kamak came and devoured my cousin. It was
she who saw him first."--"Let us go and look at her!" They set off and
moved on. They came and saw those two walking together. (The new-comer
was) a very good young man. They said to Kĭlu', "If you had not run
away, he would have married you."

Then Kĭlu' began to boast, "The suitor came first to me!" though it was
not true at all. She envied Yini'a-ñawġut because of her husband. He
entered, (and proved to be) a very good young man, and Kĭlu' envied her
sister to a great extent. Her cousin was married, (and not she). Oh,
that is all.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Appendix I. Songs](kort29)
