[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](kort13)  [Next](kort15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 10. Eme'mqut and Fox-Woman. <span id="fr_25"></span>[1](#fn_25)

Eme'mqut married Fox-Woman. He said, "I will go and get some blubber
from our summer place." He arrived there. One of the flippers of his
blubber-bag was gnawed at by a mouse. The mouse was dead. He found it
and said, "What is it, a wolverene?"

He loaded it on his sledge and hauled it home. He came home. Then only
he looked back and saw that

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

the mouse had turned into a wolverene. He looked into the house and
said, "Mi'ti, I have killed a wolverene. Let some of you come out."

They took in the wolverene and began to beat the drum. Fox-Woman, the
untidy one, was sitting with her boot-strings loose. She was looking for
lice. "Oh, you Fox-Woman! it is your turn to beat the drum." The untidy
woman was making leather thimbles. She began to beat the drum, "I am an
unskilful one, I am an untidy one! I am eating hard excrement, left
outside! I am eating strings of snowshoes in the brightness of the full
moon."

Indeed, they eat them. Whenever we come to look for our snowshoes, the
strings are eaten. <span id="fr_26"></span>[1](#fn_26)

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

She felt ashamed and went away, even with untied boot-strings. She went
away, and did not come back. After some time Eme'mqut went outside and
found her. A number of children were there. He said to Fox-Woman, "Whose
children are these?"--"I said to myself, 'Perhaps they will keep me back
somehow. I wanted to go away into the open country for my delivery. And
I was delivered outside.'"--"Now, at least, stop your clamor! Let us go
home!"

They went home. The thimbles which she had made before, and hung tip
outside, now turned somehow to clothes for her numerous children. The
people were asking Eme'mqut, "From where have you brought the woman?"--

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

\[paragraph continues\] "I brought her from the open country. Long ago
she went away to give birth to her children secretly outside. All those
together are her children." In truth, she was a skilful seamstress, and
had no reason for going away and living in secrecy.

After that they lived in joy. Eme'mqut married Kĭlu, <span
id="fr_27"></span>[1](#fn_27) Ila' married Yini'a-ña'wġut. When so
disposed, they would ascend the river and catch plenty of winter fish.
Then they would return to their house-mates. They killed plenty of game.
In this manner they led a happy life. What has become of them I do not
know. That is all.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_25"></span>[58:1](kort14.htm#fr_25) Compare Jochelson, The
Koryak, *l. c.*, No. 106, p. 294.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[59:1](kort14.htm#fr_26) Remark of the narrator.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[61:1](kort14.htm#fr_27) The narrator seems to
have forgotten the marriage of Eme'mqut with Fox-Woman, and their
subsequent reconciliation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 11. Ermine-People.--I](kort15)
