[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](kort19)  [Next](kort21) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 16. Miti' and Magpie-Man. <span id="fr_35"></span>[1](#fn_35)

Big-Raven lived with his family. Oh, Big-Raven said, "I will (go and)
fetch some willow-bark." Oh, Miti' went to feed the little puppies.
Magpie-Man came to eat there. He pecked at Miti''s face (to indicate his
love), and her whole nose was covered with scratches.

Oh, that one (Big-Raven) comes home! He said to Miti', "What has
happened to you? Your nose is scratched all over." She said, "By hitting
with my nose against the sharp ends of the door-shed corner I was
scratched thus." Oh, Big-Raven cut away all the ends of the dog-shed
corners. Then again he went for willow-bark. Miti' went out, perched on
the top of the dog-shed, and began to sing, "I am walking along the
cross beam!"

Then Magpie-Man came, and said, "Let us enter the sleeping-room!
Big-Raven will not come back soon. He will not catch us."

She took him into (the house). just as soon as they entered the
sleeping-room and began to make love there, then Big-Raven came back,
and called out, "Miti', take this load of willow!" Miti' said, "Let the
I'kla <span id="fr_36"></span>[2](#fn_36) bring it down! I am busy
trampling a half-scraped skin with lily feet."--"Nay," said Big-Raven,
"I want you to take it

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span> <span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

down." Oh, Miti' took it, and with a violent pull drew it into the
house.

Then Big-Raven entered the house and made a smouldering fire. He also
stopped up the entrance-hole and the smoke-hole, so that the
sleeping-room was full of smoke. Then a Magpie's voice was heard from
the sleeping-room. That Magpie came out. He escaped through a narrow
crack.

"(See) what (this) Magpie has done to me!" The Magpie, however, went
home. Miti' was with child. After some time she brought forth two small
eggs. (The two children) grew rapidly, and Big-Raven had a great love
for them.

Big-Raven's people were storing their catch of fish. Those two said,
"Mamma, we are hungry." She said, "Go out and say to daddy, 'We are
hungry.'" They went out, and were given two whole dried salmon. They
entered, and nibbled up (the fish). Then they said again, "We are
hungry." Miti' said to them, "Go out and ask daddy (for more)."

They went out. "Daddy, we are hungry!"--"No wonder! Two thievish
magpies!" Those two sons began to weep. "Oh, he is reproaching us!"
Miti' said to them, "Go out and tell him, 'Our real daddy is herding
reindeer (with the wealthy reindeer-breeders).'" (After that) they
entered again, and Miti' put them into a grass bag, (placing) each in
one of the (lower) corners. She went away, and came to Magpie-Man and
flung (her bag right in).

Big-Raven said, "I feel lonely. I will go to Miti'." He went and came
there. (The people said,) "Miti', come out! Your old man has come to
you." Miti' said, "Has he no legs? Let him enter of his own accord!" He
entered, and she gave him food. He began to eat, and was choking. Then
he ran out of the house.

Miti' called to him. She said, "Big-Raven!"--"Oi!"

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span> <span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Then he could not help himself, and shouted,
"Oi!" The piece that choked him flew out (of his mouth, and fell down)
at a great distance. Then Big-Raven went home. That is all.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_35"></span>[73:1](kort20.htm#fr_35) Compare Jochelson, The
Koryak, *l. c.*, No. 100, p. 288.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[73:2](kort20.htm#fr_36) Small wooden charms of
human shape (cf. Jochelson, The Koryak, *l. c.*, p. 42).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 17. How Big-Raven's Daughter was swallowed by a Kamak](kort21)
