[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](kort07)  [Next](kort09.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 4. How a Small Kamak was transformed into a Harpoon-Line. <span id="fr_16"></span>[2](#fn_16.md)

A small kamak said to his mother, "I am hungry." She said to him, "Go
and eat something in the storeroom behind the sleeping-room!" He said,
"I do not want to. I want to, go to Big-Raven's house." The mother said,
"Do not do it! You will die. You will be

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

caught In a snare." She said, "Go to the upper storeroom (in the porch)
and eat something!" He said, "What for? Those provisions taste of the
upper storeroom." She said, "Go to the cache and eat something!" He
said, "What for? Those provisions taste of the cache."

Big-Raven spread a snare close to his elevated storehouse (raised on
supports). The small kamak ran there, and was caught in a snare. He
began to whimper; "Oh, oh, I am caught, I am caught!" Big-Raven said,
"It came to my mind to go and to look at this snare." He came to it, and
wanted to enter the storehouse, but stumbled over something lying in the
way. "What now, what is it?"--" It is I. I am caught." The small kamak

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

was crying, and brushing away his tears with his small fist. "Stop
blubbering! I will take you to Miti'." He brought the small kamak to his
house, and said, "O, Miti! dance in honor of (our) catch!" She began to
dance, "We have a small kamak, we have a small kamak!" Big-Raven said,
"You dance in a wrong way. Ġa'na, step forth and dance in honor of (our)
catch!" She came out and began to dance, "We have a small ma'kak <span
id="fr_17"></span>[1](#fn_17.md), we have a small ma'kak!" Big-Raven said,
"Really this is right."

They took him into the house. The house-master said, "What shall we make
out of you, a cover for the roof-hole?"--"Not this. If I am made into a
cover for the roof-hole,

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

\[paragraph continues\] I shall feel smoky, I shall feel cold." The
house-master said, "What shall we make out of you, a plug for the
vent-hole?"--"Not this. If I am made into a plug for the vent-hole, I
shall be afraid of evil spirits passing by." The house-master said,
"What, then, do you wish us to make of you? Perhaps a work-bag for
Miti'." He said, "Not this. I shall feel smothered." The house-master
said, "We shall make you into a thong." The small kamak began to laugh
and said, "Yes!"

They made him into a thong, they cut him duly, then they carried the
line out and began to stretch it (tightly). Thus stretched, they (left
it there). Big-Raven's people went to sleep. Frost-Man and his people
said,

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

\[paragraph continues\] "Big-Raven has caught a small kamak. They made
him into a thong. Let us go and steal it!" They found it, and began to
untie it. Then it cried aloud, "Quick, get up! Already they are untying
me!" Big-Raven said, "What is the matter with our small line? It wants
to awaken us. Quick, let us get up!" They woke up, and said to the small
kamak, "What is the matter with you? Why were you crying so loudly?" The
small kamak said, "Frost-Man's people wanted to carry me away."

The people living down the coast heard (about the thing),--how Big-Raven
caught a small kamak; and how they made him into a thong; and how no one
succeeded in carrying it away, it was so watchful. Those people began to
say, "We will go and carry it away."

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

\[paragraph continues\] They said, "Surely we will carry it away."
Big-Raven's people went to sleep. The people living down the coast came
and took the line. It wanted to awaken the other people, but it was
unable to awaken them. "Oh, they are untying me already, they are
carrying me away!" Indeed, they untied it and carried it away; they
stole the line.

The others woke up, but there was no line [whatever](errata.htm#1.md). It
had been taken away. Big-Raven said, "People living down the coast have
committed this theft. Indeed, they took it, nobody else." Eme'mqut said,
"A very good line was taken away, still we will bring it back." Eme'mqut
made a wooden whale and entered it. He went away and came to the people
living down the coast. Those people were walking around. They were
saying, "This

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

is the first time that such a whale has come near to us. It is a very
good whale."

They attacked the whale, came near to it, and threw at it a harpoon with
a new line. The small kamak lustily bit into the whale. Eme'mqut said to
him under his breath, "Why are you biting me? I have come to fetch you
home." Eme'mqut threw into the boat of the whale-hunters some berries of
*Rubus Arcticus*, and they began to eat them. Meanwhile Eme'mqut fled in
all haste to his house. He carried away the new line, and took it home.
They ceased carrying the line out of the house. They kept it always in
the inner room, so the others could not steal it. That is all.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_16"></span>[35:2](kort08.htm#fr_16.md) Compare W. Jochelson,
The Koryak, *l. c.*, No. 98, p. 285.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[37:1](kort08.htm#fr_17.md) Ġa'na mixes up the
sounds of the word ka'mak. Still Big-Raven finds it quite right.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 5. Big-Raven and the Kamaks](kort09.md)
