[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4707)  [Next](sbe4709.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930055/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Pahlavi Texts, Part V: Marvels of Zoroastrianism (SBE47)*, E.W. West,
tr. \[1897\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER IV.

1\. About the marvellousness which is manifested from the first
conference onwards till the end of the seventh conference which occurred
within the duration of ten years, also his pre-eminence in prophecy in
the world, *and* the acceptance of the religion *by* the exalted
Kaî-Vi*s*tâsp, as *happened* after the ten years of conference.

2\. In *the first* two years, one *marvel* is this which is declared,
that when he was back from the first conference, he then, by the first
command of the lord *and* creator Aûha*r*ma*zd*, recited the unique
formula (âyînŏ) in an assemblage (ram) of Kîgs and Karaps, the prophecy
of his Ma*zd*a-worshipping religion and commemoration of Aûha*r*ma*zd*,
as he chanted with a loud voice, and invited mankind to the religion of
Aûha*r*ma*zd*. 3. Just as this *passage* of revelation mentions thus:
'Thereupon, the thorough inspection for this material existence of those
with a *sacred* girdle, provided with dwellings *and* provided with
cattle, *was* altogether arranged by Zaratû*s*t.'

4\. And when their announcement (nivêdi*s*nŏ) for

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

speaking to be heard *was* issued <span id="fr_161"></span>[1](#fn_161.md),
then Zaratû*s*t, on becoming exalted, called out unto the embodied world
of righteousness to extol righteousness and to scorn the demons <span
id="fr_162"></span>[2](#fn_162.md). 5. 'The homage of the Ma*zd*a-worship
of Zaratû*s*t, *and* the ceremonial and obeisance for the archangels
*are* the best for you I assert and of deprecation (ay*az*i*s*nîh) for
the demons next-of-kin marriage is really the best intimation, so that,
from the information which is given *as to* the trustworthiness of a
good work, the greatest are the most intimate of them, *those of* father
*and* daughter, son *and* she who bore *him*, and brother *and* sister.'

6\. *It is* declared that, upon those words, innumerable
demon-worshipping Kîgs and Karaps have rushed upon Zaratû*s*t and strove
for his death, just like this which revelation states:—'It is then a
number (mar) have run away who have sat in the vicinity of Tûr's progeny
(hûnû*s*kŏ) <span id="fr_163"></span>[3](#fn_163.md), the arbitrator: and
the shame of the brother of Tûr arose, like *that of* a person whose
shame *was* that they spoke of his next-of-kin marriage so that he might
contract it.'

7\. This Tûr *was* Aûrvâîtâ-dang <span id="fr_164"></span>[4](#fn_164.md)
the Tûr, the scanty giver, *who* was like a great sovereign of that

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

quarter; many troops and *much* power *were* also maintained by him, and
the multitude (mar) told him they would seize the great *one* from *him*
who is little.

8\. *But* the progeny of Aûrvâîtâ-dang the Tûr, the scanty giver,
*spoke* thus: '*Should* we for that *speech* destroy him, this great
*one* who mingles together those propitious words *for* us—where we are
thus without doubt *as to* one thing therein, *such* as next-of-kin
marriage, that it is not necessary to contract *it*—it would make us
ever doubtful whether it *might* be necessary to contract it.'

9\. And Aûrvâîtâ-dang the Tûr, the scanty giver, spoke thus: 'Thou shalt
not destroy that man whom mine eyes *have* seen *as* the most
loving-eyed of the whole embodied existence; he *will* attain strength,
for it *has* not seemed to me, when thou destroyest him on this account,
*that* wisdom *has* arisen *for* a long time; so that no rule (âhankŏ)
*of* wisdom *will* arise, in this earth, which is so counselling
(han*g*amanîg) as this *one* is (that is, when they destroy a man who is
counselling, wisdom *will* not arise *for* a long while).'

10\. Aûrvâîtâ-dang the Tûr, the scanty giver to his own *people*, also
spoke thus: 'For me thou art a pure *man* who is counselling.'

11\. And Zaratû*s*t spoke thus: 'I *shall* not always be that quiet
speaker, by <span id="fr_165"></span>[1](#fn_165.md) whom that I *have*
mentioned is the most propitious *thing* to be obtained; and of
interfering <span id="fr_166"></span>[2](#fn_166.md) speaking and managing
the temper *there* is a next-of-kin marriage, and the high-priest

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

*who has* contracted <span id="fr_167"></span>[1](#fn_167.md) *it* is to
perform the ceremonial.'

12\. And here the good spiritual lordship and mightiness of glory of
Zaratû*s*t, those which are provided for commemoration *of* the supreme
lord and creator Aûha*r*ma*zd*, are manifested *as* a great wonder to
the multitude, *and there* is rendered visible the great pre-eminence
which is in him *as* a prophet *of* the creatures, which for the
baseness (nankîh) of the deceitful Agash <span
id="fr_168"></span>[2](#fn_168.md), the secret-moving and
deceiving-natured, is the concealed control of a good disposition. 13.
Then idleness, like even the habit of fear and nature of apostasy, is an
attractor of every one of the multitude, when it extends to much length;
little by little, too, that guide and combatant becomes a petitioner for
greatness, *and it is* manifest through that compassion
(tang-libbem*â*îh) and superior mindfulness of his, *and* through the
glory of that stout champion, *there are* much fame *and* treasure.

14\. The nobles of Aûrvâîtâ-dang the Tûr, the ruler of the land, *were*
angry and clamourers for Zaratû*s*t's death; but he invited the Kîgs and
Karaps to the religion of Aûha*r*ma*zd*, just as this *passage* of
revelation states that Zaratû*s*t also spoke thus: 'Worldly
righteousness, *O* Aûrvâîtâ-dang, *thou* Tûr *and* scanty giver! is the
whole *of the worship of* the demons and the termination of the
Ma*zd*a-worship of Zaratû*s*t.' 15. And Aûrvâîtâ-dang the Tûr, the
scanty giver, spoke thus: '*O* Zaratû*s*t of the Spîtâmas! thou shalt
not attract me to this evil in which thou really art.'

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

16\. Zaratû*s*t also spoke thus: 'Aûha*r*ma*zd* enquired of me thus:
"*O* Zaratû*s*t! when thou hast come away to us, among the spiritual
lords, who of the people in thy material existence *was* the protector
of the powerful men who *are* warriors, *that was* most seeking benefit,
most seeking cattle, most extensively associating, most fully-supplying
(that is, he gives out most things), and most hospitable <span
id="fr_169"></span>[1](#fn_169.md) (*that is, one* saw the door of a
prince's (khidîvŏ) treasury)?" I replied to him thus: "Aûrvâîtâ-clang
the Tûr, the scanty giver."'

17\. 'And he spoke *in* reply to me thus: "Him, *O* Zaratû*s*t! thou
shalt attract, first of the men *who are* warriors, to thinking about,
speaking about, and acting about this religion which is Aûha*r*ma*zd*'s
and Zaratû*s*t's. 18. If you attract him, *O* Zaratû*s*t! and he
believes in it and also gives currency to this *religion* of thine, and
sits before *thee* in discipleship, this that *one* calls discipleship
of thine he shall undertake, and the religion he hears fully he shall
propagate (rûbâk va*b*îdûnyên); he is also ever after, *O* Zaratû*s*t!
the first of the men *who are* warriors, the *one* most seeking benefit,
most seeking cattle, most extensively associating, and most hospitable
of those who have yet been born *and* who *will* henceforth be born. 19.
And if you do not attract him, *O* Zaratû*s*t! and he does not believe
in it, nor gives currency *to* this *religion* of thine, nor hears *it*,
nor even sits before thee, nor would sit before thee, so that *it is*
obvious to me that *he* is not attracted, thou shalt speak unto him
thus, *O* Zaratû*s*t: 'Thou art a stricken supplicant for righteousness,
and a producer of lamentation for the souls of Tan*â*pûhar sinners

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

worthy of death;' for even so it is, and for this reason he becomes
worthy of death, because the existence of the religion is known to him."
20. What I tell thee, *O* Aûrvâîtâ-dang, *thou* Tûr *and* scanty giver!
is that thou art a stricken supplicant *for* righteousness, a producer
of lamentation for the souls of Tan*â*pûhar sinners worthy of death.'

21\. One prodigy of the demons is specified, who *was* the enemy of
whatever sacred beings *there are*, a Karap, Vaêdvôi*s*t <span
id="fr_170"></span>[1](#fn_170.md) *by* name, *of* those unsanctified
(aya*s*tân) *by* Aûha*r*ma*zd* <span id="fr_171"></span>[2](#fn_171.md).
22. And Aûha*r*ma*zd* spoke thus: 'I so befriend that man, *O*
Zaratû*s*t! who is put forward by me over the creatures, whom thou shalt
invite (khvânê*s*), I *who* am Aûha*r*ma*zd*, because I am through
righteousness opposed to harm (that is, through virtue I keep harm away
from the creatures), *and* the archangels are opposed to harm. 23.
Therefore do thou proceed, O Zaratû*s*t! *and* thou shalt demand from
him for me (that is, keep as my property) a hundred. youths of vigour
(tôsh tal) <span id="fr_172"></span>[3](#fn_172.md), girls, and teams of
four horses; so do thou speak to him thus: "*O* Vêdvoî*s*t!
Aûha*r*ma*zd* demands from thee a hundred youths of vigour, girls, *and*
teams of four horses; if thou givest *them* 

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

to him, splendour and glory are thine through that giving; and if thou
dost not give to him, evil destiny is thine through that not-giving."'

24\. Then Zaratû*s*t walked on to that Vêdvoî*s*t of those unsanctified,
and spoke to him thus: '*O* Vêdvoî*s*t of the unsanctified! that *which*
Aûha*r*ma*zd* demands from thee is a hundred youths of vigour, girls,
and teams of four horses if thou givest them to him, splendour *and*
glory are thine through that giving; and if thou dost not give to him,
evil destiny is thine through that not-giving.' 25. And that Karap
shouted in reply *to* Zaratû*s*t thus 'For me *there* is no more from
thee (that is, there is no opulence for me from thy action), nor from
Aûha*r*ma*zd*; I am more of a divinity (bagtar) *and* am more forward in
opulence than even Aûha*r*ma*zd*; many droves of a thousand swine are
also acquired by me.'

26\. On went Zaratû*s*t, up to Aûha*r*ma*zd* *and* up to the archangels,
and Zaratû*s*t spoke thus: '*O* Aûha*r*ma*zd*, propitious spirit,
creator of the world of embodied *beings, thou* righteous *one!* thus
spoke he in reply to me: "For me *there* is no more from thee, nor from
Aûha*r*ma*zd*; I am more of a divinity than thee or even Aûha*r*ma*zd*,
and many droves of a thousand swine are acquired by me."'

27\. And Aûha*r*ma*zd* spoke thus: 'Owing to the splendour and glory of
those which are ours, *O* Zaratû*s*t! that man has acquired arrogance
(that is, the cattle we produced are the many cattle of his arrogance).
28. This *will be* his retribution for it then, however, when he does
not reach further alive at the end of the third night <span
id="fr_173"></span>[1](#fn_173.md); in that third night

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

they *will* have stood aloof from alongside his life (that is, they
*will* have stood away from assisting it); those seven of them who are
radiant and bright-eyed (s*p*ê*d*ŏ dôîsar) make him rush up on high, and
up there on high *he* shall be fed upon mouldy bread (parnân).'

29\. One *marvel* is the great healthfulness owing to the Hôm-water
*and* the bringing of this *by* Zaratû*s*t from the river Dâîtî, which
is manifested when Vohûmanô *was* conveying *him* to the conference. 30.
Just as is declared in the words of Aûha*r*ma*zd* to Zaratû*s*t thus:
'For them is the Hôm-water which thou bringest, *O* Zaratû*s*t! not for
those demon-worshipping people *who* worship the demons, or for a
satisfier of courtezans (*g*êh-vi*g*âr); they shall sprinkle it on to
that bull thou shalt bring forward, who is a four-year-old of exhausted
vigour, black-haired and useful; *on* drinking up the water, that bull
*will* become quite sound from that infirmity.'

31\. Thereupon, Zaratû*s*t went on first into the embodied existence, on
which dwelt, at the end of Sagâstân <span
id="fr_174"></span>[1](#fn_174.md), that same Parsha*d* *whose* title was
Tô*r*â (*the Bull*). 32. Parsha*d*-tô*r*â <span
id="fr_175"></span>[2](#fn_175.md) also spoke to him

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

thus: '*O* Zaratû*s*t of the Spîtâmas! give me this Hôm-water which thou
bringest.' 13. And Zaratû*s*t spoke thus: 'Do thou praise righteousness,
*O* Parsha*d*-tô*r*â! and scorn the demons; *also* utter the
profession <span id="fr_176"></span>[1](#fn_176.md) of the Ma*zd*a-worship
of Zaratû*s*t among the iniquitous.' 34. *It was* praised by Parsha*d*
tô*r*â, and the demons were scorned by him; yet he did not speak among
the iniquitous as to his accepting the Ma*zd*a-worship of Zaratû*s*t.
35. Forward to him *came* Zaratû*s*t at that praise of righteousness,
for him *was* that Hôm-water which Zaratû*s*t brought; not for those
demon-worshipping people *who* have worshipped the demons, *but* for
that bull of his *which* Zaratû*s*t brought forward, a four-year-old of
exhausted vigour, black-haired and useful; owing to that bringing
forward of the water, the bull became quite sound from that infirmity.

36\. One *marvel* is that which is declared regarding the rushing of the
evil spirit for the slaughter of Zaratû*s*t, just as revelation <span
id="fr_177"></span>[2](#fn_177.md) mentions thus: 'From the northern
quarter forth rushed the deadly evil spirit, and thus shouted he, astute
in evil, the deadly evil spirit: "Rush on, *O* fiend! and destroy the
righteous Zaratû*s*t." 17. On to him they rushed, the fiend, the demon
Bû*d*, and secret-moving Pestilence, the deceiver. 38. Zaratû*s*t
chanted aloud the Ahunavair; the fiend *was* confounded at that, and
away they rushed, the demon Bû*d* and secret-moving Pestilence, the
deceiver. 39. And the fiends shouted thus: "Thou art scornfully
observing, *O* evil spirit! (that is, anything to the purpose thou

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

dost not thoroughly observe, and what thou orderest *us* to do is not
possible); the death of him who is Zaratû*s*t of the Spîtâmas is not
contemplated by us." 40. Owing to the full glory of the righteous
Zaratû*s*t, he perceived in *his* mind thus: "The wicked demons, astute
in evil, consult together about my death;" and up stood Zaratû*s*t,
forth went Zaratû*s*t.' 41. Here is manifested a great wonder to the
multitude, in that which is mentioned thus: 'And a stone *was* put forth
by the righteous Zaratû*s*t, *that* was held in *his* hand, and the size
of a hut, *and* which was obtained by him from the creator
Aûha*r*ma*zd*, the spiritual Yathâ-ahû-vairyô <span
id="fr_178"></span>[1](#fn_178.md).'

42\. And one *marvel* is this which is manifested not only in the
country of Irân to Irânians, but in every land and to every race: the
shattering of the demons’ bodies *through* the chanting of the Ahunavair
aloud *by* Zaratû*s*t. 43. Just as that which *a passage* <span
id="fr_179"></span>[2](#fn_179.md) mentions thus: 'I worship the resources
of the Kayân glory, with which the righteous Zaratû*s*t was associated
in thinking about, speaking about, *and* acting about the religion which
was, of all embodied existences, the most righteous in righteousness,
the most lordly in sovereignty, the most radiant in radiance, and the
most glorious in glory. 44. At *his* appearance <span
id="fr_180"></span>[3](#fn_180.md) the demons have fallen before him, at
*his* appearance their semen (mâyagân) also drops, at *his* appearance
the courtezan is also withdrawn by them from mankind;

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

on hearing <span id="fr_181"></span>[1](#fn_181.md) him *they* lamented,
very violently is it lamented by the demons. 45. By the Ahunavair, which
the righteous Zaratû*s*t chanted aloud to them, all the demons are
seized *and* buried in the earth, where the complete shattering of their
bodies is manifest.' 46. So that, after the shattering of their bodies,
it became evident to those in the world *that* they were not able to do
mischief in the bodily form of a demon, and they have been declared of
the nature of sacred beings to mankind, *but* mankind fully understood
that they are not sacred beings, but demons.

47\. Zaratû*s*t revealed (gushûftŏ) to mankind by the word of
Aûha*r*ma*zd*, how in this religion *the latter* tells in words to
Zaratû*s*t where *and* how, in the embodied existence, mankind consider
a demon as exalted *or* as a high-priest, because they are where they
say that they must consider *some one* as high-priest. 48. So
Aûha*r*ma*zd* spoke *to* Zaratû*s*t thus: 'How do they who are good
people, O Zaratû*s*t! consider a demon as exalted? and how are they that
even tell a demon thus "We should accept you," because the demons speak
thus: "It *will* happen to you"?'

49\. And Zaratû*s*t spoke thus: 'Only for the *reason*, O Aûha*r*ma*zd*!
*that* people hasten on to that which is a jungly plain without
dwellings, where no one resides from the departure of light until
sunrise

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

arrives, when *it is* two Hâsars <span id="fr_182"></span>[1](#fn_182.md)
of night, and again silently (agôp) from sunset until their returning
together when the two Hâsars of night are gone, they hear that no work,
no men, and no voices of dogs are there. 50. Then they say as to that,
on arriving back, thus: "We have consulted with the demons there; when
we request (zâêm) monarchy (sâstârîh) *and* leadership from them, they
give them to us; when we request the possession of flocks and opulence
from them, they give them to us."'

51\. *Then Aûha*r*ma*zd *spoke thus:* 'How can they do such a thing for
them, *O* Zaratû*s*t! (that is, how does it happen *that it is*
continually given by them *for* those that speak thus: "It happened to
us")?'

52\. And Zaratû*s*t spoke thus: 'They speak variously, *O*
Aûha*r*ma*zd*! as to that generosity; there is *one* who speaks thus: "I
have ever after been possessing more flocks, so long as I am *in*
consultation with the demons;" and there is *another* who speaks thus:
"I have ever after been worse and more ill-fated, so long as we are *in*
consultation with those demons;" according as they possess a full
subsistence for them*selves* from the demons (that is, when they
diversely subsist fully *on* whatever they bespeak from the demons).'
53. Zaratû*s*t also spoke thus: 'So they speak about it, *O*
Aûha*r*ma*zd*! thus: "Observe further, where any one of us returns *he*
is either shrunk together (that is, he holds *his* head down to *his*
chest), or shrunk away (that is, he looks quite aside), or is only
pleasantly

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

cast down and, owing to acquiescence in him, the demons tempt (nes,hûnd)
*him* away out of mankind."'

54\. And Aûha*r*ma*zd* spoke thus: 'According to thy wish, do thou, O
Zaratû*s*t! fully observe thy existence, upwards from the head,
downwards from the sole <span id="fr_183"></span>[1](#fn_183.md) of the
foot, and afar *on* various sides; and thou shouldst beseech before and
behind and *in* every direction, for we *are* not as to thee as the
demons *are* as to mankind, we give away everything only in
invisibility; but the demons, through close connection, when they rush
out, tempt only with pleasantness. 55. Even unto thee, *O* Zaratû*s*t! a
fiend *will* rush, a female, golden-bodied *and* full-bosomed (so that
she wears a bodice), and she rushes to request companionship from thee;
a female, golden bodied *and* full-bosomed, to request conversation from
thee, to request co-operation from thee. 56. *But* thou shouldst not
grant her companionship, nor conversation, nor shalt thou prescribe
*any* conduct for her; afterwards, to revert her downwards, thou shalt
utter aloud that triumphant saying the Yathâ-ahû-vairyô.'

57\. Zaratû*s*t proceeded to the habitable *and* friendly world, for the
purpose of fully observing that beaten track (kh*â*pisnŏ) of the
embodied existence; then that fiend came forward when he sat in the
vicinity of a garment—that garment <span id="fr_184"></span>[2](#fn_184.md)
which, when Vohûmanô *was* conveying *him* to the conference, *was*
deposited by him—a female, golden-bodied *and* full-bosomed, and
companionship, conversation,

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

and co-operation *were* requested by her from him; she also whined
(dandî*d*ŏ): 'I am Spenda*r*ma*d* <span
id="fr_185"></span>[1](#fn_185.md).'

58\. And Zaratû*s*t spoke thus: 'She who is Spenda*r*ma*d* *was* fully
observed by me in the light of a cloudless day, and that Spenda*r*ma*d*
appeared *to* me fine behind and fine before and fine all round (that
is, *in* all positions she was handsome); do thou turn *thy* back, *and*
I *shall* know if thou art Spenda*r*ma*d*.'

59\. And the fiend spoke to him thus: 'O Zaratû*s*t of the Spîtâmas!
where we are, those who are females are handsome in front, *but*
frightfully hideous behind; *so* do not make a demand for my back.' 60.
After she *had* protested a third *time*, the fiend turned *her* back,
and she was seen by Zaratû*s*t behind in the groin; and when matter was
exuded, *it was* full of serpents, toads, lizards, centipedes, and
frogs.

61\. And that triumphant saying, the Yathâ-ahû-vairyô, was uttered aloud
by Zaratû*s*t; then that fiend *was* annihilated, and *K*êshmak <span
id="fr_186"></span>[2](#fn_186.md) the Karap rushed forth. 62. And he
grumbled in leaving, thus: 'The misery which is here *below* is such as
I have obtained, because, owing to thee, I thought that thy sacred
beings *were* more joyful than any heroes who through defeat go to hell;
I proceed more joyfully *than* the sacred beings, as regards the life in
the body, so that I fully deceive the life in thy body, and thou art
fully deceived by me as regards thine.'

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

63\. Zaratû*s*t also revealed (gushûftŏ) this secret to mankind, and
their knowledge *how* to test a demon is manifested therein, even by a
great wonder of the same nature to mankind: the visible rushing of the
demons into the world before Zaratû*s*t, *and* their bodies *being*
afterwards shattered by the loud chanting of revelation *by* Zaratû*s*t
from the Avesta announced, which *was* the acceptance of *its* truth by
the ruler Vi*s*tâsp and the people of that time; and if this *had* not
been so, *and* Vi*s*tâsp *and* those of *his* time *were* not accepting
the Avesta which *was* announced by *Zaratû*s*t in* this fashion,
through *their* considering *it* false, it would not have reached unto
us.

64\. One *marvel* is this, with which, too, he who *was* Zaratû*s*t
became aware from revelation, about the vileness *and* perverted
religion of Zâk of the deadly Karaps of Vi*s*tâsp and many other Kaîs
and Karaps who *were* at the residence of Vi*s*tâsp, their combination
for the death of Zaratû*s*t, the preparation for severe abuse of him to
Vi*s*tâsp, and influencing Vi*s*tâsp for his death by command of
Vi*s*tâsp, *which* extends to awful imprisonment and punishment. 65.
Afterwards, too, *his* knowledge about his preservation therefrom, the
manifestation of his wondrousness, and the evidence concerning *his*
attainment unto prophesying; *also* after the continuance *of* the last
questioning of the ten years of conference, *his* departure alone, by
the advice *and* command of Aûha*r*ma*zd*, to the residence of Vi*s*tâsp
and the precinct (var) of that terrible conflict. 66. *His* uttering, on
the horse-course (aspânvar) of Vi*s*tâsp, a reminder of the power and
triumph of Aûha*r*ma*zd* over himself, *as* he invited Vi*s*tâsp to

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

the religion of Aûha*r*ma*zd*; and with great wisdom Vi*s*tâsp heard the
words of Zaratû*s*t, on account of his own complete mindfulness and
spiritual knowledge of ritual, *and* would have asked for an outpouring
of prophecy.

67\. *But* thereupon, too—before the words of Zaratû*s*t *were fully*
heard by him, *and* he could have understood the character of
Zaratû*s*t—owing to the demonizing of the deadly Zâk and the rest *of*
those Kîgs *and* Karaps, *spoken* out with slanderous knowledge *and*
perverse actions to Vi*s*tâsp about Zaratû*s*t, *there* then *occurred*
his consignment of Zaratû*s*t to that confinement *and* punishment as
stated in the words of Zaratû*s*t thus: 'I have spoken about their three
enquiries, and I am bound by thirty of them, I with thirty-three fetters
of murderers, wicked ones, and demon-worshippers <span
id="fr_187"></span>[1](#fn_187.md). 68. But the hunger of manhood's
inclination <span id="fr_188"></span>[2](#fn_188.md) violently affected the
strength of my legs, but the hunger of manhood's inclination violently
affected the force of my arms, but the hunger of manhood's inclination
violently affected the hearing of my ears, but the hunger of manhood's
inclination violently affected the sight of my eyes, and it would force
away my bosom up to *my* back (so that it <span
id="fr_189"></span>[3](#fn_189) would stay behind at my back.md) through
the continuance of that deadly hunger of manhood's inclination.'

69\. And here, through the mightiness of Zaratû*s*t—*who* proceeded
alone to the terrible combat *with* 

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

evil, where *there* became manifest, in the mode which is written, the
descent of his life into so much punishment, due to hunger and thirst,
heavy fetters, *and* other misery unto which the strength of human
nature is attaining, *but* unto which *it* is not destined—is manifested
a great wonder to king Vi*s*tâsp and his officials, when *his*
full-glorious person *was* found by them alive in awfulness,
imprisonment, and those other transformations (pa*d*gastakîh) of
long-continued starvation.

70\. One *marvel* is this, that the sacred beings contrived, for the
sake of (va*l* vahân-î) his preservation from that awfulness, a body
possessing life, *and* on his account it became lifeless and
imperceptible; afterwards, in the great session of Vi*s*tâsp and the
assembly of the world, Zaratû*s*t, through the strength and blessedness
of the true word, restored the same body anew, like that which is
issuing in the statement of the wonder about the splendid horse of
Vi*s*tâsp <span id="fr_190"></span>[1](#fn_190.md).

71\. One *marvel* is *his* telling and disclosing the thoughts of king
Vi*s*tâsp and *of* those of the realm, and many other concealed matters,
through spiritual perception.

72\. One *marvel* is several matters of evil deceit (va*d* *g*amâs)
which Dahâk had done in Bâpêl <span id="fr_191"></span>[2](#fn_191.md)

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

through witchcraft, *and* mankind had come to idol-worship through that
seduction, *and its* increase was the destruction of the world; *but*
through the triumphant words of the religion, which Zaratû*s*t
proclaimed opposing it, that witchcraft is all dissipated and disabled.

73\. One *marvel* is this which is manifested, with wonders owing to
Zaratû*s*t, in controversy about the religion with the famous learned of
the realm, among whom, known for learning in the world, *are* the
investigators (girâyagânŏ). of the words of speech; *and* among those
*things* which *are* more surprisingly controversial *are* those later
(sibastar) words which *are* to save their creatures by a later
religion. 74. Also to proclaim its truth intelligibly, and to make king
Vi*s*tâsp *and* those previously learned *men* without doubt as to the
truth of the religion, the creator Aûha*r*ma*zd* sends some *spirits*,
Vohûmanô, Ashavahi*s*tô, and the propitious fire <span
id="fr_192"></span>[1](#fn_192.md), as a reminder to Vi*s*tâsp about the
true prophesying of Zaratû*s*t, *and* the desire of Aûha*r*ma*zd* for
the acceptance of the religion *of* Ma*zd*a-worship *by* Vi*s*tâsp *and
for its* propagation in the world.

75\. The wondrousness which is manifested to Vi*s*tâsp *and* those of
the realm—both through the travelling (v*âz*î*d*anŏ) of those archangels
down from the sky to the earth, and in *their* travelling to the abode
of Vi*s*tâsp—*was* like this which revelation mentions thus: ‘Then he
who is the creator Aûha*r*ma*zd* spoke *to* them, to Vohûmanô,
Ashavahi*s*tô, and also the fire of Aûha*r*ma*zd*, the propitious, thus:
"Proceed! you *who* are archangels, unto the

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

abode of Vi*s*tâsp, whose resources (*a*fzâr) are cattle *and* who is
far *and* widely famed, with a view to *his* reliance upon this religion
(that is, till he shall stand up for this religion); and, as regards the
answering words of the righteous Zaratû*s*t of the Spîtâmas, to approve
the nature (zag *s*ân) of those words." 76. The archangels proceeded
unto the abode of Vi*s*tâsp, whose resources are cattle *and who* is far
*and* widely famed; their radiance, in that lofty residence, seemed to
him, that Vi*s*tâsp, a heaven *of* complete light, owing to their great
power and triumph; this *was* so that, when he thus looked upon it, the
exalted Kaî-Vi*s*tâsp trembled, all his courtiers (pê*s*akŏ) trembled,
all his chieftains (pa*d*ŏ) were confused, *and* he of the superior
class *was* like the driver of a chariot-horse.

77\. ‘And the fire of Aûha*r*ma*zd* spoke, in the words of heroes, thus:
“Fear not, for *there* is no fearing for thee, *thou* exalted
Kaî-Vi*s*tâsp! they have not come for alarming thy abode, *as* a
reminder of the deputed envoys of Ar*g*âsp <span
id="fr_193"></span>[1](#fn_193.md); *there* have not come, for alarming thy
abode, the two Khyôns of

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Ar*g*âsp who
demand tribute and revenue (sâk vab*âz*ŏ); and *there has* not come, for
alarming thy abode, the all-overpowering thief who is an injurer, *or*
the dog who is a highwayman. 78. We are three who have come over
(taristŏ) to thy abode, Vohûmanô, Ashavahi*s*tô, and also the fire of
the propitious lord; of these thy knowledge is most wisely most just.
79. If thou helpest vision, so that it becomes wisdom for thee, the
worldly *existence* requires the good religion of the
Ma*zd*a-worshippers, which proceeds purely through the recitation which
Zaratû*s*t of the Spîtâmas *teaches*. 80. Do thou chant the Ahunavair,
do thou praise perfect righteousness <span
id="fr_194"></span>[1](#fn_194.md), and utter no worship <span
id="fr_195"></span>[2](#fn_195.md) for the demons! because the desire of
Aûha*r*ma*zd*, as regards thee, is *for thy* reliance upon this
religion; *it* is also the desire of the archangels, and the desire, as
regards thee, *of* the other sacred beings who are beneficent
(*s*apîrdahakŏ) *and* righteous.’”

81\. '"And as the recompense in this life, if you praise the good *and*
pure religion of the righteous Zaratû*s*t of the Spîtâmas, we *will*
give unto thee a long reign and sovereignty, and the long lifetime of a
life of 150 years; we *will* give unto thee Good Integrity and
Rectitude <span id="fr_196"></span>[3](#fn_196.md) which is long-continued
in desire for constantly assisting, good for assistance

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

through constantly assisting, and not passing away; and we *will* give
unto thee a son, Pêshyôtan <span id="fr_197"></span>[1](#fn_197.md) is
*his* name, he is immortal, *and* so is undecaying, hungerless, and
thirstless, living and predominant in both existences, *those* of the
embodied *beings* and of the spirits. 82. *But*, as the recompense in
this life, if you do not praise the good *and* pure religion of the
righteous Zaratû*s*t of the Spîtâmas, we *will* not convey thee up on
high, and we *will* order thine end; the vultures which *are* mindful of
decay *will* see *and* eat up those and these of thine, thy blood *will*
reach the ground, and the waters *will* not reach thy body."'

83\. One *marvel* is that *connected* with the confidence
(v*âv*arî-hastanŏ) of Vi*s*tâsp in the religion, even through that
occurrence of the speech of the archangels; and, afterwards, the
obedience (patyasâî?) of his thoughts in the case of the delays through
the bloodshed owing to Ar*g*âsp <span id="fr_198"></span>[2](#fn_198.md)
the Khyôn and his attendant heroes (pas-gurdânŏ) through-out the same
Khyôns, because of the acceptance of the religion. 84. Also, for the
sake of daily *and* visibly showing to Vi*s*tâsp the certified victory
over Ar*g*âsp and the Khyôns, and his own superior position, unceasing
rule, splendour, and glory, the creator Aûha*r*ma*zd* sends, at the same
time, the angel Nêryôsang <span id="fr_199"></span>[3](#fn_199.md) to the
abode of Vi*s*tâsp, as a reminder for the archangel Ashavahi*s*tô to
give to Vi*s*tâsp to drink of that fountain of life, for looking

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

into the existence of the spirits, the enlightening food by means of
which great glory *and* beauty *are* seen by Vi*s*tâsp.

85\. Just as this *passage* of revelation mentions thus: ‘And he who is
the creator Aûha*r*ma*zd* spoke to the angel Nêryôsang thus: “Proceed
*and* travel, *O* Nêryôsang the assembler <span
id="fr_200"></span>[1](#fn_200.md)! unto the abode of Vi*s*tâsp, whose
resources are cattle *and who* is far *and* widely famed, and thou shalt
say this to Ashavahi*s*tô, thus: ‘*O* Ashavahi*s*tô! do thou
authoritatively take this fine saucer (ta*s*tô), which is fully finer
than the other saucers that *are* made (that is, the cup (*g*âm) is as
fine *as* is possible to make for royalty), *and* carry up to Vi*s*tâsp
the Hôm and Vars <span id="fr_201"></span>[2](#fn_201) (mûî.md) which are
for us; and do thou give it <span id="fr_202"></span>[3](#fn_202.md) unto
the ruler Vi*s*tâsp to drink up, by whose word it is accepted.’” 86.
Ashavahi*s*tô authoritatively taking the fine saucer from him, also,
thereupon, gave it unto the exalted ruler Kaî-Vi*s*tâsp to drink
*from* <span id="fr_203"></span>[4](#fn_203.md); and the ruler of the
country (dîh), the exalted Kaî-Vi*s*tâsp, lay down when divested of his
robes, and he spoke to Hûtôs <span id="fr_204"></span>[5](#fn_204.md) thus:
“You, *O* Hûtôs! are *she*

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

whom the prompt ability (t*êz*ŏ hûnar) of Zaratû*s*t of the Spîtâmas
should reach; *and* through the diligence of the prompt ability of
Zaratû*s*t of the Spîtâmas, you <span id="fr_205"></span>[1](#fn_205.md)
would expound the religion of Aûha*r*ma*zd* and Zaratû*s*t.”’

87\. One *marvel* is this which is declared, that when Vi*s*tâsp,
accepting the religion, praises righteousness, the demons in hell are
disabled, and the demon Aeshm <span id="fr_206"></span>[2](#fn_206.md)
rushes to the country of the Khyôns *and to* Ar*g*âsp, the deadly *one*
of the Khyôns, because he was the mightiest of the tyrants at that time;
and the *most* hideous of all, of so many of them in the country of the
Khyôns, are poured out by him for war.

88\. And here, too, is manifested a great wonder also to the host (ram)
of Irân who have been coming there, unto the residence of Ar*g*âsp the
Khyôn, like this which revelation mentions thus: 'Then, just at the time
his legion is separately displayed, Aeshm the unredeemable
(tan*â*pûharak) adheres (gêr*ev*ê*d*ŏ) to him, as *being himself*
without escort (agurôh), and quite opposes (ba*r*â sper*ez*ê*d*ŏ) him,
because: "You, who are a Khyôn, *have* become unlucky through want of
success after you engage *in conflict*."' 89. Henceforth, it is not that
the victory of Irân *has* come over foreigners *and* Khyôns-through
companionship at the abode *of* that man who is mightier by the birth
*of* Zaratû*s*t

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

of the Spîtâmas—when that hideous sovereignty *of* Ar*g*âsp, the deadly
Khyôn, is swallowed up by him (*Vi*s*tâsp*), for the confusion of the
deadly species (that is, *they are* further smitten by him, one through
the other; and are swallowed together by him, mutually struggling and
through mutually devouring). 90. And apart from him, that bitter and
well-hardened Khyôn that is quite disabled by him the good *Vi*s*tâsp*,
that deadly *fiend* is disturbed about him of eloquent abilities
(*Zaratû*s*t*); and so he grumbled at the hideous sovereignty thus:
'Prompt ability comes into existence *and* the Khyôn came; thereupon
prompt ability comes into existence *and* the Irânian has come <span
id="fr_207"></span>[1](#fn_207.md).'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_161"></span>[51:1](sbe4708.htm#fr_161.md) From this point §§
4-8 and 11 have been already translated in S.B.E., vol. xviii, pp. 412,
413, in illustration of the meaning of Khvêtûk-das in Sasanian times and
later.

<span id="fn_162"></span>[51:2](sbe4708.htm#fr_162.md) Av. staomî ashem;
nâismî daêvô (Yas. XI, 19; XII, r).

<span id="fn_163"></span>[51:3](sbe4708.htm#fr_163.md) An opprobrious term
for the progeny of evil beings and animals, also used by a Karap when
speaking of Zaratû*s*t in Chap. III, 21.

<span id="fn_164"></span>[51:4](sbe4708.htm#fr_164.md) As this name has not
been found in the extant Avesta, its correct reading is uncertain. In
Zs. XX, 8, it can be read Aûrvaîtŏ-dih, in which dih is the Pahl.
translation of Av. dang,hu, of which dang is a Pahl. transliteration;
and the whole name may mean 'friendly to the province,' which seems
suitable to this particular ruler. The MS. appears to have dêng.

<span id="fn_165"></span>[52:1](sbe4708.htm#fr_165.md) Or 'from.'

<span id="fn_166"></span>[52:2](sbe4708.htm#fr_166.md) It may be
'parenthetical or ambiguous.'

<span id="fn_167"></span>[53:1](sbe4708.htm#fr_167.md) Or, perhaps,
'celebrated.'

<span id="fn_168"></span>[53:2](sbe4708.htm#fr_168.md) The demon of the
evil eye (see Bd. XXVIII, 33); Av. Aghashi, Vd. XX, 3, 7, 9.

<span id="fn_169"></span>[54:1](sbe4708.htm#fr_169.md) Literally 'most
many-doored.'

<span id="fn_170"></span>[55:1](sbe4708.htm#fr_170.md) Here written in
Pâzand, but the Pahlavi form, Vêdvoî*s*t, occurs in §§ 23, 24.

<span id="fn_171"></span>[55:2](sbe4708.htm#fr_171.md) Or 'of the
non-worshippers of Aûha*r*ma*zd*.'

<span id="fn_172"></span>[55:3](sbe4708.htm#fr_172.md) For an instance of
gifts of slaves see the Pahlavi inscription on an engraved stone from
Baghdâd, in *Indian Antiquary*, vol. xi, p. 224, ll. 2, 3 of
inscription: 'kevan bîdûn va-kanî*g*akŏ . . . lakhvâr . . . shed*r*ûnam
. . . va-zak shibâ rî*d*ŏ va-shibâ kanî*g*akŏân shed*r*ûnt:'—'Now . . .
I send back a slave-boy and slave-girl . . . and those seven slave-boys
and seven slave-girls are sent.' This inscription was probably engraved
in the seventh century, judging from the forms of the letters.

<span id="fn_173"></span>[56:1](sbe4708.htm#fr_173.md) Apparently the third
night after death, on the passing away of <span id="page_57">p.
57</span> which the soul is supposed to have its destination determined,
until the resurrection (see Hâ*d*ôkht Nask, II, 18; III, 17). If the
seven sacred beings who stand aloof from him be the archangels, they
treat Vêdvoî*s*t very leniently; but this legend treats of a period
which it assumes to be earlier than the laws of Zaratû*s*t.

<span id="fn_174"></span>[57:1](sbe4708.htm#fr_174.md) The modern Sîstân,
bordering upon Afghânistân and Bulû*k*istân.

<span id="fn_175"></span>[57:2](sbe4708.htm#fr_175.md) Av. Parsha*d*-g*a*u,
mentioned twice in Yt. XIII, 96, 127, but it is not certain that both
allusions refer to the same individual. The name also occurs in Bd.
XXIX, 5, but only hi one old MS.; in all others another name is given,
though the locality appears to be <span id="page_58">p. 58</span> nearly
the same. In § 31 the first part of the name is here written Parshê*d*.

<span id="fn_176"></span>[58:1](sbe4708.htm#fr_176.md) The Fravarânê, Yas.
XI, 16.

<span id="fn_177"></span>[58:2](sbe4708.htm#fr_177.md) Pahl. Vd. XIX, 1-4.

<span id="fn_178"></span>[59:1](sbe4708.htm#fr_178.md) The first three
words of the Ahunavair formula.

<span id="fn_179"></span>[59:2](sbe4708.htm#fr_179.md) See Yt. XIX, 78-81.

<span id="fn_180"></span>[59:3](sbe4708.htm#fr_180.md) Reading
vênd*â*vdahakih, but the first letter is omitted in all three
occurrences of the word.

<span id="fn_181"></span>[60:1](sbe4708.htm#fr_181.md) If the word be
Pahlavi, it is probably intended for *s*nâyân, hearing'; but it may be
merely an approximate transcript of Av. snaodhe*n*ti*s*, which word, if
this be the case, must have puzzled Sasanian scholars as much as it does
those of the present time. As a transcript, the word might be read
snôdîyân, and we might guess the meaning of the phrase to be 'thereupon
weeping *they* lamented.'

<span id="fn_182"></span>[61:1](sbe4708.htm#fr_182.md) Av. hâthra, which,
as a measure of time, varies from one to two hours (see Farh. Um, p. 43,
ll. 1-3).

<span id="fn_183"></span>[62:1](sbe4708.htm#fr_183.md) Assuming that lêlyâ
stands for zêrîh; the only difference, in Pahlavi writing, being in the
first letter.

<span id="fn_184"></span>[62:2](sbe4708.htm#fr_184.md) See Chap, III, 60.

<span id="fn_185"></span>[63:1](sbe4708.htm#fr_185.md) The female archangel
Bountiful Devotion, in whose special charge are the earth and virtuous
women; see Sls. XV, 5, 20-24.

<span id="fn_186"></span>[63:2](sbe4708.htm#fr_186.md) See Chap. II, 44,
45.

<span id="fn_187"></span>[65:1](sbe4708.htm#fr_187.md) Compare Zs. XXIII,
5.

<span id="fn_188"></span>[65:2](sbe4708.htm#fr_188.md) Reading
gû*s*n-girâîh; but it might be dû*s*-vîrâîh, 'bad provision.' He was
left to starve to death in prison.

<span id="fn_189"></span>[65:3](sbe4708.htm#fr_189.md) The bosom. The idea
of the writer appears to have been that in case of utter starvation the
chest would totally collapse, so that the breast bone would touch the
spine.

<span id="fn_190"></span>[66:1](sbe4708.htm#fr_190.md) This very slight
allusion to the cure of Vi*s*tâsp's horse by Zaratû*s*t is sufficient to
show that this legend existed in the ninth century; but the writer of
the Dînka*rd* seems inclined to trace it back to a tale that he vaguely
relates in the earlier part of this section, and which he evidently
found in older writings; this tale, however, does not mention a horse,
but only an animated body. The Persian Zaratû*s*t-nâma
[develops](errata.htm#0.md) the legend of the sick horse, whose legs are
drawn up to its belly, into 160 couplets.

<span id="fn_191"></span>[66:2](sbe4708.htm#fr_191.md) Babylon; see Yt. V,
29-31; XV, 19-21.

<span id="fn_192"></span>[67:1](sbe4708.htm#fr_192.md) Compare Zs. XXIII,
7.

<span id="fn_193"></span>[68:1](sbe4708.htm#fr_193.md) Av. Are*g*a*d*-aspa,
king of the *Hv*yaonas (Pahl. Khyôns), mentioned in Yt. V, 109, 113,
116; XVII, 50; XIX, 87. His war with Vi*s*tâsp, for the purpose of
compelling the latter to abjure his new religion, is described in the
Yâ*d*kâr-î Zarîrân (see Geiger in *Sitzungsberichten der p.-p. and h.
Classe der k. bayer. Akad. der Wiss*. 1890, Bd. II, pp. 43-84). Ar*g*âsp
sends two envoys, Vîdraf*s* the wizard and Nâmkhvâst of the Hazârs, to
demand Vi*s*tâsp's submission; this is refused defiantly by advice of
Zarîr, the king's brother; and both nations prepare for war. When the
Irânians meet the Khyôns, Vi*s*tâsp consults his vazîr *G*âmâsp, who
prognosticates prodigious slaughter. And, after losing most of their
chieftains (including twenty-three brothers and sons of Vi*s*tâsp), the
Irânians utterly annihilate the Khyôn army. This war is called the 'war
of the religion' in Bd. XII, 33; Byt. III, 9.

<span id="fn_194"></span>[69:1](sbe4708.htm#fr_194.md) That is, recite the
Yathâ-ahû-vairyô and the Ashem-vohû formulas.

<span id="fn_195"></span>[69:2](sbe4708.htm#fr_195.md) Pahl.
a-a*îz*i*s*nîh, literally, a 'non-worship,' which may mean something
worse than 'no worship;' but 'execration or malediction' is usually
expressed by ga*z*i*s*n, 'cursing,' which is written exactly like
ya*z*i*s*n, 'worship.'

<span id="fn_196"></span>[69:3](sbe4708.htm#fr_196.md) Pahl. Aharî*s*vang
and Râ*ê*-asti*s*nîh, the equivalents of Av. Ashi*s*-vanguhi and
Rasãstât who are spiritual personifications of the qualities mentioned
in the text.

<span id="fn_197"></span>[70:1](sbe4708.htm#fr_197.md) Written Pêshyâôtanŏ,
both here and in Chap. V, 12. He is the immortal priestly ruler of
Kangd*ez*, who was expected to come to restore the religion in Iran in
the time of Aûshê*d*ar, see Bd. XXIX, 5; Byt. III, 25-32, 36-42, 51, 52.

<span id="fn_198"></span>[70:2](sbe4708.htm#fr_198.md) Here written
Ar*g*adâspô; see § 77.

<span id="fn_199"></span>[70:3](sbe4708.htm#fr_199.md) Written Nêryôsang
here and in § 85.

<span id="fn_200"></span>[71:1](sbe4708.htm#fr_200.md) Compare Vd. XXII, 7.

<span id="fn_201"></span>[71:2](sbe4708.htm#fr_201.md) A lock of three,
five, or seven hairs from the tail of a white bull, that is tied to a
metal thumb-ring which is put into the Hôm-strainer when the Hôm-juice
is about to be poured through it. See Haug's Essays, 3rd ed., pp.
397-403. This ring and lock of hair may be the relic of a hair-sieve
that may have been used for straining the Hôm-juice in former times.

<span id="fn_202"></span>[71:3](sbe4708.htm#fr_202.md) The saucer, or cup,
of strained Hôm-juice.

<span id="fn_203"></span>[71:4](sbe4708.htm#fr_203.md) The foregoing
twenty-six words, excepting two, have been here repeated by the writer
of the old Bombay MS., after turning over a folio.

<span id="fn_204"></span>[71:5](sbe4708.htm#fr_204.md) Av. Hutaosa, wife of
Vi*s*tâsp and descendant of Nô*d*ar (Av. Naotara); see Yt. XV, 35, 36.
According to the later authority of the Yâ*d*kar-î Zarîrân, § 48, she
was also a sister or Vi*s*tâsp. <span id="page_72">p. 72</span> The
similarity of her name to that of Atossa, the wife and sister of
Cambyses, whom Darius afterwards married, is striking.

<span id="fn_205"></span>[72:1](sbe4708.htm#fr_205.md) As the verbal forms
of the present third person singular and second person plural are alike
in Pahlavi, it is doubtful which personal pronoun to use.

<span id="fn_206"></span>[72:2](sbe4708.htm#fr_206.md) The demon of Wrath;
see Bd. XXVIII, 15-17.

<span id="fn_207"></span>[73:1](sbe4708.htm#fr_207.md) According to the
numbering of the folios of the old MS. of 1659 (brought from Persia to
India in 1783) one folio, numbered 313 in Persian words, is here
missing. It has not yet been found in India, and, owing to folio 312
apparently completing a sentence, and folio 314 evidently beginning a
new chapter, the loss of text is hardly perceptible. It would have
filled the next two pages.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V](sbe4709.md)
