[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Native American](../index) 
[Navajo](index) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Noqoìlpi, the Gambler: A Navajo Myth  
Matthews, Washington

Franz Boas, T. Frederick Crane, J. Owen Dorsey; W.W. Newell, General
Editor.  
*Journal of American Folklore*, Vol II, No. V, April-June, 1889.

In the *cañon* of the Chaco, in northern New Mexico, there are many
ruins of ancient pueblos which are still in a fair state of
preservation, in some of them entire apartments being yet, it is said,
intact. One of the largest of these is called by the Navajos *Kintyèl*
or *Kintyèli*, which signifies "Broad-house." It figures frequently in
their legends and is the scene of a very interesting rite-myth, which I
have in my collection. I have reason to believe that this pueblo is
identical with that seen and described in 1849 by Lieut. J. H. Simpson,
U. S. A.,2 under the name of *Pueblo Chettro Kettle*. Although his guide
translated this "Rain Pueblo," it seems more probably a corruption of
the Navajo *Tseçqa* or *Tceçga* (English Chethra) *Kintyèl*, or "Broad
House among the Cliffs," -- i.e., in the *cañon*. This story of
*Noqoìlpi* was not related to me as a separate tale, but as a part of
the great creation and migration legend of the Navajos. When the
wandering Navajos arrived at *Kintyèl*, this great pueblo was in process
of building, but was not finished. The way it came to be built was this:

  
  
  
*NOQOÌLPI*, \[1\] THE GAMBLER: A NAVAJO MYTH.

Some time before, there had descended among the Pueblos, from the
heavens, a divine gambler or gambling-god, named *Noqoìlpi*, or
He-who-wins-men (at play); his talisman was a great piece of turquoise.
When he came, he challenged the people to all sorts of games and
contests, and in all of these he was successful. He won from them, first
their property, then their women and children, and finally some of the
men themselves. Then he told them he would give them part of their
property back in payment \[See Note "A" --- Desertphile\] if they would
build a great house; so when the Navajos came \[See Note "B" ---
Desertphile\], the Pueblos were busy building in order that they might
release their enthralled relatives and their property. They were also
busy making a race-track, and preparing for all kinds of games of chance
and skill.

When all was ready, and four days' notice had been given, twelve men
came from the neighboring pueblo of *Kinçolíj* (Blue-house) to compete
with the great gambler. They bet their own persons, and after a brief
contest they lost themselves to *Noqoìlpi*. Again a notice of four days
was given, and again twelve men of *Kinçolíj* -- relatives of the former
twelve -- came to play, and these also lost themselves. For the third
time an announcement, four days in advance of a game, was given; this
time some women were among the twelve contestants, and they too lost
themselves. All were put to work on the building of *Kintyèl* as soon as
they forfeited their liberty. At the end of another four days the
children of these men and women came to try to win back their parents,
but they succeeded only in adding themselves to the number of the
gambler's slaves. On a fifth trial, after four days' warning, twelve
leading men of Blue-house were lost, among them the chief of the pueblo.
On a sixth duly announced gambling-day twelve more men, all important
persons, staked their liberty and lost it. Up to this time the Navajos
had kept count of the winnings of *Noqoìlpi*, but afterwards people from
other pueblos came in such numbers to play and lose that they could keep
count no longer. In addition to their own persons the later victims
brought in beads, shells, turquoise, and all sorts of valuables, and
gambled them away. With the labor of all these slaves it was not long
until the great *Kintyèl* was finished.

But all this time the Navajos had been merely spectators, and had taken
no part in the games. One day the voice of the beneficent god
*Qastcèyalçi* \[See Note "C" --- Desertphile\] was heard faintly in the
distance crying his usual call "hu\`hu\`hu\`hu\`."

His voice was heard, as it is always heard, four times, each time nearer
and nearer, and immediately after the last call, which was loud and
clear, *Qastcèyalçi* appeared at the door of a hut where dwelt a young
couple who had no children, and with them he communicated by means of
signs. He told them that the people of *Kinçolíj* had lost at game with
*Noqoìlpi* two great shells, the greatest treasures of the pueblo; that
the Sun had coveted these shells, and had begged them from the gambler;
that the latter had refused the request of the Sun and the Sun was
angry. In consequence of all this, as *Qastcèyalçi* related, in twelve
days from his visit certain divine personages would meet in the
mountains, in a place which he designated, to hold a great ceremony. He
invited the young man to be present at the ceremony, and disappeared.

The Navajo kept count of the passing days; on the twelfth day he
repaired to the appointed place, and there he found a great assemblage
of the gods \[Yei\]. There were *Qastcèyalçi*, *Qastcèqogan* and his
son, *Níltci*, the Wind, *Tcalyèl*, the Darkness, *Tcàapani*, the Bat,
*Klictsò*, the Great Snake, *Tsilkàli* (a little bird), *Nasísi*, the
Gopher, and many others \[See Note "D" --- Desertphile\]. Beside these,
there were present a number of pets or domesticated animals belonging to
the gambler, who were dissatisfied with their lot, were anxious to be
free, and would gladly obtain their share of the spoils in case their
master was ruined. *Níltci*, the Wind, had spoken to them, and they had
come to enter into the plot against *Noqoìlpi*. All night the gods
danced and sang, and performed their mystic rites, for the purpose of
giving to the son of *Qastcèqogan* powers as a gambler equal to those of
*Noqoìlpi*. When the morning came they washed the young neophyte all
over, dried him with \[corn\] meal, dressed him in clothes exactly like
those the gambler wore, and in every way made him look as much like the
gambler as possible, and then they counselled as to what other means
they should take to out-wit *Noqoìlpi*.

In the first place, they desired to find out how he felt about having
refused to his father, the Sun, the two great shells.

"I will do this," said *Níltci*, the Wind, "for I can penetrate
everywhere, and no one can see me;" but the others said, "No, you can go
everywhere, but you cannot travel without making a noise and disturbing
people. Let *Tcalyèl*, the Darkness, go on this errand, for he also goes
wherever he wills, yet he makes no noise."

So *Tcalyèl* went to the gambler's house, entered his room, went all
through his body while he slept, and searched well his mind, and he came
back saying, "*Noqoìlpi* is sorry for what he has done."

*Níltci*, however, did not believe this; so, although his services had
been before refused, he repaired to the chamber where the gambler slept,
and went all through his body and searched well his mind; but he too
came back saying *Noqoìlpi* was sorry that he had refused to give the
great shells to his father.

One of the games they proposed to play is called *çàka-çqadsàç*, or the
thirteen chips; it is played with thirteen thin flat pieces of wood,
which are colored red on one side and left white or uncolored on the
other side. Success depends on the number of chips, which, being thrown
upward, fall with their white sides up.

"Leave the game to me," said the Bat; "I have made thirteen chips that
are white on both sides. I will hide myself in the ceiling, and when our
champion throws up his chips I will grasp them and throw down my chips
instead."

Another game they were to play is called *nanjoj*; it is played with two
long sticks or poles, of peculiar shape and construction (one marked
with red and the other with black), and a single hoop. A long
many-tailed string, called the "turkey-claw," is secured to the centre
of each pole.

"Leave *nanjoj* to me," said the Great Snake; "I will hide myself in the
hoop and make it fall where I please."

Another game was one called *tsínbetsil*, or push-on-the-wood; in this
the contestants push against a tree until it is torn from its roots and
falls.

"I will see that this game is won," said *Nasísi*, the Gopher; "I will
gnaw the roots of the tree, so that he who shoves it may easily make it
fall."

In the game of *tcol*, or ball, the object was to hit the ball so that
it would fall beyond a certain line.

"I will win this game for you," said the little bird, *Tsilkáli*, "for I
will hide within the ball, and fly with it wherever I want to go. Do not
hit the ball hard; give it only a light tap, and depend on me to carry
it."

The pets of the gambler begged the Wind to blow hard, so that they might
have an excuse to give their master for not keeping due watch when he
was in danger, and in the morning the Wind blew for them a strong gale.
At dawn the whole party of conspirators left the mountain, and came down
to the brow of the *cañon* to watch until sunrise.

*Noqoìlpi* had two wives, who were the prettiest women in the whole
land. Wherever she went, each carried in her hand a stick with something
tied on the end of it, as a sign that she was the wife of the great
gambler.

It was their custom for one of them to go every morning at sunrise to a
neighboring spring to get water. So at sunrise the watchers on the brow
of the cliff saw one of the wives coming out of the gambler's house with
a water jar on her head, whereupon the son of *Qastcèqogan* descended
into the *cañon*, and followed her to the spring. She was not aware of
his presence until she had filled her water-jar; then she supposed it to
be her own husband, whom the youth was dressed and adorned to represent,
and she allowed him to approach her. She soon discovered her error,
however, but deeming it prudent to say nothing, she suffered him to
follow her into the house. As he entered, he observed that many of the
slaves had already assembled; perhaps they were aware that some trouble
was in store for their master. The latter looked up with an angry face;
he felt jealous when he saw the stranger entering immediately after his
wife. He said nothing of this, however, but asked at once the important
question, "Have you come to gamble with me?" This he repeated four times
\[See Note "E" --- Desertphile\], and each time the young *Qastcèqogan*
said "No." Thinking the stranger feared to play with him, *Noqoìlpi*
went on challenging him recklessly.

> "I'll bet myself against yourself;"  
> "I'll bet my feet against your feet;"  
> "I'll bet my legs against your legs;"

and so on he offered to bet every and any part of his body against the
same part of his adversary, ending by mentioning his hair.

In the mean time the party of divine ones, who had been watching from
above, came down, and people from the neighboring pueblos came in, and
among these were two boys, who were dressed in costumes similar to those
worn by the wives of the gambler. The young *Qastcèqogan* pointed to
these and said, "I will bet my wives my against your wives."

The great gambler accepted the wager, and the four persons, two women
and two mock women, were placed sitting in a row near the wall. First
they played the game of thirteen chips. The Bat assisted, as he had
promised the son of *Qastcèqogan*, and the latter soon won the game, and
with it the wives of *Noqoìlpi*.

This was the only game played inside the house; then all went out of
doors, and games of various kinds were played. First they tried
*nanjoj*. The track already prepared lay east and west, but, prompted by
the wind god, the stranger insisted on having a track made from north to
south, and again, at the bidding of the Wind, he chose the red stick.
The son of *Qastcèqogan* threw the wheel: at first it seemed about to
fall on the gambler's pole, in the "turkey-claw" of which it was
entangled; but to the great surprise of the gambler it extricated
itself, rolled farther on, and fell on the pole of his opponent. The
latter ran to pick up the ring, lest *Noqoìlpi* in doing so might hurt
the Snake inside; but the gambler was so angry that he threw his stick
away and gave up the game, hoping to do better in the next contest,
which was that of pushing down trees.

For this the great gambler pointed out two small trees, but his opponent
insisted that larger trees must be found. After some search they agreed
upon two of good size, which grew close together, and of these the
wind-god told the youth which one he must select. The gambler strained
with all his might at his tree, but could not move it, while his
opponent, when his turn came, shoved the other tree prostrate with
little effort, for its roots had all been severed by the Gopher.

Then followed a variety of games, on which *Noqoìlpi* staked his wealth
in shells and precious stones, his houses, and many of his slaves, and
lost all.

The last game was that of the ball. On the line over which the ball was
to be knocked all the people were assembled: on one side were those who
still remained slaves; on the other side were the freedmen and those who
had come to wager themselves, hoping to rescue their kinsmen. *Noqoìlpi*
bet on this game the last of his slaves and his own person. The gambler
struck his ball a heavy blow, but it did not reach the line; the
stranger gave his but a light tap, and the bird within it flew with it
far beyond the line, where at the released captives jumped over the line
and joined their people.

The victor ordered all the shell beads and precious stones and the great
shells to be brought forth. He gave the beads and shells to
*Qastèyalçi*, that they might be distributed among the gods; the two
great shells were given to the Sun. \[3\]

In the mean time *Noqoìlpi* sat to one side saying bitter things,
bemoaning his fate, and cursing and threatening his enemies:

"I will kill you all with the lightning. I will send war and disease
among you. May the cold freeze you! May the fire burn you! May the
waters drown you!" he cried. \[See Note "F" --- Desertphile\]

"He has cursed enough,"whispered *Níltci* to the son of *Qastcèqogan*.
"Put an end to his angry words." So the young victor called *Noqoìlpi*
to him, and said, "You have bet yourself and have lost; you are now my
slave and must do my bidding. You are not a god, for my power has
prevailed against yours."

The victor had a bow of magic power named *Eçin C-ilyil*, or the Bow of
Darkness: he bent this upwards, and placing the string on the ground, he
bade his illustrious slave stand on the string; then he shot *Noqoìlpi*
up into the sky as if he had been an arrow. Up and up he went, growing
smaller and smaller to the sight till he faded to a mere speck, and
finally disappeared altogether. As he flew upwards he was heard to
mutter in the angry tones of abuse and imprecation, until he was too far
away to be heard; but no one could distinguish anything he said as he
ascended.

He flew up in the sky until he came to the home of *Bekotcic-e*, the god
who carries the moon, and who is supposed by the Navajos to be identical
with the god of the Americans. He is very old, and dwells in a long row
of stone houses. When *Noqoìlpi* arrived at the house of *Bekotcic-e*,
he related to the latter all his misadventures in the lower world and
said, "Now I am poor, and this is why I have come to see you."

"You need be poor no longer," said *Bekotcic-e* "I will provide for
you."

So he made for the gambler pets or domestic animals of new kinds,
different to those which he had in the Chaco valley; he made for him
sheep, asses, horses, swine, goats, and fowls. He also gave him
*bayeta*, and other cloths of bright colors, more beautiful than those
woven by his slaves at *Kintyèli*. He made, too, a new people, the
Mexicans, for the gambler to rule over, and then he sent him back to
this world again, but he descended far to the south of his former abode,
and reached the earth in old Mexico.

*Noqoìlpi's* people increased greatly in Mexico, and after a while they
began to move toward the north, and build towns along the Rio Grande.
*Noqoìlpi* came with them until they arrived at a place north of Santa
Fé. There they ceased building, and he returned to old Mexico, where he
still lives, and where he is now the *Nakài C-igÍni*, or God of the
Mexicans.

Washington Matthews.

\[1\] In spelling the Navajo words the alphabet of the Bureau of
Ethnology is used; "L" is aspirated.

\[2\] In Journal of a Military Reconnaissance from Santa Fé, New Mexico,
to the Navajo Country, etc., Ex. Doc. No. 64, 31st Congress, 1st Session
\[Senate\]. "Reports of the Secretary of War," etc., Washington, 1850,
p. 79.

\[3\] What finally became of these great shells is ingeniously told in
another myth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

WORLD WIDE WEB EDITION NOTES  
by Desertphile:

\[A\] See also the tale of Holy Man poisioning Mister Snake with toxic
tobacco (in the **Male Shooting Way**), then charging Miss Snake all of
the Snake family's posessions to cure him. To get their posessions back,
the Snakes gave Holy Man medicinal sandpaintings.

\[B\] The *’anaasází* predate the Diné in the area (perhaps by around
1300 years). The Pueblo peoples (among them being the Zuñi and Hopi) are
thought to be the descendants of the Anasazi.

\[C\] If I recall correctly, this is **Talking God.** Talking God does
not actually "talk," though he does communicate and he makes a specific
sound. His companion, xactcéoyan, makes a somewhat similar sound.

\[D\] Bat, Gopher, and Great Snake are three of many guardians who
reside on the eastern opening of Diné sandpaintings. Others are Big Fly,
Sun's Tobacco Pouch, Oriole, Butterfly, and others.

\[E\] The event of having a question asked four times and having it
answered falsely three times before answering truthfully the forth time
comes up often in Diné tales.

\[F\] A "sore loser," to put it mildly. The behavior of Gambler here is
a great insult; a Diné acting like this would be an object of contempt.
That he eventually became equated with the Mexican (Christian) god at
the turn of the century may also be considered an insult.
