[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe34078)  [Next](sbe34080.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930306/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras, commentary by Sankaracharya (SBE34)*, tr. by George
Thibaut \[1890\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

10\. The Imperishable (is Brahman) on account of (its) supporting (all
things) up to ether.

We read (B*ri*. Up. III, 8, 7; 8). 'In what then is the ether woven,
like warp and woof?--He said: O Gârgî, the Brâhma*n*as call this the
akshara (the Imperishable). It is neither coarse nor fine,' and so
on.--Here the doubt arises whether the word 'akshara' means 'syllable'
or 'the highest Lord.'

The pûrvapakshin maintains that the word 'akshara' means 'syllable'
merely, because it has, in such terms as akshara-samâmnâya, the meaning
of 'syllable;' because we have no right to disregard the settled meaning
of a word; and because another scriptural passage also ('The syllable Om
is all this,' *Kh*. Up. II, 23, 4) declares a syllable, represented as
the object of devotion, to be the Self of all.

To this we reply that the highest Self only is denoted by the word
'akshara.'--Why?--Because it (the akshara) is said to support the entire
aggregate of effects, from earth up to ether. For the sacred text
declares at first that the entire aggregate of effects beginning with
earth and differentiated by threefold time is based on ether, in which
it is 'woven like warp and woof;' leads then (by means of the question,
'In what then is the ether woven, like warp and woof?') over to the
akshara, and, finally, concludes with the words, 'In that akshara then,
O Gârgî, the ether is woven, like warp and woof.'--Now the attribute of
supporting everything up to ether cannot be ascribed to any being but
Brahman. The text (quoted from the *Kh*. Up.) says indeed that the
syllable Om is all this, but that statement

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

is to be understood as a mere glorification of the syllable Om
considered as a means to obtain Brahman.--Therefore we take akshara to
mean either 'the Imperishable' or 'that which pervades;' on the ground
of either of which explanations it must be identified with the highest
Brahman.

But--our opponent resumes--while we must admit that the above reasoning
holds good so far that the circumstance of the akshara supporting all
things up to ether is to be accepted as a proof of all effects depending
on a cause, we point out that it may be employed by those also who
declare the pradhâna to be the general cause. How then does the previous
argumentation specially establish Brahman (to the exclusion of the
pradhâna)?--The reply to this is given in the next Sûtra.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I, 3, 11](sbe34080.md)
