[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe34132)  [Next](sbe34134) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930306/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras, commentary by Sankaracharya (SBE34)*, tr. by George
Thibaut \[1890\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

22\. (The initial statement is made) because (the highest Self) exists
in the condition (of the individual soul); so Kâ*s*ak*ri*tsna thinks.

Because the highest Self exists also in the condition of the individual
soul, therefore, the teacher Kâ*s*ak*ri*tsna thinks, the initial
statement which aims at intimating the non-difference of the two is
possible. That the highest Self only is that which appears as the
individual soul, is evident from the Brâhma*n*a-passage, 'Let me enter
into them with this living Self and evolve names and forms,' and similar
passages. We have also mantras to the same effect, for instance, 'The
wise one who, having produced all forms and made all names, sits calling
the things by their names' (Taitt. Âr. III, 12, 7) <span
id="fr_249"></span>[2](#fn_249).

<span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> And where
Scripture relates the creation of fire and the other elements, it does
not at the same time relate a separate creation of the individual soul;
we have therefore no right to look on the soul as a product of the
highest Self, different from the latter.--In the opinion of the teacher
Kâ*s*ak*ri*tsna the non-modified highest Lord himself is the individual
soul, not anything else. Â*s*marathya, although meaning to say that the
soul is not (absolutely) different from the highest Self, yet intimates
by the expression, 'On account of the fulfilment of the promise'--which
declares a certain mutual dependence--that there does exist a certain
relation of cause and effect between the highest Self and the individual
soul <span id="fr_250"></span>[1](#fn_250). The opinion of Au*d*ulomi
again clearly implies that the difference and non-difference of the two
depend on difference of condition <span id="fr_251"></span>[2](#fn_251).
Of these three opinions we conclude that the one held by Kâ*s*ak*ri*tsna
accords with Scripture, because it agrees with what all the
Vedânta-texts (so, for instance, the passage, 'That art thou') aim at
inculcating. Only on the opinion of Kâ*s*ak*ri*tsna immortality can be
viewed as the result of the knowledge of the soul; while it would be
impossible to hold the same view if the soul were a modification
(product) of the Self and as such liable to lose its existence by being
merged in its causal substance. For the same reason, name and form
cannot abide in the soul (as was above attempted to prove by means of
the simile of the rivers), but abide in the limiting adjunct and are
ascribed to the soul itself in a figurative sense only. For the same
reason the origin of the souls from the highest Self, of which Scripture
speaks in some places as analogous to the issuing of sparks from the
fire, must be viewed as based only on the limiting adjuncts of the soul.

The last three Sutras have further to be interpreted so as to furnish
replies to the second of the pûrvapakshin's arguments, viz. that the
B*ri*hadâra*n*yaka passage represents as

<span id="page_280">p. 280</span>

the object of sight the individual soul, because it declares that the
great Being which is to be seen arises from out of these elements.
'There is an indication of the fulfilment of the promise; so
Â*s*marathya thinks.' The promise is made in the two passages, 'When the
Self is known, all this is known,' and 'All this is that Self.' That the
Self is everything, is proved by the declaration that the whole world of
names, forms, and works springs from one being, and is merged in one
being  <span id="fr_252"></span>[1](#fn_252); and by its being
demonstrated, with the help of the similes of the drum, and so on, that
effect and cause are non-different. The fulfilment of the promise is,
then, finally indicated by the text declaring that that great Being
rises, in the form of the individual soul, from out of these elements;
thus the teacher Â*s*marathya thinks. For if the soul and the highest
Self are non-different, the promise that through the knowledge of one
everything becomes known is capable of fulfilment.--'Because the soul
when it will depart is such; thus Au*d*ulomi thinks.' The statement as
to the non-difference of the soul and the Self (implied in the
declaration that the great Being rises, &c.) is possible, because the
soul when--after having purified itself by knowledge, and so on--it will
depart from the body, is capable of becoming one with the highest Self.
This is Au*d*ulomi's opinion.--'Because it exists in the condition of
the soul; thus Kâ*s*ak*ri*tsna opines.' Because the highest Self itself
is that which appears as the individual soul, the statement as to the
non-difference of the two is well-founded. This is the view of the
teacher Kâ*s*ak*ri*tsna.

But, an objection may be raised, the passage, 'Rising from out of these
elements he vanishes again after them. When he has departed there is no
more knowledge,' intimates the final destruction of the soul, not its
identity with the highest Self!--By no means, we reply. The passage
means to say

<span id="page_281">p. 281</span>

only that on the soul departing from the body all specific cognition
vanishes, not that the Self is destroyed. For an objection being
raised--in the passage, 'Here thou hast bewildered me, Sir, when thou
sayest that having departed there is no more knowledge'. Scripture
itself explains that what is meant is not the annihilation of the Self,
'I say nothing that is bewildering. Verily, beloved, that Self is
imperishable, and of an indestructible nature. But there takes place
non-connexion with the mâtrâs.' That means: The eternally unchanging
Self, which is one mass of knowledge, cannot possibly perish; but by
means of true knowledge there is effected its dissociation from the
mâtrâs, i.e. the elements and the sense organs, which are the product of
Nescience. When the connexion has been solved, specific cognition, which
depended on it, no longer takes place, and thus it can be said, that
'When he has departed there is no more knowledge.'

The third argument also of the pûrvapakshin, viz. that the word
'knower'--which occurs in the concluding passage, 'How should he know
the knower?'--denotes an agent, and therefore refers to the individual
soul as the object of sight, is to be refuted according to the view of
Kâ*s*ak*ri*tsna.--Moreover, the text after having enumerated--in the
passage, 'For where there is duality as it were, there one sees the
other,' &c.--all the kinds of specific cognition which belong to the
sphere of Nescience declares--in the subsequent passage, 'But when the
Self only is all this, how should he see another?'--that in the sphere
of true knowledge all specific cognition such as seeing, and so on, is
absent. And, again, in order to obviate the doubt whether in the absence
of objects the knower might not know himself, Yâ*gñ*avalkya goes on,
'How, O beloved, should he know himself, the knower?' As thus the latter
passage evidently aims at proving the absence of specific cognition, we
have to conclude that the word 'knower' is here used to denote that
being which is knowledge, i.e. the Self.--That the view of
Kâ*s*ak*ri*tsna is scriptural, we have already shown above. And as it is
so, all the adherents of the Vedânta must admit that the difference of
the soul and the highest Self is not

<span id="page_282">p. 282</span>

real, but due to the limiting adjuncts, viz. the body, and so on, which
are the product of name and form as presented by Nescience. That view
receives ample confirmation from Scripture; compare, for instance,
'Being only, my dear, this was in the beginning, one, without a second'
(*Kh*. Up. VI, 2, 1); 'The Self is all this' (*Kh*. Up. VII, 25, 2);
'Brahman alone is all this' (Mu. Up. II, 2, 11); 'This everything is
that Self (B*ri*. Up. II, 4, 6); 'There is no other seer but he' (B*ri*.
Up. III, 7, 23); 'There is nothing that sees but it' (B*ri*. Up. III, 8,
11).--It is likewise confirmed by Sm*ri*ti; compare, for instance,
'Vâsudeva is all this' (Bha. Gî. VII, 19); 'Know me, O Bhârata, to be
the soul in all bodies' (Bha. Gî. XIII, 2); 'He who sees the highest
Lord abiding alike within all creatures' (Bha. Gî. XIII, 27).--The same
conclusion is supported by those passages which deny all difference;
compare, for instance, 'If he thinks, that is one and I another; he does
not know' (B*ri*. Up. I, 4, 10); 'From death to death he goes who sees
here any diversity' (B*ri*. Up. IV, 4, 19). And, again, by those
passages which negative all change on the part of the Self; compare, for
instance, 'This great unborn Self, undecaying, undying, immortal,
fearless is indeed Brahman' (B*ri*. Up. IV, 24).--Moreover, if the
doctrine of general identity were not true, those who are desirous of
release could not be in the possession of irrefutable knowledge, and
there would be no possibility of any matter being well settled; while
yet the knowledge of which the Self is the object is declared to be
irrefutable and to satisfy all desire, and Scripture speaks of those,
'Who have well ascertained the object of the knowledge of the Vedânta'
(Mu. Up. III, 2, 6). Compare also the passage, 'What trouble, what
sorrow can there be to him who has once beheld that unity?' (I*s*. Up.
7.)--And Sm*ri*ti also represents the mind of him who contemplates the
Self as steady (Bha. Gî. II, 54).

As therefore the individual soul and the highest Self differ in name
only, it being a settled matter that perfect knowledge has for its
object the absolute oneness of the two; it is senseless to insist (as
some do) on a plurality of Selfs, and to maintain that the individual
soul is different from the

<span id="page_283">p. 283</span>

highest Self, and the highest Self from the individual soul. For the
Self is indeed called by many different names, but it is one only. Nor
does the passage, 'He who knows Brahman which is real, knowledge,
infinite, as hidden in the cave' (Taitt. Up. II, 1), refer to some one
cave (different from the abode of the individual soul) <span
id="fr_253"></span>[1](#fn_253). And that nobody else but Brahman is
hidden in the cave we know from a subsequent passage, viz. 'Having sent
forth he entered into it' (Taitt. Up. II, 6), according to which the
creator only entered into the created beings.--Those who insist on the
distinction of the individual and the highest Self oppose themselves to
the true sense of the Vedânta-texts, stand thereby in the way of perfect
knowledge, which is the door to perfect beatitude, and groundlessly
assume release to be something effected, and therefore non-eternal <span
id="fr_254"></span>[2](#fn_254). (And if they attempt to show that
moksha, although effected, is eternal) they involve themselves in a
conflict with sound logic.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_249"></span>[278:2](sbe34133.htm#fr_249) Compare the note
to the same mantra as quoted above under I, 1, 11.

<span id="fn_250"></span>[279:1](sbe34133.htm#fr_250) And not the
relation of absolute identity.

<span id="fn_251"></span>[279:2](sbe34133.htm#fr_251) I.e. upon the
state of emancipation and its absence.

<span id="fn_252"></span>[280:1](sbe34133.htm#fr_252) Upapâdita*m*
*k*eti, sarvasyâtmamâtratvam iti *s*esha*h*. Upapâdanaprakâra*m*
sû*k*ayati eketi. Sa yathârdrendhanâgner ityâdinaikaprasavatvam, yathâ
sarvâsâm apâm ityâdinâ *k*aikapralayatva*m* sarvasyoktam. Ân. Gi.

<span id="fn_253"></span>[283:1](sbe34133.htm#fr_253) So according to
Go. Ân. and Ân. Gi., although their interpretations seem not to account
sufficiently for the ekâm of the text.--Kâ*mk*id evaikâm iti
*g*îvasthânâd anyâm ity artha*h*. Go. Ân.--*G*îvabhâvena
pratibimbâdhârâtiriktâm ity artha*h*. Ân. Gi.

<span id="fn_254"></span>[283:2](sbe34133.htm#fr_254) While release, as
often remarked, is eternal, it being in fact not different from the
eternally unchanging Brahman.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I, 4, 23](sbe34134)
