[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe34048)  [Next](sbe34050.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930306/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras, commentary by Sankaracharya (SBE34)*, tr. by George
Thibaut \[1890\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

12\. And on account of the distinctive qualities (mentioned).

Moreover, the distinctive qualities mentioned in the text agree only
with the individual Self and the highest Self. For in a subsequent
passage (I, 3, 3), 'Know the Self to be the charioteer, the body to be
the chariot,' which contains the simile of the chariot, the individual
soul is represented as a charioteer driving on through transmigratory
existence and final release, while the passage (9), 'He reaches the end
of his journey, and that is the highest place of Vish*n*u,' represents
the highest Self as the goal of the driver's course. And in a preceding
passage also, (I, 2, 12, 'The wise, who by means of meditation on his
Self, recognises the Ancient who is difficult to be seen, who has
entered into the dark, who is hidden in the cave, who dwells in the
abyss, as God, he indeed leaves joy and sorrow far behind,') the same
two beings are distinguished as thinker and as object of thought. The
highest Self is, moreover, the general topic. And further, the clause,
'Those who know Brahman call them,' &c., which brings forward a special
class of speakers, is in its place only if the highest Self is accepted
(as one of the two beings spoken of). It is therefore evident that the
passage under discussion refers to the individual soul and the highest
Self.

The same reasoning applies to the passage (Mu. Up. III, 1, 1), 'Two
birds, inseparable friends,' &c. There also the Self is the general
topic, and hence no two ordinary birds can be meant; we therefore
conclude from the characteristic mark of eating, mentioned in the
passage, 'One of them eats the sweet fruit,' that the individual soul is
meant, and from

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

the characteristic marks of abstinence from eating and of intelligence,
implied in the words, 'The other looks on without eating,' that the
highest Self is meant. In a subsequent mantra again the two are
distinguished as the seer and the object of sight. 'Merged into the same
tree (as it were into water) man grieves at his own impotence (anî*s*â),
bewildered; but when he sees the other Lord (î*s*a) contented and knows
his glory, then his grief passes away.'

Another (commentator) gives a different interpretation of the mantra,
'Two birds inseparable,' &c. To that mantra, he says, the final decision
of the present head of discussion does not apply, because it is
differently interpreted in the Pai<u>n</u>gi-rahasya Brâhma*n*a.
According to the latter the being which eats the sweet fruit is the
sattva; the other being which looks on without eating, the individual
soul (*gñ*a); so that the two are the sattva and the individual soul
(kshetra*gñ*a). The objection that the word sattva might denote the
individual soul, and the word kshetra*gñ*a, the highest Self, is to be
met by the remark that, in the first place, the words sattva and
kshetra*gñ*a have the settled meaning of internal organ and individual
soul, and are in the second place, expressly so interpreted there, (viz.
in the Pai<u>n</u>gi-rahasya,) 'The sattva is that by means of which man
sees dreams; the embodied one, the seer, is the kshetra*gñ*a; the two
are therefore the internal organ and the individual soul.' Nor does the
mantra under discussion fall under the pûrvapaksha propounded above. For
it does not aim at setting forth the embodied individual soul, in so far
as it is characterised by the attributes connected with the
transmigratory state, such as acting and enjoying; but in so far rather
as it transcends all attributes connected with the sa*m*sâra and is of
the nature of Brahman, i.e. is pure intelligence; as is evident from the
clause, 'The other looks on without eating.' That agrees, moreover, with
*s*ruti and sm*ri*ti passages, such as, 'That art thou,' and 'Know me
also to be the individual soul' (Bha. Gîtâ XIII, 2). Only on such an
explanation of the passage as the preceding one there is room for the
declaration made in the concluding passage of the section, 'These two
are the sattva and the kshetra*gñ*a; to him indeed

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

who knows this no impurity attaches <span
id="fr_146"></span>[1](#fn_146.md).--But how can, on the above
interpretation, the non-intelligent sattva (i.e. the internal organ) be
spoken of as an enjoyer, as is actually done in the clause, 'One of them
eats the sweet fruit?'--The whole passage, we reply, does not aim at
setting forth the fact that the sattva is an enjoyer, but rather the
fact that the intelligent individual soul is not an enjoyer, but is of
the nature of Brahman. To that end <span id="fr_147"></span>[2](#fn_147.md)
the passage under discussion metaphorically ascribes the attribute of
being an enjoyer to the internal organ, in so far as it is modified by
pleasure, pain, and the like. For all acting and enjoying is at the
bottom based on the non-discrimination (by the soul) of the respective
nature of internal organ and soul; while in reality neither the internal
organ nor the soul either act or enjoy; not the former, because it is
non-intelligent; not the latter, because it is not capable of any
modification. And the internal organ can be considered as acting and
enjoying, all the less as it is a mere presentment of Nescience. In
agreement with what we have here maintained, Scripture ('For where there
is as it were duality there one sees the other,' &c.; B*ri*. Up. IV, 5,
15) declares that the practical assumption of agents, and so
on--comparable to the assumption of the existence of elephants, and the
like, seen in a dream--holds good in the sphere of Nescience only; while
the passage, 'But when the Self only is all this, how should he see
another?' declares that all that practically postulated existence
vanishes for him who has arrived at discriminative knowledge.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_146"></span>[123:1](sbe34049.htm#fr_146.md) Freedom from
impurity can result only from the knowledge that the individual soul is
in reality Brahman. The commentators explain ra*g*as by avidyâ.

<span id="fn_147"></span>[123:2](sbe34049.htm#fr_147.md) Tadartham iti,
*g*îvasya brahmasiddhyartham iti yâvat, *k*aitanya*kh*âyâpannâ dhî*h*
sukhâdinâ pari*n*amata iti, tatra purusho\#pi bhakt*ri*tvam ivânubhavati
na tattvata iti vaktum adhyâropayati. Ânanda Giri.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I, 2, 13](sbe34050.md)
