[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe34209)  [Next](sbe34211.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930306/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras, commentary by Sankaracharya (SBE34)*, tr. by George
Thibaut \[1890\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

34\. And likewise (there results from the *G*aina, doctrine)
non-universality of the Self.

We have hitherto urged against the *G*aina doctrine an objection
resulting from the syâdvâda, viz. that one thing cannot have
contradictory attributes. We now turn to the objection that from their
doctrine it would follow that the individual Self is not universal, i.e.
not omnipresent.--The *G*ainas are of opinion that the soul has the same
size as the body. From this it would follow that the soul is not of
infinite extension, but limited, and hence non-eternal like jars and
similar things. Further, as the bodies of different classes of creatures
are of different size, it might happen that the soul of a man--which is
of the size of the human body--when entering, in consequence of its
former deeds, on a new state of existence in the body of an elephant
would not be able to fill the whole of it; or else that a human soul
being relegated to the body of an ant would not be able to find
sufficient room in it. The same difficulty would, moreover, arise with
regard to the successive stages of one state of existence, infancy,
youth, and old age.--But why, the *G*aina may ask, should we not look
upon the soul as consisting of an infinite number of parts capable of
undergoing compression in a small body and dilatation in a big one?--Do
you, we ask in return, admit or not admit that those countless particles
of the soul may occupy the same place or not?--If you do not admit it,
it follows that the infinite number of particles cannot be contained in
a body of limited dimensions.--If you do admit it, it follows that, as
then the space occupied by all the particles may be the space of one
particle only, the extension of all the particles together will remain
inconsiderable, and hence the soul be of minute size (not of the size of
the body). You have, moreover, no right to assume that a body

<span id="page_432">p. 432</span>

of limited size contains an infinite number of soul particles.

Well the, the *G*aina may reply, let us assume that by turns whenever
the soul enters a big body some particles accede to it while some
withdraw from it whenever it enters a small body.--To this hypothesis
the next Sûtra furnishes a reply.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II, 2, 35](sbe34211.md)
