[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe34205)  [Next](sbe34207) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930306/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras, commentary by Sankaracharya (SBE34)*, tr. by George
Thibaut \[1890\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

30\. The existence (of mental impressions) is not possible (on the
Bauddha view, on account of the absence of perception (of external
things).

We now proceed to that theory of yours, according to which the variety
of ideas can be explained from the

<span id="page_426">p. 426</span>

variety of mental impressions, without any reference to external things,
and remark that on your doctrine the existence of mental impressions is
impossible, as you do not admit the perception of external things. For
the variety of mental impressions is caused altogether by the variety of
the things perceived. How, indeed, could various impressions originate
if no external things were perceived? The hypothesis of a beginningless
series of mental impressions would lead only to a baseless regressus ad
infinitum, sublative of the entire phenomenal world, and would in no way
establish your position.--The same argument, i.e. the one founded on the
impossibility of mental impressions which are not caused by external
things, refutes also the positive and negative judgments, on the ground
of which the denier of an external world above attempted to show that
ideas are caused by mental impressions, not by external things. We
rather have on our side a positive and a negative judgment whereby to
establish our doctrine of the existence of external things, viz. 'the
perception of external things is admitted to take place also without
mental impressions,' and 'mental impressions are not admitted to
originate independently of the perception of external
things.'--Moreover, an impression is a kind of modification, and
modifications cannot, as experience teaches, take place unless there is
some substratum which is modified. But, according to your doctrine, such
a substratum of impressions does not exist, since you say that it cannot
be cognised through any means of knowledge.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II, 2, 31](sbe34207)
