[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe34012)  [Next](sbe34014.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930306/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras, commentary by Sankaracharya (SBE34)*, tr. by George
Thibaut \[1890\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

7\. (The pradhâna cannot be designated by the term 'Self') because
release is taught of him who takes his stand on that (the Sat).

The non-intelligent pradhâna cannot be the object of the term 'Self'
because in the passage *Kh*. Up. VI, 2 ff., where the subtle Sat which
is under discussion is at first referred to in the sentence, 'That is
the Self,' and where the subsequent clause, 'That art thou, O
*S*vetaketu,' declares the intelligent *S*vetaketu to have his abode in
the Self, a passage subsequent to the two quoted (viz. 'a man who has a
teacher obtains true knowledge; for him there is only delay as long as
he is not delivered, then he will be perfect') declares final release.
For if the non-intelligent pradhâna were denoted by the term 'Sat' and
did comprehend--by means of the phrase 'That art thou'--persons desirous
of final release who as such are intelligent, the meaning could only be
'Thou art non-intelligent;' so that Scripture would virtually make
contradictory statements to the disadvantage of man, and would thus
cease to be a means of right knowledge. But to assume that the faultless
*s*âstra is not a means of right knowledge, would be contrary to reason.
And if the *s*âstra, considered as a means of right knowledge, should
point out to a man desirous of release, but ignorant of the way to it, a
non-intelligent Self as the real Self, he would--comparable to the blind
man who had caught hold of the ox's tail <span
id="fr_100"></span>[1](#fn_100.md)--cling to the view of that being the
Self,

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

and thus never be able to reach the real Self different from the false
Self pointed out to him; hence he would be debarred from what
constitutes man's good, and would incur evil. We must therefore conclude
that, just as the *s*âstra teaches the agnihotra and similar
performances in their true nature as means for those who are desirous of
the heavenly world, so the passage 'that is the Self, that art thou, O
*S*vetaketu,' teaches the Self in its true nature also. Only on that
condition release for him whose thoughts are true can be taught by means
of the simile in which the person to be released is compared to the man
grasping the heated axe (*Kh*. Up. VI, 16). For in the other case, if
the doctrine of the Sat constituting the Self had a secondary meaning
only, the cognition founded on the passage 'that art thou' would be of
the nature of a fanciful combination only <span
id="fr_101"></span>[1](#fn_101.md), like the knowledge derived from the
passage, 'I am the hymn' (Ait. Âr. II, 1, 2, 6), and would lead to a
mere transitory reward; so that the simile quoted could not convey the
doctrine of release. Therefore the word 'Self is applied to the subtle
Sat not in a merely figurative sense. In the case of the faithful
servant, on the other hand, the word 'Self' can--in such phrases as
'Bhadrasena is my Self'--be taken in a figurative sense, because the
difference between master and servant is well established by perception.
Moreover, to assume that, because words are sometimes seen to be used in
figurative senses, a figurative sense may be resorted to in the case of
those things also for which words (i.e. Vedic words) are the only means
of knowledge, is altogether indefensible; for an assumption of that
nature would lead to a general want of confidence. The assertion that
the word 'Self' may (primarily) signify what is non-intelligent as well
as what is intelligent, just as the word '*g*yotis' signifies a certain
sacrifice as well as light, is inadmissible, because we have no right to
attribute to words a plurality of meanings. Hence (we rather assume
that) the word 'Self' in its primary meaning refers to what is
intelligent only and is then, by a figurative

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

attribution of intelligence, applied to the elements and the like also;
whence such phrases as 'the Self of the elements,' 'the Self of the
senses.' And even if we assume that the word 'Self' primarily signifies
both classes of beings, we are unable to settle in any special case
which of the two meanings the word has, unless we are aided either by
the general heading under which it stands, or some determinative
attributive word. But in the passage under discussion there is nothing
to determine that the word refers to something non-intelligent, while,
on the other hand, the Sat distinguished by thought forms the general
heading, and *S*vetaketu, i.e. a being endowed with intelligence, is
mentioned in close proximity. That a non-intelligent Self does not agree
with *S*vetaketu, who possesses intelligence, we have already shown. All
these circumstances determine the object of the word 'Self' here to be
something intelligent. The word '*g*yotis' does moreover not furnish an
appropriate example; for according to common use it has the settled
meaning of 'light' only, and is used in the sense of sacrifice only on
account of the arthavâda assuming a similarity (of the sacrifice) to
light.

A different explanation of the Sûtra is also possible. The preceding
Sûtra may be taken completely to refute all doubts as to the word 'Self'
having a figurative or double sense, and then the present Sûtra is to be
explained as containing an independent reason, proving that the doctrine
of the pradhâna being the general cause is untenable.

Hence the non-intelligent pradhâna is not denoted by the word 'Self.'
This the teacher now proceeds to prove by an additional reason.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_100"></span>[55:1](sbe34013.htm#fr_100.md) A wicked man meets
in a forest a blind person who has lost his way, and implores him to
lead him to his village; instead of doing so the wicked man persuades
the blind one to catch hold of the tail of an ox, which he promises
would lead him to his place. The consequence is that the blind man is,
owing to his trustfulness, led even farther astray, and injured by the
bushes, &c., through which the ox drags him.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[56:1](sbe34013.htm#fr_101.md) Cp. above, [p.
30](sbe34010.htm#page_30.md).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I, 1, 8](sbe34014.md)
