[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe34030)  [Next](sbe34032) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930306/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras, commentary by Sankaracharya (SBE34)*, tr. by George
Thibaut \[1890\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

25\. If it be objected that(Brahman is) not (denoted) on account of the
metre being denoted; (we reply) not so, because thus (i.e. by means of
the metre) the direction of the mind (on Brahman) is declared; for thus
it is seen (in other passages also).

We now address ourselves to the refutation of the assertion (made in the
pûrvapaksha of the preceding Sûtra) that in the previous passage also
Brahman is not referred to, because in the sentence, 'Gâyatrî is
everything whatsoever here exists,' the metre called Gâyatrî is spoken
of.--How (we ask the pûrvapakshin) can it be maintained that, on account
of the metre being spoken of, Brahman is not denoted, while yet the
mantra 'such is the greatness of it,' &c., clearly sets forth Brahman
with its four quarters?--You are mistaken (the pûrvapakshin replies).
The sentence, 'Gâyatrî is everything,' starts the discussion of Gâyatrî.
The same Gâyatrî is thereupon described under the various forms of all
beings, earth, body, heart, speech, breath; to which there refers also
the verse, 'that Gâyatrî

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

has four feet and is sixfold.' After that we meet with the mantra, 'Such
is the greatness of it.' &c. How then, we ask, should this mantra, which
evidently is quoted with reference to the Gâyatrî (metre) as described
in the preceding clauses, all at once denote Brahman with its four
quarters? Since therefore the metre Gâyatrî is the subject-matter of the
entire chapter, the term 'Brahman' which occurs in a subsequent passage
('the Brahman which has thus been described') must also denote the
metre. This is analogous to a previous passage (*Kh*, Up. III, 11, 3,
'He who thus knows this Brahma-upanishad'), where the word
Brahma-upanishad is explained to mean Veda-upanishad. As therefore the
preceding passage refers (not to Brahman, but) to the Gâyatrî metre,
Brahman does not constitute the topic of the entire section.

This argumentation, we reply, proves nothing against our position.
'Because thus direction of the mind is declared,' i. e. because the
Brahma*n*a passage, 'Gâyatrî indeed is all this,' intimates that by
means of the metre Gâyatrî the mind is to be directed on Brahman which
is connected with that metre. Of the metre Gâyatrî, which is nothing but
a certain special combination of syllables, it could not possibly be
said that it is the Self of everything. We therefore have to understand
the passage as declaring that Brahman, which, as the cause of the world,
is connected with that product also whose name is Gâyatrî, is 'all
this;' in accordance with that other passage which directly says, 'All
this indeed is Brahman' (Kh. Up. III, 14, 1). That the effect is in
reality not different from the cause, we shall prove later on, under
Sûtra II, 1, 14. Devout meditation on Brahman under the form of certain
effects (of Brahman) is seen to be mentioned in other passages also, so,
for instance, Ait. Âr. III, 2, 3, 12, 'For the Bahv*rik*as consider him
in the great hymn, the Adhvaryus in the sacrificial fire, the
*Kh*andogas in the Mahâvrata ceremony.' Although, therefore, the
previous passage speaks of the metre, Brahman is what is meant, and the
same Brahman is again referred to in the passage about the light, whose
purport it is to enjoin another form of devout meditation.

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

Another commentator <span id="fr_131"></span>[1](#fn_131) is of opinion
that the term Gâyatrî (does not denote Brahman in so far as viewed under
the form of Gâyatrî, but) directly denotes Brahman, on account of the
equality of number; for just as the Gâyatrî metre has four feet
consisting of six syllables each, so Brahman also has four feet, (i. e.
quarters.) Similarly we see that in other passages also the names of
metres are used to denote other things which resemble those metres in
certain numerical relations; cp. for instance, *Kh*. Up. IV, 3, 8, where
it is said at first, 'Now these five and the other five make ten and
that is the K*ri*ta,' and after that 'these are again the Virâ*g* which
eats the food.' If we adopt this interpretation, Brahman only is spoken
of, and the metre is not referred to at all. In any case Brahman is the
subject with which the previous passage is concerned.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_131"></span>[95:1](sbe34031.htm#fr_131) The v*ri*ttikâra
according to Go. Ân. in his *t*îkâ on the bhâshya to the next Sûtra.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I, 1, 26](sbe34032)
