[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe34121)  [Next](sbe34123) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930306/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras, commentary by Sankaracharya (SBE34)*, tr. by George
Thibaut \[1890\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

11\. (The assertion that there is scriptural authority for the pradhâna,
&c. can) also not (be based) on the mention of the number (of the
Sâ<u>n</u>khya categories), on account of the diversity (of the
categories) and on account of the excess (over the number of those
categories).

The attempt to base the Sâ<u>n</u>khya doctrine on the mantra speaking
of the a*g*â having failed, the Sâ<u>n</u>khya again comes forward and
points to another mantra: 'He in whom the five "five-people" and the
ether rest, him alone I believe to be the Self; I who know believe him
to be Brahman' (B*ri*. Up. IV, 4, 17). In this mantra we have one word
which expresses the number five, viz. the five-people, and then another
word, viz. five, which qualifies the former; these two words together
therefore convey the idea of five pentads, i.e. twenty-five. Now as many
beings as the number twenty-five presupposes, just so many categories
the Sânkhya system counts. Cp. Sâ<u>n</u>khya Kârikâ, 3: 'The
fundamental causal substance (i.e. the pradhâna) is not an effect. Seven
(substances), viz. the Great one (Intellect), and so on, are causal
substances as well as effects. Sixteen are effects. The soul is neither
a causal substance nor an effect.'

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> As therefore the
number twenty-five, which occurs in the scriptural passage quoted,
clearly refers to the twenty-five categories taught in the
Sâ<u>n</u>khya-sm*ri*ti, it follows that the doctrine of the pradhâna,
&c. rests on a scriptural basis.

To this reasoning we make the following reply.--It is impossible to base
the assertion that the pradhâna, &c. have Scripture in their favour on
the reference to their number which you pretend to find in the text, 'on
account of the diversity of the Sâ<u>n</u>khya categories.' The
Sâ<u>n</u>khya categories, have each their individual difference, and
there are no attributes belonging in common to each pentad on account of
which the number twenty-five could be divided into five times five. For
a number of individually separate things can, in general, not be
combined into smaller groups of two or three, &c. unless there be a
special reason for such combination.--Here the Sâ<u>n</u>khya will
perhaps rejoin that the expression five (times) five is used only to
denote the number twenty-five which has five pentads for its constituent
parts; just as the poem says, 'five years and seven Indra did not rain,'
meaning only that there was no rain for twelve years.--But this
explanation also is not tenable. In the first place, it is liable to the
objection that it has recourse to indirect indication.  <span
id="fr_239"></span>[1](#fn_239) In the second place, the second 'five'
constitutes a compound with the word 'people,' the Brâhma*n*a-accent
showing that the two form one word only.  <span
id="fr_240"></span>[2](#fn_240) To the same conclusion we are led by
another passage also (Taitt. Sam*h*. I, 6, 2, 2, pa*ñk*ânâ*m* tvâ
pa*ñk*a*g*anânâm, &c.) where the two terms constitute one word, have one
accent and one case-termination.

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The word thus
being a compound there is neither a repetition of the word 'five,'
involving two pentads, nor does the one five qualify the other, as the
mere secondary member of a compound cannot be qualified by another
word.--But as the people are already denoted to be five by the compound
'five-people,' the effect of the other 'five' qualifying the compound
will be that we understand twenty-five people to be meant; just as the
expression 'five five-bundles' (pa*ñk*a pa*ñk*apûlya*h*) conveys the
idea of twenty-five bundles.--The instance is not an analogous one, we
reply. The word 'pa*ñk*apûli' denotes a unity (i.e. one bundle made up
of five bundles) and hence when the question arises, 'How many such
bundles are there?' it can be qualified by the word 'five,' indicating
that there are five such bundles. The word pa*ñk*a*g*anâ*h*, on the
other hand, conveys at once the idea of distinction (i.e. of five
distinct things), so that there is no room at all for a further desire
to know how many people there are, and hence no room for a further
qualification. And if the word 'five' be taken as a qualifying word it
can only qualify the numeral five (in five-people); the objection
against which assumption has already been stated.--For all these reasons
the expression the five five-people cannot denote the twenty-five
categories of the Sâ<u>n</u>khyas.--This is further not possible 'on
account of the excess.' For on the Sâ<u>n</u>khya interpretation there
would be an excess over the number twenty-five, owing to the
circumstance of the ether and the Self being mentioned separately. The
Self is spoken of as the abode in which the five five-people rest, the
clause 'Him I believe to be the Self' being connected with the 'in whom'
of the antecedent clause. Now the Self is the intelligent soul of the
Sâ<u>n</u>khyas which is already included in the twenty-five categories,
and which therefore, on their interpretation of the passage, would here
be mentioned once as constituting the abode and once as what rests in
the abode! If, on the other hand, the soul were supposed not to be
compiled in the twenty-five categories, the Sâ<u>n</u>khya would thereby
abandon his own doctrine of the categories being twenty-five. The same

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

remarks apply to the separate mention made of the ether.--How, finally,
can the mere circumstance of a certain number being referred to in the
sacred text justify the assumption that what is meant are the
twenty-five Sâ<u>n</u>khya categories of which Scripture speaks in no
other place? especially if we consider that the word *g*ana has not the
settled meaning of category, and that the number may be satisfactorily
accounted for on another interpretation of the passage.

How, then, the Sâ<u>n</u>khya will ask, do you interpret the phrase 'the
five five-people?'--On the ground, we reply, of the rule Pâ*n*ini II, 1,
50, according to which certain compounds formed with numerals are mere
names. The word pa*ñk*a*g*anâ*h* thus is not meant to convey the idea of
the number five, but merely to denote certain classes of beings. Hence
the question may present itself, How many such classes are there? and to
this question an answer is given by the added numeral 'five.' There are
certain classes of beings called five-people, and these classes are
five. Analogously we may speak of the seven seven-*ri*shis, where again
the compound denotes a class of beings merely, not their number.--Who
then are those five-people?--To this question the next Sûtra replies.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_239"></span>[258:1](sbe34122.htm#fr_239) Indication
(laksha*n*â, which consists in this case in five times five being used
instead of twenty-five) is considered as an objectionable mode of
expression, and therefore to be assumed in interpretation only where a
term can in no way be shown to have a direct meaning.

<span id="fn_240"></span>[258:2](sbe34122.htm#fr_240) That
pa*ñk*a*g*anâ*h* is only one word appears from its having only one
accent, viz. the udâtta on the last syllable, which udâtta becomes
anudâtta according to the rules laid down in the Bhâshika Sûtra for the
accentuation of the *S*atapatha-brâhma*n*a.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I, 4, 12](sbe34123)
