[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe34016)  [Next](sbe34018) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930306/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras, commentary by Sankaracharya (SBE34)*, tr. by George
Thibaut \[1890\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

11\. And because it is directly stated in Scripture (therefore the
all-knowing Brahman is the cause of the world).

That the all-knowing Lord is the cause of the world, is also declared in
a text directly referring to him (viz. the all-knowing one), viz. in the
following passage of the mantropanishad of the *S*vetâ*s*vataras (VI, 9)
where the word 'he' refers to the previously mentioned all-knowing Lord,
'He is the cause, the lord of the lords of the organs, and there is of
him neither parent nor lord.' It is therefore finally settled that the
all-knowing Brahman is the general cause, not the non-intelligent
pradhâna or anything else.

In what precedes we have shown, availing ourselves of appropriate
arguments, that the Vedânta-texts exhibited under Sûtras I, I-II, are
capable of proving that the all-knowing, all-powerful Lord is the cause
of the origin, subsistence, and dissolution of the world. And we have
explained, by pointing to the prevailing uniformity of view (I, 10),
that all Vedânta-texts whatever maintain an intelligent cause. The
question might therefore be asked, 'What reason is there for the
subsequent part of the Vedânta-sûtras?' (as the chief point is settled
already.)

To this question we reply as follows: Brahman is apprehended under two
forms; in the first place as qualified by limiting conditions owing to
the multiformity of the evolutions of name and form (i.e. the
multiformity of the created world; in the second place as being the
opposite of this, i.e. free from all limiting conditions whatever.
Compare

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

the following passages: B*ri*. Up. IV, 5, 15, 'For where there is
duality as it were, then one sees the other; but when the Self only is
all this, how should he see another?' *Kh*. Up. VII, 24, 1, 'Where one
sees nothing else, hears nothing else, understands nothing else, that is
the greatest. Where one sees something else, hears something else,
understands something else, that is the little. The greatest is
immortal; the little is mortal;' Taitt. Âr. III, 12, 7, 'The wise one,
who having produced all forms and made all names, sits calling (the
things by their names <span id="fr_104"></span>[1](#fn_104));' *S*v. Up.
VI, 19, 'Who is without parts, without actions, tranquil, without
faults, without taint, the highest bridge of immortality, like a fire
that has consumed its fuel;' B*ri*. Up. II, 3, 6, 'Not so, not so;'
B*ri*. Up. III, 8, 8, 'It is neither coarse nor fine, neither short nor
long;' and 'defective is one place, perfect the other.' All these
passages, with many others, declare Brahman to possess a double nature,
according as it is the object either of Knowledge or of Nescience. As
long as it is the object of Nescience, there are applied to it the
categories of devotee, object of devotion, and the like <span
id="fr_105"></span>[2](#fn_105). The different modes of devotion lead to
different results, some to exaltation, some to gradual emancipation,
some to success in works; those modes are distinct on account of the
distinction of the different qualities and limiting conditions <span
id="fr_106"></span>[3](#fn_106). And although the one highest Self only,
i.e. the Lord distinguished by those different qualities constitutes the
object of devotion, still the fruits (of devotion) are distinct,
according as the devotion refers to different qualities. Thus Scripture
says, 'According as man worships him, that he becomes;' and, 'According
to what his thought is in this world, so will he be when he has departed

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

this life' (*Kh*. Up. III, 14, 1). Sm*ri*ti also makes an analogous
statement, 'Remembering whatever form of being he leaves this body in
the end, into that form he enters, being impressed with it through his
constant meditation' (Bha. Gîtâ VIII, 6).

Although one and the same Self is hidden in all beings movable as well
as immovable, yet owing to the gradual rise of excellence of the minds
which form the limiting conditions (of the Self), Scripture declares
that the Self, although eternally unchanging and uniform, reveals
itself <span id="fr_107"></span>[1](#fn_107) in a graduated series of
beings, and so appears in forms of various dignity and power; compare,
for instance (Ait. Âr. II, 3, 2, 1), 'He who knows the higher
manifestation of the Self in him <span id="fr_108"></span>[2](#fn_108),'
&c. Similarly Sm*ri*ti remarks, 'Whatever being there is of power,
splendour or might, know it to have sprung from portions of my glory'
(Bha. Gîtâ, X, 41); a passage declaring that wherever there is an excess
of power and so on, there the Lord is to be worshipped. Accordingly here
(i.e. in the Sûtras) also the teacher will show that the golden person
in the disc of the Sun is the highest Self, on account of an indicating
sign, viz. the circumstance of his being unconnected with any evil (Ved.
Sû. I, 1, 20); the same is to be observed with regard to I, 1, 22 and
other Sûtras. And, again, an enquiry will have to be undertaken into the
meaning of the texts, in order that a settled conclusion may be reached
concerning that knowledge of the Self which leads to instantaneous
release; for although that knowledge is conveyed by means of various
limiting conditions, yet no special connexion with limiting conditions
is intended to be intimated, in consequence of which there arises a
doubt whether it (the

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

knowledge) has the higher or the lower Brahman for its object; so, for
instance, in the case of Sûtra I, 1, 12 <span
id="fr_109"></span>[1](#fn_109). From all this it appears that the
following part of the *S*âstra has a special object of its own, viz. to
show that the Vedânta-texts teach, on the one hand, Brahman as connected
with limiting conditions and forming an object of devotion, and on the
other hand, as being free from the connexion with such conditions and
constituting an object of knowledge. The refutation, moreover, of
non-intelligent causes different from Brahman, which in I, 1, 10 was
based on the uniformity of the meaning of the Vedânta-texts, will be
further detailed by the Sûtrakâra, who, while explaining additional
passages relating to Brahman, will preclude all causes of a nature
opposite to that of Brahman.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_104"></span>[62:1](sbe34017.htm#fr_104) The wise one, i.e.
the highest Self; which as *g*îvâtman is conversant with the names and
forms of individual things.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[62:2](sbe34017.htm#fr_105) I.e. it is looked
upon as the object of the devotion of the individual souls; while in
reality all those souls and Brahman are one.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[62:3](sbe34017.htm#fr_106) Qualities, i.e. the
attributes under which the Self is meditated on; limiting conditions,
i.e. the localities--such as the heart and the like--which in pious
meditation are ascribed to the Self.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[63:1](sbe34017.htm#fr_107) Ânanda Giri reads
âvish*t*asya for âvishk*ri*tasya.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[63:2](sbe34017.htm#fr_108) Cp. the entire
passage. All things are manifestations of the highest Self under certain
limiting conditions, but occupying different places in an ascending
scale. In unsentient things, stones, &c. only the sattâ, the quality of
being manifests itself; in plants, animals, and men the Self manifests
itself through the vital sap; in animals and men there is understanding;
higher thought in man alone.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[64:1](sbe34017.htm#fr_109) Ânanda Giri on the
preceding passage beginning from 'thus here also:' na kevala*m*
dvaividhyam brahma*n*a*h* *s*rutism*ri*tyor eva siddha*m* ki*m* tu
sûtrak*ri*to\#pi matam ity âha, evam iti, *s*rutism*ri*tyor iva
prak*ri*te\#pi *s*âstre dvairûpyam brahma*n*o bhavati; tatra
sopâdhikabrahmavishayam antastaddharmâdhikara*n*am udâharati âdityeti;
uktanyâya*m* tulyade*s*eshu prasârayati evam iti; sopâdhikopade*s*avan
nirupâdhikopade*s*a*m* dar*s*ayati evam ityâdinâ, âtma*gñ*âna*m*
nir*n*etavyam iti sambandha*h*; nir*n*ayaprasa<u>n</u>gam âha pareti;
annamayâdyupâdhidvâroktasya katham paravidyâvishayatva*m* tatrâha
upâdhîti; nir*n*ayakramam âha vâkyeti, uktârtham adhikara*n*a*m*
kvâstîty âsa<u>n</u>kyokta*m* yatheti.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I, 1, 12](sbe34018)
