[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe34007)  [Next](sbe34009.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930306/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras, commentary by Sankaracharya (SBE34)*, tr. by George
Thibaut \[1890\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2\. (Brahman is that) from which the origin, &c. (i.e. the origin,
subsistence, and dissolution) of this (world proceed).

The term, &c. implies subsistence and re-absorption. That the origin is
mentioned first (of the three) depends on the declaration of Scripture
as well as on the natural development of a substance. Scripture declares
the order

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

of succession of origin, subsistence, and dissolution in the passage,
Taitt. Up. III, I, 'From whence these beings are born,' &c. And with
regard to the second reason stated, it is known that a substrate of
qualities can subsist and be dissolved only after it has entered,
through origination, on the state of existence. The words 'of this'
denote that substrate of qualities which is presented to us by
perception and the other means of right knowledge; the genitive case
indicates it to be connected with origin, &c. The words 'from which'
denote the cause. The full sense of the Sûtra therefore is: That
omniscient omnipotent cause from which proceed the origin, subsistence,
and dissolution of this world--which world is differentiated by names
and forms, contains many agents and enjoyers, is the abode of the fruits
of actions, these fruits having their definite places, times, and
causes <span id="fr_65"></span>[1](#fn_65.md), and the nature of whose
arrangement cannot even be conceived by the mind,--that cause, we say,
is Brahman. Since the other forms of existence (such as increase,
decline, &c.) are included in origination, subsistence, and dissolution,
only the three latter are referred to in the Sûtra. As the six stages of
existence enumerated by Yâska <span id="fr_66"></span>[2](#fn_66.md) are
possible only during the period of the world's subsistence, it
might--were they referred to in the Sûtra--be suspected that what is
meant are not the origin, subsistence, and dissolution (of the world) as
dependent on the first cause. To preclude this suspicion the Sûtra is to
be taken as referring, in addition to the world's origination from
Brahman, only to its subsistence in Brahman, and final dissolution into
Brahman.

The origin, &c. of a world possessing the attributes stated above cannot
possibly proceed from anything else but a Lord possessing the stated
qualities; not either from a non-intelligent prâdhana <span
id="fr_67"></span>[3](#fn_67.md), or from atoms, or from non-being,

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

or from a being subject to transmigration <span
id="fr_68"></span>[1](#fn_68.md); nor, again, can it proceed from its own
nature (i.e. spontaneously, without a cause), since we observe that (for
the production of effects) special places, times, and causes have
invariably to be employed.

(Some of) those who maintain a Lord to be the cause of the world <span
id="fr_69"></span>[2](#fn_69.md), think that the existence of a Lord
different from mere transmigrating beings can be inferred by means of
the argument stated just now (without recourse being had to Scripture at
all).--But, it might be said, you yourself in the Sûtra under discussion
have merely brought forward the same argument!--By no means, we reply.
The Sûtras (i.e. literally 'the strings') have merely the purpose of
stringing together the flowers of the Vedânta-passages. In reality the
Vedânta-passages referred to by the Sûtras are discussed here. For the
comprehension of Brahman is effected by the ascertainment, consequent on
discussion, of the sense of the Vedânta-texts, not either by inference
or by the other means of right knowledge. While, however, the
Vedânta-passages primarily declare the cause of the origin, &c., of the
world, inference also, being an instrument of right knowledge in so far
as it does not contradict the Vedânta-texts, is not to be excluded as a
means of confirming the meaning ascertained. Scripture itself, moreover,
allows argumentation; for the passages, B*ri*. Up. II, 4, 5 ('the Self
is to be heard, to be considered'), and *Kh*. Up. VI, 14, 2 ('as the
man, &c., having been informed, and being able to judge for himself,
would arrive at Gandhâra, in the same way a man who meets with a teacher
obtains knowledge'), declare that human understanding assists
Scripture <span id="fr_70"></span>[3](#fn_70.md).

Scriptural text, &c. <span id="fr_71"></span>[4](#fn_71.md), are not, in
the enquiry into Brahman,

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

the only means of knowledge, as they are in the enquiry into active duty
(i.e. in the Pûrva Mimâ*m*sâ), but scriptural texts on the one hand, and
intuition <span id="fr_72"></span>[1](#fn_72.md), &c., on the other hand,
are to be had recourse to according to the occasion: firstly, because
intuition is the final result of the enquiry into Brahman; secondly,
because the object of the enquiry is an existing (accomplished)
substance. If the object of the knowledge of Brahman were something to
be accomplished, there would be no reference to intuition, and text,
&c., would be the only means of knowledge. The origination of something
to be accomplished depends, moreover, on man since any action either of
ordinary life, or dependent on the Veda may either be done or not be
done, or be done in a different way. A man, for instance, may move on
either by means of a horse, or by means of his feet, or by some other
means, or not at all. And again (to quote examples of actions dependent
on the Veda), we meet in Scripture with sentences such as the following:
'At the atirâtra he takes the sho*d*asin cup,' and 'at the atirâtra he
does not take the sho*d*asin cup;' or, 'he makes the oblation after the
sun has risen,' and, 'he makes the oblation when the sun has not yet
risen.' Just as in the quoted instances, injunctions and prohibitions,
allowances of optional procedure, general rules and exceptions have
their place, so they would have their place with regard to Brahman also
(if the latter were a thing to be accomplished). But the fact is that no
option is possible as to whether a substance is to be thus or thus, is
to be or not to be. All option depends on the notions of man; but the
knowledge of the real nature of a thing does not depend on the notions
of man, but only on the thing itself. For to think with regard to a
post, 'this is a post or a man, or something else,' is not knowledge of
truth; the two ideas, 'it is a man or something else,' being false, and
only the third idea, 'it

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

is a post,' which depends on the thing itself, falling under the head of
true knowledge. Thus true knowledge of all existing things depends on
the things themselves, and hence the knowledge of Brahman also depends
altogether on the thing, i.e. Brahman itself.--But, it might be said, as
Brahman is an existing substance, it will be the object of the other
means of right knowledge also, and from this it follows that a
discussion of the Vedânta-texts is purposeless.--This we deny; for as
Brahman is not an object of the senses, it has no connection with those
other means of knowledge. For the senses have, according to their
nature, only external things for their objects, not Brahman. If Brahman
were an object of the senses, we might perceive that the world is
connected with Brahman as its effect; but as the effect only (i.e. the
world) is perceived, it is impossible to decide (through perception)
whether it is connected with Brahman or something else. Therefore the
Sûtra under discussion is not meant to propound inference (as the means
of knowing Brahman), but rather to set forth a Vedânta-text.--Which,
then, is the Vedânta-text which the Sûtra points at as having to be
considered with reference to the characteristics of Brahman?--It is the
passage Taitt. Up. III, 1, 'Bh*ri*gu Vâru*n*i went to his father
Varu*n*a, saying, Sir, teach me Brahman,' &c., up to 'That from whence
these beings are born, that by which, when born, they live, that into
which they enter at their death, try to know that. That is Brahman.' The
sentence finally determining the sense of this passage is found III, 6:
'From bliss these beings are born; by bliss, when born, they, live; into
bliss they enter at their death.' Other passages also are to be adduced
which declare the cause to be the almighty Being, whose essential nature
is eternal purity, intelligence, and freedom.

That Brahman is omniscient we have been made to infer from it being
shown that it is the cause of the world. To confirm this conclusion, the
Sûtrakâra continues as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_65"></span>[16:1](sbe34008.htm#fr_65.md) So the compound is to
be divided according to Ân. Gi. and Go.; the Bhâ. proposes another less
plausible division.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[16:2](sbe34008.htm#fr_66.md) According to Nirukta
I, 2 the six bhâvavikârâ*h* are: origination, existence, modification,
increase, decrease, destruction.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[16:3](sbe34008.htm#fr_67.md) The pradhâna, called
also prak*ri*ti, is the primal causal matter of the world in the
*S*â<u>n</u>khya-system. It will be fully discussed in <span
id="page_17">p. 17</span> later parts of this work. To avoid
ambiguities, the term pradhâna has been left untranslated. Cp.
Sâ<u>n</u>khya Kârikâ 3.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[17:1](sbe34008.htm#fr_68.md) Ke*k*it tu
hira*n*yagarbha*m* sa*m*sâri*n*am evâgamâ*g* *g*agaddhetum â*k*akshate.
Ânanada Giri.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[17:2](sbe34008.htm#fr_69.md) Viz. the
Vai*s*eshikas.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[17:3](sbe34008.htm#fr_70.md) Âtmana*h* *s*ruter
ity artha*h*. Ânanda Giri.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[17:4](sbe34008.htm#fr_71.md) Text (or direct
statement), suggestive power (linga), syntactical <span id="page_18">p.
18</span> connection (vâkya), &c., being the means of proof made use of
in the Pûrva Mîmâ*m*sâ.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[18:1](sbe34008.htm#fr_72.md) The so-called
sâkshâtkâra of Brahman. The &c. comprises inference and so on.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I, 1, 3](sbe34009.md)
