[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe34064)  [Next](sbe34066.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930306/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras, commentary by Sankaracharya (SBE34)*, tr. by George
Thibaut \[1890\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

28\. *G*aimini (declares that there is) no contradiction even on the
assumption of a direct (worship of the highest Lord as Vai*s*vânara).

Above (Sûtra 26) it has been said that Vai*s*vânara is the highest Lord,
to be meditated upon as having the gastric fire either for his outward
manifestation or for his limiting condition; which interpretation was
accepted in deference to the circumstance that he is spoken of as
abiding within--and so on.--The teacher *G*aimini however is of opinion
that it is not necessary to have recourse to the assumption of an
outward manifestation or limiting condition, and that there is no
objection to refer the passage about Vai*s*vânara to the direct worship
of the highest Lord.--But, if you reject the interpretation based on the
gastric fire, you place yourself in opposition to the statement that
Vai*s*vânara abides within, and to the reasons founded on the term, &c.
(Sû. 26).--To this we reply that we in no way place ourselves in
opposition to the statement that Vai*s*vânara abides within. For the
passage, 'He knows him as man-like, as abiding within man,' does not by
any means refer to the gastric fire, the latter being neither the
general topic of discussion nor having been mentioned by name
before.--What then does it refer to?--It refers to that which forms the
subject of discussion, viz. that similarity to man (of the highest Self)
which is fancifully found in the members of man from the upper part of
the head down to the chin; the text therefore says, 'He knows him as
man-like,

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

as abiding within man,' just as we say of a branch that it abides within
the tree <span id="fr_164"></span>[1](#fn_164.md).--Or else we may adopt
another interpretation and say that after the highest Self has been
represented as having the likeness to man as a limiting condition, with
regard to nature as well as to man, the passage last quoted ('He knows
him as abiding within man') speaks of the same highest Self as the mere
witness (sâkshin; i.e. as the pure Self, non-related to the limiting
conditions).--The consideration of the context having thus shown that
the highest Self has to be resorted to for the interpretation of the
passage, the term 'Vai*s*vânara' must denote the highest Self in some
way or other. The word 'Vi*s*vânara' is to be explained either as 'he
who is all and man (i.e. the individual soul),' or 'he to whom souls
belong' (in so far as he is their maker or ruler), and thus denotes the
highest Self which is the Self of all. And the form 'Vai*s*vânara' has
the same meaning as 'Vi*s*vânara,' the taddhita-suffix, by which the
former word is derived from the latter, not changing the meaning; just
as in the case of râkshasa (derived from rakshas), and vâyasa (derived
from vayas).--The word 'Agni' also may denote the highest Self if we
adopt the etymology agni = agra*n*î, i.e. he who leads in front.--As the
Gârhapatya-fire finally, and as the abode of the oblation to breath the
highest Self may be represented because it is the Self of all.

But, if it is assumed that Vai*s*vânara denotes the highest Self, how
can Scripture declare that he is measured by a span?--On the explanation
of this difficulty we now enter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_164"></span>[150:1](sbe34065.htm#fr_164.md) Whereby we mean
not that it is inside the tree, but that it forms a part of the
tree.--The Vai*s*vânara Self is identified with the different members of
the body, and these members abide within, i.e. form parts of the body.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I, 2, 29](sbe34066.md)
