[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe34219)  [Next](sbe34221.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930306/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras, commentary by Sankaracharya (SBE34)*, tr. by George
Thibaut \[1890\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

44\. Or (if) in consequence of the existence of knowledge, &c.
(Vâsudeva, &c. be taken as Lords), yet there is non-exclusion of that
(i.e. the objection raised in Sûtra 42).

Let us then--the Bhâgavatas may say--understand by Sa<u>n</u>karsha*n*a,
and so on, not the individual soul, the mind, &c., but rather Lords,
i.e. powerful beings distinguished by all the qualities characteristic
of rulers, such as pre-eminence of knowledge and ruling capacity,
strength, valour, glory.

<span id="page_442">p. 442</span>

All these are Vâsudevas free from faults, without a substratum (not
sprung from pradhâna), without any imperfections. Hence the objection
urged in Sûtra 42 does not apply.

Even on this interpretation of your doctrine, we reply, the
'non-exclusion of that,' i.e. the non-exclusion of the impossibility of
origination, can be established.--Do you, in the first place, mean to
say that the four individual Lords, Vâsudeva, and so on, have the same
attributes, but do not constitute one and the same Self?--If so, you
commit the fault of uselessly assuming more than one Lord, while all the
work of the Lord can be done by one. Moreover, you offend thereby
against your own principle, according to which there is only one real
essence, viz. the holy. Vâsudeva.--Or do you perhaps mean to say that
from the one highest Being there spring those four forms possessing
equal attributes?--In that case the objection urged in Sûtra 42 remains
valid. For Sa<u>n</u>karsha*n*a cannot be produced from Vâsudeva, nor
Pradyumna from Sa<u>n</u>karsha*n*a, nor Aniruddha from Pradyumna, since
(the attributes of all of them being the same) there is no supereminence
of any one of them. Observation shows that the relation of cause and
effect requires some superiority on the part of the cause--as, for
instance, in the case of the clay and the jar (where the cause is more
extensive than the effect)--and that without such superiority the
relation is simply impossible. But the followers of the Pâ*ñk*arâtra do
not acknowledge any difference founded on superiority of knowledge,
power, &c. between Vâsudeva and the other Lords, but simply say that
they all are forms of Vâsudeva, without any special distinctions. The
forms of Vâsudeva cannot properly be limited to four, as the whole
world, from Brahman down to a blade of grass, is understood to be a
manifestation of the supreme Being.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II, 2, 45](sbe34221.md)
