[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe34216)  [Next](sbe34218.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930306/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras, commentary by Sankaracharya (SBE34)*, tr. by George
Thibaut \[1890\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

41\. And (there would follow from that doctrine) either finite duration
or absence of omniscience (on the Lord's part).

The hypothesis of the argumentative philosophers is invalid, for the
following reason also.--They teach that the Lord is omniscient and of
infinite duration, and likewise that the pradhâna, as well as the
individual souls, is of infinite duration. Now, the omniscient Lord
either defines the measure of the pradhâna, the souls, and himself, or
does not define it. Both alternatives subvert the doctrine under
discussion. For, on the former alternative, the pradhâna, the souls, and
the Lord, being all of them of definite measure, must necessarily be of
finite duration; since ordinary experience teaches that all things of
definite extent, such as jars and the like, at some time cease to exist.
The numerical measure of pradhâna, souls, and Lord is

<span id="page_439">p. 439</span>

defined by their constituting a triad, and the individual measure of
each of them must likewise be considered as defined by the Lord (because
he is omniscient). The number of the souls is a high one <span
id="fr_422"></span>[1](#fn_422.md). From among this limited number of souls
some obtain release from the sa*m*sâra, that means their sa*m*sâra comes
to an end, and their subjection to the samsâra comes to an end.
Gradually all souls obtain release, and so there will finally be an end
of the entire sa*m*sâra and the sa*m*sâra state of all souls. But the
pradhâna which is ruled by the Lord and which modifies itself for the
purposes of the soul is what is meant by sa*m*sâra. Hence, when the
latter no longer exists, nothing is left for the Lord to rule, and his
omniscience and ruling power have no longer any objects. But if the
pradhâna, the souls, and the Lord, all have an end, it follows that they
also have a beginning, and if they have a beginning as well as an end,
we are driven to the doctrine of a general void.--Let us then, in order
to avoid these untoward conclusions, maintain the second alternative,
i.e. that the measure of the Lord himself, the pradhâna, and the souls,
is not defined by the Lord.--But that also is impossible, because it
would compel us to abandon a tenet granted at the outset, viz. that the
Lord is omniscient.

For all these reasons the doctrine of the argumentative philosophers,
according to which the Lord is the operative cause of the world, appears
unacceptable.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_422"></span>[439:1](sbe34217.htm#fr_422.md) I.e. a high one,
but not an indefinite one; since the omniscient Lord knows its measure.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II, 2, 42](sbe34218.md)
