[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe34172)  [Next](sbe34174) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930306/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras, commentary by Sankaracharya (SBE34)*, tr. by George
Thibaut \[1890\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

34\. Inequality (of dispensation) and cruelty (the Lord can)not (be
reproached with), on account of

<span id="page_358">p. 358</span>

his regarding (merit and demerit); for so (Scripture) declares.

In order to strengthen the tenet which we are at present defending, we
follow the procedure of him who shakes a pole planted in the ground (in
order to test whether it is firmly planted), and raise another objection
against the doctrine of the Lord being the cause of the world.--The
Lord, it is said, cannot be the cause of the world, because, on that
hypothesis, the reproach of inequality of dispensation and cruelty would
attach to him. Some beings, viz. the gods and others, he renders
eminently happy; others, as for instance the animals, eminently unhappy;
to some again, as for instance men, he allots an intermediate position.
To a Lord bringing about such an unequal condition of things, passion
and malice would have to be ascribed, just as to any common person
acting similarly; which attributes would be contrary to the essential
goodness of the Lord affirmed by *S*ruti and Sm*ri*ti. Moreover, as the
infliction of pain and the final destruction of all creatures would form
part of his dispensation, he would have to be taxed with great cruelty,
a quality abhorred by low people even. For these two reasons Brahman
cannot be the cause of the world.

The Lord, we reply, cannot be reproached with inequality of dispensation
and cruelty, "because he is bound by regards." If the Lord on his own
account, without any extraneous regards, produced this unequal creation,
he would expose himself to blame; but the fact is, that in creating he
is bound by certain regards, i. e. he has to look to merit and demerit.
Hence the circumstance of the creation being unequal is due to the merit
and demerit of the living creatures created, and is not a fault for
which the Lord is to blame. The position of the Lord is to be looked on
as analogous to that of Par*g*anya, the Giver of rain. For as Par*g*anya
is the common cause of the production of rice, barley, and other plants,
while the difference between the various species is due to the various
potentialities lying hidden in the respective seeds, so the Lord is the
common cause of the creation of gods, men, &c., while the differences
between these classes of beings

<span id="page_359">p. 359</span>

are due to the different merit belonging to the individual souls. Hence
the Lord, being bound by regards, cannot be reproached with inequality
of dispensation and cruelty.--And if we are asked how we come to know
that the Lord, in creating this world with its various conditions, is
bound by regards, we reply that Scripture declares that; compare, for
instance, the two following passages, 'For he (the Lord) makes him, whom
he wishes to lead up from these worlds, do a good deed; and the same
makes him, whom he wishes to lead down from these worlds, do a bad deed'
(Kaush. Up. III, 8) <span id="fr_316"></span>[1](#fn_316); and, 'A man
becomes good by good work, bad by bad work' (B*ri*. Up. III, 2, 13).
Sm*ri*ti passages also declare the favour of the Lord and its opposite
to depend on the different quality of the works of living beings; so,
for instance, 'I serve men in the way in which they approach me' (Bha.
Gî. IV, 11).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_316"></span>[359:1](sbe34173.htm#fr_316) From this passage
we must not--the commentators say--infer injustice on the part of the
Lord; for the previous merit or demerit of a being determines the
specific quality of the actions which he performs in his present
existence, the Lord acting as the common cause only (as Par*g*anya
does).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II, 1, 35](sbe34174)
