[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe34036)  [Next](sbe34038.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930306/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras, commentary by Sankaracharya (SBE34)*, tr. by George
Thibaut \[1890\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

31\. If it be said (that Brahman is) not (meant), on account of
characteristic marks of the individual soul and the chief vital air
(being mentioned); we say no, on account of the threefoldness of devout
meditation (which would result from your interpretation); on account of
(the meaning advocated by us) being accepted (elsewhere); and on account
of (characteristic marks of Brahman) being connected (with the passage
under discussion).

Although we admit, the pûrvapakshin resumes, that the chapter about the
prâ*n*a does not furnish any instruction regarding some outward deity,
since it contains a multitude of references to the interior Self; still
we deny that it is concerned with Brahman.--For what reason?--Because it
mentions characteristic marks of the individual soul on the one hand,
and of the chief vital air on the other hand. The passage, 'Let no man
try to find out what speech is, let him know the speaker,' mentions a
characteristic mark of the individual soul, and must therefore be held
to point out as the object of knowledge the individual soul which rules
and employs the different organs of action such as speech and so on. On
the other hand, we have the passage, 'But prâ*n*a alone, the intelligent
Self, having laid hold of this body makes it rise up,' which points to
the chief vital air; for the chief attribute of the vital air is that it
sustains the body. Similarly, we read in the colloquy of the vital airs
(Pra. Up. II, 3), concerning speech and the other vital airs, 'Then
prâ*n*a (the chief vital air) as the best said to them: Be not deceived;
I alone dividing myself fivefold support this body and keep it.' Those,
again, who in the

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

passage quoted above read 'this one (masc.), the body <span
id="fr_136"></span>[1](#fn_136.md)' must give the following explanation,
Prâ*n*a having laid hold of this one, viz. either the individual soul or
the aggregate of the sense organs, makes the body rise up. The
individual soul as well as the chief vital air may justly be designated
as the intelligent Self; for the former is of the nature of
intelligence, and the latter (although non-intelligent in itself) is the
abode of other prâ*n*as, viz. the sense organs, which are the
instruments of intelligence. Moreover, if the word prâ*n*a be taken to
denote the individual soul as well as the chief vital air, the prâ*n*a
and the intelligent Self may be spoken of in two ways, either as being
non-different on account of their mutual concomitance, or as being
different on account of their (essentially different) individual
character; and in these two different ways they are actually spoken of
in the two following passages, 'What is prâ*n*a that is pra*gñ*â, what
is pra*gñ*â that is prâ*n*a;' and, 'For together do these two live in
the body and together do they depart.' If, on the other hand, prâ*n*a
denoted Brahman, what then could be different from what? For these
reasons prâ*n*a does not denote Brahman, but either the individual soul
or the chief vital air or both.

All this argumentation, we reply, is wrong, 'on account of the
threefoldness of devout meditation.' Your interpretation would involve
the assumption of devout meditation of three different kinds, viz. on
the individual soul, on the chief vital air, and on Brahman. But it is
inappropriate to assume that a single sentence should enjoin three kinds
of devout meditation; and that all the passages about the prâ*n*a really
constitute one single sentence (one syntactical whole) appears from the
beginning and the concluding part. In the beginning we have the clause
'Know me only,' followed by 'I am prâ*n*a, the intelligent Self,
meditate on me as Life, as Immortality;' and in the end we read, 'And
that prâ*n*a indeed is the intelligent Self, blessed, imperishable,
immortal.' The beginning and the concluding part are thus seen to be
similar, and we

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

therefore must conclude that they refer to one and the same matter. Nor
can the characteristic mark of Brahman be so turned as to be applied to
something else; for the ten objects and the ten subjects (subjective
powers) <span id="fr_137"></span>[1](#fn_137.md)cannot rest on anything but
Brahman. Moreover, prâ*n*a must denote Brahman 'on account of (that
meaning) being accepted,' i.e. because in the case of other passages
where characteristic marks of Brahman are mentioned the word prâ*n*a is
taken in the sense of 'Brahman.' And another reason for assuming the
passage to refer to Brahman is that here also, i.e. in the passage
itself there is 'connexion' with characteristic marks of Brahman, as,
for instance, the reference to what is most beneficial for man. The
assertion that the passage, 'Having laid hold of this body it makes it
rise up,' contains a characteristic mark of the chief vital air, is
untrue; for as the function of the vital air also ultimately rests on
Brahman it can figuratively be ascribed to the latter. So Scripture also
declares, 'No mortal lives by the breath that goes up and by the breath
that goes down. We live by another in whom these two repose' (Ka. Up.
II, 5, 5). Nor does the indication of the individual soul which you
allege to occur in the passage, 'Let no man try to find out what speech
is, let him know the speaker,' preclude the view of prâ*n*a denoting
Brahman. For, as the passages, 'I am Brahman,' 'That art thou,' and
others, prove, there is in reality no such thing as an individual soul
absolutely different from Brahman, but Brahman, in so far as it
differentiates itself through the mind (buddhi) and other limiting
conditions, is called individual soul, agent, enjoyer. Such passages
therefore as the one alluded to, (viz. 'let no man try to find out what
speech is, let him know the speaker,') which, by setting aside all the
differences due to limiting conditions, aim at directing the mind on the
internal Self and thus showing that the

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

individual soul is one with Brahman, are by no means out of place. That
the Self which is active in speaking and the like is Brahman appears
from another scriptural passage also, viz. Ke. Up. I, 5, 'That which is
not expressed by speech and by which speech is expressed that alone know
as Brahman, not that which people here adore.' The remark that the
statement about the difference of prâ*n*a and pra*gñ*â (contained in the
passage, 'Together they dwell in this body, together they depart') does
not agree with that interpretation according to which prâ*n*a is
Brahman, is without force; for the mind and the vital air which are the
respective abodes of the two powers of cognition and action, and
constitute the limiting conditions of the internal Self may be spoken of
as different. The internal Self, on the other hand, which is limited by
those two adjuncts, is in itself non-differentiated, so that the two may
be identified, as is done in the passage 'prâ*n*a is pra*gñ*â.'

The second part of the Sûtra is explained in a different manner
also <span id="fr_138"></span>[1](#fn_138.md), as follows: Characteristic
marks of the individual soul as well as of the chief vital air are not
out of place even in a chapter whose topic is Brahman. How so? 'On
account of the threefoldness of devout meditation.' The chapter aims at
enjoining three kinds of devout meditation on Brahman, according as
Brahman is viewed under the aspect of prâ*n*a, under the aspect of
pra*gñ*â, and in itself. The passages, 'Meditate (on me) as life, as
immortality. Life is prâ*n*a,' and 'Having laid hold of this body it
makes it rise up. Therefore let man worship it alone as uktha,' refer to
the prâ*n*a aspect. The introductory passage, 'Now we shall explain how
all things become one in that pra*gñ*â,' and the subsequent passages,
'Speech verily milked one portion thereof; the word is its object placed
outside;' and, 'Having by pra*gñ*â taken possession of speech he obtains
by speech all words &c.,' refer to the pra*gñ*â aspect. The Brahman
aspect finally is referred to in the following passage, 'These ten

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

objects have reference to pra*gñ*â, the ten subjects have reference to
objects. If there were no objects there would be no subjects; and if
there were no subjects there would be no objects. For on either side
alone nothing could be achieved. But that is not many. For as in a car
the circumference of the wheel is set on the spokes and the spokes on
the nave, thus are these objects set on the subjects and the subjects on
the prâ*n*a.' Thus we see that the one meditation on Brahman is here
represented as threefold, according as Brahman is viewed either with
reference to two limiting conditions or in itself. In other passages
also we find that devout meditation on Brahman is made dependent on
Brahman being qualified by limiting adjuncts; so, for instance (*Kh*.
Up. III, 14, 2), 'He who consists of mind, whose body is prâ*n*a.' The
hypothesis of Brahman being meditated upon under three aspects perfectly
agrees with the prâ*n*a chapter <span id="fr_139"></span>[1](#fn_139.md);
as, on the one hand, from a comparison of the introductory and the
concluding clauses we infer that the subject-matter of the whole chapter
is one only, and as, on the other hand, we meet with characteristic
marks of prâ*n*a, pra*gñ*â, and Brahman in turns. It therefore remains a
settled conclusion that Brahman is the topic of the whole chapter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_136"></span>[103:1](sbe34037.htm#fr_136.md) Ima*m* *s*arîram
instead of ida*m* *s*arîram

<span id="fn_137"></span>[104:1](sbe34037.htm#fr_137.md) Pa*ñk*a
*s*abdâdaya*h* pa*ñk*a p*ri*thivyâdaya*s* *k*a da*s*a bhûtamâtrâ*h*
pa*ñk*a buddhîndriyâ*n*i pa*ñk*a buddhaya iti da*s*a pra*gñ*âmâtrâ*h*.
Yadvâ *gñ*ânendriyârthâ*h* pa*ñk*a karmendriyârthâ*s* *ka* pa*ñk*eti
da*s*a bhûtamâtrâ*h* dvividhânîndriyâ*n*i pra*gñ*âmâtrâ da*s*eti
bhâva*h*. Ân. Gi.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[105:1](sbe34037.htm#fr_138.md) Viz. by the
v*ri*ttikâra.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[106:1](sbe34037.htm#fr_139.md) Ihâpi tad
yu*g*yate explaining the 'iha tadyogât' of the Sûtra.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I, 2, 1](sbe34038.md)
