[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe34062)  [Next](sbe34064.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930306/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras, commentary by Sankaracharya (SBE34)*, tr. by George
Thibaut \[1890\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

26\. If it be maintained that (Vai*s*vânara is) not (the highest Lord)
on account of the term (viz. Vai*s*vânara, having a settled different
meaning), &c., and on account of his abiding within (which is a
characteristic of the gastric fire); (we say) no, on account of the
perception (of the highest Lord), being taught thus (viz. in the gastric
fire), and on account of the impossibility (of the heavenly world, &c.
being the head, &c. of the gastric fire), and because they (the
Vâ*g*asaneyins) read of him (viz. the Vai*s*vânara) as man (which term
cannot apply to the gastric fire).

Here the following objection is raised.--Vai*s*vânara cannot be the
highest Lord, on account of the term, &c., and on account of the abiding
within. The term, viz. the term Vai*s*vânara, cannot be applied to the
highest Lord, because the settled use of language assigns to it a
different sense. Thus, also, with regard to the term Agni (fire) in the
passage (*S*at. Brâ. X, 6, 1, 11), 'He is the Agni Vai*s*vânara.' The
word '&c.' (in the Sûtra) hints at the fiction concerning the three
sacred fires, the gârhapatya being represented as the heart, and so on,
of the Vai*s*vânara Self (*Kh*. Up. V, 18, 2 <span
id="fr_160"></span>[1](#fn_160).md).--Moreover, the passage, 'Therefore the
first food which a man may take is in the place of homa' (*Kh*. Up. V,
19,1), contains a glorification of (Vai*s*vânara) being the abode of the
oblation to Prâ*n*a <span id="fr_161"></span>[2](#fn_161.md). For these
reasons we have to understand

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

by Vai*s*vânara the gastric fire.--Moreover, Scripture speaks of the
Vai*s*vânara as abiding within. 'He knows him abiding within man;' which
again applies to the gastric fire only.--With reference to the averment
that on account of the specifications contained in the passage, 'His
head is Sute*g*as,' &c., Vai*s*vânara is to be explained as the highest
Self, we (the pûrvapakshin) ask: How do you reach the decision that
those specifications, although agreeing with both interpretations, must
be assumed to refer to the highest Lord only, and not to the gastric
fire?--Or else we may assume that the passage speaks of the elemental
fire which abides within and without; for that that fire is also
connected with the heavenly world, and so on, we understand from the
mantra, 'He who with his light has extended himself over earth and
heaven, the two halves of the world, and the atmosphere' (*Ri*g-veda
Sa*m*h. X, 88, 3).--Or else the attribute of having the heavenly world,
and so on, for its members may, on account of its power, be attributed
to that divinity which has the elemental fire for its body.--Therefore
Vai*s*vânara is not the highest Lord.

To all this we reply as follows.--Your assertions are unfounded,
'because there is taught the perception in this manner.' The reasons
(adduced in the former part of the Sûtra), viz. the term, and so on, are
not sufficient to make us abandon the interpretation according to which
Vai*s*vânara is the highest Lord.--Why?--On account of perception being
taught in this manner, i.e. without the gastric fire being set aside.
For the passages quoted teach the perception of the highest Lord in the
gastric fire, analogously to such passages as 'Let a man meditate on the
mind as Brahman' (*Kh*. Up. III, 18, 1).--Or else they teach that the
object of perception is the highest Lord, in so far as he has the
gastric fire called Vai*s*vânara for his limiting condition; analogously
to such passages as 'He who consists of mind, whose body is breath,
whose form is light' (*Kh*. Up. III, 14, 2 <span
id="fr_162"></span>[1](#fn_162).md). If it were the aim of the passages
about the "Vai*s*vânara

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

to make statements not concerning the highest Lord, but merely
concerning the gastric fire, there would be no possibility of
specifications such as contained in the passage 'His head is Sute*g*as,'
&c. That also on the assumption of Vai*s*vânara being either the
divinity of fire or the elemental fire no room is to be found for the
said specifications, we shall show under the following Sûtra.--Moreover,
if the mere gastric fire were meant, there would be room only for a
declaration that it abides within man, not that it is man. But, as a
matter of fact, the Vâ*g*asaneyins speak of him--in their sacred
text--as man, 'This Agni Vai*s*vânara is man; he who knows this Agni
Vai*s*vânara as man-like, as abiding within man,' &c. (*S*at. Brâ. X, 6,
I, II). The highest Lord, on the other hand, who is the Self of
everything, may be spoken of as well as man, as abiding within
man.--Those who, in the latter part of the Sûtra, read 'man-like'
(purushavidham) instead of 'man' (purusham), wish to express the
following meaning: If Vai*s*vânara were assumed to be the gastric fire
only, he might be spoken of as abiding within man indeed, but not as
man-like. But the Vâ*g*asaneyins do speak of him as man-like,' He who
knows him as man-like, as abiding within man.'--The meaning of the term
man-like is to be concluded from the context, whence it will be seen
that, with reference to nature, it means that the highest Lord has the
heaven for his head, &c., and is based on the earth; and with reference
to man, that he forms the head, &c., and is based on the chin (of the
devout worshipper <span id="fr_163"></span>[1](#fn_163).md).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_160"></span>[146:1](sbe34063.htm#fr_160.md) Na *k*a
gârhapatyâdih*ri*dayâditâ brahma*n*a*h* sambhavinî. Bhâmatî.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[146:2](sbe34063.htm#fr_161.md) Na *k*a
prâ*n*âhutyadhikara*n*atâ \# nyatra *g*a*th*arâgner yu*g*yate. Bhâmatî.

<span id="fn_162"></span>[147:1](sbe34063.htm#fr_162.md) According to the
former explanation the gastric fire is to be looked on as the outward
manifestation (pratîka) of the highest Lord; according to the latter as
his limiting condition.

<span id="fn_163"></span>[148:1](sbe34063.htm#fr_163.md) I.e. that he may
be fancifully identified with the head and so on of the devout
worshipper.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I, 2, 27](sbe34064.md)
