[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe34133)  [Next](sbe34135) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930306/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras, commentary by Sankaracharya (SBE34)*, tr. by George
Thibaut \[1890\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

23\. (Brahman is) the material cause also, on account of (this view) not
being in conflict with the promissory statements and the illustrative
instances.

It has been said that, as practical religious duty has to be enquired
into because it is the cause of an increase of happiness, so Brahman has
to be enquired into because it is the cause of absolute beatitude. And
Brahman has been defined as that from which there proceed the
origination, sustentation, and retractation of this world. Now as this
definition comprises alike the relation of substantial causality in
which clay and gold, for instance, stand to golden ornaments and earthen
pots, and the relation of operative

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span>

causality in which the potter and the goldsmith stand to the things
mentioned; a doubt arises to which of these two kinds the causality of
Brahman belongs.

The pûrvapakshin maintains that Brahman, evidently is the operative
cause of the world only, because Scripture declares his creative energy
to be preceded by reflection. Compare, for instance, Pra. Up. VI, 3; 4:
'He reflected, he created prâ*n*a.' For observation shows that the
action of operative causes only, such as potters and the like, is
preceded by reflection, and moreover that the result of some activity is
brought about by the concurrence of several factors <span
id="fr_255"></span>[1](#fn_255). It is therefore appropriate that we
should view the prime creator in the same light. The circumstance of his
being known as 'the Lord' furnishes another argument. For lords such as
kings and the son of Vivasvat are known only as operative causes, and
the highest Lord also must on that account be viewed as an operative
cause only.--Further, the effect of the creator's activity, viz. this
world, is seen to consist of parts, to be non-intelligent and impure; we
therefore must assume that its cause also is of the same nature; for it
is a matter of general observation that cause and effect are alike in
kind. But that Brahman does not resemble the world in nature, we know
from many scriptural passages, such as 'It is without parts, without
actions, tranquil, without fault, without taint' *Sv*e. Up. VI, 19).
Hence there remains no other alternative but to admit that in addition
to Brahman there exists a material cause of the world of impure nature,
such as is known from Sm*ri*ti <span id="fr_256"></span>[2](#fn_256),
and to limit the causality of Brahman, as declared by Scripture, to
operative causality.

To this we make the following reply.--Brahman is to be acknowledged as
the material cause as well as the operative cause; because this latter
view does not conflict with the promissory statements and the
illustrative instances. The promissory statement chiefly meant is the
following one,

<span id="page_285">p. 285</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 'Have you ever
asked for that instruction by which that which is not heard becomes
heard; that which is not perceived, perceived; that which is not known,
known?'(*Kh*. Up. VI, 1, 3.) This passage intimates that through the
cognition of one thing everything else, even if (previously) unknown,
becomes known. Now the knowledge of everything is possible through the
cognition of the material cause, since the effect is non-different from
the material cause. On the other hand, effects are not non-different
from their operative causes; for we know from ordinary experience that
the carpenter, for instance, is different from the house he has
built.--The illustrative example referred to is the one mentioned (*Kh*.
Up. VI, 1, 4), 'My dear, as by one clod of clay all that is made of clay
is known, the modification (i.e. the effect) being a name merely which
has its origin in speech, while the truth is that it is clay merely;'
which passage again has reference to the material cause. The text adds a
few more illustrative instances of similar nature, 'As by one nugget of
gold all that is made of gold is known; as by one pair of nail-scissors
all that is made of iron is known.'--Similar promissory statements are
made in other places also, for instance, 'What is that through which if
it is known everything else becomes known?' (Mu. Up. I, 1, 3.) An
illustrative instance also is given in the same place, 'As plants grow
on the earth' (I, 1, 7).--Compare also the promissory statement in
B*ri*. Up. IV, 5, 6, 'When the Self has been seen, heard, perceived, and
known, then all this is known;' and the illustrative instance quoted
(IV, 5, 8), 'Now as the sounds of a drum if beaten cannot be seized
externally, but the sound is seized when the drum is seized or the
beater of the drum.'--Similar promissory statements and illustrative
instances which are to be found in all Vedânta-texts are to be viewed as
proving, more or less, that Brahman is also the material cause of the
world. The ablative case also in the passage, 'That from whence
(yata*h*) these beings are born,' has to be considered as indicating the
material cause of the beings, according to the grammatical rule, Pâ*n*.
I, 4, 30.--That Brahman is at the same time the operative cause of the

<span id="page_286">p. 286</span>

world, we have to conclude from the circumstance that there is no other
guiding being. Ordinarily material causes, indeed, such as lumps of clay
and pieces of gold, are dependent, in order to shape themselves into
vessels and ornaments, on extraneous operative causes such as potters
and goldsmiths; but outside Brahman as material cause there is no other
operative cause to which the material cause could look; for Scripture
says that previously to creation Brahman was one without a second.--The
absence of a guiding principle other than the material cause can
moreover be established by means of the argument made use of in the
Sûtra, viz. accordance with the promissory statements and the
illustrative examples. If there were admitted a guiding principle
different from the material cause, it would follow that everything
cannot be known through one thing, and thereby the promissory statements
as well as the illustrative instances would be stultified.--The Self is
thus the operative cause, because there is no other ruling principle,
and the material cause because there is no other substance from which
the world could originate.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_255"></span>[284:1](sbe34134.htm#fr_255) I.e. that the
operative cause and the substantial cause are separate things.

<span id="fn_256"></span>[284:2](sbe34134.htm#fr_256) Viz. the
Sâ<u>n</u>khya-sm*ri*ti.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I, 4, 24](sbe34135)
