[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe34217)  [Next](sbe34219.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930306/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras, commentary by Sankaracharya (SBE34)*, tr. by George
Thibaut \[1890\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

42\. On account of the impossibility of the origination (of the
individual soul from the highest Lord, the doctrine of the Bhâgavatas
cannot be accepted).

We have, in what precedes, refuted the opinion of those who think that
the Lord is not the material cause but only the ruler, the operative
cause of the world. We are now

<span id="page_440">p. 440</span>

going to refute the doctrine of those according to whom he is the
material as well as the operative cause.--But, it may be objected, in
the previous portions of the present work a Lord of exactly the same
nature, i.e. a Lord who is the material, as well as the operative, cause
of the world, has been ascertained on the basis of Scripture, and it is
a recognised principle that Sm*ri*ti, in so far as it agrees with
Scripture, is authoritative; why then should we aim at controverting the
doctrine stated?--It is true, we reply, that a part of the system which
we are going to discuss agrees with the Vedânta system, and hence
affords no matter for controversy; another part of the system, however,
is open to objection, and that part we intend to attack.

The so-called Bhâgavatas are of opinion that the one holy (bhagavat)
Vâsudeva, whose nature is pure knowledge, is what really exists, and
that he, dividing himself fourfold, appears in four forms (vyûha), as
Vâsudeva, Sa<u>n</u>karsha*n*a, Pradyumna, and Aniruddha. Vâsudeva
denotes the highest Self, Sa<u>n</u>karsha*n*a the individual soul,
Pradyumna the mind (manas), Aniruddha the principle of egoity
(aha<u>n</u>kâra). Of these four Vâsudeva constitutes the ultimate
causal essence, of which the three others are the effects.--The believer
after having worshipped Vâsudeva for a hundred years by means of
approach to the temple (abhigamana), procuring of things to be offered
(upâdâna), oblation (î*g*yâ), recitation of prayers, &c. (svâdhyâya),
and devout meditation (yoga), passes beyond all affliction and reaches
the highest Being.

Concerning this system we remark that we do not intend to controvert the
doctrine that Nârâya*n*a, who is higher than the Undeveloped, who is the
highest Self, and the Self of all, reveals himself by dividing himself
in multiple ways; for various scriptural passages, such as 'He is
onefold, he is threefold' (*Kh*. Up. VII, 26, 2)', teach us that the
highest Self appears in manifold forms. Nor do we mean to object to the
inculcation of unceasing concentration of mind on the highest Being
which appears in the Bhâgavata doctrine under the forms of reverential
approach,

<span id="page_441">p. 441</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> &c.; for that we
are to meditate on the Lord we know full well from Sm*ri*ti and
Scripture. We, however, must take exception to the doctrine that
Sa<u>n</u>karsha*n*a springs from Vâsudeva, Pradyumna from
Sa<u>n</u>karsha*n*a, Aniruddha from Pradyumna. It is not possible that
from Vâsudeva, i.e. the highest Self, there should originate
Sa<u>n</u>karsha*n*a, i.e. the individual soul; for if such were the
case, there would attach to the soul non-permanency, and all the other
imperfections which belong to things originated. And thence release,
which consists in reaching the highest Being, could not take place; for
the effect is absorbed only by entering into its cause.--That the soul
is not an originated thing, the teacher will prove later on (II, 3, 17).
For this reason the Bhâgavata hypothesis is unacceptable.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II, 2, 43](sbe34219.md)
