[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe34005)  [Next](sbe34007) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930306/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras, commentary by Sankaracharya (SBE34)*, tr. by George
Thibaut \[1890\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# FOURTH ADHYÂYA.

### PÂDA I.

Adhikara*n*a I (1, 2).--The meditation on the Âtman enjoined by
Scripture is not an act to be accomplished once only, but is to be
repeated again and again.

Adhik. II (3).--The devotee engaged in meditation on Brahman is to view
it as constituting his own Self.

<span id="page_lxvii">p. lxvii</span>

Adhik. III (4).--To the rule laid down in the preceding adhikara*n*a the
so-called pratîkopâsanas, i.e. those meditations in which Brahman is
viewed under a symbol or outward manifestation (as, for instance, mano
brahmety upâsîta) constitute an exception, i.e. the devotee is not to
consider the pratîka as constituting his own Self.

Adhik. IV (5).--In the pratîkopâsanas the pratîka is to be meditatively
viewed as being one with Brahman, not Brahman as being one with the
pratîka.--Râmânu*g*a takes Sûtra 5 as simply giving a reason for the
decision arrived at under Sûtra 4, and therefore as not constituting a
new adhikara*n*a.

Adhik. V (6).--In meditations connected with constitutives of
sacrificial works (as, for instance, ya evâsau tapati tam udgîtham
upâsîta) the idea of the divinity, &c. is to be transferred to the
sacrificial item, not vice versâ. In the example quoted, for instance,
the udgîtha is to be viewed as Âditya, not Âditya as the udgîtha.

Adhik. VI (7-10).--The devotee is to carry on his meditations in a
sitting posture.--*S*a<u>n</u>kara maintains that this rule does not
apply to those meditations whose result is sa*m*yagdar*s*ana; but the
Sûtra gives no hint to that effect.

Adhik. VII (11).--The meditations maybe carried on at any time, and in
any place, favourable to concentration of mind.

Adhik. VIII (12).--The meditations are to be continued until
death.--*S*a<u>n</u>kara again maintains that those meditations which
lead to sa*m*yagdar*s*ana are excepted.

Adhik. IX (13).--When through those meditations the knowledge of Brahman
has been reached, the vidvân is no longer affected by the consequences
of either past or future evil deeds.

Adhik. X (14).--Good deeds likewise lose their efficiency.--The literal
translation of the Sûtra is, 'There is likewise non-attachment (to the
vidvân) of the other (i. e. of the deeds other than the evil ones, i. e.
of good deeds), but on the fall (of the body, i.e. when death takes
place).' The last words of the Sûtra, 'but on the fall,' are separated
by *S*a<u>n</u>kara from the preceding part of the Sûtra and interpreted
to mean, 'when death takes place (there results mukti of

<span id="page_lxxviii">p. lxxviii</span>

the vidvân, who through his knowledge has freed himself from the bonds
of works).'--According to Râmânu*g*a the whole Sûtra simply means,
'There is likewise non-attachment of good deeds (not at once when
knowledge is reached), but on the death of the vidvân <span
id="fr_23"></span>[1](#fn_23).'

Adhik. XI (15).--The non-operation of works stated in the two preceding
adhikara*n*as holds good only in the case of anârabdhakârya works, i.e.
those works which have not yet begun to produce their effects, while it
does not extend to the ârabdhakârya works on which the present existence
of the devotee depends.

Adhik. XII (16, 17).--From the rule enunciated in Adhik. X are excepted
such sacrificial performances as are enjoined permanently (nitya): so,
for instance, the agnihotra, for they promote the origination of
knowledge.

Adhik. XIII (18).--The origination of knowledge is promoted also by such
sacrificial works as are not accompanied with the knowledge of the
upâsanas referring to the different members of those works.

Adhik. XIV (19).--The ârabdhakârya works have to be worked out fully by
the fruition of their effects; whereupon the vidvân becomes united with
Brahman.--The 'bhoga' of the Sûtra is, according to *S*a<u>n</u>kara,
restricted to the present existence of the devotee, since the complete
knowledge obtained by him destroys the nescience which otherwise would
lead to future embodiments. According to Râmânu*g*a a number of embodied
existences may have to be gone through before the effects of the
ârabdhakârya works are exhausted.

### PÂDA II.

This and the two remaining pâdas of the fourth adhyâya describe the fate
of the vidvân after death. According to *S*a<u>n</u>kara we have to
distinguish the vidvân who possesses the highest knowledge, viz. that he
is one with the highest

<span id="page_xxix">p. xxix</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Brahman, and the
vidvân who knows only the lower Brahman, and have to refer certain
Sûtras to the former and others to the latter. According to Râmânu*g*a
the vidvân is one only.

Adhik. I, II, III (1-6).--On the death of the vidvân (i.e. of him who
possesses the lower knowledge, according to *S*a<u>n</u>kara) his senses
are merged in the manas, the manas in the chief vital air (prâ*n*a), the
vital air in the individual soul (*g*îva), the soul in the subtle
elements.--According to Râmânu*g*a the combination (sampatti) of the
senses with the manas, &c. is a mere conjunction (sa*m*yoga), not a
merging (laya).

Adhik. IV (7).--The vidvân (i.e. according to *S*a<u>n</u>kara, he who
possesses the lower knowledge) and the avidvân, i.e. he who does not
possess any knowledge of Brahman, pass through the same stages (i.e.
those described hitherto) up to the entrance of the soul, together with
the subtle elements, and so on into the nâ*d*îs.--The vidvân also
remains connected with the subtle elements because he has not yet
completely destroyed avidyâ, so that the immortality which Scripture
ascribes to him (am*ri*tatva*m* hi vidvân abhya*s*nute) is only a
relative one.--Râmânu*g*a quotes the following text regarding the
immortality of the vidvân:

'Yadâ sarve pramu*k*yante kâmâ ye \# sya h*ri*di sthitâ*h*  
atha martyo \# m*ri*to bhavaty atra brahma sama*s*nute,'

and explains that the immortality which is here ascribed to the vidvân
as soon as he abandons all desires can only mean the
destruction--mentioned in the preceding pâda--of all the effects of good
and evil works, while the 'reaching of Brahman' can only refer to the
intuition of Brahman vouchsafed to the meditating devotee.

Adhik. V (8-11) raises; according to *S*a<u>n</u>kara, the question
whether the subtle elements of which Scripture says that they are
combined with the highest deity (te*g*a*h* parasyâ*m* devatâyâm) are
completely merged in the latter or not. The answer is that a complete
absorption of the elements takes place only when final emancipation is
reached; that, on the other hand, as long as the sa*m*sâra state lasts,
the elements, although somehow combined with

<span id="page_lxxx">p. lxxx</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Brahman, remain
distinct so as to be able to form new bodies for the soul.

According to Râmânu*g*a the Sûtras 8-11 do not constitute a new
adhikara*n*a, but continue the discussion of the point mooted in 7. The
immortality there spoken of does not imply the separation of the soul
from the body, 'because Scripture declares sa*m*sâra, i. e. embodiedness
up to the reaching of Brahman' (tasya tâvad eva *k*ira*m* yâvan na
vimokshye atha sampatsye) (8).--That the soul after having departed from
the gross body-is not disconnected from the subtle elements, is also
proved hereby, that the subtle body accompanies it, as is observed from
authority <span id="fr_24"></span>[1](#fn_24) (9).--Hence the
immortality referred to in the scriptural passage quoted is not effected
by means of the total destruction of the body (10).

Adhik. VI (12-14) is of special importance.--According to
*S*a<u>n</u>kara the Sûtras now turn from the discussion of the
departure of him who possesses the lower knowledge only to the
consideration of what becomes of him who has reached the higher
knowledge. So far it has been taught that in the case of relative
immortality (ensuing on the apara vidyâ) the subtle elements, together
with the senses and so on, depart from the body of the dying devotee;
this implies at the same time that they do not depart from the body of
the dying sage who knows himself to be one with Brahman.--Against this
latter implied doctrine Sûtra 12 is supposed to formulate an objection.
'If it be said that the departure of the prâ*n*as from the body of the
dying sage is denied (viz. in B*ri*. Up. IV, 4, 5, na tasya prâ*n*a
utkrâmanti, of him the prâ*n*as do not pass out); we reply that in that
passage the genitive "tasya" has the sense of the ablative "tasmât," so
that the sense of the passage is, "from him, i.e. from the *g*îva of the
dying sage, the prâ*n*as do not depart, but remain with it."--This
objection *S*a<u>n</u>kara supposes to be disposed of in Sûtra 13. 'By
some there is given a clear denial of the departure of the prâ*n*as in
the case of the

<span id="page_lxxxi">p. lxxxi</span>

dying sage,' viz. in the passage B*ri*. Up. III, 2, 11, where
Yâ*gñ*avalkya instructs Ârtabhâga that, when this man dies, the prâ*n*as
do not depart from it (asmât; the context showing that asmât means 'from
it,' viz. from the body, and not 'from him,' viz. the *g*îva).--The same
view is, moreover, confirmed by Sm*ri*ti passages.

According to Râmânu*g*a the three Sûtras forming *S*a<u>n</u>kara's
sixth adhikara*n*a do not constitute a new adhikara*n*a at all, and,
moreover, have to be combined into two Sûtras. The topic continuing to
be discussed is the utkrânti of the vidvân. If, Sûtra 12 says, the
utkrânti of the prâ*n*as is not admitted, on the ground of the denial
supposed to be contained in B*ri*. Up. IV, 4, 5; the reply is that the
sense of the tasya there is '*s*ârîrât' (so that the passage means,
'from him, i.e. the *g*îva, the prâ*n*as do not depart'); for this is
clearly shown by the reading of some, viz. the Mâdhyandinas, who, in
their text of the passage, do not read 'tasya' but 'tasmât.'--With
reference to the instruction given by Yâ*gñ*avalkya to Ârtabhâga, it is
to be remarked that nothing there shows the 'ayam purusha' to be the
sage who knows Brahman.--And, finally, there are Sm*ri*ti passages
declaring that the sage also when dying departs from the body.

Adhik. VII and VIII (15, 16) teach, according to *S*a<u>n</u>kara, that,
on the death of him who possesses the higher knowledge, his prâ*n*as,
elements, &c. are merged in Brahman, so as to be no longer distinct from
it in any way.

According to Râmânu*g*a the two Sûtras continue the teaching about the
prâ*n*as, bhûtas, &c. of the vidvân in general, and declare that they
are finally merged in Brahman, not merely in the way of conjunction
(sa*m*yoga), but completely <span id="fr_25"></span>[1](#fn_25).

Adhik. IX (17).--*S*a<u>n</u>kara here returns to the owner of the aparâ
vidyâ, while Râmânu*g*a continues the description of the utkrânti of his
vidvân.--The *g*îva of the dying man

<span id="page_lxxxii">p. lxxxii</span>

passes into the heart, and thence departs out of the body by means of
the nâ*d*is; the vidvân by means of the nâ*d*i called sushum*n*â, the
avidvân by means of some other nâ*d*î.

Adhik. X (18, 19).--The departing soul passes up to the sun by means of
a ray of light which exists at night as well as during day.

Adhik. XI (20, 21).--Also that vidvân who dies during the dakshi*n*âyana
reaches Brahman.

### PÂDA III.

Adhik. I, II, III (1-3) reconcile the different accounts given in the
Upanishads as to the stations of the way which leads the vidvân up to
Brahman.

Adhik. IV (4-6)-By the 'stations' we have, however, to understand not
only the subdivisions of the way but also the divine beings which lead
the soul on.

The remaining part of the pâda is by *S*a<u>n</u>kara divided into two
adhikara*n*as. Of these the former one (7-14) teaches that the Brahman
to which the departed soul is led by the guardians of the path of the
gods is not the highest Brahman, but the effected (kârya) or qualified
(*s*agu*n*a) Brahman. This is the opinion propounded in Sûtras 7-11 by
Bâdari, and, finally, accepted by *S*a<u>n</u>kara in his commentary on
Sûtra 14. In Sûtras 12-14 *G*aimini defends the opposite view, according
to which the soul of the vidvân goes to the highest Brahman, not to the
kâryam brahma. But *G*aimini's view, although set forth in the latter
part of the adhikara*n*a, is, according to *S*a<u>n</u>kara, a mere
pûrvapaksha, while Bâdari's opinion represents the siddhânta.--The
latter of the two adhikara*n*as (VI of the whole pâda; 15,16) records
the opinion of Bâdarâya*n*a on a collateral question, viz. whether, or
not, all those who worship the effected Brahman are led to it. The
decision is that those only are guided to Brahman who have not
worshipped it under a pratîka form.

According to Râmânu*g*a, Sûtras 7-16 form one adhikara*n*a only, in
which the views of Bâdari and of *G*aimini represent two pûrvapakshas,
while Bâdarâya*n*a's opinion is adopted

<span id="page_lxxxiii">p. lxxxiii</span>

as the siddhânta. The question is whether the guardians of the path lead
to Brahman only those who worship the effected Brahman, i.e.
Hira*n*yagarbha, or those who worship the highest Brahman, or those who
worship the individual soul as free from Prak*ri*ti, and having Brahman
for its Self (ye pratyagâtmâna*m* prak*ri*tiviyukta*m* brahmâtmakam
upâsate).--The first view is maintained by Bâdari in Sûtra 7, 'The
guardians lead to Brahman those who worship the effected Brahman,
because going is possible towards the latter only;' for no movement can
take place towards the highest and as such omnipresent Brahman.--The
explanation of Sûtra 9 is similar to that of *S*a<u>n</u>kara; but more
clearly replies to the objection (that, if Hira*n*yagarbha were meant in
the passage, 'purusho\#mânava*h* sa etân brahma gamayati,' the text
would read 'sa etân brahmâ*n*am gamayati') that Hira*n*yagarbha is
called Brahman on account of his nearness to Brahman, i.e. on account of
his prathama*g*atva.---The explanation of 10, 11 is essentially the same
as in *S*a<u>n</u>kara; so also of 12-14.--The siddhânta view is
established in Sûtra 13, 'It is the opinion of Bâdarâya*n*a that it,
i.e. the ga*n*a of the guardians, leads to Brahman those who do not take
their stand on what is pratîka, i.e. those who worship the highest
Brahman, and those who meditate on the individual Self as dissociated
from prak*ri*ti, and having Brahman for its Self, but not those who
worship Brahman under pratîkas. For both views--that of *G*aimini as
well as that of Bâdari--are faulty.' The kârya view contradicts such
passages as 'asmâ*k* *kh*arîrât samutthâya para*m* *g*yotir
upasampadya,' &c.; the para view, such passages as that in the
pa*ñk*âgni-vidyâ, which declares that ya ittha*m* vidu*h*, i.e. those
who know the pañ*k*âgni-vidyâ, are also led up to Brahman.

### PÂDA IV.

Adhik. I (1-3) returns, according to--*S*a<u>n</u>kara, to the owner of
the parâ vidyâ, and teaches that, when on his death his soul obtains
final release, it does not acquire any new characteristics, but merely
manifests itself in its true nature.--The explanation given by
Râmânu*g*a is essentially

<span id="page_lxxxiv">p. lxxxiv</span>

the same, but of course refers to that vidvân whose going to Brahman had
been described in the preceding pâda.

Adhik. II (4) determines that the relation in which the released soul
stands to Brahman is that of avibhâga, non-separation. This, on
*S*a<u>n</u>kara's view, means absolute non-separation,
identity.--According to Râmânuga the question to be considered is
whether the released soul views itself as separate (p*ri*thagbhûta) from
Brahman, or as non-separate because being a mode of Brahman. The former
view is favoured by those Sruti and Sm*ri*ti passages which speak of the
soul as being with, or equal to, Brahman; the latter by, such passages
as tat tvam asi and the like. <span id="fr_26"></span>[1](#fn_26)

Adhik. Ill (5-7) discusses the characteristics of the released soul
(i.e. of the truly released soul, according to *S*a<u>n</u>kara).
According to *G*aimini the released soul, when manifesting itself in its
true nature, possesses all those qualities which in *Kh.* Up. VIII, *7*,
I and other places are ascribed to Brahman, such as apahatapâpmatva,
satyasa*m*kalpatva, &c., ai*s*varya.--According to Au*d*ulomi the only
characteristic of the released soul is *k*aitanya.--According to
Bâdarâyana the two views can be combined (*S*a<u>n</u>kara remarking
that satyasa*m*kalpatva, &c. are ascribed to the released soul
vyavahârâpekshayâ).

Adhik. IV (8-9) returns, according to *S*a<u>n</u>kara, to the aparâ
vidyâ, and discusses the question whether the soul of

<span id="page_lxxxv">p. lxxxv</span>

the pious effects its desires by its mere determination, or uses some
other means. The former alternative is accepted--According to Râmânu*g*a
the adhikara*n*a simply continues the consideration of the state of the
released, begun in the preceding adhikara*n*a. Of the released soul it
is said in *Kh*. Up. VIII, 12, 3 that after it has manifested itself in
its true nature it moves about playing and rejoicing with women,
carriages, and so on. The question then arises whether it effects all
this by its mere sa*m*kalpa (it having been shown in the preceding
adhikara*n*a that the released soul is, like the Lord, satyasa*m*kalpa),
or not. The answer is in favour of the former alternative, on account of
the explicit declaration made in *Kh*. Up. VIII, 2, 'By his mere will
the fathers come to receive him.'

Adhik. V (10-14) decides that the released are embodied or disembodied
according to their wish and will.

Adhik. VI (11, 12) explains how the soul of the released can animate
several bodies at the same time.--Sûtra 12 gives, according to
*S*a<u>n</u>kara, the additional explanation that those passages which
declare the absence of all specific cognition on the part of the
released soul do not refer to the partly released soul of the devotee,
but either to the soul in the state of deep sleep (svâpyaya = sushupti),
or to the fully released soul of the sage (sampatti =
kaivalya).--Râmânu*g*a explains that the passages speaking of absence of
consciousness refer either to the state of deep sleep, or to the time of
dying (sampatti = mara*n*am according to 'vâ<u>n</u> manasi sampadyate,'
&c.).

Adhik. VII (17-21).--The released *g*îvas participate in all the
perfections and powers of the Lord, with the exception of the power of
creating and sustaining the world. They do not return to new forms of
embodied existence.

 

After having, in this way, rendered ourselves acquainted with the
contents of the Brahma-sûtras according to the views of *S*a<u>n</u>kara
as well as Râmânu*g*a, we have now to consider the question which of the
two modes of interpretation represents--or at any rate more closely
approximates to--the true meaning of the Sûtras. That

<span id="page_lxxxvi">p. lxxxvi</span>

few of the Sûtras are intelligible if taken by themselves, we have
already remarked above; but this does not exclude the possibility of our
deciding with a fair degree of certainty which of the two
interpretations proposed agrees better with the text, at least in a
certain number of cases.

We have to note in the first place that, in spite of very numerous
discrepancies,--of which only the more important ones have been singled
out in the conspectus of contents,--the two commentators are at one as
to the general drift of the Sûtras and the arrangement of topics. As a
rule, the adhikara*n*as discuss one or several Vedic passages bearing
upon a certain point of the system, and in the vast majority of cases
the two commentators agree as to which are the special texts referred
to. And, moreover, in a very large number of cases the agreement extends
to the interpretation to be put on those passages and on the Sûtras.
This far-reaching agreement certainly tends to inspire us with a certain
confidence as to the existence of an old tradition concerning the
meaning of the Sûtras on which the bulk of the interpretations of
*S*a<u>n</u>kara as well as of Râmânu*g*a are based.

But at the same time we have seen that, in a not inconsiderable number
of cases, the interpretations of *S*a<u>n</u>kara and Râmânu*g*a diverge
more or less widely, and that the Sûtras affected thereby are, most of
them, especially important because bearing on fundamental points of the
Vedânta system. The question then remains which of the two
interpretations is entitled to preference.

Regarding a small number of Sûtras I have already (in the conspectus of
contents) given it as my opinion that Râmânu*g*a's explanation appears
to be more worthy of consideration. We meet, in the first place, with a
number of cases in which the two commentators agree as to the literal
meaning of a Sûtra, but where *S*a<u>n</u>kara sees himself reduced to
the necessity of supplementing his interpretation by certain additions
and reservations of his own for which the text gives no occasion, while
Râmânu*g*a is able to take the Sûtra as it stands. To exemplify this
remark, I again direct attention to all those Sûtras which in

<span id="page_lxxxvii">p. lxxxvii</span>

clear terms represent the individual soul as something different from
the highest soul, and concerning which *S*a<u>n</u>kara is each time
obliged to have recourse to the plea of the Sûtra referring, not to what
is true in the strict sense of the word, but only to what is
conventionally looked upon as true. It is, I admit, not altogether
impossible that *S*a<u>n</u>kara's interpretation should represent the
real meaning of the Sûtras; that the latter, indeed, to use the terms
employed by Dr. Deussen, should for the nonce set forth an exoteric
doctrine adapted to the common notions of mankind, which, however, can
be rightly understood by him only to whose mind the esoteric doctrine is
all the while present. This is not impossible, I say; but it is a point
which requires convincing proofs before it can be allowed.--We have had,
in the second place, to note a certain number of adhikara*n*as and
Sûtras concerning whose interpretation *S*a<u>n</u>kara and Râmânu*g*a
disagree altogether; and we have seen that not unfrequently the
explanations given by the latter commentator appear to be preferable
because falling in more easily with the words of the text. The most
striking instance of this is afforded by the 13th adhikara*n*a of II, 3,
which treats of the size of the *g*îva, and where Râmânu*g*a's
explanation seems to be decidedly superior to *S*a<u>n</u>kara's, both
if we look to the arrangement of the whole adhikara*n*a and to the
wording of the single Sûtras. The adhikara*n*a is, moreover, a specially
important one, because the nature of the view held as to the size of the
individual soul goes far to settle the question what kind of Vedânta is
embodied in Bâdarâya*n*a's work.

But it will be requisite not only to dwell on the interpretations of a
few detached Sûtras, but to make the attempt at least of forming some
opinion as to the relation of the Vedânta-sûtras as a whole to the chief
distinguishing doctrines of *S*a<u>n</u>kara as well as Râmânu*g*a. Such
an attempt may possibly lead to very slender positive results; but in
the present state of the enquiry even a merely negative result, viz. the
conclusion that the Sûtras do not teach particular doctrines found in
them by certain commentators, will not be without its value.

<span id="page_lxxxviii">p. lxxxviii</span>

The first question we wish to consider in some detail is whether the
Sûtras in any way favour *S*a<u>n</u>kara's doctrine that we have to
distinguish a twofold knowledge of Brahman, a higher knowledge which
leads to the immediate absorption, on death, of the individual soul in
Brahman, and a lower knowledge which raises its owner merely to an
exalted form of individual existence. The adhyâya first to be considered
in this connexion is the fourth one. According to *S*a<u>n</u>kara the
three latter pâdas of that adhyâya are chiefly engaged in describing the
fate of him who dies in the possession of the lower knowledge, while two
sections (IV, 2, 12-14; IV, 4, 1-7) tell us what happens to him who,
before his death, had risen to the knowledge of the highest Brahman.
According to Râmânu*g*a, on the other hand, the three pâdas, referring
throughout to one subject only, give an uninterrupted account of the
successive steps by which the soul of him who knows the Lord through the
Upanishads passes, at the time of death, out of the gross body which it
had tenanted, ascends to the world of Brahman, and lives there for ever
without returning into the sa*m*sâra.

On an à priori view of the matter it certainly appears somewhat strange
that the concluding section of the Sûtras should be almost entirely
taken up with describing the fate of him who has after all acquired an
altogether inferior knowledge only, and has remained shut out from the
true sanctuary of Vedântic knowledge, while the fate of the fully
initiated is disposed of in a few occasional Sûtras. It is, I think, not
too much to say that no unbiassed student of the Sûtras would--before
having allowed himself to be influenced by *S*a<u>n</u>kara's
interpretations--imagine for a moment that the solemn words, 'From
thence is no return, from thence is no return,' with which the Sûtras
conclude, are meant to describe, not the lasting condition of him who
has reached final release, the highest aim of man, but merely a stage on
the way of that soul which is engaged in the slow progress of gradual
release, a stage which is indeed greatly superior to any earthly form of
existence, but yet itself belongs to the essentially fictitious
sa*m*sâra.

<span id="page_lxxxix">p. lxxxix</span>

and as such remains infinitely below the bliss of true mukti. And this à
priori impression--which, although no doubt significant, could hardly be
appealed to as decisive--is confirmed by a detailed consideration of the
two sets of Sûtras which *S*a<u>n</u>kara connects with the knowledge of
the higher Brahman. How these Sûtras are interpreted by *S*a<u>n</u>kara
and Râmânu*g*a has been stated above in the conspectus of contents; the
points which render the interpretation given by Râmânu*g*a more probable
are as follows. With regard to IV, 2, 12-14, we have to note, in the
first place, the circumstance--relevant although not decisive in
itself--that Sûtra 12 does not contain any indication of a new topic
being introduced. In the second place, it can hardly be doubted that the
text of Sûtra 13, 'spash*t*o hy ekeshâm,' is more appropriately
understood, with Râmânu*g*a, as furnishing a reason for the opinion
advanced in the preceding Sûtra, than--with *S*a<u>n</u>kara--as
embodying the refutation of a previous statement (in which latter case
we should expect not 'hi' but 'tu'). And, in the third place, the 'eke,'
i.e. 'some,' referred to in Sûtra 13 would, on *S*a<u>n</u>kara's
interpretation, denote the very same persons to whom the preceding Sûtra
had referred, viz. the followers of the Kâ*n*va-*s*âkhâ (the two Vedic
passages referred to in 12 and 13 being B*ri*. Up. IV, 4, 5, and III, 2,
11, according to the Kâ*n*va recension); while it is the standing
practice of the Sûtras to introduce, by means of the designation 'eke,'
members of Vedic *s*âkhâs, teachers, &c. other than those alluded to in
the preceding Sûtras. With this practice Râmânu*g*a's interpretation, on
the other hand, fully agrees; for, according to him, the 'eke' are the
Mâdhyandinas, whose reading in B*ri*. Up. IV, 4, 5, viz. 'tasmât,'
clearly indicates that the 'tasya' in the corresponding passage of the
Kâ*n*vas denotes the *s*ârira, i.e. the *g*îva. I think it is not saying
too much that *S*a<u>n</u>kara's explanation, according to which the
'eke' would denote the very same Kâ*n*vas to whom the preceding Sûtra
had referred--so that the Kâ*n*vas would be distinguished from
themselves as it were--is altogether impossible.

The result of this closer consideration of the first set of

<span id="page_xc">p. xc</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Sûtras, alleged by
*S*a<u>n</u>kara to concern the owner of the higher knowledge of
Brahman, entitles us to view with some distrust--*S*a<u>n</u>kara's
assertion that another set also--IV, 4, l-7--has to be detached from the
general topic of the fourth adhyâya, and to be understood as depicting
the condition of those who have obtained final absolute release. And the
Sûtras themselves do not tend to weaken this preliminary want of
confidence. In the first place their wording also gives no indication
whatever of their having to be separated from what precedes as well as
what follows. And, in the second place, the last Sûtra of the set (7)
obliges *S*a<u>n</u>kara to ascribe to his truly released souls
qualities which clearly cannot belong to them; so that he finally is
obliged to make the extraordinary statement that those qualities belong
to them 'vyavahârâpekshayâ,' while yet the purport of the whole
adhikara*n*a is said to be the description of the truly released soul
for which no vyavahâra exists! Very truly *S*a<u>n</u>kara's commentator
here remarks, 'atra ke*k*in muhyanti akha*nd*a*k*inmâtra*gñ*ânân
muktasyâ*gñ*ânâbhâvât kuta â*gñ*ânikadharmayoga*h*,' and the way in
which thereupon he himself attempts to get over the difficulty certainly
does not improve matters.

In connexion with the two passages discussed, we meet in the fourth
adhyâya with another passage, which indeed has no direct bearing on the
distinction of aparâ and parâ vidyâ, but may yet be shortly referred to
in this place as another and altogether undoubted instance of
*S*a<u>n</u>kara's interpretations not always agreeing with the text of
the Sûtras. The Sûtras 7-16 of the third pâda state the opinions of
three different teachers on the question to which Brahman the soul of
the vidvân repairs on death, or--according to Râmânu*g*a--the
worshippers of which Brahman repair to (the highest) Brahman. Râmânu*g*a
treats the views of Bâdari and *G*aimini as two pûrvapakshas, and the
opinion of Bâdarâya*n*a--which is stated last--as the siddhânta.
*S*a<u>n</u>kara, on the other hand, detaching the Sûtras in which
Bâdarâya*n*a's view is set forth from the preceding part of the
adhikara*n*a (a proceeding which, although not

<span id="page_xci">p. xci</span>

plausible, yet cannot be said to be altogether illegitimate), maintains
that Bâdari's view, which is expounded first, represents the siddhânta,
while *G*aimini's view, set forth subsequently, is to be considered a
mere pûrvapaksha. This, of course, is altogether inadmissible, it being
the invariable practice of the Vedânta-sûtras as well as the Pûrva
Mîmâ*m*sâ-sûtras to conclude the discussion of contested points with the
statement of that view which is to be accepted as the authoritative one.
This is so patent that *S*a<u>n</u>kara feels himself called upon to
defend his deviation from the general rule (Commentary on IV, 4, 13),
without, however, bringing forward any arguments but such as are valid
only if *S*a<u>n</u>kara's system itself is already accepted.

The previous considerations leave us, I am inclined to think, no choice
but to side with Râmânu*g*a as to the general subject-matter of the
fourth adhyâya of the Sûtras. We need not accept him as our guide in all
particular interpretations, but we must acknowledge with him that the
Sûtras of the fourth adhyâya describe the ultimate fate of one and the
same vidvân, and do not afford any basis for the distinction of a higher
and lower knowledge of Brahman in *S*a<u>n</u>kara's sense.

If we have not to discriminate between a lower and a higher knowledge of
Brahman, it follows that the distinction of a lower and a higher Brahman
is likewise not valid. But this is not a point to be decided at once on
the negative evidence of the fourth adhyâya, but regarding which the
entire body of the Vedânta-sûtras has to be consulted. And intimately
connected with this investigation--in fact, one with it from a certain
point of view--is the question whether the Sûtras afford any evidence of
their author having held the doctrine of Mâyâ, the principle of
illusion, by the association with which the highest Brahman, in itself
transcending all qualities, appears as the lower Brahman or Î*s*vara.
That Râmânu*g*a denies the distinction of the two Brahmans and the
doctrine of Mâyâ we have seen above; we shall, however, in the
subsequent investigation, pay less attention to his views and
interpretations

<span id="page_xcii">p. xcii</span>

than to the indications furnished by the Sûtras themselves.

Placing myself at the point of view of a *S*a<u>n</u>kara, I am startled
at the outset by the second Sûtra of the first adhyâya, which undertakes
to give a definition of Brahman. 'Brahman is that whence the origination
and so on (i.e. the sustentation and reabsorption) of this world
proceed.' What, we must ask, is this Sûtra meant to define?--That
Brahman, we are inclined to answer, whose cognition the first Sûtra
declares to constitute the task of the entire Vedânta; that Brahman
whose cognition is the only road to final release; that Brahman in fact
which *S*a<u>n</u>kara calls the highest.--But, here we must object to
ourselves, the highest Brahman is not properly defined as that from
which the world originates. In later Vedântic writings, whose authors
were clearly conscious of the distinction of the higher absolute Brahman
and the lower Brahman related to Mâyâ or the world, we meet with
definitions of Brahman of an altogether different type. I need only
remind the reader of the current definition of Brahman as
sa*k*-*k*id-ânanda, or, to mention one individual instance, refer to the
introductory *s*lokas of the Pa*ñk*ada*s*î dilating on the sa*m*vid
svayamprabhâ, the self-luminous principle of thought which in all time,
past or future, neither starts into being nor perishes (P. D. I, 7).
'That from which the world proceeds' can by a *S*a<u>n</u>kara be
accepted only as a definition of Î*s*vara, of Brahman which by its
association with Mâyâ is enabled to project the false appearance of this
world, and it certainly is as improbable that the Sûtras should open
with a definition of that inferior principle, from whose cognition there
can accrue no permanent benefit, as, according to a remark made above,
it is unlikely that they should conclude with a description of the state
of those who know the lower Brahman only, and thus are debarred from
obtaining true release. As soon, on the other hand, as we discard the
idea of a twofold Brahman and conceive Brahman as one only, as the
all-enfolding being which sometimes emits the world from its own
substance and sometimes again retracts it into itself, ever remaining
one in all its

<span id="page_xciii">p. xciii</span>

various manifestations--a conception which need not by any means be
modelled in all its details on the views of the Râmânu*g*as--the
definition of Brahman given in the second Sûtra becomes altogether
unobjectionable.

We next enquire whether the impression left on the mind by the manner in
which Bâdarâya*n*a defines Brahman, viz. that he does not distinguish
between an absolute Brahman and a Brahman associated with Mâyâ, is
confirmed or weakened by any other parts of his work. The Sûtras being
throughout far from direct in their enunciations, we shall have to look
less to particular terms and turns of expression than to general lines
of reasoning. What in this connexion seems specially worthy of being
taken into account, is the style of argumentation employed by the
Sûtrakâra against the Sâ<u>n</u>khya doctrine, which maintains that the
world has originated, not from an intelligent being, but from the
non-intelligent pradhâna. The most important Sûtras relative to this
point are to be met with in the first pâda of the second adhyâya. Those
Sûtras are indeed almost unintelligible if taken by themselves, but the
unanimity of the commentators as to their meaning enables us to use them
as steps in our investigation. The sixth Sûtra of the pâda mentioned
replies to the Sâ<u>n</u>khya objection that the non-intelligent world
cannot spring from an intelligent principle, by the remark that 'it is
thus seen,' i.e. it is a matter of common observation that
non-intelligent things are produced from beings endowed with
intelligence; hair and nails, for instance, springing from animals, and
certain insects from dung.--Now, an argumentation of this kind is
altogether out of place from the point of view of the true
*S*â<u>n</u>kara. According to the latter the non-intelligent world does
not spring from Brahman in so far as the latter is intelligence, but in
so far as it is associated with Mâyâ. Mâyâ is the upâdâna of the
material world, and Mâyâ itself is of a non-intelligent nature, owing to
which it is by so many Vedântic writers identified with the prak*ri*ti
of the Sâ<u>n</u>khyas. Similarly the illustrative instances, adduced
under Sûtra 9 for the purpose of showing that effects when being
reabsorbed into their causal substances

<span id="page_xciv">p. xciv</span>

do not impart to the latter their own qualities, and that hence the
material world also, when being refunded into Brahman, does not impart
to it its own imperfections, are singularly inappropriate if viewed in
connexion with the doctrine of Mâyâ, according to which the material
world is no more in Brahman at the time of a pralaya than during the
period of its subsistence. According to *S*â<u>n</u>kara the world is
not merged in Brahman, but the special forms into which the upâdâna of
the world, i.e. Mâyâ, had modified itself are merged in non-distinct
Mâyâ, whose relation to Brahman is not changed thereby.--The
illustration, again, given in Sûtra 24 of the mode in which Brahman, by
means of its inherent power, transforms itself into the world without
employing any extraneous instruments of action, 'kshîravad dhi,' 'as
milk (of its own accord turns into curds),' would be strangely chosen
indeed if meant to bring nearer to our understanding the mode in which
Brahman projects the illusive appearance of the world; and also the
analogous instance given in the Sûtra next following, 'as Gods and the
like (create palaces, chariots, &c. by the mere power of their
will)'--which refers to the real creation of real things--would hardly
be in its place if meant to illustrate a theory which considers
unreality to be the true character of the world. The mere cumulation of
the two essentially heterogeneous illustrative instances (kshîravad dhi;
devâdivat), moreover, seems to show that the writer who had recourse to
them held no very definite theory as to the particular mode in which the
world springs from Brahman, but was merely concerned to render plausible
in some way or other that an intelligent being can give rise to what is
non-intelligent without having recourse to any extraneous means <span
id="fr_27"></span>[1](#fn_27).

That the Mâyâ doctrine was not present to the mind of the Sûtrakâra,
further appears from the latter part of the fourth pâda of the first
adhyâya, where it is shown that Brahman is not only the operative but
also the material cause of the world. If anywhere, there would have been

<span id="page_xcv">p. xcv</span>

the place to indicate, had such been the author's view, that Brahman is
the material cause of the world through Mâyâ only, and that the world is
unreal; but the Sûtras do not contain a single word to that effect.
Sûtra 26, on the other hand, exhibits the significant term
'pari*n*âmât;' Brahman produces the world by means of a modification of
itself. It is well known that later on, when the terminology of the
Vedânta became definitely settled, the term 'pari*n*âmavâda' was used to
denote that very theory to which the followers of *S*a<u>n</u>kara are
most violently opposed, viz. the doctrine according to which the world
is not a mere vivarta, i.e. an illusory manifestation of Brahman, but
the effect of Brahman undergoing a real change, may that change be
conceived to take place in the way taught by Râmânu*g*a or in some other
manner.--With regard to the last-quoted Sûtra, as well as to those
touched upon above, the commentators indeed maintain that whatever terms
and modes of expression are apparently opposed to the vivartavâda are in
reality reconcilable with it; to Sûtra 26, for instance, Govindânanda
remarks that the term 'pari*n*âma' only denotes an effect in general
(kâryamâtra), without implying that the effect is real. But in cases of
this nature we are fully entitled to use our own judgment, even if we
were not compelled to do so by the fact that other commentators, such as
Râmânu*g*a, are satisfied to take 'pari*n*âma' and similar terms in
their generally received sense.

A further section treating of the nature of Brahman is met with in III,
2, 11 ff. It is, according to *S*a<u>n</u>kara's view, of special
importance, as it is alleged to set forth that Brahman is in itself
destitute of all qualities, and is affected with qualities only through
its limiting adjuncts (upâdhis), the offspring of Mâyâ. I have above (in
the conspectus of contents) given a somewhat detailed abstract of the
whole section as interpreted by *S*a<u>n</u>kara on the one hand, and
Râmânu*g*a on the other hand, from which it appears that the latter's
opinion as to the purport of the group of Sûtras widely diverges from
that of *S*a<u>n</u>kara. The wording of the Sûtras is so eminently
concise and vague that I find it impossible to decide which of the two
commentators--if

<span id="page_xcvi">p. xcvi</span>

indeed either--is to be accepted as a trustworthy guide; regarding the
sense of some Sûtras *S*a<u>n</u>kara's explanation seems to deserve
preference, in the case of others Râmânu*g*a seems to keep closer to the
text. I decidedly prefer, for instance, Râmânu*g*a's interpretation of
Sûtra 22, as far as the sense of the entire Sûtra is concerned, and more
especially with regard to the term 'prak*ri*taitâvattvam,' whose proper
force is brought out by Râmânu*g*a's explanation only. So much is
certain that none of the Sûtras decidedly favours the interpretation
proposed by *S*a<u>n</u>kara. Whichever commentator we follow, we
greatly miss coherence and strictness of reasoning, and it is thus by no
means improbable that the section is one of those--perhaps not few in
number--in which both interpreters had less regard to the literal sense
of the words and to tradition than to their desire of forcing
Bâdarâya*n*a's Sûtras to bear testimony to the truth of their own
philosophic theories.

With special reference to the Mâyâ doctrine one important Sûtra has yet
to be considered, the only one in which the term 'mâyâ' itself occurs,
viz. III, 2, 3. According to *S*a<u>n</u>kara the Sûtra signifies that
the environments of the dreaming soul are not real but mere Mâyâ, i.e.
unsubstantial illusion, because they do not fully manifest the character
of real objects. Râmânu*g*a (as we have seen in the conspectus) gives a
different explanation of the term 'mâyâ,' but in judging of
*S*a<u>n</u>kara's views we may for the time accept *S*a<u>n</u>kara's
own interpretation. Now, from the latter it clearly follows that if the
objects seen in dreams are to be called Mâyâ, i.e. illusion, because not
evincing the characteristics of reality, the objective world surrounding
the waking soul must not be called Mâyâ. But that the world perceived by
waking men is Mâyâ, even in a higher sense than the world presented to
the dreaming consciousness, is an undoubted tenet of the
*S*â<u>n</u>kara Vedânta; and the Sûtra therefore proves either that
Bâdarâya*n*a did not hold the doctrine of the illusory character of the
world, or else that, if after all he did hold that doctrine, he used the
term 'mâyâ' in a sense altogether different from that

<span id="page_xcvii">p. xcvii</span>

in which *S*a<u>n</u>kara employs it.--If, on the other hand, we, with
Râmânu*g*a, understand the word 'mâyâ' to denote a wonderful thing, the
Sûtra of course has no bearing whatever on the doctrine of Mâyâ in its
later technical sense.

We now turn to the question as to the relation of the individual soul to
Brahman. Do the Sûtras indicate anywhere that their author held
*S*a<u>n</u>kara's doctrine, according to which the *g*îva is in reality
identical with Brahman, and separated from it, as it were, only by a
false surmise due to avidyâ, or do they rather favour the view that the
souls, although they have sprung from Brahman, and constitute elements
of its nature, yet enjoy a kind of individual existence apart from it?
This question is in fact only another aspect of the Mâyâ question, but
yet requires a short separate treatment.

In the conspectus I have given it as my opinion that the Sûtras in which
the size of the individual soul is discussed can hardly be understood in
*S*a<u>n</u>kara's sense, and rather seem to favour the opinion, held
among others by Râmânu*g*a, that the soul is of minute size. We have
further seen that Sûtra 18 of the third pâda of the second adhyâya,
which describes the soul as '*gñ*a,' is more appropriately understood in
the sense assigned to it by Râmânu*g*a; and, again, that the Sûtras
which treat of the soul being an agent, can be reconciled with
*S*a<u>n</u>kara's views only if supplemented in a way which their text
does not appear to authorise.--We next have the important Sûtra II, 3,
43 in which the soul is distinctly said to be a part (a*ms*a) of
Brahman, and which, as we have already noticed, can be made to fall in
with *S*a<u>n</u>kara's views only if a*ms*a is explained, altogether
arbitrarily, by 'a*ms*a iva,' while Râmânu*g*a is able to take the Sûtra
as it stands.--We also have already referred to Sûtra 50, 'âbhâsa eva
*k*a,' which *S*a<u>n</u>kara interprets as setting forth the so-called
pratibimbavâda according to which the individual Self is merely a
reflection of the highest Self. But almost every Sûtra--and Sûtra 50
forms no exception-being so obscurely expressed, that viewed by itself
it admits of various, often totally opposed, interpretations, the only
safe method is to keep in view, in the case of each ambiguous

<span id="page_xcviii">p. xcviii</span>

aphorism, the general drift and spirit of the whole work, and that, as
we have seen hitherto, is by no means favourable to the pratibimba
doctrine. How indeed could Sûtra 50, if setting forth that latter
doctrine, be reconciled with Sûtra 43, which says distinctly that the
soul is a part of Brahman? For that 43 contains, as *S*a<u>n</u>kara and
his commentators aver, a statement of the ava*kkh*edavâda, can itself be
accepted only if we interpret a*ms*a by a*ms*a iva, and to do so there
is really no valid reason whatever. I confess that Râmânu*g*a's
interpretation of the Sûtra (which however is accepted by several other
commentators also) does not appear to me particularly convincing; and
the Sûtras unfortunately offer us no other passages on the ground of
which we might settle the meaning to be ascribed to the term âbhâsa,
which may mean 'reflection,' but may mean hetvâbhâsa, i. e. fallacious
argument, as well. But as things stand, this one Sûtra cannot, at any
rate, be appealed to as proving that the pratibimbavâda which, in its
turn, presupposes the mâyâvâda, is the teaching of the Sûtras.

To the conclusion that the Sûtrakâra did not hold the doctrine of the
absolute identity of the highest and the individual soul in the sense of
*S*a<u>n</u>kara, we are further led by some other indications to be met
with here and there in the Sûtras. In the conspectus of contents we have
had occasion to direct attention to the important Sûtra II, 1, 22, which
distinctly enunciates that the Lord is adhika, i. e. additional to, or
different from, the individual soul, since Scripture declares the two to
be different. Analogously I, 2, 20 lays stress on the fact that the
*s*ârîra is not the antaryâmin, because the Mâdhyandinas, as well as the
Kâ*n*vas, speak of him in their texts as different (bhedena enam
adhîyate), and in 22 the *s*ârîra and the pradhâna are referred to as
the two 'others' (itarau) of whom the text predicates distinctive
attributes separating them from the highest Lord. The word 'itara' (the
other one) appears in several other passages (I, 1, 16; I, 3, 16; II, 1,
21) as a kind of technical term denoting the individual soul in
contradistinction from the Lord. The *S*â<u>n</u>karas indeed maintain
that all those passages refer to an unreal distinction

<span id="page_xciv">p. xciv</span>

due to avidyâ. But this is just what we should like to see proved, and
the proof offered in no case amounts to more than a reference to the
system which demands that the Sûtras should be thus understood. If we
accept the interpretations of the school of *S*a<u>n</u>kara, it remains
altogether unintelligible why the Sûtrakâra should never hint even at
what *S*a<u>n</u>kara is anxious again and again to point out at length,
viz. that the greater part of the work contains a kind of exoteric
doctrine only, ever tending to mislead the student who does not keep in
view what its nature is. If other reasons should make it probable that
the Sûtrakâra was anxious to hide the true doctrine of the Upanishads as
a sort of esoteric teaching, we might be more ready to accept
*S*a<u>n</u>kara's mode of interpretation. But no such reasons are
forthcoming; nowhere among the avowed followers of the *S*a<u>n</u>kara
system is there any tendency to treat the kernel of their philosophy as
something to be jealously guarded and hidden. On the contrary, they all,
from Gau*d*apâda down to the most modern writer, consider it their most
important, nay, only task to inculcate again and again in the clearest
and most unambiguous language that all appearance of multiplicity is a
vain illusion, that the Lord and the individual souls are in reality
one, and that all knowledge but this one knowledge is without true
value.

There remains one more important passage concerning the relation of the
individual soul to the highest Self, a passage which attracted our
attention above, when we were reviewing the evidence for early
divergence of opinion among the teachers of the Vedânta. I mean I, 4,
20-22, which three Sûtras state the views of Â*s*marathya, Au*d*ulomi,
and Kâ*s*akr*ri*tsna as to the reason why, in a certain passage of the
B*ri*hadâra*n*yaka, characteristics of the individual soul are ascribed
to the highest Self. The siddhânta view is enounced in Sûtra 22,
'avasthiter iti Kâ*s*ak*ri*tsna*h*' i. e. Kâ*s*ak*ri*tsna (accounts for
the circumstance mentioned) on the ground of the 'permanent abiding or
abode.' By this 'permanent abiding' *S*a<u>n</u>kara understands the
Lord's abiding as, i. e. existing as--or in the condition of--the
individual soul, and thus sees in the Sûtra an enunciation

<span id="page_c">p. c</span>

of his own view that the individual soul is nothing but the highest
Self, 'avik*ri*ta*h* parame*s*varo *g*îvo nânya*h*.' Râmânu*g*a on the
other hand, likewise accepting Kâ*s*ak*ri*tsna's opinion as the
siddhânta view, explains 'avasthiti' as the Lord's permanent abiding
within the individual soul, as described in the
antaryâmin-brâhma*n*a.--We can hardly maintain that the term 'avasthiti'
cannot have the meaning ascribed to it by *S*a<u>n</u>kara, viz. special
state or condition, but so much must be urged in favour of Râmânu*g*a's
interpretation that in the five other places where avasthiti (or
anavasthiti) is met with in the Sûtras (I, 2, 17; II, 2, 4; II, 2, 13;
II, 3, 24; III, 3, 32) it regularly means permanent abiding or permanent
abode within something.

If, now, I am shortly to sum up the results of the preceding enquiry as
to the teaching of the Sûtras, I must, give it as my opinion that they
do not set forth the distinction of a higher and lower knowledge of
Brahman; that they do not acknowledge the distinction of Brahman and
Î*s*vara in *S*a<u>n</u>kara's sense; that they do not hold the doctrine
of the unreality of the world; and that they do not, with
*S*a<u>n</u>kara, proclaim the absolute identity of the individual and
the highest Self. I do not wish to advance for the present beyond these
negative results. Upon Râmânu*g*a's mode of interpretation--although I
accept it without reserve in some important details--I look on the whole
as more useful in providing us with a powerful means of criticising
*S*a<u>n</u>kara's explanations than in guiding us throughout to the
right understanding of the text. The author of the Sûtras may have held
views about the nature of Brahman, the world, and the soul differing
from those of *S*a<u>n</u>kara, and yet not agreeing in all points with
those of Râmânu*g*a. If, however, the negative conclusions stated above
should be well founded, it would follow even from them that the system
of Bâdarâya*n*a had greater affinities with that of the Bhâgavatas and
Râmânu*g*a than with the one of which the *S*a<u>n</u>kara-bhâshya is
the classical exponent.

It appears from the above review of the teaching of the Sûtras that only
a comparatively very small proportion of them contribute matter enabling
us to form a judgment

<span id="page_ci">p. ci</span>

as to the nature of the philosophical doctrine advocated by
Bâdarâya*n*a. The reason of this is that the greater part of the work is
taken up with matters which, according to *S*a<u>n</u>kara's
terminology, form part of the so-called lower knowledge, and throw no
light upon philosophical questions in the stricter sense of the word.
This circumstance is not without significance. In later works belonging
to *S*a<u>n</u>kara's school in which the distinction of a higher and
lower vidyâ is clearly recognised, the topics constituting the latter
are treated with great shortness; and rightly so, for they are unable to
accomplish the highest aim of man, i.e. final release. When we
therefore, on the other hand, find that the subjects of the so-called
lower vidyâ are treated very fully in the Vedânta-sûtras, when we
observe, for instance, the almost tedious length to which the
investigation of the unity of vidyâs (most of which are so-called
sagu*n*a, i.e. lower vidyâs) is carried in the third adhyâya, or the
fact of almost the whole fourth adhyâya being devoted to the ultimate
fate of the possessor of the lower vidyâ; we certainly feel ourselves
confirmed in our conclusion that what *S*a<u>n</u>kara looked upon as
comparatively unimportant formed in Bâdarâya*n*a's opinion part of that
knowledge higher than which there is none, and which therefore is
entitled to the fullest and most detailed exposition.

The question as to what kind of system is represented by the
Vedânta-sûtras may be approached in another way also. While hitherto we
have attempted to penetrate to the meaning of the Sûtras by means of the
different commentaries, we might try the opposite road, and, in the
first place, attempt to ascertain independently of the Sûtras what
doctrine is set forth in the Upanishads, whose teaching the Sûtras
doubtless aim at systematising. If, it might be urged, the Upanishads
can be convincingly shown to embody a certain settled doctrine, we must
consider it at the least highly probable that that very same
doctrine--of whatever special nature it may be--is hidden in the
enigmatical aphorisms of Bâdarâya*n*a <span
id="fr_28"></span>[1](#fn_28).

I do not, however, consider this line of argumentation

<span id="page_cii">p. cii</span>

a safe one. Even if it could be shown that the teaching of all the chief
Upanishads agrees in all essential points (a subject to which some
attention will be paid later on), we should not on that account be
entitled unhesitatingly to assume that the Sûtras set forth the same
doctrine. Whatever the true philosophy of the Upanishads may be, there
remains the undeniable fact that there exist and have existed since very
ancient times not one but several essentially differing systems, all of
which lay claim to the distinction of being the true representatives of
the teaching of the Upanishads as well as of the Sûtras. Let us suppose,
for argument's sake, that, for instance, the doctrine of Mâyâ is
distinctly enunciated in the Upanishads; nevertheless Râmânu*g*a and,
for all we know to the contrary, the whole series of more ancient
commentators on whom he looked as authorities in the interpretation of
the Sûtras, denied that the Upanishads teach Mâyâ, and it is hence by no
means impossible that Bâdarâya*n*a should have done the same. The à
priori style of reasoning as to the teaching of the Sûtras is therefore
without much force.

But apart from any intention of arriving thereby at the meaning of the
Sûtras there, of course, remains for us the all-important question as to
the true teaching of the Upanishads, a question which a translator of
the Sûtras and *S*a<u>n</u>kara cannot afford to pass over in silence,
especially after reason has been shown for the conclusion that the
Sûtras and the *S*a<u>n</u>kara-bhâshya do not agree concerning most
important points of Vedântic doctrine. The Sûtras as well as the later
commentaries claim, in the first place, to be nothing more than
systematisations of the Upanishads, and for us a considerable part at
least of their value and interest lies in this their nature. Hence the
further question presents itself by whom the teaching of the Upanishads
has been most adequately systematised, whether by Bâdarâya*n*a, or
*S*a<u>n</u>kara, or Râmânu*g*a, or some other commentator. This
question requires to be kept altogether separate from the enquiry as to
which commentator most faithfully renders the contents of the Sûtras,
and it is by no means impossible that *S*a<u>n</u>kara, for instance,
should in

<span id="page_ciii">p. ciii</span>

the end have to be declared a more trustworthy guide with regard to the
teaching of the Upanishads than concerning the meaning of the Sûtras.

We must remark here at once that, whatever commentator may be found to
deserve preference on the whole, it appears fairly certain already at
the outset that none of the systems which Indian ingenuity has succeeded
in erecting on the basis of the Upanishads can be accepted in its
entirety. The reason for this lies in the nature of the Upanishads
themselves. To the Hindu commentator and philosopher the Upanishads came
down as a body of revealed truth whose teaching had, somehow or other,
to be shown to be thoroughly consistent and free from contradictions; a
system had to be devised in which a suitable place could be allotted to
every one of the multitudinous statements which they make on the various
points of Vedântic doctrine. But to the European scholar, or in fact to
any one whose mind is not bound by the doctrine of *S*ruti, it will
certainly appear that all such attempts stand self-condemned. If
anything is evident even on a cursory review of the Upanishads--and the
impression so created is only strengthened by a more careful
investigation--it is that they do not constitute a systematic whole.
They themselves, especially the older ones, give the most unmistakable
indications on that point. Not only are the doctrines expounded in the
different Upanishads ascribed to different teachers, but even the
separate sections of one and the same Upanishad are assigned to
different authorities. It would be superfluous to quote examples of what
a mere look at the *Kh*ândogya Upanishad, for instance, suffices to
prove. It is of course not impossible that even a multitude of teachers
should agree in imparting precisely the same doctrine; but in the case
of the Upanishads that is certainly not antecedently probable. For, in
the first place, the teachers who are credited with the doctrines of the
Upanishads manifestly belonged to different sections of Brahminical
society, to different Vedic *s*âkhâs; nay, some of them the tradition
makes out to have been kshattriyas. And, in the second place, the
period, whose

<span id="page_civ">p. civ</span>

mental activity is represented in the Upanishads, was a creative one,
and as such cannot be judged according to the analogy of later periods
of Indian philosophic development. The later philosophic schools as, for
instance, the one of which *S*a<u>n</u>kara is the great representative,
were no longer free in their speculations, but strictly bound by a
traditional body of texts considered sacred, which could not be changed
or added to, but merely systematised and commented upon. Hence the
rigorous uniformity of doctrine characteristic of those schools. But
there had been a time when, what later writers received as a sacred
legacy, determining and confining the whole course of their
speculations, first sprang from the minds of creative thinkers not
fettered by the tradition of any school, but freely following the
promptings of their own heads and hearts. By the absence of school
traditions, I do not indeed mean that the great teachers who appear in
the Upanishads were free to make an entirely new start, and to assign to
their speculations any direction they chose; for nothing can be more
certain than that, at the period as the outcome of whose philosophical
activity the Upanishads have to be considered, there were in circulation
certain broad speculative ideas overshadowing the mind of every member
of Brahminical society. But those ideas were neither very definite nor
worked out in detail, and hence allowed themselves to be handled and
fashioned in different ways by different individuals. With whom the few
leading conceptions traceable in the teaching of all Upanishads first
originated, is a point on which those writings themselves do not
enlighten us, and which we have no other means for settling; most
probably they are to be viewed not as the creation of any individual
mind, but as the gradual outcome of speculations carried on by
generations of Vedic theologians. In the Upanishads themselves, at any
rate, they appear as floating mental possessions which may be seized and
moulded into new forms by any one who feels within himself the required
inspiration. A certain vague knowledge of Brahman, the great hidden
being in which all this manifold world is one, seems to be

<span id="page_cv">p. cv</span>

spread everywhere, and often issues from the most unexpected sources.
*S*vetaketu receives instruction from his father Uddâlaka; the proud
Gârgya has to become the pupil of A*g*âta*s*atru, the king of Kâ*s*î;
Bhu*g*yu Sâhyâyani receives answers to his questions from a Gandharva
possessing a maiden; Satyakâma learns what Brahman is from the bull of
the herd he is tending, from Agni and from a flamingo; and Upako*s*ala
is taught by the sacred fires in his teacher's house. All this is of
course legend, not history; but the fact that the philosophic and
theological doctrines of the Upanishads are clothed in this legendary
garb certainly does not strengthen the expectation of finding in them a
rigidly systematic doctrine.

And a closer investigation of the contents of the Upanishads amply
confirms this preliminary impression. If we avail ourselves, for
instance, of M. Paul Régnaud's Matériaux pour servir à l'Histoire de la
Philosophie de l'Inde, in which the philosophical lucubrations of the
different Upanishads are arranged systematically according to topics, we
can see with ease how, together with a certain uniformity of general
leading conceptions, there runs throughout divergence in details, and
very often not unimportant details. A look, for instance, at the
collection of passages relative to the origination of the world from the
primitive being, suffices to show that the task of demonstrating that
whatever the Upanishads teach on that point can be made to fit into a
homogeneous system is an altogether hopeless one. The accounts there
given of the creation belong, beyond all doubt to different stages of
philosophic and theological development or else to different sections of
priestly society. None but an Indian commentator would, I suppose, be
inclined and sufficiently courageous to attempt the proof that, for
instance, the legend of the âtman purushavidha, the Self in the shape of
a person which is as large as man and woman together, and then splits
itself into two halves from which cows, horses, asses, goats, &c. are
produced in succession (B*ri*. Up. I, 1, 4), can be reconciled with the
account given of the creation in the *Kh*ândogya Upanishad, where it is
said that in the beginning there existed nothing but the sat,

<span id="page_cvi">p. cvi</span>

'that which is,' and that feeling a desire of being many it emitted out
of itself ether, and then all the other elements in due succession. The
former is a primitive cosmogonic myth, which in its details shows
striking analogies with the cosmogonic myths of other nations; the
latter account is fairly developed Vedânta (although not Vedânta
implying the Mâyâ doctrine). We may admit that both accounts show a
certain fundamental similarity in so far as they derive the manifold
world from one original being; but to go beyond this and to maintain, as
*S*a<u>n</u>kara does, that the âtman purushavidha of the
B*ri*hadâra*n*yaka is the so-called Virâ*g* of the latter
Vedânta--implying thereby that that section consciously aims at
describing only the activity of one special form of Î*s*vara, and not
simply the whole process of creation--is the ingenious shift of an
orthodox commentator in difficulties, but nothing more.

How all those more or less conflicting texts came to be preserved and
handed down to posterity, is not difficult to understand. As mentioned
above, each of the great sections of Brahminical priesthood had its own
sacred texts, and again in each of those sections there existed more
ancient texts which it was impossible to discard when deeper and more
advanced speculations began in their turn to be embodied in literary
compositions, which in the course of time likewise came to be looked
upon as sacred. When the creative period had reached its termination,
and the task of collecting and arranging was taken in hand, older and
newer pieces were combined into wholes, and thus there arose collections
of such heterogeneous character as the *Kh*ândogya and
B*ri*hadâra*n*yaka Upanishads. On later generations, to which the whole
body of texts came down as revealed truth, there consequently devolved
the inevitable task of establishing systems on which no exception could
be taken to any of the texts; but that the task was, strictly speaking,
an impossible one, i.e. one which it was impossible to accomplish fairly
and honestly, there really is no reason to deny.

For a comprehensive criticism of the methods which the different
commentators employ in systematizing the contents

<span id="page_cvii">p. cvii</span>

of the Upanishads there is no room in this place. In order, however, to
illustrate what is meant by the 'impossibility,' above alluded to, of
combining the various doctrines of the Upanishads into a whole without
doing violence to a certain number of texts, it will be as well to
analyse in detail some few at least of *S*a<u>n</u>kara's
interpretations, and to render clear the considerations by which he is
guided.

We begin with a case which has already engaged our attention when
discussing the meaning of the Sûtras, viz. the question concerning the
ultimate fate of those who have attained the knowledge of Brahman. As we
have seen, *S*a<u>n</u>kara teaches that the soul of him who has risen
to an insight into the nature of the higher Brahman does not, at the
moment of death, pass out of the body, but is directly merged in Brahman
by a process from which all departing and moving, in fact all
considerations of space, are altogether excluded. The soul of him, on
the other hand, who has not risen above the knowledge of the lower
qualified Brahman departs from the body by means of the artery called
sushum*n*â, and following the so-called devayâna, the path of the gods,
mounts up to the world of Brahman. A review of the chief Upanishad texts
on which *S*a<u>n</u>kara founds this distinction will show how far it
is justified.

In a considerable number of passages the Upanishads contrast the fate of
two classes of men, viz. of those who perform sacrifices and meritorious
works only, and of those who in addition possess a certain kind of
knowledge. Men of the former kind ascend after death to the moon, where
they live for a certain time, and then return to the earth into new
forms of embodiment; persons of the latter kind proceed on the path of
the gods--on which the sun forms one stage--up to the world of Brahman,
from which there is no return. The chief passages to that effect are
*Kh*. Up. V, 10; Kaush. Up. I, 2 ff.; Mu*nd*. Up. I, 2, 9 ff.; B*ri*.
Up. VI, 2, 15 ff.; Pra*s*na Up. I, 9 ff.--In other passages only the
latter of the two paths is referred to, cp. *Kh*. Up. IV, 15; VIII 6, 5;
Taitt. Up. I, 6; B*ri*. Up. IV, 4, 8, 9; V, 10; Maitr. Up. VI, 30, to
mention only the more important ones.

Now an impartial consideration of those passages shows

<span id="page_cviii">p. cviii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I think, beyond
any doubt, that what is meant there by the knowledge which leads through
the sun to the world of Brahman is the highest knowledge of which the
devotee is capable, and that the world of Brahman to which his knowledge
enables him to proceed denotes the highest state which he can ever
reach, the state of final release, if we choose to call it by that
name.--*Kh*. Up. V, 10 says, 'Those who know this (viz. the doctrine of
the five fires), and those who in the forest follow faith and
austerities go to light,' &c.--*Kh*. Up. IV, 15 is manifestly intended
to convey the true knowledge of Brahman; Upako*s*ala's teacher himself
represents the instruction given by him as superior to the teaching of
the sacred fires.--*Kh*. Up. VIII, 6, 5 quotes the old *s*loka which
says that the man moving upwards by the artery penetrating the crown of
the head reaches the Immortal.--Kaush. Up. I, 2--which gives the most
detailed account of the ascent of the soul--contains no intimation
whatever of the knowledge of Brahman, which leads up to the Brahman
world, being of an inferior nature.--Mu*nd*. Up. I, 2, 9 agrees with the
*Kh*ândogya in saying that 'Those who practise penance and faith in the
forest, tranquil, wise, and living on alms, depart free from passion,
through the sun, to where that immortal Person dwells whose nature is
imperishable,' and nothing whatever in the context countenances the
assumption that not the highest knowledge and the highest Person are
there referred to.--B*ri*. Up. IV, 4, 8 quotes old *s*lokas clearly
referring to the road of the gods ('the small old path'), on which
'sages who know Brahman move on to the svargaloka and thence higher on
as entirely free.--That path was found by Brahman, and on it goes
whoever knows Brahman.'--B*ri*. Up. VI, 2, 15 is another version of the
Pa*ñk*âgnividyâ, with the variation, 'Those who know this, and those who
in the forest worship faith and the True, go to light,' &c.--Pra*s*na
Up. 1, 10 says, 'Those who have sought the Self by penance, abstinence,
faith, and knowledge gain by the northern path Âditya, the sun. There is
the home of the spirits, the immortal free from danger, the highest.
From thence they do not return, for it is the end.'--Maitr. Up. VI, 30
quotes

<span id="page_cix">p. cix</span>

slokas, 'One of them (the arteries) leads upwards, piercing the solar
orb: by it, having stepped beyond the world of Brahman, they go to the
highest path.'

All these passages are as clear as can be desired. The soul of the sage
who knows Brahman passes out by the sushum*n*â, and ascends by the path
of the gods to the world of Brahman, there to remain for ever in some
blissful state. But, according to *S*a<u>n</u>kara, all these texts are
meant to set forth the result of a certain inferior knowledge only, of
the knowledge of the conditioned Brahman. Even in a passage apparently
so entirely incapable of more than one interpretation as B*ri*. Up. VI,
2, 15, the 'True,' which the holy hermits in the forest are said to
worship, is not to be the highest Brahman, but only
Hira*n*yagarbha!--And why?--Only because the system so demands it, the
system which teaches that those who know the highest Brahman become on
their death one with it, without having to resort to any other place.
The passage on which this latter tenet is chiefly based is B*ri*. Up.
IV, 4, 6, 7, where, with the fate of him who at his death has desires,
and whose soul therefore enters a new body after having departed from
the old one, accompanied by all the prâ*n*as, there is contrasted the
fate of the sage free from all desires. 'But as to the man who does not
desire, who not desiring, freed from desires is satisfied in his
desires, or desires the Self only, the vital spirits of him (tasya) do
not depart--being Brahman he goes to Brahman.'

We have seen above (p. lxxx) that this passage is referred to in the
important Sûtras on whose right interpretation it, in the first place,
depends whether or not we must admit the Sûtrakâra to have acknowledged
the distinction of a parâ and an aparâ vidyâ. Here the passage interests
us as throwing light on the way in which *S*a<u>n</u>kara systematises.
He looks on the preceding part of the chapter as describing what happens
to the souls of all those who do not know the highest Brahman, inclusive
of those who know the lower Brahman only. They pass out of the old
bodies followed by all prâ*n*as and enter new bodies. He, on the other
hand, section 6 continues, who knows the true Brahman, does not pass out
of the body, but becomes one with Brahman then

<span id="page_cx">p. cx</span>

and there. This interpretation of the purport of the entire chapter is
not impossibly right, although I am rather inclined to think that the
chapter aims at setting forth in its earlier part the future of him who
does not know Brahman at all, while the latter part of section 6 passes
on to him who does know Brahman (i.e. Brahman pure and simple, the text
knowing of no distinction of the so-called lower and higher Brahman). In
explaining section 6 *S*a<u>n</u>kara lays stress upon the clause 'na
tasya prâ*n*a utkrâmanti,' 'his vital spirits do not pass out,' taking
this to signify that the soul with the vital spirits does not move at
all, and thus does not ascend to the world of Brahman; while the purport
of the clause may simply be that the soul and vital spirits do not go
anywhere else, i.e. do not enter a new body, but are united, somehow or
other, with Brahman. On *S*a<u>n</u>kara's interpretation there
immediately arises a new difficulty. In the *s*lokas, quoted under
sections 8 and 9, the description of the small old path which leads to
the svargaloka and higher on clearly refers--as noticed already
above--to the path through the veins, primarily the sushum*n*â, on
which, according to so many other passages, the soul of the wise mounts
upwards. But that path is, according to *S*a<u>n</u>kara, followed by
him only who has not risen above the lower knowledge, and yet the
*s*lokas have manifestly to be connected with what is said in the latter
half of 6 about the owner of the parâ vidyâ. Hence *S*a<u>n</u>kara sees
himself driven to explain the *s*lokas in 8 and 9 (of which a faithful
translation is given in Professor Max Müller's version) as follows:

8\. 'The subtle old path (i.e. the path of knowledge on which final
release is reached; which path is subtle, i.e. difficult to know, and
old, i.e. to be known from the eternal Veda) has been obtained and fully
reached by me. On it the sages who know Brahman reach final release
(svargaloka*s*abda*h* samnihitaprakara*n*ât mokshâbhidhâyaka*h*).

9\. 'On that path they say that there is white or blue or yellow or
green or red (i.e. others maintain that the path to final release is, in
accordance with the colour of the arteries, either white or blue, &c.;
but that is false, for the

<span id="page_cxi">p. cxi</span>

paths through the arteries lead at the best to the world of Brahman,
which itself forms part of the sa*m*sâra); that path (i. e. the only
path to release, viz. the path of true knowledge) is found by Brahman,
i. e. by such Brâhma*n*as as through true knowledge have become like
Brahman,' &c.

A significant instance in truth of the straits to which thorough-going
systematisers of the Upanishads see themselves reduced occasionally!

But we return to the point which just now chiefly interests us. Whether
*S*a<u>n</u>kara's interpretation of the chapter, and especially of
section 6, be right or wrong, so much is certain that we are not
entitled to view all those texts which speak of the soul going to the
world of Brahman as belonging to the so-called lower knowledge, because
a few other passages declare that the sage does not go to Brahman. The
text which declares the sage free from desires to become one with
Brahman could not, without due discrimination, be used to define and
limit the meaning of other passages met with in the same Upanishad
even--for as we have remarked above the B*ri*hadâra*n*yaka contains
pieces manifestly belonging to different stages of development;--much
less does it entitle us to put arbitrary constructions on passages
forming part of other Upanishads. Historically the disagreement of the
various accounts is easy to understand. The older notion was that the
soul of the wise man proceeds along the path of the gods to Brahman's
abode. A later--and, if we like, more philosophic--conception is that,
as Brahman already is a man's Self, there is no need of any motion on
man's part to reach Brahman. We may even apply to those two views the
terms aparâ and parâ--lower and higher--knowledge. But we must not allow
any commentator to induce us to believe that what he from his advanced
standpoint looks upon as an inferior kind of cognition, was viewed in
the same light by the authors of the Upanishads.

We turn to another Upanishad text likewise touching upon the point
considered in what precedes, viz. the second Brâhma*n*a of the third
adhyâya of the B*ri*hadâra*n*yaka. The discussion there first turns upon
the grahas and atigrahas,

<span id="page_cxii">p. cxii</span>

i\. e. the senses and organs and their objects, and Yâ*g*ñavalkya
thereupon explains that death, by which everything is overcome, is
itself overcome by water; for death is fire. The colloquy then turns to
what we must consider an altogether new topic, Ârtabhâga asking, 'When
this man (ayam purusha) dies, do the vital spirits depart from him or
not?' and Yâ*g*ñavalkya answering, 'No, they are gathered up in him; he
swells, he is inflated; inflated the dead (body) is lying.'--Now this is
for *S*a<u>n</u>kara an important passage, as we have already seen above
(p. lxxxi); for he employs it, in his comment on Ved.-sûtra IV, 2, 13,
for the purpose of proving that the passage B*ri*. Up. IV, 4, 6 really
means that the vital spirits do not, at the moment of death, depart from
the true sage. Hence the present passage also must refer to him who
possesses the highest knowledge; hence the 'ayam purusha' must be 'that
man,' i. e. the man who possesses the highest knowledge, and the highest
knowledge then must be found in the preceding clause which says that
death itself may be conquered by water. But, as Râmânu*g*a also remarks,
neither does the context favour the assumption that the highest
knowledge is referred to, nor do the words of section 11 contain any
indication that what is meant is the merging of the Self of the true
Sage in Brahman. With the interpretation given by Râmânu*g*a himself,
viz. that the prâ*n*as do not depart from the *g*îva of the dying man,
but accompany it into a new body, I can agree as little (although he no
doubt rightly explains the 'ayam purusha' by 'man' in general), and am
unable to see in the passage anything more than a crude attempt to
account for the fact that a dead body appears swollen and inflated.--A
little further on (section 13) Ârtabhâga asks what becomes of this man
(ayam purusha) when his speech has entered into the fire, his breath
into the air, his eye into the sun, &c. So much here is clear that we
have no right to understand by the 'ayam purusha' of section 13 anybody
different from the 'ayam purusha' of the two preceding sections; in
spite of this *S*a<u>n</u>kara--according to whose system the organs of
the true sage do not enter into the elements, but are directly

<span id="page_cxiii">p. cxiii</span>

merged in Brahman--explains the 'ayam purusha' of section 13 to be the
'asa*m*yagdar*s*in,' i.e. the person who has not risen to the cognition
of the highest Brahman. And still a further limiting interpretation is
required by the system. The asa*m*yagdar*s*in also who as such has to
remain in the sa*m*sâra-cannot do without the organs, since his *g*îva
when passing out of the old body into a new one is invested with the
subtle body; hence section 13 cannot be taken as saying what it clearly
does say, viz. that at death the different organs pass into the
different elements, but as merely indicating that the organs are
abandoned by the divinities which, during lifetime, presided over them!

The whole third adhyâya indeed of the B*ri*hadâra*n*yaka affords ample
proof of the artificial character of *S*a<u>n</u>kara's attempts to show
that the teaching of the Upanishads follows a definite system. The
eighth brâhma*n*a, for instance, is said to convey the doctrine of the
highest non-related Brahman, while the preceding brâhma*n*as had treated
only of Î*s*vara in his various aspects. But, as a matter of fact,
brâhma*n*a 8, after having, in section 8, represented Brahman as
destitute of all qualities, proceeds, in the next section, to describe
that very same Brahman as the ruler of the world, 'By the command of
that Imperishable sun and moon stand apart,' &c.; a clear indication
that the author of the Upanishad does not distinguish a higher and lower
Brahman in--*S*a<u>n</u>kara's sense.--The preceding brâhma*n*a (7)
treats of the antaryâmin, i.e. Brahman viewed as the internal ruler of
everything. This, according to *S*a<u>n</u>kara, is the lower form of
Brahman called Î*s*vara; but we observe that the antaryâmin as well as
the so-called highest Brahman described in section 8 is, at the
termination of the two sections, characterised by means of the very same
terms (7, 23: Unseen but seeing, unheard but hearing, &c. There is no
other seer but he, there is no other hearer but he, &c.; and 8, 11: That
Brahman is unseen but seeing, unheard but hearing, &c. There is nothing
that sees but it, nothing that hears but it, &c.).--Nothing can be
clearer than that all these sections aim at describing one and the same
being, and know nothing of the distinctions made by the developed

<span id="page_cxiv">p. cxiv</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Vedânta, however
valid the latter may be from a purely philosophic point of view.

We may refer to one more similar instance from the *Kh*ândogya
Upanishad. We there meet in III, 14 with one of the most famous vidyâs
describing the nature of Brahman, called after its reputed author the
Sâ*nd*ilya-vidyâ. This small vidyâ is decidedly one of the finest and
most characteristic texts; it would be difficult to point out another
passage setting forth with greater force and eloquence and in an equally
short compass the central doctrine of the Upanishads. Yet this text,
which, beyond doubt, gives utterance to the highest conception of
Brahman's nature that Sâ*nd*ilya's thought was able to reach, is by
*S*a<u>n</u>kara and his school again declared to form part of the lower
vidyâ only, because it represents Brahman as possessing qualities. It
is, according to their terminology, not *gñ*âna, i. e. knowledge, but
the injunction of a mere upâsanâ, a devout meditation on Brahman in so
far as possessing certain definite attributes such as having light for
its form, having true thoughts, and so on. The Râmânu*g*as, on the other
hand, quote this text with preference as clearly describing the nature
of their highest, i. e. their one Brahman. We again allow that
*S*a<u>n</u>kara is free to deny that any text which ascribes qualities
to Brahman embodies absolute truth; but we also again remark that there
is no reason whatever for supposing that Sâ*nd*ilya, or whoever may have
been the author of that vidyâ, looked upon it as anything else but a
statement of the highest truth accessible to man.

We return to the question as to the true philosophy of the Upanishads,
apart from the systems of the commentators.--From what precedes it will
appear with sufficient distinctness that, if we understand by philosophy
a philosophical system coherent in all its parts, free from all
contradictions and allowing room for all the different statements made
in all the chief Upanishads, a philosophy of the Upanishads cannot even
be spoken of. The various lucubrations on Brahman, the world, and the
human soul of which the Upanishads consist do not allow themselves to be
systematised simply because they were never meant to

<span id="page_cxv">p. cxv</span>

form a system. *S*â*nd*ilya's views as to the nature of Brahman did not
in all details agree with those of Yâ*gñ*avalkya, and Uddâlaka differed
from both. In this there is nothing to wonder at, and the burden of
proof rests altogether with those who maintain that a large number of
detached philosophic and theological dissertations, ascribed to
different authors, doubtless belonging to different periods, and not
seldom manifestly contradicting each other, admit of being combined into
a perfectly consistent whole.

The question, however, assumes a different aspect, if we take the terms
'philosophy' and 'philosophical system,' not in the strict sense in
which *S*a<u>n</u>kara and other commentators are not afraid of taking
them, but as implying merely an agreement in certain fundamental
features. In this latter sense we may indeed undertake to indicate the
outlines of a philosophy of the Upanishads, only keeping in view that
precision in details is not to be aimed at. And here we finally see
ourselves driven back altogether on the texts themselves, and have to
acknowledge that the help we receive from commentators, to whatever
school they may belong, is very inconsiderable. Fortunately it cannot be
asserted that the texts on the whole oppose very serious difficulties to
a right understanding, however obscure the details often are. Concerning
the latter we occasionally depend entirely on the explanations
vouchsafed by the scholiasts, but as far as the general drift and spirit
of the texts are concerned, we are quite able to judge by ourselves, and
are even specially qualified to do so by having no particular system to
advocate.

The point we will first touch upon is the same from which we started
when examining the doctrine of the Sûtras, viz. the question whether the
Upanishads acknowledge a higher and lower knowledge in
*S*a<u>n</u>kara's sense, i. e. a knowledge of a higher and a lower
Brahman. Now this we find not to be the case. Knowledge is in the
Upanishads frequently opposed to avidyâ, by which latter term we have to
understand ignorance as to Brahman, absence of philosophic knowledge;
and, again, in several places we find the knowledge of the sacrificial
part of the Veda with its supplementary

<span id="page_cxvi">p. cxvi</span>

disciplines contrasted as inferior with the knowledge of the Self; to
which latter distinction the Mu*nd*aka Up. (I, 4) applies the terms
aparâ and parâ vidyâ. But a formal recognition of the essential
difference of Brahman being viewed, on the one hand, as possessing
distinctive attributes, and, on the other hand, as devoid of all such
attributes is not to be met with anywhere. Brahman is indeed sometimes
described as sagu*n*a and sometimes as nirgu*n*a (to use later terms);
but it is nowhere said that thereon rests a distinction of two different
kinds of knowledge leading to altogether different results. The
knowledge of Brahman is one, under whatever aspects it is viewed; hence
the circumstance (already exemplified above) that in the same vidyâs it
is spoken of as sagu*n*a as well as nirgu*n*a. When the mind of the
writer dwells on the fact that Brahman is that from which all this world
originates, and in which it rests, he naturally applies to it
distinctive attributes pointing at its relation to the world; Brahman,
then, is called the Self and life of all, the inward ruler, the
omniscient Lord, and so on. When, on the other hand, the author follows
out the idea that Brahman may be viewed in itself as the mysterious
reality of which the whole expanse of the world is only an outward
manifestation, then it strikes him that no idea or term derived from
sensible experience can rightly be applied to it, that nothing more may
be predicated of it but that it is neither this nor that. But these are
only two aspects of the cognition of one and the same entity.

Closely connected with the question as to the double nature of the
Brahman of the Upanishads is the question as to their teaching
Mâyâ.--From Colebrooke downwards the majority of European writers have
inclined towards the opinion that the doctrine of Mâyâ, i. e. of the
unreal illusory character of the sensible world, does not constitute a
feature of the primitive philosophy of the Upanishads, but was
introduced into the system at some later period, whether by Bâdarâya*n*a
or *S*a<u>n</u>kara or somebody else. The opposite view, viz. that the
doctrine of Mâyâ forms an integral element of the teaching of the
Upanishads, is implied in them everywhere, and enunciated more or less
distinctly in

<span id="page_cxvii">p. cxvii</span>

more than one place, has in recent times been advocated with much force
by Mr. Gough in the ninth chapter of his Philosophy of the Upanishads.

In his Matériaux, &c. M. Paul Régnaud remarks that 'the doctrine of
Mâyâ, although implied in the teaching of the Upanishads, could hardly
become clear and explicit before the system had reached a stage of
development necessitating a choice between admitting two co-existent
eternal principles (which became the basis of the Sâ<u>n</u>khya
philosophy), and accepting the predominance of the intellectual
principle, which in the end necessarily led to the negation of the
opposite principle.'--To the two alternatives here referred to as
possible we, however, have to add a third one, viz. that form of the
Vedânta of which the theory of the Bhâgavatas or Râmânu*g*as is the most
eminent type, and according to which Brahman carries within its own
nature an element from which the material universe originates; an
element which indeed is not an independent entity like the pradhâna of
the Sâ<u>n</u>khyas, but which at the same time is not an unreal Mâyâ
but quite as real as any other part of Brahman's nature. That a doctrine
of this character actually developed itself on the basis of the
Upanishads, is a circumstance which we clearly must not lose sight of,
when attempting to determine what the Upanishads themselves are teaching
concerning the character of the world.

In enquiring whether the Upanishads maintain the Mâyâ doctrine or not,
we must proceed with the same caution as regards other parts of the
system, i.e. we must refrain from using unhesitatingly, and without
careful consideration of the merits of each individual case, the
teaching--direct or inferred--of any one passage to the end of
determining the drift of the teaching of other passages. We may admit
that some passages, notably of the B*ri*hadâra*n*yaka, contain at any
rate the germ of the later developed Mâyâ doctrine <span
id="fr_29"></span>[1](#fn_29), and thus render it quite intelligible
that a system like *S*a<u>n</u>kara's

<span id="page_cxviii">p. cxviii</span>

should evolve itself, among others, out of the Upanishads; but that
affords no valid reason for interpreting Mâyâ into other texts which
give a very satisfactory sense without that doctrine, or are even
clearly repugnant to it. This remark applies in the very first place to
all the accounts of the creation of the physical universe. There, if
anywhere, the illusional character of the world should have been hinted
at, at least, had that theory been held by the authors of those
accounts; but not a word to that effect is met with anywhere. The most
important of those accounts--the one given in the sixth chapter of the
*Kh*ândogya Upanishad--forms no exception. There is absolutely no reason
to assume that the 'sending forth' of the elements from the primitive
Sat, which is there described at length, was by the writer of that
passage meant to represent a vivarta rather than a pari*n*âma that the
process of the origination of the physical universe has to be conceived
as anything else but a real manifestation of real powers hidden in the
primeval Self. The introductory words, addressed to *S*vetaketu by
Uddâlaka, which are generally appealed to as intimating the unreal
character of the evolution about to be described, do not, if viewed
impartially, intimate any such thing <span
id="fr_30"></span>[1](#fn_30). For what is capable of being proved, and
manifestly meant to be proved, by the illustrative instances of the lump
of clay and the nugget of gold, through which there are known all things
made of clay and gold? Merely that this whole world has Brahman for its
causal substance, just as clay is the causal matter of every earthen
pot, and gold of every golden ornament, but not that the process through
which any causal substance becomes an effect is an unreal one.
We--including Uddâlaka--may surely say that all earthen pots are in
reality nothing but earth--the earthen pot being merely a special
modification (vikâra) of clay which has a name of its own--without
thereby committing ourselves to the doctrine that the change of form,
which a lump of clay undergoes when being fashioned into a pot, is not
real but a mere baseless illusion.

In the same light we have to view numerous other passages

<span id="page_cxix">p. cxix</span>

which set forth the successive emanations proceeding from the first
principle. When, for instance, we meet in the Ka*th*a Up. I, 3, 10, in
the serial enumeration of the forms of existence intervening between the
gross material world and the highest Self (the Person), with the
'avyâk*ri*ta,' the Undeveloped, immediately below the purusha; and when
again the Mu*nd*aka Up. II, 1, 2, speaks of the 'high Imperishable'
higher than which is the heavenly Person; there is no reason whatever to
see in that 'Undeveloped' and that 'high Imperishable' anything but that
real element in Brahman from which, as in the Râmânu*g*a system, the
material universe springs by a process of real development. We must of
course render it quite clear to ourselves in what sense the terms 'real'
and 'unreal' have to be understood. The Upanishads no doubt teach
emphatically that the material world does not owe its existence to any
principle independent from the Lord like the pradhâna of the
Sâ<u>n</u>khyas; the world is nothing but a manifestation of the Lord's
wonderful power, and hence is unsubstantial, if we take the term
'substance' in its strict sense. And, again, everything material is
immeasurably inferior in nature to the highest spiritual principle from
which it has emanated, and which it now hides from the individual soul.
But neither unsubstantiality nor inferiority of the kind mentioned
constitutes unreality in the sense in which the Mâyâ of *S*a<u>n</u>kara
is unreal. According to the latter the whole world is nothing but an
erroneous appearance, as unreal as the snake, for which a piece of rope
is mistaken by the belated traveller, and disappearing just as the
imagined snake does as soon as the light of true knowledge has risen.
But this is certainly not the impression left on the mind by a
comprehensive review of the Upanishads which dwells on their general
scope, and does not confine itself to the undue urging of what may be
implied in some detached passages. The Upanishads do not call upon us to
look upon the whole world as a baseless illusion to be destroyed by
knowledge; the great error which they admonish us to relinquish is
rather that things have a separate individual existence, and are not
tied together by the bond of being all of them effects

<span id="page_cxx">p. cxx</span>

of Brahman, or Brahman itself. They do not say that true knowledge
sublates this false world, as *S*a<u>n</u>kara says, but that it enables
the sage to extricate himself from the world--the inferior mûrta rûpa of
Brahman, to use an expression of the B*ri*hadâra*n*yaka--and to become
one with Brahman in its highest form. 'We are to see everything in
Brahman, and Brahman in everything;' the natural meaning of this is, 'we
are to look upon this whole world as a true manifestation of Brahman, as
sprung from it and animated by it.' The mâyâvâdin has indeed
appropriated the above saying also, and interpreted it so as to fall in
with his theory; but he is able to do so only by perverting its manifest
sense. For him it would be appropriate to say, not that everything we
see is in Brahman, but rather that everything we see is out of Brahman,
viz. as a false appearance spread over it and hiding it from us.

Stress has been laid <span id="fr_31"></span>[1](#fn_31) upon certain
passages of the B*ri*hadâra*n*yaka which seem to hint at the unreality
of this world by qualifying terms, indicative of duality or plurality of
existence, by means of an added 'iva,' i.e. 'as it were' (yatrânyad iva
syât; yatra dvaitam iva bhavati; âtmâ dhyâyatîva lelâyatîva). Those
passages no doubt readily lend themselves to Mâyâ interpretations, and
it is by no means impossible that in their author's mind there was
something like an undeveloped Mâyâ doctrine. I must, however, remark
that they, on the other hand, also admit of easy interpretations not in
any way presupposing the theory of the unreality of the world. If
Yâ*gñ*avalkya refers to the latter as that 'where there is something
else as it were, where there is duality as it were,' he may simply mean
to indicate that the ordinary opinion, according to which the individual
forms of existence of the world are opposed to each other as altogether
separate, is a mistaken one, all things being one in so far as they
spring from--and are parts of--Brahman. This would in no way involve
duality or plurality being unreal in *S*a<u>n</u>kara's sense, not any
more than, for instance, the modes of Spinoza are unreal because,
according to that philosopher, there is only one universal

<span id="page_cxxi">p. cxxi</span>

substance. And with regard to the clause 'the Self thinks as it were' it
has to be noted that according to the commentators the 'as it were' is
meant to indicate that truly not the Self is thinking, but the upâdhis,
i.e. especially the manas with which the Self is connected. But whether
these upâdhis are the mere offspring of Mâyâ, as *S*a<u>n</u>kara
thinks, or real forms of existence, as Râmânu*g*a teaches, is an
altogether different question.

I do not wish, however, to urge these last observations, and am ready to
admit that not impossibly those iva's indicate that the thought of the
writer who employed them was darkly labouring with a conception akin
to--although much less explicit than--the Mâyâ of *S*a<u>n</u>kara. But
what I object to is, that conclusions drawn from a few passages of,
after all, doubtful import should be employed for introducing the Mâyâ
doctrine into other passages which do not even hint at it, and are fully
intelligible without it <span id="fr_32"></span>[1](#fn_32).

The last important point in the teaching of the Upanishads we have to
touch upon is the relation of the *g*îvas, the individual souls to the
highest Self. The special views regarding that point held by
*S*a<u>n</u>kara and Râmânu*g*a, as have been stated before. Confronting
their theories with the texts of the Upanishads we must, I think, admit
without hesitation, that *S*a<u>n</u>kara's doctrine faithfully
represents the prevailing teaching of the Upanishads in one important
point at least, viz. therein that the soul or Self of the sage--whatever
its original relation to Brahman may be--is in the end completely merged
and indistinguishably lost in the universal Self. A distinction,
repeatedly alluded to before, has indeed to be kept in view here also.
Certain texts of the Upanishads describe the soul's going upwards, on
the path of the gods, to the world of Brahman, where it dwells for
unnumbered years, i.e. for ever. Those texts, as a type of which we may
take, the passage Kaushît. Up. I--the fundamental text of the
Râmânu*g*a's concerning the soul's

<span id="page_cxxii">p. cxxii</span>

fate after death--belong to an earlier stage of philosophic development;
they manifestly ascribe to the soul a continued individual existence.
But mixed with texts of this class there are others in which the final
absolute identification of the individual Self with the universal Self
is indicated in terms of unmistakable plainness. 'He who knows Brahman
and becomes Brahman;' 'he who knows Brahman becomes all this;' 'as the
flowing rivers disappear in the sea losing their name and form, thus a
wise man goes to the divine person.' And if we look to the whole, to the
prevailing spirit of the Upanishads, we may call the doctrine embodied
in passages of the latter nature the doctrine of the Upanishads. It is,
moreover, supported by the frequently and clearly stated theory of the
individual souls being merged in Brahman in the state of deep dreamless
sleep.

It is much more difficult to indicate the precise teaching of the
Upanishads concerning the original relation of the individual soul to
the highest Self, although there can be no doubt that it has to be
viewed as proceeding from the latter, and somehow forming a part of it.
Negatively we are entitled to say that the doctrine, according to which
the soul is merely brahma bhrântam or brahma mâyopâdhikam, is in no way
countenanced by the majority of the passages bearing on the question. If
the emission of the elements, described in the *Kh*ândogya and referred
to above, is a real process--of which we saw no reason to doubt--the
*g*îva âtman with which the highest Self enters into the emitted
elements is equally real, a true part or emanation of Brahman itself.

After having in this way shortly reviewed the chief elements of Vedântic
doctrine according to the Upanishads, we may briefly consider
*S*a<u>n</u>kara's system and mode of interpretation--with whose details
we had frequent opportunities of finding fault--as a whole. It has been
said before that the task of reducing the teaching of the whole of the
Upanishads to a system consistent and free from contradictions is an
intrinsically impossible one. But the task once being given, we are
quite ready to admit that *S*a<u>n</u>kara's system is most probably the
best which can be devised.

<span id="page_cxxiii">p. cxxiii</span>

While unable to allow that the Upanishads recognise a lower and higher
knowledge of Brahman, in fact the distinction of a lower and higher
Brahman, we yet acknowledge that the adoption of that distinction
furnishes the interpreter with an instrument of extraordinary power for
reducing to an orderly whole the heterogeneous material presented by the
old theosophic treatises. This becomes very manifest as soon as we
compare *S*a<u>n</u>kara's system with that of Râmânu*g*a. The latter
recognises only one Brahman which is, as we should say, a personal God,
and he therefore lays stress on all those passages of the Upanishads
which ascribe to Brahman the attributes of a personal God, such as
omniscience and omnipotence. Those passages, on the other hand, whose
decided tendency it is to represent Brahman as transcending all
qualities, as one undifferenced mass of impersonal intelligence,
Râmânu*g*a is unable to accept frankly and fairly, and has to
misinterpret them more or less to make them fall in with his system. The
same remark holds good with regard to those texts which represent the
individual soul as finally identifying itself with Brahman; Râmânu*g*a
cannot allow a complete identification but merely an assimilation
carried as far as possible. *S*a<u>n</u>kara, on the other hand, by
skilfully ringing the changes on a higher and a lower doctrine, somehow
manages to find room for whatever the Upanishads have to say. Where the
text speaks of Brahman as transcending all attributes, the highest
doctrine is set forth. Where Brahman is called the All-knowing ruler of
the world, the author means to propound the lower knowledge of the Lord
only. And where the legends about the primary being and its way of
creating the world become somewhat crude and gross, Hira*n*yagarbha and
Virâ*g* are summoned forth and charged with the responsibility. Of
Virâ*g* Mr. Gough remarks (p. 55) that in him a place is provided by the
poets of the Upanishads for the purusha of the ancient *ri*shis, the
divine being out of whom the visible and tangible world proceeded. This
is quite true if only we substitute for the 'poets of the Upanishads'
the framers of the orthodox Vedânta system--for the Upanishads give no
indication whatever

<span id="page_cxxiv">p. cxxiv</span>

that by their purusha they understand not the simple old purusha but the
Virâ*g* occupying a definite position in a highly elaborate system;--but
the mere phrase, 'providing a place' intimates with sufficient clearness
the nature of the work in which systematisers of the Vedântic doctrine
are engaged.

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *S*a<u>n</u>kara's
method thus enables him in a certain way to do justice to different
stages of historical development, to recognise clearly existing
differences which other systematisers are intent on obliterating. And
there has yet to be made a further and even more important admission in
favour of his system. It is not only more pliable, more capable of
amalgamating heterogeneous material than other systems, but its
fundamental doctrines are manifestly in greater harmony with the
essential teaching of the Upanishads than those of other Vedântic
systems. Above we were unable to allow that the distinction made by
*S*a<u>n</u>kara between Brahman and Î*s*vara is known to the
Upanishads; but we must now admit that if, for the purpose of
determining the nature of the highest being, a choice has to be made
between those texts which represent Brahman as nirgu*n*a, and those
which ascribe to it personal attributes, *S*a<u>n</u>kara is right in
giving preference to texts of the former kind. The Brahman of the old
Upanishads, from which the souls spring to enjoy individual
consciousness in their waking state, and into which they sink back
temporarily in the state of deep dreamless sleep and permanently in
death, is certainly not represented adequately by the strictly personal
Î*s*vara of Râmânu*g*a, who rules the world in wisdom and mercy. The
older Upanishads, at any rate, lay very little stress upon personal
attributes of their highest being, and hence *S*a<u>n</u>kara is right
in so far as he assigns to his hypostatised personal Î*s*vara <span
id="fr_33"></span>[1](#fn_33) a lower place than to his absolute
Brahman. That he also faithfully represents the prevailing spirit of the
Upanishads in his theory of the ultimate fate

<span id="page_cxxv">p. cxxv</span>

of the soul, we have already remarked above. And although the Mâyâ
doctrine cannot, in my opinion, be said to form part of the teaching of
the Upanishads, it cannot yet be asserted to contradict it openly,
because the very point which it is meant to elucidate, viz. the mode in
which the physical universe and the multiplicity of individual souls
originate, is left by the Upanishads very much in the dark. The later
growth of the Mâyâ doctrine on the basis of the Upanishads is therefore
quite intelligible, and I fully agree with Mr. Gough when he says
regarding it that there has been no addition to the system from without
but only a development from within, no graft but only growth. The lines
of thought which finally led to the elaboration of the full-blown Mâyâ
theory may be traced with considerable certainty. In the first place,
deepening speculation on Brahman tended to the notion of advaita being
taken in a more and more strict sense, as implying not only the
exclusion of any second principle external to Brahman, but also the
absence of any elements of duality or plurality in the nature of the one
universal being itself; a tendency agreeing with the spirit of a certain
set of texts from the Upanishads. And as the fact of the appearance of a
manifold world cannot be denied, the only way open to thoroughly
consistent speculation was to deny at any rate its reality, and to call
it a mere illusion due to an unreal principle, with which Brahman is
indeed associated, but which is unable to break the unity of Brahman's
nature just on account of its own unreality. And, in the second place, a
more thorough following out of the conception that the union with
Brahman is to be reached through true knowledge only, not unnaturally
led to the conclusion that what separates us in our unenlightened state
from Brahman is such as to allow itself to be completely sublated by an
act of knowledge; is, in other words, nothing else but an erroneous
notion, an illusion.--A further circumstance which may not impossibly
have co-operated to further the development of the theory of the world's
unreality will be referred to later on. <span
id="fr_34"></span>[1](#fn_34)

<span id="page_cxxvi">p. cxxvi</span>

We have above been obliged to leave it an open question what kind of
Vedânta is represented by the Vedânta-sûtras, although reason was shown
for the supposition that in some important points their teaching is more
closely related to the system of Râmânu*g*a than to that of
*S*a<u>n</u>kara. If so, the philosophy of *S*a<u>n</u>kara would on the
whole stand nearer to the teaching of the Upanishads than the Sûtras of
Bâdarâya*n*a. This would indeed be a somewhat unexpected
conclusion--for, judging a priori, we should be more inclined to assume
a direct propagation of the true doctrine of the Upanishads through
Bâdarâya*n*a to *S*a<u>n</u>kara--but a priori considerations have of
course no weight against positive evidence to the contrary. There are,
moreover, other facts in the history of Indian philosophy and theology
which help us better to appreciate the possibility of Bâdarâya*n*a's
Sûtras already setting forth a doctrine that lays greater stress on the
personal character of the highest being than is in agreement with the
prevailing tendency of the Upanishads. That the pure doctrine of those
ancient Brahminical treatises underwent at a rather early period
amalgamations with beliefs which most probably had sprung up in
altogether different--priestly or non-priestly--communities is a
well-known circumstance; it suffices for our purposes to refer to the
most eminent of the early literary monuments in which an amalgamation of
the kind mentioned is observable, viz. the Bhagavadgîtâ. The doctrine of
the Bhagavadgîtâ represents a fusion of the Brahman theory of the
Upanishads with the belief in a personal highest being--K*ri*sh*n*a or
Vish*n*u--which in many respects approximates very closely to the system
of the Bhâgavatas; the attempts of a certain set of Indian commentators
to explain it as setting forth pure Vedânta, i.e. the pure doctrine of
the Upanishads, may simply be set aside. But this same Bhagavadgîtâ is
quoted in Bâdarâya*n*a's Sûtras (at least according to the unanimous
explanations of the most eminent scholiasts of different schools) as
inferior to *S*ruti only in authority. The Sûtras,

<span id="page_cxxvii">p. cxxvii</span>

moreover, refer in different places to certain Vedântic portions of the
Mahâbhârata, especially the twelfth book, several of which represent
forms of Vedânta distinctly differing from *S*a<u>n</u>kara's teaching,
and closely related to the system of the Bhâgavatas.

Facts of this nature--from entering into the details of which we are
prevented by want of space--tend to mitigate the primâ facie strangeness
of the assumption that the Vedânta-sûtras, which occupy an intermediate
position between the Upanishads and *S*a<u>n</u>kara, should yet diverge
in their teaching from both. The Vedânta of Gau*d*apâda and
*S*a<u>n</u>kara would in that case mark a strictly orthodox reaction
against all combinations of non-Vedic elements of belief and doctrine
with the teaching of the Upanishads. But although this form of doctrine
has ever since *S*a<u>n</u>kara's time been the one most generally
accepted by Brahminic students of philosophy, it has never had any
wide-reaching influence on the masses of India. It is too little in
sympathy with the wants of the human heart, which, after all, are not so
very different in India from what they are elsewhere. Comparatively few,
even in India, are those who rejoice in the idea of a universal
non-personal essence in which their own individuality is to be merged
and lost for ever, who think it sweet 'to be wrecked on the ocean of the
Infinite <span id="fr_35"></span>[1](#fn_35).' The only forms of
Vedântic philosophy which are--and can at any time have been--really
popular, are those in which the Brahman of the Upanishads has somehow
transformed itself into a being, between which and the devotee there can
exist a personal relation, love and faith on the part of man, justice
tempered by mercy on the part of the divinity. The only religious books
of widespread influence are such as the Râmâyan of Tulsidâs, which lay
no stress on the distinction between an absolute Brahman inaccessible to
all human wants and sympathies, and a shadowy Lord whose very conception
depends on the illusory principle of Mâyâ, but love to dwell on the
delights of devotion

<span id="page_cxxviii">p. cxxviii</span>

to one all-wise and merciful ruler, who is able and willing to lend a
gracious ear to the supplication of the worshipper.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

The present translation of the Vedânta-sûtras does not aim at rendering
that sense which their author may have aimed at conveying, but strictly
follows *S*a<u>n</u>kara's interpretation. The question as to how far
the latter agrees with the views held by Bâdarâya*n*a has been discussed
above, with the result that for the present it must, on the whole, be
left an open one. In any case it would not be feasible to combine a
translation of *S*a<u>n</u>kara's commentary with an independent version
of the Sûtras which it explains. Similar considerations have determined
the method followed in rendering the passages of the Upanishads referred
to in the Sûtras and discussed at length by *S*a<u>n</u>kara. There also
the views of the commentator have to be followed closely; otherwise much
of the comment would appear devoid of meaning. Hence, while of course
following on the whole the critical translation published by Professor
Max Müller in the earlier volumes of this Series, I had, in a not
inconsiderable number of cases, to modify it so as to render
intelligible *S*a<u>n</u>kara's explanations and reasonings. I hope to
find space in the introduction to the second volume of this translation
for making some general remarks on the method to be followed in
translating the Upanishads.

I regret that want of space has prevented me from extracting fuller
notes from later scholiasts. The notes given are based, most of them, on
the *t*îkâs composed by Ânandagiri and Govindânanda (the former of which
is unpublished as yet, so far as I know), and on the Bhâmatî.

My best thanks are due to Pa*nd*its Râma Mi*s*ra *S*âstrin and
Ga<u>n</u>gâdhara *S*âstrin of the Benares Sanskrit College, whom I have
consulted on several difficult passages. Greater still are my
obligations to Pa*nd*it Ke*s*ava *S*âstrin, of the same institution, who
most kindly undertook to read a proof of the whole of the present
volume, and whose advice has enabled me to render my version of more
than one passage more definite or correct.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_23"></span>[lxxviii:1](sbe34006.htm#fr_23) Nanu vidusho\#pi
setikartavyatâkopâsananirv*ri*ttaye v*ri*sh*t*yannâdiphalânîsh*t*âny eva
katha*m* teshâ*m* virodhâd vinâ*s*a u*k*yate. Tatrâha pâte tv iti.
*S*arîrapâte tu teshâ*m* vinâ*s*a*h* *s*arîrapâtâd ûrdhv*m* tu
vidyânugu*n*ad*ri*sh*t*aphalâni suk*ri*tâni na*s*yantîty artha*h*.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[lxxx:1](sbe34006.htm#fr_24) Upalabhyate hi
devayânena panthâ ga*kkh*ato vidushas tam pratibrûyât satyam brûyâd iti
*k*andramasâ sa*m*vâdava*k*anena *s*arîrasadbhâva*h*, ata*h*
sûkshma*s*arîram anuvartate.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[lxxxi:1](sbe34006.htm#fr_25) When the *g*îva
has passed out of the body and ascends to the world of Brahman, it
remains enveloped by the subtle body until it reaches the river
Vi*g*arâ. There it divests itself of the subtle body, and the latter is
merged in Brahman.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[lxxxiv:1](sbe34006.htm#fr_26) Kim aya*m*
para*m* gyotir upasampanna*h* sarvabandhavinirmukta*h* pratyagâtmâ
svâtmâna*m* paramâtmana*h* p*ri*thagbhûtam anubhavati uta tatprakâratayâ
tadavibhaktam iti vi*s*aye so \# *s*nute sarvân kâmân saha brahma*n*â
vipas*k*itâ pa*s*ya*h* pa*s*yate rukmavar*n*a*m* kartâram îsa*m*
purusha*m* brahmayoni*m* tadâ vidvân pu*n*yapâpe vidhûya nirañgana*h*
parama*m* sâmyam upaiti ida*m* *gñ*ânam upâ*s*ritya mama sâdharmyam
âgatâ*h* sarve \# pi nopa*g*âyante pralayena vyathanti
*k*etyadi*s*ruytism*ri*tbhyo muktasya pare*n*a
sâhityasâmyasâdharmyâvagamât p*ri*thagbhûtam anubhavatîti prâpte
u*k*yate. Avibhâgeneti. Parasmâd brahmana*h* svâtmânam
avibhâgenânubhavati mukta*h*. Kuta*h*. D*ri*sh*t*atvât. Para*m*
brahmopasampadya niv*ri*ttâvidyâtirodhânasya yathâtâthyena svâtamano
d*ri*sh*t*atvât. Svatmana*h* svarûpa*m* hi tat tvam asy ayam âtmâ brahma
aitadâtmyam ida*m* sarva*m* sarva*m* khalv ida*m*
brahmetyâdisâmânâdhikara*n*yanirde*s*ai*h* ya âtmani tish*th*an
âtmano\#ntaro yam âtmâ na veda yastâtmâ *s*arîra*m* ya âtmânam antaro
yamayati âtmântaryâmy am*ri*ta*h* anta*h* pravish*t*a*h* *s*âstâ
*g*anânâm ityâdibhi*s* *k*a paramâtmâtmaka*m* ta*kk*harîtatayâ
tatprakâtabhûtam iti pratipâditam avashiter iti kâsak*ri*stnety atrâto
\# vibhâgenaha*m* brahmâsmîty evânubhavati.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[xciv:1](sbe34006.htm#fr_27) *S*a<u>n</u>kara's
favourite illustrative instance of the magician producing illusive
sights is--significantly enough--not known to the Sûtras.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[ci:1](sbe34006.htm#fr_28) Cp. Gough's
Philosophy of the Upanishads, pp. 240 ff.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[cxvii:1](sbe34006.htm#fr_29) It is well known
that, with the exception of the *S*vetâ*s*vatara and Maitrâyanîya, none
of the chief Upanishads exhibits the word 'mâyâ.' The term indeed occurs
in one place in the B*ri*hadâra*n*yaka; but that passage is a quotation
from the *Ri*k Sa*m*hitâ in which mâyâ means 'creative power.' Cp. P.
Régnaud, La Mâyâ, in the Revue de l'Histoire des Religions, tome xii,
No. 3 1885).

<span id="fn_30"></span>[cxviii:1](sbe34006.htm#fr_30) As is
demonstrated very satisfactorily by Râmânu*g*a.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[cxx:1](sbe34006.htm#fr_31) Gough, Philosophy of
the Upanishads pp. 213 ff.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[cxxi:1](sbe34006.htm#fr_32) I cannot discuss in
this place the Maya passages of the--Svetâ*s*vatara and the Maitrâyanîya
Upanishads. Reasons which want of space prevents me from setting forth
in detail induce me to believe that neither of those two treatises
deserves to be considered by us when wishing to ascertain the true
unmixed doctrine of the Upanishads.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[cxxiv:1](sbe34006.htm#fr_33) The Î*s*vara who
allots to the individual souls their new forms of embodiment in strict
accordance with their merit or demerit cannot be called anything else
but a personal God. That this personal conscious being is at the same
time identified with the totality of the individual souls in the
unconscious state of deep dreamless sleep, is one of those extraordinary
contradictions which thorough-going systematisers of Vedântic doctrine
are apparently unable to avoid altogether.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[cxxv:1](sbe34006.htm#fr_34) That section of the
introduction in which the point referred to in the text <span
id="page_cxxvi">p. cxxvi</span> is touched upon will I hope form part of
the second volume of the translation. The same remark applies to a point
concerning which further information had been promised above on page v.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[cxxvii:1](sbe34006.htm#fr_35)

Così tra questa  
Immensità s'annega il pensier mio,  
E il naufrago m' è dolce in questo mare.  
                                     LEOPARDI.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I, 1, 1](sbe34007)
