[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe34111)  [Next](sbe34113) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930306/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras, commentary by Sankaracharya (SBE34)*, tr. by George
Thibaut \[1890\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

### FOURTH PÂDA.

REVERENCE TO THE HIGHEST SELF!

1\. If it be said that some (mention) that which is based on inference
(i.e. the pradhâna); we deny this, because (the term alluded to) refers
to what is contained in the simile of the body (i.e. the body itself);
and (that the text) shows.

In the preceding part of this work--as whose topic there has been set
forth an enquiry into Brahman--we have at first defined Brahman (I, 1,
2); we have thereupon refuted the objection that that definition applies
to the pradhâna also, by showing that there is no scriptural authority
for the latter (I, 1, 5), and we have shown in detail that the common
purport of all Vedânta-texts is to set forth the doctrine that Brahman,
and not the pradhâ*n*a, is the cause of the world. Here, however, the
Sâ<u>n</u>khya again raises an objection which he considers not to have
been finally disposed of.

It has not, he says, been satisfactorily proved that there is no
scriptural authority for the pradhâna; for some *s*âkhâs contain
expressions which seem to convey the idea of the pradhâna. From this it
follows that Kapila and other supreme *ri*shis maintain the doctrine of
the pradhâna being the general cause only because it is based on the
Veda.--As long therefore as it has not been proved that those passages
to which the Sân<u>k</u>hyas refer have a different meaning (i.e. do not
allude to the pradhâna), all our previous argumentation as to the
omniscient Brahman being the cause of the world must be considered as
unsettled. We therefore now begin a new chapter which aims at proving
that those passages actually have a different meaning.

The Sâ<u>n</u>khyas maintain that that also which is based on inference,
i.e. the pradhâna, is perceived in the text of some *s*âkhâs. We read,
for instance, they say, in the Kâ*th*aka (I, 3, 11), 'Beyond the Great
there is the Undeveloped,

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

beyond the Undeveloped there is the Person.' There we recognise, named
by the same names and enumerated in the same order, the three entities
with which we are acquainted from the Sâ<u>n</u>khya-sm*ri*ti, viz. the
great principle, the Undeveloped (the pradhâna), and the soul <span
id="fr_232"></span>[1](#fn_232). That by the Undeveloped is meant the
pradhâna is to be concluded from the common use of Sm*ri*ti and from the
etymological interpretation of which the word admits, the pradhâna being
called undeveloped because it is devoid of sound and other qualities. It
cannot therefore be asserted that there is no scriptural authority for
the pradhâna. And this pradhâna vouched for by Scripture we declare to
be the cause of the world, on the ground of Scripture, Sm*ri*ti, and
ratiocination.

Your reasoning, we reply, is not valid. The passage from the Kâ*th*aka
quoted by you intimates by no means the existence of that great
principle and that Undeveloped which are known from the
Sâ<u>n</u>khya-sm*ri*ti. We do not recognise there the pradhâna of the
Sâ<u>n</u>khyas, i.e. an independent general cause consisting of three
constituting elements; we merely recognise the word 'Undeveloped,' which
does not denote any particular determined thing, but may--owing to its
etymological meaning, 'that which is not developed, not
manifest'--denote anything subtle and difficult to distinguish. The
Sâ<u>n</u>khyas indeed give to the word a settled meaning, as they apply
it to the pradhâna; but then that meaning is valid for their system
only, and has no force in the determination of the sense of the Veda.
Nor does mere equality of position prove equality of being, unless the
latter be recognised independently. None but a fool would think a cow to
be a horse because he sees it tied in the usual place of a horse. We,
moreover, conclude, on the strength of the general subject-matter, that
the passage does not refer to the pradhâna the fiction of the
Sâ<u>n</u>khyas, 'on account of there being referred

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

to that which is contained in the simile of the body.' This means that
the body which is mentioned in the simile of the chariot is here
referred to as the Undeveloped. We infer this from the general
subject-matter of the passage and from the circumstance of nothing else
remaining.--The immediately preceding part of the chapter exhibits the
simile in which the Self, the body, and so on, are compared to the lord
of a chariot, a chariot, &c., 'Know the Self to be the lord of the
chariot, the body to be the chariot, the intellect the charioteer, and
the mind the reins. The senses they call the horses, the objects of the
senses their roads. When he (the Self) is in union with the body, the
senses and the mind, then wise people call him the enjoyer.' The text
then goes on to say that he whose senses, &c. are not well controlled
enters into sa*m*sâra, while he who has them under control reaches the
end of the journey, the highest place of Vish*n*u. The question then
arises: What is the end of the journey, the highest place of Vish*n*u?
Whereupon the text explains that the highest Self which is higher than
the senses, &c., spoken of is the end of the journey, the highest place
of Vish*n*u. 'Beyond the senses there are the objects, beyond the
objects there is the mind, beyond the mind there is the intellect, the
great Self is beyond the intellect. Beyond the great there is the
Undeveloped, beyond the Undeveloped there is the Person. Beyond the
Person there is nothing--this is the goal, the highest Road.' In this
passage we recognise the senses, &c. which in the preceding simile had
been compared to horses and so on, and we thus avoid the mistake of
abandoning the matter in hand and taking up a new subject. The senses,
the intellect, and the mind are referred to in both passages under the
same names. The objects (in the second passage) are the objects which
are (in the former passage) designated as the roads of the senses; that
the objects are beyond (higher than) the senses is known from the
scriptural passage representing the senses as grahas, i.e. graspers, and
the objects as atigrahas, i. e. superior to the grahas (B*ri* Up. III,
2). The mind (manas) again is superior to the objects, because the
relation of the senses and their objects is based on the mind. The
intellect

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

(buddhi) is higher than the mind, since the objects of enjoyment are
conveyed to the soul by means of the intellect. Higher than the
intellect is the great Self which was represented as the lord of the
chariot in the passage, 'Know the Self to be the lord of the chariot.'
That the same Self is referred to in both passages is manifest from the
repeated use of the word 'Self;' that the Self is superior to
intelligence is owing to the circumstance that the enjoyer is naturally
superior to the instrument of enjoyment. The Self is appropriately
called great as it is the master.--Or else the phrase 'the great Self'
may here denote the intellect of the first-born Hira*n*yagarbha which is
the basis of all intellects; in accordance with the following
Sm*ri*ti-passage' it is called mind, the great one; reflection, Brahman;
the stronghold, intellect; enunciation, the Lord; highest knowledge,
consciousness; thought, remembrance  <span
id="fr_233"></span>[1](#fn_233),' and likewise with the following
scriptural passage, 'He (Hira*n*yagarbha) who first creates Brahman and
delivers the Vedas to him' (*S*vet. Up. VI, 18). The intellect, which in
the former passage had been referred to under its common name buddhi, is
here mentioned separately, since it may be represented as superior to
our human intellects. On this latter explanation of the term 'the great
Self,' we must assume that the personal Self which in the simile had
been compared to the charioteer is, in the latter passage, included in
the highest person (mentioned last); to which there is no objection,
since in reality the personal Self and the highest Self are
identical.--Thus there remains now the body only which had before been
compared to a chariot. We therefore conclude

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

that the text after having enumerated the senses and all the other
things mentioned before, in order to point out the highest place, points
out by means of the one remaining word, viz. avyakta, the only thing
remaining out of those which had been mentioned before, viz. the body.
The entire passage aims at conveying the knowledge of the unity of the
inward Self and Brahman, by describing the soul's passing through
sa*m*sâra and release under the form of a simile in which the body, &c.
of the soul--which is affected by Nescience and therefore joined to a
body, senses, mind, intellect, objects, sensations, &c.--are compared to
a chariot, and so on.--In accordance with this the subsequent verse
states the difficulty of knowing the highest place of Vish*n*u ('the
Self is hidden in all beings and does not shine forth, but it is seen by
subtle seers through their sharp and subtle intellect'), and after that
the next verse declares Yoga to be the means of attaining that
cognition. 'A wise man should keep down speech in the mind, he should
keep down the mind in intelligence, intelligence he should keep down
within the great Self, and he should keep that within the quiet
Self.'--That means: The wise man should restrain the activity of the
outer organs such as speech, &c., and abide within the mind only; he
should further restrain the mind which is intent on doubtful external
objects within intelligence, whose characteristic mark is decision,
recognising that indecision is evil; he should further restrain
intelligence within the great Self, i.e. the individual soul or else the
fundamental intellect; he should finally fix the great Self on the calm
Self, i.e. the highest Self, the highest goal, of which the whole
chapter treats.--If we in this manner review the general context, we
perceive that there is no room for the pradhâna imagined by the
Sânkhyas.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_232"></span>[238:1](sbe34112.htm#fr_232) The Great one is
the technical Sâ<u>n</u>khya-term for buddhi, avyakta is a common
designation of pradhâna or prak*ri*ti, and purusha is the technical name
of the soul. Compare, for instance, Sâ<u>n</u>khya Kâr. 2, 3.

<span id="fn_233"></span>[240:1](sbe34112.htm#fr_233)
Sa*m*kalpavikalparûpamanana*s*aktyâ haira*n*yagarbhî buddhir manas
tasyâ*h* vyash*t*imana*h*su samash*t*itayâ vyâptim âha mahân iti,
Sa*m*kalpâdi*s*ktitayâ tarhi sa*m*dehâtmatva*m* tatrâha matir iti.
Mahatvam upapâdayati brahmeti. Bhogya*g*âtâdhâratvam âha pûr iti.
Ni*sk*ayâtmakatvam âha buddhir iti. Kîrti*s*aktimattvam âha khyâtir iti.
Niyamana*s*aktimatvam aha î*s*vara iti. Loke yat prak*ri*sh*t*a*m*
*gñ*ânam tato\#natirekam âha pra*gñ*eti. Tatphalam api tato
nârthântaravishayam ity âha sa*m*vid iti. *K*itpradhânatvam âha *k*itir
iti. G*ñ*atasarvârtbânusa*m*dhâna*s*aktim âha sm*ri*tis *k*eti. Ânanda
Giri.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I, 4, 2](sbe34113)
