[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe34118)  [Next](sbe34120) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930306/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras, commentary by Sankaracharya (SBE34)*, tr. by George
Thibaut \[1890\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

8\. (It cannot be maintained that a*g*â means the

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

pradhâna) because no special characteristic is stated; as in the case of
the cup.

Here the advocate of the pradhâna comes again forward and maintains that
the absence of scriptural authority for the pradhâna is not yet proved.
For, he says, we have the following mantra (*S*ve. Up. IV, 5), 'There is
one a*g*â <span id="fr_237"></span>[1](#fn_237), red, white, and black,
producing manifold offspring of the same nature. There is one
[a*g*â](errata.htm#1) who loves her and lies by her; there is another
who leaves her after having enjoyed her.'--In this mantra the words
'red,' 'white,' and 'black' denote the three constituent elements of the
pradhâna. Passion is called red on account of its colouring, i.e.
influencing property; Goodness is called white, because it is of the
nature of Light; Darkness is called black on account of its covering and
obscuring property. The state of equipoise of the three constituent
elements, i.e. the pradhâna, is denoted by the attributes of its parts,
and is therefore called red-white-black. It is further called a*g*â,
i.e. unborn, because it is acknowledged to be the fundamental matter out
of which everything springs, not a mere effect.--But has not the word
a*g*â the settled meaning of she-goat?--True; but the ordinary meaning
of the word cannot be accepted in this place, because true knowledge
forms the general subject-matter.--That pradhâna produces many creatures
participating in its three constituent elements. One unborn being loves
her and lies by her, i.e. some souls, deluded by ignorance, approach
her, and falsely imagining that they experience pleasure or pain, or are
in a state of dulness, pass through the course of transmigratory
existence. Other souls, again, which have attained to discriminative
knowledge, lose their attachment to prak*ri*ti, and leave her after
having enjoyed her, i.e. after she has afforded to them enjoyment and
release.--On the ground of this passage, as interpreted above, the

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

followers of Kapila claim the authority of Scripture for their pradhâna
hypothesis.

To this argumentation we reply, that the quoted mantra by no means
proves the Sâ<u>n</u>khya doctrine to be based on Scripture. That
mantra, taken by itself, is not able to give additional strength to any
doctrine. For, by means of some supposition or other, the terms a*g*â,
&c. can be reconciled with any doctrine, and there is no reason for the
special assertion that the Sâ<u>n</u>khya doctrine only is meant. The
case is analogous to that of the cup mentioned in the mantra, 'There is
a cup having its mouth below and its bottom above' (B*ri*. Up. II, 2,
3). Just as it is impossible to decide on the ground of this mantra
taken by itself what special cup is meant--it being possible to ascribe,
somehow or other, the quality of the mouth being turned downward to any
cup--; so here also there is no special quality stated, so that it is
not possible to decide from the mantra itself whether the pradhâna is
meant by the term a*g*â, or something else.--But in connexion with the
mantra about the cup we have a supplementary passage from which we learn
what kind of cup is meant, 'What is called the cup having its mouth
below and its bottom above is this head.'--Whence, however, can we learn
what special being is meant by the a*g*â of the
*S*vetâ*s*vatara-upanishad?--To this question the next Sûtra replies.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_237"></span>[253:1](sbe34119.htm#fr_237) As the meaning of
the word a*g*â is going to be discussed, and as the author of the Sûtras
and *S*a<u>n</u>kara seem to disagree as to its meaning (see later on),
I prefer to leave the word untranslated in this place.--*S*a<u>n</u>kara
reads--and explains,--in the mantra, sarûpâ*h* (not sarûpâm) and
bhuktabhogâm, not bhuktabhogyâm.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I, 4, 9](sbe34120)
