[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe34122)  [Next](sbe34124) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930306/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras, commentary by Sankaracharya (SBE34)*, tr. by George
Thibaut \[1890\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

12\. (The pa*ñk*a*g*anâ*h* are) the breath and so on, (as is seen) from
the complementary passage.

The mantra in which the pa*ñk*a*g*anâ*h* are mentioned is followed by
another one in which breath and four other things are mentioned for the
purpose of describing the nature of Brahman. 'They who know the breath
of breath, the eye of the eye, the ear of the ear, the food of food, the
mind of mind  <span id="fr_241"></span>[1](#fn_241).' Hence we conclude,
on the ground of proximity, that the five-people are the beings
mentioned in this latter mantra.--But how, the Sâ<u>n</u>khya asks, can
the word 'people' be applied to the breath, the eye, the ear, and so
on?--How, we ask in return, can it be

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

applied to your categories? In both cases the common meaning of the word
'people' has to be disregarded; but in favour of our explanation is the
fact that the breath, the eye, and so on, are mentioned in a
complementary passage. The breath, the eye, &c. may be denoted by the
word 'people' because they are connected with people. Moreover, we find
the word 'person,' which means as much as 'people,' applied to the
prâ*n*as in the passage, 'These are the five persons of Brahman' (*Kh*.
Up. III, 13, 6); and another passage runs, 'Breath is father, breath is
mother,' &c. (*Kh*. Up. VII, 15, 1). And, owing to the force of
composition, there is no objection to the compound being taken in its
settled conventional meaning  <span
id="fr_242"></span>[1](#fn_242).--But how can the conventional meaning
be had recourse to, if there is no previous use of the word in that
meaning?--That may be done, we reply, just as in the case of udbhid and
similar words  <span id="fr_243"></span>[2](#fn_243). We often infer
that a word of unknown meaning refers to some known thing because it is
used in connexion with the latter. So, for instance, in the case of the
following words: 'He is to sacrifice with the udbhid; he cuts the yûpa;
he makes the vedi.' Analogously we conclude that the term
pa*ñk*a*g*anâ*h*, which, from the grammatical rule quoted, is known to
be a name, and which therefore demands a thing of which it is the name,
denotes the breath, the eye, and so on, which are connected with it
through their being mentioned in a complementary passage.--Some
commentators explain the word pa*ñk*a*g*anâ

h

<span id="page_262">p. 262</span>

to mean the Gods, the Fathers, the Gandharvas, the Asuras, and the
Rakshas. Others, again, think that the four castes together with the
Nishâdas are meant. Again, some scriptural passage (*Ri*g-veda Sa*m*h.
VIII, 53, 7) speaks of the tribe of 'the five-people,' meaning thereby
the created beings in general; and this latter explanation also might be
applied to the passage under discussion. The teacher (the Sûtrakâra), on
the other hand, aiming at showing that the passage does not refer to the
twenty-five categories of the Sâ<u>n</u>khyas, declares that on the
ground of the complementary passage breath, &c. have to be understood.

Well, let it then be granted that the five-people mentioned in the
Mâdhyandina-text are breath, &c. since that text mentions food also (and
so makes up the number five). But how shall we interpret the
Kâ*n*va-text which does not mention food (and thus altogether speaks of
four things only)?--To this question the next Sûtra replies.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_241"></span>[260:1](sbe34123.htm#fr_241) So in the
Mâdhyandina recension of the Upanishad; the Kâ*n*va recension has not
the clause 'the food of food.'

<span id="fn_242"></span>[261:1](sbe34123.htm#fr_242) This in answer to
the Sâ<u>n</u>khya who objects to *g*ana when applied to the prâna, &c.
being interpreted with the help of laksha*n*â; while if referred to the
pradhâna, &c. it may be explained to have a direct meaning, on the
ground of yaugika interpretation (the pradhâna being *g*ana because it
produces, the mahat &c. being *g*ana because they are produced). The
Vedântin points out that the compound pa*ñk*a*g*anâ*h* has its own
rû*dh*i-meaning, just as a*s*vakar*n*a, literally horse-ear, which
conventionally denotes a certain plant.

<span id="fn_243"></span>[261:2](sbe34123.htm#fr_243) We infer that
udbhid is the name of a sacrifice because it is mentioned in connexion
with the act of sacrificing; we infer that the yûpa is a wooden post
because it is said to be cut, and so on.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I, 4, 13](sbe34124)
