[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe34055)  [Next](sbe34057.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930306/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras, commentary by Sankaracharya (SBE34)*, tr. by George
Thibaut \[1890\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

19\. And (the internal ruler is) not that which the Sm*ri*ti assumes,
(viz. the pradhâna,) on account of the statement of qualities not
belonging to it.

Good so far, a Sâ<u>n</u>khya opponent resumes. The attributes, however,
of not being seen, &c., belong also to the pradhâna assumed by the
Sâ<u>n</u>khya-sm*ri*ti, which is acknowledged to be devoid of form and
other sensible qualities. For their

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Sm*ri*ti says,
'Undiscoverable, unknowable, as if wholly in sleep' (Manu I, 5). To this
pradhâna also the attribute of rulership belongs, as it is the cause of
all effects. Therefore the internal ruler may be understood to denote
the pradhâna. The pradhâna has, indeed, been set aside already by the
Sûtra I, 1, 5, but we bring it forward again, because we find that
attributes belonging to it, such as not being seen and the like, are
mentioned in Scripture.

To this argumentation the Sûtrakâra replies that the word 'internal
ruler' cannot denote the pradhâna, because qualities not belonging to
the latter are stated. For, although the pradhâna may be spoken of as
not being seen, &c, it cannot be spoken of as seeing, since the
Sâ<u>n</u>khyas admit it to be non-intelligent. But the scriptural
passage which forms the complement to the passage about the internal
ruler (B*ri*. Up. III, 7, 23) says expressly, 'Unseen but seeing,
unheard but hearing, unperceived but perceiving, unknown but
knowing.'--And Selfhood also cannot belong to the pradhâna.

Well, then, if the term 'internal ruler' cannot be admitted to denote
the pradhâna, because the latter is neither a Self nor seeing; let us
suppose it to denote the embodied (individual) soul, which is
intelligent, and therefore hears, sees, perceives, knows; which is
internal (pratya*ñk*), and therefore of the nature of Self; and which is
immortal, because it is able to enjoy the fruits of its good and evil
actions. It is, moreover, a settled matter that the attributes of not
being seen, &c., belong to the embodied soul, because the agent of an
action, such as seeing, cannot at the same time be the object of the
action. This is declared in scriptural passages also, as, for instance
(B*ri*. Up. III, 4, 2), 'Thou couldst not see the seer of sight.' The
individual soul is, moreover, capable of inwardly ruling the complex of
the organs of action, as it is the enjoyer. Therefore the internal ruler
is the embodied soul.--To this reasoning the following Sûtra replies.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I, 2, 20](sbe34057.md)
