[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe34001)  [Next](sbe34003) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930306/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras, commentary by Sankaracharya (SBE34)*, tr. by George
Thibaut \[1890\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

# INTRODUCTION.

To the sacred literature of the Brahmans, in the strict sense of the
term, i.e. to the Veda, there belongs a certain number of complementary
works without whose assistance the student is, according to Hindu
notions, unable to do more than commit the sacred texts to memory. In
the first place all Vedic texts must, in order to be understood, be read
together with running commentaries such as Sâya*n*a's commentaries on
the Sa*m*hitâs and Brâhma*n*as, and the Bhâshyas ascribed to
*S*a<u>n</u>kara on the chief Upanishads. But these commentaries do not
by themselves conduce to a full comprehension of the contents of the
sacred texts, since they confine themselves to explaining the meaning of
each detached passage without investigating its relation to other
passages, and the whole of which they form part; considerations of the
latter kind are at any rate introduced occasionally only. The task of
taking a comprehensive view of the contents of the Vedic writings as a
whole, of systematising what they present in an unsystematical form, of
showing the mutual co-ordination or subordination of single passages and
sections, and of reconciling contradictions--which, according to the
view of the orthodox commentators, can be apparent only--is allotted to
a separate *s*âstra or body of doctrine which is termed Mîmâ*m*sâ, i.e.
the investigation or enquiry κατ᾽ ἐζοχήν, viz. the enquiry into the
connected meaning of the sacred texts.

Of this Mîmâ*m*sâ two branches have to be distinguished, the so-called
earlier (pûrva) Mîmâ*m*sâ, and the later (uttara) Mîmâ*m*sâ. The former
undertakes to systematise the karmakâ*nd*a, i.e. that entire portion of
the Veda which is concerned with action, pre-eminently sacrificial
action, and which comprises the Sa*m*hitâs and the Brâhma*n*as exclusive
of the Âra*n*yaka portions; the latter performs the same

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

service with regard to the so-called *gñ*ânakâ*nd*a, i.e. that part of
the Vedic writings which includes the Âra*n*yaka portions of the
Brâhma*n*as, and a number of detached treatises called Upanishads. Its
subject is not action but knowledge, viz. the knowledge of Brahman.

At what period these two *s*âstras first assumed a definite form, we are
unable to ascertain. Discussions of the nature of those which constitute
the subject-matter of the Pûrva Mîmâ*m*sâ must have arisen at a very
early period, and the word Mîmâ*m*sâ itself together with its
derivatives is already employed in the Brâhma*n*as to denote the doubts
and discussions connected with certain contested points of ritual. The
want of a body of definite rules prescribing how to act, i.e. how to
perform the various sacrifices in full accordance with the teaching of
the Veda, was indeed an urgent one, because it was an altogether
practical want, continually pressing itself on the adhvaryus engaged in
ritualistic duties. And the task of establishing such rules was moreover
a comparatively limited and feasible one; for the members of a certain
Vedic *s*âkhâ or school had to do no more than to digest thoroughly
their own brâhma*n*a and sa*m*hitâ, without being under any obligation
of reconciling with the teaching of their own books the occasionally
conflicting rules implied in the texts of other *s*âkhâs. It was assumed
that action, as being something which depends on the will and choice of
man, admits of alternatives, so that a certain sacrifice may be
performed in different ways by members of different Vedic schools, or
even by the followers of one and the same *s*âkhâ.

The Uttara Mîmâ*m*sâ-*s*âstra may be supposed to have originated
considerably later than the Pûrva Mîmâ*m*sâ. In the first place, the
texts with which it is concerned doubtless constitute the latest branch
of Vedic literature. And in the second place, the subject-matter of
those texts did not call for a systematical treatment with equal
urgency, as it was in no way connected with practice; the mental
attitude of the authors of the Upanishads, who in their lucubrations on
Brahman and the soul aim at nothing less than at definiteness and
coherence, may have perpetuated itself through

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

many generations without any great inconvenience resulting therefrom.

But in the long run two causes must have acted with ever-increasing
force, to give an impulse to the systematic working up of the teaching
of the Upanishads also. The followers of the different Vedic sâkhâs no
doubt recognised already at an early period the truth that, while
conflicting statements regarding the details of a sacrifice can be got
over by the assumption of a vikalpa, i.e. an optional proceeding, it is
not so with regard to such topics as the nature of Brahman, the relation
to it of the human soul, the origin of the physical universe, and the
like. Concerning them, one opinion only can be the true one, and it
therefore becomes absolutely incumbent on those, who look on the whole
body of the Upanishads as revealed truth, to demonstrate that their
teaching forms a consistent whole free from all contradictions. In
addition there supervened the external motive that, while the
karma-kâ*nd*a of the Veda concerned only the higher castes of
brahmanically constituted society, on which it enjoins certain
sacrificial performances connected with certain rewards, the
*gñ*ânakâ*nd*a, as propounding a certain theory of the world, towards
which any reflecting person inside or outside the pale of the orthodox
community could not but take up a definite position, must soon have
become the object of criticism on the part of those who held different
views on religious and philosophic things, and hence stood in need of
systematic defence.

At present there exists a vast literature connected with the two
branches of the Mîmâ*m*sâ. We have, on the one hand, all those works
which constitute the Pûrva Mîmâ*m*sâ-*s*âstra--or as it is often,
shortly but not accurately, termed, the Mîmâ*m*sâ-sâstra--and, on the
other hand, all those works which are commonly comprised under the name
Vedânta-*s*âstra. At the head of this extensive literature there stand
two collections of Sûtras (i. e. short aphorisms constituting in their
totality a complete body of doctrine upon some subject), whose reputed
authors are *G*aimini and Bâdarâya*n*a. There can, however, be no doubt
that the composition of those two

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

collections of Sûtras was preceded by a long series of preparatory
literary efforts of which they merely represent the highly condensed
outcome. This is rendered probable by the analogy of other *s*âstras, as
well as by the exhaustive thoroughness with which the Sûtras perform
their task of systematizing the teaching of the Veda, and is further
proved by the frequent references which the Sûtras make to the views of
earlier teachers. If we consider merely the preserved monuments of
Indian literature, the Sûtras (of the two Mîmâ*m*sâs as well as of other
*s*âstras) mark the beginning; if we, however, take into account what
once existed, although it is at present irretrievably lost, we observe
that they occupy a strictly central position, summarising, on the one
hand, a series of early literary essays extending over many generations,
and forming, on the other hand, the head spring of an ever broadening
activity of commentators as well as virtually independent writers, which
reaches down to our days, and may yet have some future before itself.

The general scope of the two Mîmâ*m*sa-sûtras and their relation to the
Veda have been indicated in what precedes. A difference of some
importance between the two has, however, to be noted in this connexion.
The systematisation of the karmakâ*nd*a of the Veda led to the
elaboration of two classes of works, viz. the Kalpa-sûtras on the one
hand, and the Pûrva Mîmâ*m*sa-sûtras on the other hand. The former give
nothing but a description as concise as possible of the sacrifices
enjoined in the Brâhma*n*as; while the latter discuss and establish the
general principles which the author of a Kalpa-sûtra has to follow, if
he wishes to render his rules strictly conformable to the teaching of
the Veda. The *gñ*ânakâ*nd*a of the Veda, on the other hand, is
systematised in a single work, viz. the Uttara Mîmâ*m*sâ or
Vedanta-sûtras, which combine the two tasks of concisely stating the
teaching of the Veda, and of argumentatively establishing the special
interpretation of the Veda adopted in the Sûtras. This difference may be
accounted for by two reasons. In the first place, the contents of the
karmakâ*nd*a, as being of an entirely practical nature, called for
summaries such as the Kalpa-sûtras, from which all burdensome
discussions of

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

method are excluded; while there was no similar reason for the
separation of the two topics in the case of the purely theoretical
science of Brahman. And, in the second place, the Vedânta-sûtras
throughout presuppose the Pûrva Mîmâ*m*sâ-sûtras, and may therefore
dispense with the discussion of general principles and methods already
established in the latter.

The time at which the two Mîmâ*m*sâ-sûtras were composed we are at
present unable to fix with any certainty; a few remarks on the subject
will, however, be made later on. Their outward form is that common to
all the so-called Sûtras which aims at condensing a given body of
doctrine in a number of concise aphoristic sentences, and often even
mere detached words in lieu of sentences. Besides the Mîmâ*m*sâ-sûtras
this literary form is common to the fundamental works on the other
philosophic systems, on the Vedic sacrifices, on domestic ceremonies, on
sacred law, on grammar, and on metres. The two Mîmâ*m*sâ-sûtras occupy,
however, an altogether exceptional position in point of style. All
Sûtras aim at conciseness; that is clearly the reason to which this
whole species of literary composition owes its existence. This their aim
they reach by the rigid exclusion of all words which can possibly be
spared, by the careful avoidance of all unnecessary repetitions, and, as
in the case of the grammatical Sûtras, by the employment of an
arbitrarily coined terminology which substitutes single syllables for
entire words or combination of words. At the same time the manifest
intention of the Sûtra writers is to express themselves with as much
clearness as the conciseness affected by them admits of. The aphorisms
are indeed often concise to excess, but not otherwise intrinsically
obscure, the manifest care of the writers being to retain what is
essential in a given phrase, and to sacrifice only what can be supplied,
although perhaps not without difficulty, and an irksome strain of memory
and reflection. Hence the possibility of understanding without a
commentary a very considerable portion at any rate of the ordinary
Sûtras. Altogether different is the case of the two Mîmâ*m*sâ-sûtras.
There scarcely one single Sûtra is

<span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span>

intelligible without a commentary. The most essential words are
habitually dispensed with; nothing is, for instance, more common than
the simple omission of the subject or predicate of a sentence. And when
here and there a Sûtra occurs whose words construe without anything
having to be supplied, the phraseology is so eminently vague and obscure
that without the help derived from a commentary we should be unable to
make out to what subject the Sûtra refers. When undertaking to translate
either of the Mîmâ*m*sâ-sutras we therefore depend altogether on
commentaries; and hence the question arises which of the numerous
commentaries extant is to be accepted as a guide to their right
understanding.

The commentary here selected for translation, together with
Bâdarâya*n*a's Sûtras <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) (to which we
shall henceforth confine our attention to the exclusion of *G*aimini's
Pûrva Mîmâ*m*sâ-sutras), is the one composed by the celebrated
theologian *S*a<u>n</u>kara or, as he is commonly called,
*S*a<u>n</u>karâ*k*ârya. There are obvious reasons for this selection.
In the first place, the *S*a<u>n</u>kara-bhâshya represents the
so-called orthodox side of Brahmanical theology which strictly upholds
the Brahman or highest Self of the Upanishads as something different
from, and in fact immensely superior to, the divine beings such as
Vish*n*u or Siva, which, for many centuries, have been the chief objects
of popular worship in India. In the second place, the doctrine advocated
by *S*a<u>n</u>kara is, from a purely philosophical point of view and
apart from all theological considerations, the most important and
interesting one which has arisen on Indian soil; neither those forms of
the Vedânta which diverge from the view represented by *S*a<u>n</u>kara
nor any of the non-Vedântic systems can be compared with the so-called
orthodox Vedânta in boldness, depth, and subtlety of speculation. In the
third place, *S*a<u>n</u>kara's bhâshya is, as far as we know, the
oldest of the extant commentaries, and relative antiquity is at any rate
one of the circumstances which have to be

<span id="page_xv">p. xv</span>

taken into account, although, it must be admitted, too much weight may
easily be attached to it. The *S*a<u>n</u>kara-bhâshya further is the
authority most generally deferred to in India as to the right
understanding of the Vedânta-sûtras, and ever since *S*a<u>n</u>kara's
time the majority of the best thinkers of India have been men belonging
to his school. If in addition to all this we take into consideration the
intrinsic merits of *S*a<u>n</u>kara's work which, as a piece of
philosophical argumentation and theological apologetics, undoubtedly
occupies a high rank, the preference here given to it will be easily
understood.

But to the European--or, generally, modern--translator of the
Vedânta-sûtras with *S*a<u>n</u>kara's commentary another question will
of course suggest itself at once, viz. whether or not *S*a<u>n</u>kara's
explanations faithfully render the intended meaning of the author of the
Sûtras. To the Indian Pandit of *S*a<u>n</u>kara's school this question
has become an indifferent one, or, to state the case more accurately, he
objects to its being raised, as he looks on *S*a<u>n</u>kara's authority
as standing above doubt and dispute. When pressed to make good his
position he will, moreover, most probably not enter into any detailed
comparison of *S*a<u>n</u>kara's comments with the text of
Bâdarâya*n*a's Sûtras, but will rather endeavour to show on speculative
grounds that *S*a<u>n</u>kara's philosophical view is the only true one,
whence it of course follows that it accurately represents the meaning of
Bâdarâya*n*a, who himself must necessarily be assured to have taught the
true doctrine. But on the modern investigator, who neither can consider
himself bound by the authority of a name however great, nor is likely to
look to any Indian system of thought for the satisfaction of his
speculative wants, it is clearly incumbent not to acquiesce from the out
set in the interpretations given of the Vedânta-sûtras--and the
Upanishads--by *S*a<u>n</u>kara and his school, but to submit them, as
far as that can be done, to a critical investigation.

This is a task which would have to be undertaken even if
*S*a<u>n</u>kara's views as to the true meaning of the Sûtras and
Upanishads had never been called into doubt on Indian soil, although in
that case it could perhaps hardly be entered

<span id="page_xvi">p. xvi</span>

upon with much hope of success; but it becomes much more urgent, and at
the same time more feasible, when we meet in India itself with systems
claiming to be Vedântic and based on interpretations of the Sûtras and
Upanishads more or less differing from those of *S*a<u>n</u>kara. The
claims of those systems to be in the possession of the right
understanding of the fundamental authorities of the Vedânta must at any
rate be examined, even if we should finally be compelled to reject them.

It appears that already at a very early period the Vedânta-sûtras had
come to be looked upon as an authoritative work, not to be neglected by
any who wished to affiliate their own doctrines to the Veda. At present,
at any rate, there are very few Hindu sects not interested in showing
that their distinctive tenets are countenanced by Bâdarâya*n*a's
teaching. Owing to this the commentaries on the Sûtras have in the
course of time become very numerous, and it is at present impossible to
give a full and accurate enumeration even of those actually existing,
much less of those referred to and quoted. Mr. Fitz-Edward Hall, in his
Bibliographical Index, mentions fourteen commentaries, copies of which
had been inspected by himself. Some among these (as, for instance,
Râmânu*g*a's Vedânta-sâra, No. XXXV) are indeed not commentaries in the
strict sense of the word, but rather systematic expositions of the
doctrine supposed to be propounded in the Sûtras; but, on the other
hand, there are in existence several true commentaries which had not
been accessible to Fitz-Edward Hall. it would hardly be practical--and
certainly not feasible in this place--to submit all the existing
bhâshyas to a critical enquiry at once. All we can do here is to single
out one or a few of the more important ones, and to compare their
interpretations with those given by *S*a<u>n</u>kara, and with the text
of the Sûtras themselves.

The bhâshya, which in this connexion is the first to press itself upon
our attention, is the one composed by the famous Vaish*n*ava theologian
and philosopher Râmânu*g*a, who is supposed to have lived in the twelfth
century. The Râmânu*g*a or, as it is often called, the *S*rî-bhâshya
appears to be

<span id="page_xvii">p. xvii</span>

the oldest commentary extant next to *S*a<u>n</u>kara's. It is further
to be noted that the sect of the Râmânu*g*as occupies a pre-eminent
position among the Vaishnava, sects which themselves, in their totality,
may claim to be considered the most important among all Hindu sects. The
intrinsic value of the *S*rî-bhâshya moreover is--as every student
acquainted with it will be ready to acknowledge--a very high one; it
strikes one throughout as a very solid performance due to a writer of
extensive learning and great power of argumentation, and in its polemic
parts, directed chiefly against the school of *S*a<u>n</u>kara, it not
unfrequently deserves to be called brilliant even. And in addition to
all this it shows evident traces of being not the mere outcome of
Râmânu*g*a's individual views, but of resting on an old and weighty
tradition.

This latter point is clearly of the greatest importance. If it could be
demonstrated or even rendered probable only that the oldest bhâshya
which we possess, i. e. the *S*a<u>n</u>kara-bhâshya, represents an
uninterrupted and uniform tradition bridging over the interval between
Bâdarâya*n*a, the reputed author of the Sûtras, and *S*a<u>n</u>kara;
and if, on the other hand, it could be shown that the more modern
bhâshyas are not supported by old tradition, but are nothing more than
bold attempts of clever sectarians to force an old work of generally
recognised authority into the service of their individual tenets; there
would certainly be no reason for us to raise the question whether the
later bhâshyas can help us in making out the true meaning of the Sûtras.
All we should have to do in that case would be to accept
*S*a<u>n</u>kara's interpretations as they stand, or at the utmost to
attempt to make out, if at all possible, by a careful comparison of
*S*a<u>n</u>kara's bhâshya with the text of the Sûtras, whether the
former in all cases faithfully represents the purport of the latter.

In the most recent book of note which at all enters into the question as
to how far we have to accept *S*a<u>n</u>kara as a guide to the right
understanding of the Sûtras (Mr. A. Gough's Philosophy of the
Upanishads) the view is maintained (pp. 239 ff.) that *S*a<u>n</u>kara
is the generally recognised expositor

<span id="page_xviii">p. xviii</span>

of true Vedânta doctrine, that that doctrine was handed down by an
unbroken series of teachers intervening between him and the Sûtrakâra,
and that there existed from the beginning only one Vedânta doctrine,
agreeing in all essential points with the doctrine known to us from
*S*a<u>n</u>kara's writings. Mr. Gough undertakes to prove this view,
firstly, by a comparison of *S*a<u>n</u>kara's system with the teaching
of the Upanishads themselves; and, secondly, by a comparison of the
purport of the Sûtras--as far as that can be made out independently of
the commentaries--with the interpretations given of them by
*S*a<u>n</u>kara. To both these points we shall revert later on.
Meanwhile, I only wish to remark concerning the former point that, even
if we could show with certainty that all the Upanishads propound one and
the same doctrine, there yet remains the undeniable fact of our being
confronted by a considerable number of essentially differing theories,
all of which claim to be founded on the Upanishads. And with regard to
the latter point I have to say for the present that, as long as we have
only *S*a<u>n</u>kara's bhâshya before us, we are naturally inclined to
find in the Sûtras--which, taken by themselves, are for the greater part
unintelligible--the meaning which *S*a<u>n</u>kara ascribes to them;
while a reference to other bhâshyas may not impossibly change our views
at once.--Meanwhile, we will consider the question as to the unbroken
uniformity of Vedântic tradition from another point or view, viz. by
enquiring whether or not the Sûtras themselves, and the
*S*a<u>n</u>kara-bhâshya, furnish any indications of there having
existed already at an early time essentially different Vedântic systems
or lines of Vedântic speculation.

Beginning with the Sûtras, we find that they supply ample evidence to
the effect that already at a very early time, viz. the period antecedent
to the final composition of the Vedânta-sûtras in their present shape,
there had arisen among the chief doctors of the Vedânta differences of
opinion, bearing not only upon minor points of doctrine, but affecting
the most essential parts of the system. In addition to Bâdarâya*n*a
himself, the reputed author of the

<span id="page_xix">p. xix</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Sûtras, the latter
quote opinions ascribed to the following teachers: Âtreya, Â*s*marathya,
Au*d*ulomi, Kârsh*n*âgini, Kâ*s*ak*ri*tsna, *G*aimini, Bâdari. Among the
passages where diverging views of those teachers are recorded and
contrasted three are of particular importance. Firstly, a passage in the
fourth pâda of the fourth adhyâya (Sûtras 5-7), where the opinions of
various teachers concerning the characteristics of the released soul are
given, and where the important discrepancy is noted that, according to
Au*d*ulomi, its only characteristic is thought (*k*aitanya), while
Gaimini maintains that it possesses a number of exalted qualities, and
Bâdarâya*n*a declares himself in favour of a combination of those two
views.--The second passage occurs in the third pâda of the fourth
adhyâya (Sûtras 7-14), where *G*aimini maintains that the soul of him
who possesses the lower knowledge of Brahman goes after death to the
highest Brahman, while Bâdari--whose opinion is endorsed by
*S*a<u>n</u>kara--teaches that it repairs to the lower Brahman
only--Finally, the third and most important passage is met with in the
fourth pâda of the first adhyâya (Sûtras 20-22), where the question is
discussed why in a certain passage of the B*ri*hadâra*n*yaka Brahman is
referred to in terms which are strictly applicable to the individual
soul only. In connexion therewith the Sûtras quote the views of three
ancient teachers about the relation in which the individual soul stands
to Brahman. According to Â*s*marathya (if we accept the interpretation
of his view given by *S*a<u>n</u>kara and *S*a<u>n</u>kara's
commentators) the soul stands to Brahman in the bhedâbheda relation,
i.e. it is neither absolutely different nor absolutely non-different
from it, as sparks are from fire. Audulomi, on the other hand, teaches
that the soul is altogether different from Brahman up to the time when
obtaining final release it is merged in it, and Kâ*s*ak*ri*tsna finally
upholds the doctrine that the soul is absolutely non-different from
Brahman; which, in, some way or other presents itself as the individual
soul.

That the ancient teachers, the ripest outcome of whose speculations and
discussions is embodied in the Vedânta-sûtras, disagreed among
themselves on points of vital

<span id="page_xx">p. xx</span>

importance is sufficiently proved by the three passages quoted. The one
quoted last is specially significant as showing that recognised
authorities--deemed worthy of being quoted in the Sûtras--denied that
doctrine on which the whole system of *S*a<u>n</u>kara hinges, viz. the
doctrine of the absolute identity of the individual soul with Brahman.

Turning next to the *S*a<u>n</u>kara-bhâshya itself, we there also meet
with indications that the Vedântins were divided among themselves on
important points of dogma. These indications are indeed not numerous:
*S*a<u>n</u>kara, does not on the whole impress one as an author
particularly anxious to strengthen his own case by appeals to ancient
authorities, a peculiarity of his which later writers of hostile
tendencies have not failed to remark and criticise. But yet more than
once *S*a<u>n</u>kara also refers to the opinion of 'another,' viz.,
commentator of the Sûtras, and in several places *S*a<u>n</u>kara's
commentators explain that the 'other' meant is the V*ri*ttikâra (about
whom more will be said shortly). Those references as a rule concern
minor points of exegesis, and hence throw little or no light on
important differences of dogma; but there are two remarks of
*S*a<u>n</u>kara's at any rate which are of interest in this connexion.
The one is made with reference to Sûtras 7-14 of the third pâda of the
fourth adhyâya; 'some,' he says there, 'declare those Sûtras, which I
look upon as setting forth the siddhânta view, to state merely the
pûrvapaksha;' a difference of opinion which, as we have seen above,
affects the important question as to the ultimate fate of those who have
not reached the knowledge of the highest Brahman.--And under I, 3, 19
*S*a<u>n</u>kara, after having explained at length that the individual
soul as such cannot claim any reality, but is real only in so far as it
is identical with Brahman, adds the following words, 'apare tu vâdina*h*
pâramârthikam eva *g*aiva*m* rûpam iti manyante asmadîyâ*s* *k*a
ke*k*it,' i. e. other theorisers again, and among them some of ours, are
of opinion that the individual soul as such is real.' The term 'ours,'
here made use of, can denote only the Aupanishadas or Vedântins, and it
thus appears that *S*a<u>n</u>kara himself

<span id="page_xxi">p. xxi</span>

was willing to class under the same category himself and philosophers
who--as in later times the Râmânu*g*as and others--looked upon the
individual soul as not due to the fictitious limitations of Mâyâ, but as
real in itself; whatever may be the relation in which they considered it
to stand to the highest Self.

From what precedes it follows that the Vedântins of the school to which
*S*a<u>n</u>kara himself belonged acknowledged the existence of Vedântic
teaching of a type essentially different from their own. We must now
proceed to enquire whether the Râmânu*g*a system, which likewise claims
to be Vedânta, and to be founded on the Vedânta-sûtras, has any title to
be considered an ancient system and the heir of a respectable tradition.

It appears that Râmânu*g*a claims--and by Hindu writers is generally
admitted--to follow in his bhâshya the authority of Bodhâyana, who had
composed a v*ri*tti on the Sûtras. Thus we read in the beginning of the
*S*rî-bhâshya (Pandit, New Series, VII, p. 163),
'Bhagavad-bodhâyanak*ri*tâ*m* vistîrnâ*m* brahmasûtra-v*ri*tti*m*
pûrvâ*k*âryâ*h* sa*m*kikshipus tanmatânusâre*n*a sûtrâksharâ*n*i
vyâkhyâsyante.' Whether the Bodhâyana to whom that v*ri*tti is ascribed
is to be identified with the author of the Kalpa-sûtra, and other works,
cannot at present be decided. But that an ancient v*ri*tti on the Sûtras
connected with Bodhâyana's name actually existed, there is not any
reason to doubt. Short quotations from it are met with in a few places
of the *S*rî-bhâshya, and, as we have seen above, *S*a<u>n</u>kara's
commentators state that their author's polemical remarks are directed
against the V*ri*ttikâra. In addition to Bodhâyana, Râmânu*g*a appeals
to quite a series of ancient teachers--pûrvâ*k*âryâs--who carried on the
true tradition as to the teaching of the Vedânta and the meaning of the
Sûtras. In the Vedârthasa<u>n</u>graha--a work composed by Râmânu*g*a
himself--we meet in one place with the enumeration of the following
authorities: Bodhâyana, *T*a<u>n</u>ka, Drami*d*a, Guhadeva, Kapardin,
Bharu*k*i, and quotations from the writings of some of these are not
unfrequent in the Vedârthasa<u>n</u>graha, as well as the *S*rî-bhâshya.

<span id="page_xxii">p. xxii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The author most
frequently quoted is Drami*d*a <span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1), who
composed the Drami*d*a-bhâshya; he is sometimes referred to as the
bhâshyakâra. Another writer repeatedly quoted as the vâkyakâra is, I am
told <span id="fr_2"></span>[2](#fn_2), to be identified with the
*T*a<u>n</u>ka mentioned above. I refrain from inserting in this place
the information concerning the relative age of these writers which may
be derived from the oral tradition of the Râmânu*g*a sect. From another
source, however, we receive an intimation that Drami*d*â*k*ârya or
Dravi*d*â*k*ârya preceded *S*a<u>n</u>kara in point of time. In his
*t*îkâ on *S*a<u>n</u>kara's bhâshya to the *Kh*ândogya Upanishad III,
10, 4, Ânandagiri remarks that the attempt made by his author to
reconcile the cosmological views of the Upanishad with the teaching of
Sm*ri*ti on the same point is a reproduction of the analogous attempt
made by the Dravi*d*â*k*ârya.

It thus appears that that special interpretation of the Vedânta-sûtras
with which the *S*rî-bhâshya makes us acquainted is not due to
innovating views on the part of Râmânu*g*a, but had authoritative
representatives already at a period anterior to that of
*S*a<u>n</u>kara. This latter point, moreover, receives additional
confirmation from the relation in which the so-called Râmânu*g*a sect
stands to earlier sects. What the exact position of Râmânu*g*a was, and
of what nature were the reforms that rendered him so prominent as to
give his name to a new sect, is not exactly known at present; at the
same time it is generally acknowledged that the Râmânu*g*as are closely
connected with the so-called Bhâgavatas or Pâ*ñk*arâtras, who are known
to have existed already at a very early time. This latter point is
proved by evidence of various kinds; for our present purpose it suffices
to point to the fact that, according to the interpretation of the most
authoritative commentators, the last

<span id="page_xxiii">p. xxiii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Sûtras of the
second pâda of the second adhyâya (Vedânta-sûtras) refer to a
distinctive tenet of the Bhâgavatas--which tenet forms part of the
Râmânu*g*a system also--viz. that the highest being manifests itself in
a fourfold form (vyûha) as Vâsudeva, Sa<u>n</u>karsha*n*a, Pradyumna,
Aniruddha, those four forms being identical with the highest Self, the
individual soul, the internal organ (manas), and the principle. of
egoity (aha<u>n</u>kâra). Whether those Sûtras embody an approval of the
tenet referred to, as Râmânu*g*a maintains, or are meant to impugn it,
as *S*a<u>n</u>kara thinks; so much is certain that in the opinion of
the best commentators the Bhâgavatas, the direct forerunners of the
Râmânu*g*as, are mentioned in the Sûtras themselves, and hence must not
only have existed, but even reached a considerable degree of importance
at the time when the Sûtras were composed. And considering the general
agreement of the systems of the earlier Bhâgavatas and the later
Râmânu*g*as, we have a full right to suppose that the two sects were at
one also in their mode of interpreting the Vedânta-sûtras.

The preceding considerations suffice, I am inclined to think, to show
that it will by no means be wasted labour to enquire how Râmânu*g*a
interprets the Sûtras, and wherein he differs from *S*a<u>n</u>kara.
This in fact seems clearly to be the first step we have to take, if we
wish to make an attempt at least of advancing beyond the interpretations
of scholiasts to the meaning of the Sûtras themselves. A full and
exhaustive comparison of the views of the two commentators would indeed
far exceed the limits of the space which can here he devoted to that
task, and will, moreover, be made with greater ease and advantage when
the complete Sanskrit text of the *S*rî-bhâshya has been printed, and
thus made available for general reference. But meanwhile it is possible,
and--as said before--even urged upon a translator of the Sûtras to
compare the interpretations, given by the two bhâshyakâras, of those
Sûtras, which, more than others, touch on the essential points of the
Vedânta system <span id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3). This

<span id="page_xxiv">p. xxiv</span>

will best be done in connexion with a succinct but full review of the
topics discussed in the adhikara*n*as of the Vedânta-sûtras, according
to *S*a<u>n</u>kara; a review which--apart from the side-glances at
Râmânu*g*a's comments--will be useful as a guide through the Sûtras and
the *S*a<u>n</u>kara-bhâshya. Before, however, entering on that task, I
think it advisable to insert short sketches of the philosophical systems
of *S*a<u>n</u>kara as well as of Râmânu*g*a, which may be referred to
when, later on discrepancies between the two commentators will be noted.
In these sketches I shall confine myself to the leading features, and
not enter into any details. Of *S*a<u>n</u>kara's system we possess as
it. is more than one trustworthy exposition; it may suffice to refer to
Deussen's System of the Vedânta, in which the details of the entire
system, as far as they can be learned from the Sûtra-bhâshya, are
represented fully and faithfully, and to Gough's Philosophy of the
Upanishads which, principally in its second chapter, gives a lucid
sketch of the *S*a<u>n</u>kara Vedânta, founded on the Sûtra-bhâshya,
the Upanishad bhâshyas, and some later writers belonging to
*S*a<u>n</u>kara's school. With regard to Râmânu*g*a's philosophy our
chief source was, hitherto, the Râmânu*g*a chapter in the
Sarvadar*s*a*n*asa*m*graha; the short sketch about to be given is
founded altogether on the *S*rî-bhâshya itself.

What in *S*a<u>n</u>kara's opinion the Upanishads teach, is shortly as
follows.--Whatever is, is in reality one; there truly exists only one
universal being called Brahman or Paramâtman, the highest Self This
being is of an absolutely homogeneous nature; it is pure 'Being,' or,
which comes to the same, pure intelligence or thought (*k*aitanya,

<span id="page_xxv">p. xxv</span>

gñâna). Intelligence or thought is not to be predicated of Brahman as
its attribute, but constitutes its substance, Brahman is not a thinking
being, but thought itself. It is absolutely destitute of qualities;
whatever qualities or attributes are conceivable, can only be denied of
it.--But, if nothing exists but one absolutely simple being, whence the
appearance of the world by which we see ourselves surrounded, and, in
which we ourselves exist as individual beings?--Brahman, the answer
runs, is associated with a certain power called Mâyâ or avidyâ to which
the appearance of this entire world is due. This power cannot be called
'being' (sat), for 'being' is only Brahman; nor can it be called
'non-being' (asat) in the strict sense, for it at any rate produces the
appearance of this world. It is in fact a principle of illusion; the
undefinable cause owing to which there seems to exist a material world
comprehending distinct individual existences. Being associated with this
principle of illusion, Brahman is enabled to project the appearance of
the world, in the same way as a magician is enabled by his
incomprehensible magical power to produce illusory appearances of
animate and inanimate beings. Mâyâ thus constitutes the upâdâna, the
material cause of the world; or--if we wish to call attention to the
circumstance that Mâyâ belongs to Brahman as a *s*akti--we may say that
the material cause of the world is Brahman in so far as it is associated
with Mâyâ. In this latter quality Brahman is more properly called
Î*s*vara, the Lord.

Mâyâ, under the guidance of the Lord, modifies itself by a progressive
evolution into all the individual existences (bheda), distinguished by
special names and forms, of which the world consists; from it there
spring in due succession the different material elements and the whole
bodily apparatus belonging to sentient Beings. In all those apparently,
individual forms of existence the one indivisible Brahman is present,
but, owing to the particular adjuncts into which Mâyâ has specialised
itself, it appears to be broken up--it is broken up, as it were--into a
multiplicity, of intellectual or sentient principles, the so-called
*g*îvas (individual or personal souls). What is real in each

<span id="page_xxvi">p. xxvi</span>

giva is only the universal Brahman itself; the whole aggregate of
individualising bodily organs and mental functions, which in our
ordinary experience separate and distinguish one *g*iva from another, is
the offspring of Mâyâ and as such unreal.

The phenomenal world or world of ordinary experience (vyavahâra) thus
consists of a number of individual souls engaged in specific cognitions,
volitions, and so on, and of the external material objects with which
those cognitions and volitions are concerned. Neither the specific
cognitions nor their objects are real in the true sense of the word, for
both are altogether due to Mâyâ. But at the same time we have to reject
the idealistic doctrine of certain Bauddha schools according to which
nothing whatever truly exists, but certain trains of cognitional acts or
ideas to which no external objects correspond; for external things,
although not real in the strict sense of the word, enjoy at any rate as
much reality as the specific cognitional acts whose objects they are.

The non-enlightened soul is unable to look through and beyond Mâyâ,
which, like a veil, hides from it its true nature. Instead of
recognising itself to be Brahman, it blindly identifies itself with its
adjuncts (upâdhi), the fictitious offspring of Mâyâ, and thus looks for
its true Self in the body, the sense organs, and the internal organ
(manas), i.e. the organ of specific cognition. The soul, which in
reality is pure intelligence, non-active, infinite, thus becomes limited
in extent, as it were, limited in knowledge and power, an agent and
enjoyer. Through its actions it burdens itself with merit and demerit,
the consequences of which it has to bear or enjoy in series of future
embodied existences, the Lord--as a retributor and dispenser--allotting
to each soul that form of embodiment to which it is entitled by its
previous actions. At the end of each of the great world periods called
kalpas the Lord retracts the whole world, i.e. the whole material world
is dissolved and merged into non-distinct Mâyâ, while the individual
souls, free for the time from actual connexion with upâdhis, lie in deep
slumber as it were. But as the

<span id="page_xxvii">p. xxvii</span>

consequences of their former deeds are not yet exhausted, they have
again to enter on embodied existence as soon as the Lord sends forth a
new material world, and the old round of birth, action, death begins
anew to last to all eternity as it has lasted from all eternity.

The means of escaping from this endless sa*ms*âra, the way out of which
can never be found by the non-enlightened soul, are furnished by the
Veda. The karmakâ*nd*a indeed, whose purport it is to enjoin certain
actions, cannot lead to final release; for even the most meritorious
works necessarily lead to new forms of embodied existence. And in the
*gñ*ânakâ*nd*a of the Veda also two different parts have to be
distinguished, viz., firstly, those chapters and passages which treat of
Brahman in so far as related to the world, and hence characterised by
various attributes, i.e. of Î*s*vara or the lower Brahman; and,
secondly, those texts which set forth the nature of the highest Brahman
transcending all qualities, and the fundamental identity of the
individual soul with that highest Brahman. Devout meditation on Brahman
as suggested by passages of the former kind does not directly lead to
final emancipation; the pious worshipper passes on his death into the
world of the lower Brahman only, where he continues to exist as a
distinct individual soul--although in the enjoyment of great power and
knowledge--until at last he reaches the highest knowledge, and, through
it, final release.--That student of the Veda, on the other hand, whose
soul has been enlightened by the texts embodying the higher knowledge of
Brahman, whom passages such as the great saying, 'That art thou,' have
taught that there is no difference between his true Self and the highest
Self, obtains at the moment of death immediate final release, i.e. he
withdraws altogether from the influence of Mâyâ, and asserts himself in
his true nature, which is nothing else but the absolute highest Brahman.

Thus *S*a<u>n</u>kara.--According to Râmânuga, on the other hand, the
teaching of the Upanishads has to be summarised as follows.--There
exists only one all-embracing being called Brahman or the highest Self
of the Lord. This being is

<span id="page_xxviii">p. xxviii</span>

not destitute of attributes, but rather endowed with all imaginable
auspicious qualities. It is not 'intelligence,'--as *S*a<u>n</u>kara
maintains,--but intelligence is its chief attribute. The Lord is
all-pervading, all-powerful, all-knowing, all-merciful; his nature is
fundamentally antagonistic to all evil. He contains within himself
whatever exists. While, according to *S*a<u>n</u>kara, the only reality
is to be found in the non-qualified homogeneous highest Brahman which
can only be defined as pure 'Being' or pure thought, all plurality being
a mere illusion; Brahman--according to Râmânu*g*a's view--comprises
within itself distinct elements of plurality which all of them lay claim
to absolute reality of one and the same kind. Whatever is presented to
us by ordinary experience, viz. matter in all its various modifications
and the individual souls of different classes and degrees, are essential
real constituents of Brahman's nature. Matter and souls (a*k*it and
*k*it) constitute, according to Râmânu*g*a's terminology, the body of
the Lord; they stand to him in the same relation of entire dependence
and subserviency in which the matter forming an animal or vegetable body
stands to its soul or animating principle. The Lord pervades and rules
all things which exist--material or immaterial--as their antaryâmin; the
fundamental text for this special Râmânu*g*a tenet--which in the
writings of the sect is quoted again and again--is the so-called
antaryâmin brâhma*n*a. (B*ri*. Up. Ill, 7) which says, that within all
elements, all sense organs, and, lastly, within all individual souls,
there abides an inward ruler whose body those elements, sense-organs,
and individual souls constitute.--Matter and souls as forming the body
of the Lord are also called modes of him (prakâra). They are to be
looked upon as his effects, but they have enjoyed the kind of individual
existence which is theirs from all eternity, and will never be entirely
resolved into Brahman. They, however, exist in two different,
periodically alternating, conditions. At some times they exist in a
subtle state in which they do not possess those qualities by which they
are ordinarily known, and there is then no distinction of individual
name and form. Matter in that state is unevolved (avyakta); the

<span id="page_xxix">p. xxix</span>

individual souls are not joined to material bodies, and their
intelligence is in a state of contraction, non-manifestation
(sa<u>n</u>ko*k*a). This is the pralaya state which recurs at the end of
each kalpa, and Brahman is then said to be in its causal condition
(kâra*n*âvasthâ). To that state all those scriptural passages refer
which speak of Brahman or the Self as being in the beginning one only,
without a second. Brahman then is indeed not absolutely one, for it
contains within itself matter and souls in a germinal condition; but as
in that condition they are so subtle as not to allow of individual
distinctions being made, they are not counted as something second in
addition to Brahman.--When the pralaya state comes to an end, creation
takes place owing to an act of volition on the Lord's part. Primary
unevolved matter then passes over into its other condition; it becomes
gross and thus acquires all those sensible attributes, visibility,
tangibility, and so on, which are known from ordinary experience. At the
same time the souls enter into connexion with material bodies
corresponding to the degree of merit or demerit acquired by them in
previous forms of existence; their intelligence at the same time
undergoes a certain expansion (vikâ*s*a). The Lord, together with matter
in its gross state and the 'expanded' souls, is Brahman in the condition
of an effect (kâryâvasthâ). Cause and effect are thus at the bottom the
same; for the effect is nothing but the cause which has undergone a
certain change (pari*n*âma). Hence the cause being known, the effect is
known likewise.

Owing to the effects of their former actions the individual souls are
implicated in the sa*m*sâra, the endless cycle of birth, action, and
death, final escape from which is to be obtained only through the study
of the *gñ*ânakâ*nd*a of the Veda. Compliance with the injunctions of
the karmakâ*nd*a docs not lead outside the sa*m*sâra; but he who,
assisted by the grace of the Lord, cognizes--and meditates on-him in the
way prescribed by the Upanishads reaches at his death final
emancipation, i.e. he passes through the different stages of the path of
the gods up to the world of Brahman and there enjoys an

<span id="page_xxx">p. xxx</span>

everlasting blissful existence from which there is no return into the
sphere of transmigration. The characteristics of the released soul are
similar to those of Brahman; it participates in all the latter's
glorious qualities and powers, excepting only Brahman's power to emit,
rule, and retract the entire world.

The chief points in which the two systems sketched above agree on the
one hand and diverge on the other may be shortly stated as
follows.--Both systems teach advaita, i.e. non-duality or monism. There
exist not several fundamentally distinct principles, such as the
prak*ri*ti and the purushas of the Sâ<u>n</u>khyas, but there exists
only one all-embracing being. While, however, the advaita taught by
*S*a<u>n</u>kara is a rigorous, absolute one, Râmânu*g*a's doctrine has
to be characterised as visish*t*a advaita, i.e. qualified non-duality,
non-duality with a difference. According to *S*a<u>n</u>kara, whatever
is, is Brahman, and Brahman itself is absolutely homogeneous, so that
all difference and plurality must be illusory. According to Râmânu*g*a
also, whatever is, is Brahman; but Brahman is not of a homogeneous
nature, but contains within itself elements of plurality owing to which
it truly manifests itself in a diversified world. The world with its
variety of material forms of existence and individual souls is not
unreal Mâyâ, but a real part of Brahman's nature, the body investing the
universal Self. The Brahman of *S*a<u>n</u>kara is in itself impersonal,
a homogeneous mass of objectless thought, transcending all attributes; a
personal God it becomes only through its association with the unreal
principle of Maya, so that-strictly speaking--*S*a<u>n</u>kara's
personal God, his Î*s*vara, is himself something unreal. Râmânu*g*a's
Brahman, on the other hand, is essentially a personal God, the
all-powerful and all-wise ruler of a real world permeated and animated
by his spirit. There is thus no room for the distinction between a param
nirgu*n*am and an apara*m* sagu*n*am brahma, between Brahman and
Î*s*vara.--*S*a<u>n</u>kara's individual soul is Brahman in so far as
limited by the unreal upâdhis due to Maya. The individual soul of
Râmânu*g*a, on the other hand, is really individual; it has

<span id="page_xxxi">p. xxxi</span>

indeed sprung from Brahman and is never outside Brahman, but
nevertheless it enjoys a separate personal existence and will remain a
personality for ever.--The release from sa*m*sâra means, according to
*S*a<u>n</u>kara, the absolute merging of the individual soul in
Brahman, due to the dismissal of the erroneous notion that the soul is
distinct from Brahman; according to Râmânu*g*a it only means the soul's
passing from the troubles of earthly life into a kind of heaven or
paradise where it will remain for ever in undisturbed personal
bliss.--As Râmânu*g*a does not distinguish a higher and lower Brahman,
the distinction of a higher and lower knowledge is likewise not valid
for him; the teaching of the Upanishads is not twofold but essentially
one, and leads the enlightened devotee to one result only <span
id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4).

I now proceed to give a conspectus of the contents of the Vedânta-sûtras
according to *S*a<u>n</u>kara in which at the same time all the more
important points concerning which Râmânu*g*a disagrees will be noted. We
shall here have to enter into details which to many may appear tedious.
But it is only on a broad substratum of accurately stated details that
we can hope to establish any definite conclusions regarding the
comparative value of the different modes of interpretation which have
been applied to the Sûtras. The line of investigation is an entirely new
one, and for the present nothing can be taken for granted or known.--In
stating the different heads of discussion (the so-called adhikara*n*as),
each of which comprises one or more Sûtras, I shall follow the
subdivision into adhikara*n*as adopted in the Vyâsâdhika-ra*n*amâlâ, the
text of which is printed in the second volume of the Bibliotheca Indica
edition of the Sûtras.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[xiv:1](sbe34002.htm#fr_0) The Sûtras in which
the *gñ*ânakâ*nd*a of the Veda is systematised go by various names,
being called either Vedânta-sutras, or Uttara Mîmâ*m*sâ-sutras, or
Brahma-sûtras, or *S*ârîraka Mîmâ*m*sâ-sutras.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[xxii:1](sbe34002.htm#fr_1) The name of this
writer is sometimes given as Drami*d*a, sometimes as Dravi*d*a. In the
opinion of Pa*nd*it Râma Mi*s*ra *S*âstrin of the Benares
College--himself a Râmânu*g*a and thoroughly conversant with the books
and traditions of his sect--the form 'Drami*d*a' is the correct one.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[xxii:2](sbe34002.htm#fr_2) Viz. by Pa*nd*it Râma
Mi*s*ra *S*âstrin. As the Pa*nd*it intends himself to publish all the
traditional information he possesses concerning the history of the
Bhâgavatas and Râmânu*g*as, I limit myself in the text to stating the
most relevant results of my study of the *S*rî-bhâshya and the
Vedârthasa<u>n</u>graha.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[xxiii:1](sbe34002.htm#fr_3) Owing to the
importance of the *S*a<u>n</u>kara-bhâshya as the fundamental work of
the most influential Hindu school of philosophy, the number of topics,
which might be discussed in the introduction to its translation is
considerable. But <span id="page_xxiv">p. xxiv</span> the limitation of
the space at our disposal necessitates a selection, and it can hardly be
doubted that, among the possible tasks of a translator, that of
ascertaining how far the teaching of *S*a<u>n</u>kara agrees with that
of Bâdarâya*n*a, and, further, how far either of them represents the
true doctrine of the Upanishads, is the one first to be. taken in
hand.--Some other topics, such as a detailed account of
*S*a<u>n</u>kara's teaching according to the bhâshya, an enquiry as to
the books and authors quoted by *S*a<u>n</u>kara, &c., have, moreover,
been treated not long ago in a very thorough fashion by Dr Deussen in
his 'System des Vedanta.'

<span id="fn_4"></span>[xxxi:1](sbe34002.htm#fr_4) The only 'sectarian'
feature of the *S*rî-bhâshya is, that identifies Brahman with Vishnu or
Nârâya<u>n</u>a; but this in no way affects the interpretations put on
the Sûtras and Upanishads. Nârâya<u>n</u>a is in fact nothing but
another name of Brahman.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: First Adhyâya](sbe34003)
