[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe34107)  [Next](sbe34109.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930306/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras, commentary by Sankaracharya (SBE34)*, tr. by George
Thibaut \[1890\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

39\. (The prâ*n*a is Brahman), on account of the trembling (predicated
of the whole world).

The discussion of qualification for Brahma-knowledge--on which we
entered as an opportunity offered--being finished we return to our chief
topic, i.e. the enquiry into the purport of the Vedânta-texts.--We read
(Ka. Up. II, 6, 2), 'Whatever there is, the whole world when gone forth
trembles in the prâ*n*a. It (the prâ*n*a) is a great terror, a raised
thunderbolt. Those who know it become immortal  <span
id="fr_230"></span>[1](#fn_230.md).'--This passage declares that this whole
world trembles, abiding in prâ*n*a, and that there is raised something
very terrible, called a thunderbolt, and that through its knowledge
immortality is obtained. But as it is not immediately clear what the
prâ*n*a is, and what that terrible thunderbolt, a discussion arises.

The pûrvapakshin maintains that, in accordance with the ordinary meaning
of the term, prâ*n*a denotes the air with its five modifications, that
the word 'thunderbolt' also is to be taken in its ordinary sense, and
that thus the whole passage contains a glorification of air. For, he
says, this whole world trembles, abiding within air with its five
forms--which is here called prâ*n*a--and the terrible thunderbolts also
spring from air (or wind) as their cause. For in the air, people say,
when it manifests itself in the form of Par*g*anya, lightning, thunder,
rain, and thunderbolts manifest themselves.--Through the knowledge of
that air immortality

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

also can be obtained; for another scriptural passage says, 'Air is
everything by itself, and air is all things together. He who knows this
conquers death.'--We therefore conclude that the same air is to be
understood in the passage under discussion.

To this we make the following reply.--Brahman only can be meant, on
account of what precedes as well as what follows. In the preceding as
well as the subsequent part of the chapter Brahman only is spoken of;
how then can it be supposed that in the intermediate part all at once
the air should be referred to? The immediately preceding passage runs as
follows, 'That only is called the Bright, that is called Brahman, that
alone is called the Immortal. All worlds are contained in it, and no one
goes beyond it.' That the Brahman there spoken of forms the topic of our
passage also, we conclude, firstly, from proximity; and, secondly, from
the circumstance that in the clause, 'The whole world trembles in
prâ*n*a we recognise a quality of Brahman, viz. its constituting the
abode of the whole world. That the word prâ*n*a can denote the highest
Self also, appears from such passages as 'the prâ*n*a of prâ*n*a'
(B*ri*. Up. IV, 4, 18). Being the cause of trembling, moreover, is a
quality which, properly appertains to the highest Self only, not to mere
air. Thus Scripture says, 'No mortal lives by the prâ*n*a and the breath
that goes down. We live by another in whom these two repose' (Ka. Up.
II, 5, 5). And also in the passage subsequent to the one under
discussion, ('From terror of it fire burns, from terror the sun burns,
from terror Indra and Vâyu, and Death as the fifth run away,') Brahman,
and not the air, must be supposed to be spoken of, since the subject of
that passage is represented as the cause of fear on the part of the
whole world inclusive of the air itself. Thence we again conclude that
the passage under discussion also refers to Brahman, firstly, on the
ground of proximity; and, secondly, because we recognise a quality of
Brahman, viz. its being the cause of fear, in the words, 'A great
terror, a raised thunderbolt.' The word 'thunderbolt' is here used to
denote a cause of fear in general. Thus in ordinary life also a man
strictly

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

carries out a king's command because he fearfully considers in his mind,
'A thunderbolt (i.e. the king's wrath, or threatened punishment) is
hanging over my head; it might fall if I did not carry out his command.'
In the same manner this whole world inclusive of fire, air, sun, and so
on, regularly carries on its manifold functions from fear of Brahman;
hence Brahman as inspiring fear is compared to a thunderbolt. Similarly,
another scriptural passage, whose topic is Brahman, declares, 'From
terror of it the wind blows, from terror the sun rises; from terror of
it Agni and Indra, yea, Death runs as the fifth.'--That Brahman is what
is referred to in our passage, further follows from the declaration that
the fruit of its cognition is immortality. For that immortality is the
fruit of the knowledge of Brahman is known, for instance, from the
mantra, 'A man who knows him only passes over death, there is no other
path to go' (*S*vet. Up. VI, 15).--That immortality which the
pûrvapakshin asserts to be sometimes represented as the fruit of the
knowledge of the air is a merely relative one; for there (i.e. in the
chapter from which the passage is quoted) at first the highest Self is
spoken of, by means of a new topic being started (B*ri*. Up. III, 4),
and thereupon the inferior nature of the air and so on is referred to.
('Everything else is evil.')--That in the passage under discussion the
highest Self is meant appears finally from the general subject-matter;
for the question (asked by Na*k*iketas in I, 2, 14, 'That which thou
seest as neither this nor that, as neither effect nor cause, as neither
past nor future tell me that') refers to the highest Self.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_230"></span>[229:1](sbe34108.htm#fr_230.md) As the words stand
in the original they might be translated as follows (and are so
translated by the pûrvapakshin), 'Whatever there is, the whole world
trembles in the prâ*n*a, there goes forth (from it) a great terror, viz.
the raised thunderbolt.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I, 3, 40](sbe34109.md)
