[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe34060)  [Next](sbe34062.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930306/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras, commentary by Sankaracharya (SBE34)*, tr. by George
Thibaut \[1890\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

24\. Vai*s*vânara (is the highest Lord) on account of the distinction
qualifying the common terms (Vai*s*vânara and Self).

(In *Kh*. Up. V, 11 ff.) a discussion begins with the words, 'What is
our Self, what is Brahman?' and is carried on in the passage, 'You know
at present that Vai*s*vânara Self, tell us that;' after that it is
declared with reference to Heaven, sun, air, ether, water, and earth,
that they are connected with the qualities of having good light, &c.,
and, in order to disparage devout meditation on them singly, that they
stand to the Vai*s*vânara in the relation of being his head, &c.,
merely; and then finally (V, 18) it is said, 'But he who meditates on
the Vai*s*vânara Self as measured by a span, as abhivimâna <span
id="fr_157"></span>[1](#fn_157.md), he eats food in all worlds, in all
beings, in all Selfs. Of that Vai*s*vânara Self the head is Sute*g*as
(having good light), the eye Vi*s*varûpa (multiform), the breath
P*ri*thagvartman (moving in various courses), the trunk Bahula (full),
the bladder Rayi (wealth), the feet the earth, the chest the altar, the
hairs the grass on the altar, the heart the Gârhapatya fire, the mind
the Anvâhârya fire, the mouth the Âhavanîya fire.'--Here the doubt
arises whether by the term 'Vai*s*vânara' we have to understand the
gastric fire, or the elemental fire, or the divinity presiding over the
latter, or the embodied soul, or the highest Lord.--But what, it may be
asked, gives rise to this doubt?--The circumstance, we reply, of
'Vai*s*vânara' being employed as a common term for the gastric fire, the
elemental fire, and the divinity of the latter, while 'Self' is a term
applying to the embodied soul as well as to the highest Lord. Hence the
doubt arises which meaning of the term is to be accepted and which to be
set aside.

Which, then, is the alternative to be embraced?--Vai*s*vânara, the
pûrvapakshin maintains, is the gastric fire, because we meet, in some
passages, with the term used in

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

that special sense; so, for instance (B*ri*. Up. V, 9), 'Agni
Vai*s*vânara is the fire within man by which the food that is eaten is
cooked.'--Or else the term may denote fire in general, as we see it used
in that sense also; so, for instance (*Ri*g-veda Sa*m*h. X, 88, 12),
'For the whole world the gods have made the Agni Vai*s*vânara a sign of
the days.' Or, in the third place, the word may denote that divinity
whose body is fire. For passages in which the term has that sense are
likewise met with; compare, for instance, *Ri*g-veda Sa*m*h. I, 98, 1,
'May we be in the favour of Vai*s*vânara; for he is the king of the
beings, giving pleasure, of ready grace;' this and similar passages
properly applying to a divinity endowed with power and similar
qualities. Perhaps it will be urged against the preceding explanations,
that, as the word Vai*s*vânara is used in co-ordination with the term
'Self,' and as the term 'Self' alone is used in the introductory passage
('What is our Self, what is Brahman?'), Vai*s*vânara has to be
understood in a modified sense, so as to be in harmony with the term
Self. Well, then, the pûrvapakshin rejoins, let us suppose that
Vai*s*vânara is the embodied Self which, as being an enjoyer, is in
close vicinity to the Vai*s*vânara fire, <span
id="fr_158"></span>[1](#fn_158) (i.e. the fire within the body,.md) and
with which the qualification expressed by the term, 'Measured by a
span,' well agrees, since it is restricted by its limiting condition
(viz. the body and so on).--In any case it is evident that the term
Vai*s*vânara does not denote the highest Lord.

To this we make the following reply.--The word Vai*s*vânara denotes the
highest Self, on account of the distinction qualifying the two general
terms.--Although the term 'Self,' as well as the term 'Vai*s*vânara,'
has various meanings--the latter term denoting three beings while the
former denotes two--yet we observe a distinction from which we conclude
that both terms can here denote the highest Lord only; viz. in the
passage, 'Of that Vai*s*vânara Self the head is Sute*g*as,' &c. For it
is clear that that passage refers to the highest Lord in so far as he is
distinguished by having heaven, and so on, for his head and limbs, and
in so far as

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

he has entered into a different state (viz. into the state of being the
Self of the threefold world); represents him, in fact, for the purpose
of meditation, as the internal Self of everything. As such the absolute
Self may be represented, because it is the cause of everything; for as
the cause virtually contains all the states belonging to its effects,
the heavenly world, and so on, may be spoken of as the members of the
highest Self.--Moreover, the result which Scripture declares to abide in
all worlds--viz. in the passage, 'He eats food in all worlds, in all
beings, in all Selfs'--is possible only if we take the term Vai*s*vânara
to denote the highest Self.--The same remark applies to the declaration
that all the sins are burned of him who has that knowledge, 'Thus all
his sins are burned,' &c. (*Kh*. Up. V, 24, 3).--Moreover, we meet at
the beginning of the chapter with the words 'Self' and 'Brahman;' viz.
in the passage, 'What is our Self, what is Brahman?' Now these are marks
of Brahman, and indicate the highest Lord only. Hence he only can be
meant by the term Vai*s*vânara.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_157"></span>[143:1](sbe34061.htm#fr_157.md) About which term
see later on.

<span id="fn_158"></span>[144:1](sbe34061.htm#fr_158.md) Sârîre
laksha*n*ayâ vai*s*vânara*s*abdopapattim âha tasyeti. Ân. Gi.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I, 2, 25](sbe34062.md)
