[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe34197)  [Next](sbe34199) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930306/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras, commentary by Sankaracharya (SBE34)*, tr. by George
Thibaut \[1890\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_410">p. 410</span>

22\. Cessation dependent on a sublative act of the mind, and cessation
not so dependent cannot be established, there being no (complete)
interruption.

The Bauddhas who maintain that universal destruction is going on
constantly, assume that 'whatever forms an object of knowledge and is
different from the triad is produced (sa*m*sk*ri*ta) and momentary.' To
the triad there mentioned they give the names 'cessation dependent on a
sublative act of the mind,' 'cessation not dependent on such an act,'
and 'space.' This triad they hold to be non-substantial, of a merely
negative character (abhâvamâtra), devoid of all positive
characteristics. By 'cessation dependent on a sublative act of the
mind,' we have to understand such destruction of entities as is preceded
by an act of thought  <span id="fr_401"></span>[1](#fn_401); by
'cessation not so dependent' is meant destruction of the opposite kind
 <span id="fr_402"></span>[2](#fn_402); by 'space' is meant absence in
general of something covering (or occupying space). Out of these three
non-existences 'space' will be refuted later on (Sûtra 24), the two
other ones are refuted in the present Sûtra.

Cessation which is dependent on a sublative act of the mind, and
cessation which is not so dependent are both impossible, 'on account of
the absence of interruption.' For both kinds of cessation must have
reference either to the series (of momentary existences) or to the
single members constituting the series.--The former alternative is
impossible, because in all series (of momentary existences) the members
of the series stand in an unbroken relation of cause and effect so that
the series cannot be interrupted  <span
id="fr_403"></span>[3](#fn_403).--The latter

<span id="page_411">p. 411</span>

alternative is likewise inadmissible, for it is impossible to maintain
that any momentary existence should undergo complete annihilation
entirely undefinable and disconnected (with the previous state of
existence), since we observe that a thing is recognised in the various
states through which it may pass and thus has a connected existence
 <span id="fr_404"></span>[1](#fn_404). And in those cases also where a
thing is not clearly recognised (after having undergone a change) we yet
infer, on the ground of actual observations made in other cases, that
one and the same thing continues to exist without any interruption.--For
these reasons the two kinds of cessation which the Bauddhas assume
cannot be proved.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_401"></span>[410:1](sbe34198.htm#fr_401) As when a man
smashes a jar having previously formed the intention of doing so.

<span id="fn_402"></span>[410:2](sbe34198.htm#fr_402) I. e. the
insensible continual decay of things.--Viparîta iti pratiksha*n*a*m*
gha*t*âdînâ*m* yuktyâ sâdhyamâno\#ku*s*alair avagantum a*s*akya*h*
sûkshmo vinâ*s*o\#pratisa*m*khyânirodha*h*. Brahmâv.

<span id="fn_403"></span>[410:3](sbe34198.htm#fr_403) A series of
momentary existences constituting a chain of causes and effects can
never be entirely stopped; for the last momentary existence must be
supposed either to produce its effect or not to produce it. In the
former case the series is continued; the latter alternative would imply
that the last link does not really <span id="page_411">p. 411</span>
exist, since the Bauddhas define the sattâ of a thing as its causal
efficiency (cp. Sarvadar*s*a*n*asa*m*graha). And the non-existence of
the last link would retrogressively lead to the non-existence of the
whole series.

<span id="fn_404"></span>[411:1](sbe34198.htm#fr_404) Thus clay is
recognised as such whether it appears in the form of a jar, or of the
potsherds into which the jar is broken, or of the powder into which the
potsherds are ground.--Analogously we infer that even things which seem
to vanish altogether, such as a drop of water which has fallen on heated
iron, yet continue to exist in some form.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II, 2, 23](sbe34199)
