[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe34185)  [Next](sbe34187) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930306/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras, commentary by Sankaracharya (SBE34)*, tr. by George
Thibaut \[1890\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

10\. And moreover (the Sâ<u>n</u>khya doctrine) is objectionable on
account of its contradictions.

The doctrine of the Sâ<u>n</u>khyas, moreover, is full of
contradictions. Sometimes they enumerate seven senses, sometimes
eleven <span id="fr_338"></span>[2](#fn_338). In some places they teach
that the subtle elements of material things proceed from the great
principle, in other places again that they proceed from
self-consciousness. Sometimes they speak of three internal organs,
sometimes of one only <span id="fr_339"></span>[3](#fn_339). That their
doctrine, moreover, contradicts *S*ruti, which teaches that the Lord is
the cause of the world, and Sm*ri*ti, based on *S*ruti, is well
known.--For these reasons also the Sâ<u>n</u>khya system is
objectionable.

Here the Sâ<u>n</u>khya again brings a countercharge--The system of the
Vedântins also, he says, must be declared to be objectionable; for it
does not admit that that which suffers and that which causes
suffering <span id="fr_340"></span>[4](#fn_340) are different classes of
things (and thereby renders futile the well-established distinction of
causes of suffering and suffering beings). For

<span id="page_377">p. 377</span>

those who admit the one Brahman to be the Self of everything and the
cause of the whole world, have to admit also that the two attributes of
being that which causes suffering and that which suffers belong to the
one supreme Self (not to different classes of beings). If, then, these
two attributes belong to one and the same Self, it never can divest
itself of them, and thus Scripture, which teaches perfect knowledge for
the purpose of the cessation of all suffering, loses all its meaning.
For--to adduce a parallel case--a lamp as long as it subsists as such is
never divested of the two qualities of giving heat and light. And if the
Vedântin should adduce the case of water with its waves, ripples, foam,
&c. <span id="fr_341"></span>[1](#fn_341), we remark that there also the
waves, &c. constitute attributes of the water which remain permanently,
although they by turns manifest themselves, and again enter into the
state of non-manifestation; hence the water is never really destitute of
waves, not any more than the lamp is ever destitute of heat and
light.--That that which causes suffering, and that which suffers
constitute different classes of things is, moreover, well known from
ordinary experience. For (to consider the matter from a more general
point of view) the person desiring and the thing desired <span
id="fr_342"></span>[2](#fn_342) are understood to be separate
existences. If the object of desire were not essentially different and
separate from the person desiring, the state of being desirous could not
be ascribed to the latter, because the object with reference to which
alone he can be called desiring would already essentially be established
in him (belong to him). The latter state of things exists in the case of
a lamp and its light, for instance. Light essentially belongs to the
lamp, and hence the latter never can stand in want of light; for want or
desire can exist only if the thing wanted or desired is not yet
obtained.

<span id="page_378">p. 378</span>

(And just as there could be no desiring person, if the object of desire
and the desiring person were not essentially separate), so the object of
desire also would cease to be an object for the desiring person, and
would be an object for itself only. As a matter of fact, however, this
is not the case; for the two ideas (and terms), 'object of desire' and
'desiring person,' imply a relation (are correlative), and a relation
exists in two things, not in one only. Hence the desiring person and the
object of desire are separate.--The same holds good with regard to what
is not desired (object of aversion; anartha) and the non-desiring person
(anarthin). An object of desire is whatever is of advantage to the
desiring person, an object of aversion whatever is of disadvantage; with
both one person enters into relation by turns. On account of the
comparative paucity of the objects of desire, and the comparative
multitude of the objects of aversion, both may be comprised under the
general term, 'object of aversion.' Now, these objects of aversion we
mean when we use the term 'causes of suffering,' while by the term
'sufferer' we understand the soul which, being one, enters into
successive relations with both (i.e. the objects of desire and the
objects of aversion). If, then, the causes of suffering and the sufferer
constitute one Self (as the Vedânta teaches), it follows that final
release is impossible.--But if, on the other hand, the two are assumed
to constitute separate classes, the possibility of release is not
excluded, since the cause of the connexion of the two (viz. wrong
knowledge) may be removed.

All this reasoning--we, the Vedântins, reply--is futile, because on
account of the unity of the Self the relation, whose two terms are the
causes of suffering, and the sufferer cannot exist (in the Self).--Our
doctrine would be liable to your objection if that which causes
suffering and that which suffers did, while belonging to one and the
same Self, stand to each other in the relation of object and subject.
But they do not stand in that relation just because they are one. If
fire, although it possesses different attributes, such as heat and
light, and is capable of change, does neither burn nor illumine itself
since it is one only; how can the

<span id="page_379">p. 379</span>

one unchangeable Brahman enter with reference to itself into the
relation of cause of suffering and sufferer?--Where then, it may be
asked, does the relation discussed (which after all cannot be denied
altogether) exist?--That, we reply, is not difficult to see <span
id="fr_343"></span>[1](#fn_343). The living body which is the object of
the action of burning is the sufferer; the sun, for instance, is a cause
of suffering (burning).--But, the opponent rejoins, burning is a pain,
and as such can affect an intelligent being only, not the
non-intelligent body; for if it were an affection of the mere body, it
would, on the destruction of the body, cease of itself, so that it would
be needless to seek for means to make it cease.--But it is likewise not
observed, we reply, that a mere intelligent being destitute of a body is
burned and suffers pain.--Nor would you (the Sâ<u>n</u>khya) also assume
that the affection called burning belongs to a mere intelligent being.
Nor can you admit <span id="fr_344"></span>[2](#fn_344) a real connexion
of the soul and the body, because through such a connexion impurity and
similar imperfections would attach to the soul <span
id="fr_345"></span>[3](#fn_345). Nor can suffering itself be said to
suffer. And how then, we ask, can you explain the relation existing
between a sufferer and the causes of suffering? If (as a last refuge)
you should maintain that the sattva-gu*n*a is that which suffers, and
the gu*n*a called passion that which causes suffering, we again object,
because the intelligent principle (the soul) cannot be really connected
with these two <span id="fr_346"></span>[4](#fn_346). And if you should
say that the soul suffers as it were because it leans towards <span
id="fr_347"></span>[5](#fn_347) the sattva-gu*n*a, we point out that the
employment of the phrase, 'as it were,' shows that the soul does not
really suffer.

<span id="page_380">p. 380</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> If it is
understood that its suffering is not real, we do not object to the
phrase 'as it were <span id="fr_348"></span>[1](#fn_348).' For the
amphisbena also does not become venomous because it is 'a serpent as it
were' ('like a serpent'), nor does the serpent lose its venom because it
is 'like an amphisbena.' You must therefore admit that the relation of
causes of suffering and of sufferers is not real, but the effect of
Nescience. And if you admit, that, then my (the Vedântic) doctrine also
is free from objections <span id="fr_349"></span>[2](#fn_349).

But perhaps you (the Sâ<u>n</u>khya) will say that, after all, suffering
(on the part of the soul) is real <span id="fr_350"></span>[3](#fn_350).
In that case, however, the impossibility of release is all the more
undeniable <span id="fr_351"></span>[4](#fn_351), especially as the
cause of suffering (viz. the pradhâna) is admitted to be eternal.--And
if (to get out of this difficulty) you maintain that, although the
potentialities of suffering (on the part of the soul) and of causing
suffering (on the part of the pradhâna) are eternal, yet suffering, in
order to become actual, requires the conjunction of the two--which
conjunction in its turn depends on a special reason, viz. the
non-discrimination of the pradhâna by the soul--and that hence, when
that reason no longer exists, the conjunction of the two comes to an
absolute termination, whereby the absolute release of the soul becomes
possible; we are again unable to accept your explanation, because that
on which the non-discrimination depends, viz. the gu*n*a, called
Darkness, is acknowledged by you to be eternal.

<span id="page_381">p. 381</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> And as  <span
id="fr_352"></span>[1](#fn_352) there is no fixed rule for the
(successive) rising and sinking of the influence of the particular
gu*n*as, there is also no fixed rule for the termination of the cause
which effects the conjunction of soul and pradhâna (i.e.
non-discrimination); hence the disjunction of the two is uncertain, and
so the Sâ<u>n</u>khyas cannot escape the reproach of absence of final
release resulting from their doctrine. To the Vedântin, on the other
hand, the idea of final release being impossible cannot occur in his
dreams even; for the Self he acknowledges to be one only, and one thing
cannot enter into the relation of subject and object, and Scripture,
moreover, declares that the plurality of effects originates from speech
only. For the phenomenal world, on the other hand, we may admit the
relation of sufferer and suffering just as it is observed, and need
neither object to it nor refute it.

Herewith we have refuted the doctrine which holds the pradhâna to be the
cause of the world. We have now to dispose of the atomic theory.

We begin by refuting an objection raised by the atomists against the
upholders of Brahman.--The Vai*s*eshikas argue as follows: The qualities
which inhere in the substance constituting the cause originate qualities
of the same kind in the substance constituting the effect; we see, for
instance, that from white threads white cloth is produced, but do not
observe what is contrary (viz. white threads resulting in a piece of
cloth of a different colour). Hence, if the intelligent Brahman is
assumed as the cause of the world, we should expect to find intelligence
inherent in the effect also, viz. the world. But this is not the case,
and consequently the intelligent Brahman cannot be the cause of the
world.--This reasoning the Sûtrakâra shows to be fallacious, on the
ground of the system of the Vai*s*eshikas themselves.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_338"></span>[376:2](sbe34186.htm#fr_338) In the former case
the five intellectual senses are looked upon as mere modifications of
the sense of touch.

<span id="fn_339"></span>[376:3](sbe34186.htm#fr_339) Buddhi in the
latter case being the generic name for buddhi, aha<u>n</u>kâra, and
manas.

<span id="fn_340"></span>[376:4](sbe34186.htm#fr_340) Lit. that which
burns and that which is burned, which literal rendering would perhaps be
preferable throughout. As it is, the context has necessitated its
retention in some places.--The sufferers are the individual souls, the
cause of suffering the world in which the souls live.

<span id="fn_341"></span>[377:1](sbe34186.htm#fr_341) In the case of the
lamp, light and heat are admittedly essential; hence the Vedântin is
supposed to bring forward the sea with its waves, and so on, as
furnishing a case where attributes pass away while the substance
remains.

<span id="fn_342"></span>[377:2](sbe34186.htm#fr_342) 'Artha,' a useful
or beneficial thing, an object of desire.

<span id="fn_343"></span>[379:1](sbe34186.htm#fr_343) In reality neither
suffering nor sufferers exist, as the Vedântin had pointed out in the
first sentences of his reply; but there can of course be no doubt as to
who suffers and what causes suffering in the vyavahârika-state, i.e. the
phenomenal world.

<span id="fn_344"></span>[379:2](sbe34186.htm#fr_344) In order to
explain thereby how the soul can experience pain.

<span id="fn_345"></span>[379:3](sbe34186.htm#fr_345) And that would be
against the Sâ<u>n</u>khya dogma of the soul's essential purity.

<span id="fn_346"></span>[379:4](sbe34186.htm#fr_346) So that the fact
of suffering which cannot take place apart from an intelligent principle
again remains unexplained.

<span id="fn_347"></span>[379:5](sbe34186.htm#fr_347) Âtmanas tapte
sattve pratibimitatvâd yuktâ taptir iti *s*a<u>n</u>kate sattveti. An.
Gi.

<span id="fn_348"></span>[380:1](sbe34186.htm#fr_348) For it then
indicates no more than a fictitious resemblance.

<span id="fn_349"></span>[380:2](sbe34186.htm#fr_349) The Sâ<u>n</u>khya
Pûrvapakshin had objected to the Vedânta doctrine that, on the latter,
we cannot account for the fact known from ordinary experience that there
are beings suffering pain and things causing suffering.--The Vedântin in
his turn endeavours to show that on the Sâ<u>n</u>khya doctrine also the
fact of suffering remains inexplicable, and is therefore to be
considered not real, but fictitious merely, the product of Nescience.

<span id="fn_350"></span>[380:3](sbe34186.htm#fr_350) Not only
'suffering as it were,' as it had been called above.

<span id="fn_351"></span>[380:4](sbe34186.htm#fr_351) For real suffering
cannot be removed by mere distinctive knowledge on which--according to
the Sâ<u>n</u>khya also--release depends.

<span id="fn_352"></span>[381:1](sbe34186.htm#fr_352) This in answer to
the remark that possibly the conjunction of soul and pradhâna may come
to an end when the influence of Darkness declines, it being overpowered
by the knowledge of Truth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II, 2, 11](sbe34187)
