[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe34034)  [Next](sbe34036.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930306/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras, commentary by Sankaracharya (SBE34)*, tr. by George
Thibaut \[1890\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

29\. If it be said that (Brahman is) not (denoted) on account of the
speaker denoting himself; (we reply that this objection is not valid)
because there is in that (chapter) a multitude of references to the
interior Self.

An objection is raised against the assertion that prâ*n*a denotes
Brahman. The word prâ*n*a, it is said, does not denote the highest
Brahman, because the speaker designates himself. The speaker, who is a
certain powerful god called Indra, at first says, in order to reveal
himself to Pratardana, 'Know me only,' and later on, 'I am prâ*n*a, the
intelligent Self.' How, it is asked, can the prâ*n*a, which this latter
passage, expressive of personality as it is, represents as the Self of
the speaker, be Brahman to which, as we know from Scripture, the
attribute of being a speaker cannot be ascribed; compare, for instance,
B*ri*. Up. III, 8, 8, 'It is without speech, without mind.' Further on,
also, the speaker, i.e. Indra, glorifies himself by enumerating a number
of attributes, all of which depend on personal existence and can in no
way belong to Brahman, 'I slew the three-headed son of Tvash*tri*; I
delivered the Arunmukhas, the devotees, to the wolves,' and so on. Indra
may be called prâ*n*a on account of his strength. Scripture says,
'Strength indeed is prâ*n*a,' and Indra is known as the god of strength;
and of any deed of strength people say, 'It is Indra's work.' The
personal Self of a deity may, moreover, be called an intelligent Self;
for the gods, people say, possess unobstructed knowledge. It thus being
a settled matter that some passages convey information about the
personal Self

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

of some deity, the other passages also--as, for instance, the one about
what is most beneficial for man--must be interpreted as well as they may
with reference to the same deity. Hence prâ*n*a does not denote Brahman.

This objection we refute by the remark that in that chapter there are
found a multitude of references to the interior Self. For the passage,
'As long as prâ*n*a dwells in this body so long surely there is life,'
declares that that prâ*n*a only which is the intelligent interior
Self--and not some particular outward deity--has power to bestow and to
take back life. And where the text speaks of the eminence of the
prâ*n*as as founded on the existence of the prâ*n*a, it shows that that
prâ*n*a is meant which has reference to the Self and is the abode of the
sense-organs. <span id="fr_133"></span>[1](#fn_133.md)

Of the same tendency is the passage, 'Prâ*n*a, the intelligent Self,
alone having laid hold of this body makes it rise up;' and the passage
(which occurs in the passus, 'Let no man try to find out what speech
is,' &c.), 'For as in a car the circumference of the wheel is set on the
spokes and the spokes on the nave, thus are these objects set on the
subjects (the senses) and the subjects on the prâ*n*a. And that prâ*n*a
indeed is the Self of prâ*gñ*a, blessed, imperishable, immortal.' So
also the following passage which, referring to this interior Self,
forming as it were the centre of the peripherical interaction of the
objects and senses, sums up as follows, 'He is my Self, thus let it be
known;' a summing up which is appropriate only if prâ*n*a is meant to
denote not some outward existence, but the interior Self. And another
scriptural passage declares 'this Self is Brahman, omniscient' <span
id="fr_134"></span>[2](#fn_134) (B*ri*. Up. II, 5, 19.md). We therefore
arrive at

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

the conclusion that, on account of the multitude of references to the
interior Self, the chapter contains information regarding Brahman, not
regarding the Self of some deity.--How then can the circumstance of the
speaker (Indra) referring to himself be explained?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_133"></span>[100:1](sbe34035.htm#fr_133.md) The text runs,
'astitve *k*a prâ*n*ânâ*m* ni*hs*reyasam,' and Go. Ân. explains 'astitve
prâ*n*asthitau prâ*n*ânâ*m* indriyâ*n*âm sthitir ity arthata*h* *s*rutim
âha.' He as well as Ân. Gi. quotes as the text of the scriptural passage
referred to 'athâto ni*hs*reyasâdânam ity âdi.' But if instead of
'astitve *k*a' we read 'asti tv eva,' we get the concluding clause of
Kau. Up. III, 2, as given in Cowell's edition.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[100:2](sbe34035.htm#fr_134.md) Whence we know
that the interior Self referred to in the Kau. Up. is Brahman.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I, 1, 30](sbe34036.md)
