[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](mbh05)  [Next](mbh07.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002H9XPY0/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Myth of the Birth of the Hero*, by Otto Rank, \[1914\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

#### PARIS

The famed Greek legend of the birth of Paris relates that King Priam of
Troy had with his wife Hecuba a son, named Hector. When Hecuba was about
to bear another child, *she dreamed* that she brought forth a burning
log of wood, which set fire to the entire city. Priam asked the advice
of Aisakos, who was his son with his first wife, Arisbe, and an expert
in the interpretation of dreams. Aisakos declared that the child would
bring trouble upon the city, and advised that it be exposed. Priam gave
the little boy to a slave, Agelaos, who carried him to the top of Mount
Ida. *The child was nursed during five days by a she-bear*. When Agelaos
found that he was still alive, he picked him up, and carried him home to
raise him. He named the boy Paris; but after the child had grown into a
strong and handsome youth, he was called Alexander, because he fought
the robbers and protected the flocks. Before long he discovered his
parents. How this came about is told by Hyginus, according to whose
report the infant is *found by shepherds*. One day messengers, sent by
Priam, come to these herders to fetch a bull which is to serve as the
prize for the victor in some commemorative games. They selected a bull
that Paris valued so highly that he followed the men who led the beast
away, assisted in the combats, and won the prize. This aroused the anger
of his brother Deiphobus, who threatened him with his sword, but his
sister Cassandra recognized him as her brother, and Priam joyfully
received him as his son. The misfortune which Paris later brought to his
family and his native city, through the abduction of Helen, is well
known from Homer's *Iliad*, as well as from countless earlier and later
poems.

A certain resemblance with the story of the birth of Paris is presented
by the poem of Zal, in Firdausi's Persian hero myths. <span
id="fr_44"></span>[1](#fn_44.md) The first son is born to Sam, king of
Sistan, by one of his consorts. Because he had white hair, *his* 

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

*mother concealed the birth*. But the nurse reveals the birth of his son
to the king. Sam is disappointed, and commands that the child be
exposed. The servants carry it to the top of Mount Elburz, where it is
raised by the Seemurgh, a powerful bird. The full-grown youth is seen by
a traveling caravan, whose members speak of him as "whose nurse a bird
is sufficient." King Sam once *sees his son in a dream*, and sallies
forth to seek the exposed child. He is unable to reach the summit of the
elevated rock where he finally espies the youth. But the Seemurgh bears
his son down to him; he receives him joyfully and nominates him as his
successor.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_44"></span>[23:1](mbh06.htm#fr_44.md) Ibid., translated by
Schack.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Telephus](mbh07.md)
