[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](mbh03)  [Next](mbh05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002H9XPY0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Myth of the Birth of the Hero*, by Otto Rank, \[1914\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### KARNA

A close relationship with the Sargon legend is also shown in certain
features of the ancient Hindu epic Mahabharata, in its account of the
birth of the hero Karna. <span id="fr_37"></span>[3](#fn_37) The
contents of the legend are briefly rendered by Lassen. <span
id="fr_38"></span>[4](#fn_38)

The princess Pritha, also known as Kunti, bore as a virgin the boy
Karna, whose father was the sun-god Surya. The young Karna was born with
the golden ear ornaments of his father and with an unbreakable coat of
mail. The mother in her distress concealed and exposed the boy. In the
adaptation of the myth by A. Holtzmann, verse 1458 reads: "Then my nurse
and I made a large basket of rushes, placed a lid thereon, and lined it
with wax; into this basket I laid the boy and carried him down to the
river Acva." Floating on the waves, the basket reaches the river

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Ganges and travels
as far as the city of Campa. "There was passing along the bank of the
river, the charioteer, the noble friend of Dhritarashtra, and with him
was Radha, his beautiful and pious spouse. She was wrapt in deep sorrow,
because no son had been given to her. On the river she saw the basket,
which the waves carried close to her on the shore; she showed it to
Azirath, who went and drew it forth from the waves." The two take care
of the boy and raise him as their own child.

Kunti later on marries King Pandu, who is forced to refrain from
conjugal intercourse by the curse that he is to die in the arms of his
spouse. But Kunti bears three sons, again through divine conception, one
of the children being born in the cave of a wolf. One day Pandu dies in
the embrace of his second wife. The sons grow up, and at a tournament
which they arrange, Karna appears to measure his strength against the
best fighter, Arjuna, the son of Kunti. Arjuna scoffingly refuses to
fight the charioteer's son. In order to make him a worthy opponent, one
of those present anoints him as king. Meanwhile Kunti has recognized
Karna as her son, by the divine mark, and prays him to desist from the
contest with his brother, revealing to him the secret of his birth. But
he considers her revelation as a fantastic tale, and insists implacably
upon satisfaction. He falls in the combat, struck by Arjuna's
arrow. <span id="fr_39"></span>[1](#fn_39)

A striking resemblance to the entire structure of the Karna legend is
presented by the birth history of Ion, the ancestor of the Ionians. The
following account is based on a relatively late tradition. <span
id="fr_40"></span>[2](#fn_40)

Apollo, in the grotto of the rock of the Athenian Acropolis, procreated
a son with Creusa, the daughter of Erechtheus. In this grotto the boy
was also born, and exposed; the mother leaves the child behind in a
woven basket, in the hope that Apollo will not leave his son to

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

perish. At Apollo's request, Hermes carries the child the same night to
Delphi, where the priestess finds him on the threshold of the temple in
the morning. She brings the boy up, and when he has grown into a youth
makes him a servant of the temple. Erechtheus later gave his daughter
Creusa in marriage to Xuthus. As the marriage long remained childless,
they addressed the Delphian oracle, praying to be blessed with progeny.
The god reveals to Xuthus that the first to meet him on leaving the
sanctuary is his son. He hastens outside and meets the youth, whom he
joyfully greets as his own son, giving him the name Ion, which means
"walker." Creusa refuses to accept the youth as her son; her attempt to
poison him fails, and the infuriated people turn against her. Ion is
about to attack her, but Apollo, who does not wish the son to kill his
own mother, enlightens the mind of the priestess so that she understands
the connection. By means of the basket in which the newborn child had
lain, Creusa recognizes him as her son, and reveals to him the secret of
his birth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_35"></span>[18:1](mbh03.htm#fr_35) Compare Beer: *The Life
of Abraham* (Leipzig, 1859), according to the interpretation of Jewish
traditions; also August Wünsche: *From Israel's Temples of Learning*
(Leipzig, 1907).

<span id="fn_36"></span>[18:2](mbh03.htm#fr_36) See chapters 20 and 21
of Genesis, and also Bergel, op. cit.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[18:3](mbh04.htm#fr_37) The Hindu birth legend
of the mythical king Vikramaditya must also be mentioned in this
connection. Here again occur the barren marriage of the parents, the
miraculous conception, ill-omened warnings, the exposure of the boy in
the forest, his nourishment with honey, finally the acknowledgment by
the father. See Jülg: *Mongolische Märche* (Innsbruck, 1868), PP. 73 ff.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[18:4](mbh04.htm#fr_38) *Indische Alterumskunde*
(Karlsruhe, 1846).

<span id="fn_39"></span>[19:1](mbh04.htm#fr_39) Compare the detailed
account in Lefmann: *History of Ancient India* (Berlin, 1890), pp. 181
ff.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[19:2](mbh04.htm#fr_40) See Röscher, concerning
the *Ion* of Euripides. Where no other source is stated, all Greek and
Roman myths are taken from the *Ausführliches Lexikon der griechischen
and römischen Mythologie*, edited by W. H. Röscher, which also contains
a list of all sources.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Oedipus](mbh05)
