[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](mbh04)  [Next](mbh06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002H9XPY0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Myth of the Birth of the Hero*, by Otto Rank, \[1914\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### OEDIPUS

The parents of Oedipus, King Laius and his queen, Jocasta, lived for a
long time in childless wedlock. Laius, who longs for an heir, asks the
Delphic Apollo for advice. The oracle answers that he may have a son if
he so desires; but fate has ordained that his own son will kill him.
Fearing the fulfillment of the oracle, Laius refrains from conjugal
relations, but being intoxicated one day he nevertheless procreates a
son, whom he causes to be exposed in the river Cithaeron, barely three
days after his birth. In order to be quite sure that the child will
perish, Laius orders his ankles to be pierced. According to the account
of Sophocles, which is not the oldest, however, the shepherd who has
been intrusted with the exposure, surrenders the boy to a shepherd of
King Polybus, of Corinth, at whose court he is brought up, according to
the universal statement. Others say that the boy was exposed in a box on
the sea, and was

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

taken from the water by Periböa, the wife of King Polybus, as she was
rinsing her clothes by the shore. <span id="fr_41"></span>[1](#fn_41)
Polybus brought him up as his own son.

Oedipus, on hearing accidentally that he is a foundling, asks the
Delphian oracle about his true parents, but receives only the prophecy
that he will kill his father and marry his mother. In the belief that
this prophecy refers to his foster parents, he flees from Corinth to
Thebes, but on the way unwittingly kills his father Laius. By solving a
riddle, he frees the city from the plague of the Sphinx, a man-devouring
monster, and in reward is given the hand of Jocasta, his mother, as well
as the throne of his father. The revelation of these horrors and the
subsequent misfortune of Oedipus were a favorite subject for spectacular
display among the Greek tragedians.

An entire series of Christian legends have been elaborated on the
pattern of the Oedipus myth, and the summarized contents of the Judas
legend may serve as a paradigm of this group. Before his birth, his
mother, Cyboread, is warned by a dream that she will bear a wicked son,
to the ruin of all his people. The parents expose the boy in a box on
the sea. The waves cast the child ashore on the Isle of Scariot, where
the childless queen finds him, and brings him up as her son. Later on,
the royal couple have a son of their own, and the foundling, who feels
himself slighted, kills his foster brother. As a fugitive from the
country, he takes service at the court of Pilate, who makes a confidant
of him and places him above his entire household. In a fight, Judas
kills a neighbor, without knowing that he is his father. The widow of
the murdered man--his own mother--then becomes his wife. After the
revelation of these horrors, he repents and seeks

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

the Saviour, who receives him among his apostles. His betrayal of Jesus
is known from the Gospels.

The legend of St. Gregory on the Stone--the subject of the narrative of
Hartmann von Aue--represents a more complicated type of this
mythological cycle. Gregory, the child of the incestuous union of royal
lovers, is exposed by his mother in a box on the sea, saved and raised
by fishermen, and is then educated in a convent for the church. But he
prefers the life of a knight, is victorious in combats, and in reward is
given the hand of the princess, his mother. After the discovery of the
incest, Gregory does penance for seventeen years on a rock in the midst
of the sea, and he is finally made the Pope, at the command of
God. <span id="fr_42"></span>[1](#fn_42)

A very similar legend is the Persian epic of King Darab, told by the
poet Firdausi. <span id="fr_43"></span>[2](#fn_43) The last Kiranian
Behmen nominated as his successor his daughter and simultaneous wife
Humâi; his son Sâsân was grieved and withdrew into solitude. A short
time after the death of her husband, Humâi gave birth to a son, whom she
resolved to expose. He was placed in a box, which was put into the
Euphrates and drifted downstream, until it was stopped by a stone that
had been placed in the water by a tanner. The box with the child was
found by him, and he carried the boy to his wife, who had recently lost
her own child. The couple agreed to raise the foundling. As the boy grew
up, he soon became so strong that the other children were unable to
resist him. He did not care for the work of his foster father, but
learned to be a warrior. His foster mother was forced by him to reveal
the secret of his origin, and he joined the army that Humâi was then
sending out to fight the king of Rim. Her attention being called to him
by his bravery, Humâi readily recognized him as her son, and named him
her successor.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_41"></span>[21:1](mbh05.htm#fr_41) According to Bethe
(*Thebanische Heldenlieder*), the exposure on the waters was the
original rendering. According to other versions, the boy is found and
raised by horseherds; according to a later myth, by a countryman,
Melibios.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[22:1](mbh05.htm#fr_42) Cholevicas: *History of
German Poetry According to the Antique Elements*.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[22:2](mbh05.htm#fr_43) Firdausi: *Shah Namah*
("The Book of Kings"), as rendered by F. Spiegel: *Eranische
Alterumskunde*, Vol. II, p. 584.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Paris](mbh06)
