[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](mbh06)  [Next](mbh08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002H9XPY0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Myth of the Birth of the Hero*, by Otto Rank, \[1914\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### TELEPHUS

Aleos, King of Tegea, was informed by the oracle that his sons would
perish through a descendant of his daughter. He therefore made his
daughter Auge a priestess of the goddess Athena, and threatened her with
death should she mate with a man. But when Hercules dwelt as a guest in
the sanctuary of Athena, on his expedition against Augeas, he saw the
maiden, and while intoxicated, he raped her. When Aleos became aware of
her pregnancy, he delivered her to Nauplius, a rough sailor, with the
command to throw her into the sea. But on the way she gave birth to
Telephus on Mount Parthenios, and Nauplius, unmindful of the orders he
had received, carried both her and the child to Mysia, where he
delivered them to King Teuthras.

According to another version, Auge secretly brought forth as a
priestess, but kept the child hidden in the temple. When Aleos
discovered the sacrilege, he caused the child to be exposed in the
Parthenian mountains. Nauplius was instructed to sell the mother in
foreign lands, or to

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

kill her. She was delivered by him into the hands of Teuthras <span
id="fr_45"></span>[1](mbh08.htm#fn_45)

According to the current tradition, Auge *exposes the newborn child* and
escapes to Mysia, where the childless King Teuthras adopts her as his
daughter. The boy, however, is nursed by a doe, and is found by
shepherds who take him to King Corythos. The king brings him up as his
son. When Telephus has grown into a youth, he betakes himself to Mysia,
on the advice of the oracle, to seek his mother. He frees Teuthras, who
is in danger from his enemies, and in reward receives the hand of the
supposed daughter of the king, namely his own mother Auge. But she
refuses to submit to Telephus, and when he in his ire is about to pierce
the disobedient one with his sword, she calls on her lover Hercules in
her distress, and Telephus thus recognizes his mother. After the death
of Teuthras he becomes King of Mysia.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Perseus](mbh08)
