[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](mbh16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002H9XPY0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Myth of the Birth of the Hero*, by Otto Rank, \[1914\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

### III. The Interpretation of the Myths

A CURSORY review of these variegated hero myths forcibly brings out a
series of uniformly common features, with a typical groundwork, from
which a standard saga, as it were, may be constructed. This schedule
corresponds approximately to the ideal human skeleton that is constantly
seen, with minor deviations, on transillumination of figures that
outwardly differ from one another. The individual traits of the several
myths, and especially the apparently crude variations from the
prototype, can be entirely elucidated only by myth interpretation.

The standard saga itself may be formulated according to the following
outline: The hero is the child of most distinguished parents, usually
the son of a king. His origin is preceded by difficulties, such as
continence, or prolonged barrenness, or secret intercourse of the
parents due to external prohibition or obstacles. During or before the
pregnancy, there is a prophecy, in the form of a dream or oracle,
cautioning against his birth, and usually threatening danger to the
father (or his representative). As a rule, he is surrendered to the
water, in a box. He is then saved by animals, or by lowly people
(shepherds), and is suckled by a female animal or by an humble woman.
After he has grown up, he finds his distinguished parents, in a highly
versatile fashion. He takes his revenge on his father, on the one hand,
and is acknowledged, on the other. Finally he achieves rank and
honors. <span id="fr_90"></span>[1](#fn_90)

Since the normal relations of the hero toward his father and his mother
regularly appear impaired in all these

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

myths, as shown by the outline, there is reason to assume that something
in the nature of the hero must account for such a disturbance, and
motives of this kind are not very difficult to discover. It is readily
understood--and may be noted in the modern imitations of the heroic
age--that for the hero, who is exposed to envy, jealousy, and calumny to
a much higher degree than all others, the descent from his parents often
becomes the source of the greatest distress and embarrassment. The old
saying that "A prophet is not without honour, save in his own country
and in his father's house," has no other meaning but that he whose
parents, brothers and sisters, or playmates, are known to us, is not so
readily conceded to be a prophet. There seems to be a certain necessity
for the prophet to deny his parents; the well-known Meyerbeer opera is
based upon the avowal that the prophetic hero is allowed, in favor of
his mission, to abandon and repudiate even his tenderly loving mother.

A number of difficulties arise, however, as we proceed to a deeper
inquiry into the motives which oblige the hero to sever his family
relations. Numerous investigators have emphasized that the understanding
of myth formation requires our going back to their ultimate source,
namely the individual faculty of imagination. <span
id="fr_91"></span>[1](#fn_91) The fact has also been pointed out that
this imaginative faculty is found in its active and unchecked exuberance
only in childhood. Therefore, the imaginative life of the child should
first be studied, in order to facilitate the understanding of the far
more complex and also more handicapped mythological and artistic
imagination in general.

Meanwhile, the investigation of the juvenile faculty of imagination has
hardly commenced, instead of being sufficiently advanced to permit the
utilization of the findings for the explanation of the more complicated
psychic activities. The reason for this imperfect understanding of the
psychic life of the child is traceable to the lack of a suitable
instrument, as well as of a reliable avenue, leading into the
intricacies of this very delicate and rather inaccessible domain. These
juvenile emotions can by no means be

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

studied in the normal human adult, and it may actually be charged, in
view of certain psychic disturbances, that the normal psychic integrity
of normal subjects consists precisely in their having overcome and
forgotten their childish vagaries and imaginations; so that the way has
become blocked. In children, on the other hand, empirical observation
(which as a rule must remain merely superficial) fails in the
investigation of psychic processes because we are not as yet enabled to
trace all manifestations correctly to their motive forces; so that we
are lacking the instrument. There is a certain class of persons, the
so-called psycho-neurotics, shown by the teachings of Freud to have
remained children, in a sense, although otherwise appearing grown-up.
These psychoneurotics may be said not to have given up their juvenile
psychic life, which on the contrary, in the course of maturity has
become strengthened and fixed, instead of modified. In psychoneurotics,
the emotions of the child are preserved and exaggerated, thus becoming
capable of pathological effects, in which these humble emotions appear
broadened and enormously magnified. The fancies of neurotics are, as it
were, the uniformly exaggerated reproductions of the childish
imaginings. This would point the way to a solution of the problem.
Unfortunately, however, access is still much more difficult to establish
in these cases than to the child mind. There is only one known
instrument which makes this road practicable, namely the psychoanalytic
method, which has been developed through the work of Freud. Constant
handling of this instrument will clear the observer's vision to such a
degree that he will be enabled to discover the identical motive forces,
only in delicately shaded manifestations, also in the psychic life of
those who do not become neurotics later on.

Professor Freud had the kindness to place at the author's disposal his
valuable experience with the psychology of the neuroses; and on this
material are based the following comments on the imaginative faculty of
the child as well as of the neurotic.

The detachment of the growing individual from the authority of the
parents is one of the most necessary, but also

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

one of the most painful achievements of evolution. It is absolutely
necessary for this detachment to take place, and it may be assumed that
all normal grown individuals have accomplished it to a certain extent.
Social progress is essentially based upon this opposition between the
two generations. On the other hand, there exists a class of neurotics
whose condition indicates that they have failed to solve this very
problem. For the young child, the parents are, in the first place, the
sole authority and the source of all faith. To resemble them, i.e., the
progenitor of the same sex--to grow up like father or mother--this is
the most intense and portentous wish of the child's early years.
Progressive intellectual development naturally brings it about that the
child gradually becomes acquainted with the category to which the
parents belong. Other parents become known to the child, who compares
these with his own, and thereby becomes justified in doubting the
incomparability and uniqueness with which he had invested them. Trifling
occurrences in the life of the child, which induce a mood of
dissatisfaction, lead up to a criticism of the parents; and the
gathering conviction that other parents are preferable in certain ways
is utilized for this attitude of the child toward the parents.

From the psychology of the neurosis, we have learned that very intense
emotions of sexual rivalry are also involved in this connection. The
causative factor evidently is the feeling of being neglected.
Opportunities arise only too frequently when the child is neglected, or
at least feels himself neglected, when he misses the entire love of the
parents, or at least regrets having to share this with the other
children of the family. The feeling that one's own inclinations are not
entirely reciprocated seeks its relief in the idea--often consciously
remembered from very early years--of being a stepchild, or an adopted
child. Many persons who have not become neurotics very frequently
remember occasions of this kind, when the hostile behavior of the
parents was interpreted and reciprocated by them in this fashion,
usually under the influence of storybooks. The influence of sex is
already evident, in so far as the boy shows a far greater tendency to
harbor hostile feelings

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

against his father than his mother, with a much stronger inclination to
emancipate himself from the father than from the mother. The imaginative
faculty of girls is possibly much less active in this respect.

These consciously remembered psychic emotions of the years of childhood
supply the factor which permits the interpretation of the myth. What is
not often consciously remembered, but can almost invariably be
demonstrated through psychoanalysis, is the next stage in the
development of this incipient alienation from the parents, which may be
designated by the term "family romance of neurotics." The essence of
neurosis, and of all higher mental qualifications, comprises a special
activity of the imagination that is primarily manifested in the play of
the child, and which from about the period preceding puberty takes hold
of the theme of the family relations. A characteristic example of this
special imaginative faculty is represented by the familiar
*daydreams*, <span id="fr_92"></span>[1](#fn_92) which are continued
until long after puberty. Accurate observation of these daydreams shows
that they serve for the fulfillment of wishes, for the righting of life,
and that they have two essential objects, one erotic, the other of an
ambitious nature (usually with the erotic factor concealed therein).
About the time in question, the child's imagination is engaged upon the
task of getting rid of the parents, who are now despised and are as a
rule to be supplanted by others of a higher social rank. The child
utilizes an accidental coincidence of actual happenings (meetings with
the lord of the manor or the proprietor of the estate, in the country;
with the reigning prince, in the city; in the United States, with some
great statesman or millionaire). Accidental occurrences of this kind
arouse the child's envy, and this finds its expression in fancy fabrics
which replace the two parents by others of a higher rank. The technical
elaboration of these two imaginings, which of course by this time have
become conscious, depends upon the child's adroitness and also upon the
material at his disposal. It is likewise a factor

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

whether these fancies are elaborated with more or less claim to
plausibility. This stage is reached at a time when the child is still
lacking all knowledge of the sexual conditions of descent.

With the added knowledge of the manifold sexual relations of father and
mother--with the child's realization of the fact that the father is
always uncertain, whereas the mother is very certain--the family romance
undergoes a peculiar restriction: it is satisfied with ennobling the
father, while the descent from the mother is no longer questioned, but
accepted as an unalterable fact. This second (or sexual) stage of the
family romance is moreover supported by another motive, which did not
exist in the first (or asexual) stage. Knowledge of sexual matters gives
rise to the tendency to picture erotic situations and relations,
impelled by the pleasurable emotion of placing the mother, or the
subject of the greatest sexual curiosity, in the situation of secret
unfaithfulness and clandestine love affairs. In this way the primary or
asexual fantasies are raised to the standard of the improved later
understanding.

The motive of revenge and retaliation, which was originally to the
front, is again evident. These neurotic children are mostly those who
were punished by the parents to break them of bad sexual habits, and
they take their revenge upon their parents by their imaginings. The
younger children of a family are particularly inclined to deprive their
predecessors of their advantage by fables of this kind (exactly as in
the intrigues of history). Frequently they do not hesitate in crediting
the mother with as many love affairs as there are rivals. An interesting
variation of this family romance restores the legitimacy of the plotting
hero himself, while the other children are disposed of in this way as
illegitimate. The family romance may be governed besides by a special
interest, all sorts of inclinations being met by its adaptability and
variegated character. The little romancer gets rid in this fashion, for
example, of the kinship of a sister who may have attracted him sexually.

Those who turn aside with horror from this corruption of the child mind,
or perhaps actually contest the possibility

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

of such matters, should note that all these apparently hostile
imaginings have not such a very bad significance after all, and that the
original affection of the child for his parents is still preserved under
their thin disguise. The faithlessness and ingratitude on the part of
the child are only apparent, for on investigating in detail the most
common of these romantic fancies--the substitution of both parents, or
of the father alone, by more exalted personages--the discovery will be
made that these new and highborn parents: are invested throughout with
the qualities which are derived from real memories of the true lowly
parents, so that the child does not actually remove his father but
exalts him. *The entire endeavor to replace the real father by a more
distinguished one is merely the expression of the child's longing for
the vanished happy time, when his father still appeared to be the
strongest and greatest man, and the mother seemed the dearest and most
beautiful woman*. The child turns away from the father, as he now knows
him, to the father in whom he believed in his earlier years, his
imagination being in truth only the expression of regret for this happy
time having passed away. *Thus the overvaluation of the earliest years
of childhood again claims its own in these fancies*. <span
id="fr_93"></span>[1](#fn_93) An interesting contribution to this
subject is furnished by the study of dreams. Dream-interpretation
teaches that even in later years, in the dreams of the emperor or the
empress, these princely persons stand for the father and the
mother. <span id="fr_94"></span>[2](#fn_94) Thus the infantile
overvaluation of the parents is still preserved in the dream of the
normal adult.

As we proceed to fit the above features into our scheme, we feel
justified in analogizing the ego of the child with the hero of the myth,
in view of the unanimous tendency of family romances and hero myths;
keeping in mind that the myth throughout reveals an endeavor to get rid
of the parents, and that the same wish arises in the fantasies of the
individual child at the time when he is trying to

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

establish his personal independence. The ego of the child behaves in
this respect like the hero of the myth, and as a matter of fact, the
hero should always be interpreted merely as a collective ego, which is
equipped with all the excellences. In a similar manner, the hero in
personal poetic fiction usually represents the poet himself, or at least
one side of his character.

Summarizing the essentials of the hero myth, we find the descent from
noble parents, the exposure in a river, and in a box, and the raising by
lowly parents; followed in the further evolution of the story by the
hero's return to his first parents, with or without punishment meted out
to them. It is very evident that the two parent-couples of the myth
correspond to the real and the imaginary parent-couple of the romantic
fantasy. Closer inspection reveals the psychological identity of the
humble and the noble parents, precisely as in the infantile and neurotic
fantasies.

In conformity with the overvaluation of the parents in early childhood,
the myth begins with the noble parents, exactly like the romantic
fantasy, whereas in reality adults soon adapt themselves to the actual
conditions. Thus the fantasy of the family romance is simply realized in
the myth, with a bold reversal to the actual conditions. The hostility
of the father, and the resulting exposure, accentuate the motive which
has caused the ego to indulge in the entire fiction. The fictitious
romance is the excuse, as it were, for the hostile feelings which the
child harbors against his father, and which in this fiction are
projected against the father. The exposure in the myth, therefore, is
equivalent to the repudiation or nonrecognition in the romantic fantasy.
The child simply gets rid of the father in the neurotic romance, while
in the myth the father endeavors to lose the child. Rescue and revenge
are the natural terminations, as demanded by the essence of the fantasy.

In order to establish the full value of this parallelization, as just
sketched in its general outlines, it must enable us to interpret certain
constantly recurring details of the myth which seem to require a special
explanation. This demand would seem to acquire special importance in
view of the

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

fact that no satisfactory explanation of these details is forthcoming in
the writings of even the most enthusiastic astral mythologists or
natural philosophers. Such details are represented by the regular
occurrence of dreams (or oracles) and by the mode of exposure in a box
and in the water. These motifs do not at first glance seem to permit a
psychological derivation. Fortunately the study of dream-symbolisms
permits the elucidation of these elements of the hero myth. The
utilization of the same material in the dreams of healthy persons and
neurotics <span id="fr_95"></span>[1](#fn_95) indicates that the
exposure in the water signifies no more and no less than the *symbolic
expression of birth*, The children come out of the water. <span
id="fr_96"></span>[2](#fn_96) The basket, box, or receptacle simply
means the container, the womb; <span id="fr_97"></span>[3](#fn_97) so
that the exposure directly signifies

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

the process of birth, although it is represented by its opposite.

Those who object to this representation by opposites should remember how
often the dream works with the same mechanism. <span
id="fr_98"></span>[1](#fn_98) A confirmation of this interpretation of
the exposure, as taken from the common human symbolism, is furnished by
the material itself, in the dream by the grandfather (or still more
convincingly by the mother herself) <span id="fr_99"></span>[2](#fn_99)
in the Ctesian version of Cyrus before his birth; in this dream, so much
water flows from the lap of the expectant mother as to
[inundate](errata.htm#2) all Asia, like an enormous ocean. <span
id="fr_100"></span>[3](#fn_100) It is remarkable that in both cases the
Chaldeans correctly interpreted these water dreams as birth dreams. In
all probability,

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

these dreams themselves are constructed out of the knowledge of a very
ancient and universally understood symbolism, with a dim foresight of
the relations and connections which are appreciated and presented in
Freud's teachings. There he says, in referring to a dream in which the
dreamer hurls herself into the dark water of a lake: Dreams of this sort
are birth dreams, and their interpretation is accomplished by reversing
the fact as communicated in the manifest dream; namely, instead of
hurling oneself into the water, it means emerging from the water, i.e.,
to be born. <span id="fr_101"></span>[1](#fn_101) The justice of this
interpretation, which renders the water dream equivalent to the
exposure, is again confirmed by the fact that precisely in the Cyrus
saga, which contains the water dream, the theme of the exposure in the
water is lacking, while only the basket, which does not occur in the
dream, plays a part in the exposure.

In this interpretation of the exposure as the birth, we must not let
ourselves be disturbed by the discrepancy between the succession of the
individual elements of the symbolized materialization and the real birth
process. This chronological rearrangement or even reversal has been
explained by Freud as due to the general manner in which recollections
are elaborated into fantasies; the same material reappears in the
fantasies, but in an entirely novel arrangement, and no attention
whatsoever is paid to the natural sequence of the acts. <span
id="fr_102"></span>[2](#fn_102)

Besides this chronological reversal, the reversal of the contents
requires special explanation. The first reason for the representation of
the birth by its opposite--the life-threatening exposure in the
water--is the accentuation of the parental hostility toward the future
hero. <span id="fr_103"></span>[3](#fn_103) The creative

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

influence of this tendency to represent the parents as the first and
most powerful opponents of the hero will be appreciated when it is kept
in mind that the entire family romance in general owes its origin to the
feeling of being neglected--namely, the assumed hostility of the
parents. In the myth, this hostility goes so far that the parents refuse
to let the child be born, which is precisely the reason of the hero's
lament; moreover, the myth plainly reveals the desire to enforce his
materialization even against the will of the parents. The vital peril,
thus concealed in the representation of birth through exposure, actually
exists in the process of birth itself. The overcoming of all these
obstacles also expresses the idea that the future hero has actually
overcome the greatest difficulties by virtue of his birth, for he has
victoriously thwarted all attempts to prevent it. <span
id="fr_104"></span>[1](#fn_104) Or another interpretation may be
admitted, according to which the youthful hero, foreseeing his destiny
to taste more than his share of the bitterness of life, deplores in a
pessimistic mood the inimical act which has called him to earth. He
accuses the parents, as it were, for having exposed him to the struggle
of life, for having allowed him to be born. <span
id="fr_105"></span>[2](#fn_105) The refusal to let the son be born,
which belongs especially to the father, is frequently concealed by the
contrast motif, the wish for a child (as in Oedipus, Perseus, and
others), while the hostile attitude toward the future successor on the
throne and in the kingdom is projected to the outside--it is attributed
to an oracular verdict, which is thereby revealed as the substitute of
the ominous dream, or better, as the equivalent of its interpretation.

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

From another point of view, however, the family romance shows that the
fantasies of the child, although apparently estranging the parents, have
nothing else to say concerning them besides their confirmation as the
real parents. The exposure myth, translated with the assistance of
symbolism, likewise contains nothing but the assurance: this is my
mother, who has borne me at the command of the father. But on account of
the tendency of the myth, and the resulting transference of the hostile
attitude from the child to the parents, this assurance of the real
parentage can only be expressed as the repudiation of such parentage.

On closer inspection, it is noteworthy in the first place that the
hostile attitude of the hero toward his parents concerns especially the
father. Usually, as in the myth of Oedipus, Paris, and others, the royal
father receives a prophecy of some disaster, threatening him through the
expected son; then it is the father who causes the exposure of the boy
and who pursues and menaces him in all sorts of ways after his
unlooked-for rescue, but finally succumbs to his son, according to the
prophecy. In order to understand this trait, which at first may appear
somewhat startling, it is not necessary to explore the heavens for some
process into which this trait might be laboriously fitted. Looking with
open eyes and unprejudiced minds at the relations between parents and
children, or between brothers, as these exist in reality, <span
id="fr_106"></span>[1](#fn_106) a certain tension is frequently, if not
regularly revealed between father and son, or still more distinctly a
competition between brothers. Although this tension may not be obvious
and permanent, it is lurking in the sphere of the unconscious, as it
were, with periodic eruptions. Erotic factors are especially apt to be
involved, and as a rule the deepest, generally unconscious root of the
dislike of the son for the father, or of two brothers for each other, is
related to be competition for the tender devotion and love of the
mother. The Oedipus myth shows plainly, only in grosser dimensions, the
accuracy of this interpretation, for the parricide is here followed by

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

the incest with the mother. This erotic relation with the mother, which
predominates in other mythological cycles, is relegated to the
background in the myths of the birth of the hero, while the opposition
against the father is more strongly accentuated. <span
id="fr_107"></span>[1](#fn_107)

The fact that this infantile rebellion against the father is apparently
provoked in the birth myths by the hostile behavior of the father, is
due to a reversal of the relation, known as *projection*, which is
brought about by very peculiar characteristics of the myth-forming
psychic activity. The projection mechanism--which also bore its part in
the reinterpretation of the birth act, as well as certain other
characteristics of myth formation, to be discussed
presently--necessitates the uniform characterization of the myth as a
*paranoid* structure, in view of its resemblance to peculiar processes
in the mechanism of certain psychic disturbances. Intimately connected
with the paranoid character is the property of separating or
dissociating what is fused in the imagination. This process, as
illustrated by the two parent-couples, provides the foundation for the
myth formation, and together with the projection mechanism supplies the
key to the understanding of an entire series of otherwise inexplicable
configurations of the myth. As the motor power for this projection of
the hero's hostile attitude onto

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

the father, there stands revealed the wish for its justification,
arising from the troublesome realization of these feelings against the
father. The displacement process that begins with the projection of the
troublesome sensation is still further continued, however, and with the
assistance of the mechanism of separation or dissociation, it has found
a different expression of its gradual progress in very characteristic
forms of the hero myth. In the original psychologic setting, the father
is still identical with the king, the tyrannical persecutor. The first
attenuation of this relation is manifested in those myths in which the
separation of the tyrannical persecutor from the real father is already
attempted, but not yet entirely accomplished, the former being still
related to the hero, usually as his grandfather, for example in the
Cyrus myth with all its versions, and in the majority of all hero myths
in general. In the separation of the father's part from that of the
king, this type signifies the first return step of the descent fantasy
toward the actual conditions, and accordingly the hero's father appears
in this type mostly as a lowly man (see Cyrus, Gilgamesh, and others) .
The hero thus arrives again at an approach toward his parents, the
establishment of a certain kinship, which finds its expression in the
fact that not only the hero himself, but also his father and his mother
represent objects of the tyrant's persecution. The hero in this way
acquires a more intimate connection with the mother--they are often
exposed together (Perseus, Telephus, Feridun)--who is nearer to him on
account of the erotic relation; while the renouncement of his hatred
against the father here attains the expression of its most forcible
reaction, <span id="fr_108"></span>[1](#fn_108) for the hero henceforth
appears, as in the Hamlet saga, not as the persecutor of his father (or
grandfather) but as the avenger of the persecuted father. This involves
a deeper relation of the Hamlet saga with the Persian story of
Kaikhosrav, where the hero likewise appears as the avenger of his
murdered father (compare Feridun and others).

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

The person of the grandfather himself, who in certain sagas appears
replaced by other relatives (the uncle, in the Hamlet saga), also
possesses a deeper meaning. <span id="fr_109"></span>[1](#fn_109) The
myth complex of the incest with the mother--and the related revolt
against the father--is here combined with the second great complex,
which has for its contents the erotic relations between father and
daughter. Under this heading belongs, besides other widely ramified
groups of sagas, <span id="fr_110"></span>[2](#fn_110) the story which
is told in countless versions of a *newborn boy*, of whom it is
*prophesied* that he is to become the *son-in-law* and *heir* of a
certain ruler or potentate, and who finally does so in spite of all
persecutions (exposure and so forth) on the part of the latter. <span
id="fr_111"></span>[3](#fn_111) The father who refuses to give his
daughter to any of her suitors, or who attaches to the winning of the
daughter certain conditions difficult of fulfillment, does this because
he really begrudges her to all others, for when all is told he wishes to
possess her himself. He locks her up in some inaccessible spot, so as to
safeguard her virginity (Perseus, Gilgamesh, Telephus, Romulus), and
when his command is disobeyed he pursues the daughter and her offspring
with insatiable hatred. However, the unconscious sexual motives of his
hostile attitude, which is later on avenged by his grandson, render it
evident that again the hero kills in him simply the man who is trying to
rob him of the love of his mother; namely, the father.

Another attempt at a reversal to a more original type consists in the
following theme: The return to the lowly father, which has been brought
about through the separation of the father's rôle from that of the king,
is again nullified through the lowly father's secondary elevation to the
rank of a god, as in Perseus and the other sons of virgin mothers
(Karna, Ion, Romulus, Jesus) . The secondary character of this godly
paternity is especially evident in those myths where the virgin who has
been impregnated by

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

divine conception later on marries a mortal (Jesus, Karna, Ion), who
then appears as the real father, while the god as the father represents
merely the most exalted childish idea of the magnitude, power, and
perfection of the father. <span id="fr_112"></span>[1](#fn_112) At the
same time, these myths strictly insist upon the motif of the virginity
of the mother, which elsewhere is merely hinted at. The first impetus is
perhaps supplied by the transcendental tendency, necessitated through
the introduction of the god. At the same time, the birth from the virgin
is the most abrupt repudiation of the father, the consummation of the
entire myth, as illustrated by the Sargon legend, which does not admit
any father besides the vestal mother.

The last stage of this progressive attenuation of the hostile relation
to the father is represented by that form of the myth in which the
person of the royal persecutor not only appears entirely detached from
that of the father, but has even lost the remotest kinship with the
hero's family, which he opposes in the most hostile manner, as its enemy
(in Feridun, Abraham, King Herod against Jesus, and others) . Although
of his original threefold character as the father, the king, and the
persecutor, he retains only the part of the royal persecutor or the
tyrant, the entire plan of the myth conveys the impression that nothing
had been changed--as if the designation "father" had been simply
replaced by the term "tyrant." This interpretation of the father as a
"tyrant," which is typical of the infantile ideation, <span
id="fr_113"></span>[2](#fn_113) will be found later on to possess the
greatest importance for the interpretation of certain abnormal
constellations of this complex.

The prototype of this identification of the king with the father, which
regularly recurs also in the dreams of adults,

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

presumably is the origin of royalty from the patriarchate in the family,
which is still attested by the use of identical words for king and
father, in the Indo-Germanic languages (compare the German
*Landesvater*, "father of his country," = king). <span
id="fr_114"></span>[1](#fn_114) The reversal of the family romance to
actual conditions is almost entirely accomplished in this type of myth.
The lowly parents are acknowledged with a frankness which seems to be
directly contradictory to the tendency of the entire myth.

Precisely this revelation of the real conditions, which hitherto had to
be left to the interpretation, enables us to prove the accuracy of the
latter from the material itself. The biblical legend of Moses has been
selected as especially well adapted to this purpose.

Briefly summarizing the outcome of the previous
interpretation-mechanism, to make matters plainer, we find the two
parent-couples to be identical, after their splitting into the
personalities of the father and the tyrannical persecutor has been
connected--the highborn parents are the echo, as it were, of the
exaggerated notions the child originally harbored concerning his
parents. The Moses legend actually shows the parents of the hero
divested of all prominent attributes; they are simple people, devotedly
attached to the child, and incapable of harming him. Meanwhile, the
assertion of tender feelings for the child is a confirmation, here as
well as everywhere, of the bodily parentage (compare the overseer in the
Gilgamesh legend, the charioteer in the story of Karna, the fisherman in
the Perseus myth, etc.) . The amicable utilization of the exposure
motif, which occurs in this type of myth, is referable to such a
relationship. The child is surrendered in a basket to the water, but not
with the object of killing him (as, for example, the hostile exposure of
Oedipus and many other heroes), but for the purpose of saving him
(compare also Abraham's early history, page [17](mbh03.htm#page_17)).
The danger-fraught warning to the exalted father becomes a hopeful
prophecy for the lowly father--compare, in the birth story of Jesus, the
oracle for Herod and Joseph's dream)--entirely corresponding

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

to the expectations placed by most parents in the career of their
offspring.

Retaining from the original tendency of, the romance the fact that
Pharaoh's daughter drew the child from the water, i.e., gave it birth,
the outcome is the familiar theme (grandfather type) of the king whose
daughter is to bear a son, but who, on being warned by the ill-omened
interpretation of a dream, resolves to kill his forthcoming grandson.
The handmaiden of his daughter (who in the biblical story draws the box
from the water at the behest of the princess) is charged by the king
with the exposure of the newborn child in a box, in the waters of the
river Nile, that it may perish (the exposure motif, from the viewpoint
of the highborn parents, here appearing in its original disastrous
significance). The box with the child is then found by lowly people, and
the poor woman raises the child (as his wet nurse); when he is grown up,
he is recognized by the princess as her son. Just as in the prototype,
the fantasy concludes with the recognition by the highborn parents.

If the Moses legend were placed before us in this more original form, as
we have reconstructed it from the existing material, <span
id="fr_115"></span>[1](#fn_115) the sum of this interpretation-mechanism
would be approximately what is told in the myth as it is actually
transmitted--namely, that his true mother was not a princess, but the
poor woman who was introduced as his nurse, her husband being his
father.

This interpretation is offered as the tradition, in the reconverted
myth; and the fact that this tracing of the progressive mutation
furnishes the familiar type of hero myth, is the proof of the
correctness of our interpretation.

It has thus been our good fortune to show the full accuracy of our
interpretative technique through the material itself, and it is now time
to demonstrate the tenability of the general viewpoint upon which this
entire technique is

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

founded. Hitherto, the results of our interpretation have created the
appearance that the entire myth formation started from the hero himself,
that is, from the youthful hero. At the start we took this attitude in
analogizing the hero of the myth with the ego of the child. Now we find
ourselves confronted with the obligation to harmonize these assumptions
and conclusions with the other conceptions of myth formation, which they
seem to contradict directly.

The myths are certainly not constructed by the hero, least of all by the
child hero, but they have long been known to be the product of a people
of adults. The impetus is evidently supplied by the popular amazement at
the apparition of the hero, whose extraordinary life history the people
can only imagine as ushered in by a wonderful infancy. This
extraordinary childhood of the hero, however, is constructed by the
individual myth-makers--to whom the indefinite idea of the folk-mind
must be ultimately traced--from the consciousness of their own infancy.
In investing the hero with their own infantile history, they identify
themselves with him, as it were, claiming to have been similar heroes in
their own personality. The true hero of the romance is, therefore, the
ego, which finds itself in the hero, by reverting to the time when the
ego was itself a hero, through its first heroic act, i.e., the revolt
against the father. The ego can only find its own heroism in the days of
infancy, and it is therefore obliged to invest the hero with its own
revolt, crediting him with the features which made the ego a hero. This
object is achieved with infantile motives and materials, in reverting to
the infantile romance and transferring it to the hero. Myths are,
therefore, created by adults, by means of retrograde childhood
fantasies, <span id="fr_116"></span>[1](#fn_116) the hero being credited
with the myth-maker's personal infantile history. Meanwhile, the
tendency of this entire process is the excuse of the individual units

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

of the people for their own infantile revolt against the father.

Besides the excuse of the hero for his rebellion, the myth therefore
contains also the excuse of the individual for his revolt against the
father. This revolt has burdened him since his childhood, as he has
failed to become a hero. He is now enabled to excuse himself by
emphasizing that the father has given him grounds for his hostility. The
affectionate feeling for the father is also manifested in the same
fiction, as has been shown above. These myths have therefore sprung from
two opposite motives, both of which are subordinate to the motive of
vindication of the individual through the hero: on the one hand the
motive of affection and gratitude toward the parents; and on the other
hand, the motive of the revolt against the father. It is not stated
outright in these myths, however, that the conflict with the father
arises from the sexual rivalry for the mother, but is apparently
suggested that this conflict dates back primarily to the concealment of
the sexual processes (at childbirth), which in this way became an enigma
for the child. This enigma finds its temporary and symbolical solution
in the infantile sexual theory of the basket and the water. <span
id="fr_117"></span>[1](#fn_117)

The profound participation of the incest motif in myth formation is
discussed in the author's special investigation of the Lohengrin saga,
which belongs to the myth of the birth of the hero. The cyclic character
of the Lohengrin saga is referred by him to the *fantasy of being one's
own son*, as revealed by Freud. <span id="fr_118"></span>[2](#fn_118)
This accounts for the identity of father and son, in certain myths, and
for the repetition of their careers; it explains the fact that the hero
is sometimes not exposed until he has reached maturity, and also the
intimate connection between birth and death in the exposure motif. <span
id="fr_119"></span>[3](#fn_119) Jung, who regards the typical fate of
the hero as the portrayal of the human libido and its typical

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

vicissitudes, has made this theme the pivot of his interpretation, as
the fantasy of being born again, to which the incest motif is
subordinated. Not only the birth of the hero, which takes place under
peculiar symbolic circumstances, but also the motif of the two mothers
of the hero, are explained by Jung through the birth of the hero taking
place under the mysterious ceremonials of a rebirth from the mother
consort. <span id="fr_120"></span>[1](#fn_120)

Having thus outlined the contents of the birth myth of the hero it still
remains for us to point out certain complications within the birth myth
itself, which have been explained on the basis of its paranoid
character, as "splits" of the personality of the royal father and
persecutor. In some myths, however, and especially in the fairy tales
that belong to this group, <span id="fr_121"></span>[2](#fn_121) the
multiplication of mythical personages--and with them, of course, the
multiplication of motifs, or even of entire stories--are carried so far
that sometimes the original features are altogether overgrown by these
addenda. The multiplication is so variegated and; so exuberantly
developed that the mechanism of the analysis no longer does it justice.
Moreover, the new personalities here do not show the same independence,
as it were, as the new personalities created by splitting, but they
rather present the characteristics of a copy, a duplicate, or a
"double," which is the proper mythological term. An apparently very
complicated example, namely, Herodotus’ version of the Cyrus saga,
illustrates that there doubles are not inserted purely for
ornamentation, or to give a semblance of historical veracity, but that
they are insolubly connected with myth formation and its tendency. Also,
in the Cyrus legend, as in the other myths, a confrontation

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

occurs. The royal grandfather, Astyages, and his daughter, with her
husband, are confronted by the cattle herder and his wife. A checkered
gathering of other personalities which move around them, are readily
grouped at sight: Between the highborn parent-couple and their child
stand the administrator Harpagos with his wife and his son, and the
noble Artembares with his legitimate offspring. Our trained sense for
the peculiarities of myth structure recognizes at once the doubles of
the parents in the intermediate parent-couples and all the participants
are seen to be identical personalities of the parents and their child;
this interpretation being suggested by certain features of the myth
itself. Harpagos receives the child from the king, to expose it; he
therefore acts precisely like the royal father and remains true to his
fictitious paternal part in his reluctance to kill the child
himself--because it is related to him--but he delivers it instead to the
herder Mithradates, who is thus again identified with Harpagos. The
noble Artembares, whose son Cyrus causes to be whipped, is also
identified with Harpagos; for when Artembares with his whipped boy
stands before the king, to demand retribution, Harpagos at once is
likewise seen standing before the king, to defend himself, and he also
is obliged to present his son to the king. Thus Artembares himself plays
an episodal part as the hero's father, and this is fully confirmed by
the Ctesian version, which tells us that the nobleman who adopted the
herder's son, Cyrus, as his own son, was named Artembares.

Even more distinct than the identity of the different fathers is that of
their children, which of course serves to confirm the identity of the
fathers. In the first place, and this would seem to be conclusive, *the
children are all of the same age*--not only the son of the princess, and
the child of the herder, who are born at the same time; but Herodotus
specially emphasizes that Cyrus played the game of "Kings" (in which he
caused the son of Artembares to be whipped) with boys of the same age as
Cyrus. He also points out, perhaps intentionally, that the *son of
Harpagos*, destined to become the playmate of Cyrus, whom the king had
recognized, was likewise apparently of the same age as

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Cyrus.
Furthermore, the remains of this boy are placed before his father,
Harpagos, in a basket; it was also a basket in which the newborn Cyrus
was to have been exposed, and this actually happened to his substitute,
the herder's son, whose identity with Cyrus is obvious and tangible in
the version of Justin given on page [36](mbh10.htm#page_36). In this
report, Cyrus is actually exchanged with the *living* child of the
herders; but this paradoxical parental feeling is reconciled by the
consciousness that in reality nothing at all has been altered by this
exchange. It appears more intelligible, of course, that the herder's
wife should wish to raise the living child of the king, instead of her
own *stillborn* boy, as in the Herodotus version (page
[30](mbh10.htm#page_30)); but here the identity of the boys is again
evident, for just as the herder's son suffered death instead of Cyrus in
the past, twelve years later the son of Harpagos (also in a basket) is
killed directly for Cyrus, whom Harpagos had allowed to live. <span
id="fr_122"></span>[1](#fn_122)

The impression is thereby conveyed that all the multiplications of
Cyrus, after having been created for a certain purpose, are again
removed, as disturbing elements, once this purpose has been fulfilled.
This purpose is undoubtedly the exalting tendency that is inherent in
the family romance. The hero, in the various duplications of himself and
his parents, ascends the social scale from the herder Mithradates, by
way of the noble Artembares (who is high in the king's favor), and of
the first administrator, Harpagos (who is personally related to the
king)--until he has himself become a prince; so his career is shown in
the Ctesian version, where Cyrus advances from the herder's son to the
king's administrator. <span id="fr_123"></span>[2](#fn_123) In this way,
he constantly

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

removes, as it were, the last traces of his ascent, the lower Cyrus
being discarded after absolving the different stages of his
career. <span id="fr_124"></span>[1](#fn_124)

This complicated myth with its promiscuous array of personages is thus
simplified and reduced to three actors--the hero and his parents.
Entirely similar conditions prevail in regard to the "cast" of many
other myths. For example, the duplication may concern the daughter, as
in the Moses myth, in which the princess-mother (in order to establish
the identity of the two families) <span id="fr_125"></span>[2](#fn_125)
appears among the poor people as the daughter Miriam, who is merely a
split of the mother, the latter appearing divided into the princess and
the poor woman. In case the duplication concerns the father, his doubles
appear as a rule in the part of relatives, more particularly as his
brothers, as for example in the Hamlet saga, in distinction from the
foreign personages created by the analysis. In a similar way, the
grandfather, who is taking the place of the father, may also appear
complemented by a brother, who is the hero's granduncle, and as such his
opponent, as in the myths of Romulus, Perseus, and others. Other
duplications, in apparently

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

complicated mythological structures--as for example in Kaikhosrav,
Feridun, and others--are easily recognized when envisaged from this
angle.

The duplication of the fathers (or the grandfathers) by a brother may be
continued in the next generation, and concern the hero himself, thus
leading to the *brother myths*, which can only be hinted at in
connection with the present theme. The prototypes of the boy (who in the
Cyrus saga vanish into thin air after they have served their purpose,
the exaltation of the hero's descent), if they were to assume a vitality
of their own, would come to confront the hero as competitors with equal
rights, namely, as his brothers. The original sequence is probably
better preserved through the interpretation of the hero's strange
doubles as shadowy brothers who, like the twin brother, must die for the
hero's sake. Not only the father (who is in the way of the maturing son)
is removed, but also the interfering competitor (the brother), in a
naïve realization of the childish fantasies, for the simple reason that
the hero does not want a family.

The complications of the hero legends with other myth cycles include
(besides the myth of the hostile brothers, which has already been
disposed of) also the actual incest myth, such as forms the nucleus of
the Oedipus saga. The mother, and her relation to the hero, appear
relegated to the background in the myth of the birth of the hero. But
there is another conspicuous motif: the lowly mother is so often
represented by an animal. This motif of the helpful animals <span
id="fr_126"></span>[1](#fn_126) belongs in part to a series of foreign
elements, the explanation of which would far exceed the scope of this
essay. <span id="fr_127"></span>[2](#fn_127)

The animal motif may be fitted into the sequence of

I<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

our interpretation, on the basis of the following reflections. Much as
the projection onto the father justifies the hostile attitude on the
part of the son, so the lowering of the mother into an animal is
likewise meant to vindicate the ingratitude of the son who denies her.
As the persecuting king is detached from the father, so the exclusive
rôle of wet nurse assigned to the mother--in this substitution by an
animal--goes back to the separation of the mother into the parts of the
child-bearer and the suckler. This cleavage is again subservient to the
exalting tendency, in so far as the childbearing part is reserved for
the highborn mother, whereas the lowly woman, who cannot be eradicated
from the early history, must content herself with the function of nurse.
Animals are especially appropriate substitutes, because the sexual
processes are here plainly evident also to the child, while the
concealment of these processes is presumably the root of the childish
revolt against the parents. The exposure in the box and in the water
asexualizes the birth process, as it were, in a childlike fashion; the
children are fished out of the water by the stork, who takes them to the
parents in a basket. <span id="fr_128"></span>[1](#fn_128) The animal
fable improves upon this idea, by emphasizing the similarity between
human birth and animal birth.

This introduction of the motif may possibly be interpreted from the
parodistic point of view if we assume that the child accepts the story
of the stork from his parents, feigning ignorance, but adding
superciliously: If an animal

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

has brought me, it may also have nursed me. <span
id="fr_129"></span>[1](#fn_129)

When all is said and done, however, and when the cleavage is followed
back, the separation of the childbearer from the suckler--which really
endeavors to remove the bodily mother entirely, by means of her
substitution through an animal or a strange nurse--does not express
anything beyond the fact: The woman who has suckled me is my mother.
This statement is found directly symbolized in the Moses legend, the
retrogressive character of which we have already studied; for precisely
the woman who is his own mother is chosen to be his nurse (similarly
also in the myth of Hercules, and the Egyptian-Phoenician Osiris-Adonis
myth--where Osiris, encased in a chest, floats down the river and is
finally found under the name Adonis, by Isis, who is installed by Queen
Astarte as the nurse of her own son). <span
id="fr_130"></span>[2](#fn_130)

Only a brief reference can here be made to other motifs which seem to be
more loosely related to the entire myth. Such themes include that of
playing the fool, which is suggested in animal fables as the universal
childish attitude toward grownups. They include, furthermore, the
physical defects of certain heroes (Zal, Oedipus, Hephaestus), which are
meant perhaps to serve for the vindication of individual imperfections,
in such a way that the reproaches of the father for possible defects or
shortcomings are incorporated into the myth, with the appropriate
accentuation--the hero being endowed with the same weakness which
burdens the self-respect of the individual.

This explanation of the psychological significance of the myth of the
birth of the hero would not be complete without emphasizing its
relations to certain mental diseases. Even readers without psychiatric
training--or these perhaps more than any others--must have been struck
with

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

these relations. As a matter of fact, the hero myths are equivalent in
many essential features to the delusional ideas of certain psychotic
individuals who suffer from delusions of persecution and grandeur--the
so-called paranoiacs. Their system of delusions is constructed very much
like the hero myth, and therefore indicates the same psychogenic themes
as the neurotic family romance, which is analyzable, whereas the system
of delusions is inaccessible even for psychoanalytical approaches. For
example, the paranoiac is apt to claim that the people whose name he
bears are not his real parents, but that he is actually the son of a
princely personage; he was to be removed for some mysterious reason, and
was therefore surrendered to his "parents" as a foster child. His
enemies, however, wish to maintain the fiction that he is of lowly
descent, in order to suppress his legitimate claims to the crown or to
enormous riches. <span id="fr_131"></span>[1](#fn_131) Cases of this
kind often occupy alienists or tribunals. <span
id="fr_132"></span>[2](#fn_132)

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

This intimate relationship between the hero myth and the delusional
structure of paranoiacs has already been definitely established through
the characterization of the myth as a paranoid structure, which is here
confirmed by its contents. The remarkable fact that paranoiacs will
frankly reveal their entire romance has ceased to be puzzling, since the
profound investigations of Freud have shown that the contents of
hysterical fantasies, which can often be made conscious through
analysis, are identical up to the minutest details with the complaints
of persecuted paranoiacs; moreover, the identical contents are also
encountered as a reality in the arrangements of perverts for the
gratification of their desires. <span id="fr_133"></span>[1](#fn_133)

The egotistical character of the entire system is distinctly revealed by
the paranoiac, for whom the exaltation of the parents, as brought about
by him, is merely the means for his own exaltation. As a rule the pivot
for his entire system is simply the culmination of the family romance,
in the apodictic statement: I am the emperor (or god). Reasoning in the
symbolism of dreams and myths--which is also the symbolism of all
fancies, including the "morbid" power of imagination--all he
accomplishes thereby is to put himself in the place of the father, just
as the hero terminates his revolt against the father. This can be done
in both instances, because the conflict with the father--which dates
back to the concealment of the sexual processes, as suggested by the
latest discoveries--is nullified at the instant when the grown boy
himself becomes a father. The persistence with which the paranoiac puts
himself in the father's place, i.e., becomes a father himself, appears
like an illustration to the common answers of little boys to a scolding
or a putting off of their inquisitive curiosity: You just wait until I
am a papa myself, and I'll know all about it!

Besides the paranoiac, his equally asocial counterpart must also be
emphasized. In the expression of the identical

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

fantasy contents, the hysterical individual, who has suppressed them, is
offset by the pervert, who realizes them; and just so the diseased and
passive paranoiac--who needs his delusion for the correction of the
actuality, which to him is intolerable--is offset by the active
criminal, who endeavors to change the actuality according to his mind.
In this special sense, this type is represented by the anarchist. The
hero himself, as shown by his detachment from the parents, begins his
career in opposition to the older generation; he is at once a rebel, a
renovator, and a revolutionary. However, every revolutionary is
originally a disobedient son, a rebel against the father. <span
id="fr_134"></span>[1](#fn_134) (Compare the suggestion of Freud, in
connection with the interpretation of a "revolutionary dream.") <span
id="fr_135"></span>[2](#fn_135)

But whereas the paranoiac, in conformity with his passive character, has
to suffer persecutions and wrongs which ultimately proceed from the
father--and which he endeavors to escape by putting himself in the place
of the father or the emperor--the anarchist complies more faithfully
with the heroic character, by promptly himself becoming the persecutor
of kings, and finally killing the king, precisely like the hero. The
remarkable similarity between the career of certain anarchistic
criminals and the family romance of hero and child has been elsewhere
illustrated by the author, through special instances. <span
id="fr_136"></span>[3](#fn_136) The truly heroic element then consists
only in the real justice or even necessity of the act, which is
therefore generally endorsed and admired; <span
id="fr_137"></span>[4](#fn_137) while the morbid trait, also in criminal

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

cases, is the pathologic transference of the hatred from the father to
the real king, or several kings, when more general and still more
distorted.

As the hero is commended for the same deed, without asking for its
psychic motivation, so the anarchist might claim indulgence from the
severest penalties, for the reason that he has killed an entirely
different person from the one he really intended to destroy, in spite of
an apparently excellent (perhaps political) motivation of his act. <span
id="fr_138"></span>[1](#fn_138)

For the present let us stop at the narrow boundary line where the
contents of innocent infantile imaginings, suppressed and unconscious
neurotic fantasies, poetical myth structures, and certain forms of
mental disease and crime lie close together, although far apart as to
their causes and dynamic forces. We resist the temptation to follow one
of these divergent paths that lead to altogether different realms, but
which are as yet unblazed trails in the wilderness.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_90"></span>[65:1](mbh17.htm#fr_90) The possibility of
further specification of separate items of this outline will be seen
from the compilation given by Lessmann at the conclusion of his "*Die
Kyrossage in Europe*" (loc. cit.).

<span id="fn_91"></span>[66:1](mbh17.htm#fr_91) See also Wundt, who
interprets the hero psychologically as a projection of human desires and
aspirations (op. cit., p. 48).

<span id="fn_92"></span>[69:1](mbh17.htm#fr_92) Compare Freud:
"Hysterical Fancies, and their Relation to Bisexuality," with references
to the literature on this subject. This contribution is contained in the
second series of *Sammlung kleiner Schriften zur Neurosenlehre* (Vienna
and Leipzig, 1909).

<span id="fn_93"></span>[71:1](mbh17.htm#fr_93) For the idealizing of
the parents by the children, compare Maeder's comments (*Jahrbuch für
Psychoanalyse*, I (1909), p. 152, and *Zentralblatt für Psychoanalyse*,
I, p. 51) on Varendonk's essay, "*Les idéals d’enfant*."

<span id="fn_94"></span>[71:2](mbh17.htm#fr_94) *Interpretation of
Dreams*.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[73:1](mbh17.htm#fr_95) Compare the "birth
dreams" in Freud's *Interpretation of Dreams*, also the examples quoted
by the author in *Die Lohengrin Saga* (Vienna, 1911), pp. 27 ff.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[73:2](mbh17.htm#fr_96) In fairy tales, which
are adapted to infantile ideation, and especially to the infantile
sexual theories (compare Freud in the December, 1908, number of
*Sexuelle Probleme*), the birth of man is frequently represented as a
lifting of the child from a well or a lake (Thimme, op. cit. p. 157).
The story of "Dame Holle's Pond" (Grimm: *Deutsche Sagen*, Vol. I, p. 7)
relates that the newborn children come from her well, whence she brings
them forth. The same interpretation is apparently expressed in certain
national rites; for example, when a Celt had reason to doubt his
paternity, be placed the newborn child on a large shield and put it
adrift in the nearest river. If the waves carried it ashore, it was
considered as legitimate, but if the child drowned, this was proof of
the contrary, and the mother was also put to death (see Franz Helbing:
*History of Feminine Infidelity*). Additional ethnological material from
folklore has been compiled by the author in *Die Lohengrin Saga*, pp. 20
ff.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[73:3](mbh17.htm#fr_97) The "box" in certain
myths is represented by the *cave*, which also distinctly symbolizes the
womb; aside from statements in Abraham, Ion, and others, a noteworthy
case is that of Zeus, who is born in a cave on Mount Ida and nourished
by the goat Amalthea, his mother concealing him for fear of her husband,
the Titan Cronus. According to Homer's *Iliad* (XVIII, 396 ff.),
Hephaestus is also cast into the water by his mother, on account of his
lameness, and remains hidden for nine years in a cave surrounded by
water. By exchanging the reversal, the birth (the fall into the water)
is here plainly represented as the termination of the nine months of the
intra-uterine life. More common than the cave birth is the exposure in a
box, which is likewise told in the Babylonian Marduk-Tammuz myth, as
well as in the Egyptian-Phoenician Osiris-Adonis myth (compare Winckler:
*Die Weltanschauung des alten Orients, Ex Oriente Lux*, Vol. I., p. 43;
and Jeremias, *Die Babylonisches* . . . , p. 41). Bacchus, according to
Pausanius (III, 24), is also removed from the persecution of the king
through exposure in a chest on the Nile, and is saved at the age of
three months by a king's daughter, which is remarkably suggestive of the
Moses legend A similar story is told of Tennes, the son of Cycnus
(Siecke: "*Hermes* . . ." loc. cit., p. 48) and of many others.

The occurrence of the same symbolic representation among the aborigines
<span id="page_74">p. 74</span> is illustrated by the following
examples: Stucken (op. cit.) relates the New Zealand tale of the
Polynesian Fire (and Seed) Robber, Mani-tiki-tiki, who is exposed
directly after his birth, his mother throwing him into the sea, wrapped
in an apron (chest, box). A similar story is reported by Frobenius (op.
cit., p. 379) from the Betsimisaraka of Madagascar, where the child is
exposed on the water, is found and raised by a rich, childless woman,
but finally resolves to discover his actual parents. According to a
report of Bab (*Zeitschrift für Ethnologie*, 1906, p. 281), the wife of
the Raja Besurjay was presented with a child floating on a bubble of
water-foam (from Singapore).

<span id="fn_98"></span>[74:1](mbh17.htm#fr_98) Compare Freud:
Interpretation of Dreams.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[74:2](mbh17.htm#fr_99) Abraham (op. cit. pp.
22-3) contains the analysis of a very similar although more complicated
birth dream, corresponding to the actual conditions: the dreamer, a
young pregnant woman awaiting her delivery, not without fear, dreamed of
the birth of her son, and the water appeared directly as the amniotic
fluid.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[74:3](mbh17.htm#fr_100) This fantasy of an
enormous water is extremely suggestive of the large and widespread group
of the flood myths, which actually seem to be no more than the universal
expression of the exposure myth. The hero is here represented by
humanity at large. The wrathful father is the god; the destruction and
the rescue of humanity follow each other in immediate succession. In
this parallelization, it is of interest to note that the ark, or pitched
house, in which Noah floats upon the water is designated in the Old
Testament by the same word (*tebah*) as the receptacle in which the
infant Moses is exposed (Jeremias: *The Old Testament* . . ., p. 250).
For the motif of the great flood, compare Jeremias, p. 226, and
Lessmann, at the close of his treatise, "Die Kyrossage .," loc. cit.,
where the flood is described as a possible digression of the exposure in
the water. A transition instance is illustrated by the flood saga told
by Bader, in his Baden folk legends: When the Sunken Valley was
inundated once upon a time by a cloudburst, a little boy was seen
floating upon the waters in a cradle, and was miraculously saved by a
cat (Gustav Friedrich, op. cit., p. 265).

TRANSLATORS' NOTE: The author has endeavored to explain the
psychological relations of the exposure myth, the flood legend, and the
devouring myth in his article on the "Overlying Symbols in Dream
Awakening, and Their Recurrence in Mythical Ideation"--"*Die
Symbolschichtung in Wecktraum and ihre Wiederkehr im mythischen
Denken*," Jahrbuch für Psychoanalyse, V (1912).

<span id="fn_101"></span>[75:1](mbh17.htm#fr_101) *Interpretation of
Dreams*. Compare the same reversal of the meanings in Winckler's
interpretation of the etymology of the name of Moses, on page 16,
footnote 7.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[75:2](mbh17.htm#fr_102) The same conditions
remain in the formation of dreams and in the transformation of
hysterical fantasies into seizures. See p. 238 (and the annotation on
that page) of Freud's *Traumdeutung* (the German edition of
*Interpretation of Dreams*); see also his "*Allgemeines über den
hysterischen Anfall*"("General Remarks on Hysterical Seizures") in
*Sammlung kleiner Schriften* . , 2d series, pp. 146 ff.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[75:3](mbh17.htm#fr_103) According to a pointed
remark of Jung's, this reversal in its further mythical sublimation
permits the approximation of the hero's life to the solar cycle. Carl G.
Jung: "*Wandlungen und Symbole der Libido*," *Jahrbuch für
Psychoanalyse*, V (1912), p. 253.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[76:1](mbh17.htm#fr_104) The second item of the
schedule here enters into consideration: the voluntary continence or
prolonged separation of the parents, which naturally induces the
miraculous conception and virgin birth of the mother. The abortion
fantasies, which are especially distinct in the Zoroaster legend, also
belong under this heading.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[76:2](mbh17.htm#fr_105) The comparison of
birth with a shipwreck, by the Roman poet Lucretius, seems to be in
perfect harmony with this symbolism: "Behold the infant: Like a
shipwrecked sailor, cast ashore by the fury of the billows, the poor
child lies naked on the ground, bereft of all means for existence, after
Nature has dragged him in pain from the mother's womb. With plaintive
wailing he filleth the place of his birth, and he is right, for many
evils await him in life" (*De Natura Rerum*, V, 222-7). Similarly, the
first version of Schiller's *Robbers*, in speaking of Nature, says: "She
endowed us with the spirit of invention, when she exposed us naked and
helpless on the shore of the great Ocean, the World. Let him swim who
may, and let the clumsy perish!"

<span id="fn_106"></span>[77:1](mbh17.htm#fr_106) Compare the
representation of this relation and its psychic consequences, in Freud's
*Interpretation of Dreams*.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[78:1](mbh17.htm#fr_107) Some myths convey the
impression that the love relation with the mother had been removed, as
being too objectionable to the consciousness of certain periods or
peoples. Traces of this suppression are still evident in a comparison of
different myths or different versions of the same myth. For example, in
the version of Herodotus, Cyrus is a son of the daughter of Astyages;
but according to the report of Ctesias, he makes the daughter of
Astyages, whom he conquers, his wife, and kills her husband (who in the
rendering of Herodotus is his father). See Hüsing, op. cit. Also a
comparison of the saga of Darab with the very similar legend of St.
Gregory serves to show that in the Darab story the incest with the
mother which otherwise precedes the recognition of the son is simply
omitted; here, on the contrary, the recognition prevents the incest.
This attenuation may be studied in the nascent state, as it were, in the
myth of Telephus, where the hero is married to his mother but recognizes
her before the consummation of the incest. The fairy-tale-like setting
of the Tristan legend, which makes Isolde draw the little Tristan from
the water (i.e., give him birth), thereby suggests the fundamental
incest theme, which is likewise manifested in the adultery with the wife
of the uncle.

TRANSLATORS' NOTE: The reader is referred to *Inzestmotiv*, in which the
incest theme, which is here merely mentioned, is discussed in detail,
picking up the many threads which lead to this theme, but which have
been dropped at the present time.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[79:1](mbh17.htm#fr_108) The mechanism of this
defense is discussed in Freud's "Hamlet Analysis," in his
*Interpretation of Dreams*. Ernest Jones has also discussed this in an
article (1911) in the *American Journal of Psychology*.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[80:1](mbh17.htm#fr_109) I regard to further
meanings of the grandfather, see Freud's "Analysis of a Phobia in a
Five-Year-Old Boy," *Jahrbuch für Psychoanalyse*, I (1909); also the
contributions of Jones, Abraham, and Ferenczi in the March, 1913, issue
of *Internationale Zeitschrift für ärtzliche Psychoanalyse*.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[80:2](mbh17.htm#fr_110) See Chapter xi,
*Inzestmotiv*.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[80:3](mbh17.htm#fr_111) Detailed literary
references concerning the wide distribution of this story are found in
R. Köhler: *Kleiner Schriften*, Vol. II, p. 357.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[81:1](mbh17.htm#fr_112) A similar
identification of the father with God ("Heavenly Father," etc.) occurs,
according to Freud, with the same regularity in the fantasies of normal
and pathological psychic activity as the identification of the emperor
with the father. It is also noteworthy in this connection that almost
all peoples derive their origin from their god (Abraham, op. cit.).

<span id="fn_113"></span>[81:2](mbh17.htm#fr_113) An amusing example of
unconscious humor in children recently appeared in the daily press: A
politician had explained to his little son that a tyrant is a man who
forces others to do what he commands, without heeding their wishes in
the matter. "Well," said the child, "then you and Mama are also
tyrants!"

<span id="fn_114"></span>[82:1](mbh17.htm#fr_114) See Max Müller, op.
cit., pp. 20 ff. Concerning the various psychological contingencies of
this setting, compare pp. 83 ff. of *Inzestmotiv*.

<span id="fn_115"></span>[83:1](mbh17.htm#fr_115) Compare Eduard Meyer:
"*Die Mosessagen and die Lewiten*," in *Sitzungsberichte der königlich
preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften*, XXXI (1905), p. 640:
"Presumably Moses was originally the son of the tyrant's daughter (who
is now his foster mother), and probably of divine origin." The
subsequent elaboration into the present form is probably referable to
national motives.

<span id="fn_116"></span>[84:1](mbh17.htm#fr_116) This idea, which is
derived from the knowledge of the neurotic fantasy and symptom
construction, was applied by Professor Freud to the interpretation of
the romantic and mythical work of poetic imagination, in a lecture
entitled "Der Dichter and das Phantasieren" ("Poets and Imaginings"),
reprinted in *Sammlung kleiner Schriften* . . ., 2d series.

<span id="fn_117"></span>[85:1](mbh17.htm#fr_117) Per ethno-psychologic
parallels and other infantile sexual theories which throw some light
upon the supplementary myth of the hero's procreation, compare the
author's treatise in *Zentralblatt für Psychoanalyse*, II (1911), pp.
392-425.

<span id="fn_118"></span>[85:2](mbh17.htm#fr_118) Rank: *Die Lohengrin
Saga*.

<span id="fn_119"></span>[85:3](mbh17.htm#fr_119) Concerning the water
as the "water of death," compare especially ibid., Chapter iv.

<span id="fn_120"></span>[86:1](mbh17.htm#fr_120) Loc. cit., p. 356.

<span id="fn_121"></span>[86:2](mbh17.htm#fr_121) The fairy tales, which
have been left out of consideration in the context, precisely on account
of these complications, include especially: "The Devil with the Three
Golden Hairs" (Grimm, No. 29), and the very similar "Saga of Emperor
Henry III" (Grimm, *Deutsche Sagen*, Vol. II, p. 177); "Water-Peter,"
with numerous variations (Grimm, Vol. III, p. 103); "Fundevogel," No.
51; "The Three Birdies" (No. 96); "The King of the Golden Mountain" (No.
92), with its parallels; as well as some foreign fairy tales, which are
quoted by Bauer, at the end of his article (loc. cit.). Compare also, in
Hahn: *Greek and Albanese Fairy Tales* (Leipzig, 1864), the review of
the exposure stories and myths, especially No. 20 and No. 69.

<span id="fn_122"></span>[88:1](mbh17.htm#fr_122) A connection is here
supplied with the theme of the twins, in which we seem to recognize the
two boys born at the same time--one of which dies for the sake of the
other, be it directly after birth, or later--and whose parents appear
divided in our myths into two or more parent-couples. Concerning the
probable significance of this shadowy twin brother as the afterbirth,
compare the author's discussion in his *Inzestmotiv* (pp. 459 ff).

<span id="fn_123"></span>[88:2](mbh17.htm#fr_123) The early history of
Sigurd, as it is related in the Völsungasaga (compare Rassmann, op.
cit., Vol. I, p. 99), closely resembles the Ctesian version of the Cyrus
saga, giving us the tradition of another hero's wonderful career,
together with its rational rearrangement. For particulars, see Bauer,
loc. cit., p. 554. Also the biblical history of Joseph (Exodus
37-50)--with the exposure, the animal sacrifice, the dreams, the sketchy
brethren, and the fabulous career of this hero--seems to belong to this
type of myth.

<span id="fn_124"></span>[89:1](mbh17.htm#fr_124) In order to avoid
misunderstandings, it appears necessary to emphasize at this point the
historical nucleus of certain hero myths. Cyrus, as is shown by the
inscriptions which have been discovered (compare Duncker, op. cit., p.
289; and Bauer, loc. cit., p. 498) was descended from an old hereditary
royal house. It could not be the object of the myth to elevate the
descent of Cyrus, nor must the above interpretation be regarded as an
attempt to establish a lowly descent. Similar conditions prevail in the
case of Sargon, whose royal father is also known (compare Jeremias: *The
Old Testament* . . . , p. 410 *n*.). Nevertheless a historian writes
about Sargon as follows (Ungnad: "*Die Anfänge der Staatenbildung in
Babylonien*," *Deutsche Rundschau*, July 1905): "He was evidently of
noble descent, or no such saga could have been woven about his birth and
his youth." It would be a gross error to consider our interpretation as
an argument in this sense. Again, the apparent contradiction which might
be held up against our explanation, under another mode of
interpretation, becomes the proof of its correctness, through the
reflection that it is not the hero but the average man who makes the
myth and wishes to vindicate himself in it. The people imagine the hero
in this manner, investing him with their own infantile fantasies,
irrespective of their actual compatibility or incompatibility with
historical facts. This also serves to explain the transference of the
typical motifs, be it to several generations of the same hero-family, or
be it to historical personalities in general (concerning Caesar,
Augustus and others, compare Usener, *Rhein. Mus*., LV, p. 271).

<span id="fn_125"></span>[89:2](mbh17.htm#fr_125) This identification of
the families is carried through to the minutest detail in certain myths,
as for example in the Oedipus myth, where one royal couple is offset by
another, and where even the herdsman who receives the infant for
exposure has his exact counterpart in the herdsman to whom he entrusts
the rescue of the boy.

<span id="fn_126"></span>[90:1](mbh17.htm#fr_126) Compare Gubernatis:
*Zoological Mythology* (London, 1872); and Hartmann: *Die Tiere in der
indogermanischen Mythologie* (Leipzig, 1874). Concerning the
significance of animals in exposure myths, see also the contributions by
Bauer (loc. cit., pp. 574 ff.); Goldziher (op. cit., p. 274); and
Liebrecht: *Zur Volkskunde, Romulus and die Welfen* (Heilbronn, 1879).

<span id="fn_127"></span>[90:2](mbh17.htm#fr_127) Compare Freud's
article on the infantile recurrence of totemism, in *Imago*, Vol. II
(1913). Concerning the totemistic foundation of the Roman she-wolf, see
Jones's writings on nightmares (*Älptraume*). The woodpecker of the
Romulus saga was discussed by Jung (loc. cit., pp. 382 ff.).

<span id="fn_128"></span>[91:1](mbh17.htm#fr_128) The stork is known
also in mythology as the bringer of children. Siecke (*Liebesgeschichten
des Himmels*, p. 26) points out the swan as the player of this part in
certain regions and countries. The rescue and further protection of the
hero by a bird is not uncommon; compare Gilgamesh, Zal, and Cycnus (who
is exposed by his mother near the sea and is nourished by a swan, while
his son Tennes floats in a chest upon the water). The interpretation of
the leading motif of the Lohengrin saga also enters into present
consideration. Its most important motifs belong to this mythical cycle:
Lohengrin floats in a skiff upon the water, and is brought ashore by a
swan. No one may ask whence he has come; the sexual mystery of the
origin of man must not be revealed, but it is replaced by the suggestion
of the stork fable; the children are fished from the water by the swan
and are taken to the parents in a box. Corresponding to the prohibition
of all inquiries in the Lohengrin saga, we find in other myths (for
example, the Oedipus myth), a *command to investigate*, or a riddle that
must be solved. For the psychological significance of the stork fable,
compare Freud: *Infantile Sexual Theories*. Concerning the hero myth,
see also the author's *Die Lohengrin Saga*.

<span id="fn_129"></span>[92:1](mbh17.htm#fr_129) Compare Freud:
"Analysis of a Phobia in a Five-Year-Old Boy," loc. cit.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[92:2](mbh17.htm#fr_130) Usener (*Stoff des
griechischen Epos*, p, 53) says that the controversy between the earlier
and the later Greek sagas concerning the mother of a divinity is usually
reconciled by the formula that the mother of the general Greek saga is
recognized as such, while the mother of the local tradition is lowered
to the rank of a nurse. Thero may therefore be unhesitatingly regarded
as the mother, not merely the nurse, of the god Ares.

<span id="fn_131"></span>[93:1](mbh17.htm#fr_131) Abraham, loc. cit., p.
40; Riklin, op. cit., p. 74.

<span id="fn_132"></span>[93:2](mbh17.htm#fr_132) Brief mention is made
of a case concerning a Frau von Hervay, because of a few subtle
psychological comments upon the same by A. Berger (*Feuilleton der Neue
Freie Presse*, Nov. 6, 1904), which in part touch upon our
interpretation of the hero myth. Berger writes as follows: "I am
convinced that she seriously believes herself to be the illegitimate
daughter of an aristocratic Russian lady. The desire to belong through
birth to more distinguished and brilliant circles than her own
surroundings probably dates back to her early years; and her wish to be
a princess gave rise to the delusion that she was not the daughter of
her parents, but the child of a noblewomen who had concealed her
illegitimate offspring from the world by letting her grow up as the
daughter of a sleight-of-hand man. Having once become entangled in these
fancies, it was natural for her to interpret any harsh word that
offended her, or any accidental ambiguous remark that she happened to
hear, but especially her reluctance to be the daughter of this couple,
as a confirmation of her romantic delusion. She therefore made it the
task of her life to regain the social position of which she felt herself
to have been defrauded. Her biography manifests the strenuous insistence
upon this idea, with a tragic outcome."

The female type of the family romance, as it confronts us in this case
from the asocial side, has also been transmitted as a hero myth in
isolated instances. The story goes of the later Queen Semiramis (in
Diodorus, II, 4) that her mother, the goddess Derceto, being ashamed of
her, exposed the child in a barren and rocky land, where she was fed by
doves and found by shepherds, who gave the infant to the overseer of the
royal flocks, the childless Simnas, who raised her as his own daughter.
He named her Semiramis, which meant "dove" in the ancient Syrian
language. Her further career and autocratic rulership, thanks to her
masculine energy, is a matter of "history."

Other exposure myths are told of Atalanta, Cybele, and Aërope (see
Röscher, op. cit.).

<span id="fn_133"></span>[94:1](mbh17.htm#fr_133) Freud: *Three
Contributions to the Theory of Sex;* also *Psychopathologie des
Altagslebens;* and *Hysterische Phantasien and ihre Beziehung zur
Bisexualität*.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[95:1](mbh17.htm#fr_134) This is especially
evident in the myths of the Greek gods, where the son (Cronus, Zeus)
must first remove the father, before he can enter upon his rulership.
The form of the removal, namely through castration--obviously the
strongest expression of the revolt against the father--is at the same
time the proof of its sexual provenance. Concerning the revenge
character of this castration, as well as the infantile significance of
the entire complex, compare Freud: "Infantile Sexual Theories," and
"Analysis of a Phobia in a Five-Year-Old Boy (loc. cit.).

<span id="fn_135"></span>[95:2](mbh17.htm#fr_135) Freud:
[*Traumdeutung*](errata.htm#3) (German edition of *Interpretation of
Dreams*), 2d edition, p. 153.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[95:3](mbh17.htm#fr_136) "*Belege zur
Bettungsphantasie*," *Zentralblatt für Psychoanalyse*, I (1911), p. 331;
also "*Die Rolle des Familienromans in der Psychologie des
Attentäters*," *Internationale Zeitschrift für ärtzliche Psychoanalyse*,
I (191,3).

<span id="fn_137"></span>[95:4](mbh17.htm#fr_137) Compare the contrast
between Tell and Parricida, in Schiller's *Wilhelm Tell*, which is
discussed in detail in the author's *Inzestmotiv*.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[96:1](mbh17.htm#fr_138) Compare in this
connection the unsuccessful homicidal attempt of Tatjana Leontiew, and
its subtle psychological illumination, in Wittels: *Die sexuelle Not*
(Vienna and Leipzig, 1909).
