[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](mbh10)  [Next](mbh12.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002H9XPY0/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Myth of the Birth of the Hero*, by Otto Rank, \[1914\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### TRISTAN

The theme of the Feridun story is pursued in the Tristan saga, as
related in the epic poem by Gottfried von Strassburg. This is especially
evident in the prologue of the Tristan saga, which is repeated later on
in the adventures of the hero himself (duplication) . Riwalin, king in
the land of the Parmenians, in an expedition to the court of Mark, king
of Cornwall and England, had become acquainted with the latter's
beautiful sister, Blancheflure, and his heart was aflame with love for
her. While assisting Mark in a [campaign](errata.htm#0.md), Riwalin was
mortally wounded and

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

was carried to Tintajole. Blancheflure, *disguised as a beggar maid*,
hastened to his sickbed, and her devoted love saved the king's life. She
fled with her lover to his native land (obstacles) and was there
proclaimed as his consort. But Morgan attacked Riwalin's country, for
the sake of Blancheflure, whom the king entrusted to his *faithful
retainer* Rual, because she was carrying a child. Rual placed the queen
for safekeeping in the castle of Kaneel. Here *she gave birth to a son
and died, while her husband fell in the battle against Morgan. In order
to protect the king's offspring from Morgan's pursuits*, Rual spread the
rumor that the infant had been born dead. The boy was named Tristan,
because he had been conceived and born in sorrow. Under the care of his
foster parents, Tristan grew up, equally straight in body and mind,
until his fourteenth year, when he was kidnapped by Norwegian merchants,
who then put him ashore in Cornwall because they feared the wrath of the
gods. Here *the boy was found by the soldiers of King Mark*, who was so
well pleased with the brave and handsome youth that he promptly made him
his master of the chase (career), and held him in great affection.
Meanwhile, faithful Rual had set forth to seek his abducted foster son,
whom he found at last in Cornwall, where Rual had come begging his way.
Rual *revealed Tristan's descent* to the king, who was delighted to see
in him the son of his beloved sister, and raised him to the rank of
knight. In order *to avenge his father*, Tristan proceeded with Rual to
Parmenia, vanquished Morgan, the usurper, and gave the country to Rual
as liege, while he himself returned to his uncle Mark. <span
id="fr_59"></span>[1](#fn_59.md)

The actual Tristan saga goes on with a repetition of the principal
themes. In the service of Mark, Tristan kills Morald, the bridegroom of
Isolde, and being wounded unto death, he is saved by Isolde. He asks her
hand in marriage on behalf of his uncle Mark. When he fulfills the
condition of killing a dragon, she accompanies him reluctantly to
Cornwall, to which they travel by ship. On the journey they partake
unwittingly of the disastrous love potion

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

which binds them together in frenzied passion; they betray King Mark. On
the wedding night, Isolde's faithful maid, Brangäne, represents the
queen, and sacrifices her virginity to the king. Next follows the
banishment of Tristan, his several attempts to regain his beloved,
although he had meanwhile married another Isolde--"Isolde the White
Hand," of Brittany, who resembled his love, "Isolde the Fair." At last
he is again wounded unto death, and Isolde arrives too late to save
him. <span id="fr_60"></span>[1](#fn_60.md)

A plainer version of the Tristan saga--in the sense of the
characteristic features of the myth of the birth of the hero--is found
in the fairy tale "The True Bride," quoted by Riklin from
Rittershaus. <span id="fr_61"></span>[2](#fn_61.md) A royal pair have no
children. The king having threatened to kill his wife unless she bears a
child by the time of his return from his sea voyage, she is brought to
him during his journey, by his zealous maid-servant, as the fairest of
three promenading ladies, and he takes her into his tent without
recognizing her. <span id="fr_62"></span>[3](#fn_62.md) She returns home
without having been discovered, gives birth to a daughter, Isol, and
dies. Isol later on finds, in a box by the seaside, a most beautiful
little boy, whose name is Tristram, and she raises him to become engaged
to him. The subsequent story, which contains the motif of the true
bride, is noteworthy for present purposes only in so far as here again
occurs the draught of oblivion, and two Isoldes. The king's second wife
gives a potion to Tristram, which causes him to forget the fair Isol
entirely, so that he wishes to marry the black Isota. Ultimately he
discovers the deception, however, and becomes united with Isol.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_59"></span>[42:1](mbh11.htm#fr_59.md) After Chop:
*Erläuterungen zu Wagner's Tristan* (Reclam edition).

<span id="fn_60"></span>[43:1](mbh11.htm#fr_60.md) Compare Immermann:
*Tristan and Isolde, Ein Gedicht in Romanzen* (Düsseldorf, 1841). Like
the epic of Gottfried von Strassburg, his version begins with the
preliminary history of the loves of Tristan's parents, King Riwalin
Kannlengres of Parmenia and Mark's beautiful sister Blancheflur. The
maiden never reveals her love, which is not sanctioned by her brother,
but she visits the king, who is wounded unto death, in his chamber, and
dying he procreates Tristan, "the son of the most daring and doleful
love." Grown up as a foundling in the care of Rual and his wife,
Florete, the winsome youth Tristan introduces himself to Mark in a stag
hunt, as an expert huntsman, is recognized as his nephew by a ring, the
king's gift to his beloved sister, and becomes his favorite.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[43:2](mbh11.htm#fr_61.md) *Wunscherfüllung and
Symbolik im Märchen*, p. 56; from the Rittershaus collection of fairy
tales (XXVII, p. 113). See translation by W. A. White, M.D.,
*Psychoanalytic Review*, Vol. I, No. 1.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[43:3](mbh11.htm#fr_62.md) Compare the substitution
of the bride, through Brangäne.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romulus](mbh12.md)
