[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](mbh11)  [Next](mbh13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002H9XPY0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Myth of the Birth of the Hero*, by Otto Rank, \[1914\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

#### ROMULUS

The original version of the story of Romulus and Remus--as told by the
most ancient Roman annalist Quintus Fabius Pictor--is rendered as
follows by Mommsen: <span id="fr_63"></span>[1](#fn_63)

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

*The twins* borne by Ilia, the daughter of the preceding king Numitor,
*from the embrace of the war-god Mars were condemned by King Amulius*,
the present ruler of Alba, to be cast into the river. The king's
servants took the children and carried them from Alba as far as the
Tiber on the Palatine Hill; but when they tried to descend the hill to
the river, to carry out the command, they found that the river had
risen, and they were unable to reach its bed. The tub with the children
was therefore thrust by them into the shallow water at the shore. *It
floated* for a while; *but the water promptly receded, and knocking
against a stone, the tub capsized*, and the screaming infants were upset
into the river mud. *They were heard by a she-wolf who had just brought
forth and had her udders full of milk; she came and gave her teats to
the boys*, to nurse them, and as they were drinking she licked them
clean with her tongue. Above them flew a woodpecker, which guarded the
children, and also carried food to them. The father was providing for
his sons: for the wolf and the woodpecker are animals consecrated to
father Mars. This was seen by one of the royal herdsmen, who was driving
his pigs back to the pasture from which the water had receded. Startled
by the spectacle, he summoned his mates, who found the she-wolf
attending like a mother to the children, and the children treated her as
their mother. The men made a loud noise to scare the animal away; but
the

</div>

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

wolf was not afraid; she left the children, but not from fear; slowly,
without heeding the herdsmen, she disappeared into the wilderness of the
forest, at the holy site of Faunus, where the water gushes from a gully
of the mountain. Meanwhile the men picked up the boys and carried them
to the chief swineherd of the king, Faustulus, for they believed that
the gods did not wish the children to perish. *But the wife of Faustulus
had just given birth to a dead child, and was full of sorrow. Her
husband gave her the twins, and she nursed them; the couple raised the
children, and named them Romulus and Remus*.

</div>

After Rome had been founded, later on, King Romulus built himself a
house not far from the place where his tub had stood. The gully in which
the she-wolf had disappeared has been known since that time as the
Wolf's Gully, the Lupercal. The image in ore of the she-wolf with the
twins was subsequently erected at this spot, <span
id="fr_64"></span>[1](#fn_64) and the she-wolf herself, the Lupa, was
worshipped by the Romans as a divinity.

The Romulus saga later on underwent manifold transmutations,
mutilations, additions, and interpretations. <span
id="fr_65"></span>[2](#fn_65) It is best known in the form transmitted
by Livy (I, 3 ff.), where we learn something about the antecedents and
subsequent fate of the twins:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

King Proca bequeaths the royal dignity to his firstborn son, Numitor.
But his *younger brother, Amulius, pushes him from the throne*, and
becomes king himself. So that no scion from Numitor's family may arise,
as the avenger, he kills the male descendants of his brother. *Rhea
Silvia, the daughter, he elects as a vestal, and thus deprives her of
the hope of progeny, through perpetual virginity* as enjoined upon her
under the semblance of a most honorable distinction. But the vestal
maiden was overcome by violence, and

</div>

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

having *brought forth twins*, she named *Mars* as the *father of her
illegitimate offspring*, be it from conviction, or because a god
appeared more creditable to her as the perpetrator of the crime.

</div>

The narrative of the exposure in the Tiber goes on to relate that the
floating tub, in which the boys had been exposed, was left on dry land
by the receding waters, and that a thirsty wolf, attracted from the
neighboring mountains by the children's cries, offered them her teats.
The boys are said to have been found by the chief royal herder,
supposedly named Faustulus, who took them to the homestead of his wife,
Larentia, where they were raised. Some believe that Larentia was called
Lupa ("she-wolf") by the herders because she offered her body, and that
this was the origin of the wonderful saga.

Grown to manhood, the youths Romulus and Remus protect the herds against
the attacks of wild animals and robbers. One day Remus is taken prisoner
by the robbers, who accuse him of having stolen Numitor's flocks. But
Numitor, to whom he is surrendered for punishment, was touched by his
tender age, and when he learned of the twin brothers, he suspected that
they might be his exposed grandsons. While he was anxiously pondering
the resemblance with the features of his daughter, and the boy's age as
corresponding to the time of the exposure, Faustulus arrived with
Romulus, and a conspiracy was hatched when the descent of the boys had
been learned from the herders. The youths armed themselves for
vengeance, while Numitor took up weapons to defend his claim to the
throne he had usurped. After *Amulius had been assassinated*, Numitor
was reinstituted as the ruler, and the youths resolved to found a city
in the region where they had been exposed and brought up. A furious
dispute arose upon the question of which brother was to be the ruler of
the newly erected city, for neither twin was favored by the right of
primogeniture, and the outcome of the bird oracle was equally doubtful.
The saga relates that Remus jumped over the new wall, to deride his
twin, and *Romulus became so much enraged that he slew his brother*.
Romulus then

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

usurped the sole mastery, and the city was named Rome after him.

The Roman tale of Romulus and Remus has a close counterpart in the Greek
myth of a city foundation by the twin brothers Amphion and Zethus, who
were the first to found the site of Thebes of the Seven Gates. The
enormous rocks which Zethus brought from the mountains were joined by
the music drawn from Amphion's lyre strings to form the walls which
became so famous later on. Amphion and Zethus passed as the *children of
Zeus and Antiope*, daughter of King Nykteus. She escaped by flight from
the punishment of her father, who died of grief; on his deathbed he
implored *his brother and successor on the throne, Lycus*, to punish the
wrongdoing of Antiope. Meantime she had married Epopeus, the king of
Sicyon, who was killed by Lycus. Antiope was led away by him in fetters.
She gave birth to twin sons in the Cithaeron, where she left them. A
shepherd raised the boys and called them Amphion and Zethus. Later on,
Antiope succeeded in escaping from the torments of Lycus and his wife,
Dirce. She accidentally sought shelter in the Cithaeron, with the twin
brothers, now grown up. The shepherd reveals to the youths the fact that
Antiope is their mother. Thereupon they cruelly kill Dirce, and deprive
Lycus of the rulership.

The remaining twin sagas, <span id="fr_66"></span>[1](#fn_66) which are
extremely numerous, cannot be discussed in detail in this connection.
Possibly they represent a complication of the birth myth by another very
ancient and widely distributed myth complex, that of the hostile
brothers, the detailed discussion of which belongs elsewhere. The
apparently late and secondary character of the twin type in the birth
myths justifies the separation of this part of mythology from the
present theme. As regards the Romulus saga, Mommsen considers it highly
probable that it originally told only of Romulus, while the figure of
Remus was added subsequently, and somewhat disjointedly, when it became
desirable

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

to invest the consulate with a solemnity founded on old tradition. <span
id="fr_67"></span>[1](mbh13.htm#fn_67)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_63"></span>[44:1](mbh12.htm#fr_63) Theodor Mommsen: "*Die
echte and die falsche Acca Larentia*"; in *Festgaben für G. Homeyer*
(Berlin, 1891), pp. 93 ff; and *Römische Forschungen* (Berlin, 1879),
Vol. II, pp. 1 ff. Mommsen reconstructs the lost narrative of Fabius
from the preserved reports of Dionysius (I, 79-831) and of Plutarch
(*Romulus*).

<span id="fn_64"></span>[45:1](mbh12.htm#fr_64) The Capitoline She-Wolf
is considered the work of very ancient Etruscan artists; it was erected
at the Lupercal in the year 296 B.C., according to Livy (X, 231).

<span id="fn_65"></span>[45:2](mbh12.htm#fr_65) All these renderings
were compiled by Schwegler, in his *Roman History*, Vol. I, pp. 384 ff.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[47:1](mbh12.htm#fr_66) Some Greek twin sagas
are quoted by Schubert (op. cit. pp. 13 ff.) in their essential content.
Concerning the extensive distribution of this legendary form, compare
the somewhat confused book of J. H. Becker: *The Twin Saga as the Key to
the Interpretation of Ancient Tradition* (Leipzig, 1891).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hercules](mbh13)
