[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030074)  [Next](1030076) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.vi.xxi"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 20.—The Sender and the Sent Equal.
Why the Son is Said to Be Sent by the Father. Of the Mission of the Holy
Spirit. How and by Whom He Was Sent. The Father the Beginning of the
Whole Godhead.</span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p2"></span>27. But if the Son is said to be sent
by the Father on this account, that the one is the Father, and the other
the Son, this does not in any manner hinder us from believing the Son to
be equal, and consubstantial, and co-eternal with the Father, and yet to
have been sent as Son by the Father. Not because the one is greater, the
other less; but because the one is Father, the other Son; the one
begetter, the other begotten; the one, He from whom He is who is sent;
the other, He who is from Him who sends. For the Son is from the Father,
not the Father from the Son. And according to this manner we can now
understand that the Son is not only said to have been sent because “the
Word was made flesh,” <span id="fr_533"></span>[534](#fn_533) but
therefore sent that the Word might be made flesh, and that He might
perform through His bodily presence those things which were written;
that is, that not only is He understood to have been sent as man, which
the Word was made but the Word, too, was sent that it might be made man;
because He was not sent in respect to any inequality of power, or
substance, or anything that in Him was not equal to the Father; but in
respect to this, that the Son is from the Father, not the Father from
the Son; for the Son is the Word of the Father, which is also called His
wisdom. What wonder, therefore, if He is sent, not because He is unequal
with the Father, but because He is “a pure emanation (*manatio*) issuing
from the glory of the Almighty God?” For there, that which issues, and
that from which it issues, is of one and the same substance. For it does
not issue as water issues from an aperture of earth or of stone, but as
light issues from light. For the words, “For she is the brightness of
the everlasting light,” what else are they than, she is light of
everlasting light? For what is the brightness of light, except light
itself? and so co-eternal, with the light, from which the light is. But
it is preferable to say, “the brightness of light,” rather than” the
light of light;” lest that which issues should be thought to be darker
than that from which it issues. For when one hears of the brightness of
light as being light itself, it is more easy to believe that the former
shines by means of the latter, than that the latter shines less. But
because there was no need of warning men not to think that light to be
less, which begat the other (for no heretic ever dared say this, neither
is it to be believed that any one will dare to do so), Scripture meets
that other thought, whereby that light which issues might seem darker
than that from which it issues; and it has removed this surmise by
saying, “It is the brightness of that light,” namely, of eternal light,
and so shows it to be equal. For if it were less, then it would be its
darkness, not its brightness; but if it were greater, then it could not
issue from it, for it could not surpass that from which it is educed.
Therefore, because it issues from it, it is not greater than it is; and
because it is not its darkness, but its brightness, it is not less than
it is: therefore it is equal. Nor ought this to trouble us, that it is
called a pure emanation issuing from the glory of the Almighty God, as
if itself were not omnipotent, but an emanation from the Omnipotent; for
soon after it is said of it, “And being but one, she can do all
things.” <span id="fr_534"></span>[535](#fn_534) But who is omnipotent,
unless He who can do all things? It is sent, therefore, by Him from whom
it issues; for so she is sought after by him who loved and desired her.
“Send her,” he says, “out of Thy holy heavens, and from the throne of
Thy glory, that, being present, she may labor with me;” <span
id="fr_535"></span>[536](#fn_535) that is, may teach me to labor
\[heartily\] in order that I may not labor \[irksomely\]. For her labors
are virtues. But she is sent in one way that she may be with man; she
has been sent in another way that she herself may be man. For, <span
id="page_84">p. 84</span> <span
id="iv.i.vi.xxi-Page_84"></span>“entering into holy souls, she maketh
them friends of God and prophets;” <span
id="fr_536"></span>[537](#fn_536) so she also fills the holy angels, and
works all things fitting for such ministries by them. <span
id="fr_537"></span>[538](#fn_537) But when the fullness of time was
come, she was sent, <span id="fr_538"></span>[539](#fn_538) not to fill
angels, nor to be an angel, except in so far as she announced the
counsel of the Father, which was her own also; nor, again, to be with
men or in men, for this too took place before, both in the fathers and
in the prophets; but that the Word itself should be made flesh, that is,
should be made man. In which future mystery, when revealed, was to be
the salvation of those wise and holy men also, who, before He was born
of the Virgin, were born of women; and in which, when done and made
known, is the salvation of all who believe, and hope, and love. For this
is “the great mystery of godliness, which <span
id="fr_539"></span>[540](#fn_539) was manifest in the flesh, justified
in the Spirit, seen of angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on
in the world, received up into glory.” <span
id="fr_540"></span>[541](#fn_540)

<span id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p11"></span>28. Therefore the Word of God is sent
by Him, of whom He is the Word; He is sent by Him, from whom He was
begotten (*genitum*); He sends who begot, That is sent which is
begotten. And He is then sent to each one, when He is apprehended and
perceived by each, in so far as He can be apprehended and perceived, in
proportion to the comprehension of the rational soul, either advancing
towards God, or already perfect in God. The Son, therefore, is not
properly said to have been sent in that He is begotten of the Father;
but either in that the Word made flesh appeared to the world, whence He
says, “I came forth from the Father, and am come into the world;” <span
id="fr_541"></span>[542](#fn_541) or in that from time to time, He is
perceived by the mind of each, according to the saying, “Send her, that,
being present with me, she may labor with me.” <span
id="fr_542"></span>[543](#fn_542) What then is born (*natum*) from
eternity is eternal, “for it is the brightness of the everlasting
light;” but what is sent from time to time, is that which is apprehended
by each. But when the Son of God was made manifest in the flesh, He was
sent into this world in the fullness of time, made of a woman. “For
after that, in the wisdom of God, the world by wisdom knew not God”
(since “the light shineth in darkness, and the darkness comprehended it
not”), it “pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save them that
believe,” <span id="fr_543"></span>[544](#fn_543) and that the Word
should be made flesh, and dwell among us. <span
id="fr_544"></span>[545](#fn_544) But when from time to time He comes
forth and is perceived by the mind of each, He is said indeed to be
sent, but not into this world; for He does not appear sensibly, that is,
He does not present Himself to the corporeal senses. For we ourselves,
too, are not in this world, in respect to our grasping with the mind as
far as we can that which is eternal; and the spirits of all the
righteous are not in this world, even of those who are still living in
the flesh, in so far as they have discernment in things divine. But the
Father is not said to be sent, when from time to time He is apprehended
by any one, for He has no one of whom to be, or from whom to proceed;
since Wisdom says, “I came out of the mouth of the Most High,” <span
id="fr_545"></span>[546](#fn_545) and it is said of the Holy Spirit, “He
proceedeth from the Father,” <span id="fr_546"></span>[547](#fn_546) but
the Father is from no one.

<span id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p18"></span>29. As, therefore, the Father begat,
the Son is begotten; so the Father sent, the Son was sent. But in like
manner as He who begat and He who was begotten, so both He who sent and
He who was sent, are one, since the Father and the Son are one. <span
id="fr_547"></span>[548](#fn_547) So also the Holy Spirit is one with
them, since these three are one. For as to be born, in respect to the
Son, means to be from the Father; so to be sent, in respect to the Son,
means to be known to be from the Father. And as to be the gift of God in
respect to the Holy Spirit, means to proceed from the Father; so to be
sent, is to be known to proceed from the Father. Neither can we say that
the Holy Spirit does not also proceed from the Son, for the same Spirit
is not without reason said to be the Spirit both of the Father and of
the Son. <span id="fr_548"></span>[549](#fn_548) Nor do I see what else
He intended to signify, when He breathed on the face of the disciples,
and said, “Receive ye the Holy Ghost.” <span
id="fr_549"></span>[550](#fn_549) For that bodily breathing, proceeding
from the body with the feeling of bodily touching, was not the substance
of the Holy Spirit, but a declaration by a fitting sign, that the Holy
Spirit proceeds not only from the Father, but also from the Son. For the
veriest of madmen would not say, that it was one Spirit which He gave
when He breathed on them, and another which He sent after His
ascension. <span id="fr_550"></span>[551](#fn_550) For the Spirit of God
is one, the Spirit of the Father and of the Son, the Holy Spirit, who
worketh all in all. <span id="fr_551"></span>[552](#fn_551) But that He
was given twice was certainly a significant economy, which we will <span
id="page_85">p. 85</span> <span id="iv.i.vi.xxi-Page_85"></span>discuss
in its place, as far as the Lord may grant. That then which the Lord
says,—“Whom I will send unto you from the Father,” <span
id="fr_552"></span>[553](#fn_552) —shows the Spirit to be both of the
Father and of the Son; because, also, when He had said, “Whom the Father
will send,” He added also, “in my name.” <span
id="fr_553"></span>[554](#fn_553) Yet He did not say, Whom the Father
will send from me, as He said, “Whom I will send unto you from the
Father,”—showing, namely, that the Father is the beginning
(*principium*) of the whole divinity, or if it is better so expressed,
deity. <span id="fr_554"></span>[555](#fn_554) He, therefore, who
proceeds from the Father and from the Son, is referred back to Him from
whom the Son was born (*natus*). And that which the evangelist says,
“For the Holy Ghost was not yet given, because that Jesus was not yet
glorified;” <span id="fr_555"></span>[556](#fn_555) how is this to be
understood, unless because the special giving or sending of the Holy
Spirit after the glorification of Christ was to be such as it had never
been before? For it was not previously none at all, but it had not been
such as this. For if the Holy Spirit was not given before, wherewith
were the prophets who spoke filled? Whereas the Scripture plainly says,
and shows in many places, that they spake by the Holy Spirit. Whereas,
also, it is said of John the Baptist, “And he shall be filled with the
Holy Ghost, even from his mother’s womb.” And his father Zacharias is
found to have been filled with the Holy Ghost, so as to say such things
of him. And Mary, too, was filled with the Holy Ghost, so as to foretell
such things of the Lord, whom she was bearing in her womb. <span
id="fr_556"></span>[557](#fn_556) And Simeon and Anna were filled with
the Holy Spirit, so as to acknowledge the greatness of the little child
Christ. <span id="fr_557"></span>[558](#fn_557) How, then, was “the
Spirit not yet given, since Jesus was not yet glorified,” unless because
that giving, or granting, or mission of the Holy Spirit was to have a
certain speciality of its own in its very advent, such as never was
before? For we read nowhere that men spoke in tongues which they did not
know, through the Holy Spirit coming upon them; as happened then, when
it was needful that His coming should be made plain by visible signs, in
order to show that the whole world, and all nations constituted with
different tongues, should believe in Christ through the gift of the Holy
Spirit, to fulfill that which is sung in the Psalm, “There is no speech
nor language where their voice is not heard; their sound is gone out
through all the earth, and their words to the end of the world.” <span
id="fr_558"></span>[559](#fn_558)

<span id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p31"></span>30. Therefore man was united, and in
some sense commingled, with the Word of God, so as to be One Person,
when the fullness of time was come, and the Son of God, made of a woman,
was sent into this world, that He might be also the Son of man for the
sake of the sons of men. And this person angelic nature could prefigure
beforehand, so as to pre-announce, but could not appropriate, so as to
be that person itself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_533"></span>[83:534](1030075.htm#fr_533) <span
id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p3"></span> [John
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014)<span
id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p3.1"></span>[John
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014)<span id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="fn_534"></span>[83:535](1030075.htm#fr_534) <span
id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p3.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p4"></span> [Wisdom
7.25-27](../../../bib/apo/wis007.htm#025)<span
id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p4.1"></span>[Wisd. vii.
25-27](../../../bib/apo/wis007.htm#025)<span
id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="fn_535"></span>[83:536](1030075.htm#fr_535) <span
id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p4.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p5"></span> [Wisdom
9.10](../../../bib/apo/wis009.htm#010)<span
id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p5.1"></span>[Wisd. ix.
10](../../../bib/apo/wis009.htm#010)<span id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="fn_536"></span>[84:537](1030075.htm#fr_536) <span
id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p5.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p6"></span> [Wisdom
7.27](../../../bib/apo/wis007.htm#027)<span
id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p6.1"></span>[Wisd. vii.
27](../../../bib/apo/wis007.htm#027)<span id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="fn_537"></span>[84:538](1030075.htm#fr_537) <span
id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p6.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p7"></span> \[The allusion is to the Wisdom of
Proverbs, and of the Book of Wisdom which Augustin regards as canonical,
as his frequent citations show.—W.G.T.S.\]

<span id="fn_538"></span>[84:539](1030075.htm#fr_538) <span
id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p8"></span> [Gal.
4.4](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#004)<span
id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p8.1"></span>[Gal. iv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#004)<span id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="fn_539"></span>[84:540](1030075.htm#fr_539) <span
id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p8.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p9"></span> *Quod, scil. sacramentum*

<span id="fn_540"></span>[84:541](1030075.htm#fr_540) <span
id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p10"></span> [1 Tim.
3.16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#016)<span
id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p10.1"></span>[1 Tim. iii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#016)<span id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p10.2"></span>

<span id="fn_541"></span>[84:542](1030075.htm#fr_541) <span
id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p12"></span> [John
16.28](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#028)<span
id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p12.1"></span>[John xvi.
28](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#028)<span id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p12.2"></span>

<span id="fn_542"></span>[84:543](1030075.htm#fr_542) <span
id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p12.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p13"></span> [Wisdom
9.10](../../../bib/apo/wis009.htm#010)<span
id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p13.1"></span>[Wisd. ix.
10](../../../bib/apo/wis009.htm#010)<span id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p13.2"></span>

<span id="fn_543"></span>[84:544](1030075.htm#fr_543) <span
id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p13.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p14"></span> [1 Cor.
1.21](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#021)<span
id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p14.1"></span>[1 Cor. i.
21](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#021)<span id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p14.2"></span>

<span id="fn_544"></span>[84:545](1030075.htm#fr_544) <span
id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p14.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p15"></span> [John
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#005),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014)<span
id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p15.1"></span>[John
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#005),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014)<span
id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p15.2"></span>

<span id="fn_545"></span>[84:546](1030075.htm#fr_545) <span
id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p15.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p16"></span> [Ecclus.
24.3](../../../bib/apo/sir024.htm#003)<span
id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p16.1"></span>[Ecclus. xxiv.
3](../../../bib/apo/sir024.htm#003)<span id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p16.2"></span>

<span id="fn_546"></span>[84:547](1030075.htm#fr_546) <span
id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p16.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p17"></span> [John
15.26](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#026)<span
id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p17.1"></span>[John xv.
26](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#026)<span id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p17.2"></span>

<span id="fn_547"></span>[84:548](1030075.htm#fr_547) <span
id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p19"></span> [John
10.30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030)<span
id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p19.1"></span>[John x.
30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030)<span id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p19.2"></span>

<span id="fn_548"></span>[84:549](1030075.htm#fr_548) <span
id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p19.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p20"></span> \[Augustin here, as in previous
instances, affirms the procession of the Spirit from the Father and
Son.—W.G.T.S.\]

<span id="fn_549"></span>[84:550](1030075.htm#fr_549) <span
id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p21"></span> [John
20.22](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#022)<span
id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p21.1"></span>[John xx.
22](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#022)<span id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p21.2"></span>

<span id="fn_550"></span>[84:551](1030075.htm#fr_550) <span
id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p21.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p22"></span> [Acts
2.1-4](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#001)<span
id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p22.1"></span>[Acts ii.
1-4](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#001)<span
id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p22.2"></span>

<span id="fn_551"></span>[84:552](1030075.htm#fr_551) <span
id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p22.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p23"></span> [1 Cor.
12.6](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#006)<span
id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p23.1"></span>[1 Cor. xii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#006)<span id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p23.2"></span>

<span id="fn_552"></span>[85:553](1030075.htm#fr_552) <span
id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p23.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p24"></span> [John
15.26](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#026)<span
id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p24.1"></span>[John xv.
26](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#026)<span id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p24.2"></span>

<span id="fn_553"></span>[85:554](1030075.htm#fr_553) <span
id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p24.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p25"></span> [John
14.26](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#026)<span
id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p25.1"></span>[John xiv.
26](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#026)<span id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p25.2"></span>

<span id="fn_554"></span>[85:555](1030075.htm#fr_554) <span
id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p25.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p26"></span> \[The term “beginning” is employed
“relatively, and not according to substance,” as Augustin says. The
Father is “the beginning of the whole deity,” with reference to the
personal distinctions of Father, Son, and Spirit—the Son being from the
Father, and the Spirit from Father and Son. The trinitarian relations or
modes of the essence, “begin” with the first person, not the second or
the third. The phrase “whole deity,” in the above statement, is put for
“trinity,” not for “essence.” Augustin would not say that the Father is
the “beginning” (*principium*) of the divine essence considered
abstractly, but only of the essence as *trinal*. In this sense,
Trinitarian writers denominate the Father “*fons trinitatis,*” and
sometimes “*fons deitatis*.” Turrettin employs this latter phraseology
(iii. xxx. i. 8); so does Owen (*Communion with Trinity*, Ch. iii.); and
Hooker (*Polity*, v. liv.). But in this case, the guarding clause of
Turretin is to be subjoined: “*fons deitatis, si modus subsistendi
spectatur*.” The phrase “*fons trinitatis*,” or “*principium
trinitatis*,” is less liable to be misconceived, and more accurate than
“*fons deitatis*,” or “*principum deitatis*.”—W.G.T.S.\]

<span id="fn_555"></span>[85:556](1030075.htm#fr_555) <span
id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p27"></span> [John
7.39](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#039)<span
id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p27.1"></span>[John vii.
39](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#039)<span id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p27.2"></span>

<span id="fn_556"></span>[85:557](1030075.htm#fr_556) <span
id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p27.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p28"></span> [Luke
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#015),
[41](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#041)<span
id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p28.1"></span>[Luke
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#015),
[41](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#041)<span
id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p28.2"></span>–79

<span id="fn_557"></span>[85:558](1030075.htm#fr_557) <span
id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p28.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p29"></span> [Luke
2.25-38](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#025)<span
id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p29.1"></span>[Luke ii.
25-38](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#025)<span
id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p29.2"></span>

<span id="fn_558"></span>[85:559](1030075.htm#fr_558) <span
id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p29.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p30"></span> [Ps.
19:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#004)<span
id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p30.1"></span>[Ps.
19:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#004)<span id="iv.i.vi.xxi-p30.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 21](1030076)
