[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030428)  [Next](1030430) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p1"></span> 2. It is then my purpose to prove to
you, if I can, that the Manichees profanely and rashly inveigh against
those, who, following the authority of the Catholic Faith, before that
they are able to gaze upon that Truth, which the pure mind beholds, are
by believing forearmed, and prepared for God Who is about to give them
light. For you know, Honoratus, that for no other reason we fell in with
such men, than because they used to say, that, apart from all terror of
authority, by pure and simple reason, they would lead within to God, and
set free from all error those who were willing to be their hearers. For
what else constrained me, during nearly nine years, spurning the
religion which had been set in me from a child by my parents, to be a
follower and diligent hearer of those men, <span
id="fr_1694"></span>[1695](#fn_1694) save that they said that we are
alarmed by superstition, and are commanded to have faith before reason,
but that they urge no one to have faith, without having first discussed
and made clear the truth? Who would not be enticed by such promises,
especially the mind of a young man desirous of the truth, and further a
proud and talkative mind by discussions of certain learned men in the
school? such as they then found me, disdainful forsooth as of old wives’
fables, and desirous to grasp and drink in, what they promised, the open
and pure Truth? But what reason, on the other hand, recalled me, not to
be altogether joined to them, so that I continued in that rank which
they call of Hearers, so that I resigned not the hope and business of
this world; save that I noticed that they also are rather eloquent and
full in refutation of others, than abide firm and sure in proof of what
is their own. But of myself what shall I say, who was already a Catholic
Christian? teats which now, after very long thirst, I almost exhausted
and dry, have returned to with all greediness, and with deeper weeping
and groaning have shaken together and wrung them out more deeply, that
so there might flow what might be enough to refresh me affected as I
was, and to bring back hope of life and safety. What then shall I say of
myself? You, not yet a Christian, who, through encouragement from me,
execrating them greatly as you did, were hardly led to believe that you
ought to listen to them and make trial of them, by what else, I pray
you, were you delighted, call to mind, I entreat you, save by a certain
great presumption and promise of reasons? But because they disputed long
and much with very great copiousness and vehemence concerning the errors
of unlearned men, a thing which I learned too late at length to be most
easy for any moderately educated man; if even of their own they
implanted in us any thing, we thought that we were obliged to retain it,
insomuch as there fell not in our way other things, wherein to
acquiesce. So they did in our case what crafty fowlers are wont to do,
who set branches smeared with bird-lime beside water to deceive thirsty
birds. For they fill up and cover anyhow the other waters which are
around, or fright them from them by alarming devices, that they may fall
into their snares, not through choice, but want.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1694"></span>[348:1695](1030429.htm#fr_1694) <span
id="iv.vi.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p2"></span> Confess. b. i. c. 11; b. v. c. 14.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 3](1030430)
