[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030092)  [Next](1030094) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.vii.xvi"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vii.xvi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.vii.xvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 16.—What is Said of God in Time,
is Said Relatively, Not Accidentally.</span>

<span id="iv.i.vii.xvi-p2"></span>17. Nor let it trouble us that the
Holy Spirit, although He is co-eternal with the Father and the Son, yet
is called something which exists in time; as, for instance, this very
thing which we have called Him, a thing that has been given. For the
Spirit is a gift eternally, but a thing that has been given in time. For
if a lord also is not so called unless when he begins to have a slave,
that appellation likewise is relative and in time to God; for the
creature is not from all eternity, of which He is the Lord. How then
shall we make it good that relative terms themselves are not accidental,
since nothing happens accidentally to God in time, because He is
incapable of change, as we have argued in the beginning of this
discussion? Behold! to be the Lord, is not eternal to God; otherwise we
should be compelled to say that the creature also is from eternity,
since He would not be a lord from all eternity unless the creature also
was a servant from all eternity. But as he cannot be a slave who has not
a lord, neither can he be a lord who has not a slave. And if there be
any one who says that God, indeed, is alone eternal, and that times are
<span id="page_96">p. 96</span> <span
id="iv.i.vii.xvi-Page_96"></span>not eternal on account of their variety
and changeableness, but that times nevertheless did not begin to be in
time (for there was no time before times began, and therefore it did not
happen to God in time that He should be Lord, since He was Lord of the
very times themselves, which assuredly did not begin in time): what will
he reply respecting man, who was made in time, and of whom assuredly He
was not the Lord before he was of whom He was to be Lord? Certainly to
be the Lord of man happened to God in time. And that all dispute may
seem to be taken away, certainly to be your Lord, or mine, who have only
lately begun to be, happened to God in time. Or if this, too, seems
uncertain on account of the obscure question respecting the soul, what
is to be said of His being the Lord of the people of Israel? since,
although the nature of the soul already existed, which that people had
(a matter into which we do not now inquire), yet that people existed not
as yet, and the time is apparent when it began to exist. Lastly, that He
should be Lord of this or that tree, or of this or that corn crop, which
only lately began to be, happened in time; since, although the matter
itself already existed, yet it is one thing to be Lord of the matter
(*materiæ*), another to be Lord of the already created nature
(*naturæ*). <span id="fr_598"></span>[599](#fn_598) For man, too, is
lord of the wood at one time, and at another he is lord of the chest,
although fabricated of that same wood; which he certainly was not at the
time when he was already the lord of the wood. How then shall we make it
good that nothing is said of God according to accident, except because
nothing happens to His nature by which He may be changed, so that those
things are relative accidents which happen in connection with some
change of the things of which they are spoken. As a friend is so called
relatively: for he does not begin to be one, unless when he has begun to
love; therefore some change of will takes place, in order that he may be
called a friend. And money, when it is called a price, is spoken of
relatively, and yet it was not changed when it began to be a price; nor,
again, when it is called a pledge, or any other thing of the kind. If,
therefore, money can so often be spoken of relatively with no change of
itself, so that neither when it begins, nor when it ceases to be so
spoken of, does any change take place in that nature or form of it,
whereby it is money; how much more easily ought we to admit, concerning
that unchangeable substance of God, that something may be so predicated
relatively in respect to the creature, that although it begin to be so
predicated in time, yet nothing shall be understood to have happened to
the substance itself of God, but only to that creature in respect to
which it is predicated? “Lord,” it is said, “Thou hast been made our
refuge.” <span id="fr_599"></span>[600](#fn_599) God, therefore, is said
to be our refuge relatively, for He is referred to us, and He then
becomes our refuge when we flee to Him; pray does anything come to pass
then in His nature, which, before we fled to Him, was not? In us
therefore some change does take place; for we were worse before we fled
to Him, and we become better by fleeing to Him: but in Him there is no
change. So also He begins to be our Father, when we are regenerated
through His grace, since He gave us power to become the sons of
God. <span id="fr_600"></span>[601](#fn_600) Our substance therefore is
changed for the better, when we become His sons; and He at the same time
begins to be our Father, but without any change of His own substance.
Therefore that which begins to be spoken of God in time, and which was
not spoken of Him before, is manifestly spoken of Him relatively; yet
not according to any accident of God, so that anything should have
happened to Him, but clearly according to some accident of that, in
respect to which God begins to be called something relatively. When a
righteous man begins to be a friend of God, he himself is changed; but
far be it from us to say, that God loves any one in time with as it were
a new love, which was not in Him before, with whom things gone by have
not passed away and things future have been already done. Therefore He
loved all His saints before the foundation of the world, as He
predestinated them; but when they are converted and find them; then they
are said to begin to be loved by Him, that what is said may be said in
that way in which it can be comprehended by human affections. So also,
when He is said to be wroth with the unrighteous, and gentle with the
good, they are changed, not He: just as the light is troublesome to weak
eyes, pleasant to those that are strong; namely, by their change, not
its own.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_598"></span>[96:599](1030093.htm#fr_598) <span
id="iv.i.vii.xvi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vii.xvi-p3"></span> \[“Matter” denotes the material as
created *ex nihilo*: “nature” the material as formed into individuals.
In this reference, Augustin speaks of “the nature of the soul” of the
people of Israel as existing while “as yet that people existed not”
individually— having in mind their race-existence in Adam.—W.G.T.S.\]

<span id="fn_599"></span>[96:600](1030093.htm#fr_599) <span
id="iv.i.vii.xvi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vii.xvi-p4"></span> [Ps.
90.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#001)<span
id="iv.i.vii.xvi-p4.1"></span>[Ps.
xc.](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#000)<span
id="iv.i.vii.xvi-p4.2"></span>1

<span id="fn_600"></span>[96:601](1030093.htm#fr_600) <span
id="iv.i.vii.xvi-p4.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vii.xvi-p5"></span> [John
1.12](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#012)<span
id="iv.i.vii.xvi-p5.1"></span>[John i.
12](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#012)<span id="iv.i.vii.xvi-p5.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book VI](1030094)
