[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030031)  [Next](1030033) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.iv.xi"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv.xi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.iv.xi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 10—Whether God the Trinity
Indiscriminately Appeared to the Fathers, or Any One Person of the
Trinity. The Appearing of God to Adam. Of the Same Appearance. The
Vision to Abraham.</span>

<span id="iv.i.iv.xi-p2"></span>17. And first, in that which is written
in Genesis, *viz*., that God spake with man whom He had formed out of
the dust; if we set apart the figurative meaning, and treat it so as to
place faith in the narrative even in the letter, it should appear that
God then spake with man in the appearance of a man. This is not indeed
expressly laid down in the book, but the general tenor of its reading
sounds in this sense, especially in that which is written, that Adam
heard the voice of the Lord God, walking in the garden in the cool of
the evening, and hid himself among the trees of the garden; and when God
said, “Adam, where art thou?” <span id="fr_266"></span>[267](#fn_266)
replied, “I heard Thy voice, and I was afraid because I was naked, and I
hid myself from Thy face.” For I do not see how such a walking and
conversation of God can be understood literally, except He appeared as a
man. For it can neither be said that a voice only of God was framed,
when God is said to have walked, or that He who was walking in a place
was not visible; while Adam, too, says that he hid himself from the face
of God. Who then was He? Whether the Father, or the Son, or the Holy
Spirit? Whether altogether indiscriminately did God the Trinity Himself
speak to man in the form of man? The context, indeed, itself of the
Scripture nowhere, it should seem, indicates a change from person to
person; but He seems still to speak to the first man, who said, “Let
there be light,” and, “Let there be a firmament,” and so on through each
of those days; whom we usually take to be God the Father, making by a
word whatever He willed to make. For He made all things by His word,
which Word we know, by the right rule of faith, to be His only Son. If,
therefore, God the Father spake to the first man, and Himself was
walking in the garden in the cool of the evening, and if it was from His
face that the sinner hid himself amongst the trees of the garden, why
are we not to go on to understand that it was He also who appeared to
Abraham and to Moses, and to whom He would, and how He would, through
the changeable and visible creature, subjected to Himself, while He
Himself remains in Himself and in His own substance, in which He is
unchangeable and invisible? But, possibly, it might be that the
Scripture passed over in a hidden way from person to person, and while
it had related that the Father said “Let there be light,” and the rest
which it mentioned Him to have done by the Word, went on to indicate the
Son as speaking to the first man; not unfolding this openly, but
intimating it to be understood by those who could understand it.

<span id="iv.i.iv.xi-p4"></span>18. Let him, then, who has the strength
whereby he can penetrate this secret with his mind’s eye, so that to him
it appears clearly, either that the Father also is able, or that only
the Son and Holy Spirit are able, to appear to human eyes through a
visible creature; let him, I say, proceed to examine these things if he
can, or even to express and handle them in words; but the thing itself,
so far as concerns this testimony of Scripture, where God spake with
man, is, in my judgment, not discoverable, because it does not evidently
appear even whether Adam usually saw God with the eyes of his body;
especially as it is a great question what manner of eyes it was that
were opened when they tasted the forbidden fruit; <span
id="fr_267"></span>[268](#fn_267) for before they had tasted, these eyes
were closed. Yet I would not rashly assert, even if that scripture
implies Paradise to have been a material place, that God could not have
walked there in any way except in some bodily form. For it might be
said, that only words were framed for the man to hear, without seeing
any form. Neither, because it is written, “Adam hid himself from the
face of God,” does it follow forthwith that he usually saw His face. For
what if he himself indeed could not see, but feared to be himself seen
by Him whose voice he had heard, and had felt His presence as he walked?
For Cain, too, said to God, “From Thy face I will hide myself;” <span
id="fr_268"></span>[269](#fn_268) yet we are not therefore compelled to
admit that he was wont to behold the face of God with his bodily eyes in
any visible form, although he had heard the voice of God questioning and
speaking with him of his sin. But what <span id="page_46">p. 46</span>
<span id="iv.i.iv.xi-Page_46"></span>manner of speech it was that God
then uttered to the outward ears of men, especially in speaking to the
first man, it is both difficult to discover, and we have not undertaken
to say in this discourse. But if words alone and sounds were wrought, by
which to bring about some sensible presence of God to those first men, I
do not know why I should not there understand the person of God the
Father, seeing that His person is manifested also in that voice, when
Jesus appeared in glory on the mount before the three disciples; <span
id="fr_269"></span>[270](#fn_269) and in that when the dove descended
upon Him at His baptism; <span id="fr_270"></span>[271](#fn_270) and in
that where He cried to the Father concerning His own glorification and
it was answered Him, “I have both glorified, and will glorify
again.” <span id="fr_271"></span>[272](#fn_271) Not that the voice could
be wrought without the work of the Son and of the Holy Spirit (since the
Trinity works indivisibly), but that such a voice was wrought as to
manifest the person of the Father only; just as the Trinity wrought that
human form from the Virgin Mary, yet it is the person of the Son alone;
for the invisible Trinity wrought the visible person of the Son alone.
Neither does anything forbid us, not only to understand those words
spoken to Adam as spoken by the Trinity, but also to take them as
manifesting the person of that Trinity. For we are compelled to
understand of the Father only, that which is said, “This is my beloved
Son.” <span id="fr_272"></span>[273](#fn_272) For Jesus can neither be
believed nor understood to be the Son of the Holy Spirit, or even His
own Son. And where the voice uttered, “I have both glorified, and will
glorify again,” we confess it was only the person of the Father; since
it is the answer to that word of the Lord, in which He had said,
“Father, glorify thy Son,” which He could not say except to God the
Father only, and not also to the Holy Spirit, whose Son He was not. But
here, where it is written, “And the Lord God said to Adam,” no reason
can be given why the Trinity itself should not be understood.

<span id="iv.i.iv.xi-p11"></span>19. Likewise, also, in that which is
written, “Now the Lord had said unto Abraham, Get thee out of thy
country, and from thy kindred, and thy father’s house,” it is not clear
whether a voice alone came to the ears of Abraham, or whether anything
also appeared to his eyes. But a little while after, it is somewhat more
clearly said, “And the Lord appeared unto Abraham, and said, Unto thy
seed will I give this land.” <span id="fr_273"></span>[274](#fn_273) But
neither there is it expressly said in what form God appeared to him, or
whether the Father, or the Son, or the Holy Spirit appeared to him.
Unless, perhaps, they think that it was the Son who appeared to Abraham,
because it is not written, God appeared to him, but “the Lord appeared
to him.” For the Son seems to be called the Lord as though the name was
appropriated to Him; as *e.g.* the apostle says, “For though there be
that are called gods, whether in heaven or in earth, (as there be gods
many and lords many,) but to us there is but one God, the Father, of
whom are all things, and we in Him; and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom
are all things, and we by Him.” <span id="fr_274"></span>[275](#fn_274)
But since it is found that God the Father also is called Lord in many
places,—for instance, “The Lord hath said unto me, Thou art my Son; this
day have I begotten Thee;” <span id="fr_275"></span>[276](#fn_275) and
again, “The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit Thou at my right hand;” <span
id="fr_276"></span>[277](#fn_276) since also the Holy Spirit is found to
be called Lord, as where the apostle says, “Now the Lord is that
Spirit;” and then, lest any one should think the Son to be signified,
and to be called the Spirit on account of His incorporeal substance, has
gone on to say, “And where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is
liberty;” <span id="fr_277"></span>[278](#fn_277) and no one ever
doubted the Spirit of the Lord to be the Holy Spirit: therefore, neither
here does it appear plainly whether it was any person of the Trinity
that appeared to Abraham, or God Himself the Trinity, of which one God
it is said, “Thou shalt fear the Lord thy God, and Him only shall thou
serve.” <span id="fr_278"></span>[279](#fn_278) But under the oak at
Mamre he saw three men, whom he invited, and hospitably received, and
ministered to them as they feasted. Yet Scripture at the beginning of
that narrative does not say, three men appeared to him, but, “The Lord
appeared to him.” And then, setting forth in due order after what manner
the Lord appeared to him, it has added the account of the three men,
whom Abraham invites to his hospitality in the plural number, and
afterwards speaks to them in the singular number as one; and as one He
promises him a son by Sara, *viz*. the one whom the Scripture calls
Lord, as in the beginning of the same narrative, “The Lord,” it says,
“appeared to Abraham.” He invites them then, and washes their feet, and
leads them forth at their departure, as though they were men; but he
speaks as with the Lord God, whether when a son is promised to him, or
when the destruction is shown to him that was impending over
Sodom. <span id="fr_279"></span>[280](#fn_279)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_266"></span>[45:267](1030032.htm#fr_266) <span
id="iv.i.iv.xi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv.xi-p3"></span> [Gen.
3.8-10](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#008)<span
id="iv.i.iv.xi-p3.1"></span>[Gen. iii.
8-10](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#008)<span id="iv.i.iv.xi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="fn_267"></span>[45:268](1030032.htm#fr_267) <span
id="iv.i.iv.xi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv.xi-p5"></span> [Gen.
3.7](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#007)<span
id="iv.i.iv.xi-p5.1"></span>[Gen. iii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#007)<span id="iv.i.iv.xi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="fn_268"></span>[45:269](1030032.htm#fr_268) <span
id="iv.i.iv.xi-p5.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv.xi-p6"></span> [Gen.
4.14](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#014)<span
id="iv.i.iv.xi-p6.1"></span>[Gen. iv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#014)<span id="iv.i.iv.xi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="fn_269"></span>[46:270](1030032.htm#fr_269) <span
id="iv.i.iv.xi-p6.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv.xi-p7"></span> [Matt.
17.5](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#005)<span id="iv.i.iv.xi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="fn_270"></span>[46:271](1030032.htm#fr_270) <span
id="iv.i.iv.xi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv.xi-p8"></span> [Matt.
3.17](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#017)<span id="iv.i.iv.xi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="fn_271"></span>[46:272](1030032.htm#fr_271) <span
id="iv.i.iv.xi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv.xi-p9"></span> [John
12.28](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#028)<span
id="iv.i.iv.xi-p9.1"></span>[John xii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#028)<span id="iv.i.iv.xi-p9.2"></span>

<span id="fn_272"></span>[46:273](1030032.htm#fr_272) <span
id="iv.i.iv.xi-p9.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv.xi-p10"></span> [Matt.
3.17](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#017)<span
id="iv.i.iv.xi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="fn_273"></span>[46:274](1030032.htm#fr_273) <span
id="iv.i.iv.xi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv.xi-p12"></span> [Gen.
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#001),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#007)<span
id="iv.i.iv.xi-p12.1"></span>[Gen.
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#001),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#007)<span id="iv.i.iv.xi-p12.2"></span>

<span id="fn_274"></span>[46:275](1030032.htm#fr_274) <span
id="iv.i.iv.xi-p12.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv.xi-p13"></span> [1 Cor.
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#006)<span
id="iv.i.iv.xi-p13.1"></span>[1 Cor.
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#006)<span id="iv.i.iv.xi-p13.2"></span>

<span id="fn_275"></span>[46:276](1030032.htm#fr_275) <span
id="iv.i.iv.xi-p13.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv.xi-p14"></span> [Ps.
2.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#007)<span
id="iv.i.iv.xi-p14.1"></span>[Ps. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#007)<span id="iv.i.iv.xi-p14.2"></span>

<span id="fn_276"></span>[46:277](1030032.htm#fr_276) <span
id="iv.i.iv.xi-p14.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv.xi-p15"></span> [Ps.
110.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#001)<span
id="iv.i.iv.xi-p15.1"></span>[Ps. cx.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#001)<span id="iv.i.iv.xi-p15.2"></span>

<span id="fn_277"></span>[46:278](1030032.htm#fr_277) <span
id="iv.i.iv.xi-p15.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv.xi-p16"></span> [2 Cor.
3.17](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#017)<span
id="iv.i.iv.xi-p16.1"></span>[2 Cor. iii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#017)<span id="iv.i.iv.xi-p16.2"></span>

<span id="fn_278"></span>[46:279](1030032.htm#fr_278) <span
id="iv.i.iv.xi-p16.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv.xi-p17"></span> [Deut.
6.13](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#013)<span
id="iv.i.iv.xi-p17.1"></span>[Deut. vi.
13](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#013)<span id="iv.i.iv.xi-p17.2"></span>

<span id="fn_279"></span>[46:280](1030032.htm#fr_279) <span
id="iv.i.iv.xi-p17.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv.xi-p18"></span> [Gen.
18](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#000)<span id="iv.i.iv.xi-p18.1"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 11](1030033)
