[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030661)  [Next](1030663) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.xix"></span>

<span id="v.v.xix-p1"></span> 18. This being from the very first and
most firmly established, touching other lies the question proceeds more
securely. But by consequence we must also see that all lies must be kept
aloof which hurt any man unjustly: because no man is to have a wrong,
albeit a lighter one is done to him, that another may have a heavier
kept from him. Nor are those lies to be allowed, which, though they hurt
not another, yet do nobody any good, and are hurtful to the persons
themselves who gratuitously tell them. Indeed, these are the persons who
are properly to be called liars. For there is a difference between lying
and being a liar. A man may tell a lie unwillingly; but a liar loves to
lie, and inhabits in his mind in the delight of lying. Next to such are
those to be placed who by a lie wish to please men, not that they may do
wrong or bring reproach upon any man; for we have already before put
away that kind; but that they may be pleasant in conversation. These,
differ from the class in which we have placed liars in this respect,
that liars delight in lying, rejoicing in deceit for its own sake: but
these lust to please by agreeable talk, and yet would rather please by
saying things that were true, but when they do not easily find true
things to say that are pleasant to the hearers, they choose rather to
tell lies than to hold their tongues. Yet it is difficult for these
sometimes to undertake a story which is the whole of it false; but most
commonly they interweave falsehood with truth, where they are at a loss
for something sweet. Now these two sorts of lies do no harm to those who
believe them, because they are not deceived concerning any matter of
religion and truth, or concerning any profit or advantage of their own.
It <span id="page_467">p. 467</span> <span
id="v.v.xix-Page_467"></span>suffices them, to judge the thing possible
which is told, and to have faith in a man of whom they ought not rashly
to think that he is telling a lie. For where is the harm of believing
that such an one’s father or grandfather was a good man, when he was
not? or that he has served with the army even in Persia, though he never
set foot out of Rome? But to the persons who tell these lies, they do
much harm: to the former sort, because they so desert truth as to
rejoice in deceit: to the latter, because they want to please people
better than the truth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 19](1030663)
