[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030374)  [Next](1030376) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.ii"></span><span id="page_283">p. 283</span> <span
id="iv.iii.ii-Page_283"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.iii.ii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 1.—How Augustin Writes in Answer to a
Favor Asked by a Deacon of Carthage.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p2"></span>1. You have requested me, brother
Deogratias, to send you in writing something which might be of service
to you in the matter of catechising the uninstructed. For you have
informed me that in Carthage, where you hold the position of a deacon,
persons, who have to be taught the Christian faith from its very
rudiments, are frequently brought to you by reason of your enjoying the
reputation of possessing a rich gift in catechising, due at once to an
intimate acquaintance with the faith, and to an attractive method of
discourse; <span id="fr_1331"></span>[1332](#fn_1331) but that you
almost always find yourself in a difficulty as to the manner in which a
suitable declaration is to be made of the precise doctrine, the belief
of which constitutes us Christians: regarding the point at which our
statement of the same ought to commence, and the limit to which it
should be allowed to proceed: and with respect to the question whether,
when our narration is concluded, we ought to make use of any kind of
exhortation, or simply specify those precepts in the observance of which
the person to whom we are discoursing may know the Christian life and
profession to be maintained. <span id="fr_1332"></span>[1333](#fn_1332)
At the same time, you have made the confession and complaint that it has
often befallen you that in the course of a lengthened and languid
address you have become profitless and distasteful even to yourself, not
to speak of the learner whom you have been endeavoring to instruct by
your utterance, and the other parties who have been present as hearers;
and that you have been constrained by these straits to put upon me the
constraint of that love which I owe to you, so that I may not feel it a
burdensome thing among all my engagements to write you something on this
subject.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p5"></span>2. As for myself then, if, in the
exercise of those capacities which through the bounty of our Lord I am
enabled to present, the same Lord requires me to offer any manner of aid
to those whom He has made brethren to me, I feel constrained not only by
that love and service which is due from me to you on the terms of
familiar friendship, but also by that which I owe universally to my
mother the Church, by no means to refuse the task, but rather to take it
up with a prompt and devoted willingness. For the more extensively I
desire to see the treasure of the Lord <span
id="fr_1333"></span>[1334](#fn_1333) distributed, the more does it
become my duty, if I ascertain that the stewards, who are my
fellow-servants, find any difficulty in laying it out, to do all that
lies in my power to the end that they may be able to accomplish easily
and expeditiously what they sedulously and earnestly aim at.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1331"></span>[283:1332](1030375.htm#fr_1331) <span
id="iv.iii.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p3"></span> Reading *et doctrina fidei et suavitate
sermonis*, instead of which, however, *et doctrinam…suavitatem,* *etc.*
also occurs, = possessing at once a rich gift in catechising, and an
intimate acquaintance with the faith, and an attractive method of
discourse, \[or, sweetness of language\].

<span id="fn_1332"></span>[283:1333](1030375.htm#fr_1332) <span
id="iv.iii.ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p4"></span> Reading *retineri* as in the <span
class="c19"><span id="iv.iii.ii-p4.1"></span>mss</span>. Some editions
give *retinere* = know how to maintain the Christian life and
profession.

<span id="fn_1333"></span>[283:1334](1030375.htm#fr_1333) <span
id="iv.iii.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p6"></span> *Pecuniam Dominicam*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](1030376)
