[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030008)  [Next](1030010) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.iii.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.iii.ii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 2.—In What Manner This Work
Proposes to Discourse Concerning the Trinity.</span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.ii-p2"></span>4. Wherefore, our Lord God helping, we
will undertake to render, as far as we are able, that very account which
they so importunately demand: *viz*., that the Trinity is the one and
only and true God, and also how the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit
are rightly said, believed, understood, to be of one and the same
substance or essence; in such wise that they may not fancy themselves
mocked by excuses on our part, but may find by actual trial, both that
the highest good is that which is discerned by the most purified minds,
and that for this reason it cannot be discerned or understood by
themselves, because the eye of the human mind, being weak, is dazzled in
that so transcendent light, unless it be invigorated by the nourishment
of the righteousness of faith. First, however, we must demonstrate,
according to the authority of the Holy Scriptures, whether the faith be
so. Then, if God be willing and aid us, we may perhaps at least so far
serve these talkative arguers—more puffed up than capable, and therefore
laboring under the more dangerous disease—as to enable them to find
something which they are not able to doubt, that so, in that case where
they cannot find the like, they may be led to lay the fault to their own
minds, rather than to the truth itself or to our reasonings; and thus,
if there be anything in them of either love or fear towards God, they
may return and begin from faith in due order: perceiving at length how
healthful a medicine has been provided for the faithful in the holy
Church, whereby a heedful piety, healing the feebleness of the mind, may
render it able to perceive the unchangeable truth, and hinder it from
falling headlong, through disorderly rashness, into pestilent and false
opinion. Neither will I myself shrink from inquiry, if I am anywhere in
doubt; nor be ashamed to learn, if I am anywhere in error.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3](1030010)
