[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030457)  [Next](1030459) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.xxxii"></span><span id="page_362">p. 362</span> <span
id="iv.vi.xxxii-Page_362"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.xxxii-p1"></span> 31. What, that all heretics exhort us
to believe in Christ? Can they possibly be more opposed to themselves?
And in this matter they are to be pressed in a twofold way. In the first
place we must ask of them, where is the reason which they used to
promise, where the reproof of rashness, where the assumption of
knowledge? For, if it be disgraceful to believe any without reason, what
do you wait for, what are you busied about, that I believe some one
without reason, in order that I may the more easily be led by your
reason? What, will your reason raise any firm superstructure on the
foundation of rashness? I speak after their manner, whom we displease by
believing. For I not only judge it most healthful to believe before
reason, when you are not qualified to receive reason, and by the very
act of faith thoroughly to cultivate the mind to receive the seeds of
truth, but altogether a thing of such sort as that without it health
cannot return to sick souls. And in that this seems to them matter for
mockery and full of rashness, surely they are shameless in making it
their business that we believe in Christ. Next, I confess that I have
already believed in Christ, and have convinced myself that what He hath
said is true, although it be supported by no reason; is this, heretic,
what you will teach me in the first place? Suffer me to consider a
little with myself, (since I have not seen Christ Himself, as He willed
to appear unto men, Who is said to have been seen by them, even by
common eyes,) who they are that I have believed concerning Him, in order
that I may approach you already furnished beforehand with such a faith.
I see that there are none that I have believed, save the confirmed
opinion and widely extended report of peoples and nations: and that the
mysteries of the Church Catholic have in all times and places had
possession of these peoples. Why therefore shall I not of these, in
preference to others, inquire with all care, what Christ commanded, by
whose authority I have been moved already to believe that Christ hath
commanded something that is profitable? Are you likely to be a better
expounder to me of what He said, Whose past or present existence I
should not believe, if by you I were to be recommended to believe thus?
This therefore I have believed, as I said, trusting to report
strengthened by numbers, agreement, antiquity. But you, who are both so
few, and so turbulent, and so new, no one doubts that ye bring forward
nothing worthy of authority. What then is that so great madness? Believe
them, that you are to believe in Christ, and learn from us what He said.
Why, I pray you? For were they to fail and to be unable to teach me any
thing with much greater ease could I persuade my self, that I am not to
believe in Christ, than that I am to learn any thing concerning Him,
save from those through whom I had believed in Him. O vast confidence,
or rather absurdity! I teach you what Christ, in Whom you believe,
commanded. What, in case I believed not in Him? You could not, could
you, teach me any thing concerning Him? But, says he, it behoves you to
believe. You do not mean, do you, that I am (to believe) you when you
commend Him to my faith? No, saith he, for we lead by reason them who
believe in Him. Why then should I believe in Him? Because report hath
been grounded. Whether is it through you, or through others? Through
others, saith he. Shall I then believe them, in order that you may teach
me? Perhaps I ought to do so, were it not that they gave me this chief
charge, that I should not approach you at all; for they say that you
have deadly doctrines. You will answer, They lie. How then shall I
believe them concerning Christ, Whom they have not seen, (and) not
believe them concerning you, whom they are unwilling to see? Believe the
Scriptures, saith he. But every writing, <span
id="fr_1748"></span>[1749](#fn_1748) if it be brought forward new and
unheard of, or be commended by few, with no reason to confirm it, it is
not it that is believed, but they who bring it forward. Wherefore, for
those Scriptures, if you are they who bring them forward, you so few and
unknown, I am not pleased to believe them. At the same time also you are
acting contrary to your promise, in enforcing faith rather than giving a
reason. You will recall me again to numbers and (common) report. Curb, I
pray you, your obstinacy, and that untamed lust, I know not what, of
spreading your name: and advise me rather to seek the chief men of this
multitude, and to seek with all care and pains rather to learn something
concerning these writings from these men, but for whose existence, I
should not know that I had to learn at all. But do you return into your
dens, and lay not any snares under the name of truth, which you endeavor
to take from those, to whom you yourself grant authority.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1748"></span>[362:1749](1030458.htm#fr_1748) <span
id="iv.vi.xxxii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.xxxii-p2"></span> *Scripturæ*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 32](1030459)
