[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030643)  [Next](1030645) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.i"></span>

<span id="v.v.i-p1"></span> This book appears from its place in the
*Retractations* to have been written about <span class="c19"><span
id="v.v.i-p1.1"></span>a.d.</span> 395, as it is the last work named in
the first book, which contains those which he wrote before he was
Bishop. Some editions represent it as addressed to Consentius, but not
the <span class="c19"><span id="v.v.i-p1.2"></span>mss.</span> The
latter are probably right, as his other work on the subject was written
in answer to the inquiries of Consentius on the case of the
Priscillianists many years later.—*Bened. Ed.*

<span id="v.v.i-p2"></span>*Retractations*, Book I. last Chapter.

<span id="v.v.i-p3"></span>“I have also written a Book on Lying, which
though it takes some pains to understand, contains much that is useful
for the exercise of the mind, and more that is profitable to morals, in
inculcating the love of speaking the truth. This also I was minded to
remove from my works, because it seemed to me obscure, and intricate,
and altogether troublesome; for which reason I had not sent it abroad.
And when I had afterwards written another book, under this title,
*Against Lying*, much more had I determined and ordered that the former
should cease to exist; which however was not done. Therefore in this
retractation of my works, as I have found this still in being, I have
ordered that it should remain; chiefly because therein are to be found
some necessary things which in the other are not. Why the other has for
its title, *Against Lying*, but this, *Of Lying*, the reason is this,
that throughout the one is an open assault upon lying, whereas great
part of this is taken up with the discussion of the question for and
against. Both, however, are directed to the same object. This book
begins thus: “*Magna quæstio est de Mendacio*.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 1](1030645)
