[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030240)  [Next](1030242) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xxii"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xxii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 22.—How Great the Unlikeness is
Between the Image of the Trinity Which We Have Found in Ourselves, and
the Trinity Itself.</span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xxii-p2"></span>42. But since these are in one
person, as man is, some one may say to us, These three things, memory,
understanding, and love, are mine, not their own; neither do they do
that which they do for themselves, but for me, or rather I do it by
them. For it is I who remember by memory, and understand by
understanding, and love by love: and when I direct the mind’s eye to my
memory, and so say in my heart the thing I know, and a true word is
begotten of my knowledge, both are mine, both the knowledge certainly
and the word. For it is I who know, and it is I who say in my heart the
thing I know. And when I come to find in my memory by thinking that I
understand and love anything, which understanding and love were there
also before I thought thereon, it is my own understanding and my own
love that I find in my own memory, whereby it is I that understand,
<span id="page_222">p. 222</span> <span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxii-Page_222"></span>and I that love, not those things
themselves. Likewise, when my thought is mindful, and wills to return to
those things which it had left in the memory, and to understand and
behold them, and say them inwardly, it is my own memory that is mindful,
and it is my own, not its will, wherewith it wills. When my very love
itself, too, remembers and understands what it ought to desire and what
to avoid, it remembers by my, not by its own memory; and understands
that which it intelligently loves by my, not by its own, understanding.
In brief, by all these three things, it is I that remember, I that
understand, I that love, who am neither memory, nor understanding, nor
love, but who have them. These things, then, can be said by a single
person, which has these three, but is not these three. But in the
simplicity of that Highest Nature, which is God, although there is one
God, there are three persons, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 23](1030242)
