[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030772)  [Next](1030774) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.vii.xlii"></span>

<span id="v.vii.xlii-p1"></span> 41. Wherefore, they which will not do
right things, let them give over at least to teach wrong things. Howbeit
they be others whom in this speech we reprove: but as for those who by
this one fault, of letting their hair contrary to apostolic precept grow
long, offend and trouble the Church, because when some being unwilling
to think of them any thing amiss are forced to twist the manifest words
of the Apostle into a wrong meaning, others choose to defend the sound
understanding of the Scriptures rather than fawn upon any men, there
arise between the weaker and the stronger brethren most bitter and
perilous contentions: which things perchance if they knew, these would
correct without hesitation this also, in whom we admire and love all
else. Those then we not reprove, but ask and solemnly beseech by the
Godhead and the Manhood of Christ and by the charity of the Holy Ghost,
that they no more put this stumbling-block before the weak for whom
Christ died, and aggravate the grief and torment of our heart when we
bethink us how much more readily evil men can imitate this evil thing
for deceiving of mankind, when they see this in them whom on the score
of other so great good we with deserved offices of Christian love do
honor. If however, after this admonition, or rather this solemn entreaty
of ours, they shall think fit to persevere in the same, we shall do
nothing else but only grieve and mourn. This let them know; it is
enough. If they be servants of God, they have pity. If they have not
pity, I will not say any thing worse. All these things, therefore, in
the which peradventure I have been more loquacious than the occupations
both of thee and of me could wish, if thou approve the same, make thou
to be known to our brethren and sons, on whose behalf thou hast deigned
to put this burden upon me: but if aught seem to thee meet to be
withdrawn or amended, by reply of your Blessedness I shall know the
same.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: On Patience.](1030774)
