[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030106)  [Next](1030108) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.ix.ii"></span><span id="page_107">p. 107</span> <span
id="iv.i.ix.ii-Page_107"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ix.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.ix.ii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 2.—The Father and the Son are
Together One Wisdom, as One Essence, Although Not Together One
Word.</span>

<span id="iv.i.ix.ii-p2"></span>3. Therefore the Father and the Son
together are one essence, and one greatness, and one truth, and one
wisdom. But the Father and Son both together are not one Word, because
both together are not one Son. For as the Son is referred to the Father,
and is not so called in respect to Himself, so also the Word is referred
to him whose Word it is, when it is called the Word. Since He is the Son
in that He is the Word, and He is the Word in that He is the Son.
Inasmuch, therefore, as the Father and the Son together are certainly
not one Son, it follows that the Father and the Son together are not the
one Word of both. And therefore He is not the Word in that He is wisdom;
since He is not called the Word in respect to Himself, but only
relatively to Him whose Word He is, as He is called the Son in relation
to the Father; but He is wisdom by that whereby He is essence. And
therefore, because one essence, one wisdom. But since the Word is also
wisdom, yet is not thereby the Word because He is wisdom for He is
understood to be the Word relatively, but wisdom essentially: let us
understand, that when He is called the Word, it is meant, wisdom that is
*born*, so as to be both the Son and the Image; and that when these two
words are used, namely *wisdom* (*is*) *born*, in one of the two, namely
*born*, <span id="fr_628"></span>[629](#fn_628) both Word, and Image,
and Son, are understood, and in all these names essence is not
expressed, since they are spoken relatively; but in the other word,
namely *wisdom*, since it is spoken also in respect to substance, for
wisdom is wise in itself, essence also is expressed, and that being of
His which is to be wise. Whence the Father and Son together are one
wisdom, because one essence, and singly wisdom of wisdom, as essence of
essence. And hence they are not therefore not one essence, because the
Father is not the Son, and the Son is not the Father, or because the
Father is un-begotten, but the Son is begotten: since by these names
only their *relative* attributes are expressed. But both together are
one wisdom and one essence; in which to be, is the same as to be wise.
And both together are not the Word or the Son, since to be is not the
same as to be the Word or the Son, as we have already sufficiently shown
that these terms are spoken relatively.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_628"></span>[107:629](1030107.htm#fr_628) <span
id="iv.i.ix.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ix.ii-p3"></span> \[Augustin sometimes denominates the
Son “begotten” (*genitus*), and sometimes “born” (*natus*). Both terms
signify that the Son is *of* the Father; God of God, Light of Light,
Essence of Essence.—W.G.T.S.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3](1030108)
