[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030808)  [Next](1030810) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.ix.vii"></span>

<span id="v.ix.vii-p1"></span> 6. If this be true, doubtless also the
providing for the interment of bodies a place at <span id="page_542">p.
542</span> <span id="v.ix.vii-Page_542"></span>the Memorials of Saints,
is a mark of a good human affection towards the remains of one’s
friends: since if there be religion in the burying, there cannot but be
religion in taking thought where the burying shall be. But while it is
desirable there should be such like solaces of survivors, for the
showing forth of their pious mind towards their beloved, I do not see
what helps they be to the dead save in this way: that upon recollection
of the place in which are deposited the bodies of those whom they love,
they should by prayer commend them to those same Saints, who have as
patrons taken them into their charge to aid them before the Lord. Which
indeed they would be still able to do, even though they were not able to
inter them in such places. But then the only reason why the name
Memorials or Monuments is given to those sepulchres of the dead which
become specially distinguished, is that they recall to memory, and by
putting in mind cause us to think of, them who by death are withdrawn
from the eyes of the living, that they may not by forgetfulness be also
withdrawn from men’s hearts. For both the term Memorial <span
id="fr_2725"></span>[2726](#fn_2725) most plainly shews this, and
Monument is so named from monishing, that is, putting in mind. For which
reason the Greeks also call that <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ix.vii-p2.1"></span>μνημεῖον</span> which we call a Memorial or
Monument: because in their tongue the memory itself, by which we
remember, is called <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ix.vii-p2.2"></span>μνήμη</span>. When therefore the mind
recollects where the body of a very dear friend lies buried, and
thereupon there occurs to the thoughts a place rendered venerable by the
name of a Martyr, to that same Martyr doth it commend the soul in
affection of heartfelt recollection <span
id="fr_2726"></span>[2727](#fn_2726) and prayer. And when this affection
is exhibited to the departed by faithful men who were most dear to them,
there is no doubt that it profits them who while living in the body
merited that such things should profit them after this life. But even if
some necessity should through absence of all facility not allow bodies
to be interred, or in such places interred, yet should there be no
pretermitting of supplications for the spirits of the dead: which
supplications, that they should be made for all in Christian and
catholic fellowship departed, even without mentioning of their names,
under a general commemoration, the Church hath charged herself withal;
to the intent that they which lack, for these offices, parents or sons
or whatever kindred or friends, may have the same afforded unto them by
the one pious mother which is common to all. But if there were lack of
these supplications, which are made with right faith and piety for the
dead, I account that it should not a whit profit their spirits,
howsoever in holy places the lifeless bodies should be deposited.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2725"></span>[542:2726](1030809.htm#fr_2725) <span
id="v.ix.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix.vii-p2"></span> *Memoria*

<span id="fn_2726"></span>[542:2727](1030809.htm#fr_2726) <span
id="v.ix.vii-p2.3"></span>

<span id="v.ix.vii-p3"></span> *Recordationis*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 7](1030810)
