[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030239)  [Next](1030241) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xxi"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xxi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 21.—Of the Likeness of the Father
and of the Son Alleged to Be in Our Memory and Understanding. Of the
Likeness of the Holy Spirit in Our Will or Love.</span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xxi-p2"></span>40. I have undoubtedly taken pains so
far as I could, not indeed so that the thing might be seen face to face,
but that it might be seen by this likeness in an enigma, <span
id="fr_1037"></span>[1038](#fn_1037) in how small a degree soever, by
conjecture, in our memory and understanding, to intimate God the Father
and God the Son: *i.e.* God the begetter, who has in some way spoken by
His own co-eternal Word all things that He has in His substance; and God
His Word Himself, who Himself has nothing either more or less in
substance than is in Him, who, not lyingly but truly, hath begotten the
Word; and I have assigned to memory everything that we know, even if we
were not thinking of it, but to understanding the formation after a
certain special mode of the thought. For we are usually said to
understand what, by thinking of it, we have found to be true; and this
it is again that we leave in the memory. But that is a still more hidden
depth of our memory, wherein we found this also first when we thought of
it, and wherein an inner word is begotten such as belongs to no
tongue,—as it were, knowledge of knowledge, vision of vision, and
understanding which appears in \[reflective\] thought; of understanding
which had indeed existed before in the memory, but was latent there,
although, unless the thought itself had also some sort of memory of its
own, it would not return to those things which it had left in the memory
while it turned to think of other things.

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xxi-p4"></span>41. But I have shown nothing in this
enigma respecting the Holy Spirit such as might appear to be like Him,
except our own will, or love, or affection, which is a stronger will,
since our will which we have naturally is variously affected, according
as various objects are adjacent or occur to it, by which we are
attracted or offended. What, then, is this? Are we to say that our will,
when it is right, knows not what to desire, what to avoid? Further, if
it knows, doubtless then it has a kind of knowledge of its own, such as
cannot be without memory and understanding. Or are we to listen to any
one who should say that love knows not what it does, which does not do
wrongly? As, then, there are both understanding and love in that primary
memory wherein we find provided and stored up that to which we can come
in thought, because we find also those two things there, when we find by
thinking that we both understand and love anything; which things were
there too when we were not thinking of them: and as there are memory and
love in that understanding, which is formed by thought, which true word
we say inwardly without the tongue of any nation when we say what we
know; for the gaze of our thought does not return to anything except by
remembering it, and does not care to return unless by loving it: so
love, which combines the vision brought about in the memory, and the
vision of the thought formed thereby, as if parent and offspring, would
not know what to love rightly unless it had a knowledge of what it
desired, which it cannot have without memory and understanding.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1037"></span>[221:1038](1030240.htm#fr_1037) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xxi-p3"></span> [1 Cor.
13.12](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#012)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxi-p3.1"></span>[1 Cor. xiii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#012)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxi-p3.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 22](1030241)
