[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030253)  [Next](1030255) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.vi"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.ii.vi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 4.—The Questions Propounded by
Laurentius.</span>

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p2"></span>You are anxious, you say, that I should
write a sort of handbook for you, which you might always keep beside
you, containing answers to the questions you put, *viz.*: what ought to
be man’s chief end in life; what he ought, in view of the various
heresies, chiefly to avoid; to what extent religion is supported by
reason; what there is in reason that lends no support to faith, when
faith stands alone; what is the starting-point, what the goal, of
religion; what is the sum of the whole body of doctrine; what is the
sure and proper foundation of the catholic faith. Now, undoubtedly, you
will know the answers to all these questions, if you know thoroughly the
proper objects of faith, hope, and love. For these must be the chief,
nay, the exclusive objects of pursuit in religion. He who speaks against
these is either a total stranger to the name of Christ, or is a heretic.
These are to be defended by reason, which must have its starting-point
either in the bodily senses or in the intuitions of the mind. And what
we have neither had experience of through our bodily senses, nor have
been able to reach through the intellect, must undoubtedly be believed
on the testimony of those witnesses by whom the Scriptures, justly
called divine, were written; and who by divine assistance were enabled,
either through bodily sense or intellectual perception, to see or to
foresee the things in question.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 5](1030255)
