[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030158)  [Next](1030160) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.xiii.ix"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xiii.ix-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.xiii.ix-p1.1"></span>Chapter 9.—Species is Produced by Species
in Succession.</span>

<span id="iv.i.xiii.ix-p2"></span>16. In this arrangement, then, while
we begin from the bodily species and arrive finally at the species which
comes to be in the intuition (*contuitu*) of the concipient, we find
four species born, as it were, step by step one from the other, the
second from the first, the third from the second, the fourth from the
third: since from the species of the body itself, there arises that
which comes to be in the sense of the percipient; and from this, that
which comes to be in the memory; and from this, that which comes to be
in the mind’s eye of the concipient. And the will, therefore, thrice
combines as it were parent with offspring: first the species of the body
with that to which it gives birth in the sense of the body; and that
again with that which from it comes to be in the memory; and this also,
thirdly, with that which is born from it in the intuition of the
concipient’s mind. But the intermediate combination which is the second,
although it is nearer to the first, is yet not so like the first as the
third is. For there are two kinds of vision, the one of \[sensuous\]
perception (*sentientis*), the other of conception (*cogitantis*). But
in order that the vision of conception may come to be, there is wrought
for the purpose, in the memory, from the vision of \[sensuous\]
perception something like it, to which the eye of the mind may turn
itself in conceiving, as the glance (*acies*) of the eyes turns itself
in \[sensuously\] perceiving to the bodily object. I have, therefore,
chosen to put forward two trinities in this kind: one when the vision of
\[sensuous\] perception is formed from the bodily object, the other when
the vision of conception is formed from the memory. But I have refrained
from commending an intermediate one; because we do not commonly call it
vision, when the form which comes to be in the sense of him who
perceives, is entrusted to the memory. Yet in all cases the will does
not appear unless as the combiner as it were of parent and offspring;
and so, proceed from whence it may, it can be called neither parent nor
offspring. <span id="fr_740"></span>[741](#fn_740)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_740"></span>[153:741](1030159.htm#fr_740) <span
id="iv.i.xiii.ix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xiii.ix-p3"></span> \[Augustin’s map of consciousness is
as follows: (1). The corporeal species=the external object (outward
appearance). (2). The sensible species=the sensation (appearance for the
sense). (3). The mental species in its first form=present perception.
(4). The mental species in its second form=remembered perception. These
three “species” or appearances of the object: namely, corporeal,
sensible, and mental, according to him, are combined in one synthesis
with the object by the operation of the will. By “will,” he does not
mean distinct and separate volitions: but the spontaneity of the
ego—what Kant denominates the mechanism of the understanding, seen in
the spontaneous employment of the categories of thought, as the mind
ascends from empirical sensation to rational conception.

<span id="iv.i.xiii.ix-p4"></span>The English translator has failed to
make clear the sharply defined psychology of these chapters, by loosely
rendering “*sentire*,” “to perceive,” and “*cogitare*” to
think.—W.G.T.S.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 10](1030160)
