[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030570)  [Next](1030572) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iii.xviii"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xviii-p1"></span> 17. Only by this, which I have briefly
set down, the reader ought to be set on his guard against those, who, in
this that is written, “but such shall have tribulation of the flesh but
I spare you,” falsely charge marriage, as indirectly condemned by this
sentence; as though he were unwilling to utter the condemnation itself,
when he saith, “But I spare you;” so that, forsooth, when he spares
them, he spared not his own soul, as saying falsely, “And, if thou shalt
have taken a wife, thou hast not sinned; and if a virgin shall have been
married, she sinneth not.” And this, whoso believe or would have
believed concerning holy Scripture, they, as it were prepare for
themselves a way for liberty of lying, or for defense of their own
perverse opinion, in whatever case they hold other sentiments than what
sound doctrine demands. For if there shall be alleged any plain
statement from the divine books, whereby to refute their errors, this
they have at hand as a shield, whereby defending themselves as it were
against the truth, they lay themselves bare to be wounded by the devil:
to say that the author of the book did not speak the truth in this
instance, at one time in order to spare the weak, at another in order to
alarm despisers: just as a case shall come to hand, wherein to defend
their own perverse opinion: and thus, whilst they had rather defend than
amend their own opinions, they essay to break the authority of holy
Scripture, whereby alone all proud and hard necks are broken.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 18](1030572)
