[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030228)  [Next](1030230) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.xvii.x"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.x-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.xvii.x-p1.1"></span>Chapter 10.—Concerning the Word of the
Mind, in Which We See the Word of God, as in a Glass and an
Enigma.</span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.x-p2"></span>17. But let us now speak of those
things of which we think as known, and have in our knowledge even if we
do not think of them; whether they belong to the contemplative
knowledge, which, as I have argued, is properly to be called wisdom, or
to the active which is properly to be called knowledge. For both
together belong to one mind, and are one image of God. But when we treat
of the lower of the two distinctly and separately, then it is not to be
called an image of God, although even then, too, some likeness of that
Trinity may be found in it; as we showed in the thirteenth book. We
speak now, therefore, of the entire knowledge of man altogether, in
which whatever is known to us is known; that, at any rate, which is
true; otherwise it would not be known. For no one knows what is false,
except when he knows it to be false; and if he knows this, then he knows
what is true: for it is true that that is false. We treat, therefore,
now of those things which we think as known, and which are known to us
even if they are not being thought of. But certainly, if we would utter
them in words, we can only do so by thinking them. For although there
were no words spoken, at any rate, he who thinks speaks in his heart.
And hence that passage in the book of Wisdom: “They said within
themselves, thinking not aright.” <span
id="fr_970"></span>[971](#fn_970) For the words, “They said within
themselves,” are explained by the addition of “thinking.” A like passage
to this is that in the Gospel,—that certain scribes, when they heard the
Lord’s words to the paralytic man, “Be of good cheer, my son, thy sins
are forgiven thee,” said within themselves, “This man blasphemeth.” For
how did they “say within themselves,” except by thinking? Then follows,
“And when Jesus saw their thoughts, He said, Why think ye evil in your
thoughts?” <span id="fr_971"></span>[972](#fn_971) So far Matthew. But
Luke narrates the same thing thus: “The scribes and Pharisees began to
think, saying, Who is this that speaketh blasphemies? Who can forgive
sins but God alone? But when Jesus perceived their thoughts, He,
answering, said unto them, What think ye in your hearts?” <span
id="fr_972"></span>[973](#fn_972) That which in the book of Wisdom is,
“They said, thinking,” is the same here with, “They thought, saying.”
For both there and here it is declared, that they spake within
themselves, and in their own heart, *i.e.* spake by thinking. For they
“spake within themselves,” and it was said to them, “What think ye?” And
the Lord Himself says of that rich man whose ground brought forth
plentifully, “And he thought within himself, saying.” <span
id="fr_973"></span>[974](#fn_973)

<span id="iv.i.xvii.x-p7"></span>18. Some thoughts, then, are speeches
of the heart, wherein the Lord also shows that there is a mouth, when He
says, “Not that which entereth into the mouth defileth a man; but that
which proceedeth out of the mouth, that defileth a man.” In one sentence
He has comprised two diverse mouths of the man, one of the body, one of
the heart. For assuredly, that from which they thought the man to be
defiled, enters into the mouth of the body; but that from which the Lord
said the man was defiled, proceedeth out of the mouth of the heart. So
certainly He Himself explained what He had said. For a little after, He
says also to His disciples concerning the same thing: “Are ye also yet
without understanding? Do ye not understand, that whatsoever entereth in
at the mouth goeth into the belly, and is cast out into the draught?”
Here He most certainly pointed to the mouth of the body. But in that
which follows He plainly speaks of the mouth of the heart, where He
says, “But those things which proceed out of the mouth come forth from
the heart; and they defile the man. For out of the heart proceed evil
thoughts,” <span id="fr_974"></span>[975](#fn_974) etc. What is clearer
than this explanation? And yet, when we call thoughts speeches of the
heart, it does not follow that they are not also acts of sight, arising
from the sight of knowledge, when they are true. For when these things
are done outwardly by means of the body, then speech and sight are
different things; but when we think inwardly, the two <span
id="page_209">p. 209</span> <span id="iv.i.xvii.x-Page_209"></span>are
one,—just as sight and hearing are two things mutually distinct in the
bodily senses, but to see and hear are the same thing in the mind; and
hence, while speech is not seen but rather heard outwardly, yet the
inward speeches, *i.e.* thoughts, are said by the holy Gospel to have
been seen, not heard, by the Lord. “They said within themselves, This
man blasphemeth,” says the Gospel; and then subjoined, “And when Jesus
saw their thoughts.” Therefore He saw, what they said. For by His own
thought He saw their thoughts, which they supposed no one saw but
themselves.

<span id="iv.i.xvii.x-p9"></span>19. Whoever, then, is able to
understand a word, not only before it is uttered in sound, but also
before the images of its sounds are considered in thought,—for this it
is which belongs to no tongue, to wit, of those which are called the
tongues of nations, of which our Latin tongue is one;—whoever, I say, is
able to understand this, is able now to see through this glass and in
this enigma some likeness of that Word of whom it is said, “In the
beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was
God.” <span id="fr_975"></span>[976](#fn_975) For of necessity, when we
speak what is true, *i.e.* speak what we know, there is born from the
knowledge itself which the memory retains, a word that is altogether of
the same kind with that knowledge from which it is born. For the thought
that is formed by the thing which we know, is the word which we speak in
the heart: which word is neither Greek nor Latin, nor of any other
tongue. But when it is needful to convey this to the knowledge of those
to whom we speak, then some sign is assumed whereby to signify it. And
generally a sound, sometimes a nod, is exhibited, the former to the
ears, the latter to the eyes, that the word which we bear in our mind
may become known also by bodily signs to the bodily senses. For what is
to nod or beckon, except to speak in some way to the sight? And Holy
Scripture gives its testimony to this; for we read in the Gospel
according to John: “Verily, verily, I say unto you, that one of you
shall betray me. Then the disciples looked one upon another, doubting of
whom He spake. Now there was leaning on Jesus’ breast one of His
disciples whom Jesus loved. Simon Peter therefore beckons to him, and
says to him, Who is it of whom He speaks?” <span
id="fr_976"></span>[977](#fn_976) Here he spoke by beckoning what he did
not venture to speak by sounds. But whereas we exhibit these and the
like bodily signs either to ears or eyes of persons present to whom we
speak, letters have been invented that we might be able to converse also
with the absent; but these are signs of words, as words themselves are
signs in our conversation of those things which we think.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_970"></span>[208:971](1030229.htm#fr_970) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.x-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.x-p3"></span> [Wisdom
2.1](../../../bib/apo/wis002.htm#001)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.x-p3.1"></span>[Wisd. ii.
1](../../../bib/apo/wis002.htm#001)<span id="iv.i.xvii.x-p3.2"></span>

<span id="fn_971"></span>[208:972](1030229.htm#fr_971) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.x-p3.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.x-p4"></span> [Matt.
9.2-4](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#002)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.x-p4.1"></span>

<span id="fn_972"></span>[208:973](1030229.htm#fr_972) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.x-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.x-p5"></span> [Luke
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#021),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#022)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.x-p5.1"></span>[Luke
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#021),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#022)<span id="iv.i.xvii.x-p5.2"></span>

<span id="fn_973"></span>[208:974](1030229.htm#fr_973) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.x-p5.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.x-p6"></span> [Luke
12.17](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#017)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.x-p6.1"></span>[Luke xii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#017)<span id="iv.i.xvii.x-p6.2"></span>

<span id="fn_974"></span>[208:975](1030229.htm#fr_974) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.x-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.x-p8"></span> [Matt.
15.10-20](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#010)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.x-p8.1"></span>

<span id="fn_975"></span>[209:976](1030229.htm#fr_975) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.x-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.x-p10"></span> [John
1.1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.x-p10.1"></span>[John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span id="iv.i.xvii.x-p10.2"></span>

<span id="fn_976"></span>[209:977](1030229.htm#fr_976) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.x-p10.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.x-p11"></span> [John
13.21-24](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#021)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.x-p11.1"></span>[John xiii.
21-24](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#021)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.x-p11.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 11](1030230)
