[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030227)  [Next](1030229) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.xvii.ix"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.ix-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.xvii.ix-p1.1"></span>Chapter 9.—Of the Term “Enigma,” And of
Tropical Modes of Speech.</span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.ix-p2"></span>15. What has been said relates to the
words of the apostle, that “we see now through a glass;” but whereas he
has added, “in an enigma,” the meaning of this addition is unknown to
any who are unacquainted with the books that contain the doctrine of
those modes of speech, which the Greeks call Tropes, which Greek word we
also use in Latin. For as we more commonly speak of *schemata* than of
figures, so we more commonly speak of tropes than of modes. And it is a
very difficult and uncommon thing to express the names of the several
modes or tropes in Latin, so as to refer its appropriate name to each.
And hence some Latin translators, through unwillingness to employ a
Greek word, where the apostle says, “Which things are an
allegory,” <span id="fr_967"></span>[968](#fn_967) have rendered it by a
circumlocution—Which things signify one thing by another. But there are
several species of this kind of trope that is called allegory, and one
of them is that which is called enigma. Now the definition of the
generic term must necessarily embrace also all its species; and hence,
as every horse is an animal, but not every animal is a horse, so every
enigma is an allegory, but every allegory is not an enigma. What then is
an allegory, but a trope wherein one thing is understood from another?
as in the Epistle to the Thessalonians, “Let us not therefore sleep, as
do others; but let us watch and be sober: for they who sleep, sleep in
the night; and they who are drunken, are drunken in the night: but let
us who are of the day, be sober.” <span
id="fr_968"></span>[969](#fn_968) But this allegory is not an enigma.
for here the meaning is patent to all but the very dull; but an enigma
is, to explain it briefly, an obscure allegory, as, *e.g.*, “The
horseleech had three daughters,” <span id="fr_969"></span>[970](#fn_969)
and other like instances. But when the apostle spoke of an allegory, he
does not find it in the words, but in the fact; since he has shown that
the two Testaments are to be understood by the two sons of Abraham, one
by a bondmaid, and the other by a free woman, which was a thing not
said, but also done. And before this was explained, it was obscure; and
accordingly such an allegory, which is the generic name, could be
specifically called an enigma.

<span id="iv.i.xvii.ix-p6"></span>16. But because it is not only those
that are ignorant of the books that contain the doctrine of tropes, who
inquire the apostle’s meaning, when he said that we “see now in an
enigma,” but those, too, who are acquainted with the doctrine, but yet
desire to know what that enigma is in which “we now see;” we must find a
single meaning for the two phrases, *viz*. for that which says, “we see
now through a glass,” and for that which adds, “in an enigma.” For it
makes but one sentence, when the whole is so uttered, “We see now
through a glass in an enigma.” Accordingly, as far as my judgment goes,
as by the word glass he meant to signify an image, so by that of enigma
any likeness you will, but yet one obscure, and difficult to see
through. While, therefore, any likenesses whatever may be understood as
signified by the apostle when he speaks of a glass and an enigma, so
that they are adapted to the understanding of God, in such way as He can
be understood; yet nothing is better adapted to this purpose than that
which is not vainly called His image. Let no one, then, wonder, that we
labor to see in any way at all, even in that fashion of seeing which is
granted to us in this life, *viz*. through a glass, in an enigma. For we
should not hear of an enigma in this place if sight were easy. And this
is a yet greater enigma, that we do not see what we cannot but see. For
who does not see his own thought? And yet who does see his own thought,
I do not say with the eye of the flesh, but with the inner sight itself?
Who <span id="page_208">p. 208</span> <span
id="iv.i.xvii.ix-Page_208"></span>does not see it, and who does see it?
Since thought is a kind of sight of the mind; whether those things are
present which are seen also by the bodily eyes, or perceived by the
other senses; or whether they are not present, but their likenesses are
discerned by thought; or whether neither of these is the case, but
things are thought of that are neither bodily things nor likenesses of
bodily things, as the virtues and vices; or as, indeed, thought itself
is thought of; or whether it be those things which are the subjects of
instruction and of liberal sciences; or whether the higher causes and
reasons themselves of all these things in the unchangeable nature are
thought of; or whether it be even evil, and vain, and false things that
we are thinking of, with either the sense not consenting, or erring in
its consent.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_967"></span>[207:968](1030228.htm#fr_967) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.ix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.ix-p3"></span> [Gal.
4.24](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#024)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.ix-p3.1"></span>[Gal. iv.
24](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#024)<span id="iv.i.xvii.ix-p3.2"></span>

<span id="fn_968"></span>[207:969](1030228.htm#fr_968) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.ix-p3.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.ix-p4"></span> [1 Thess.
5.6-8](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#006)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.ix-p4.1"></span>[1 Thess. v.
6-8](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#006)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.ix-p4.2"></span>

<span id="fn_969"></span>[207:970](1030228.htm#fr_969) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.ix-p4.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.ix-p5"></span> [Prov.
30.15](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#015)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.ix-p5.1"></span>[Prov. xxx.
15](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#015)<span id="iv.i.xvii.ix-p5.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 10](1030229)
