[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030091)  [Next](1030093) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.vii.xv"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vii.xv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.vii.xv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 15.—Whether the Holy Spirit Was a
Gift Before as Well as After He Was Given.</span>

<span id="iv.i.vii.xv-p2"></span>16. But it is asked further, whether,
as the Son, by being born, has not only this, that He is the Son, but
that He is absolutely; and so also the Holy Spirit, by being given, has
not only this, that He is given, but that He is absolutely—whether
therefore He was, before He was given, but was not yet a *gift*; or
whether, for the very reason that God was about to give Him, He was
already a gift also before He was given. But if He does not proceed
unless when He is given, and assuredly could not proceed before there
was one to whom He might be given; how, in that case, was He
\[absolutely\] in His very substance, if He is not unless because He is
given? just as the Son, by being born, not only has this, that He is a
Son, which is said relatively, but His very substance absolutely, so
that He is. Does the Holy Spirit proceed always, and proceed not in
time, but from eternity, but because He so proceeded that He was capable
of being given, was already a gift even before there was one to whom He
might be given? For there is a difference in meaning between a gift and
a thing that has been given. For a gift may exist even before it is
given; but it cannot be called a thing that has been given unless it has
been given.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 16](1030093)
