[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030421)  [Next](1030423) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.v.viii"></span>

<span id="iv.v.viii-p1"></span> 8. But as the wills of friends, which
are not seen, are believed through tokens which are seen; thus the
Church, which is now seen, is, of all things which are not seen, but
which are shown forth in those writings wherein itself also is foretold,
an index of the past, and a herald of the future. Because both things
past, which cannot now be seen, and things present which cannot be seen
all of them, at the time at which they were foretold, no one of these
could then be seen. Therefore, since they have begun to come to pass as
they were foretold, from those things which have come to pass unto those
which are coming to pass, those things which were foretold concerning
Christ and the Church have run on in an ordered series: unto which
series these pertain concerning the day of Judgment, concerning the
resurrection of the dead, concerning the eternal damnation of the
ungodly with the devil, and concerning the eternal recompense of the
godly with Christ, things which, foretold in like manner, are yet to
come. Why therefore should we not believe the first and the last things
which we see not, when we have, as witnesses of both, the things
between, which we see, and in the books of the Prophets either hear or
read both <span id="page_342">p. 342</span> <span
id="iv.v.viii-Page_342"></span>the first things, and the things between,
and the last things, foretold before they came to pass? Unless haply
unbelieving men judge those things to have been written by Christians,
in order that those things which they already believed might have
greater weight of authority, if they should be thought to have been
promised before they came.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 9](1030423)
