[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030147)  [Next](1030149) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.xii.xi"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xii.xi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.xii.xi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 11.—In Memory, Understanding \[or
Intelligence\], and Will, We Have to Note Ability, Learning, and Use.
Memory, Understanding, and Will are One Essentially, and Three
Relatively.</span>

<span id="iv.i.xii.xi-p2"></span>17. Putting aside, then, for a little
while all other things, of which the mind is certain concerning itself,
let us especially consider and discuss these three—memory,
understanding, will. For we may commonly discern in these three the
character of the abilities of the young also; since the more tenaciously
and easily a boy remembers, and the more acutely he understands, and the
more ardently he studies, the more praiseworthy is he in point of
ability. But when the question is about any one’s learning, then we ask
not how solidly and easily he remembers, or how shrewdly he understands;
but what it is that he remembers, and what it is that he understands.
And because the mind is regarded as praiseworthy, not only as being
learned, but also as being good, one gives heed not only to what he
remembers and what he understands, but also to what he wills (*velit*);
not how ardently he wills, but first what it is he wills, and then how
greatly he wills it. For the mind that loves eagerly is then to be
praised, when it loves that which ought to be loved eagerly. Since,
then, we speak of these three—ability, knowledge, use—the first of these
is to be considered under the three heads, of what a man can do in
memory, and understanding, and will. The second of them is to be
considered in regard to that which any one has in his memory and in his
understanding, which he has attained by a studious will. But the third,
*viz*. use, lies in the will, which handles those things that are
contained in the memory and understanding, whether it refer them to
anything further, or rest satisfied with them as an end. For to use, is
to take up something into the power of the will; and to enjoy, is to use
with joy, not any longer of hope, but of the actual thing. Accordingly,
every one who enjoys, uses; for he takes up something into the power of
the will, wherein he also is satisfied as with an end. But not every one
who uses, enjoys, if he has sought after that, which he takes up into
the power of the will, not on account of the thing itself, but on
account of something else.

<span id="iv.i.xii.xi-p3"></span>18. Since, then, these three, memory,
understanding, will, are not three lives, but one life; nor three minds,
but one mind; it follows certainly that neither are they three
substances, but one substance. Since memory, which is called life, and
mind, and substance, is so called in respect to itself; but it is called
memory, relatively to something. And I should say the same also of
understanding and of will, since they are called understanding and will
relatively to something; but each in respect to itself is life, and
mind, and essence. And hence these three are one, in that they are one
life, one mind, one essence; and whatever else they are severally called
in respect to themselves, they are called also together, not plurally,
but in the singular number. But they are three, in that wherein they are
mutually referred to each other; and if they were not equal, and this
not only each to each, but also each to all, they certainly could not
mutually contain each other; for not only is each contained by each, but
also all by each. For I remember that I have memory and understanding,
and will; and I understand that I understand, and will, and remember;
and I will that I will, and remember, and understand; and I remember
together my whole memory, and understanding, and will. For that of my
memory which I do not remember, is not in my memory; and nothing is so
much in the memory as memory itself. Therefore I remember the whole
memory. Also, whatever I understand I know that I understand, and I know
that I will whatever I will; but whatever I know I remember. Therefore I
remember the whole of my understanding, and the whole of my will.
Likewise, when I understand these three things, I understand them
together as whole. For there is none of things intelligible which I do
not understand, except what I do not know; but what I do not know, I
neither remember, nor will. Therefore, whatever of things intelligible I
do not understand, it follows also that I neither remember nor will. And
whatever of things intelligible I remember and will, it fol<span
id="page_143">p. 143</span> <span id="iv.i.xii.xi-Page_143"></span>lows
that I understand. My will also embraces my whole understanding and my
whole memory whilst I use the whole that I understand and remember. And,
therefore, while all are mutually comprehended by each, and as wholes,
each as a whole is equal to each as a whole, and each as a whole at the
same time to all as wholes; and these three are one, one life, one mind,
one essence. <span id="fr_727"></span>[728](#fn_727)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_727"></span>[143:728](1030148.htm#fr_727) <span
id="iv.i.xii.xi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xii.xi-p4"></span> \[This ternary of memory,
understanding, and will, is a better analogue to the Trinity than the
preceding one in chapter IX—namely, mind, knowledge, and love. Memory,
understanding, and will have equal substantiality, while mind,
knowledge, and love have not. The former are three *faculties*, in each
of which is the whole mind or spirit. The memory is the whole mind as
remembering; the understanding is the whole mind as cognizing; and the
will is the whole mind as determining. The one essence of the mind is in
each of these three modes, each of which is distinct from the others;
and yet there are not three essences or minds. In the other ternary, of
mind, knowledge, and love, the last two are not faculties but single
*acts* of the mind. A particular act of cognition is not the whole mind
in the *general* mode of cognition. This would make it a faculty. A
particular act of loving, or of willing, is not the whole mind in the
*general* mode of loving, or of willing. This would make the momentary
and transient act a permanent faculty. This ternary fails, as we have
noticed in a previous annotation (IX. ii. 2), in that only the mind is a
substance.

<span id="iv.i.xii.xi-p5"></span>The ternary of memory, understanding,
and will is an adequate analogue to the Trinity in respect to equal
substantiality. But it fails when the separate *consciousness* of the
Trinitarian distinctions is brought into consideration. The three
faculties of memory, understanding, and will, are not so objective to
each other as to admit of three forms of consciousness, of the use of
the personal pronouns, and of the personal actions that are ascribed to
the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. It also fails, in that these three are
not *all* the modes of the mind. There are other faculties: *e. g.*, the
imagination. The whole essence of the mind is in this also.—W.G.T.S.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 12](1030149)
