[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030245)  [Next](1030247) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xxvii"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xxvii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 27.—What It is that Suffices
Here to Solve the Question Why the Spirit is Not Said to Be Begotten,
and Why the Father Alone is Unbegotten. What They Ought to Do Who Do Not
Understand These Things.</span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xxvii-p2"></span>48. But because it is most
difficult to distinguish generation from procession in that co-eternal,
and equal, and incorporeal, and ineffably unchangeable and indivisible
Trinity, let it suffice meanwhile to put before those who are not able
to be drawn on further, what we said upon this subject in a sermon to be
delivered in the ears of Christian people, and after saying wrote it
down. For when, among other things, I had taught them by testimonies of
the Holy Scriptures that the Holy Spirit proceeds from both, I continue:
“If, then, the Holy Spirit proceeds both from the Father and from the
Son, why did the Son say, ‘He proceedeth from the Father?’ <span
id="fr_1069"></span>[1070](#fn_1069) Why, think you, except as He is
wont to refer to Him, that also which is His <span id="page_226">p.
226</span> <span id="iv.i.xvii.xxvii-Page_226"></span>own, from whom
also He Himself is? Whence also is that which He saith, ‘My doctrine is
not mine own, but His that sent me?’ <span
id="fr_1070"></span>[1071](#fn_1070) If, therefore, it is His doctrine
that is here understood, which yet He said was not His own, but His that
sent Him, how much more is it there to be understood that the Holy
Spirit proceeds also from Himself, where He so says, He proceedeth from
the Father, as not to say, He proceedeth not from me? From Him,
certainly, from whom the Son had his Divine nature, for He is God of
God, He has also, that from Him too proceeds the Holy Spirit; and hence
the Holy Spirit has from the Father Himself, that He should proceed from
the Son also, as He proceeds from the Father. Here, too, in some way may
this also be understood, so far as it can be understood by such as we
are, why the Holy Spirit is not said to be born, but rather to
proceed; <span id="fr_1071"></span>[1072](#fn_1071) since if He, too,
was called a Son, He would certainly be called the Son of both, which is
most absurd, since no one is son of two, save of father and mother. But
far be it from us to surmise any such thing as this between God the
Father and God the Son. Because not even the son of men proceeds at the
same time from both father and mother; but when he proceeds from the
father into the mother, he does not at that time proceed from the
mother; and when he proceeds from the mother into this present light, he
does not at that time proceed from the father. But the Holy Spirit does
not proceed from the Father into the Son, and from the Son proceed to
sanctify the creature, but proceeds at once from both; although the
Father has given this to the Son, that He should proceed, as from
Himself, so also from Him. For we cannot say that the Holy Spirit is not
life, while the Father is life, and the Son is life: and hence as the
Father, while He has life in Himself, has given also to the Son to have
life in Himself; so has He given also to Him that life should proceed
from Him, as it also proceeds from Himself.” <span
id="fr_1072"></span>[1073](#fn_1072) I have transferred this from that
sermon into this book, but I was speaking to believers, not to
unbelievers.

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xxvii-p7"></span>49. But if they are not competent
to gaze upon this image, and to see how true these things are which are
in their mind, and yet which are not so three as to be three persons,
but all three belong to a man who is one person; why do they not believe
what they find in the sacred books respecting that highest Trinity which
is God, rather than insist on the clearest reason being rendered them,
which cannot be comprehended by the human mind, dull and infirm as it
is? And to be sure, when they have steadfastly believed the Holy
Scriptures as most true witnesses, let them strive, by praying and
seeking and living well, that they may understand, *i.e.* that so far as
it can be seen, that may be seen by the mind which is held fast by
faith. Who would forbid this? Nay, who would not rather exhort them to
it? But if they think they ought to deny that these things are, because
they, with their blind minds, cannot discern them, they, too, who are
blind from their birth, ought to deny that there is a sun. The light
then shineth in darkness; but if the darkness comprehend it not, <span
id="fr_1073"></span>[1074](#fn_1073) let them first be illuminated by
the gift of God, that they may be believers, and let them begin to be
light in comparison with the unbelievers; and when this foundation is
first laid, let them be built up to see what they believe, that at some
time they may be able to see. For some things are so believed, that they
cannot be seen at all. For Christ is not to be seen a second time on the
cross; but unless this be believed which has been so done and seen, that
it is not now to be hoped for as about to be and to be seen, there is no
coming to Christ, such as without end He is to be seen. But as far as
relates to the discerning in some way by the understanding that highest,
ineffable, incorporeal, and unchangeable nature the sight of the human
mind can nowhere better exercise itself, so only that the rule of faith
govern it, than in that which man himself has in his own nature better
than the other animals, better also than the other parts of his own
soul, which is the mind itself, to which has been assigned a certain
sight of things invisible, and to which, as though honorably presiding
in a higher and inner place, the bodily senses also bring word of all
things, that they may be judged, and than which there is no higher, to
which it is to be subject, and by which it is to be governed, except
God.

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xxvii-p9"></span>50. But among these many things
which I have now said, and of which there is nothing <span
id="page_227">p. 227</span> <span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvii-Page_227"></span>that I dare to profess myself to
have said worthy of the ineffableness of that highest Trinity, but
rather to confess that the wonderful knowledge of Him is too great for
me, and that I cannot attain <span id="fr_1074"></span>[1075](#fn_1074)
to it: O thou, my soul, where dost thou feel thyself to be? where dost
thou lie? where dost thou stand? until all thy infirmities be healed by
Him who has forgiven all thy iniquities. <span
id="fr_1075"></span>[1076](#fn_1075) Thou perceivest thyself assuredly
to be in that inn whither that Samaritan brought him whom he found with
many wounds inflicted by thieves, half-dead. <span
id="fr_1076"></span>[1077](#fn_1076) And yet thou hast seen many things
that are true, not by those eyes by which colored objects are seen, but
by those for which he prayed who said, “Let mine eyes behold the things
that are equal.” <span id="fr_1077"></span>[1078](#fn_1077) Certainly,
then, thou hast seen many things that are true, and hast distinguished
them from that light by the light of which thou hast seen them. Lift up
thine eyes to the light itself, and fix them upon it if thou canst. For
so thou wilt see how the birth of the Word of God differs from the
procession of the Gift of God, on account of which the only-begotten Son
did not say that the Holy Spirit is begotten of the Father, otherwise He
would be His brother, but that lie proceeds from Him. Whence, since the
Spirit of both is a kind of consubstantial communion of Father and Son,
He is not called, far be it from us to say so, the Son of both. But thou
canst not fix thy sight there, so as to discern this lucidly and
clearly; I know thou canst not. I say the truth, I say to myself, I know
what I cannot do; yet that light itself shows to thee these three things
in thyself, wherein thou mayest recognize an image of the highest
Trinity itself, which thou canst not yet contemplate with steady eye.
Itself shows to thee that there is in thee a true word, when it is born
of thy knowledge, *i.e.* when we say what we know: although we neither
utter nor think of any articulate word that is significant in any tongue
of any nation, but our thought is formed by that which we know; and
there is in the mind’s eye of the thinker an image resembling that
thought which the memory contained, will or love as a third combining
these two as parent and offspring. And he who can, sees and discerns
that this will proceeds indeed from thought (for no one wills that of
which he is absolutely ignorant what or of what sort it is), yet is not
an image of the thought: and so that there is insinuated in this
intelligible thing a sort of difference between birth and procession,
since to behold by thought is not the same as to desire, or even to
enjoy will. Thou, too, hast been able \[to discern this\], although thou
hast not been, neither art, able to unfold with adequate speech what,
amidst the clouds of bodily likenesses, which cease not to flit up and
down before human thoughts, thou hast scarcely seen. But that light
which is not thyself shows thee this too, that these incorporeal
likenesses of bodies are different from the truth, which, by rejecting
them, we contemplate with the understanding. These, and other things
similarly certain, that light hath shown to thine inner eyes. What
reason, then, is there why thou canst not see that light itself with
steady eye, except certainly infirmity? And what has produced this in
thee, except iniquity? Who, then, is it that healeth all thine
infirmities, unless it be He that forgiveth all thine iniquities? And
therefore I will now at length finish this book by a prayer better than
by an argument.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1069"></span>[225:1070](1030246.htm#fr_1069) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xxvii-p3"></span> [John
15.26](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#026)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvii-p3.1"></span>[John xv.
26](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#026)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1070"></span>[226:1071](1030246.htm#fr_1070) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvii-p3.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xxvii-p4"></span> [John
7.16](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#016)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvii-p4.1"></span>[John vii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#016)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1071"></span>[226:1072](1030246.htm#fr_1071) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvii-p4.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xxvii-p5"></span> \[Generation and procession are
each an emanation of the essence by which it is modified. Neither of
them is a creation *ex nihilo*. The school-men attempted to explain the
difference between the two emanations, by saying that the generation of
the Son is by the mode of the intellect—hence the Son is called Wisdom,
or Word (Logos); but the procession of the Spirit is by the mode of the
will—hence the Spirit is called Love. Turrettin distinguishes the
difference by the following particulars: 1. In respect to the source.
Generation is from the Father alone; procession is from Father and Son.
2. In respect to effects. Generation yields not only personality, but
resemblance. The Son is the “image” of the Father, but the Spirit is not
the image of the Father and Son. Generation is accompanied with the
power to communicate the essence; procession is not. 3. In respect to
order of relationship. Generation is second, procession is third. In the
order of nature, not of time (for both generation and procession are
eternal, therefore simultaneous), procession is after generation.
*Institutio* III. xxxi. 3.—W.G.T.S.\]

<span id="fn_1072"></span>[226:1073](1030246.htm#fr_1072) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xxvii-p6"></span> Serm. in *Joh. Evang. tract.*. 99,
n. 8, 9.

<span id="fn_1073"></span>[226:1074](1030246.htm#fr_1073) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xxvii-p8"></span> [John
1.5](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#005)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvii-p8.1"></span>[John i.
5](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#005)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1074"></span>[227:1075](1030246.htm#fr_1074) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xxvii-p10"></span> [Ps.
139.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#005)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvii-p10.1"></span>[Ps. cxxxix.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#005)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1075"></span>[227:1076](1030246.htm#fr_1075) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvii-p10.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xxvii-p11"></span> [Ps.
103.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#003)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvii-p11.1"></span>[Ps. ciii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#003)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1076"></span>[227:1077](1030246.htm#fr_1076) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvii-p11.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xxvii-p12"></span> [Luke
10:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#030),
[34](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#034)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvii-p12.1"></span>[Luke
10:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#030),
[34](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#034)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1077"></span>[227:1078](1030246.htm#fr_1077) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvii-p12.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xxvii-p13"></span> [Ps.
17.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#002)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvii-p13.1"></span>[Ps. xvii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#002)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvii-p13.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 28](1030247)
