[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030387)  [Next](1030389) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.xv"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.iii.xv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 14.—Of the Remedy Against the Fifth
and Sixth Sources of Weariness.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.xv-p2"></span>20. If, again, your spirit has been
broken by the necessity of giving up some other employment, on which, as
the more requisite, you were now bent; and if the sadness caused by that
constraint makes you catechise in no pleasant mood, you ought to ponder
the fact that, excepting that we know it to be our duty, in all our
dealings with men, to act in a merciful manner, and in the exercise of
the sincerest charity,—with this one exception, I say, it is quite
uncertain to us what is the more profitable thing for us to do, and what
the more opportune thing for us either to pass by for a time or
altogether to omit. For inasmuch as we know not how the merits of men,
on whose behalf we are acting, stand with God, the question as to what
is expedient for them at a certain time is something which, instead of
being able to comprehend, we can rather only surmise, without the aid of
any (clear) inferences, or (at best) with the slenderest and the most
uncertain. Therefore we ought certainly to dispose the matters with
which we have to deal according to our intelligence; and then, if we
prove able to carry them out in the manner upon which we have resolved,
we should rejoice, not indeed that it was our will, but that it was
God’s will, that they should thus be accomplished. But if anything
unavoidable happens, by which the disposition thus proposed by us is
interfered with, we should bend ourselves to it readily, lest we be
broken; so that the very disposition of affairs which God has preferred
to ours may also be made our own. For it is more in accordance with
propriety that we should follow His will than that He should follow
ours. Besides, as regards this order in the doing of things, which we
wish to keep in accordance with our own judgment, surely that course is
to be approved of in which objects that are superior have the
precedence. Why then are we aggrieved that the precedence over men
should be held by the Lord God in His vast superiority to us men, so
that in the said love which we entertain for our own order, we should
thus (exhibit the disposition to) despise order? For “no one orders for
the better” what he has to do, except the man who is rather ready to
leave undone what he is prohibited from doing by the divine power, than
desirous of doing that which he meditates in his own human cogitations.
For “there are many devices in a man’s heart; nevertheless, the counsel
of the Lord stands for ever.” <span id="fr_1415"></span>[1416](#fn_1415)

<span id="page_298">p. 298</span> <span id="iv.iii.xv-Page_298"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xv-p4"></span>21. But if our mind is agitated by some
cause of offense, so as not to be capable of delivering a discourse of a
calm and enjoyable strain, our charity towards those for whom Christ
died, desiring to redeem them by the price of His own blood from the
death of the errors of this world, ought to be so great, that the very
circumstance of intelligence being brought us in our sadness, regarding
the advent of some person who longs to become a Christian, ought to be
enough to cheer us and dissipate that heaviness of spirit, just as the
delights of gain are wont to soften the pain of losses. For we are not
(fairly) oppressed by the offense of any individual, unless it be that
of the man whom we either perceive or believe to be perishing himself,
or to be the occasion of the undoing of some weak one. Accordingly, one
who comes to us with the view of being formally admitted, in that we
cherish the hope of his ability to go forward, should wipe away the
sorrow caused by one who fails us. For even if the dread that our
proselyte may become the child of hell <span
id="fr_1416"></span>[1417](#fn_1416) comes into our thoughts, as, there
are many such before our eyes, from whom those offenses arise by which
we are distressed, this ought to operate, not in the way of keeping us
back, but rather in the way of stimulating us and spurring us on. And in
the same measure we ought to admonish him whom we are instructing to be
on his guard against imitating those who are Christians only in name and
not in very truth, and to take care not to suffer himself to be so moved
by their numbers as either to be desirous of following them, or to be
reluctant to follow Christ on their account, and either to be unwilling
to be in the Church of God, where they are, or to wish to be there in
such a character as they bear. And somehow or other, in admonitions of
this sort, that address is the more glowing to which a present sense of
grief supplies the fuel; so that instead of being duller, we utter with
greater fire and vehemence under such feelings things which, in times of
greater ease, we would give forth in a colder and less energetic manner.
And this should make us rejoice that an opportunity is afforded us under
which the emotions of our mind pass not away without yielding some
fruit.

<span id="iv.iii.xv-p6"></span>22. If, however, grief has taken
possession of us on account of something in which we ourselves have
erred or sinned, we should bear in mind not only that a “broken spirit
is a sacrifice to God,” <span id="fr_1417"></span>[1418](#fn_1417) but
also the saying, “Like as water quencheth fire, so alms sin;” <span
id="fr_1418"></span>[1419](#fn_1418) and again, “I will have mercy,”
saith He, “rather than sacrifice.” <span
id="fr_1419"></span>[1420](#fn_1419) Therefore, as in the event of our
being in peril from fire we would certainly run to the water in order to
get the fire extinguished, and we would be grateful if any person were
to offer it in the immediate vicinity; so, if some flame of sin has
risen from our own stack, <span id="fr_1420"></span>[1421](#fn_1420) and
if we are troubled on that account, when an opportunity has been given
for a most merciful work, we should rejoice in it, as if a fountain were
offered us in order that by it the conflagration which had burst forth
might be extinguished. Unless haply we are foolish enough to think that
we ought to be readier in running with bread, wherewith we may fill the
belly of a hungry man, than with the word of God, wherewith we may
instruct the mind of the man who feeds on it. <span
id="fr_1421"></span>[1422](#fn_1421) There is this also to consider,
namely, that if it would only be of advantage to us to do this thing,
and entail no disadvantage to leave it undone, we might despise a remedy
offered in an unhappy fashion in the time of peril with a view to the
safety, not now of a neighbor, but of ourselves. But when from the mouth
of the Lord this so threatening sentence is heard, “Thou wicked and
slothful servant, thou oughtest to give my money to the
exchangers,” <span id="fr_1422"></span>[1423](#fn_1422) what madness, I
pray thee, is it thus, seeing that our sin pains us, to be minded to sin
again, by refusing to give the Lord’s money to one who desires it and
asks it! When these and such like considerations and reflections have
succeeded in dispelling the darkness of weary feelings, the bent of mind
is rendered apt for the duty of catechising, so that that is received in
a pleasant manner which breaks forth vigorously and cheerfully from the
rich vein of charity. For these things indeed which are uttered here are
spoken, not so much by me to you, as rather to us all by that very “love
which is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit that is given to
us.” <span id="fr_1423"></span>[1424](#fn_1423)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1415"></span>[297:1416](1030388.htm#fr_1415) <span
id="iv.iii.xv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xv-p3"></span> [Prov.
19.21](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#021)<span
id="iv.iii.xv-p3.1"></span>[Prov. xix.
21](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#021)<span id="iv.iii.xv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1416"></span>[298:1417](1030388.htm#fr_1416) <span
id="iv.iii.xv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xv-p5"></span> [Matt.
23.15](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#015)<span id="iv.iii.xv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="fn_1417"></span>[298:1418](1030388.htm#fr_1417) <span
id="iv.iii.xv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xv-p7"></span> [Ps.
51.17](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#017)<span
id="iv.iii.xv-p7.1"></span>[Ps. li.
17](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#017)<span id="iv.iii.xv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1418"></span>[298:1419](1030388.htm#fr_1418) <span
id="iv.iii.xv-p7.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xv-p8"></span> [Ecclus.
3.30](../../../bib/apo/sir003.htm#030)<span
id="iv.iii.xv-p8.1"></span>[Ecclus. iii.
30](../../../bib/apo/sir003.htm#030)<span id="iv.iii.xv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1419"></span>[298:1420](1030388.htm#fr_1419) <span
id="iv.iii.xv-p8.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xv-p9"></span> [Hos.
6.6](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#006)<span
id="iv.iii.xv-p9.1"></span>[Hos. vi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#006)<span id="iv.iii.xv-p9.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1420"></span>[298:1421](1030388.htm#fr_1420) <span
id="iv.iii.xv-p9.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xv-p10"></span> *Fæno*= hay.

<span id="fn_1421"></span>[298:1422](1030388.htm#fr_1421) <span
id="iv.iii.xv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xv-p11"></span> Reading *istud edentis*; for which some
editions give *studentis* = of one who studies it.

<span id="fn_1422"></span>[298:1423](1030388.htm#fr_1422) <span
id="iv.iii.xv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xv-p12"></span> [Matt.
25:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#026),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#027)<span id="iv.iii.xv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="fn_1423"></span>[298:1424](1030388.htm#fr_1423) <span
id="iv.iii.xv-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xv-p13"></span> [Rom.
5.5](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#005)<span
id="iv.iii.xv-p13.1"></span>[Rom. v.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#005)<span id="iv.iii.xv-p13.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 15](1030389)
