[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030067)  [Next](1030069) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.vi.xiv"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.xiv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.vi.xiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 13.—The Death of Christ Voluntary.
How the Mediator of Life Subdued the Mediator of Death. How the Devil
Leads His Own to Despise the Death of Christ.</span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.xiv-p2"></span>16. Wherefore, since the spirit is to
be preferred to the body, and the death of the spirit means that God has
left it, but the death of the body that the spirit has left it; and
since herein lies the punishment in the death of the body, that the
spirit leaves the body against its will, because it left God willingly;
so that, whereas the spirit left God because it would, it leaves the
body although it would not; nor leaves it when it would, unless it has
offered violence to itself, whereby the body itself is slain: the spirit
of the Mediator showed how it was through no punishment of sin that He
came to the death of the flesh, because He did not leave it against His
will, but because He willed, when He willed, as He willed. For because
He is so commingled \[with the flesh\] by the Word of God as to be one,
He says: “I have power to lay down my life, and I have power to take it
again. No man taketh it from me, but I lay down my life that I might
take it again.” <span id="fr_509"></span>[510](#fn_509) And, as the
Gospel tells us, they who were <span id="page_78">p. 78</span> <span
id="iv.i.vi.xiv-Page_78"></span>present were most astonished at this,
that after that \[last\] word, in which He set forth the figure of our
sin, He immediately gave up His spirit. For they who are hung on the
cross are commonly tortured by a prolonged death. Whence it was that the
legs of the thieves were broken, in order that they might die directly,
and be taken down from the cross before the Sabbath. And that He was
found to be dead already, caused wonder. And it was this also, at which,
as we read, Pilate marvelled, when the body of the Lord was asked of him
for burial. <span id="fr_510"></span>[511](#fn_510)

<span id="iv.i.vi.xiv-p5"></span>17. Because that deceiver then,—who was
a mediator to death for man, and feignedly puts himself forward as to
life, under the name of cleansing by sacrilegious rites and sacrifices,
by which the proud are led away,—can neither share in our death, nor
rise again from his own: he has indeed been able to apply his single
death to our double one; but he certainly has not been able to apply a
single resurrection, which should be at once a mystery of our renewal,
and a type of that waking up which is to be in the end. He then who
being alive in the spirit raised again His own flesh that was dead, the
true Mediator of life, has cast out him, who is dead in the spirit and
the mediator of death, from the spirits of those who believe in Himself,
so that he should not reign within, but should assault from without, and
yet not prevail. And to him, too, He offered Himself to be tempted, in
order that He might be also a mediator to overcome his temptations, not
only by succor, but also by example. But when the devil, from the first,
although striving through every entrance to creep into His inward parts,
was thrust out, having finished all his alluring temptation in the
wilderness after the baptism; <span id="fr_511"></span>[512](#fn_511)
because, being dead in the spirit, he forced no entrance into Him who
was alive in the spirit, he betook himself, through eagerness for the
death of man in any way whatsoever, to effecting that death which he
could, and was permitted to effect it upon that mortal element which the
living Mediator had received from us. And where he could do anything,
there in every respect he was conquered; and wherein he received
outwardly the power of slaying the Lord in the flesh, therein his inward
power, by which he held ourselves, was slain. For it was brought to pass
that the bonds of many sins in many deaths were loosed, through the one
death of One which no sin had preceded. Which death, though not due, the
Lord therefore rendered for us, that the death which was due might work
us no hurt. For He was not stripped of the flesh by obligation of any
authority, but He stripped Himself. For doubtless He who was able not to
die, if He would not, did die because He would: and so He made a show of
principalities and powers, openly triumphing over them in Himself. <span
id="fr_512"></span>[513](#fn_512) For whereas by His death the one and
most real sacrifice was offered up for us, whatever fault there was,
whence principalities and powers held us fast as of right to pay its
penalty, He cleansed, abolished, extinguished; and by His own
resurrection He also called us whom He predestinated to a new life; and
whom He called, them He justified; and whom He justified, them He
glorified. <span id="fr_513"></span>[514](#fn_513) And so the devil, in
that very death of the flesh, lost man, whom he was possessing as by an
absolute right, seduced as he was by his own consent, and over whom he
ruled, himself impeded by no corruption of flesh and blood, through that
frailty of man’s mortal body, whence he was both too poor and too weak;
he who was proud in proportion as he was, as it were, both richer and
stronger, ruling over him who was, as it were, both clothed in rags and
full of troubles. For whither he drove the sinner to fall, himself not
following, there by following he compelled the Redeemer to descend. And
so the Son of God deigned to become our friend in the fellowship of
death, to which because he came not, the enemy thought himself to be
better and greater than ourselves. For our Redeemer says, “Greater love
hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his
friends.” <span id="fr_514"></span>[515](#fn_514) Wherefore also the
devil thought himself superior to the Lord Himself, inasmuch as the Lord
in His sufferings yielded to him; for of Him, too, is understood what is
read in the Psalm, “For Thou hast made Him a little lower than the
angels:” <span id="fr_515"></span>[516](#fn_515) so that He, being
Himself put to death, although innocent, by the unjust one acting
against us as it were by just right, might by a most just right overcome
him, and so might lead captive the captivity wrought through sin, <span
id="fr_516"></span>[517](#fn_516) and free us from a captivity that was
just on account of sin, by blotting out the handwriting, and redeeming
us who were to be justified although sinners, through His own righteous
blood unrighteously poured out.

<span id="iv.i.vi.xiv-p12"></span>18. Hence also the devil mocks those
who are his own until this very day, to whom he presents himself as a
false mediator, as though they would be cleansed or rather entangled and
drowned by his rites, in that he very <span id="page_79">p. 79</span>
<span id="iv.i.vi.xiv-Page_79"></span>easily persuades the proud to
ridicule and despise the death of Christ, from which the more he himself
is estranged, the more is he believed by them to be the holier and more
divine. Yet those who have remained with him are very few, since the
nations acknowledge and with pious humility imbibe the price paid for
themselves, and in trust upon it abandon their enemy, and gather
together to their Redeemer. For the devil does not know how the most
excellent wisdom of God makes use of both his snares and his fury to
bring about the salvation of His own faithful ones, beginning from the
former end, which is the beginning of the spiritual creature, even to
the latter end, which is the death of the body, and so “reaching from
the one end to the other, mightily and sweetly ordering all
things.” <span id="fr_517"></span>[518](#fn_517) For wisdom “passeth and
goeth through all things by reason of her pureness, and no defiled thing
can fall into her.” <span id="fr_518"></span>[519](#fn_518) And since
the devil has nothing to do with the death of the flesh, whence comes
his exceeding pride, a death of another kind is prepared in the eternal
fire of hell, by which not only the spirits that have earthly, but also
those who have aerial bodies, can be tormented. But proud men, by whom
Christ is despised, because He died, wherein He bought us with so great
a price, <span id="fr_519"></span>[520](#fn_519) both bring back the
former death, and also men, to that miserable condition of nature, which
is derived from the first sin, and will be cast down into the latter
death with the devil. And they on this account preferred the devil to
Christ, because the former cast them into that former death, whither he
himself fell not through the difference of his nature, and whither on
account of them Christ descended through His great mercy: and yet they
do not hesitate to believe themselves better than the devils, and do not
cease to assail and denounce them with every sort of malediction, while
they know them at any rate to have nothing to do with the suffering of
this kind of death, on account of which they despise Christ. Neither
will they take into account that the case may possibly be, that the Word
of God, remaining in Himself, and in Himself in no way changeable, may
yet, through the taking upon Him of a lower nature, be able to suffer
somewhat of a lower kind, which the unclean spirit cannot suffer,
because he has not an earthly body. And so, whereas they themselves are
better than the devils, yet, because they bear a body of flesh, they can
so die, as the devils certainly cannot die, who do not bear such a body.
They presume much on the deaths of their own sacrifices, which they do
not perceive that they sacrifice to deceitful and proud spirits; or if
they have come to perceive it, think their friendship to be of some good
to themselves, treacherous and envious although they are, whose purpose
is bent upon nothing else except to hinder our return.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_509"></span>[77:510](1030068.htm#fr_509) <span
id="iv.i.vi.xiv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.xiv-p3"></span> [John
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#018)<span
id="iv.i.vi.xiv-p3.1"></span>[John
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#018)<span id="iv.i.vi.xiv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="fn_510"></span>[78:511](1030068.htm#fr_510) <span
id="iv.i.vi.xiv-p3.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.xiv-p4"></span> [Mark
15:37](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#037),
[39](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#039),
[43](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#043),
[44](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#044), [John
19:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#030)<span
id="iv.i.vi.xiv-p4.1"></span>[Mark
15:37](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#037),
[39](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#039),
[43](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#043),
[44](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#044)<span
id="iv.i.vi.xiv-p4.2"></span>, and [John xix.
30-34](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#030)<span
id="iv.i.vi.xiv-p4.3"></span>

<span id="fn_511"></span>[78:512](1030068.htm#fr_511) <span
id="iv.i.vi.xiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.xiv-p6"></span> [Matt.
4.1-11](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#001)<span
id="iv.i.vi.xiv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="fn_512"></span>[78:513](1030068.htm#fr_512) <span
id="iv.i.vi.xiv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.xiv-p7"></span> [Col.
2.15](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#015)<span
id="iv.i.vi.xiv-p7.1"></span>[Col. ii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#015)<span id="iv.i.vi.xiv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="fn_513"></span>[78:514](1030068.htm#fr_513) <span
id="iv.i.vi.xiv-p7.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.xiv-p8"></span> [Rom.
8.30](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#030)<span
id="iv.i.vi.xiv-p8.1"></span>[Rom. viii.
30](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#030)<span id="iv.i.vi.xiv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="fn_514"></span>[78:515](1030068.htm#fr_514) <span
id="iv.i.vi.xiv-p8.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.xiv-p9"></span> [John
15.13](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#013)<span
id="iv.i.vi.xiv-p9.1"></span>[John xv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#013)<span id="iv.i.vi.xiv-p9.2"></span>

<span id="fn_515"></span>[78:516](1030068.htm#fr_515) <span
id="iv.i.vi.xiv-p9.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.xiv-p10"></span> [Ps.
8.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#005)<span
id="iv.i.vi.xiv-p10.1"></span>[Ps. viii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#005)<span id="iv.i.vi.xiv-p10.2"></span>

<span id="fn_516"></span>[78:517](1030068.htm#fr_516) <span
id="iv.i.vi.xiv-p10.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.xiv-p11"></span> [Eph.
4.8](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#008)<span
id="iv.i.vi.xiv-p11.1"></span>[Eph. iv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#008)<span id="iv.i.vi.xiv-p11.2"></span>

<span id="fn_517"></span>[79:518](1030068.htm#fr_517) <span
id="iv.i.vi.xiv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.xiv-p13"></span> [Wisdom
8.1](../../../bib/apo/wis008.htm#001)<span
id="iv.i.vi.xiv-p13.1"></span>[Wisd. viii.
1](../../../bib/apo/wis008.htm#001)<span id="iv.i.vi.xiv-p13.2"></span>

<span id="fn_518"></span>[79:519](1030068.htm#fr_518) <span
id="iv.i.vi.xiv-p13.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.xiv-p14"></span> [Wis.
7:24](../../../bib/apo/wis007.htm#024),
[25](../../../bib/apo/wis007.htm#025)<span
id="iv.i.vi.xiv-p14.1"></span>[Wis.
7:24](../../../bib/apo/wis007.htm#024),
[25](../../../bib/apo/wis007.htm#025)<span
id="iv.i.vi.xiv-p14.2"></span>

<span id="fn_519"></span>[79:520](1030068.htm#fr_519) <span
id="iv.i.vi.xiv-p14.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.xiv-p15"></span> [1 Cor.
6.20](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#020)<span
id="iv.i.vi.xiv-p15.1"></span>[1 Cor. vi.
20](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#020)<span id="iv.i.vi.xiv-p15.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 14](1030069)
