[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030224)  [Next](1030226) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.xvii.vi"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.xvii.vi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 6.—How There is a Trinity in the
Very Simplicity of God. Whether and How the Trinity that is God is
Manifested from the Trinities Which Have Been Shown to Be in Men.</span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.vi-p2"></span>9. When, then, we say, Eternal, wise,
blessed, are these three the Trinity that is called God? We reduce,
indeed, those twelve to this small number of three; but perhaps we can
go further, and reduce these three also to one of them. For if wisdom
and might, or life and wisdom, can be one and the same thing in the
nature of God, why cannot eternity and wisdom, or blessedness and
wisdom, be one and the same thing in the nature of God? And hence, as it
made no difference whether we spoke of these twelve or of those three
when we reduced the many to the small number; so does it make no
difference whether we speak of those three, or of that one, to the
singularity of which we have shown that the other two of the three may
be reduced. What fashion, then, of argument, what possible force and
might of understanding, what liveliness of reason, what
sharp-sightedness of thought, will set forth how (to pass over now the
others) this one thing, that God is called wisdom, is a trinity? For God
does not receive wisdom from any one as we receive it from Him, but He
is Himself His own wisdom; because His wisdom is not one thing, and His
essence another, seeing that to Him to be wise is to be. Christ, indeed,
is called in the Holy Scriptures, “the power of God, and the wisdom of
God.” <span id="fr_954"></span>[955](#fn_954) But we have discussed in
the seventh book how this is to be understood, so that the Son may not
seem to make the Father wise; and our explanation came to this, that the
Son is wisdom of wisdom, in the same way as He is light of light, God of
God. Nor could we find the Holy Spirit to be in any other way than that
He Himself also is wisdom, and altogether one wisdom, as one God, one
essence. How, then, do we understand this wisdom, which is God, to be a
trinity? I do not say, How do we believe this? For among the faithful
this ought to admit no question. But supposing there is any way by which
we can see with the understanding what we believe, what is that way?

<span id="iv.i.xvii.vi-p4"></span>10. For if we recall where it was in
these books that a trinity first began to show itself <span
id="page_204">p. 204</span> <span id="iv.i.xvii.vi-Page_204"></span>to
our understanding, the eighth book is that which occurs to us; since it
was there that to the best of our power we tried to raise the aim of the
mind to understand that most excellent and unchangeable nature, which
our mind is not. And we so contemplated this nature as to think of it as
not far from us, and as above us, not in place, but by its own awful and
wonderful excellence, and in such wise that it appeared to be with us by
its own present light. Yet in this no trinity was yet manifest to us,
because in that blaze of light we did not keep the eye of the mind
steadfastly bent upon seeking it; only we discerned it in a sense,
because there was no bulk wherein we must needs think the magnitude of
two or three to be more than that of one. But when we came to treat of
love, which in the Holy Scriptures is called God, <span
id="fr_955"></span>[956](#fn_955) then a trinity began to dawn upon us a
little, *i.e.* one that loves, and that which is loved, and love. But
because that ineffable light beat back our gaze, and it became in some
degree plain that the weakness of our mind could not as yet be tempered
to it, we turned back in the midst of the course we had begun, and
planned according to the (as it were) more familiar consideration of our
own mind, according to which man is made after the image of God, <span
id="fr_956"></span>[957](#fn_956) in order to relieve our overstrained
attention; and thereupon we dwelt from the ninth to the fourteenth book
upon the consideration of the creature, which we are, that we might be
able to understand and behold the invisible things of God by those
things which are made. And now that we have exercised the understanding,
as far as was needful, or perhaps more than was needful, in lower
things, lo! we wish, but have not strength, to raise ourselves to behold
that highest Trinity which is God. For in such manner as we see most
undoubted trinities, whether those which are wrought from without by
corporeal things, or when these same things are thought of which were
perceived from without; or when those things which take their rise in
the mind, and do not pertain to the senses of the body, as faith, or as
the virtues which comprise the art of living, are discerned by manifest
reason, and, held fast by knowledge; or when the mind itself, by which
we know whatever we truly say that we know, is known to itself, or
thinks of itself; or when that mind beholds anything eternal and
unchangeable, which itself is not;—in such way, then, I say, as we see
in all these instances most undoubted trinities, because they are
wrought in ourselves, or are in ourselves, when we remember, look at, or
desire these things;—do we, I say, in such manner also see the Trinity
that is God; because there also, by the understanding, we behold both
Him as it were speaking, and His Word, *i.e.* the Father and the Son;
and then, proceeding thence, the love common to both, namely, the Holy
Spirit? These trinities that pertain to our senses or to our mind, do we
rather see than believe them, but rather believe than see that God is a
trinity? But if this is so, then doubtless we either do not at all
understand and behold the invisible things of God by those things that
are made, or if we behold them at all, we do not behold the Trinity in
them; and there is therein somewhat to behold, and somewhat also which
we ought to believe, even though not beheld. And as the eighth book
showed that we behold the unchangeable good which we are not, so the
fourteenth reminded us thereof, when we spoke of the wisdom that man has
from God. Why, then, do we not recognize the Trinity therein? Does that
wisdom which God is said to be, not perceive itself, and not love
itself? Who would say this? Or who is there that does not see, that
where there is no knowledge, there in no way is there wisdom? Or are we,
in truth, to think that the Wisdom which is God knows other things, and
does not know itself; or loves other things, and does not love itself?
But if this is a foolish and impious thing to say or believe, then
behold we have a trinity,—to wit, wisdom, and the knowledge wisdom has
of itself, and its love of itself. For so, too, we find a trinity in man
also, *i.e.* mind, and the knowledge wherewith mind knows itself, and
the love wherewith it loves itself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_954"></span>[203:955](1030225.htm#fr_954) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.vi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.vi-p3"></span> [1 Cor.
1.24](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#024)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.vi-p3.1"></span>[1 Cor. i.
24](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#024)<span id="iv.i.xvii.vi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="fn_955"></span>[204:956](1030225.htm#fr_955) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.vi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.vi-p5"></span> [1 John
4.16](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#016)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.vi-p5.1"></span>[1 John iv.
16](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#016)<span id="iv.i.xvii.vi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="fn_956"></span>[204:957](1030225.htm#fr_956) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.vi-p5.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.vi-p6"></span> [Gen.
1.27](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#027)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.vi-p6.1"></span>[Gen. i.
27](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#027)<span id="iv.i.xvii.vi-p6.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 7](1030226)
