[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030443)  [Next](1030445) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.xviii"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.xviii-p1"></span> 17. “But they seemed there to make
absurd statements.” On whose assertion? Forsooth on that of enemies, for
whatever cause, for whatever reason, for this is not now the question,
still enemies. Upon reading, I found it so of myself. Is it so? Without
having received any instruction in poetry, you would not dare to essay
to read Terentianus Maurus without a master: Asper, Cornutus, Donatus,
and others without number are needed, that any poet whatever may be
understood, whose strains seem to court even the applause of the
theatre; do you in the case of those books, which, however they may be,
yet by the confession of well-nigh the whole human race are commonly
reported to be sacred and full of divine things, rush upon them without
a guide, and dare to deliver an opinion on them without a teacher; and,
if there meet you any matters, which seem absurd, do not accuse rather
your own dullness, and mind decayed by the corruption of this world,
such as is that of all that are foolish, than those \[books\] which
haply cannot be understood by such persons! You should seek some one at
once pious and learned, or who by consent of many was said to be such,
that you might be both bettered by his advice, and instructed by his
learning. Was he not easy to find? He should be searched out with pains.
Was there no one in the country in which you lived? What cause could
more profitably force to travel? Was he quite hidden, or did he not
exist on the continent <span id="fr_1729"></span>[1730](#fn_1729) ? One
should cross the sea. If across the sea he was not found in any place
near to us, you should proceed even as far as those lands, in which the
things related in those books are said to have taken place. What,
Honoratus, have we done of this kind? And yet a religion perhaps the
most holy, (for as yet I am speaking as though it were matter of doubt,)
the opinion whereof hath by this time taken possession of the whole
world, we wretched boys condemned at our own discretion and sentence.
What if those things which in those same Scriptures seem to offend some
unlearned persons, were so set there for this purpose, that when things
were read of such as are abhorrent from the feeling of ordinary men, not
to say of wise and holy men, we might with much more earnestness seek
the hidden meaning. Perceive you not how the Catamite of the
Bucolics, <span id="fr_1730"></span>[1731](#fn_1730) for whom the rough
shepherd gushed forth into tears, men essay to interpret, and affirm
that the boy Alexis, on whom Plato also is said to have composed a love
strain, hath some great meaning or other, but escapes the judgment of
the unlearned; whereas without any sacrilege a poet however rich may
seem to have published wanton songs?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1729"></span>[355:1730](1030444.htm#fr_1729) <span
id="iv.vi.xviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.xviii-p2"></span> *Continenti*

<span id="fn_1730"></span>[355:1731](1030444.htm#fr_1730) <span
id="iv.vi.xviii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.xviii-p3"></span> Virg. Ecl. ii.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 18](1030445)
