[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030146)  [Next](1030148) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.xii.x"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xii.x-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.xii.x-p1.1"></span>Chapter 10.—Every Mind Knows Certainly Three
Things Concerning Itself—That It Understands, that It Is, and that It
Lives.</span>

<span id="iv.i.xii.x-p2"></span>13. Let it not then add anything to that
which it knows itself to be, when it is bidden to know itself. For it
knows, at any rate, that this is said to itself; namely, to the self
that is, and that lives, and that understands. But a dead body also is,
and cattle live; but neither a dead body nor cattle understand.
Therefore it so knows that it so is, and that it so lives, as an
understanding is and lives. When, therefore, for example’s sake, the
mind thinks itself air, it thinks that air understands; it knows,
however, that itself understands, but it does not know itself to be air,
but only thinks so. Let it separate that which it thinks itself; let it
discern that which it knows; let this remain to it, about which not even
have they doubted who have thought the mind to be this corporeal thing
or that. For certainly every mind does not consider <span
id="page_141">p. 141</span> <span id="iv.i.xii.x-Page_141"></span>itself
to be air; but some think themselves fire, others the brain, and some
one kind of corporeal thing, others another, as I have mentioned before;
yet all know that they themselves understand, and are, and live; but
they refer understanding to that which they understand, but to be, and
to live, to themselves. And no one doubts, either that no one
understands who does not live, or that no one lives of whom it is not
true that he is; and that therefore by consequence that which
understands both is and lives; not as a dead body is which does not
live, nor as a soul lives which does not understand, but in some proper
and more excellent manner. Further, they know that they will, and they
equally know that no one can will who is not and who does not live; and
they also refer that will itself to something which they will with that
will. They know also that they remember; and they know at the same time
that nobody could remember, unless he both was and lived; but we refer
memory itself also to something, in that we remember those things.
Therefore the knowledge and science of many things are contained in two
of these three, memory and understanding; but will must be present, that
we may enjoy or use them. For we enjoy things known, in which things
themselves the will finds delight for their own sake, and so reposes;
but we use those things, which we refer to some other thing which we are
to enjoy. Neither is the life of man vicious and culpable in any other
way, than as wrongly using and wrongly enjoying. But it is no place here
to discuss this.

<span id="iv.i.xii.x-p3"></span>14. But since we treat of the nature of
the mind, let us remove from our consideration all knowledge which is
received from without, through the senses of the body; and attend more
carefully to the position which we have laid down, that all minds know
and are certain concerning themselves. For men certainly have doubted
whether the power of living, of remembering, of understanding, of
willing, of thinking, of knowing, of judging, be of air, or of fire, or
of the brain, or of the blood, or of atoms, or besides the usual four
elements of a fifth kind of body, I know not what; or ,whether the
combining or tempering together of this our flesh itself has power to
accomplish these things. And one has attempted to establish this, and
another to establish that. Yet who ever doubts that he himself lives,
and remembers, and understands, and wills, and thinks, and knows, and
judges? Seeing that even if he doubts, he lives; if he doubts, he
remembers why he doubts; if he doubts, he understands that he doubts; if
he doubts, he wishes to be certain; if he doubts, he thinks; if he
doubts, he knows that he does not know; if he doubts, he judges that he
ought not to assent rashly. Whosoever therefore doubts about anything
else, ought not to doubt of all these things; which if they were not, he
would not be able to doubt of anything.

<span id="iv.i.xii.x-p4"></span>15. They who think the mind to be either
a body or the combination or tempering of the body, will have all these
things to seem to be in a subject, so that the substance is air, or
fire, or some other corporeal thing, which they think to be the mind;
but that the understanding (*intelligentia*) is in this corporeal thing
as its quality, so that this corporeal thing is the subject, but the
understanding is in the subject: *viz*. that the mind is the subject,
which they judge to be a corporeal thing, but the understanding
\[intelligence\], or any other of those things which we have mentioned
as certain to us, is in that subject. They also hold nearly the same
opinion who deny the mind itself to be body, but think it to be the
combination or tempering together of the body; for there is this
difference, that the former say that the mind itself is the substance,
in which the understanding \[intelligence\] is, as in a subject; but the
latter say that the mind itself is in a subject, *viz.* in the body, of
which it is the combination or tempering together. And hence, by
consequence, what else can they think, except that the understanding
also is in the same body as in a subject?

<span id="iv.i.xii.x-p5"></span>16. And all these do not perceive that
the mind knows itself, even when it seeks for itself, as we have already
shown. But nothing is at all rightly said to be known while its
substance is not known. And therefore, when the mind knows itself, it
knows its own substance; and when it is certain about itself, it as
certain about its own substance. But it is certain about itself, as
those things which are said above prove convincingly; although it is not
at all certain whether itself is air, or fire, or some body, or some
function of body. Therefore it is not any of these. And to that whole
which is bidden to know itself, belongs this, that it is certain that it
is not any of those things of which it is uncertain, and is certain that
it is that only, which only it is certain that it is. For it thinks in
this way of fire, or air, and whatever else of the body it thinks of.
Neither can it in any way be brought to pass that it should so think
that which itself is, as it thinks that which itself is not. Since it
thinks all these things through an imaginary phantasy, whether fire, or
air, or this or that body, or that part or combination and tempering
together of the body: nor assuredly is it said to be all those things,
but <span id="page_142">p. 142</span> <span
id="iv.i.xii.x-Page_142"></span>some one of them. But if it were any one
of them, it would think this one in a different manner from the rest
*viz*. not through an imaginary phantasy, as absent things are thought,
which either themselves or some of like kind have been touched by the
bodily sense; but by some inward, not feigned, but true presence (for
nothing is more present to it than itself); just as it thinks that
itself lives, and remembers, and understands, and wills. For it knows
these things in itself, and does not imagine them as though it had
touched them by the sense outside itself, as corporeal things are
touched. And if it attaches nothing to itself from the thought of these
things, so as to think itself to be something of the kind, then
whatsoever remains to it from itself that alone is itself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 11](1030148)
