[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030086)  [Next](1030088) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.vii.x"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vii.x-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.vii.x-p1.1"></span>Chapter 10.—Those Things Which Belong
Absolutely to God as an Essence, are Spoken of the Trinity in the
Singular, Not in the Plural.</span>

<span id="iv.i.vii.x-p2"></span>11. As, therefore, we do not say three
essences, so we do not say three greatnesses, or three who are great.
For in things which are great by partaking of greatness, to which it is
one thing to *be*, and another to be *great*, as a great house, and a
great mountain, and a great mind; in these things, I say, greatness is
one thing, and that which is great because of greatness is another, and
a great house, certainly, is not absolute greatness itself. But that is
absolute greatness by which not only a great house is great, and any
great mountain is great, but also by which every other thing whatsoever
is great, which is called great; so that greatness itself is one thing,
and those things are another which are called great from it. And this
greatness certainly is primarily great, and in a much more excellent way
than those things which are great by partaking of it. But since God is
not great with that greatness which is not Himself, so that God, in
being great, is, as it were, partaker of that greatness;—otherwise that
will be a greatness greater than God, whereas there is nothing greater
than God; therefore, He is great with that greatness by which He Himself
is that same greatness. And, therefore, as we do not say three essences,
so neither do we say three greatnesses; for it is the same thing to God
to be, and to be great. For the same reason neither <span
id="page_93">p. 93</span> <span id="iv.i.vii.x-Page_93"></span>do we say
three greats, but one who is great; since God is not great by partaking
of greatness, but He is great by Himself being great, because He Himself
is His own greatness. Let the same be said also of the goodness, and of
the eternity, and of the omnipotence of God, and, in short, of all the
predicaments which can be predicated of God, as He is spoken of in
respect to Himself, not metaphorically and by similitude, but properly,
if indeed anything can be spoken of Him properly, by the mouth of man.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 11](1030088)
