[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030710)  [Next](1030712) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.vi.xxiii"></span>

<span id="v.vi.xxiii-p1"></span> 22. And to holy David indeed it might
more justly be said, that he ought not to have been angry; no, not with
one however ungrateful and rendering evil for good; yet if, as man,
anger did steal over him, he ought not to have let it so prevail, that
he should swear to do a thing which either by giving way to his rage he
should do, or by breaking his oath leave undone. But to the other, set
as he was amid the libidinous frenzy of the Sodomites, who would dare to
say, “Although thy guests in thine own house, whither to enter in thou
by most violent humanity hast compelled them, be laid hold upon by lewd
men, and being deforced be carnally known as women, fear thou not a
whit, care for it not a whir, have no dread, no horror, no trembling?”
What man, even a companion of those wretches, would dare to say this to
the pious host? But assuredly it would be most rightly said, “Do what
thou canst, that the thing be not done which thou deservedly fearest:
but let not this fear of thine drive thee to do a thing which if thy
daughters be willing that it be done unto them, they will through thee
do wickedness with the Sodomites, if unwilling, will through thee from
the Sodomites suffer violence. Commit not thou a great crime of thine
own, while thou dreadest a greater crime of other men; for be the
difference as great as thou wilt between thine own and that of others,
this will be thine own, that other men’s.” Unless perchance in defending
this man one should so crowd himself into a corner, as to say, “Since to
receive a wrong is better than to do one, and those guests were not
about to do but to suffer a wrong, that just man chose that his
daughters should suffer wrong rather than his guests, acting upon his
rights as his daughters’ lord; and he knew that it would be no sin in
them if the thing were done, because they would but bear them which did
the sin, not consenting unto them, and so without sin of their own. In
fine, they did not offer themselves (albeit better females than males)
to be carnally known instead of those guests, lest they should be
rendered guilty, not by the suffering of others’ lust, but by consenting
of their own will: nor yet did their father permit it to be done unto
himself, when they essayed to do it, because he would not betray his
guests to them, (albeit there had been less of evil, if it were done to
one man than to two;) but as much as he could he resisted, lest himself
also should be defiled by any assent of his own, though even if the
frenzy of others’ lust had prevailed by strength of body, it would not
have defiled him so long as he consented not. Now as the daughters
sinned not, neither did he sin in their persons, because he was not
making them to sin, if they should be deforced against their will, but
only to bear them that did the sin. Just as if he should offer his
slaves to be beaten by ruffians, that his guests might not suffer the
wrong of beating.” Of which matter I shall not dispute, because it would
take long to argue, whether even a master may justly use his right of
power over his slave, so as to cause an unoffending slave to be smitten,
that his unoffending friend may not be beaten in his house by violent
bad men. But certainly, as concerning David, it is no wise right to say
that he ought to have sworn to do a thing which afterwards he would
perceive that he ought not to do. Whence it is clear that we ought not
to take all that we read to have been done by holy or just men, and
transfer the same to morals, but hence too we must learn how widely that
saying of the Apostle extends, and even to what persons it reaches:
“Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are spiritual
restore such an one in the spirit of meekness, considering thyself also,
lest thou be tempted.” <span id="fr_2412"></span>[2413](#fn_2412) The
being overtaken in a fault happens, either while one does not see at the
time what is right to be done, or while, seeing it, one is overcome;
that is, that a sin is done, either for that the truth is hidden, or for
that infirmity compelleth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2412"></span>[490:2413](1030711.htm#fr_2412) <span
id="v.vi.xxiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.xxiii-p2"></span> [Gal.
6.1](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#001)<span
id="v.vi.xxiii-p2.1"></span>[Gal. vi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#001)<span id="v.vi.xxiii-p2.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 23](1030712)
