[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030129)  [Next](1030131) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.xi.vi"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xi.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.xi.vi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 6.—There is One Knowledge of the
Thing in the Thing Itself, and Another in Eternal Truth Itself. That
Corporeal Things, Too, are to Be Judged the Rules of Eternal
Truth.</span>

<span id="iv.i.xi.vi-p2"></span>9. But when the human mind knows itself
and loves itself, it does not know and love anything unchangeable: and
each individual man declares his own particular mind by one manner of
speech, when he considers what takes place in himself; but defines the
human mind abstractly by special or general knowledge. And so, when he
speaks to me of his own individual mind, as to whether he understands
this or that, or does not understand it, or whether he wishes or does
not wish this or that, I believe; but when he speaks the truth of the
mind of man generally or specially, I recognize and approve. Whence it
is manifest, that each sees a thing in himself, in such way that another
person may believe what he says of it, yet may not see it; but another
\[sees a thing\] in the truth itself, in such way that another person
also can gaze upon it; of which the former undergoes changes at
successive times, the latter consists in an unchangeable eternity. For
we do not gather a generic or specific knowledge of the human mind by
means of resemblance by seeing many minds with the eyes of the body: but
we gaze upon indestructible truth, from which to define perfectly, as
far as we can, not of what sort is the mind of any one particular man,
but of what sort it ought to be upon the eternal plan.

<span id="iv.i.xi.vi-p3"></span>10. Whence also, even in the case of the
images of things corporeal which are drawn in through the bodily sense,
and in some way infused into the memory, from which also those things
which have not been seen are thought under a fancied image, whether
otherwise than they really are, or even perchance as they are;—even here
too, we are proved either to accept or reject, within ourselves, by
other rules which remain altogether unchangeable above our mind, when we
approve or reject anything rightly. For both when I recall the walls of
Carthage which I have seen, and imagine to myself the walls of
Alexandria which I have not seen, and, in preferring this to that among
forms which in both cases are imaginary, make that preference upon
grounds of reason; the judgment of truth from above is still strong and
clear, and rests firmly upon the utterly indestructible rules of its own
right; and if it is covered as it were by cloudiness of corporeal
images, yet is not wrapt up and confounded in them.

<span id="iv.i.xi.vi-p4"></span>11. But it makes a difference, whether,
<span id="page_130">p. 130</span> <span
id="iv.i.xi.vi-Page_130"></span>under that or in that darkness, I am
shut off as it were from the clear heaven; or whether (as usually
happens on lofty mountains), enjoying the free air between both, I at
once look up above to the calmest light, and down below upon the densest
clouds. For whence is the ardor of brotherly love kindled in me, when I
hear that some man has borne bitter torments for the excellence and
steadfastness of faith? And if that man is shown to me with the finger,
I am eager to join myself to him, to become acquainted with him, to bind
him to myself in friendship. And accordingly, if opportunity offers, I
draw near, I address him, I converse with him, I express my goodwill
towards him in what words I can, and wish that in him too in turn should
be brought to pass and expressed goodwill towards me; and I endeavor
after a spiritual embrace in the way of belief, since I cannot search
out so quickly and discern altogether his innermost heart. I love
therefore the faithful and courageous man with a pure and genuine love.
But if he were to confess to me in the course of conversation, or were
through unguardedness to show in any way, that either he believes
something unseemly of God, and desires also something carnal in Him, and
that he bore these torments on behalf of such an error, or from the
desire of money for which he hoped, or from empty greediness of human
praise: immediately it follows that the love with which I was borne
towards him, displeased, and as it were repelled, and taken away from an
unworthy man, remains in that form, after which, believing him such as I
did, I had loved him; unless perhaps I have come to love him to this
end, that he may become such, while I have found him not to be such in
fact. And in that man, too, nothing is changed: although it can be
changed, so that he may become that which I had believed him to be
already. But in my mind there certainly is something changed, *viz*.,
the estimate I had formed of him, which was before of one sort, and now
is of another: and the same love, at the bidding from above of
unchangeable righteousness, is turned aside from the purpose of
enjoying, to the purpose of taking counsel. But the form itself of
unshaken and stable truth, wherein I should have enjoyed the fruition of
the man, believing him to be good, and wherein likewise I take counsel
that he may be good, sheds in an immoveable eternity the same light of
incorruptible and most sound reason, both upon the sight of my mind, and
upon that cloud of images, which I discern from above, when I think of
the same man whom I had seen. Again, when I call back to my mind some
arch, turned beautifully and symmetrically, which, let us say, I saw at
Carthage; a certain reality that had been made known to the mind through
the eyes, and transferred to the memory, causes the imaginary view. But
I behold in my mind yet another thing, according to which that work of
art pleases me; and whence also, if it displeased me, I should correct
it. We judge therefore of those particular things according to that
\[form of eternal truth\], and discern that form by the intuition of the
rational mind. But those things themselves we either touch if present by
the bodily sense, or if absent remember their images as fixed in our
memory, or picture, in the way of likeness to them, such things as we
ourselves also, if we wished and were able, would laboriously build up:
figuring in the mind after one fashion the images of bodies, or seeing
bodies through the body; but after another, grasping by simple
intelligence what is above the eye of the mind, *viz*., the reasons and
the unspeakably beautiful skill of such forms.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 7](1030131)
