[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030656)  [Next](1030658) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.xiv"></span>

<span id="v.v.xiv-p1"></span> 13. In which proposition these points may
well deserve to be questioned: whether such consent is to be accounted
as a deed: or whether that is to be called consent which hath not
approbation: or whether it be approbation, when it is said, “It is
expedient to suffer this rather than do that;” and whether the person
spoken of did right to burn incense rather than suffer violation of his
body; and whether it would be right rather to tell a lie, if that was
the alternative proposed, than to burn incense? But if such consent is
to be accounted as a deed, then are they murderers who have chosen
rather to be put to death than bear false witness, yea, what is worse,
they are murderers of themselves. For why, at this rate, should it not
be said that they have slain themselves, because they chose that this
should be done to them that they might not do what they were urged to
do? Or, if it be accounted a worse thing to slay another than himself,
what if these terms were offered to a Martyr, that, upon his refusing to
bear false witness of Christ and to sacrifice to demons, then, before
his eyes, not some other man, but his own father should be put to death;
his father entreating him that he would not by his persevering permit
that to be done? Is it not manifest, that, upon his remaining steadfast
in his purpose of most faithful testimony, they alone would be the
murderers who should slay his father, and not he a parricide into the
bargain? As therefore, in this case, the man would be no party to this
so heinous deed, for choosing, rather than violate his faith by false
testimony, that his own father should be put to death by others, (yea,
though that father were a sacrilegious person whose soul would be
snatched away to punishment;) so the like consent, in the former case,
would not make him a party to that so foul disgrace, if he refused to do
evil himself, let others do what they might in consequence of his not
doing it. For what do such persecutors say, but, “Do evil that we may
not?” If the case were so, that our doing evil would make them not to
have done it, even then it would not be our duty by doing wickedness
ourselves to vote them harmless; but as in fact they are already doing
it when they say nothing of the kind, <span
id="fr_2330"></span>[2331](#fn_2330) why are they to have us to keep
them company in wickedness rather than be vile and noisome by
themselves? For that is not to be called consent; seeing that we do not
approve what they do, always wishing that they would not, and, as much
as in us lies, hindering them that they should not do it, and, when it
is done, not only not committing it with them, but with all possible
detestation condemning the same.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2330"></span>[464:2331](1030657.htm#fr_2330) <span
id="v.v.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.xiv-p2"></span> Al. *when they say such things*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 14](1030658)
