[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030095)  [Next](1030097) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.viii.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.i.viii.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.viii.ii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 2 .—What is Said of the Father and
Son Together, and What Not.</span>

<span id="iv.i.viii.ii-p2"></span>3. But if nothing is spoken of the
Father as such, except that which is spoken of Him in relation to the
Son, that is, that He is His father, or begetter, or beginning; and if
also the begetter is by consequence a beginning to that which he begets
of himself; but whatever else is spoken of Him is so spoken as *with*
the Son, or rather *in* the Son; whether that He is great with that
greatness which He begat, or just with that justice which He begat, or
good with that goodness which He begat, or powerful with that force or
power which He begat, or wise with that wisdom which He begat: yet the
Father is not said to be greatness itself, but the begetter of
greatness; but the Son, as He is called the Son as such, is not so
called *with* the Father but in relation *to* the Father, so is not
great in and by himself, but *with* the Father, of whom He is the
greatness; and so also is called wise *with* the Father, of whom He
Himself is the wisdom; just as the Father is called wise *with* the Son,
because He is wise with that wisdom which He begat; therefore the one is
not called without the other, whatever they are called in respect to
themselves; that is, whatever they are called that manifests their
essential nature, both are so called together;—if these things are so,
then the Father is not God without the Son, nor the Son God without the
Father, but both together are God. And that which is said, “In the
beginning was the Word,” means that the Word was in the Father. Or if
“In the beginning” is intended to mean, Before all things; then in that
which follows, “And the Word was with God,” the Son alone is understood
to be the Word, not the Father and Son together, as though both were one
Word (for He is the Word in the same way as He is the Image, but the
Father and Son are not both together the Image, but the Son alone is the
Image of the Father: just as He is also the Son of the Father, for both
together are not the Son). But in that which is added, “And the Word was
with God,” there is much reason to understand thus: “The Word,” which is
the Son alone, “was with God,” which is not the Father alone, but God
the Father and the Son together. <span id="fr_602"></span>[603](#fn_602)
But what wonder is there, if this can be said in the case of some
twofold things widely different from each other? For what are so
different as soul and body? Yet we can say the soul was with a man, that
is, in a man; although the soul is not the body, and man is both soul
and body together. So that what follows in the Scripture, “And the Word
was God,” <span id="fr_603"></span>[604](#fn_603) may be understood
thus: The Word, which is not the Father, was God together with the
Father. Are we then to say thus, that the Father is the begetter of His
own greatness, that is, the begetter of His own power, or the begetter
of His own wisdom; and that the Son is greatness, and power, and wisdom;
but that the great, omnipotent, and wise God, is both together? How then
God *of* God, Light of Light? For not both together are God of God, but
only the Son is of God, that is to say, of the Father; nor are both
together Light of Light, but the Son only is of Light, that is, of the
Father. Unless, perhaps, it was in order to intimate and inculcate
briefly that the Son is co-eternal with the Father, that it is said, God
of God, and Light of Light, or anything else of the like kind: as if to
say, This which is not the Son without the Father, *of* this which is
not the Father without the Son; that is, this Light which is not Light
without the Father, *of* that Light, *viz*. the Father, which is not
Light without the Son; so that, when it is said, God which is not the
Son without the Father, and *of* God which is not the Father without the
Son, it may be perfectly understood that the Begetter did not precede
that which He begot. And if this be so, then this alone cannot be said
of them, namely, this or that of this or that, which they are not both
together. Just as the Word cannot be said to be *of* the <span
id="page_99">p. 99</span> <span id="iv.i.viii.ii-Page_99"></span>Word,
because both are not the Word together, but only the Son; nor image *of*
image, since they are not both together the image; nor Son *of* Son,
since both together are not the Son, according to that which is said, “I
and my Father are one.” <span id="fr_604"></span>[605](#fn_604) For “we
are one” means, what He is, that am I also; according to essence, not
according to relation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_602"></span>[98:603](1030096.htm#fr_602) <span
id="iv.i.viii.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.viii.ii-p3"></span> \[The term “God,” in the proposition,
“the Word was with God,” must refer to the Father, not to “the Father
and Son together,” because the Son could not be said to be “with”
himself. St. John says that “the word was God” (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.i.viii.ii-p3.1"></span>θεὸς</span>). The
absence of the article with <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.i.viii.ii-p3.2"></span> θεὸς</span> denotes the abstract deity,
or the divine nature without reference to the persons in it. He also
says that “the Word was with God” (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.i.viii.ii-p3.3"></span>τὸν θεὸν</span>). The presence of the
article in this instance denotes one of the divine persons in the
essence: namely, the Father, with whom the Word was from eternity, and
upon whose “bosom” he was from eternity. ([John
1.18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018)<span
id="iv.i.viii.ii-p3.4"></span>[John i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018)<span
id="iv.i.viii.ii-p3.5"></span>).—W.G.T.S.\]

<span id="fn_603"></span>[98:604](1030096.htm#fr_603) <span
id="iv.i.viii.ii-p3.6"></span>

<span id="iv.i.viii.ii-p4"></span> [John
1.1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span
id="iv.i.viii.ii-p4.1"></span>[John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span id="iv.i.viii.ii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="fn_604"></span>[99:605](1030096.htm#fr_604) <span
id="iv.i.viii.ii-p4.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.viii.ii-p5"></span> [John
10.30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030)<span
id="iv.i.viii.ii-p5.1"></span>[John x.
30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030)<span id="iv.i.viii.ii-p5.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3](1030097)
