[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030534)  [Next](1030536) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.ii.xix"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xix-p1"></span> 18. For what food is unto the
conservation of the man, this sexual intercourse is unto the
conservation of the race: and both are not without carnal delight: which
yet being modified, and by restraint of temperance reduced unto the use
after nature, cannot be lust. <span id="fr_1983"></span>[1984](#fn_1983)
But what unlawful food is in the supporting of life, this sexual
intercourse of fornication or adultery is in the seeking of a family.
And what unlawful food is in luxury of belly and throat, this unlawful
intercourse is in lust that seeks not a family. And what the excessive
appetite of some is in lawful food, this that intercourse that is matter
of pardon is in husband and wife. As therefore it is better to die of
hunger than to eat things offered unto idols: so it is better to die
without children, than to seek a family from unlawful intercourse. But
from whatever source men be born, if they follow not the vices of their
parents, and worship God aright, they shall be honest and safe. For the
seed of man, from out what kind of man soever, is the creation of God,
and it shall fare ill with those who use it ill, yet shall not, itself
at any time be evil. But as the good sons of adulterers are no defense
of adulteries, so the evil sons of married persons are no charge against
marriage. Wherefore as the Fathers of the time of the New Testament
taking food from the duty of conservation, although they took it with
natural delight of the flesh, were yet in no way compared with the
delight of those who fed on what had been offered in sacrifice, or of
those who, although the food was lawful, yet took it to excess: so the
Fathers of the time of the Old Testament from the duty of conservation
used sexual intercourse; and yet that their natural delight, by no means
relaxed unto unreasonable and unlawful lust, is not to be compared
either with the vileness of fornications, or with the intemperance of
married persons. Forsooth through the same vein <span
id="fr_1984"></span>[1985](#fn_1984) of charity, now after the spirit,
then after the flesh, it was a duty to beget sons for the sake of that
mother Jerusalem: but it was nought save the difference of times which
made the works of the fathers different. But thus it was necessary that
even Prophets, not living after the flesh, should come together after
the flesh; even as it was necessary that Apostles also, not living after
the flesh, should eat food after the flesh.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1983"></span>[407:1984](1030535.htm#fr_1983) <span
id="v.ii.xix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xix-p2"></span> *Retract*. b. ii. c. xxii. 2. “it was
meant that the good and right use of lust is not lust, for as it is evil
will to use good things, so is it good will to use evil things.”

<span id="fn_1984"></span>[407:1985](1030535.htm#fr_1984) <span
id="v.ii.xix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xix-p3"></span> “*Vena*.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 19](1030536)
