[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030437)  [Next](1030439) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.xii"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.xii-p1"></span> 11. And, this being so, hear also just
so many conditions and differences of the same Scriptures. For it must
be that just so many meet us. For either any one hath written
profitably, and is not profitably understood by some one: or both take
place unprofitably: or the reader understands profitably, whereas he,
who is read, hath written contrariwise. Of these the first I blame not,
the last I regard not. For neither can I blame the man, who without any
fault of his own hath been ill understood; nor can I be distressed at
any one being read, who hath failed to see the truth, when I see that
the readers are no way injured. There is then one kind most approved,
and as it were most cleansed, when both the things written are well, and
are taken in a good sense by the readers. And yet that also is still
further divided into two: for it doth not altogether shut out error. For
it generally comes to pass, that, when a writer hath held a good sense,
the reader also holds a good sense; still other than he, and often
better, often worse, yet profitably. But when both we hold the same
sense as he whom we read, and that is every way suited to right conduct
of life, there is the fullest possible measure of truth, and there is no
place opened for error from any other quarter. And this kind is
altogether very rare, when what we read is matter of extreme obscurity:
nor can it, in my opinion, be clearly known, but only believed. For by
what proofs shall I so gather the will of a man who is absent or dead,
as that I can swear to it: when, even if he were questioned being
present, there might be many things, which, if he were no ill man, he
would most carefully hide? But I think that it hath nothing to do
towards learning the matter of fact, of what character the writer was;
yet is he most fairly believed good, whose writings have benefited the
human race and posterity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 12](1030439)
