[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030073)  [Next](1030075) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.vi.xx"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.xx-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.vi.xx-p1.1"></span>Chapter 19.—In What Manner the Son Was Sent
and Proclaimed Beforehand. How in the Sending of His Birth in the Flesh
He Was Made Less Without Detriment to His Equality with the
Father.</span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.xx-p2"></span>25. Behold, then, why the Son of God was
sent; nay, rather behold what it is for the Son of God to be sent.
Whatever things they were which were wrought in time, with a view to
produce faith, whereby we might be cleansed so as to contemplate truth,
in things that have a beginning, which have been put forth from
eternity, and are referred back to eternity: these were either
testimonies of this mission, or they were the mission itself of the Son
of God. But some of these testimonies announced Him beforehand as to
come, some testified that He had come already. For that He was made a
creature by whom the whole creation was made, must needs find a witness
in the whole creation. For except one were preached by the sending of
many \[witnesses\] one would not be bound to, the sending away of many.
And unless there were such testimonies as should seem to be great to
those who are lowly, it would not be believed, that He being great
should make men great, who as lowly was sent to the lowly. For the
heaven and the earth and all things in them are incomparably greater
works of the Son of God, since all things were made by Him, than the
signs and the portents which broke forth in testimony of Him. But yet
men, in order that, being lowly, they might believe these great things
to have been wrought by Him, trembled at those lowly things, as if they
had been great.

<span id="iv.i.vi.xx-p3"></span>26. “When, therefore, the fullness of
time was come, God sent forth His Son, made of a woman, made under the
Law;” <span id="fr_531"></span>[532](#fn_531) to such a degree lowly,
that He was “made;” in this way therefore sent, in that He was made. If,
therefore, the greater sends the less, we too, acknowledge Him to have
been made less; and in so far less, in so far as made; and in so far
made, in so far as sent. For “He sent forth His Son made of a woman.”
And yet, because all things were made by Him, not only before He was
made and sent, but before all things were at all, we confess the same to
be equal to the sender, whom we call less, as having been sent. In what
way, then, could He be seen by the fathers, when certain angelical
visions were shown to them, before that fullness of time at which it was
fitting He should be sent, and so before He was sent, at a time when not
yet sent He was seen as He is equal with the Father? For <span
id="page_83">p. 83</span> <span id="iv.i.vi.xx-Page_83"></span>how does
He say to Philip, by whom He was certainly seen as by all the rest, and
even by those by whom He was crucified in the flesh, “Have I been so
long time with you, and yet hast thou not known me, Philip? he that hath
seen me, hath seen the Father also;” unless because He was both seen and
yet not seen? He was seen, as He had been made in being sent; He was not
seen, as by Him all things were made. Or how does He say this too, “He
that hath my commandments and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me; and
he that loveth me shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and
will manifest myself to him,” <span id="fr_532"></span>[533](#fn_532) at
a time when He was manifest before the eyes of men; unless because He
was offering that flesh, which the Word was made in the fullness of
time, to be accepted by our faith; but was keeping back the Word itself,
by whom all things were made, to be contemplated in eternity by the mind
when cleansed by faith?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_531"></span>[82:532](1030074.htm#fr_531) <span
id="iv.i.vi.xx-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.xx-p4"></span> [Gal.
4.4](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#004)<span
id="iv.i.vi.xx-p4.1"></span>[Gal. iv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#004)<span id="iv.i.vi.xx-p4.2"></span>

<span id="fn_532"></span>[83:533](1030074.htm#fr_532) <span
id="iv.i.vi.xx-p4.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.xx-p5"></span> [John
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#009),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#021)<span
id="iv.i.vi.xx-p5.1"></span>[John
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#009),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#021)<span id="iv.i.vi.xx-p5.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 20](1030075)
