[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030184)  [Next](1030186) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.xv.vii"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xv.vii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.xv.vii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 7.—Faith is Necessary, that Man May
at Some Time Be Blessed, Which He Will Only Attain in the Future Life.
The Blessedness of Proud Philosophers Ridiculous and Pitiable.</span>

<span id="iv.i.xv.vii-p2"></span>10. And on this account, faith, by
which men believe in God, is above all things necessary in this mortal
life, most full as it is of errors and hardships. For there are no good
things whatever, and above all, not those by which any one is made good,
or those by which he will become blessed, of which any other source can
be found whence they come to man, and are added to man, unless it be
from God. But when he who is good and faithful in these miseries shall
have come from this life to the blessed life, then will truly come to
pass what now is absolutely impossible,—namely, that a man may live as
he will. <span id="fr_801"></span>[802](#fn_801) For he will not will to
live badly <span id="page_172">p. 172</span> <span
id="iv.i.xv.vii-Page_172"></span>in the midst of that felicity, nor will
he will anything that will be wanting, nor will there be wanting
anything which he shall have willed. Whatever shall be loved, will be
present; nor will that be longed for, which shall not be present.
Everything which will be there will be good, and the supreme God will be
the supreme good and will be present for those to enjoy who love Him;
and what altogether is most blessed, it will be certain that it will be
so forever. But now, indeed, philosophers have made for themselves,
according to the pleasure of each, their own ideals of a blessed life;
that they might be able, as it were by their own power, to do that,
which by the common conditions of mortals they were not able to
do,—namely, to live as they would. For they felt that no one could be
blessed otherwise than by having what he would, and by suffering nothing
which he would not. And who would not will, that the life whatsoever it
be, with which he is delighted, and which he therefore calls blessed,
were so in his own power, that he could have it continually? And yet who
is in this condition? Who wills to suffer troubles in order that he may
endure them manfully, although he both wills and is able to endure them
if he does suffer them? Who would will to live in torments, even
although he is able to live laudably by holding fast to righteousness in
the midst of them through patience? They who have endured these evils,
either in wishing to have or in fearing to lose what they loved, whether
wickedly or laudably, have thought of them as transitory. For many have
stretched boldly through transitory evils to good things which will
last. And these, doubtless, are blessed through hope, even while
actually suffering such transitory evils, through which they arrive at
good things which will not be transitory. But he who is blessed through
hope is not yet blessed: for he expects, through patience, a blessedness
which he does not yet grasp. Whereas he, on the other hand, who is
tormented without any such hope, without any such reward, let him use as
much endurance as he pleases, is not truly blessed, but bravely
miserable. For he is not on that account not miserable, because he would
be more so if he also bore misery impatiently. Further, even if he does
not suffer those things which he would not will to suffer in his own
body, not even then is he to be esteemed blessed, inasmuch as he does
not live as he wills. For to omit other things, which, while the body
remains unhurt, belong to those annoyances of the mind, without which we
should will to live, and which are innumerable; he would will, at any
rate, if he were able, so to have his body safe and sound, and so to
suffer no inconveniences from it, as to have it within his own control,
or even to have it with an imperishableness of the body itself; and
because he does not possess this, and hangs in doubt about it, he
certainly does not live as he wills. For although he may be ready from
fortitude to accept, and bear with an equal mind, whatever adversities
may happen to him, yet he had rather they should not happen, and
prevents them if he is able; and he is in such way ready for both
alternatives, that, as much as is in him, he wishes for the one and
shuns the other; and if he have fallen into that which he shuns, he
therefore bears it willingly, because that could not happen which he
willed. He bears it, therefore, in order that he may not be crushed; but
he would not willingly be even burdened. How, then, does he live as he
wills? Is it because he is willingly strong to bear what he would not
will to be put upon him? Then he only wills what he can, because he
cannot have what he wills. And here is the sum-total of the blessedness
of proud mortals, I know not whether to be laughed at, or not rather to
be pitied, who boast that they live as they will, because they willingly
bear patiently what they are unwilling should happen to them. For this,
they say, is like Terence’s wise saying,—

<span id="iv.i.xv.vii-p4"></span>“Since that cannot be which you will,
will that which thou canst.” <span id="fr_802"></span>[803](#fn_802)

<span id="iv.i.xv.vii-p6"></span>That this is aptly said, who denies?
But it is advice given to the miserable man, that he may not be more
miserable. And it is not rightly or truly said to the blessed man, such
as all wish themselves to be, That cannot be which you will. For if he
is blessed, whatever he wills can be; since he does not will that which
cannot be. But such a life is not for this mortal state, neither will it
come to pass unless when immortality also shall come to pass. And if
this could not be given at all to man, blessedness too would be sought
in vain, since it cannot be without immortality.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_801"></span>[171:802](1030185.htm#fr_801) <span
id="iv.i.xv.vii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xv.vii-p3"></span> \[The prophet Nathan enunciates the
same truth, in his words to David, “Go do all that is in thine heart;
for the Lord is with thee.” [2 Sam. vii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#003)<span
id="iv.i.xv.vii-p3.1"></span>.—W.G.T.S.\]

<span id="fn_802"></span>[172:803](1030185.htm#fr_802) <span
id="iv.i.xv.vii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xv.vii-p5"></span> *Andreia*, [Act
ii.](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#000)<span id="iv.i.xv.vii-p5.1"></span>
Scene i, v. 5, 6.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 8](1030186)
