[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030057)  [Next](1030059) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.vi.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.vi.iv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 3.—The One Death and Resurrection of
The Body of Christ Harmonizes with Our Double Death and Resurrection of
Body and Soul, to the Effect of Salvation. In What Way the Single Death
of Christ is Bestowed Upon Our Double Death.</span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.iv-p2"></span>5. But for our present need we must
discuss, so far as God gives us power, in what manner the single of our
Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ answers to, and is, so to say, in harmony
with our double to the effect of salvation. We certainly, as no
Christian doubts, are dead both in soul and body: in soul, because of
sin; in body, because of the punishment of sin, and through this also in
body because of sin. And to both these parts of ourselves, that is, both
to soul and to body, there was need both of a medicine and of
resurrection, that what had been changed for the worse might be renewed
for the better. Now the death of the soul is ungodliness, and the death
of the body is corruptibility, through which comes also a departure of
the soul from the body. For as the soul dies when God leaves it, so the
body dies when the soul leaves it; whereby the former becomes foolish,
the latter lifeless. For the soul is raised up again by repentance, and
the renewing of life is begun in the body still mortal by faith, by
which men believe on Him who justi<span id="page_72">p. 72</span> <span
id="iv.i.vi.iv-Page_72"></span>fies the ungodly; <span
id="fr_449"></span>[450](#fn_449) and it is increased and strengthened
by good habits from day to day, as the inner man is renewed more and
more. <span id="fr_450"></span>[451](#fn_450) But the body, being as it
were the outward man, the longer this life lasts is so much the more
corrupted, either by age or by disease, or by various afflictions, until
it come to that last affliction which all call death. And its
resurrection is delayed until the end; when also our justification
itself shall be perfected ineffably. For then we shall be like Him, for
we shall see Him as He is. <span id="fr_451"></span>[452](#fn_451) But
now, so long as the corruptible body presseth down the soul, <span
id="fr_452"></span>[453](#fn_452) and human life upon earth is all
temptation, <span id="fr_453"></span>[454](#fn_453) in His sight shall
no man living be justified, <span id="fr_454"></span>[455](#fn_454) in
comparison of the righteousness in which we shall be made equal with the
angels, and of the glory which shall be revealed in us. But why mention
more proofs respecting the difference between the death of the soul and
the death of the body, when the Lord in one sentence of the Gospel has
made either death easily distinguishable by any one from the other,
where He says, “Let the dead bury their dead”? <span
id="fr_455"></span>[456](#fn_455) For burial was the fitting disposal of
a dead body. But by those who were to bury it He meant those who were
dead in soul by the impiety of unbelief, such, namely, as are awakened
when it is said, “Awake thou that sleepest, and arise from the dead, and
Christ shall give thee light.” <span id="fr_456"></span>[457](#fn_456)
And there is a death which the apostle denounces, saying of the widow,
“But she that liveth in pleasure is dead while she liveth.” <span
id="fr_457"></span>[458](#fn_457) Therefore the soul, which was before
ungodly and is now godly, is said to have come alive again from the dead
and to live, on account of the righteousness of faith. But the body is
not only said to be about to die, on account of that departure of the
soul which will be; but on account of the great infirmity of flesh and
blood it is even said to be now dead, in a certain place in the
Scriptures, namely, where the apostle says, that “the body is dead
because of sin, but the spirit is life because of righteousness.” <span
id="fr_458"></span>[459](#fn_458) Now this life is wrought by faith,
“since the just shall live by faith.” <span
id="fr_459"></span>[460](#fn_459) But what follows? “But if the spirit
of Him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, He that raised
up Christ from the dead shall also quicken your mortal bodies by His
Spirit which dwelleth in you.” <span id="fr_460"></span>[461](#fn_460)

<span id="iv.i.vi.iv-p15"></span>6. Therefore on this double death of
ours our Saviour bestowed His own single death; and to cause both our
resurrections, He appointed beforehand and set forth in mystery and type
His own one resurrection. For He was not a sinner or ungodly, that, as
though dead in spirit, He should need to be renewed in the inner man,
and to be recalled as it were to the life of righteousness by
repentance; but being clothed in mortal flesh, and in that alone dying,
in that alone rising again, in that alone did He answer to both for us;
since in it was wrought a mystery as regards the inner man, and a type
as regards the outer. For it was in a mystery as regards our inner man,
so as to signify the death of our soul, that those words were uttered,
not only in the Psalm, but also on the cross: “My God, my God, why hast
Thou forsaken me?” <span id="fr_461"></span>[462](#fn_461) To which
words the apostle agrees, saying, “Knowing this, that our old man is
crucified with Him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that
henceforth we should not serve sin;” since by the crucifixion of the
inner man are understood the pains of repentance, and a certain
wholesome agony of self-control, by which death the death of ungodliness
is destroyed, and in which death God has left us. And so the body of sin
is destroyed through such a cross, that now we should not yield our
members as instruments of unrighteousness unto sin. <span
id="fr_462"></span>[463](#fn_462) Because, if even the inner man
certainly is renewed day by day, <span id="fr_463"></span>[464](#fn_463)
yet undoubtedly it is old before it is renewed. For that is done
inwardly of which the same apostle speaks: “Put off the old man, and put
on the new;” which he goes on to explain by saying, “Wherefore, putting
away lying, speak every man truth.” <span
id="fr_464"></span>[465](#fn_464) But where is lying put away, unless
inwardly, that he who speaketh the truth from his heart may inhabit the
holy hill of God? <span id="fr_465"></span>[466](#fn_465) But the
resurrection of the body of the Lord is shown to belong to the mystery
of our own inner resurrection, where, after He had risen, He says to the
woman, “Touch me not, for I am not yet ascended to my Father;” <span
id="fr_466"></span>[467](#fn_466) with which mystery the apostle’s words
agree, where he says, “If ye then be risen with Christ, seek those
things which are above, where Christ sitteth on the right hand of God;
set your thoughts <span id="fr_467"></span>[468](#fn_467) on things
above.” <span id="fr_468"></span>[469](#fn_468) For not to touch Christ,
unless when He had ascended to the Father, means not to have
thoughts <span id="fr_469"></span>[470](#fn_469) of Christ after a
fleshly manner. Again, the death of the flesh of our Lord contains a
type of the death of our outer man, since it is by such suffering most
of all that He exhorts <span id="page_73">p. 73</span> <span
id="iv.i.vi.iv-Page_73"></span>His servants that they should not fear
those who kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul. <span
id="fr_470"></span>[471](#fn_470) Wherefore the apostle says, “That I
may fill up that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ in my
flesh.” <span id="fr_471"></span>[472](#fn_471) And the resurrection of
the body of the Lord is found to contain a type of the resurrection of
our outward man, because He says to His disciples, “Handle me, and see;
for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me have.” <span
id="fr_472"></span>[473](#fn_472) And one of the disciples also,
handling His scars, exclaimed, “My Lord and my God!” <span
id="fr_473"></span>[474](#fn_473) And whereas the entire integrity of
that flesh was apparent, this was shown in that which He had said when
exhorting His disciples: “There shall not a hair of your head
perish.” <span id="fr_474"></span>[475](#fn_474) For how comes it that
first is said, “Touch me not, for I am not yet ascended to my
Father;” <span id="fr_475"></span>[476](#fn_475) and how comes it that
before He ascends to the Father, He actually is touched by the
disciples: unless because in the former the mystery of the inner man was
intimated, in the latter a type was given of the outer man? Or can any
one possibly be so without understanding, and so turned away from the
truth, as to dare to say that He was touched by men before He ascended,
but by women when He had ascended? It was on account of this type, which
went before in the Lord, of our future resurrection in the body, that
the apostle says, “Christ the first-fruits; afterward they that are
Christ’s.” <span id="fr_476"></span>[477](#fn_476) For it was the
resurrection of the body to which this place refers, on account of which
he also says, “Who has changed our vile body, that it may be fashioned
like unto His glorious body.” <span id="fr_477"></span>[478](#fn_477)
The one death therefore of our Saviour brought salvation to our double
death, and His one resurrection wrought for us two resurrections; since
His body in both cases, that is, both in His death and in His
resurrection, was ministered to us by a kind of healing suitableness,
both as a mystery of the inner man, and as a type of the outer.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_449"></span>[72:450](1030058.htm#fr_449) <span
id="iv.i.vi.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.iv-p3"></span> [Rom.
4.5](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#005)<span
id="iv.i.vi.iv-p3.1"></span>[Rom. iv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#005)<span id="iv.i.vi.iv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="fn_450"></span>[72:451](1030058.htm#fr_450) <span
id="iv.i.vi.iv-p3.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.iv-p4"></span> [2 Cor.
4.16](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#016)<span
id="iv.i.vi.iv-p4.1"></span>[2 Cor. iv.
16](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#016)<span id="iv.i.vi.iv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="fn_451"></span>[72:452](1030058.htm#fr_451) <span
id="iv.i.vi.iv-p4.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.iv-p5"></span> [1 John
3.1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#001)<span
id="iv.i.vi.iv-p5.1"></span>[1 John iii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#001)<span id="iv.i.vi.iv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="fn_452"></span>[72:453](1030058.htm#fr_452) <span
id="iv.i.vi.iv-p5.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.iv-p6"></span> [Wisdom
9.15](../../../bib/apo/wis009.htm#015)<span
id="iv.i.vi.iv-p6.1"></span>[Wisd. ix.
15](../../../bib/apo/wis009.htm#015)<span id="iv.i.vi.iv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="fn_453"></span>[72:454](1030058.htm#fr_453) <span
id="iv.i.vi.iv-p6.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.iv-p7"></span> [Job
7.1](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#001)<span id="iv.i.vi.iv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="fn_454"></span>[72:455](1030058.htm#fr_454) <span
id="iv.i.vi.iv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.iv-p8"></span> [Ps.
143.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa143.htm#002)<span
id="iv.i.vi.iv-p8.1"></span>[Ps. cxliii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#002)<span id="iv.i.vi.iv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="fn_455"></span>[72:456](1030058.htm#fr_455) <span
id="iv.i.vi.iv-p8.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.iv-p9"></span> [Matt.
8.22](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#022)<span id="iv.i.vi.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="fn_456"></span>[72:457](1030058.htm#fr_456) <span
id="iv.i.vi.iv-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.iv-p10"></span> [Eph.
5.14](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#014)<span
id="iv.i.vi.iv-p10.1"></span>[Eph. v.
14](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#014)<span id="iv.i.vi.iv-p10.2"></span>

<span id="fn_457"></span>[72:458](1030058.htm#fr_457) <span
id="iv.i.vi.iv-p10.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.iv-p11"></span> [1 Tim.
5.6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#006)<span
id="iv.i.vi.iv-p11.1"></span>[1 Tim. v.
6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#006)<span id="iv.i.vi.iv-p11.2"></span>

<span id="fn_458"></span>[72:459](1030058.htm#fr_458) <span
id="iv.i.vi.iv-p11.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.iv-p12"></span> [Rom.
8.10](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#010)<span
id="iv.i.vi.iv-p12.1"></span>[Rom. viii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#010)<span id="iv.i.vi.iv-p12.2"></span>

<span id="fn_459"></span>[72:460](1030058.htm#fr_459) <span
id="iv.i.vi.iv-p12.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.iv-p13"></span> [Rom.
1.17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017)<span
id="iv.i.vi.iv-p13.1"></span>[Rom. i.
17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017)<span id="iv.i.vi.iv-p13.2"></span>

<span id="fn_460"></span>[72:461](1030058.htm#fr_460) <span
id="iv.i.vi.iv-p13.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.iv-p14"></span> [Rom.
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#011)<span
id="iv.i.vi.iv-p14.1"></span>[Rom.
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#011)<span id="iv.i.vi.iv-p14.2"></span>

<span id="fn_461"></span>[72:462](1030058.htm#fr_461) <span
id="iv.i.vi.iv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.iv-p16"></span> [Ps.
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#001), [Matt.
27:46](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#046)<span
id="iv.i.vi.iv-p16.1"></span>[Ps. xxii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#001)<span id="iv.i.vi.iv-p16.2"></span>,
and [Matt. xxvii. 46](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#046)<span
id="iv.i.vi.iv-p16.3"></span>

<span id="fn_462"></span>[72:463](1030058.htm#fr_462) <span
id="iv.i.vi.iv-p16.4"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.iv-p17"></span> [Rom.
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#006),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#013)<span
id="iv.i.vi.iv-p17.1"></span>[Rom.
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#006),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#013)<span id="iv.i.vi.iv-p17.2"></span>

<span id="fn_463"></span>[72:464](1030058.htm#fr_463) <span
id="iv.i.vi.iv-p17.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.iv-p18"></span> [2 Cor.
4.16](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#016)<span
id="iv.i.vi.iv-p18.1"></span>[2 Cor. iv.
16](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#016)<span id="iv.i.vi.iv-p18.2"></span>

<span id="fn_464"></span>[72:465](1030058.htm#fr_464) <span
id="iv.i.vi.iv-p18.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.iv-p19"></span> [Eph.
4.22-25](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#022)<span
id="iv.i.vi.iv-p19.1"></span>[Eph. iv.
22-25](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#022)<span
id="iv.i.vi.iv-p19.2"></span>

<span id="fn_465"></span>[72:466](1030058.htm#fr_465) <span
id="iv.i.vi.iv-p19.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.iv-p20"></span> [Ps.
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#001),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#003)<span
id="iv.i.vi.iv-p20.1"></span>[Ps.
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#001),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#003)<span id="iv.i.vi.iv-p20.2"></span>

<span id="fn_466"></span>[72:467](1030058.htm#fr_466) <span
id="iv.i.vi.iv-p20.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.iv-p21"></span> [John
20.17](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#017)<span
id="iv.i.vi.iv-p21.1"></span>[John xx.
17](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#017)<span id="iv.i.vi.iv-p21.2"></span>

<span id="fn_467"></span>[72:468](1030058.htm#fr_467) <span
id="iv.i.vi.iv-p21.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.iv-p22"></span> *Sapite*

<span id="fn_468"></span>[72:469](1030058.htm#fr_468) <span
id="iv.i.vi.iv-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.iv-p23"></span> [Col.
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#002)<span
id="iv.i.vi.iv-p23.1"></span>[Col.
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#002)<span id="iv.i.vi.iv-p23.2"></span>

<span id="fn_469"></span>[72:470](1030058.htm#fr_469) <span
id="iv.i.vi.iv-p23.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.iv-p24"></span> *Sapere*

<span id="fn_470"></span>[73:471](1030058.htm#fr_470) <span
id="iv.i.vi.iv-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.iv-p25"></span> [Matt.
10.28](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#028)<span
id="iv.i.vi.iv-p25.1"></span>

<span id="fn_471"></span>[73:472](1030058.htm#fr_471) <span
id="iv.i.vi.iv-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.iv-p26"></span> [Col.
1.24](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#024)<span
id="iv.i.vi.iv-p26.1"></span>[Col. i.
24](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#024)<span id="iv.i.vi.iv-p26.2"></span>

<span id="fn_472"></span>[73:473](1030058.htm#fr_472) <span
id="iv.i.vi.iv-p26.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.iv-p27"></span> [Luke
24.39](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#039)<span
id="iv.i.vi.iv-p27.1"></span>[Luke xxiv.
39](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#039)<span id="iv.i.vi.iv-p27.2"></span>

<span id="fn_473"></span>[73:474](1030058.htm#fr_473) <span
id="iv.i.vi.iv-p27.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.iv-p28"></span> [John
20.28](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#028)<span
id="iv.i.vi.iv-p28.1"></span>[John xx.
28](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#028)<span id="iv.i.vi.iv-p28.2"></span>

<span id="fn_474"></span>[73:475](1030058.htm#fr_474) <span
id="iv.i.vi.iv-p28.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.iv-p29"></span> [Luke
21.18](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#018)<span
id="iv.i.vi.iv-p29.1"></span>[Luke xxi.
18](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#018)<span id="iv.i.vi.iv-p29.2"></span>

<span id="fn_475"></span>[73:476](1030058.htm#fr_475) <span
id="iv.i.vi.iv-p29.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.iv-p30"></span> [John
20.17](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#017)<span
id="iv.i.vi.iv-p30.1"></span>[John xx.
17](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#017)<span id="iv.i.vi.iv-p30.2"></span>

<span id="fn_476"></span>[73:477](1030058.htm#fr_476) <span
id="iv.i.vi.iv-p30.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.iv-p31"></span> [1 Cor.
15.23](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#023)<span
id="iv.i.vi.iv-p31.1"></span>[1 Cor. xv.
23](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#023)<span id="iv.i.vi.iv-p31.2"></span>

<span id="fn_477"></span>[73:478](1030058.htm#fr_477) <span
id="iv.i.vi.iv-p31.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.iv-p32"></span> [Phil.
3.21](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#021)<span
id="iv.i.vi.iv-p32.1"></span>[Phil. iii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#021)<span id="iv.i.vi.iv-p32.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4](1030059)
