[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030708)  [Next](1030710) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.vi.xxi"></span>

<span id="v.vi.xxi-p1"></span> 20. But, what must be confessed, to human
minds certain compensative sins do cause such embarrassment, that they
are even thought meet to be praised, and rather to be called right
deeds. For who can doubt it to be a great sin, if a father prostitute
his own daughters to the fornications of the impious? And yet hath there
arisen a case in which a just man thought it his duty to do this, when
the Sodomites with nefarious onset of lust were rushing upon his guests.
For he said, “I have two daughters which have not known man; I will
bring them out to you, and do ye to them as is good in your eyes: only
unto these men do ye no wrong, for that they have come under covering of
my roof.” <span id="fr_2407"></span>[2408](#fn_2407) What shall we say
here? Do we not so abhor the wickedness which the Sodomites were
attempting to do to the guests of the just man, that, whatever were done
so this were not done, he should deem right to be done? Very much also
moveth us the person of the doer, which by merit of righteousness was
obtaining deliverance from Sodom, to say that, since it is a less evil
for women to suffer lewdness than for men, it even pertained to the
righteousness of that just man, that to his daughters he chose this
rather to be done, than to his guests; not only willing this in his
mind, but also offering it in word, and, if they should assent, ready to
fulfill it in deed. But then, if we shall open this way to sins, that we
are to commit less sins, in order that others may not commit greater; by
a broad boundary, nay rather, with no boundary at all, but with a
tearing up and removing of all bounds, in infinite space, will all sins
enter in and reign. For, when it shall be defined, that a man is to sin
less, that another may not sin more; then, of course, by our committing
thefts shall other men’s committing of lewdness be guarded against, and
incest by lewdness; and if any impiety shall seem even worse than
incest, even incest shall be pronounced meet to be done by us, if in
such wise it can be wrought that that impiety be not committed by
others: and in each several kind of sins, both thefts for thefts, and
lewdness for lewdness, and incest for incest, shall be accounted meet to
be done: our own sins for other men’s, not only less for greater, but
even if it come to the very highest and worst, fewer for more; if the
stress of affairs so turns, that otherwise other men would not abstain
from sin unless by our sinning, somewhat less indeed, but still sinning;
so that in every case where an enemy who shall have power of this sort
shall say, “Unless thou be wicked, I will be more wicked, or unless thou
do this wickedness, I will do more such,” we must seem to admit
wickedness in ourselves, if we wish to refrain (others) from wickedness.
To be wise in this sort, what is it but to lose one’s wits, or rather,
to be downright mad? Mine own iniquity, not another’s, whether
perpetrated upon me or upon others, is that from which I must beware of
damnation. For “the soul that sinneth, it shall die.” <span
id="fr_2408"></span>[2409](#fn_2408)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2407"></span>[489:2408](1030709.htm#fr_2407) <span
id="v.vi.xxi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.xxi-p2"></span> [Gen.
19.8](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#008)<span
id="v.vi.xxi-p2.1"></span>[Gen. xix.
8](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#008)<span id="v.vi.xxi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2408"></span>[489:2409](1030709.htm#fr_2408) <span
id="v.vi.xxi-p2.3"></span>

<span id="v.vi.xxi-p3"></span> [Ez.
18.4](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#004)<span
id="v.vi.xxi-p3.1"></span>[Ezek. xviii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#004)<span id="v.vi.xxi-p3.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 21](1030710)
