[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030168)  [Next](1030170) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.xiv.vii"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xiv.vii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.xiv.vii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 7.—How Man is the Image of God.
Whether the Woman is Not Also the Image of God. How the Saying of the
Apostle, that the Man is the Image of God, But the Woman is the Glory of
the Man, is to Be Understood Figuratively and Mystically.</span>

<span id="iv.i.xiv.vii-p2"></span>9. We ought not therefore so to
understand that man is made in the image of the supreme Trinity, that
is, in the image of God, as that the same image should be understood to
be in three human beings; especially when the apostle says that the man
is the image of God, and on that account removes the covering from his
head, which he warns the woman to use, speaking thus: “For a man indeed
ought not to cover his head, forasmuch as he is the image and glory of
God; but the woman is the glory of the man.” What then shall we say to
this? If the woman fills up the image of the trinity after the measure
of her own person, why is the man still called that image after she has
been taken out of his side? Or if even one person of a human being out
of three can be called the image of God, as each person also is God in
the supreme Trinity itself, why is the woman also not the image of God?
For she is instructed for this very reason to cover her head, which he
is forbidden to do because he is the image of God. <span
id="fr_755"></span>[756](#fn_755)

<span id="iv.i.xiv.vii-p4"></span>10. But we must notice how that which
the apostle says, that not the woman but the man is the image of God, is
not contrary to that which is written in Genesis, “God created man: in
the image of God created He him; male and female created He them: and He
blessed them.” For this text says that human nature itself, which is
complete \[only\] in both sexes, was made in the image of God; and it
does not separate the woman from the image of God which it signifies.
For after <span id="page_159">p. 159</span> <span
id="iv.i.xiv.vii-Page_159"></span>saying that God made man in the image
of God, “He created him,” it says, “male and female:” or at any rate,
punctuating the words otherwise, “male and female created He them.” How
then did the apostle tell us that the man is the image of God, and
therefore he is forbidden to cover his head; but that the woman is not
so, and therefore is commanded to cover hers? Unless, forsooth,
according to that which I have said already, when I was treating of the
nature of the human mind, that the woman together with her own husband
is the image of God, so that that whole substance may be one image; but
when she is referred separately to her quality of *help-meet*, which
regards the woman herself alone, then she is not the image of God; but
as regards the man alone, he is the image of God as fully and completely
as when the woman too is joined with him in one. As we said of the
nature of the human mind, that both in the case when as a whole it
contemplates the truth it is the image of God; and in the case when
anything is divided from it, and diverted in order to the cognition of
temporal things; nevertheless on that side on which it beholds and
consults truth, here also it is the image of God, but on that side
whereby it is directed to the cognition of the lower things, it is not
the image of God. And since it is so much the more formed after the
image of God, the more it has extended itself to that which is eternal,
and is on that account not to be restrained, so as to withhold and
refrain itself from thence; therefore the man ought not to cover his
head. But because too great a progression towards inferior things is
dangerous to that rational cognition that is conversant with things
corporeal and temporal; this ought to have power on its head, which the
covering indicates, by which it is signified that it ought to be
restrained. For a holy and pious meaning is pleasing to the holy
angels. <span id="fr_756"></span>[757](#fn_756) For God sees not after
the way of time, neither does anything new take place in His vision and
knowledge, when anything is done in time and transitorily, after the way
in which such things affect the senses, whether the carnal senses of
animals and men, or even the heavenly senses of the angels.

<span id="iv.i.xiv.vii-p6"></span>11. For that the Apostle Paul, when
speaking outwardly of the sex of male and female, figured the mystery of
some more hidden truth, may be understood from this, that when he says
in another place that she is a widow indeed who is desolate, without
children and nephews, and yet that she ought to trust in God, and to
continue in prayers night and day, <span
id="fr_757"></span>[758](#fn_757) he here indicates, that the woman
having been brought into the transgression by being deceived, is brought
to salvation by child-bearing; and then he has added, “If they continue
in faith, and charity, and holiness, with sobriety.” <span
id="fr_758"></span>[759](#fn_758) As if it could possibly hurt a good
widow, if either she had not sons, or if those whom she had did not
choose to continue in good works. But because those things which are
called good works are, as it were, the sons of our life, according to
that sense of life in which it answers to the question, What is a man’s
life? that is, How does he act in these temporal things? which life the
Greeks do not call <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.i.xiv.vii-p8.3"></span>ξωή</span> but <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.i.xiv.vii-p8.4"></span>βίος</span>; and because these good works
are chiefly performed in the way of offices of mercy, while works of
mercy are of no profit, either to Pagans, or to Jews who do not believe
in Christ, or to any heretics or schismstics whatsoever in whom faith
and charity and sober holiness are not found: what the apostle meant to
signify is plain, and in so far figuratively and mystically, because he
was speaking of covering the head of the woman, which will remain mere
empty words, unless referred to some hidden sacrament.

<span id="iv.i.xiv.vii-p9"></span>12. For, as not only most true reason
but also the authority of the apostle himself declares, man was not made
in the image of God according to the shape of his body, but according to
his rational mind. For the thought is a debased and empty one, which
holds God to be circumscribed and limited by the lineaments of bodily
members. But further, does not the same blessed apostle say, “Be renewed
in the spirit of your mind, and put on the new man, which is created
after God;” <span id="fr_759"></span>[760](#fn_759) and in another place
more clearly, “Putting off the old man,” he says, “with his deeds; put
on the new man, which is renewed to the knowledge of God after the image
of Him that created him?” <span id="fr_760"></span>[761](#fn_760) If,
then, we are renewed in the spirit of our mind, and he is the new man
who is renewed to the knowledge of God after the image of Him that
created him; no one can doubt, that man was made after the image of Him
that created him, not according to the body, nor indiscriminately
according to any part of the mind, but according to the rational mind,
wherein the knowledge of God can exist. And it is according to this
renewal, also, that we are made sons of God by the baptism of Christ;
and putting on the new man, certainly put on Christ through faith. Who
is there, then, <span id="page_160">p. 160</span> <span
id="iv.i.xiv.vii-Page_160"></span>who will hold women to be alien from
this fellowship, whereas they are fellow-heirs of grace with us; and
whereas in another place the same apostle says, “For ye are all the
children of God by faith in Christ Jesus; for as many as have been
baptized into Christ have put on Christ: there is neither Jew nor Greek,
there is neither bond nor free, there is neither male nor female; for ye
are all one in Christ Jesus?” <span id="fr_761"></span>[762](#fn_761)
Pray, have faithful women then lost their bodily sex? But because they
are there renewed after the image of God, where there is no sex; man is
there made after the image of God, where there is no sex, that is, in
the spirit of his mind. Why, then, is the man on that account not bound
to cover his head, because he is the image and glory of God, while the
woman is bound to do so, because she is the glory of the man; as though
the woman were not renewed in the spirit of her mind, which spirit is
renewed to the knowledge of God after the image of Him who created him?
But because she differs from the man in bodily sex, it was possible
rightly to represent under her bodily covering that part of the reason
which is diverted to the government of temporal things; so that the
image of God may remain on that side of the mind of man on which it
cleaves to the beholding or the consulting of the eternal reasons of
things; and this, it is clear, not men only, but also women have.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_755"></span>[158:756](1030169.htm#fr_755) <span
id="iv.i.xiv.vii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xiv.vii-p3"></span> [1 Cor.
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#007),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#005)<span
id="iv.i.xiv.vii-p3.1"></span>[1 Cor.
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#007),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#005)<span id="iv.i.xiv.vii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="fn_756"></span>[159:757](1030169.htm#fr_756) <span
id="iv.i.xiv.vii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xiv.vii-p5"></span> [1 Cor.
11.10](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#010)<span
id="iv.i.xiv.vii-p5.1"></span>[1 Cor. xi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#010)<span id="iv.i.xiv.vii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="fn_757"></span>[159:758](1030169.htm#fr_757) <span
id="iv.i.xiv.vii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xiv.vii-p7"></span> [1 Tim.
5.5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#005)<span
id="iv.i.xiv.vii-p7.1"></span>[1 Tim. v.
5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#005)<span id="iv.i.xiv.vii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="fn_758"></span>[159:759](1030169.htm#fr_758) <span
id="iv.i.xiv.vii-p7.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xiv.vii-p8"></span> [1 Tim.
2.15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#015)<span
id="iv.i.xiv.vii-p8.1"></span>[1 Tim. ii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#015)<span id="iv.i.xiv.vii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="fn_759"></span>[159:760](1030169.htm#fr_759) <span
id="iv.i.xiv.vii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xiv.vii-p10"></span> [Eph.
4:23](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#023),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#024)<span
id="iv.i.xiv.vii-p10.1"></span>[Eph.
4:23](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#023),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#024)<span
id="iv.i.xiv.vii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="fn_760"></span>[159:761](1030169.htm#fr_760) <span
id="iv.i.xiv.vii-p10.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xiv.vii-p11"></span> [Col.
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#010)<span
id="iv.i.xiv.vii-p11.1"></span>[Col.
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#010)<span
id="iv.i.xiv.vii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="fn_761"></span>[160:762](1030169.htm#fr_761) <span
id="iv.i.xiv.vii-p11.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xiv.vii-p12"></span> [Gal.
3.26-28](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#026)<span
id="iv.i.xiv.vii-p12.1"></span>[Gal. iii.
26-28](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#026)<span
id="iv.i.xiv.vii-p12.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 8](1030170)
