[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030406)  [Next](1030408) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.v"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.iv.v-p1.1"></span>Chapter 4.—Of the Son of God as Neither Made by
the Father Nor Less Than the Father, and of His Incarnation.</span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p2"></span>5. Wherefore <span class="c19"><span
id="iv.iv.v-p2.1"></span>The Only-Begotten Son of God</span> was neither
made by the Father; for, according to the word of an evangelist, “all
things were made by Him:” <span id="fr_1540"></span>[1541](#fn_1540) nor
begotten instantaneously; <span id="fr_1541"></span>[1542](#fn_1541)
since God, who is eternally <span id="fr_1542"></span>[1543](#fn_1542)
wise, has with Himself His eternal Wisdom: nor unequal with the Father,
that is to say, in anything less than He; for an apostle also speaks in
this wise, “Who, although He was constituted in the form of God, thought
it not robbery to be equal with God.” <span
id="fr_1543"></span>[1544](#fn_1543) By this catholic faith, therefore,
those are excluded, on the one hand, who affirm that the Son is the same
\[Person\] as the Father; for \[it is clear that\] this Word could not
possibly be *with* God, were it not with God *the Father*, and \[it is
just as evident that\] He who is *alone* is *equal* to no one. And, on
the other hand, those are equally excluded who affirm that the Son is a
creature, although not such an one as the rest of the creatures are. For
<span id="page_324">p. 324</span> <span
id="iv.iv.v-Page_324"></span>however great they declare the creature to
be, if it is a creature, it has been fashioned and made. <span
id="fr_1544"></span>[1545](#fn_1544) For the terms *fashion* and
*create* <span id="fr_1545"></span>[1546](#fn_1545) mean one and the
same thing; although in the usage of the Latin tongue the phrase
*create* is employed at times instead of what would be the strictly
accurate word *beget*. But the Greek language makes a distinction. For
we call that *creatura* (creature) which they call <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.iv.v-p8.1"></span>κτίσμα</span> or <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.iv.v-p8.2"></span>κτίσις</span>; and when we
desire to speak without ambiguity, we use not the word *creare*
(create), but the word *condere* (fashion, found). Consequently, if the
Son is a creature, however great that may be, He has been made. But we
believe in Him by whom *all* things (*omnia*) were made, not in Him by
whom the *rest* of things (*cetera*) were made. For here again we cannot
take this term *all things* in any other sense than as meaning
whatsoever things have been made.

<span id="iv.iv.v-p9"></span>6. But as “the Word was made flesh, and
dwelt among us,” <span id="fr_1546"></span>[1547](#fn_1546) the same
Wisdom which was begotten of God condescended also to be created among
men. <span id="fr_1547"></span>[1548](#fn_1547) There is a reference to
this in the word, “The Lord created me in the beginning of His
ways.” <span id="fr_1548"></span>[1549](#fn_1548) For the beginning of
His ways is the Head of the Church, which is Christ <span
id="fr_1549"></span>[1550](#fn_1549) endued with human nature (*homine
indutus*), by whom it was purposed that there should be given to us a
pattern of living, that is, a sure <span
id="fr_1550"></span>[1551](#fn_1550) way by which we might reach God.
For by no other path was it possible for us to return but by humility,
who fell by pride, according as it was said to our first creation,
“Taste, and ye shall be as gods.” <span
id="fr_1551"></span>[1552](#fn_1551) Of this humility, therefore, that
is to say, of the way by which it was needful for us to return, our
Restorer Himself has deemed it meet to exhibit an example in His own
person, “who thought it not robbery to be equal with God, but emptied
Himself, taking the form of a servant;” <span
id="fr_1552"></span>[1553](#fn_1552) in order that He might be created
Man in the beginning of His ways, the Word by whom all things were made.
Wherefore, in so far as He is the Only-begotten, He has no brethren; but
in so far as He is the First-begotten, He has deemed it worthy of Him to
give the name of brethren to all those who, subsequently to and by means
of His pre-eminence, <span id="fr_1553"></span>[1554](#fn_1553) are born
again into the grace of God through the adoption of sons, according to
the truth commended to us by apostolic teaching. <span
id="fr_1554"></span>[1555](#fn_1554) Thus, then, the Son according to
nature (*naturalis filius*) was born of the very substance of the
Father, the only one so born, subsisting as that which the Father
is, <span id="fr_1555"></span>[1556](#fn_1555) God of God, Light of
Light. We, on the other hand, are not the light by nature, but are
enlightened by that Light, so that we may be able to shine in wisdom.
For, as one says, “that was the true Light, which lighteth every man
that cometh into the world.” <span id="fr_1556"></span>[1557](#fn_1556)
Therefore we add to the faith of things eternal likewise the temporal
dispensation <span id="fr_1557"></span>[1558](#fn_1557) of our Lord,
which He deemed it worthy of Him to bear for us and to minister in
behalf of our salvation. For in so far as He is the only-begotten Son of
God, it cannot be said of Him that *He was* and that *He shall* be, but
only that *He is*; because, on the one hand, that which *was,* *now is*
not; and, on the other, that which *shall be, as yet is* not. He, then,
is unchangeable, independent of the condition of times and variation.
And it is my opinion that this is the very consideration to which was
due the circumstance that He introduced to the apprehension of His
servant Moses the kind of name \[which He then adopted\]. For when he
asked of Him by whom he should say that he was sent, in the event of the
people to whom he was being sent despising him, he received his answer
when He spake in this wise: “<span class="c19"><span
id="iv.iv.v-p21.2"></span>I Am that I Am</span>.” Thereafter, too, He
added this: “Thus shalt thou say unto the children of Israel, <span
class="c19"><span id="iv.iv.v-p21.3"></span>He that is</span> (*Qui
est*) has sent me unto you.” <span id="fr_1558"></span>[1559](#fn_1558)

<span id="iv.iv.v-p23"></span>7. From this, I trust, it is now made
patent to spiritual minds that there cannot possibly exist any nature
contrary to God. For if He *is*,—and this is a word which can be spoken
with propriety only of God (for that which truly *is* remains
unchangeably; inasmuch as that which is changed has been something which
now it is not, and shall be something which as yet it is not),—it
follows that God has nothing contrary to Himself. For if the question
were put to us, What is contrary to white? we would reply, black; if the
question were, What is contrary to hot? we would reply, cold; if the
question were, What is contrary to quick? we would reply, slow; and
<span id="page_325">p. 325</span> <span id="iv.iv.v-Page_325"></span>all
similar interrogations we would answer in like manner. When, however, it
is asked, What is contrary to that *which is*? the right reply to give
is, *that which is not*.

<span id="iv.iv.v-p24"></span>8. But whereas, in a temporal
dispensation, as I have said, with a view to our salvation and
restoration, and with the goodness of God acting therein, our changeable
nature has been assumed by that unchangeable Wisdom of God, we add the
faith in temporal things which have been done with salutary effect on
our behalf, believing in that <span class="c19"><span
id="iv.iv.v-p24.1"></span> Son of God Who Was Born Through the Holy
Ghost of the Virgin Mary.</span> For by the gift of God, that is, by the
Holy Spirit, there was granted to us so great humility on the part of so
great a God, that He deemed it worthy of Him to assume the entire nature
of man (*totum hominem*) in the womb of the Virgin, inhabiting the
material body so that it sustained no detriment (*integrum*), and
leaving it <span id="fr_1559"></span>[1560](#fn_1559) without detriment.
This temporal dispensation is in many ways craftily assailed by the
heretics. But if any one shall have grasped the catholic faith, so as to
believe that the entire nature of man was assumed by the Word of God,
that is to say, body, soul, and spirit, he has sufficient defense
against those parties. For surely, since that assumption was effected in
behalf of our salvation, one must be on his guard lest, as he believes
that there is something belonging to our nature which sustains no
relation to that assumption, this something may fail also to sustain any
relation to the salvation. <span id="fr_1560"></span>[1561](#fn_1560)
And seeing that, with the exception of the form of the members, which
has been imparted to the varieties of living objects with differences
adapted to their different kinds, man is in nothing separated from the
cattle but in \[the possession of\] a rational spirit (*rationali
spiritu*), which is also named mind (*mens*), how is that faith sound,
according to which the belief is maintained, that the Wisdom of God
assumed that part of us which we hold in common with the cattle, while
He did not assume that which is brightly illumined by the light of
wisdom, and which is man’s peculiar gift?

<span id="iv.iv.v-p27"></span>9. Moreover, those parties <span
id="fr_1561"></span>[1562](#fn_1561) also are to be abhorred who deny
that our Lord Jesus Christ had in Mary a mother upon earth; while that
dispensation has honored both sexes, at once the male and the female,
and has made it plain that not only that sex which He assumed pertains
to God’s care, but also that sex by which He did assume this other, in
that He bore \[the nature of\] the man (*virum gerendo*), \[and\] in
that He was born of the woman. Neither is there anything to compel us to
a denial of the mother of the Lord, in the circumstance that this word
was spoken by Him: “Woman, what have I to do with thee? Mine hour is not
yet come.” <span id="fr_1562"></span>[1563](#fn_1562) But He rather
admonishesus to understand that, in respect of His being God, there was
no mother for Him, the part of whose personal majesty (*cujus majestatis
personam*) He was preparing to show forth in the turning of water into
wine. But as regards His being crucified, He was crucified in respect of
his being man; and that was the hour which had not come as yet, at the
time when this word was spoken, “What have I to do with thee? Mine hour
is not yet come;” that is, the hour at which I shall recognize thee. For
at that period, when He was crucified as man, He recognized His human
mother (*hominem matrem*), and committed her most humanely
(*humanissime*) to the care of the best beloved disciple. <span
id="fr_1563"></span>[1564](#fn_1563) Nor, again, should we be moved by
the fact that, when the presence of His mother and His brethren was
announced to Him, He replied, “Who is my mother, or who my brethren?”
etc. <span id="fr_1564"></span>[1565](#fn_1564) But rather let it teach
us, that when parents hinder our ministry wherein we minister the word
of God to our brethren, they ought not to be recognized by us. For if,
on the ground of His having said, “Who is my mother?” every one should
conclude that He had no mother on earth, then each should as matter of
course be also compelled to deny that the apostles had fathers on earth;
since He gave them an injunction in these terms: “Call no man your
father upon the earth; for one is your Father, which is in
heaven.” <span id="fr_1565"></span>[1566](#fn_1565)

<span id="iv.iv.v-p33"></span>10. Neither should the thought of the
woman’s womb impair this faith in us, to the effect that there should
appear to be any necessity for rejecting such a generation of our Lord
for the mere reason that worthless men consider it unworthy (*sordidi
sordidam putant*). For most true are these sayings of an apostle, both
that “the foolishness of God is wiser than men,” <span
id="fr_1566"></span>[1567](#fn_1566) and that “to the pure all things
are pure.” <span id="fr_1567"></span>[1568](#fn_1567) Those, <span
id="fr_1568"></span>[1569](#fn_1568) therefore, who entertain this
opinion ought to ponder the fact that the rays of this sun, which indeed
they do not praise as a creature of God, but adore as God, are diffused
all the world over, through the noisomenesses of sewers and every kind
of horrible thing, and that <span id="page_326">p. 326</span> <span
id="iv.iv.v-Page_326"></span>they operate in these according to their
nature, and yet never become debased by any defilement thence
contracted, albeit that the visible light is by nature in closer
conjunction with visible pollutions. How much less, therefore, could the
Word of God, who is neither corporeal nor visible, sustain defilement
from the female body, wherein He assumed human flesh together with soul
and spirit, through the incoming of which the majesty of the Word dwells
in a less immediate conjunction with the frailty of a human body! <span
id="fr_1569"></span>[1570](#fn_1569) Hence it is manifest that the Word
of God could in no way have been defiled by a human body, by which even
the human soul is not defiled. For not when it rules the body and
quickens it, but only when it lusts after the mortal good things
thereof, is the soul defiled by the body. But if these persons were to
desire to avoid the defilements of the soul, they would dread rather
these falsehoods and profanities.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1540"></span>[323:1541](1030407.htm#fr_1540) <span
id="iv.iv.v-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p3"></span> [John
1.3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003)<span
id="iv.iv.v-p3.1"></span>[John i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003)<span id="iv.iv.v-p3.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1541"></span>[323:1542](1030407.htm#fr_1541) <span
id="iv.iv.v-p3.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p4"></span> According to the literal meaning of the
phrase *ex tempore*. It may, however, here be used as = under conditions
of time, or in time.

<span id="fn_1542"></span>[323:1543](1030407.htm#fr_1542) <span
id="iv.iv.v-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p5"></span> Reading *sempiterne*: for which
*sempiternus* = the eternal wise God, is also given.

<span id="fn_1543"></span>[323:1544](1030407.htm#fr_1543) <span
id="iv.iv.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p6"></span> [Phil.
2.6](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#006)<span
id="iv.iv.v-p6.1"></span>[Phil. ii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#006)<span id="iv.iv.v-p6.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1544"></span>[324:1545](1030407.htm#fr_1544) <span
id="iv.iv.v-p6.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p7"></span> *Condita et facta est*

<span id="fn_1545"></span>[324:1546](1030407.htm#fr_1545) <span
id="iv.iv.v-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p8"></span> *Condere* and *creare*.

<span id="fn_1546"></span>[324:1547](1030407.htm#fr_1546) <span
id="iv.iv.v-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p10"></span> [John
1.14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014)<span
id="iv.iv.v-p10.1"></span>[John i.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014)<span id="iv.iv.v-p10.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1547"></span>[324:1548](1030407.htm#fr_1547) <span
id="iv.iv.v-p10.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p11"></span> Adopting in *hominibus creavi*. One
important <span class="c19"><span id="iv.iv.v-p11.1"></span>ms</span>.
gives *in omnibus* = amongst all.

<span id="fn_1548"></span>[324:1549](1030407.htm#fr_1548) <span
id="iv.iv.v-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p12"></span> [Prov.
8.22](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#022)<span
id="iv.iv.v-p12.1"></span>[Prov. viii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#022)<span id="iv.iv.v-p12.2"></span>,
with *creavit me* instead of the *possessed me* of the English version.

<span id="fn_1549"></span>[324:1550](1030407.htm#fr_1549) <span
id="iv.iv.v-p12.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p13"></span> Various editions give *principium et
caput Ecclesiæ est Christus* = the beginning of His ways and the Head of
the Church is Christ.

<span id="fn_1550"></span>[324:1551](1030407.htm#fr_1550) <span
id="iv.iv.v-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p14"></span> For *via certa* others give *via recta* =
a right way.

<span id="fn_1551"></span>[324:1552](1030407.htm#fr_1551) <span
id="iv.iv.v-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p15"></span> [Gen.
3.5](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#005)<span
id="iv.iv.v-p15.1"></span>[Gen. iii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#005)<span id="iv.iv.v-p15.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1552"></span>[324:1553](1030407.htm#fr_1552) <span
id="iv.iv.v-p15.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p16"></span> [Phil.
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007)<span
id="iv.iv.v-p16.1"></span>[Phil. 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007)<span id="iv.iv.v-p16.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1553"></span>[324:1554](1030407.htm#fr_1553) <span
id="iv.iv.v-p16.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p17"></span> *Per ejus primatum* = by means of His
standing as the Firstborn. We follow the Benedictine reading, *qui post
ejus et per ejus primatum in Dei gratiam renascuntur*. But there is
another, although less authoritative, version, viz. *qui post ejus
primitias in Dei gratia nascimur* = all of us who, subsequently to His
first-fruits, are born in the grace of God.

<span id="fn_1554"></span>[324:1555](1030407.htm#fr_1554) <span
id="iv.iv.v-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p18"></span> [Luke
8:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#021), [Rom.
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#015), [Gal.
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#005), [Eph.
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#005), [Heb.
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#011)<span
id="iv.iv.v-p18.1"></span>[Luke viii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#021)<span id="iv.iv.v-p18.2"></span>;
[Rom. viii. 15-17](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#015)<span
id="iv.iv.v-p18.3"></span>; [Gal. iv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#005)<span id="iv.iv.v-p18.4"></span>;
[Eph. i. 5](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#005)<span
id="iv.iv.v-p18.5"></span>; [Heb. ii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#011)<span id="iv.iv.v-p18.6"></span>

<span id="fn_1555"></span>[324:1556](1030407.htm#fr_1555) <span
id="iv.iv.v-p18.7"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p19"></span> *Id existens quod Pater est*, etc.
Another version is, *idem existens quod Pater Deus* = subsisting as the
same that God the Father is.

<span id="fn_1556"></span>[324:1557](1030407.htm#fr_1556) <span
id="iv.iv.v-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p20"></span> [John
1.9](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#009)<span
id="iv.iv.v-p20.1"></span>[John i.
9](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#009)<span id="iv.iv.v-p20.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1557"></span>[324:1558](1030407.htm#fr_1557) <span
id="iv.iv.v-p20.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p21"></span> The term *dispensatio* occurs very
frequently as the equivalent of the Greek <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iv.v-p21.1"></span>οἰκονομία</span> = economy, designating the
Incarnation.

<span id="fn_1558"></span>[324:1559](1030407.htm#fr_1558) <span
id="iv.iv.v-p21.4"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p22"></span> [Ex.
3.14](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#014)<span
id="iv.iv.v-p22.1"></span>[Ex. iii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#014)<span id="iv.iv.v-p22.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1559"></span>[325:1560](1030407.htm#fr_1559) <span
id="iv.iv.v-p24.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p25"></span> *Deserens*. With less point, *deferens*
has been suggested = bearing it, or delivering it.

<span id="fn_1560"></span>[325:1561](1030407.htm#fr_1560) <span
id="iv.iv.v-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p26"></span> Or it may = *he* should fail to have any
relation to the salvation.

<span id="fn_1561"></span>[325:1562](1030407.htm#fr_1561) <span
id="iv.iv.v-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p28"></span> Referring to the Manicheans.

<span id="fn_1562"></span>[325:1563](1030407.htm#fr_1562) <span
id="iv.iv.v-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p29"></span> [John
2.4](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#004)<span
id="iv.iv.v-p29.1"></span>[John ii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#004)<span id="iv.iv.v-p29.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1563"></span>[325:1564](1030407.htm#fr_1563) <span
id="iv.iv.v-p29.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p30"></span> [John
19:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#026),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#027)<span
id="iv.iv.v-p30.1"></span>[John 19:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#026),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#027)<span id="iv.iv.v-p30.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1564"></span>[325:1565](1030407.htm#fr_1564) <span
id="iv.iv.v-p30.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p31"></span> [Matt.
12.48](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#048)<span id="iv.iv.v-p31.1"></span>

<span id="fn_1565"></span>[325:1566](1030407.htm#fr_1565) <span
id="iv.iv.v-p31.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p32"></span> [Matt.
23.9](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#009)<span id="iv.iv.v-p32.1"></span>

<span id="fn_1566"></span>[325:1567](1030407.htm#fr_1566) <span
id="iv.iv.v-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p34"></span> [1 Cor.
1.25](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#025)<span id="iv.iv.v-p34.1"></span>[1
Cor. i. 25](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#025)<span
id="iv.iv.v-p34.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1567"></span>[325:1568](1030407.htm#fr_1567) <span
id="iv.iv.v-p34.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p35"></span> [Tit.
1.15](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#015)<span
id="iv.iv.v-p35.1"></span>[Tit. i.
15](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#015)<span id="iv.iv.v-p35.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1568"></span>[325:1569](1030407.htm#fr_1568) <span
id="iv.iv.v-p35.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p36"></span> In reference to the Manicheans.

<span id="fn_1569"></span>[326:1570](1030407.htm#fr_1569) <span
id="iv.iv.v-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p37"></span> The Benedictine text gives, *quibus
intervenientibus habitat majestas Verbi ab humani corporis fragilitate
secretius*. Another well-supported version is, *ad humani corporis
fragilitatem*, etc. = more retired in relation to the frailty of the
human body.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 5](1030408)
