[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030809)  [Next](1030811) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.ix.viii"></span>

<span id="v.ix.viii-p1"></span> 7. When therefore the faithful mother of
a faithful son departed desired to have his body deposited in the
basilica of a Martyr, forasmuch as she believed that his soul would be
aided by the merits of the Martyr, the very believing of this was a sort
of supplication, and this profited, if aught profited. And in that she
recurs in her thoughts to this same sepulchre, and in her prayers more
and more commends her son, the spirit of the departed is aided, not by
the place of its dead body, but by that which springs from memory of the
place, the living affection of the mother. For at once the thought, who
is commended and to whom, doth touch, and that with no unprofitable
emotion, the religious mind of her who prays. For also in prayer to
God, <span id="fr_2727"></span>[2728](#fn_2727) men do with the members
of their bodies that which becometh suppliants, when they bend their
knees, when they stretch forth their hands, or even prostrate themselves
on the ground, and whatever else they visibly do, albeit their invisible
will and heart’s intention be known unto God, and He needs not these
tokens that any man’s mind should be opened unto Him: only hereby one
more excites himself to pray and groan more humbly and more fervently.
And I know not how it is, that, while these motions of the body cannot
be made but by a motion of the mind preceding, yet by the same being
outwardly in visible sort made, that inward invisible one which made
them is increased: and thereby the heart’s affection which preceded that
they might be made, groweth because they are made. But still if any be
in that way held, or even bound, that he is not able to do these things
with his limbs, it does not follow that the inner man does not pray, and
before the eyes of God in its most secret chamber, where it hath
compunction, cast itself on the ground. So likewise, while it makes very
much difference, where a person deposits the body of his dead, while he
supplicates for his spirit unto God, because both the affection
preceding chose a spot which was holy, and after the body is there
deposited the recalling to mind of that holy spot renews and increases
the affection which had preceded; yet, though he may not be able in that
place which his religious mind did choose to lay in the ground him whom
he loves, in no wise ought he to cease from <span id="page_543">p.
543</span> <span id="v.ix.viii-Page_543"></span>necessary supplications
in commending of the same. For wheresoever the flesh of the departed may
lie or not lie, the spirit requires rest and must get it: for the spirit
in its departing from thence took with it the consciousness without
which it could make no odds how one exists, whether in a good estate or
a bad: and it does not look for aiding of its life from that flesh to
which it did itself afford the life which it withdrew in its departing,
and is to render back in its returning; since not flesh to spirit, but
spirit unto flesh procureth merit even of very resurrection, whether it
be unto punishment or unto glory that it is to come to life again.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2727"></span>[542:2728](1030810.htm#fr_2727) <span
id="v.ix.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix.viii-p2"></span> *Orantes*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 8](1030811)
