[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030038)  [Next](1030040) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.iv.xviii"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 17.—How the Back Parts of God
Were Seen. The Faith of the Resurrection of Christ. The Catholic Church
Only is the Place from Whence the Back Parts of God are Seen. The Back
Parts of God Were Seen by the Israelites. It is a Rash Opinion to Think
that God the Father Only Was Never Seen by the Fathers.</span>

<span id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p2"></span>Not unfitly is it commonly understood
to be prefigured from the person of our Lord Jesus Christ, that His
“back parts” are to be taken to be His flesh, in which He was <span
id="page_51">p. 51</span> <span id="iv.i.iv.xviii-Page_51"></span>born
of the Virgin, and died, and rose again; whether they are called back
parts <span id="fr_311"></span>[312](#fn_311) on account of the
posteriority of mortality, or because it was almost in the end of the
world, that is, at a late period, <span
id="fr_312"></span>[313](#fn_312) that He deigned to take it: but that
His “face” was that form of God, in which He “thought it not robbery to
be equal with God,” <span id="fr_313"></span>[314](#fn_313) which no one
certainly can see and live; whether because after this life, in which we
are absent from the Lord, <span id="fr_314"></span>[315](#fn_314) and
where the corruptible body presseth down the soul, <span
id="fr_315"></span>[316](#fn_315) we shall see “face to face,” <span
id="fr_316"></span>[317](#fn_316) as the apostle says—(for it is said in
the Psalms, of this life, “Verily every man living is altogether
vanity;” <span id="fr_317"></span>[318](#fn_317) and again, “For in Thy
sight shall no man living be justified;” <span
id="fr_318"></span>[319](#fn_318) and in this life also, according to
John, “It doth not yet appear what we shall be, but we know,” he says,
“that when He shall appear, we shall be like Him, for we shall see Him
as He is,” <span id="fr_319"></span>[320](#fn_319) which he certainly
intended to be understood as after this life, when we shall have paid
the debt of death, and shall have received the promise of the
resurrection);—or whether that even now, in whatever degree we
spiritually understand the wisdom of God, by which all things were made,
in that same degree we die to carnal affections, so that, considering
this world dead to us, we also ourselves die to this world, and say what
the apostle says, “The world is crucified unto me, and I unto the
world.” <span id="fr_320"></span>[321](#fn_320) For it was of this death
that he also says, “Wherefore, if ye be dead with Christ, why as though
living in the world are ye subject to ordinances?” <span
id="fr_321"></span>[322](#fn_321) Not therefore without cause will no
one be able to see the “face,” that is, the manifestation itself of the
wisdom of God, and live. For it is this very appearance, for the
contemplation of which every one sighs who strives to love God with all
his heart, and with all his soul, and with all his mind; to the
contemplation of which, he who loves his neighbor, too, as himself
builds up his neighbor also as far as he may; on which two commandments
hang all the law and the prophets. <span
id="fr_322"></span>[323](#fn_322) And this is signified also in Moses
himself. For when he had said, on account of the love of God with which
he was specially inflamed, “If I have found grace in thy sight, show me
now Thyself plainly, that I may find grace in Thy sight;” he immediately
subjoined, on account of the love also of his neighbor, “And that I may
know that this nation is Thy people.” It is therefore that “appearance”
which hurries away every rational soul with the desire of it, and the
more ardently the more pure that soul is; and it is the more pure the
more it rises to spiritual things; and it rises the more to spiritual
things the more it dies to carnal things. But whilst we are absent from
the Lord, and walk by faith, not by sight, <span
id="fr_323"></span>[324](#fn_323) we ought to see the “back parts” of
Christ, that is His flesh, by that very faith, that is, standing on the
solid foundation of faith, which the rock signifies, <span
id="fr_324"></span>[325](#fn_324) and beholding it from such a safe
watch-tower, namely in the Catholic Church, of which it is said, “And
upon this rock I will build my Church.” <span
id="fr_325"></span>[326](#fn_325) For so much the more certainly we love
that face of Christ, which we earnestly desire to see, as we recognize
in His back parts how much first Christ loved us.

<span id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p18"></span>29. But in the flesh itself, the
faith in His resurrection saves and justifies us. For, “If thou shalt
believe,” he says, “in thine heart, that God hath raised Him from the
dead, thou shalt be saved;” <span id="fr_326"></span>[327](#fn_326) and
again, “Who was delivered,” he says, “for our offenses, and was raised
again for our justification.” <span id="fr_327"></span>[328](#fn_327) So
that the reward of our faith is the resurrection of the body of our
Lord. <span id="fr_328"></span>[329](#fn_328) For even His enemies
believe that that flesh died on the cross of His passion, but they do
not believe it to have risen again. Which we believing most firmly, gaze
upon it as from the solidity of a rock: whence we wait with certain hope
for the adoption, to wit, the redemption of our body; <span
id="fr_329"></span>[330](#fn_329) because we hope for that in the
members of Christ, that is, in ourselves, which by a sound faith we
acknowledge to be perfect in Him as in our Head. Thence it is that He
would not have His back parts seen, unless as He passed by, that His
resurrection may be believed. For that which is Pascha in Hebrew, is
translated Passover. <span id="fr_330"></span>[331](#fn_330) Whence John
the Evangelist also says, “Before the feast of the Passover, when Jesus
knew that His hour was come, that He should pass out of this world unto
the Father.” <span id="fr_331"></span>[332](#fn_331)

<span id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p25"></span>30. But they who believe this, but
believe it not in the Catholic Church, but in some schism or in heresy,
do not see the back parts of the Lord from “the place that is by Him.”
For what does that mean which the Lord says, “Behold, there is a place
by me, and thou <span id="page_52">p. 52</span> <span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-Page_52"></span>shalt stand upon a rock?” What earthly
place is “by” the Lord, unless that is “by Him” which touches Him
spiritually? For what place is not “by” the Lord, who “reacheth from one
end to another mightily, and sweetly doth order all things,” <span
id="fr_332"></span>[333](#fn_332) and of whom it is said, “Heaven is His
throne, and earth is His footstool;” and who said, “Where is the house
that ye build unto me, and where is the place of my rest? For has not my
hand made all those things?” <span id="fr_333"></span>[334](#fn_333) But
manifestly the Catholic Church itself is understood to be “the place by
Him,” wherein one stands upon a rock, where he healthfully sees the
“Pascha Domini,” that is, the “Passing by” <span
id="fr_334"></span>[335](#fn_334) of the Lord, and His back parts, that
is, His body, who believes in His resurrection. “And thou shalt stand,”
He says, “upon a rock while my glory passeth by.” For in reality,
immediately after the majesty of the Lord had passed by in the
glorification of the Lord, in which He rose again and ascended to the
Father, we stood firm upon the rock. And Peter himself then stood firm,
so that he preached Him with confidence, whom, before he stood firm, he
had thrice from fear denied; <span id="fr_335"></span>[336](#fn_335)
although, indeed, already before placed in predestination upon the
watch-tower of the rock, but with the hand of the Lord still held over
him that he might not see. For he was to see His back parts, and the
Lord had not yet “passed by,” namely, from death to life; He had not yet
been glorified by the resurrection.

<span id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p30"></span>31. For as to that, too, which
follows in Exodus, “I will cover thee with mine hand while I pass by,
and I will take away my hand and thou shalt see my back parts;” many
Israelites, of whom Moses was then a figure, believed in the Lord after
His resurrection, as if His hand had been taken off from their eyes, and
they now saw His back parts. And hence the evangelist also mentions that
prophesy of Isaiah, “Make the heart of this people fat, and make their
ears heavy, and shut their eyes.” <span
id="fr_336"></span>[337](#fn_336) Lastly, in the Psalm, that is not
unreasonably understood to be said in their person, “For day and night
Thy hand was heavy upon me.” “By day,” perhaps, when He performed
manifest miracles, yet was not acknowledged by them; but “by night,”
when He died in suffering, when they thought still more certainly that,
like any one among men, He was cut off and brought to an end. But since,
when He had already passed by, so that His back parts were seen, upon
the preaching to them by the Apostle Peter that it behoved Christ to
suffer and rise again, they were pricked in their hearts with the grief
of repentance, <span id="fr_337"></span>[338](#fn_337) that that might
come to pass among the baptized which is said in the beginning of that
Psalm, “Blessed are they whose transgressions are forgiven, and whose
sins are covered;” therefore, after it had been said, “Thy hand is heavy
upon me,” the Lord, as it were, passing by, so that now He removed His
hand, and His back parts were seen, there follows the voice of one who
grieves and confesses and receives remission of sins by faith in the
resurrection of the Lord: “My moisture,” he says, “is turned into the
drought of summer. I acknowledged my sin unto Thee, and mine iniquity
have I not hid. I said, I will confess my transgressions unto the Lord,
and Thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin.” <span
id="fr_338"></span>[339](#fn_338) For we ought not to be so wrapped up
in the darkness of the flesh, as to think the face indeed of God to be
invisible, but His back visible, since both appeared visibly in the form
of a servant; but far be it from us to think anything of the kind in the
form of God; far be it from us to think that the Word of God and the
Wisdom of God has a face on one side, and on the other a back, as a
human body has, or is at all changed either in place or time by any
appearance or motion. <span id="fr_339"></span>[340](#fn_339)

<span id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p35"></span>32. Wherefore, if in those words
which were spoken in Exodus, and in all those corporeal appearances, the
Lord Jesus Christ was manifested; or if in some cases Christ was
manifested, as the consideration of this passage persuades us, in others
the Holy Spirit, as that which we have said above admonishes us; at any
rate no such result follows, as that God the Father never appeared in
any such form to the Fathers. For many such appearances happened in
those times, without either the Father, or the Son, or the Holy Spirit
being expressly named and designated in them; but yet with some
intimations given through certain very probable interpretations, so that
it would be too rash to say that God the Father never appeared by any
visible forms to the fathers or the prophets. For they gave birth to
this opinion who were not able to understand in respect to the unity of
the Trinity such texts as, “Now unto the King eternal, immortal,
invisible, the only wise God;” <span id="fr_340"></span>[341](#fn_340)
and, “Whom no man hath seen, nor <span id="page_53">p. 53</span> <span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-Page_53"></span>can see.” <span
id="fr_341"></span>[342](#fn_341) Which texts are understood by a sound
faith in that substance itself, the highest, and in the highest degree
divine and unchangeable, whereby both the Father and the Son and the
Holy Spirit is the one and only God. But those visions were wrought
through the changeable creature, made subject to the unchangeable God,
and did not manifest God properly as He is, but by intimations such as
suited the causes and times of the several circumstances.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_311"></span>[51:312](1030039.htm#fr_311) <span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p3"></span> *Posteriora*

<span id="fn_312"></span>[51:313](1030039.htm#fr_312) <span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p4"></span> *Posterius*

<span id="fn_313"></span>[51:314](1030039.htm#fr_313) <span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p5"></span> [Phil.
2.6](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#006)<span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p5.1"></span>[Phil. ii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#006)<span id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="fn_314"></span>[51:315](1030039.htm#fr_314) <span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p5.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p6"></span> [2 Cor.
5.6](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#006)<span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p6.1"></span>[2 Cor. v.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#006)<span id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="fn_315"></span>[51:316](1030039.htm#fr_315) <span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p6.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p7"></span> [Wisdom
9.15](../../../bib/apo/wis009.htm#015)<span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p7.1"></span>[Wisd. ix.
15](../../../bib/apo/wis009.htm#015)<span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="fn_316"></span>[51:317](1030039.htm#fr_316) <span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p7.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p8"></span> [1 Cor.
13.12](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#012)<span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p8.1"></span>[1 Cor. xiii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#012)<span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="fn_317"></span>[51:318](1030039.htm#fr_317) <span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p8.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p9"></span> [Ps.
39.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#005)<span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p9.1"></span>[Ps. xxxix.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#005)<span id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="fn_318"></span>[51:319](1030039.htm#fr_318) <span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p9.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p10"></span> [Ps.
143.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa143.htm#002)<span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p10.1"></span>[Ps. cxliii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#002)<span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="fn_319"></span>[51:320](1030039.htm#fr_319) <span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p10.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p11"></span> [1 John
3.2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#002)<span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p11.1"></span>[1 John iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#002)<span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="fn_320"></span>[51:321](1030039.htm#fr_320) <span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p11.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p12"></span> [Gal.
6.14](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#014)<span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p12.1"></span>[Gal. vi.
14](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#014)<span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="fn_321"></span>[51:322](1030039.htm#fr_321) <span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p12.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p13"></span> [Col.
2.20](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#020)<span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p13.1"></span>[Col. ii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#020)<span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p13.2"></span>. *Viventes de hoc mundo decernitis*.

<span id="fn_322"></span>[51:323](1030039.htm#fr_322) <span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p13.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p14"></span> [Matt.
22.37-40](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#037)<span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="fn_323"></span>[51:324](1030039.htm#fr_323) <span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p15"></span> [2 Cor.
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#007)<span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p15.1"></span>[2 Cor.
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#007)<span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="fn_324"></span>[51:325](1030039.htm#fr_324) <span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p15.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p16"></span> \[Augustin here gives the
Protestant interpretation of the word “rock,” in the passage, “on this
rock I will build my church.”—W.G.T.S.\]

<span id="fn_325"></span>[51:326](1030039.htm#fr_325) <span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p17"></span> [Matt.
16.18](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#018)<span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="fn_326"></span>[51:327](1030039.htm#fr_326) <span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p19"></span> [Rom.
10.9](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#009)<span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p19.1"></span>[Rom. x.
9](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#009)<span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="fn_327"></span>[51:328](1030039.htm#fr_327) <span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p19.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p20"></span> [Rom.
4.25](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#025)<span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p20.1"></span>[Rom. iv.
25](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#025)<span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="fn_328"></span>[51:329](1030039.htm#fr_328) <span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p20.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p21"></span> \[The meaning seems to be, that the
vivid realization that Christ’s body rose from the dead is the reward of
a Christian’s faith. The unbeliever has no such reward.—W.G.T.S.\]

<span id="fn_329"></span>[51:330](1030039.htm#fr_329) <span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p22"></span> [Rom.
8.23](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#023)<span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p22.1"></span>[Rom. viii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#023)<span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="fn_330"></span>[51:331](1030039.htm#fr_330) <span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p22.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p23"></span> *Transitus* = passing by.

<span id="fn_331"></span>[51:332](1030039.htm#fr_331) <span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p24"></span> [John
13.1](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#001)<span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p24.1"></span>[John xiii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#001)<span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="fn_332"></span>[52:333](1030039.htm#fr_332) <span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p26"></span> [Wisdom
8.1](../../../bib/apo/wis008.htm#001)<span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p26.1"></span>[Wisd. viii.
1](../../../bib/apo/wis008.htm#001)<span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="fn_333"></span>[52:334](1030039.htm#fr_333) <span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p26.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p27"></span> [Isa.
66:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#002)<span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p27.1"></span>[Isa.
66:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#002)<span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="fn_334"></span>[52:335](1030039.htm#fr_334) <span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p27.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p28"></span> *Transitus*

<span id="fn_335"></span>[52:336](1030039.htm#fr_335) <span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p29"></span> [Matt.
26.70-74](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#070)<span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="fn_336"></span>[52:337](1030039.htm#fr_336) <span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p31"></span> [Isa.
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#010), [Matt.
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#015)<span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p31.1"></span>[Isa. vi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#010)<span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p31.2"></span>; [Matt. xiii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#015)<span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p31.3"></span>

<span id="fn_337"></span>[52:338](1030039.htm#fr_337) <span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p31.4"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p32"></span> [Acts
2:37](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#037),
[41](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#041)<span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p32.1"></span>[Acts
2:37](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#037),
[41](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#041)<span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p32.2"></span>

<span id="fn_338"></span>[52:339](1030039.htm#fr_338) <span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p32.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p33"></span> [Ps.
32:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#005)<span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p33.1"></span>[Ps.
32:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#005)<span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p33.2"></span>

<span id="fn_339"></span>[52:340](1030039.htm#fr_339) <span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p33.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p34"></span> \[This explanation of the “back
parts” of Christ to mean his resurrection, and of “the place that is by
him,” to mean the church, is an example of the fanciful exegesis into
which Augustin, with the fathers generally, sometimes falls. The
reasoning, here, unlike that in the preceding chapter, is not from the
immediate context, and hence extraneous matter is read into the
text.—W.G.T.S.\]

<span id="fn_340"></span>[52:341](1030039.htm#fr_340) <span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p36"></span> [1 Tim.
1.17](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#017)<span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p36.1"></span>[1 Tim. i.
17](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#017)<span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p36.2"></span>

<span id="fn_341"></span>[53:342](1030039.htm#fr_341) <span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p36.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p37"></span> [1 Tim.
6.16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#016)<span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p37.1"></span>[1 Tim. vi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#016)<span
id="iv.i.iv.xviii-p37.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 18](1030040)
