[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030644)  [Next](1030646) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.ii"></span>

<span id="v.v.ii-p1"></span> 1. <span class="c19"><span
id="v.v.ii-p1.1"></span> There</span> is a great question about Lying,
which often arises in the midst of our every day business, and gives us
much trouble, that we may not either rashly call that a lie which is not
such, or decide that it is sometimes right to tell a lie, that is, a
kind of honest, well-meant, charitable lie. This question we will
painfully discuss by seeking with them that seek: whether to any good
purpose, we need not take upon ourselves to affirm, for the attentive
reader will sufficiently gather from the course of the discussion. It
is, indeed, very full of dark corners, and hath many cavern-like
windings, whereby it oft eludes the eagerness of the seeker; so that at
one moment what was found seems to slip out of one’s hands, and anon
comes to light again, and then is once more lost to sight. At last,
however, the chase will bear down more surely, and will overtake our
sentence. Wherein if there is any error, yet as Truth is that which
setteth free from all error, and <span id="page_458">p. 458</span> <span
id="v.v.ii-Page_458"></span>Falsehood that which entangleth in all
error, one never errs more safely, methinks, than when one errs by too
much loving the truth, and too much rejecting of falsehood. For they who
find great fault say it is too much, whereas peradventure Truth would
say after all, it is not yet enough. But whoso readest, thou wilt do
well to find no fault until thou have read the whole; so wilt thou have
less fault to find. Eloquence thou must not look for: we have been
intent upon things, and upon dispatch in putting out of hand a matter
which nearly concerns our every day life, and therefore have had small
pains, or almost none, to bestow upon words.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 2](1030646)
