[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030415)  [Next](1030417) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.v.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.v.ii-p1"></span> 2. But, say they, those things which are
in the mind, in that we can by the mind itself discern them, we have no
need to know through the eyes of the body; but those things, which you
say unto us that we should believe, you neither point to without, that
through the eyes of the body we may know them; nor are they within, in
our own mind, that by exercising thought we may see them. And these
things they so say, as though any one would be bidden to believe, if
that, which is believed, he could already see set before him. Therefore
certainly ought we to believe certain temporal things also, which we see
not, that we may merit <span id="fr_1652"></span>[1653](#fn_1652) to see
eternal things also, which we believe. But, whosoever thou art who wilt
not believe save what thou seest, lo, bodies that are present thou seest
with the eyes of the body, wills and thoughts of thine own that are
present, because they are in thine own mind, thou seest by the mind
itself; tell me, I pray thee, thy friend’s will towards thee by what
eyes seest thou? For no will can be seen by the eyes of the body. What?
see you in your own mind this also <span id="page_338">p. 338</span>
<span id="iv.v.ii-Page_338"></span>which is going on in the mind of
another? But if you see it not, how do you repay in turn the good will
of your friend, if what you cannot see, you believe not? Will you haply
say that you see the will of another through his works? Therefore you
will see acts, and hear words, but concerning your friend’s will, that
which cannot be seen and heard you will believe. For that will is not
color or figure, so as to be thrown upon the eyes; or sound or strain,
so as to glide into the ears; nor indeed is it your own, so as to be
perceived by the motion <span id="fr_1653"></span>[1654](#fn_1653) of
your own heart. It remains therefore that, being neither seen, nor
heard, nor beheld within thyself, it be believed, that thy life be not
left deserted without any friendship, or affection bestowed upon thee be
not repaid by thee in return. Where then is that which thou saidest,
that thou oughtest not to believe, save what thou sawest either
outwardly in the body, or inwardly in the heart? Lo, out of thine own
heart, thou believest an heart not thine own; and lendest thy faith,
where thou dost not direct the glance of thy body or of thy mind. Thy
friend’s face thou discernest by thy own body, thy own faith thou
discernest by thine own mind; but thy friend’s faith is not loved by
thee, unless there be in thee in return that faith, whereby thou mayest
believe that which in him thou seest not. Although a man may also
deceive by feigning good will, and hiding malice: or, if he have no
thought to do harm, yet by expecting some benefit from thee, feigns,
because he has not, love.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1652"></span>[337:1653](1030416.htm#fr_1652) <span
id="iv.v.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.ii-p2"></span> *Mereamur*

<span id="fn_1653"></span>[338:1654](1030416.htm#fr_1653) <span
id="iv.v.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.ii-p3"></span> *Affectione*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 3](1030417)
