[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030399)  [Next](1030401) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.xxvii"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxvii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.iii.xxvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 26.—Of the Formal Admission of the
Catechumen, and of the Signs Therein Made Use of.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxvii-p2"></span>50. At the conclusion of this address
the person is to be asked whether he believes these things and earnestly
desires to observe them. And on his replying to that effect then
certainly he is to be solemnly signed and dealt with in accordance with
the custom of the Church. On the subject of the sacrament, indeed, <span
id="fr_1500"></span>[1501](#fn_1500) which he receives, it is first to
be well impressed upon his notice that the signs of divine things are,
it is true, things visible, but that the invisible things themselves are
also honored in them, and that that species, <span
id="fr_1501"></span>[1502](#fn_1501) which is then sanctified by the
blessing, is therefore not to be regarded merely in the way in which it
is regarded in any common use. And thereafter he ought to be told what
is also signified by the form of words to which he has listened, and
what in him is seasoned <span id="fr_1502"></span>[1503](#fn_1502) by
that (spiritual grace) of which this material substance presents the
emblem. Next we should take occasion by that ceremony to admonish him
that, if he hears anything even in the Scriptures which may carry a
carnal sound, he should, even although he fails to understand it,
nevertheless believe that something spiritual is signified thereby,
which bears upon holiness of character and the future life. Moreover, in
this way he learns briefly that, whatever he may hear in the canonical
books of such a kind as to make him unable to refer it to the love of
eternity, and of truth, and of sanctity, and to the love of our
neighbor, he should believe that to have been spoken or done with a
figurative significance; and that, consequently, he should endeavor to
understand it in such a manner as to refer it to that twofold (duty of)
love. He should be further admonished, however, not to take the term
*neighbor* in a carnal sense, but to understand under it every one who
may ever be with him in that holy city, whether there already or not yet
apparent. And (he should finally be counselled) not to despair of the
amendment of any man whom he perceives to be living under the patience
of God for no other reason, as the apostle <span
id="fr_1503"></span>[1504](#fn_1503) says, than that he may be brought
to repentance.

<span id="iv.iii.xxvii-p7"></span>51. If this discourse, in which I have
supposed myself to have been teaching some uninstructed person in my
presence, appears to you to be too long, you are at liberty to expound
these matters with greater brevity. I do not think, however, that it
ought to be longer than this. At the same time, much depends on what the
case itself, as it goes on, may render advisable, and what the audience
actually present shows itself not only to bear, but also to desire.
When, however, rapid despatch is required, notice with what facility the
whole matter admits of being explained. Suppose once more that some one
comes before us who desires to be a Christian; and accordingly, suppose
further that he has been interrogated, and that he has returned the
answer which we have taken the former catechumen to have given; for,
even should he decline to make this reply, it must at least be said that
he ought to have given it;—then all that remains to be said to him
should be put together in the following manner:—

<span id="iv.iii.xxvii-p8"></span>52. Of a truth, brother, that is great
and true blessedness which is promised to the saints in a future world.
All visible things, on the other hand, pass away, and all the pomp, and
pleasure, and solicitude <span id="fr_1504"></span>[1505](#fn_1504) of
this world will perish, and (even now) they drag those who love them
along with them onward to destruction. The merciful God, willing to
deliver men from this destruction, that is to say, from everlasting
pains, if they should not prove enemies to themselves, and if they
should not withstand the mercy of their Creator, sent His only-begotten
Son, that is to say, His Word, equal with Himself, by whom He made all
things. And He, while abiding indeed in His divinity, and neither
receding from the Father nor being changed in anything, did at the same
time, by taking on Himself human nature, <span
id="fr_1505"></span>[1506](#fn_1505) and appearing to men in mortal
flesh, come unto men; in order that, <span id="page_313">p. 313</span>
<span id="iv.iii.xxvii-Page_313"></span>just as death entered among the
human race by one man, to wit, the first that was made, that is to say,
Adam, because he consented unto his wife when she was seduced by the
devil to the effect that they (both) transgressed the commandment of
God; even so by one man, Jesus Christ, who is also God, the Son of God,
all those who believe in Him might have all their past sins done away
with, and enter into eternal life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1500"></span>[312:1501](1030400.htm#fr_1500) <span
id="iv.iii.xxvii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxvii-p3"></span> It has been supposed by the
Benedictine editors that *sane* may be a misreading for *salis*. Whether
that be or be not the case, the *sacramentum* intended here appears to
be the *sacramentum salis*, in reference to which Neander (*Church
History* iii. p. 458, Bohn’s Translation) states that “in the North
African Church the bishop gave to those whom he received as
*competentes*, while signing the cross over them as a symbol of
consecration, a portion of salt over which a blessing had been
pronounced. This was to signify the divine word imparted to the
candidates as the true salt for human nature.” There is an allusion to
the same in the *Confessions* (i. 11), where Augustin says, “Even from
my mother’s womb who greatly hoped in thee, I was signed with the sign
of His cross, and seasoned with His salt.”

<span id="fn_1501"></span>[312:1502](1030400.htm#fr_1501) <span
id="iv.iii.xxvii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxvii-p4"></span> *Speciem* = kind, in reference to the
outward and sensible sign of the *salt*.

<span id="fn_1502"></span>[312:1503](1030400.htm#fr_1502) <span
id="iv.iii.xxvii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxvii-p5"></span> Adopting *condiat*, which
unquestionably is the reading most accordant with the figure of the
sacramental salt here dealt with. Some editions give *condatur* = what
is hidden in it, *i.e.* in the said form of words.

<span id="fn_1503"></span>[312:1504](1030400.htm#fr_1503) <span
id="iv.iii.xxvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxvii-p6"></span> [Rom.
2.4](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#004)<span
id="iv.iii.xxvii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="fn_1504"></span>[312:1505](1030400.htm#fr_1504) <span
id="iv.iii.xxvii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxvii-p9"></span> *Curiositas*

<span id="fn_1505"></span>[312:1506](1030400.htm#fr_1505) <span
id="iv.iii.xxvii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxvii-p10"></span> *Hominem*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 27](1030401)
