[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030052)  [Next](1030054) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.v.xii"></span>

<span id="iv.i.v.xii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.v.xii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 11.—The Essence of God Never
Appeared in Itself. Divine Appearances to the Fathers Wrought by the
Ministry of Angels. An Objection Drawn from the Mode of Speech Removed.
That the Appearing of God to Abraham Himself, Just as that to Moses, Was
Wrought by Angels. The Same Thing is Proved by the Law Being Given to
Moses by Angels. What Has Been Said in This Book, and What Remains to Be
Said in the Next.</span>

<span id="iv.i.v.xii-p2"></span>Wherefore the substance, or, if it is
better so to say, the essence of God, <span
id="fr_411"></span>[412](#fn_411) wherein we understand, in proportion
to our measure, in however small a degree, the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Spirit, since it is in no way changeable, can in no way in its
proper self be visible.

<span id="iv.i.v.xii-p4"></span>22. It is manifest, accordingly, that
all those appearances to the fathers, when God was presented to them
according to His own dispensation, suitable to the times, were wrought
through the creature. And if we cannot discern in what manner He wrought
them by ministry of angels, yet we say that they were wrought by angels;
but not from our own power of discernment, lest we should seem to any
one to be wise beyond our measure, whereas we are wise so as to think
soberly, as God hath dealt to us the measure of faith; <span
id="fr_412"></span>[413](#fn_412) and we believe, and therefore
speak. <span id="fr_413"></span>[414](#fn_413) For the authority is
extant of the divine Scriptures, from which our reason ought not to turn
aside; nor by leaving the solid support of the divine utterance, to fall
headlong over the precipice of its own surmisings, in matters wherein
neither the perceptions of the body rule, nor the clear reason of the
truth shines forth. Now, certainly, it is written most clearly in the
Epistle to the Hebrews, when the dispensation of the New Testament was
to be distinguished from the dispensation of the Old, according to the
fitness of ages and of times, that not only those visible things, but
also the word itself, was wrought by angels. For it is said thus: “But
to which of the angels said He at any time, Sit on my right hand, until
I make thine enemies thy footstool? Are they not all ministering
spirits, sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of
salvation?” <span id="fr_414"></span>[415](#fn_414) Whence it appears
that all those things were not only wrought by angels, but wrought also
on our account, that is, on account of the people of God, to whom is
promised the inheritance of eternal life. As it is written also to the
Corinthians, “Now all these things happened unto them in a figure: and
they are written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are
come.” <span id="fr_415"></span>[416](#fn_415) And then, demonstrating
by plain consequence that as at that time the word was spoken by the
angels, so now by the Son; “Therefore,” he says, “we ought to give the
more earnest heed to the things which we have heard, lest at any time we
should let them slip. For if the word spoken by angels was steadfast,
and every transgression and disobedience received a just recompense of
reward; how shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation?” And
then, as though you asked, What salvation?—in order to show that he is
now speaking of the New Testament, that is, of the word which was spoken
not by angels, but by the Lord, he says, “Which at the first began to be
spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them that heard Him;
God also bearing them witness, both with signs and wonders, and with
divers miracles, and gifts of the Holy Ghost, according to His own
will.” <span id="fr_416"></span>[417](#fn_416)

<span id="iv.i.v.xii-p10"></span>23. But some one may say, Why then is
it written, “The Lord said to Moses;” and not, rather, The angel said to
Moses? Because, when the crier proclaims the words of the judge, it is
not usually written in the record, so and so the crier said, but so and
so the judge. In like manner also, when the holy prophet speaks,
although we say, The prophet said, we mean nothing else to be understood
than that the Lord said; and if we were to say, The Lord said, we should
not put the prophet aside, but only intimate who spake by him. And,
indeed, these Scriptures often reveal the angel to be the Lord, of whose
speaking it is from time to time said, “the Lord said,” as we have shown
already. But on account of those who, since the Scripture in that place
specifies an angel, will have the Son of God Himself and in <span
id="page_66">p. 66</span> <span id="iv.i.v.xii-Page_66"></span>Himself
to be understood, because He is called an angel by the prophet, as
announcing the will of His Father and of Himself; I have therefore
thought fit to produce a plainer testimony from this epistle, where it
is not said by an angel, but “by angels.”

<span id="iv.i.v.xii-p11"></span>24. For Stephen, too, in the Acts of
the Apostles, relates these things in that manner in which they are also
written in the Old Testament: “Men, brethren, and fathers, hearken,” he
says; “The God of glory appeared unto our father Abraham, when he was in
Mesopotamia.” <span id="fr_417"></span>[418](#fn_417) But lest any one
should think that the God of glory appeared then to the eyes of any
mortal in that which He is in Himself, he goes on to say that an angel
appeared to Moses. “Then fled Moses,” he says, “at that saying, and was
a stranger in the land of Midian, where he begat two sons. And when
forty years were expired, there appeared to him in the wilderness of
mount Sinai an angel of the Lord in a flame of fire in a bush. When
Moses saw it, he wondered at the sight: and as he drew near to behold
it, the voice of the Lord came unto him, saying, I am the God of thy
fathers, the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob.
Then Moses trembled, and durst not behold. Then said the Lord to him,
Put off thy shoes from thy feet,” <span
id="fr_418"></span>[419](#fn_418) etc. Here, certainly, he speaks both
of angel and of Lord; and of the same as the God of Abraham, and the God
of Isaac, and the God of Jacob; as is written in Genesis.

<span id="iv.i.v.xii-p14"></span>25. Can there be any one who will say
that the Lord appeared to Moses by an angel, but to Abraham by Himself?
Let us not answer this question from Stephen, but from the book itself,
whence Stephen took his narrative. For, pray, because it is written,
“And the Lord God said unto Abraham;” <span
id="fr_419"></span>[420](#fn_419) and a little after, “And the Lord God
appeared unto Abraham;” <span id="fr_420"></span>[421](#fn_420) were
these things, for this reason, not done by angels? Whereas it is said in
like manner in another place, “And the Lord appeared to him in the
plains of Mamre, as he sat in the tent door in the heat of the day;” and
yet it is added immediately, “And he lift up his eyes and looked, and,
lo, three men stood by him:” <span id="fr_421"></span>[422](#fn_421) of
whom we have already spoken. For how will these people, who either will
not rise from the words to the meaning, or easily throw themselves down
from the meaning to the words,—how, I say, will they be able to explain
that God was seen in three men, except they confess that they were
angels, as that which follows also shows? Because it is not said an
angel spoke or appeared to him, will they therefore venture to say that
the vision and voice granted to Moses was wrought by an angel because it
is so written, but that God appeared and spake in His own substance to
Abraham because there is no mention made of an angel? What of the fact,
that even in respect to Abraham an angel is not left unmentioned? For
when his son was ordered to be offered up as a sacrifice, we read thus:
“And it came to pass after these things that God did tempt Abraham, and
said unto him, Abraham: and he said, Behold, here I am. And He said,
Take now thy son, thine only son Isaac, whom thou lovest, and get thee
into the land of Moriah; and offer him there for a burnt-offering upon
one of the mountains that I will tell thee of.” Certainly God is here
mentioned, not an angel. But a little afterwards Scripture hath it thus:
“And Abraham stretched forth his hand, and took the knife to slay his
son. And the angel of the Lord called unto him out of heaven, and said,
Abraham, Abraham: and he said, Here am I. And he said, Lay not thine
hand upon the lad, neither do thou anything unto him.” What can be
answered to this? Will they say that God commanded that Isaac should be
slain, and that an angel forbade it? and further, that the father
himself, in opposition to the decree of God, who had commanded that he
should be slain, obeyed the angel, who had bidden him spare him? Such an
interpretation is to be rejected as absurd. Yet not even for it, gross
and abject as it is, does Scripture leave any room, for it immediately
adds: “For now I know that thou fearest God, seeing thou hast not
withheld thy son, thine only son, on account of me.” <span
id="fr_422"></span>[423](#fn_422) What is “on account of me,” except on
account of Him who had commanded him to be slain? Was then the God of
Abraham the same as the angel, or was it not rather God by an angel?
Consider what follows. Here, certainly, already an angel has been most
clearly spoken of; yet notice the context: “And Abraham lifted up his
eyes, and looked, and behold behind him a ram caught in a thicket by his
horns: and Abraham went and took the ram, and offered him up for a
burnt-offering in the stead of his son. And Abraham called the name of
that place, The Lord saw: <span id="fr_423"></span>[424](#fn_423) as it
is said to this day, In the mount the Lord was seen.” <span
id="fr_424"></span>[425](#fn_424) Just as that <span id="page_67">p.
67</span> <span id="iv.i.v.xii-Page_67"></span>which a little before God
said by an angel, “For now I know that thou fearest God;” not because it
was to be understood that God then came to know, but that He brought it
to pass that through God Abraham himself came to know what strength of
heart he had to obey God, even to the sacrificing of his only son: after
that mode of speech in which the effect is signified by the
efficient,—as cold is said to be sluggish, because it makes men
sluggish; so that He was therefore said to know, because He had made
Abraham himself to know, who might well have not discerned the firmness
of his own faith, had it not been proved by such a trial. So here, too,
Abraham called the name of the place “The Lord saw,” that is, caused
Himself to be seen. For he goes on immediately to say, “As it is said to
this day, In the mount the Lord was seen.” Here you see the same angel
is called Lord: wherefore, unless because the Lord spake by the angel?
But if we pass on to that which follows, the angel altogether speaks as
a prophet, and reveals expressly that God is speaking by the angel. “And
the angel of the Lord,” he says, “called unto Abraham out of heaven the
second time, and said, By myself I have sworn, saith the Lord; for
because thou hast done this thing, and hast not withheld thy son, thine
only son, on account of me,” <span id="fr_425"></span>[426](#fn_425)
etc. Certainly these words, *viz*. that he by whom the Lord speaks
should say, “Thus saith the Lord,” are commonly used by the prophets
also. Does the Son of God say of the Father, “The Lord saith,” while He
Himself is that Angel of the Father? What then? Do they not see how hard
pressed they are about these three men who appeared to Abraham, when it
had been said before, “The Lord appeared to him?” Were they not angels
because they are called men? Let them read Daniel, saying, “Behold the
man Gabriel.” <span id="fr_426"></span>[427](#fn_426)

<span id="iv.i.v.xii-p23"></span>26. But why do we delay any longer to
stop their mouths by another most clear and most weighty proof, where
not an angel in the singular nor men in the plural are spoken of, but
simply angels; by whom not any particular word was wrought, but the Law
itself is most distinctly declared to be given; which certainly none of
the faithful doubts that God gave to Moses for the control of the
children of Israel, or yet, that it was given by angels. So Stephen
speaks: “Ye stiff-necked,” he says, “and uncircumcised in heart and
ears, ye do always resist the Holy Ghost: as your fathers did, so do ye.
Which of the prophets have not your fathers persecuted? and they have
slain them which showed before of the coming of the Just One; of whom ye
have been now the betrayers and murderers: who have received the Law by
the disposition of angels, <span id="fr_427"></span>[428](#fn_427) and
have not kept it.” <span id="fr_428"></span>[429](#fn_428) What is more
evident than this? What more strong than such an authority? The Law,
indeed, was given to that people by the disposition of angels; but the
advent of our Lord Jesus Christ was by it prepared and pre-announced;
and He Himself, as the Word of God, was in some wonderful and
unspeakable manner in the angels, by whose disposition the Law itself
was given. And hence He said in the Gospel, “For had ye believed Moses,
ye would have believed me; for he wrote of me.” <span
id="fr_429"></span>[430](#fn_429) Therefore then the Lord was speaking
by the angels; and the son of God, who was to be the Mediator of God and
men, from the seed of Abraham, was preparing His own advent by the
angels, that He might find some by whom He would be received, confessing
themselves guilty, whom the Law unfulfilled had made transgressors. And
hence the apostle also says to the Galatians, “Wherefore then serveth
the Law? It was added because of transgressions, till the seed should
come to whom the promise was made, which \[seed\] was ordered <span
id="fr_430"></span>[431](#fn_430) through angels in the hand of a
mediator;” <span id="fr_431"></span>[432](#fn_431) that is, ordered
through angels in His *own* hand. For He was not born in limitation, but
in power. But you learn in another place that he does not mean any one
of the angels as a mediator, but the Lord Jesus Christ Himself, in so
far as He deigned to be made man: “For there is one God,” he says, “and
one Mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus.” <span
id="fr_432"></span>[433](#fn_432) Hence that passover in the killing of
the lamb: <span id="fr_433"></span>[434](#fn_433) hence all those things
which are figuratively spoken in the Law, of Christ to come in the
flesh, and to suffer, but also to rise again, which Law was given by the
disposition of angels; in which angels, were certainly the Father, and
the Son, and the Holy Spirit; and in which, sometimes the Father,
sometimes the Son, sometimes the Holy Spirit, and sometimes God, without
any distinction of person, was figuratively signified by them, although
appearing in visible and sensible forms, yet by His own creature, not by
His substance, in order to the seeing of which, hearts are cleansed
through all those things which are seen by the eyes and heard by the
ears.

<span id="iv.i.v.xii-p31"></span>27. But now, as I think, that which we
had undertaken to show in this book has been <span id="page_68">p.
68</span> <span id="iv.i.v.xii-Page_68"></span>sufficiently discussed
and demonstrated, according to our capacity; and it has been
established, both by probable reason, so far as a man, or rather, so far
as I am able, and by strength of authority, so far as the divine
declarations from the Holy Scriptures have been made clear, that those
words and bodily appearances which were given to these ancient fathers
of ours before the incarnation of the Saviour, when God was said to
appear, were wrought by angels: whether themselves speaking or doing
something in the person of God, as we have shown that the prophets also
were wont to do, or assuming from the creature that which they
themselves were not, wherein God might be shown in a figure to men;
which manner of showing also, Scripture teaches by many examples, that
the prophets, too, did not omit. It remains, therefore, now for us to
consider,—since both in the Lord as born of a virgin, and in the Holy
Spirit descending in a corporeal form like a dove, <span
id="fr_434"></span>[435](#fn_434) and in the tongues like as of fire,
which appeared with a sound from heaven on the day of Pentecost, after
the ascension of the Lord, <span id="fr_435"></span>[436](#fn_435) it
was not the Word of God Himself by His own substance, in which He is
equal and eternal with the Father, nor the Spirit of the Father and of
the Son by His own substance, in which He Himself also is equal and
co-eternal with both, but assuredly a creature, such as could be formed
and exist in these fashions, which appeared to corporeal and mortal
senses,—it remains, I say, to consider what difference there is between
these manifestations and those which were proper to the Son of God and
to the Holy Spirit, although wrought by the visible creature; <span
id="fr_436"></span>[437](#fn_436) which subject we shall more
conveniently begin in another book.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_411"></span>[65:412](1030053.htm#fr_411) <span
id="iv.i.v.xii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.v.xii-p3"></span> \[“Substance,” from *sub stans*, is a
passive term, denoting latent and potential being. “Essence,” from
*esse*, is an active term, denoting energetic being. The schoolmen, as
Augustin does here, preferred the latter term to the former, though
employing both to designate the divine nature.—W.G.T.S.\]

<span id="fn_412"></span>[65:413](1030053.htm#fr_412) <span
id="iv.i.v.xii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.v.xii-p5"></span> [Rom.
12.3](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#003)<span
id="iv.i.v.xii-p5.1"></span>[Rom. xii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#003)<span id="iv.i.v.xii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="fn_413"></span>[65:414](1030053.htm#fr_413) <span
id="iv.i.v.xii-p5.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.v.xii-p6"></span> [2 Cor.
4.13](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#013)<span
id="iv.i.v.xii-p6.1"></span>[2 Cor. iv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#013)<span id="iv.i.v.xii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="fn_414"></span>[65:415](1030053.htm#fr_414) <span
id="iv.i.v.xii-p6.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.v.xii-p7"></span> [Heb.
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#014)<span
id="iv.i.v.xii-p7.1"></span>[Heb.
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#014)<span id="iv.i.v.xii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="fn_415"></span>[65:416](1030053.htm#fr_415) <span
id="iv.i.v.xii-p7.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.v.xii-p8"></span> [1 Cor.
10.11](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#011)<span
id="iv.i.v.xii-p8.1"></span>[1 Cor. x.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#011)<span id="iv.i.v.xii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="fn_416"></span>[65:417](1030053.htm#fr_416) <span
id="iv.i.v.xii-p8.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.v.xii-p9"></span> [Heb.
2.1-4](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#001)<span
id="iv.i.v.xii-p9.1"></span>[Heb. ii.
1-4](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#001)<span id="iv.i.v.xii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="fn_417"></span>[66:418](1030053.htm#fr_417) <span
id="iv.i.v.xii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.v.xii-p12"></span> [Act.
7.2](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#002)<span
id="iv.i.v.xii-p12.1"></span>[Acts vii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#002)<span id="iv.i.v.xii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="fn_418"></span>[66:419](1030053.htm#fr_418) <span
id="iv.i.v.xii-p12.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.v.xii-p13"></span> [Exod.
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#015), [Exod.
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#007), [Acts
7:29](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#029)<span
id="iv.i.v.xii-p13.1"></span>[Ex. ii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#015)<span id="iv.i.v.xii-p13.2"></span>
and iii. 7, and [Acts vii. 29-33](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#029)<span
id="iv.i.v.xii-p13.3"></span>

<span id="fn_419"></span>[66:420](1030053.htm#fr_419) <span
id="iv.i.v.xii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.v.xii-p15"></span> [Gen.
12.1](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#001)<span
id="iv.i.v.xii-p15.1"></span>[Gen. xii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#001)<span id="iv.i.v.xii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="fn_420"></span>[66:421](1030053.htm#fr_420) <span
id="iv.i.v.xii-p15.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.v.xii-p16"></span> [Gen.
17.1](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#001)<span
id="iv.i.v.xii-p16.1"></span>[Gen. xvii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#001)<span id="iv.i.v.xii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="fn_421"></span>[66:422](1030053.htm#fr_421) <span
id="iv.i.v.xii-p16.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.v.xii-p17"></span> [Gen.
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#002)<span
id="iv.i.v.xii-p17.1"></span>[Gen.
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#002)<span id="iv.i.v.xii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="fn_422"></span>[66:423](1030053.htm#fr_422) <span
id="iv.i.v.xii-p17.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.v.xii-p18"></span> *Propter me*

<span id="fn_423"></span>[66:424](1030053.htm#fr_423) <span
id="iv.i.v.xii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.v.xii-p19"></span> *Dominus vidit*

<span id="fn_424"></span>[66:425](1030053.htm#fr_424) <span
id="iv.i.v.xii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.v.xii-p20"></span> *Dominus visus est*

<span id="fn_425"></span>[67:426](1030053.htm#fr_425) <span
id="iv.i.v.xii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.v.xii-p21"></span> [Gen.
22](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#000)<span id="iv.i.v.xii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="fn_426"></span>[67:427](1030053.htm#fr_426) <span
id="iv.i.v.xii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.v.xii-p22"></span> [Dan.
9.21](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#021)<span
id="iv.i.v.xii-p22.1"></span>[Dan. ix.
21](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#021)<span id="iv.i.v.xii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="fn_427"></span>[67:428](1030053.htm#fr_427) <span
id="iv.i.v.xii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.v.xii-p24"></span> *In edictis angelorum*

<span id="fn_428"></span>[67:429](1030053.htm#fr_428) <span
id="iv.i.v.xii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.v.xii-p25"></span> [Acts
7.51-53](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#051)<span
id="iv.i.v.xii-p25.1"></span>[Acts vii.
51-53](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#051)<span
id="iv.i.v.xii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="fn_429"></span>[67:430](1030053.htm#fr_429) <span
id="iv.i.v.xii-p25.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.v.xii-p26"></span> [John
5.46](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#046)<span
id="iv.i.v.xii-p26.1"></span>[John v.
46](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#046)<span id="iv.i.v.xii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="fn_430"></span>[67:431](1030053.htm#fr_430) <span
id="iv.i.v.xii-p26.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.v.xii-p27"></span> *Dispositum*

<span id="fn_431"></span>[67:432](1030053.htm#fr_431) <span
id="iv.i.v.xii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.v.xii-p28"></span> [Gal.
3.19](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#019)<span
id="iv.i.v.xii-p28.1"></span>[Gal. iii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#019)<span id="iv.i.v.xii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="fn_432"></span>[67:433](1030053.htm#fr_432) <span
id="iv.i.v.xii-p28.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.v.xii-p29"></span> [1 Tim.
2.5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#005)<span
id="iv.i.v.xii-p29.1"></span>[1 Tim. ii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#005)<span id="iv.i.v.xii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="fn_433"></span>[67:434](1030053.htm#fr_433) <span
id="iv.i.v.xii-p29.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.v.xii-p30"></span> [Ex.
12](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#000)<span id="iv.i.v.xii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="fn_434"></span>[68:435](1030053.htm#fr_434) <span
id="iv.i.v.xii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.v.xii-p32"></span> [Matt.
3.16](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#016)<span
id="iv.i.v.xii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="fn_435"></span>[68:436](1030053.htm#fr_435) <span
id="iv.i.v.xii-p32.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.v.xii-p33"></span> [Acts
2.1-4](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#001)<span
id="iv.i.v.xii-p33.1"></span>[Acts ii.
1-4](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#001)<span id="iv.i.v.xii-p33.2"></span>

<span id="fn_436"></span>[68:437](1030053.htm#fr_436) <span
id="iv.i.v.xii-p33.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.v.xii-p34"></span> \[The reference here is to the
difference between a theophany, and an incarnation; already alluded to,
in the note on p. 149.—W.G.T.S.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book IV](1030054)
