[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030739)  [Next](1030741) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.vii.ix"></span>

<span id="v.vii.ix-p1"></span> 8. But let us return to the order of our
discourse, and the whole of the passage itself of the Epistle let us
diligently consider. “Have we not,” saith he, “leave <span
id="fr_2494"></span>[2495](#fn_2494) to eat and to drink? have we not
leave to lead about a woman, a sister?” What leave meant he, but what
the Lord gave unto them whom He sent to preach the kingdom of heaven,
saying, “Those things which are (given) of them, eat ye; <span
id="fr_2495"></span>[2496](#fn_2495) for the workman is worthy of his
hire;” and proposing Himself as an example of the same power, to Whom
most faithful women did of their means minister such necessaries? But
the Apostle Paul hath done more, from his fellow-Apostles alleging a
proof of this license permitted of the Lord. For not as finding fault
hath he subjoined, “As do also the other Apostles, and the brethren of
the Lord, and Cephas;” but that hence he might show that this which he
would not accept was a thing which, that it was lawful for him to accept
was proved by the wont of the rest also his fellow-soldiers. “Or I only
and Barnabas, have we not power to forbear working?” Lo, he hath taken
away all doubt even from the slowest hearts, that they may understand of
what working he speaks. For to what end saith he, “Or I only and
Barnabas, have we not power to forbear working?” but for that all
evangelists and ministers of God’s word had power received of the Lord,
not to work with their hands, but to live by the Gospel, working only
spiritual works in preaching of the kingdom of heaven and edifying of
the peace of the Church? For no man can say that it is of that very
spiritual working that the Apostle said, “Or I only and Barnabas, have
we not power to forbear working?” For this power to forbear working all
those had: let him say then, who essays to deprave and pervert precepts
Apostolical; let him say, if he dares that all evangelists received of
the Lord power to forbear preaching the Gospel. But if this is most
absurd and mad to say, why will they not understand what is plain to
all, that they did indeed receive power not to work, but works bodily,
whereby to get a living, because “the workman is worthy of his hire,” as
the Gospel speaks. It is not therefore that Paul and Barnabas only had
not power to forbear working; but that all alike had this power of which
these availed not themselves in “laying out more” upon the Church; so as
in those places where they preached the Gospel they judged to be meet
for the weak. And for this reason, that he might not seem to have found
fault with his fellow-Apostles, he goes on to say: “Who goeth a warfare
at any time at his own charges? Who feedeth a flock, and of the milk of
the flock partaketh not? Speak I these things as a man? Saith not the
Law the same? For in the law of Moses it is written, Thou shall not
muzzle the ox that treadeth out the corn. Doth God care for oxen? Or
saith he it for our sake altogether? For our sakes truly is it written,
because he that plougheth ought to plough in hope, and he that thresheth
in hope of partaking of the fruits.” <span
id="fr_2496"></span>[2497](#fn_2496) By these words the Apostle Paul
sufficiently indicates, that it was no usurping unto themselves of aught
beyond their due on the part of his fellow-Apostles, that they wrought
not bodily, whence they might have the things which to this life are
necessary, but as the Lord ordained, should, living by the Gospel, eat
bread gratuitously given of them unto whom they were preaching a
gratuitous grace. Their charges, namely, they did like soldiers receive,
and of the fruit of the vineyard by them planted, they did, as need was,
freely gather; and of the milk of the flock which they fed, they drank;
and of the threshing-floor on which they threshed, they took their meat.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2494"></span>[507:2495](1030740.htm#fr_2494) <span
id="v.vii.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii.ix-p2"></span> *Licentiam*

<span id="fn_2495"></span>[507:2496](1030740.htm#fr_2495) <span
id="v.vii.ix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii.ix-p3"></span> [Luke
10.7](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#007)<span
id="v.vii.ix-p3.1"></span>[Luke x.
7](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#007)<span id="v.vii.ix-p3.2"></span>.
“*Ea quæ ab ipsis sunt*.”

<span id="fn_2496"></span>[507:2497](1030740.htm#fr_2496) <span
id="v.vii.ix-p3.3"></span>

<span id="v.vii.ix-p4"></span> [1 Cor.
9.7-10](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#007)<span
id="v.vii.ix-p4.1"></span>[1 Cor. ix.
7-10](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#007)<span id="v.vii.ix-p4.2"></span>.
\[See R.V.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 9](1030741)
