[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030665)  [Next](1030667) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.xxiii"></span>

<span id="v.v.xxiii-p1"></span> 22. What then, if a homicide seek refuge
with a Christian, or if he see where the homicide have taken refuge, and
be questioned of this matter by him who seeks, in order to bring to
punishment a man, the slayer of man? Is he to tell a lie? For how does
he not hide a sin by lying, when he for whom he lies has been guilty of
a heinous sin? Or is it because he is not questioned concerning his sin,
but about the place where he is concealed? So then to lie in order to
hide a person’s sin is evil; but to lie in order to hide the sinner is
not evil? “Yea, surely:” says some one: “for a man sins not in avoiding
punishment, but in doing something worthy of punishment. Moreover, it
pertaineth to Christian discipline neither to despair of any man’s
amendment, nor to bar against any man the way of repentance.” What if
thou be led to the judge, and then questioned concerning the very place
where the other is in hiding? Art thou prepared to say, either, “He is
not there,” when thou knowest him to be there; or, “I know not, and have
not seen,” what thou knowest and hast seen? Art thou then prepared to
bear false witness, and to slay thy soul that a manslayer may not be
slain? Or, up to the presence of the judge wilt thou lie, but when the
judge questions thee, then speak truth that thou be not a false witness?
So then thou art going to slay a man thyself by betraying him. Surely
the betrayer too is one whom the divine Scripture detesteth. Or haply is
he no betrayer, who in answer to the judge’s interrogation gives true
information; but would be a betrayar, if, unasked, he should delate a
man to his destruction? Put the case with respect to a just and innocent
man, that thou know where he is in hiding, and be questioned by the
judge; which man, however, has been ordered to be taken to execution by
a higher power, so that he who interrogates is charged with the
execution of the law, not the author of the sentence? Will it be no
false witness that thou shall lie for an innocent man, because the
interrogator is not a judge, but only charged with the execution? What
if the author of the law interrogate thee, or any unjust judge, making
quest of an innocent man to bring him to punishment? What wilt thou do?
wilt thou be false witness, or betrayer? Or will he be a betrayer, who
to a just judge shall ultroneously delate a lurking homicide; and he not
so, who to an unjust judge, interrogating him of the hiding-place of an
innocent man whom he seeks to slay, shall inform against the person who
has thrown himself upon his honor? Or between the crime of false witness
and that of betrayal, wilt thou remain doubtful and unable to make up
thy mind? Or by holding thy peace or professing that thou wilt not tell,
wilt thou make up thy mind to avoid both? Then why not do this before
thou come to the judge, that thou mayest shun the lie also? For, having
kept clear of a lie, thou wilt escape all false witness; whether every
lie be false witness, or not every: but by keeping clear of all false
witness in thy sense of the word, thou wilt not escape all lying. How
much braver then, how much more excellent, to say, “I will neither
betray nor lie?”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 23](1030667)
