[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030446)  [Next](1030448) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.xxi"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.xxi-p1"></span> 20. Having then laid down these
principles, which, as I think, are so just that I ought to win this
cause before you, let who will be my adversary, I will set forth to you,
as I am able, what way I followed, when I was searching after true
religion in that spirit, in which I have now set forth that it ought to
be sought. For upon leaving you and crossing the sea, now delaying and
hesitating, what I ought to hold, what to let go; which delay rose upon
me every day the more, from the time that I was a hearer of that
man, <span id="fr_1731"></span>[1732](#fn_1731) whose coming was
promised to us, as you know, as if from heaven, to explain all things
which moved us, and found him, with the exception of a certain
eloquence, such as the rest; being now settled in Italy, I reasoned and
deliberated greatly with myself, not whether I should continue in that
sect, into which I was sorry that I had fallen, but in what way I was to
find the truth, my sighs through love of which are known to no one
better than to yourself. Often it seemed to me that it could not be
found, and huge waves of my thoughts would roll toward deciding in favor
of the Academics. Often again, with what power I had, looking into the
human soul, with so much life, with so much intelligence, with so much
clearness, I thought that the truth lay not hid, save that in it the way
of search lay hid, and that this same way must be taken from some divine
authority. It remained to enquire what was that authority, where in so
great dissensions each promised that he would deliver it. Thus there met
me a wood, out of which there was no way, which I was very loath to be
involved in: and amid these things, without any rest, my mind was
agitated through desire of finding the truth. However, I continued to
unsew myself more and more from those whom now I had proposed to leave.
But there remained nothing else, in so great dangers, than with words
full of tears and sorrow to entreat the Divine Providence to help me.
And this I was content to do: and now certain disputations of the Bishop
of Milan <span id="fr_1732"></span>[1733](#fn_1732) had almost moved me
to desire, not without some hope, to enquire into many things concerning
the Old Testament itself, which, as you know, we used to view as
accursed, having been ill commended to us. And I had decided to be a
Catechumen in the Church, unto which I had been delivered by my parents,
until such time as I should either find what I wished, or should
persuade myself that it needed not to be sought. Therefore had there
been one who could teach me, he would find me at a very critical moment
most fervently disposed and very apt to learn. If you see that you too
have been long affected in this way, therefore, and with a like care for
thy soul, and if now you seem to yourself to have been tossed to and fro
enough, and wish to put an end to labors of this kind, follow the
pathway of Catholic teaching, which hath flowed down from Christ Himself
through the Apostles even unto us, and will hereafter flow down to
posterity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1731"></span>[356:1732](1030447.htm#fr_1731) <span
id="iv.vi.xxi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.xxi-p2"></span> i.e. Faustus. v. Conf. b. v. c. vi. § 10

<span id="fn_1732"></span>[356:1733](1030447.htm#fr_1732) <span
id="iv.vi.xxi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.xxi-p3"></span> i.e. S. Ambrose. v. Conf. b. v. c. xiii.
xiv. § 23, 24, 25

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 21](1030448)
