[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030230)  [Next](1030232) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xii"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.xvii.xii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 12.—The Academic
Philosophy.</span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xii-p2"></span>First, of what sort and how great is
the very knowledge itself that a man can attain, be he ever so skillful
and learned, by which our thought is formed with truth, when we speak
what we know? For to pass by those things that come into the mind from
the bodily senses, among which so many are otherwise than they seem to
be, that he who is overmuch pressed down by their resemblance to truth,
seems sane to himself, but really is not <span id="page_211">p.
211</span> <span id="iv.i.xvii.xii-Page_211"></span>sane;—whence it is
that the Academic <span id="fr_986"></span>[987](#fn_986) philosophy has
so prevailed as to be still more wretchedly insane by doubting all
things;—passing by, then, those things that come into the mind by the
bodily senses, how large a proportion is left of things which we know in
such manner as we know that we live? In regard to this, indeed, we are
absolutely without any fear lest perchance we are being deceived by some
resemblance of the truth; since it is certain, that he who is deceived,
yet lives. And this again is not reckoned among those objects of sight
that are presented from without, so that the eye may be deceived in it;
in such way as it is when an oar in the water looks bent, and towers
seem to move as you sail past them, and a thousand other things that are
otherwise than they seem to be: for this is not a thing that is
discerned by the eye of the flesh. The knowledge by which we know that
we live is the most inward of all knowledge, of which even the Academic
cannot insinuate: Perhaps you are asleep, and do not know it, and you
see things in your sleep. For who does not know that what people see in
dreams is precisely like what they see when awake? But he who is certain
of the knowledge of his own life, does not therein say, I know I am
awake, but, I know I am alive; therefore, whether he be asleep or awake,
he is alive. Nor can he be deceived in that knowledge by dreams; since
it belongs to a living man both to sleep and to see in sleep. Nor can
the Academic again say, in confutation of this knowledge: Perhaps you
are mad, and do not know it: for what madmen see is precisely like what
they also see who are sane; but he who is mad is alive. Nor does he
answer the Academic by saying, I know I am not mad, but, I know I am
alive. Therefore he who says he knows he is alive, can neither be
deceived nor lie. Let a thousand kinds, then, of deceitful objects of
sight be presented to him who says, I know I am alive; yet he will fear
none of them, for he who is deceived yet is alive. But if such things
alone pertain to human knowledge, they are very few indeed; unless that
they can be so multiplied in each kind, as not only not to be few, but
to reach in the result to infinity. For he who says, I know I am alive,
says that he knows one single thing. Further, if he says, I know that I
know I am alive, now there are two; but that he knows these two is a
third thing to know. And so he can add a fourth and a fifth, and
innumerable others, if he holds out. But since he cannot either
comprehend an innumerable number by additions of units, or say a thing
innumerable times, he comprehends this at least, and with perfect
certainty, *viz*. that this is both true and so innumerable that he
cannot truly comprehend and say its infinite number. This same thing may
be noticed also in the case of a will that is certain. For it would be
an impudent answer to make to any one who should say, I will to be
happy, that perhaps you are deceived. And if he should say, I know that
I will this, and I know that I know it, he can add yet a third to these
two, *viz*. that he knows these two; and a fourth, that he knows that he
knows these two; and so on *ad infinitum*. Likewise, if any one were to
say, I will not to be mistaken; will it not be true, whether he is
mistaken or whether he is not, that nevertheless he does will not to be
mistaken? Would it not be most impudent to say to him, Perhaps you are
deceived? when beyond doubt, whereinsoever he may be deceived, he is
nevertheless not deceived in thinking that he wills not to be deceived.
And if he says he knows this, he adds any number he chooses of things
known, and perceives that number to be infinite. For he who says, I will
not to be deceived, and I know that I will not to be so, and I know that
I know it, is able now to set forth an infinite number here also,
however awkward may be the expression of it. And other things too are to
be found capable of refuting the Academics, who contend that man can
know nothing. But we must restrict ourselves, especially as this is not
the subject we have undertaken in the present work. There are three
books of ours on that subject, <span id="fr_987"></span>[988](#fn_987)
written in the early time of our conversion, which he who can and will
read, and who understands them, will doubtless not be much moved by any
of the many arguments which they have found out against the discovery of
truth. For whereas there are two kinds of knowable things,—one, of those
things which the mind perceives by the bodily senses; the other, of
those which it perceives by itself,—these philosophers have babbled much
against the bodily senses, but have never been able to throw doubt upon
those most certain perceptions of things true, which the mind knows by
itself, such as is that which I have mentioned, I know that I am alive.
But far be it from us to doubt the truth of what we have learned by the
bodily senses; since by them we have learned to know the heaven and the
earth, and those things in them which are known to us, so far <span
id="page_212">p. 212</span> <span id="iv.i.xvii.xii-Page_212"></span>as
He who created both us and them has willed them to be within our
knowledge. Far be it from us too to deny, that we know what we have
learned by the testimony of others: otherwise we know not that there is
an ocean; we know not that the lands and cities exist which most copious
report commends to us; we know not that those men were, and their works,
which we have learned by reading history; we know not the news that is
daily brought us from this quarter or that, and confirmed by consistent
and conspiring evidence; lastly, we know not at what place or from whom
we have been born: since in all these things we have believed the
testimony of others. And if it is most absurd to say this, then we must
confess, that not only our own senses, but those of other persons also,
have added very much indeed to our knowledge.

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xii-p5"></span>22. All these things, then, both
those which the human mind knows by itself, and those which it knows by
the bodily senses, and those which it has received and knows by the
testimony of others, are laid up and retained in the storehouse of the
memory; and from these is begotten a word that is true when we speak
what we know, but a word that is before all sound, before all thought of
a sound. For the word is then most like to the thing known, from which
also its image is begotten, since the sight of thinking arises from the
sight of knowledge; when it is a word belonging to no tongue, but is a
true word concerning a true thing, having nothing of its own, but wholly
derived from that knowledge from which it is born. Nor does it signify
when he learned it, who speaks what he knows; for sometimes he says it
immediately upon learning it; provided only that the word is true,
*i.e.* sprung from things that are known.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_986"></span>[211:987](1030231.htm#fr_986) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.xii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xii-p3"></span> \[Not the Old Academy of Plato and
his immediate disciples, who were anti-skeptical; but the new Academy,
to which Augustin has previously referred (XIV. xix. 26). This was
skeptical—W.G.T.S.\]

<span id="fn_987"></span>[211:988](1030231.htm#fr_987) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.xii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xii-p4"></span> *Libri Tres contra Academicos*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 13](1030232)
