[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030205)  [Next](1030207) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.xvi.vii"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvi.vii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.xvi.vii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 7.—The Thing is Made Plain by an
Example. In What Way the Matter is Handled in Order to Help the
Reader.</span>

<span id="iv.i.xvi.vii-p2"></span>Wherefore let us consider more
carefully that example which we have adduced, wherein it was shown that
not knowing a thing is different from not thinking \[conceiving\] of it;
and that it may so happen that a man knows something of which he is not
thinking, when he is thinking of something else, not of that. When any
one, then, who is skilled in two or more branches of knowledge is
thinking of one of them, though he is not thinking of the other or
others, yet he knows them. But can we rightly say, This musician
certainly knows music, but he does not now understand it, because he is
not thinking of it; but he does now understand geometry, for of that he
is now thinking? Such an assertion, as far as appears, is absurd. What,
again, if we were to say, This musician certainly knows music, but he
does not now love it, while he is not now thinking of it; but he does
now love geometry, because of that he is now thinking,—is not this
similarly absurd? But we say quite correctly, This person whom you
perceive disputing about geometry is also a perfect musician, for he
both remembers music, and understands, and loves it; but although he
both knows and loves it, he is not now thinking of it, since he is
thinking of geometry, of which he is disputing. And hence we are warned
that we have a kind of knowledge of certain things stored up in the
recesses of the mind, and that this, when it is thought of, as it were,
steps forth in public, and is placed as if openly in the sight of the
mind; for then the mind itself finds that it both remembers, and
understands, and loves itself, even although it was not thinking of
itself, when it was thinking of something else. But in the case of that
of which we have not thought for a long time, and cannot think of it
unless reminded; that, if the phrase is allowable, in some wonderful way
I know not how, we do not *know* that we know. In short, it is rightly
said by him who reminds, to him whom he reminds, You know this, but you
do not know that you know it; I will remind you, and you will find that
you know what you had thought you did not know. Books, too, lead to the
same results, *viz*. those that are written upon subjects which the
reader under the guidance of reason finds to be true; not those subjects
which he believes to be true on the faith of the narrator, as in the
case of history; but those which he himself also finds to be true,
either of himself, or in that truth itself which is the light of the
mind. But he who cannot contemplate these things, even when reminded, is
too deeply buried in the darkness of ignorance, through great blindness
of heart and too wonderfully needs divine help, to be able to attain to
true wisdom.

<span id="iv.i.xvi.vii-p3"></span>10. For this reason I have wished to
adduce some kind of proof, be it what it might, respecting the act of
conceiving, such as might serve to show in what way, out of the things
contained in the memory, the mind’s eye is informed in recollecting, and
some such thing is begotten, when a man conceives, as was already in him
when, before he conceived, he remembered; because it is easier to
distinguish things that take place at successive times, and where the
parent precedes the offspring by an interval of time. For if we refer
ourselves to the inner memory of the mind by which it remembers itself,
and to the inner understanding by which it understands itself, and to
the inner will by which it loves itself, where these three always are
together, and always have been together since they began to be at all,
whether they were being thought of or not; the image of this trinity
will indeed appear to pertain even to the memory alone; but because in
this case a word cannot be without a thought (for we *think* all that we
say, even if it be said by that inner word which belongs to no separate
language), this image is rather to be discerned in these three things,
*viz.* memory, intelligence, will. And I mean now by intelligence that
by which we understand in thought, that is, when our thought is formed
by the finding of those things, which had been at hand to the memory but
were not being thought of; and I mean that will, or love, or preference
which combines this offspring and parent, and is in some way common to
both. Hence it was that I tried also, *viz.* in the eleventh book, to
lead on the slowness of readers by means of outward sensible things
which are seen by the eyes of the flesh; and that I then proceeded to
enter with them upon that power of the inner man whereby he reasons of
things temporal, deferring the consideration of that which dominates as
the higher power, by which he contemplates things eternal. And I
discussed this in two books, distinguishing the two in the twelfth, the
one of them being higher and the other lower, and that the lower ought
to be subject to the higher; and in the thirteenth I discussed, with
what truth and brevity I could, the office of the lower, in which the
wholesome knowledge of things human is contained, in order that we may
so <span id="page_189">p. 189</span> <span
id="iv.i.xvi.vii-Page_189"></span>act in this temporal life as to attain
that which is eternal; since, indeed, I have cursorily included in a
single book a subject so manifold and copious, and one so well known by
the many and great arguments of many and great men, while manifesting
that a trinity exists also in it, but not yet one that can be called an
image of God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 8](1030207)
