[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030222)  [Next](1030224) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.xvii.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.xvii.iv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 4.—What Universal Nature Teaches
Us Concerning God.</span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.iv-p2"></span>6. Let us, then, now seek the Trinity
which is God, in the things themselves that are eternal, incorporeal,
and unchangeable; in the perfect contemplation of which a blessed life
is promised us, which cannot be other than eternal. For not only does
the authority of the divine books declare that God is; but the whole
nature of the universe itself which surrounds us, and to which we also
belong, proclaims that it has a most excellent Creator, who has given to
us a mind and natural reason, whereby to see that things living are to
be preferred to things that are not living; things that have sense to
things that have not; things that have understanding to things that have
not; things immortal to things mortal; things powerful to things
impotent; things righteous to things unrighteous; things beautiful to
things deformed; things good to things evil; things incorruptible to
things corruptible; things unchangeable to things changeable; things
invisible to things visible; things incorporeal to things corporeal;
things blessed to things miserable. And hence, since without doubt we
place the Creator above things created, we must needs confess that the
Creator both lives in the highest sense, and perceives and understands
all things, and that He cannot die, or suffer decay, or be changed; and
that He is not a body, but a spirit, of all the most powerful, most
righteous, most beautiful, most good, most blessed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 5](1030224)
