[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030268)  [Next](1030270) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.xxi"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xxi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.ii.xxi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 19.—Men’s Errors Vary Very Much in
the Magnitude of the Evils They Produce; But Yet Every Error is in
Itself an Evil.</span>

<span id="iv.ii.xxi-p2"></span>In some things, then, it is a great evil
to be deceived; in some it is a small evil; in some no evil at all; and
in some it is an actual advantage. It is to his grievous injury that a
man is deceived when he does not believe what leads to eternal life, or
believes what leads to eternal death. It is a small evil for a man to be
deceived, when, by taking falsehood for truth, he brings upon himself
temporal annoyances; for the patience of the believer will turn even
these to a good use, as when, for example, taking a bad man for a good,
he receives injury from him. But one who believes a bad man to be good,
and yet suffers no injury, is nothing the worse for being deceived, nor
does he fall under the prophetic denunciation: “Woe to those who call
evil good!” <span id="fr_1111"></span>[1112](#fn_1111) For we are to
understand that this is spoken not about evil men, but about the things
that make men evil. Hence the man who calls adultery good, falls justly
under that prophetic denunciation. But the man who calls the adulterer
good, thinking him to be chaste, and not knowing him to be an adulterer,
falls into no error in regard to the nature of good and evil, but only
makes a mistake as to the secrets of human conduct. He calls <span
id="page_244">p. 244</span> <span id="iv.ii.xxi-Page_244"></span>the man
good on the ground of believing him to be what is undoubtedly good; he
calls the adulterer evil, and the pure man good; and he calls this man
good, not knowing him to be an adulterer, but believing him to be pure.
Further, if by making a mistake one escape death, as I have said above
once happened to me, one even derives some advantage from one’s mistake.
But when I assert that in certain cases a man may be deceived without
any injury to himself, or even with some advantage to himself, I do not
mean that the mistake in itself is no evil, or is in any sense a good; I
refer only to the evil that is avoided, or the advantage that is gained,
through making the mistake. For the mistake, considered in itself, is an
evil: a great evil if it concern a great matter, a small evil if it
concern a small matter, but yet always an evil. For who that is of sound
mind can deny that it is an evil to receive what is false as if it were
true, and to reject what is true as if it were false, or to hold what is
uncertain as certain, and what is certain as uncertain? But it is one
thing to think a man good when he is really bad, which is a mistake; it
is another thing to suffer no ulterior injury in consequence of the
mistake, supposing that the bad man whom we think good inflicts no
damage upon us. In the same way, it is one thing to think that we are on
the right road when we are not; it is another thing when this mistake of
ours, which is an evil, leads to some good, such as saving us from an
ambush of wicked men.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1111"></span>[243:1112](1030269.htm#fr_1111) <span
id="iv.ii.xxi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xxi-p3"></span> [Isa.
5.20](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#020)<span
id="iv.ii.xxi-p3.1"></span>[Isa. v.
20](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#020)<span id="iv.ii.xxi-p3.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 20](1030270)
