[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030682)  [Next](1030684) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.xl"></span>

<span id="v.v.xl-p1"></span> 39. And all these sins, truly, whether such
whereby an injury is done to men in the comforts of this life, or
whereby men corrupt themselves and hurt none against his will: all these
sins, then, even though they seem to mean well by this temporal life to
the procuring of any delight or profit, (for no man commits any of these
things with any other purpose and end;) yet in regard of that life which
is forever and ever, they do entangle and in all ways hinder. But there
are some of these that hinder the doers only, others likewise those on
whom they are done. For as to the things which people keep safe for the
sake of utility to this life, when these are <span id="page_475">p.
475</span> <span id="v.v.xl-Page_475"></span>taken away by injurious
persons, they alone sin and are hindered from eternal life who do this,
not they to whom they do it. Therefore, even if a person consent to the
taking of them from him, either that he may not do some evil, or that he
may not in these very things suffer some greater inconvenience; not only
does he not sin, but in the one case he acts bravely and laudably, in
the other usefully and unblameably. But as to those things which are
kept for the sake of sanctity and religion, when injurious persons wish
to violate these, it is right, if the condition be proposed and the
means given, to redeem them even by sins of lesser moment, yet not by
wrongs to other men. And then do these things thenceforth cease to be
sins, which are undertaken in order to the avoidance of greater sins.
For as in things useful, for instance in pecuniary or any other corporal
commodity, that is not called a loss which is parted with in order to a
greater gain; so in things holy, that is not called sin which is
admitted lest a worse be admitted. Or if that is called loss, which one
foregoes that he may not forego more; let this also be called sin, while
however the necessity of undertaking it in order to the eschewing of a
greater is no more to be doubted, than that, in order to avoid a greater
loss, it is right to suffer a smaller one.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 40](1030684)
