[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030400)  [Next](1030402) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.xxviii"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxviii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.iii.xxviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 27.—Of the Prophecies of the Old
Testament in Their Visible Fulfillment in the Church.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxviii-p2"></span>53. “For all those things, which at
present you witness in the Church of God, and which you see to be taking
place under the name of Christ throughout the whole world, were
predicted long ages ago. And even as we read of them, so also we now see
them. And by means of these things we are built up unto faith. Once of
old there occurred a flood over the whole earth, the object of which was
that sinners might be destroyed. And, nevertheless, those who escaped in
the ark exhibited a sacramental sign of the Church that was to be, which
at present is floating on the waves of the world, and is delivered from
submersion by the wood of the cross of Christ. It was predicted to
Abraham, a faithful servant of God, a single man, that of Him it was
determined that a people should be born who should worship one God in
the midst of all other nations which worshipped idols; and all things
which were prophesied of as destined to happen to that people have come
to pass exactly as they were foretold. Among that people Christ, the
King of all saints and their God, was also prophesied of as destined to
come of the seed of that same Abraham according to the flesh, which
(flesh) He took unto Himself, in order that all those also who became
followers of His faith might be sons of Abraham; and thus it has come to
pass: Christ was born of the Virgin Mary, who belonged to that race. It
was foretold by the prophets that He would suffer on the cross at the
hands of that same people of the Jews, of whose lineage, according to
the flesh, He came; and thus it has come to pass. It was foretold that
He would rise again: He has risen again; and, in accordance with these
same predictions of the prophets, He has ascended into heaven and has
sent the Holy Spirit to His disciples. It was foretold not only by the
prophets, but also by the Lord Jesus Christ Himself, that His Church
would exist throughout the whole world, extended by the martyrdoms and
sufferings of the saints; and this was foretold at a time when as yet
His name was at once undeclared to the Gentiles, and made a subject of
derision where it was known; and, nevertheless, in the power of His
miracles, whether those which He wrought by His own hand or those which
he effected by means of His servants, as these things are being reported
and believed, we already see the fulfillment of that which was
predicted, and behold the very kings of the earth, who formerly were
wont to persecute the Christians, even now brought into subjection to
the name of Christ. It was also foretold that schisms and heresies would
arise from His Church, and that under His name they would seek their own
glory instead of Christ’s, in such places as they might be able to
command; and these predictions have been realized.

<span id="iv.iii.xxviii-p3"></span>54. “Will those things, then, which
yet remain fail to come to pass? It is manifest that, just as the former
class of things which were foretold have come to pass, so will these
latter also come to pass. I refer to all the tribulations of the
righteous, which yet wait for fulfillment, and to the day of judgment,
which will separate all the wicked from the righteous in the
resurrection of the dead;—and not only will it thus separate those
wicked men who are outside the Church, but also it will set apart for
the fire, which is due to such, the chaff of the Church itself, which
must be borne with in utmost patience on to the last winnowing.
Moreover, they who deride the (doctrine of a) resurrection, because they
think that this flesh, inasmuch as it becomes corrupt, cannot rise
again, will certainly rise in the same unto punishment, and God will
make it plain to such, that He who was able to form these bodies when as
yet they were not, is able in a moment to restore them as they were. But
all the faithful who are destined to reign with Christ shall rise with
the same body in such wise that they may also be counted worthy to be
changed into angelic incorruption; so that they may be made equal unto
the angels of God, even as the Lord Himself has promised; <span
id="fr_1506"></span>[1507](#fn_1506) and that they may praise Him
without any failure and without any weariness, ever living in Him and of
Him, with such joy and blessedness as can be neither expressed nor
conceived by man.

<span id="iv.iii.xxviii-p5"></span>55. “Believe these things, therefore,
and be on your guard against temptations (for the devil seeks for others
who may be brought to perish along with himself); so that not only may
that adversary fail to seduce you by the help of those who are without
the Church, <span id="page_314">p. 314</span> <span
id="iv.iii.xxviii-Page_314"></span>whether they be pagans, or Jews, or
heretics; but you yourself also may decline to follow the example of
those within the Catholic Church itself whom you see leading an evil
life, either indulging in excess in the pleasures of the belly and the
throat, or unchaste, or given up to the vain and unlawful observances of
curious superstitions, whether they be addicted to (the inanities of)
public spectacles, or charms, or divinations of devils, <span
id="fr_1507"></span>[1508](#fn_1507) or be living in the pomp and
inflated arrogance of covetousness and pride, or be pursuing any sort of
life which the law condemns and punishes. But rather connect yourself
with the good, whom you will easily find out, if you yourself were once
become of that character; so that you may unite with each other in
worshipping and loving God for His own sake; <span
id="fr_1508"></span>[1509](#fn_1508) for He himself will be our complete
reward to the intent that we may enjoy His goodness and beauty <span
id="fr_1509"></span>[1510](#fn_1509) in that life. He is to be loved,
however, not in the way in which any object that is seen with the eyes
is loved, but as wisdom is loved, and truth, and holiness, and
righteousness, and charity, <span id="fr_1510"></span>[1511](#fn_1510)
and whatever else may be mentioned as of kindred nature; and further,
with a love conformable to these things not as they are in men, but as
they are in the very fountain of incorruptible and unchangeable wisdom.
Whomsoever, therefore, you may observe to be loving these things, attach
yourself to them, so that through Christ, who became man in order that
He might be the Mediator between God and men, you may be reconciled to
God. But as regards the perverse, even if they find their way within the
walls of the Church, think not that they will find their way into the
kingdom of heaven; for in their own time they will be set apart, if they
have not altered to the better. Consequently, follow the example of good
men, bear with the wicked, love all; forasmuch as you know not what he
will be to-morrow who to-day is evil. Howbeit, love not the
unrighteousness of such; but love the persons themselves with the
express intent that they may apprehend righteousness; for not only is
the love of God enjoined upon us, but also the love of our neighbor, on
which two commandments hang all the law and the prophets. <span
id="fr_1511"></span>[1512](#fn_1511) And this is fulfilled by no one
save the man who has received the (other) gift, <span
id="fr_1512"></span>[1513](#fn_1512) the Holy Spirit, who is indeed
equal with the Father and with the Son; for this same Trinity is God;
and on this God every hope ought to be placed. On man our hope ought not
to be placed, of whatsoever character he may be. For He, by whom we are
justified, is one thing; and they, together with whom we are justified,
are another. Moreover, it is not only by lusts that the devil tempts,
but also by the terrors of insults, and pains, and death itself. But
whatever a man shall have suffered on behalf of the name of Christ, and
for the sake of the hope of eternal life, and shall have endured in
constancy, (in accordance therewith) the greater reward shall be given
him; whereas, if he shall give way to the devil, he shall be damned
along with him. But works of mercy, conjoined with pious humility, meet
with this acknowledgment from God, to wit, that He will not suffer His
servants to be tempted more than they are able to bear.” <span
id="fr_1513"></span>[1514](#fn_1513)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1506"></span>[313:1507](1030401.htm#fr_1506) <span
id="iv.iii.xxviii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxviii-p4"></span> [Luke
20.36](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#036)<span
id="iv.iii.xxviii-p4.1"></span>[Luke xx.
36](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#036)<span
id="iv.iii.xxviii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1507"></span>[314:1508](1030401.htm#fr_1507) <span
id="iv.iii.xxviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxviii-p6"></span> *Remediorum aut divinationum
diabolicarum*. Some editions insert *sacrilegorum* after *remediorum* =
sacrilegious charms or divinations of devils.

<span id="fn_1508"></span>[314:1509](1030401.htm#fr_1508) <span
id="iv.iii.xxviii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxviii-p7"></span> Gratis.

<span id="fn_1509"></span>[314:1510](1030401.htm#fr_1509) <span
id="iv.iii.xxviii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxviii-p8"></span> Cf. [Zech.
9.17](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#017)<span
id="iv.iii.xxviii-p8.1"></span>[Zech. ix.
17](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#017)<span
id="iv.iii.xxviii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1510"></span>[314:1511](1030401.htm#fr_1510) <span
id="iv.iii.xxviii-p8.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxviii-p9"></span> Many <span class="c19"><span
id="iv.iii.xxviii-p9.1"></span> mss</span>. omit the words: and
holiness, and righteousness, and charity.

<span id="fn_1511"></span>[314:1512](1030401.htm#fr_1511) <span
id="iv.iii.xxviii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxviii-p10"></span> [Matt.
22:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#037),
[39](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#039)<span
id="iv.iii.xxviii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="fn_1512"></span>[314:1513](1030401.htm#fr_1512) <span
id="iv.iii.xxviii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxviii-p11"></span> One edition reads *Dominum*, the
Lord, the Holy Spirit, etc., instead of *donum*.

<span id="fn_1513"></span>[314:1514](1030401.htm#fr_1513) <span
id="iv.iii.xxviii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxviii-p12"></span> [1 Cor.
10.13](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#013)<span
id="iv.iii.xxviii-p12.1"></span>[1 Cor. x.
13](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#013)<span
id="iv.iii.xxviii-p12.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: A Treatise on Faith and the Creed.](1030402)
