[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030050)  [Next](1030052) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.v.x"></span>

<span id="iv.i.v.x-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.v.x-p1.1"></span>Chapter 9.—The Original Cause of All Things is
from God.</span>

<span id="iv.i.v.x-p2"></span>16. For it is one thing to make and
administer the creature from the innermost and highest turning-point of
causation, which He alone does who is God the Creator; but quite another
thing to apply some operation from without in proportion to the strength
and faculties assigned to each by Him, so that what is created may come
forth into being at this time or at that, and in this or that way. For
all these things in the way of original and beginning have already been
created in a kind of texture of the elements, but they come forth when
they get the opportunity. <span id="fr_387"></span>[388](#fn_387) For as
mothers are pregnant with young, so the world itself is pregnant with
the causes of things that are born; which are not created in it, except
from that highest essence, where nothing either springs up or dies,
either begins to be or ceases. But the applying from without of
adventitious causes, which, although they are not natural, yet are to be
applied according to nature, in order that those things which are
contained and hidden in the secret bosom of nature may break forth and
be outwardly created in some way by the unfolding of the proper measures
and numbers and weights which they have received in secret from Him “who
has ordered all things in measure and number and weight:” <span
id="fr_388"></span>[389](#fn_388) this is not only in the power of bad
angels, but also of bad men, as I have shown above by the example of
agriculture.

<span id="iv.i.v.x-p5"></span>17. But lest the somewhat different
condition of animals should trouble any one, in that they have the
breath of life with the sense of desiring those things that are
according to nature, and of avoiding those things that are contrary to
it; we must consider also, how many men there are who know from what
herbs or flesh, or from what juices or liquids you please, of whatever
sort, whether so placed or so buried, or so bruised or so mixed, this or
that animal is commonly born; yet who can be so foolish as to dare to
call himself the creator of these animals? Is it, therefore, to be
wondered at, if just as any, the most worthless of men, can know whence
such or such worms and flies are produced; so the evil angels in
proportion to the subtlety of their perceptions discern in the more
hidden seeds of the elements whence frogs and serpents are produced, and
so through certain and known opportune combinations applying these seeds
by secret movements, cause them to be created, but do not create them?
Only men do not marvel at those things that are usually done by men. But
if any one chance to wonder at the quickness of those growths, in that
those living beings were so quickly made, let him consider how even this
may be brought about by men in proportion to the measure of human
capability. For whence is it that the same bodies generate worms more
quickly in summer than in winter, or in hotter than in colder places?
Only these things are applied by men with so much the more difficulty,
in proportion as their earthly and sluggish members are wanting in
subtlety of perception, and in rapidity of bodily motion. And hence it
arises that in the case of any kind of angels, in proportion as it is
easier for them to draw out the proximate causes from the elements, so
much the more marvellous is their rapidity in works of this kind.

<span id="iv.i.v.x-p6"></span>18. But He only is the creator who is the
chief former of these things. Neither can any one be this, unless He
with whom primarily rests the measure, number, and weight of all things
existing; and He is God the one Creator, by whose unspeakable power it
comes to pass, also, that what these angels were able to do if they were
permitted, they are therefore not able to do because they are not
permitted. For there is no other reason why they who made frogs and
serpents were not able to make the most minute flies, unless because
<span id="page_63">p. 63</span> <span id="iv.i.v.x-Page_63"></span>the
greater power of God was present prohibiting them, through the Holy
Spirit; which even the magicians themselves confessed, saying, “This is
the finger of God.” <span id="fr_389"></span>[390](#fn_389) But what
they are able to do by nature, yet cannot do, because they are
prohibited; and what the very condition of their nature itself does not
suffer them to do; it is difficult, nay, impossible, for man to search
out, unless through that gift of God which the apostle mentions when he
says, “To another the discerning of spirits.” <span
id="fr_390"></span>[391](#fn_390) For we know that a man can walk, yet
that he cannot do so if he is not permitted; but that he cannot fly,
even if he be permitted. So those angels, also, are able to do certain
things if they are permitted by more powerful angels, according to the
supreme commandment of God; but cannot do certain other things, not even
if they are permitted by them; because He does not permit from whom they
have received such and such a measure of natural powers: who, even by
His angels, does not usually permit what He has given them power to be
able to do.

<span id="iv.i.v.x-p9"></span>19. Excepting, therefore, those corporeal
things which are done in the order of nature in a perfectly usual series
of times, as *e.g.*, the rising and setting of the stars, the
generations and deaths of animals, the innumerable diversities of seeds
and buds, the vapors and the clouds, the snow and the rain, the
lightnings and the thunder, the thunderbolts and the hail, the winds and
the fire, cold and heat, and all like things; excepting also those which
in the same order of nature occur rarely, such as eclipses, unusual
appearances of stars, and monsters, and earthquakes, and such like;—all
these, I say, are to be excepted, of which indeed the first and chief
cause is only the will of God; whence also in the Psalm, when some
things of this kind had been mentioned, “Fire and hail, snow and vapor,
stormy wind,” lest any one should think those to be brought about either
by chance or only from corporeal causes, or even from such as are
spiritual, but exist apart from the will of God, it is added
immediately, “fulfilling His word.” <span
id="fr_391"></span>[392](#fn_391)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_387"></span>[62:388](1030051.htm#fr_387) <span
id="iv.i.v.x-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.v.x-p3"></span> \[This is the same as the theological
distinction between substances and their modifications. “The former,”
says Howe, “are the proper object of creation strictly taken; the
modifications of things are not properly created, in the strictest sense
of creation, but are educed and brought forth out of those substantial
things that were themselves created, or made out of nothing.”—Germs are
originated *ex nihilo*, and fall under creation proper; their evolution
and development takes place according to the nature and inherent force
of the germ, and falls under providence, in distinction from creation.
See the writer’s Theological Essays, 133–137.—W.G.T.S.\]

<span id="fn_388"></span>[62:389](1030051.htm#fr_388) <span
id="iv.i.v.x-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.v.x-p4"></span> [Wisdom
11.20](../../../bib/apo/wis011.htm#020)<span
id="iv.i.v.x-p4.1"></span>[Wisd. xi.
20](../../../bib/apo/wis011.htm#020)<span id="iv.i.v.x-p4.2"></span>

<span id="fn_389"></span>[63:390](1030051.htm#fr_389) <span
id="iv.i.v.x-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.v.x-p7"></span> [Exod.
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#012), [Exod.
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#007),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#018),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#019)<span
id="iv.i.v.x-p7.1"></span>[Ex. vii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#012)<span id="iv.i.v.x-p7.2"></span>,
and viii. 7, 18, 19

<span id="fn_390"></span>[63:391](1030051.htm#fr_390) <span
id="iv.i.v.x-p7.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.v.x-p8"></span> [1 Cor.
12.10](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#010)<span
id="iv.i.v.x-p8.1"></span>[1 Cor. xii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#010)<span id="iv.i.v.x-p8.2"></span>

<span id="fn_391"></span>[63:392](1030051.htm#fr_391) <span
id="iv.i.v.x-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.v.x-p10"></span> [Ps.
148.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#008)<span
id="iv.i.v.x-p10.1"></span>[Ps. cxlviii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#008)<span id="iv.i.v.x-p10.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 10](1030052)
