[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030391)  [Next](1030393) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.xix"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xix-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.iii.xix-p1.1"></span>Chapter 18.—Of What is to Be Believed on the
Subject of the Creation of Man and Other Objects.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.xix-p2"></span>29. “Whereas, then, the omnipotent God,
who is also good and just and merciful, who made all things,—whether
they be great or small, whether they be highest or lowest, whether they
be things which are seen, such as are the heavens and the earth and the
sea, and in the heavens, in particular, the sun and the moon and other
luminaries, and in the earth and the sea, again, trees and shrubs and
animals each after their kind, and all bodies celestial or terrestrial
alike, or whether they be things which are not seen, such as are those
spirits whereby bodies are animated and endowed with life,—made also man
after His own image, in order that, as He Himself, in virtue of His
omnipotence, presides over universal creation, so man, in virtue of that
intelligence of his by which he comes to know even his Creator and
worships Him, might preside over all the living creatures of earth:
Whereas, too, he made the woman to be an helpmeet for him: not for
carnal concupiscence,—since, indeed, they had not corruptible bodies at
that period, before the punishment of sin invaded them in the form of
mortality,—but for this purpose, that the man might at once have glory
of the woman in so far as he went before her to God, and present in
himself an example to her for imitation in holiness and piety, even as
he himself was to be the glory of God in so far as he followed his
wisdom:

<span id="iv.iii.xix-p3"></span>30. “Therefore did he place them in a
certain locality of perpetual blessedness, which the Scripture
designates Paradise: and he gave them a commandment, on condition of not
violating which they were to continue for ever in that blessedness of
immortality; while, on the other hand, if they transgressed it, they
were to sustain the penalties of mortality. Now God knew beforehand that
they would trangress it. Nevertheless, in that He is the author and
maker of everything good, He chose rather to make them, as He also made
the beasts, in order that He might replenish the earth with the good
things proper to earth. And certainly man, even sinful man, is better
than a beast. And the commandment, which they were not to keep, He yet
preferred to give them, in order that they might be without excuse when
He should begin to vindicate Himself against them. For whatever man may
have done, he finds God worthy to be praised in all His doings: if he
shall have acted rightly, he finds Him worthy to be praised for the
righteousness of His rewards: if he shall have sinned, he finds Him
worthy to be praised for the righteousness of His punishments: if he
shall have confessed his sins and returned to an upright life, he finds
Him worthy to be praised for the mercy of His pardoning favors. Why,
then, should God not make man, although He foreknew that he would sin,
when He might crown him if he stood, and set him right if he fell, and
help him if he rose, Himself being always and everywhere glorious in
goodness, righteousness, and clemency? Above all, why should He not do
so, since He also foreknew this, namely, that from the race of that
mortality there would spring saints, who should not seek their own, but
give glory to their Creator; and who, obtaining deliverance from every
corruption by worshipping Him, should be counted worthy to live for
ever, and to live in blessedness with the holy angels? For He who gave
freedom of will to men, in order that they might worship God not of
slavish necessity but with ingenuous inclination, gave it also to the
angels; and hence neither did the angel, who, in com<span
id="page_303">p. 303</span> <span id="iv.iii.xix-Page_303"></span>pany
with other spirits who were his satellites, forsook in pride the
obedience of God and became the devil, do any hurt to God, but to
himself. For God knoweth how to dispose of souls <span
id="fr_1438"></span>[1439](#fn_1438) that leave Him, and out of their
righteous misery to furnish the inferior sections of His creatures with
the most appropriate and befitting laws of His wonderful dispensation.
Consequently, neither did the devil in any manner harm God, whether in
falling himself, or in seducing man to death; nor did man himself in any
degree impair the truth, or power, or blessedness <span
id="fr_1439"></span>[1440](#fn_1439) of His Maker, in that, when his
partner was seduced by the devil, he of his own deliberate inclination
consented unto her in the doing of that which God had forbidden. For by
the most righteous laws of God all were condemned, God Himself being
glorious in the equity of retribution, while they were shamed through
the degradation of punishment: to the end that man, when he turned away
from his Creator, should be overcome by the devil and made his subject,
and that the devil might be set before man as an enemy to be conquered,
when he turned again to his Creator; so that whosoever should consent
unto the devil even to the end, might go with him into eternal
punishments; whereas those who should humble themselves to God, and by
His grace overcome the devil, might be counted worthy of eternal
rewards.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1438"></span>[303:1439](1030392.htm#fr_1438) <span
id="iv.iii.xix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xix-p4"></span> Rather “spirits.” See the correction
made in the *Retractations*, ii. 14, as given above in the Introductory
Notice.

<span id="fn_1439"></span>[303:1440](1030392.htm#fr_1439) <span
id="iv.iii.xix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xix-p5"></span> The *beatitatem* is omitted by several
<span class="c19"><span id="iv.iii.xix-p5.1"></span>mss.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 19](1030393)
