[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030459)  [Next](1030461) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.xxxiv"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.xxxiv-p1"></span> 33. Wherefore, although I am not able
to teach, yet I cease not to advise, that, (whereas many wish to appear
wise, and it is no easy matter to discern whether they be fools,) with
all earnestness, and with all prayers, and lastly with groans, or even,
if so it may be, with tears, you entreat of God to set you free from the
evil of error; if your heart be set on a happy life. And this will take
place the more easily, if you obey with a willing mind His commands,
which He hath willed should be confirmed by so great authority of the
Catholic Church. For whereas the wise man is so joined to God in mind,
as that there is nothing set between to separate; for God is Truth; and
no one is by any means wise, unless his mind come into contact with the
Truth; we cannot deny that between the folly of man, and the most pure
Truth of God, the wisdom of man is set, as something in the middle. For
the wise man, so far as it is given unto him, imitates God; but for a
man who is a fool, there is nothing nearer to him, than a man who is
wise, for him to imitate with profit: and since, as has been said, it is
not easy to understand this one by reason, it behoved that certain
miracles be brought near to the very eyes, which fools use with much
greater readiness than the mind, that, men being moved by authority,
their life and habits might first be cleansed, and they thus rendered
capable of receiving reason. Whereas, therefore, it needed both that man
be imitated, and that our hope be not set in man, what could be done on
the part of God more full of kindness and grace, than that the very
pure, eternal, unchangeable Wisdom of God, unto Whom it behoves us to
cleave, should deign to take upon Him (the nature of) man? That not only
He might do what should invite us to follow God, but also might suffer
what used to deter us from following God. For, whereas no one can attain
unto the most sure and chief good, unless he shall fully and perfectly
love it; which will by no means take place, so long as the evils of the
body and of fortune are dreaded; He by being born after a miraculous
manner and working caused Himself to be loved; and by dying and rising
again shut out fear. And, further, in all other matters, which it were
long to go through, He shewed Himself such, as that we might perceive
unto what the clemency of God could be reached forth, and unto what the
weakness of man be lifted up.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 34](1030461)
