[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030071)  [Next](1030073) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.vi.xviii"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.xviii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.vi.xviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 17.—In How Many Ways Things
Future are Foreknown. Neither Philosophers, Nor Those Who Were
Distinguished Among the Ancients, are to Be Consulted Concerning the
Resurrection of the Dead.</span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.xviii-p2"></span>22.—although the name of prophets,
too, is not altogether foreign to their writings. But it makes the
greatest possible difference, whether things future are conjectured by
experience of things past (as physicians also have committed many things
to writing in the way of foresight, which they themselves have noted by
experience; or as again husbandmen, or sailors, too, foretell many
things; for if such predictions are made a long while before, they are
thought to be divinations), or whether such things have already started
on their road to come to us, and being seen coming far off, are
announced in proportion to the acuteness of the sense of those who see
them, by doing which the aerial powers are thought to divine (just as if
a person from the top of a mountain were to see far off some one coming,
and were to announce it beforehand to those who dwelt close by in the
plain); or whether they are either fore-announced to certain men, or are
heard by them and again transmitted to other men, by means of holy
angels, to whom God shows those things by His Word and His Wisdom,
wherein both things future and things past consist: or whether the minds
of certain men themselves are so far borne upwards by theHoly Spirit, as
to behold, not through the angels, but of themselves, the immoveable
<span id="page_81">p. 81</span> <span
id="iv.i.vi.xviii-Page_81"></span>causes of things future, in that very
highest pinnacle of the universe itself. \[And I say, behold,\] for the
aerial powers, too, *hear* these things, either by message through
angels, or through men; and hear only so much as He judges to be
fitting, to whom all things are subject. Many things, too, are foretold
by a kind of instinct and inward impulse of such as know them not: as
Caiaphas did not know what he said, but being the high priest, he
prophesied. <span id="fr_524"></span>[525](#fn_524)

<span id="iv.i.vi.xviii-p4"></span>23. Therefore, neither concerning the
successions of ages, nor concerning the resurrection of the dead, ought
we to consult those philosophers, who have understood as much as they
could the eternity of the Creator, in whom “we live, and move, and have
our being.” <span id="fr_525"></span>[526](#fn_525) Since, knowing God
through those things which are made, they have not glorified Him as God,
neither were thankful but professing themselves wise, they became
fools. <span id="fr_526"></span>[527](#fn_526) And whereas they were not
fit to fix the eye of the mind so firmly upon the eternity of the
spiritual and unchangeable nature, as to be able to see, in the wisdom
itself of the Creator and Governor of the universe, those revolutions of
the ages, which in that wisdom were already and were always, but here
were about to be so that as yet they were not; or, again, to see therein
those changes for the better, not of the souls only, but also of the
bodies of men, even to the perfection of their proper measure; whereas
then, I say, they were in no way fit to see these things therein, they
were not even judged worthy of receiving any announcement of them by the
holy angels; whether externally through the senses of the body, or by
interior revelations exhibited in the spirit; as these things actually
were manifested to our fathers, who were gifted with true piety, and who
by foretelling them, obtaining credence either by present signs, or by
events close at hand, which turned out as they had foretold, earned
authority to be believed respecting things remotely future, even to the
end of the world. But the proud and deceitful powers of the air, even if
they are found to have said through their soothsayers some things of the
fellowship and citizenship of the saints, and of the true Mediator,
which they heard from the holy prophets or the angels, did so with the
purpose of seducing even the faithful ones of God, if they could, by
these alien truths, to revolt to their own proper falsehoods. But God
did this by those who knew not what they said, in order that the truth
might sound abroad from all sides, to aid the faithful, to be a witness
against the ungodly.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_524"></span>[81:525](1030072.htm#fr_524) <span
id="iv.i.vi.xviii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.xviii-p3"></span> [John
11.51](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#051)<span
id="iv.i.vi.xviii-p3.1"></span>[John xi.
51](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#051)<span
id="iv.i.vi.xviii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="fn_525"></span>[81:526](1030072.htm#fr_525) <span
id="iv.i.vi.xviii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.xviii-p5"></span> [Acts
17.28](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#028)<span
id="iv.i.vi.xviii-p5.1"></span>[Acts xvii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#028)<span
id="iv.i.vi.xviii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="fn_526"></span>[81:527](1030072.htm#fr_526) <span
id="iv.i.vi.xviii-p5.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.xviii-p6"></span> [Rom.
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#021),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#022)<span
id="iv.i.vi.xviii-p6.1"></span>[Rom.
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#021),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#022)<span
id="iv.i.vi.xviii-p6.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 18](1030073)
