[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030077)  [Next](1030079) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.vii.i"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vii.i-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.vii.i-p1.1"></span>Chapter 1.—What the Author Entreats from
God, What from the Reader. In God Nothing is to Be Thought Corporeal or
Changeable.</span>

<span id="iv.i.vii.i-p2"></span>1. <span class="c19"><span
id="iv.i.vii.i-p2.1"></span> Beginning</span>, as I now do henceforward,
to speak of subjects which cannot altogether be spoken as they are
thought, either by any man, or, at any rate, not by myself; although
even our very thought, when we think of God the Trinity, falls (as we
feel) very far short of Him of whom we think, nor comprehends Him as He
is; but He is seen, as it is written, even by those who are so great as
was the Apostle Paul, “through a glass and in an enigma:” <span
id="fr_563"></span>[564](#fn_563) first, I pray to our Lord God Himself,
of whom we ought always to think, and of whom we are not able to think
worthily, in praise of whom blessing is at all times to be
rendered, <span id="fr_564"></span>[565](#fn_564) and whom no speech is
sufficient to declare, that He will grant me both help for understanding
and explaining that which I design, and pardon if in anything I offend.
For I bear in mind, not only my desire, but also my infirmity. I ask
also of my readers to pardon me, where they may perceive me to have had
the desire rather than the power to speak, what they either understand
better themselves, or fail to understand through the obscurity of my
language, just as I myself pardon them what they cannot understand
through their own dullness.

<span id="iv.i.vii.i-p5"></span>2. And we shall mutually pardon one
another the more easily, if we know, or at any rate firmly believe and
hold, that whatever is said of a nature, unchangeable, invisible and
having life absolutely and sufficient to itself, must not be measured
after the custom of things visible, and changeable, and mortal, or not
self-sufficient. But although we labor, and yet fail, to grasp and know
even those things which are within the scope of our corporeal senses, or
what we are ourselves in the inner man; yet it is with no shamelessness
that faithful piety burns after those divine and unspeakable things
which are above: piety, I say, not inflated by the arrogance of its own
power, but inflamed by the grace of <span id="page_88">p. 88</span>
<span id="iv.i.vii.i-Page_88"></span>its Creator and Saviour Himself.
For with what understanding can man apprehend God, who does not yet
apprehend that very understanding itself of his own, by which he desires
to apprehend Him? And if he does already apprehend this, let him
carefully consider that there is nothing in his own nature better than
it; and let him see whether he can there see any outlines of forms, or
brightness of colors, or greatness of space, or distance of parts, or
extension of size, or any movements through intervals of place, or any
such thing at all. Certainly we find nothing of all this in that, than
which we find nothing better in our own nature, that is, in our own
intellect, by which we apprehend wisdom according to our capacity. What,
therefore, we do not find in that which is our own best, we ought not to
seek in Him who is far better than that best of ours; that so we may
understand God, if we are able, and as much as we are able, as good
without quality, great without quantity, a creator though He lack
nothing, ruling but from no position, sustaining all things without
“having” them, in His wholeness everywhere, yet without place, eternal
without time, making things that are changeable, without change of
Himself, and without passion. Whoso thus thinks of God, although he
cannot yet find out in all ways what He is, yet piously takes heed, as
much as he is able, to think nothing of Him that He is not.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_563"></span>[87:564](1030078.htm#fr_563) <span
id="iv.i.vii.i-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vii.i-p3"></span> [1 Cor.
13.12](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#012)<span
id="iv.i.vii.i-p3.1"></span>[1 Cor. xiii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#012)<span id="iv.i.vii.i-p3.2"></span>

<span id="fn_564"></span>[87:565](1030078.htm#fr_564) <span
id="iv.i.vii.i-p3.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vii.i-p4"></span> [Ps.
34.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#001)<span
id="iv.i.vii.i-p4.1"></span>[Ps. xxxiv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#001)<span id="iv.i.vii.i-p4.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](1030079)
