[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030382)  [Next](1030384) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.x"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.x-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.iii.x-p1.1"></span>Chapter 9.—Of the Method in Which Grammarians
and Professional Speakers are to Be Dealt with.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.x-p2"></span>13. There are also some who come from the
commonest schools of the grammarians and professional speakers, whom you
may not venture to reckon either among the uneducated or among those
very learned classes whose minds have been exercised in questions of
real magnitude. When such persons, therefore, who appear to be superior
to the rest of mankind, so far as the art of speaking is concerned,
approach you with the view of becoming Christians, it will be your duty
in your communications with them, in a higher degree than in your
dealings with those other illiterate hearers, to make it plain that they
are to be diligently admonished to clothe themselves with Christian
humility, and learn not to despise individuals whom they may discover
keeping themselves free from vices of conduct more carefully than from
faults of language; and also that they ought not to presume so much as
to compare with a pure heart the practised tongue which they were
accustomed even to put in preference. But above all, such persons should
be taught to listen to the divine Scriptures, so that they may neither
deem solid eloquence to be mean, merely because it is not inflated, nor
suppose that the words or deeds <span id="page_292">p. 292</span> <span
id="iv.iii.x-Page_292"></span>of men, of which we read the accounts in
those books, involved and covered as they are in carnal wrappings, <span
id="fr_1387"></span>[1388](#fn_1387) are not to be drawn forth and
unfolded with a view to an (adequate) understanding of them, but are to
be taken merely according to the sound of the letter. And as to this
same matter of the utility of the hidden meaning, the existence of which
is the reason why they are called also mysteries, the power wielded by
these intricacies of enigmatical utterances in the way of sharpening our
love for the truth, and shaking off the torpor of weariness, is a thing
which the persons in question must have made good to them by actual
experience, when some subject which failed to move them when it was
placed baldly before them, has its significance elicited by the detailed
working out of an allegorical sense. For it is in the highest degree
useful to such men to come to know how ideas are to be preferred to
words, just as the soul is preferred to the body. And from this, too, it
follows that they ought to have the desire to listen to discourses
remarkable for their truth, rather than to those which are notable for
their eloquence; just as they ought to be anxious to have friends
distinguished for their wisdom, rather than those whose chief merit is
their beauty. They should also understand that there is no voice for the
ears of God save the affection of the soul. For thus they will not act
the mocker if they happen to observe any of the prelates and ministers
of the Church either calling upon God in language marked by barbarisms
and solecisms, or failing in understanding correctly the very words
which they are pronouncing, and making confused pauses. <span
id="fr_1388"></span>[1389](#fn_1388) It is not meant, of course, that
such faults are not to be corrected, so that the people may say “Amen”
to something which they plainly understand; but what is intended is,
that such things should be piously borne with by those who have come to
understand how, as in the forum it is in the sound, so in the church it
is in the desire that the grace of speech resides. <span
id="fr_1389"></span>[1390](#fn_1389) Therefore that of the forum may
sometimes be called good speech, but never gracious speech. <span
id="fr_1390"></span>[1391](#fn_1390) Moreover, with respect to the
sacrament which they are about to receive, it is enough for the more
intelligent simply to hear what the thing signifies. But with those of
slower intellect, it will be necessary to adopt a somewhat more detailed
explanation, together with the use of similitudes, to prevent them from
despising what they see.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1387"></span>[292:1388](1030383.htm#fr_1387) <span
id="iv.iii.x-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.x-p3"></span> *Carnalibus integumentis involuta atque
operta*

<span id="fn_1388"></span>[292:1389](1030383.htm#fr_1388) <span
id="iv.iii.x-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.x-p4"></span> Or = confusing the sense by false pauses:
*perturbateque distinguere*.

<span id="fn_1389"></span>[292:1390](1030383.htm#fr_1389) <span
id="iv.iii.x-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.x-p5"></span> *Ut sono in foro, sic voto in ecclesia
benedici*

<span id="fn_1390"></span>[292:1391](1030383.htm#fr_1390) <span
id="iv.iii.x-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.x-p6"></span> *Bona dictio, nunquam tamen benedictio*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 10](1030384)
