[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030004)  [Next](1030006) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.i"></span> <span id="page_3">p. 3</span> <span
id="iv.i.i-Page_3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p1"></span><span class="c7"><span
id="iv.i.i-p1.1"></span>Introductory Essay.</span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p2"></span>By William G. T. Shedd, D.D.

<span id="iv.i.i-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iv.i.i-p3.1"></span>The</span> doctrine of the Divine Unity is a
truth of natural religion; the doctrine of the Trinity is a truth of
revealed religion. The various systems of natural theism present
arguments for the Divine existence, unity, and attributes, but proceed
no further. They do not assert and endeavor to demonstrate that the
Supreme Being is three persons in one essence. It is because this
doctrine is not discoverable by human reason, that the Christian church
has been somewhat shy of attempts to construct it analytically; or even
to defend it upon grounds of reason. The keen Dr. South expresses the
common sentiment, when he remarks that “as he that denies this
fundamental article of the Christian religion may lose his soul, so he
that much strives to understand it may lose his wits.” Yet all the
truths of revelation, like those of natural religion, have in them the
element of reason, and are capable of a rational defense. At the very
least their self-consistence can be shown, and objections to them can be
answered. And this is a rational process. For one of the surest
characteristics of reason is, freedom from self contradiction, and
consonance with acknowledged truths in other provinces of human inquiry
and belief.

<span id="iv.i.i-p4"></span>It is a remarkable fact, that the earlier
forms of Trinitarianism are among the most metaphysical and speculative
of any in dogmatic history. The controversy with the Arian and the
Semi-Arian, brought out a statement and defense of the truth, not only
upon scriptural but ontological grounds. Such a powerful dialectician as
Athanasius, while thoroughly and intensely scriptural—while starting
from the text of scripture, and subjecting it to a rigorous exegesis—did
not hesitate to pursue the Arian and Semi-Arian dialectics to its most
recondite fallacy in its subtlest recesses. If any one doubts this, let
him read the four Orations of Athanasius, and his defence of the Nicene
Decrees. In some sections of Christendom, it has been contended that the
doctrine of the Trinity should be received without any attempt at all to
establish its rationality and intrinsic necessity. In this case, the
tenets of eternal generation and procession have been regarded as going
beyond the Scripture data, and if not positively rejected, have been
thought to hinder rather than assist faith in three divine persons and
one God. But the history of opinions shows that such sections of the
church have not proved to be the strongest defenders of the Scripture
statement, nor the most successful in keeping clear of the Sabellian,
Arian, or even Socinian departure from it.

<span id="iv.i.i-p5"></span>Those churches which have followed Scripture
most implicitly, and have most feared human speculation, are the very
churches which have inserted into their creeds the most highly analytic
statement that has yet been made of the doctrine of the Trinity. The
Nicene Trinitarianism is incorporated into nearly all the symbols of
modern Christendom; and this specifies, particularly, the tenets of
eternal generation and procession with their corollaries. The English
Church, to whose great divines, Hooker, Bull, Waterland, and Pearson,
scientific Trinitarianism owes a very lucid and careful statement, has
added the Athanasian creed to the Nicene. The Presbyterian churches,
distinguished for the closeness of their adherence to the simple
Scripture, yet call upon their membership to confess, <span
id="page_4">p. 4</span> <span id="iv.i.i-Page_4"></span>that “in the
unity of the Godhead there be three persons, of one substance, power,
and eternity; God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost. The
Father is of none, neither begotten nor proceeding; the Son is eternally
begotten of the Father; the Holy Ghost eternally proceeding from the
Father and the Son.” <span id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1)

<span id="iv.i.i-p7"></span>The treatise of Augustin upon the Trinity,
which is here made accessible to the English reader, is one of the
ablest produced in the patristic age. The author devoted nearly thirty
years of his matured life to its composition (<span class="c19"><span
id="iv.i.i-p7.1"></span>A.D.</span> 400 to 428). He was continually
touching and retouching it, and would have delayed its publication
longer than he did, had a copy not been obtained surreptitiously and
published. He seems to have derived little assistance from others; for
although the great Greek Trinitarians—Athanasius, the two Gregories, and
Basil—had published their treatises, yet he informs us that his
knowledge of Greek, though sufficient for understanding the exegetical
and practical writings of his brethren of the Greek Church, was not
adequate to the best use of their dialectical and metaphysical
compositions. <span id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2) Accordingly, there is no
trace in this work of the writings of the Greek Trinitarians, though a
substantial agreement with them. The only Trinitarian author to whom he
alludes is Hilary—a highly acute and abstruse Trinitarian.

<span id="iv.i.i-p9"></span>In his general position, Augustin agrees
with the Nicene creed; but laying more emphasis upon the
consubstantiality of the persons, and definitely asserting the
procession of the Spirit from the Father and Son. Some dogmatic
historians seem to imply that he differed materially from the Nicene
doctrine on the point of *subordination*. Hagenbach (Smith’s Ed. § 95)
asserts that “Augustin completely purified the dogma of the Trinity from
the older vestiges of subordination;” and adds that “such vestiges are
unquestionably to be found in the most orthodox Fathers, not only in the
East but also in the West.” He cites Hilary and Athanasius as examples,
and quotes the remark of Gieseler, that “the idea of a subordination
lies at the basis of such declarations.” Neander (II. 470, Note 2) says
that Augustin “kept at a distance everything that bordered on
subordinationism.” These statements are certainly too sweeping and
unqualified. There are three kinds of subordination: the filial or
trinitarian; the theanthropic; and the Arian. The first is taught, and
the second implied, in the Nicene creed. The last is denied and
excluded. Accordingly, dogmatic historians like Petavius, Bull,
Waterland, and Pearson, contend that the Nicene creed, in affirming the
filial, but denying the Arian subordination; in teaching subordination
as to person and relationship, but denying it as to essence; enunciates
a revealed truth, and that this is endorsed by all the Trinitarian
fathers, Eastern and Western. And there certainly can be no doubt that
Augustin held this view. He maintains, over and over again, that Sonship
as a relationship is second and subordinate to Fatherhood; that while a
Divine Father and a Divine Son must necessarily be of the very same
nature and grade of being, like a human father and a human son, yet the
latter issues from the former, not the former from the latter.
Augustin’s phraseology on this point is as positive as that of
Athanasius, and in some respects even more bold and capable of
misinterpretation. He denominates the Father the “beginning”
(principium) of the Son, and the Father and Son the “beginning”
(principium) of the Holy Spirit. “The Father is the beginning of the
whole divinity, or if it is better so expressed, deity.” IV. xx. 29. “In
their mutual rela<span id="page_5">p. 5</span> <span
id="iv.i.i-Page_5"></span>tion to one another in the Trinity itself, if
the begetter is a beginning (principium) in relation to that which he
begets, the Father is a beginning in relation to the Son, because he
begets Him.” V. xiv. 15. Since the Holy Spirit proceeds from both Father
and Son, “the Father and Son are a beginning (principium) of the Holy
Spirit, not two beginnings.” V. xiv. 15. Compare also V. xiii.; X. iv.;
and annotations pp. Augustin employs this term “beginning” only in
relation to the person, not to the essence. There is no “beginning,” or
source, when the essence itself is spoken of. Consequently, the
“subordination” (implied in a “beginning” by generation and spiration)
is not the Arian subordination, as to essence, but the trinitarian
subordination, as to person and relation. <span
id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3)

<span id="iv.i.i-p11"></span>Augustin starts with the assumption that
man was made in the image of the *triune* God, the God of revelation;
not in the image of the God of natural religion, or the untriune deity
of the nations. Consequently, it is to be expected that a trinitarian
analogue can be found in his mental constitution. If man is God’s image,
he will show traces of it in every respect. All acknowledge that the
Divine unity, and all the communicable attributes, have their finite
correspondents in the unity and attributes of the human mind. But the
Latin father goes further than this. This, in his view, is not the whole
of the Divine image. When God says, “Let *us* make man in *our* image,
after *our* likeness” ([Gen. 1.26](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#026)<span
id="iv.i.i-p11.1"></span>[Gen. i.
26](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#026)<span id="iv.i.i-p11.2"></span>),
Augustin understands these words to be spoken *by* the Trinity, and *of*
the Trinity—by and of the true God, the God of revelation: the Father,
Son, and Holy Spirit, one God. He denies that this is merely the
*pluralis excellentiæ*, and that the meaning of these words would be
expressed by a change of the plural to the singular, and to the reading,
“Let *me* make man in *my* image, after *my* likeness.” “For if the
Father alone had made man without the Son, it would not have been
written, ‘Let us make man in our image, after our likeness.’” City of
God XVI. vi.; Trinity I. vii. 14. In Augustin’s opinion, the Old
Testament declaration that God is a unity, does not exclude the New
Testament declaration that he is a trinity. “For” says he, “that which
is written, ‘Hear O Israel: the Lord our God is one Lord’ ought
certainly not to be understood as if the Son were excepted, or the Holy
Spirit were excepted; which one Lord our God we rightly call our Father,
as regenerating us by his grace.” Trinity V. xi. 12. How far Moses
*understood* the full meaning of the Divine communication and
instruction, is one thing. *Who* it really and actually was that made
the communication to him, is another. Even if we assume, though with
insufficient reason for so doing, that Moses himself had no intimation
of the Trinity, it does not follow that it was not the Trinity that
inspired him, and all the Hebrew prophets. The apostle Peter teaches
that the Old Testament inspiration was a Trinitarian inspiration, when
he says that “the prophets who prophesied of the grace that should come,
searched what the Spirit of *Christ* which was in them did signify, when
it testified beforehand of the sufferings of Christ, and the glory that
should follow.” ([1 Pet. 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#011)<span id="iv.i.i-p11.3"></span>[1
Pet. 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#011)<span id="iv.i.i-p11.4"></span>).

<span id="iv.i.i-p12"></span>In asserting, however, that an image of the
Trinity exists in man’s nature, Augustin is careful to observe that it
is utterly imperfect and inadequate. He has no thought or expectation of
clearing up the mystery by any analogy whatever. He often gives
expression to his sense of the inscrutability and incomprehensibility of
the Supreme Being, in language of the most lowly and awe-struck
adoration. “I pray to our Lord God himself, of whom we ought always to
think, and yet of whom we are not able to think worthily, and whom no
speech is sufficient to declare, that He will grant me both help for
understanding and explaining that which I design, and pardon if in
anything I offend.” V. i. 1. “O Lord the one God, God the Trinity,
whatever I have said in these books that is of Thine, may they
acknowledge who are Thine; if anything of my own, may it be pardoned
both by Thee and by those who are Thine. Amen.” XV. xxviii.

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span> <span id="iv.i.i-Page_6"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p13"></span>Augustin’s method in this work is (1.) The
exegetical; (2.) The rational. He first deduces the doctrine of the
Trinity from Scripture, by a careful collation and combination of the
texts, and then defends it against objections, and illustrates it by the
analogies which he finds in nature generally, and in the human mind
particularly. The Scripture argument is contained in the first seven
books; the rational in the last eight. The first part is, of course, the
most valuable of the two. Though the reader may not be able to agree
with Augustin in his interpretation of some Scripture passages,
particularly some which he cites from the Old Testament, he will
certainly be impressed by the depth, acumen, and accuracy with which the
Latin father reaches and exhausts the meaning of the acknowledged
trinitarian texts. Augustin lived in an age when the Scriptures and the
Greek and Roman classics were nearly all that the student had, upon
which to expend his intellectual force. There was considerable
metaphysics, it is true, but no physics, and little mathematics. There
was consequently a more undivided and exclusive attention bestowed upon
revealed religion as embodied in the Scriptures, and upon ethics and
natural religion as contained in the classics, than has ever been
bestowed by any subsequent period in Christendom. One result was that
scripture was expounded by scripture; things spiritual by things
spiritual. This appears in the exegetical part of this treatise.
Augustin reasons out of the Scriptures; not out of metaphysics or
physics.

<span id="iv.i.i-p14"></span>The second, or speculative division of the
work, is that which will be most foreign to the thinking of some
trinitarians. In it they will find what seems to them to be a
philosophy, rather than an interpretation of the word of God. We shall,
therefore, in this introductory essay, specify some of the advantages,
as it seems to us, of the general method of defending and illustrating
the doctrine of the Trinity employed by Augustin and the patristic
Trinitarians.

<span id="iv.i.i-p15"></span>1. Fuller justice is done to Scripture by
this method. Revelation denominates the first trinitarian person the
Father, the second the Son, the third the Spirit. These terms are
literal, not metaphorical; because the relations denoted by them are
eternally in the essence. Scripture clearly teaches that the Father is
such from eternity. Consequently, “paternity” (implied in the name
Father) can no more be ascribed to the first person of the Godhead in a
figurative sense, than eternity can be. For a person that is a father
must be so in relation to a son. No son, no father. Consequently, an
*eternal* Father implies an eternal Son. And the same reasoning holds
true of the relation of the Father and Son to the Spirit. The terms
Father, Son, and Spirit, in the baptismal formula and the apostolic
benediction, must designate primary and eternal distinctions. The rite
that initiates into the kingdom of God, certainly would not be
administered in three names that denote only assumed and temporal
relations of God; nor would blessings for time and eternity be invoked
from God under such secondary names.

<span id="iv.i.i-p16"></span>Hence, these trinal names given to God in
the baptismal formula and the apostolic benediction, actually *force*
upon the trinitarian theologian, the ideas of paternity, generation,
filiation, spiration, and procession. He cannot reflect upon the
implication of these names without forming these ideas, and finding
himself necessitated to concede their literal validity and objective
reality. He cannot say that the first person is the Father, and then
deny that he “begets.” He cannot say that the second person is the Son,
and then deny that he is “begotten.” He cannot say that the third person
is the Spirit, and then deny that he “proceeds” by “spiration”
(*spiritus quia spiratus*) from the Father and Son. When therefore
Augustin, like the primitive fathers generally, endeavors to illustrate
this eternal, necessary, and constitutional energizing and activity
(*opera ad intra*) in the Divine Essence, whereby the Son issues from
the Father and the Spirit from Father and Son, by the emanation of
sunbeam from sun, light from light, river from fountain, thought from
mind, word <span id="page_7">p. 7</span> <span
id="iv.i.i-Page_7"></span>from thought—when the ternaries from nature
and the human mind are introduced to elucidate the Trinity—nothing more
is done than when by other well-known and commonly adopted analogies the
Divine unity, or omniscence, or omnipresence, is sought to be
illustrated. There is no analogy taken from the finite that will clear
up the mystery of the infinite—whether it be the mystery of the eternity
of God, or that of his trinity. But, at the same time, by the use of
these analogies the mind is kept close up to the Biblical term or
statement, and is not allowed to content itself with only a half-way
understanding of it. Such a method brings thoroughness and clearness
into the interpretation of the Word of God.

<span id="iv.i.i-p17"></span>2. A second advantage in this method is,
that it shows the doctrine of the Trinity to be inseparable from that of
the Unity of God. The Deistical conception of the Divine unity is wholly
different from the Christian. The former is that of natural religion,
formed by the unassisted human mind in its reflection upon the Supreme
Being. The latter is that of revealed religion, given to the human mind
by inspiration. The Deistical unity is mere singleness. The Christian
unity is a trinality. The former is a unit. The latter a true unity, and
union. The former is meagre, having few contents. The latter is a
plenitude—what St. Paul denominates “the fullness of the Godhead” (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.i.i-p17.1"></span>πλήρωμα τῆς
θεότητος</span>). [Coloss. i. 9](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#009)<span
id="iv.i.i-p17.2"></span>.

<span id="iv.i.i-p18"></span>It follows, consequently, that the Divine
unity cannot be discussed by itself without reference to trinality, as
the Deist and the Socinian endeavor to do. <span
id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4) Trinality belongs as necessarily and
intrinsically to the Divine unity as eternity does to the Divine
essence. “If,” says Athanasius (Oration I. 17) “there was not a Blessed
Trinity from eternity, but only a unity existed first, which at length
became a Trinity, it follows that the Holy Trinity must have been at one
time imperfect, and at another time entire: imperfect until the Son came
to be created, as the Arians maintain, and then entire afterwards.” If
we follow the teachings of Revelation, and adopt the revealed idea of
God, we may not discuss mere and simple unity, nor mere and simple
trinality; but we must discuss unity *in* trinality, and trinality *in*
unity. We may not think of a monad which originally, and in the order
either of nature or of time, is not trinal, but becomes so. The instant
there is a monad, there is a triad; the instant there is a unity, there
are Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. The Christian Trinity is not that of
Sabellius: namely, an original untrinal monad that subsequently, in the
order of nature if not of time, becomes a triad; whereby four factors
are introduced into the problem. God is not one *and* three, but one
*in* three. There is no primary monad, as such, and without trinality,
to which the three distinctions are secondary adjuncts. The monad, or
essence, never exists in and by itself as untrinalized, as in the
Sabellian scheme. It exists only as in the three Persons; only as
trinalized. The Essence, consequently, is not prior to the Persons,
either in the order of nature or of time, nor subsequent to them, but
simultaneously and eternally in and with them.

<span id="iv.i.i-p20"></span>The Primitive church took this ground with
confidence. Unity and trinality were inseparable in their view. The term
God meant for them the Trinity. A “theologian,” in their nomenclature,
was a trinitarian. They called the Apostle John <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.i.i-p20.1"></span>ὁ θεόλογος</span>, because
he was enlightened by the Holy Spirit to make fuller disclosures, in the
preface to his Gospel, concerning the deity of the Logos and the
doctrine of the Trinity, than were the other evangelists. And they gave
the same epithet to Gregory Nazianzum, because of the acumen and insight
of his trinitarian treatises. This work of Augustin adopts the same
position, and defends it with an ability second to none.

<span id="iv.i.i-p21"></span>3. A third advantage of this method of
illustrating the doctrine of the Trinity is, that it goes to show that
the personality of God depends upon the trinality of the Divine
Essence<span id="page_8">p. 8</span> <span
id="iv.i.i-Page_8"></span>—that if there are no interior distinctions in
the Infinite Being, he cannot be self-contemplative, self-cognitive, or
self-communing.

<span id="iv.i.i-p22"></span>This is an important and valuable feature
of the method in question, when viewed in its bearing upon the modern
assertion that an Infinite Being cannot be personal. This treatise of
Augustin does not develope the problem upon this point, but it leads to
it. In illustrating the Trinity by the ternaries in nature, and
especially in the human mind, he aims only to show that trinality of a
certain kind does not conflict with *unity* of a certain kind. Memory,
understanding, and will are three faculties, yet one soul. Augustin is
content with elucidating the Divine unity by such illustrations. The
elucidation of the Divine *personality* by them, was not attempted in
his day nor in the Mediæval and Reformation churches. The conflict with
pantheism forced this point upon the attention of the Modern church.

<span id="iv.i.i-p23"></span>At the same time, these Christian fathers
who took the problem of the Trinity into the centre of the Divine
essence, and endeavored to show its necessary grounds there, prepared
the way for showing, by the same method, that trinality is not only
consistent with personality, but is actually indispensable to it. In a
brief essay like this, only the briefest hints can be indicated.

<span id="iv.i.i-p24"></span>If God is personal, he is self-conscious.
Self-consciousness is, (1), the power which a rational spirit, or mind,
has of making itself its own object; and, (2), of knowing that it has
done so. If the first step is taken, and not the second, there is no
self-consciousness. For the subject would not know that the object is
the *self*. And the second step cannot be taken, if the first has not
been. These two acts of a rational spirit, or mind, involve three
distinctions in it, or three modes of it. The whole mind as a subject
contemplates the very same whole mind as an object. Here are two
distinctions, or modes of one mind. And the very same whole mind
perceives that the contemplating subject and the contemplated object are
one and the same essence or being. Here are three modes of one mind,
each distinct from the others, yet all three going to make up the one
self-conscious spirit. Unless there were these three distinctions, there
would be no self-knowledge. Mere singleness, a mere subject without an
object, is incompatible with self-consciousness.

<span id="iv.i.i-p25"></span>In denying distinctions in the Divine
Essence, while asserting its personality, Deism, with Socinianism and
Mohammedanism, contends that God can be self-knowing and self-communing
as a single subject without an object. The controversy, consequently, is
as much between the deist and the psychologist, as it is between him and
the trinitarian. It is as much a question whether his view of
personality and self-consciousness is correct, as whether his
interpretation of Scripture is. For the dispute involves the necessary
conditions of personality. If a true psychology does not require
trinality in a spiritual essence in order to its own self-contemplation,
and self-knowledge, and self-communion, then the deist is correct; but
if it does, then he is in error. That the study of self-consciousness in
modern metaphysics has favored trinitarianism, is unquestionable. Even
the spurious trinitarianism which has grown up in the schools of the
later pantheism goes to show, that a trinal constitution is requisite in
an essence, in order to explain self-consciousness, and that absolute
singleness, or the absence of all interior distinctions, renders the
problem insoluble. <span id="fr_5"></span>[6](#fn_5)

<span id="iv.i.i-p27"></span>But the authority of Scripture is higher
than that of psychology, and settles the matter. Revelation
unquestionably discloses a deity who is “blessed forever;” whose
blessedness is *independent* of the universe which he has made from
nonentity, and who must therefore find all the conditions of blessedness
within himself alone. He is blessed from eternity, in his own
self-contemplation and self-communion. He does not need the universe in
order <span id="page_9">p. 9</span> <span id="iv.i.i-Page_9"></span>that
he may have an object which he can know, which he can love, and over
which he can rejoice. “The Father knoweth the Son,” from all eternity
([Matt. 11.27](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#027)<span
id="iv.i.i-p27.1"></span>); and “loveth the Son,” from all eternity
([John 3.35](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#035)<span
id="iv.i.i-p27.2"></span>[John iii.
35](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#035)<span id="iv.i.i-p27.3"></span>);
and “glorifieth the Son,” from all eternity ([John
17.5](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#005)<span
id="iv.i.i-p27.4"></span>[John xvii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#005)<span id="iv.i.i-p27.5"></span>).
Prior to creation, the Eternal Wisdom “was by Him as one brought up with
Him, and was daily His delight, rejoicing always before Him” ([Prov.
8.30](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#030)<span
id="iv.i.i-p27.6"></span>[Prov. viii.
30](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#030)<span id="iv.i.i-p27.7"></span>);
and the Eternal Word “was in the beginning with God” ([John
1.2](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#002)<span
id="iv.i.i-p27.8"></span>[John i.
2](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#002)<span id="iv.i.i-p27.9"></span>); and
“the Only Begotten Son (or God Only Begotten, as the uncials read) was
eternally in the bosom of the Father” ([John
1.18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018)<span
id="iv.i.i-p27.10"></span>[John i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018)<span id="iv.i.i-p27.11"></span>).

<span id="iv.i.i-p28"></span>Here is society within the Essence, and
wholly independent of the universe; and communion and blessedness
resulting therefrom. But this is impossible to an essence without
personal distinctions. Not the singular Unit of the deist, but the
plural Unity of the trinitarian, explains this. A subject without an
object could not know. What is there to be known? Could not love. What
is there to be loved? Could not rejoice. What is there to rejoice over?
And the object cannot be the universe. The *infinite* and *eternal*
object of God’s infinite and eternal knowledge, love, and joy, cannot be
his creation: because this is neither eternal, nor infinite. There was a
time when the universe was not; and if God’s self-consciousness and
blessedness depends upon the universe, there was a time when God was
neither self-conscious nor blessed. The objective God for the subjective
God must, therefore, be very God of very God, begotten not made, the
eternal Son of the eternal Father.

<span id="iv.i.i-p29"></span>The same line of reasoning applies to the
third trinitarian person, but there is no need of going through with it.
The history of opinion shows, that if the first two eternal distinctions
are conceded, there is no denial of the reality and eternity of the
third. <span id="fr_6"></span>[7](#fn_6)

<span id="iv.i.i-p31"></span>The analogue derived from the nature of
finite personality and self-consciousness has one great
advantage—namely, that it illustrates the independence of the Divine
personality and self-consciousness. The later pantheism (not the earlier
of Spinoza) constructs a kind of trinity, but it is dependent upon the
universe. God distinguishes Himself from the *world*, and thereby finds
the object required for the subject. But this implies either that the
world is eternal, or else, that God is not eternally self-conscious. The
Christian trinitarianism, on the contrary, finds all the media and
conditions of self-consciousness within the Divine Essence. God
distinguishes himself from *himself*, not from the universe. The eternal
Father beholds himself in the eternal Son, his *alter ego*, the “express
image of his own person” ([Heb.
1.3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003)<span
id="iv.i.i-p31.1"></span>[Heb. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003)<span id="iv.i.i-p31.2"></span>). God
does not struggle gradually into self-consciousness, as in the Hegelian
scheme, by the help of the universe. Before that universe was in
existence, and in the solitude of his own eternity and self-sufficiency,
he had within his own essence all the media and conditions of
self-consciousness. And after the worlds were called into being, the
Divine personality remained the same immutable and infinite
self-knowledge, unaffected by anything in his handiwork.

<span id="iv.i.i-p32"></span>“O Light Eterne, sole in thyself that
dwellest,

<span id="iv.i.i-p33"></span>Sole knowest thyself, and known unto
thyself,

<span id="iv.i.i-p34"></span>And knowing, lovest and smilest on
thyself!”—<span class="c19"><span id="iv.i.i-p34.1"></span>Dante</span>:
*Paradise* xxxiii. 125.

<span id="iv.i.i-p35"></span>While, however, this analogue from the
conditions of finite personality approaches nearer to the eternal
distinctions in the Godhead than does that ternary which Augustin
employs—namely, memory, understanding, and will—yet like all finite
analogies to the Infinite it is inadequate. For the subject-ego,
object-ego, and ego-percipient, are not so essentially distinct and
completely objective to each other, as are the Father, Son, and Holy
Spirit. They cannot employ the personal pronouns in reference to each
other. They cannot reciprocally perform acts and discharge functions
towards each other, like the <span id="page_10">p. 10</span> <span
id="iv.i.i-Page_10"></span>Divine Three. Revelation is explicit upon
this point. It specifies at least the following twelve actions and
relations, that incontestably prove the conscious distinctness and
mutual objectivity of the persons of the Trinity. One divine person
loves another ([John 3.35](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#035)<span
id="iv.i.i-p35.1"></span>[John iii.
35](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#035)<span id="iv.i.i-p35.2"></span>);
dwells in another ([John 14:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#011)<span
id="iv.i.i-p35.3"></span>[John 14:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#011)<span id="iv.i.i-p35.4"></span>);
knows another ([Matt. 11.27](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#027)<span
id="iv.i.i-p35.5"></span>); sends another ([Gen.
16.7](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#007)<span
id="iv.i.i-p35.6"></span>[Gen. xvi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#007)<span id="iv.i.i-p35.7"></span>);
suffers from another ([Zech.
13.7-13](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#007)<span
id="iv.i.i-p35.8"></span>[Zech. xiii.
7-13](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#007)<span id="iv.i.i-p35.9"></span>);
addresses another ([Heb. 1.8](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#008)<span
id="iv.i.i-p35.10"></span>[Heb. i.
8](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#008)<span id="iv.i.i-p35.11"></span>); is
the way to another ([John 14.6](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#006)<span
id="iv.i.i-p35.12"></span>[John xiv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#006)<span id="iv.i.i-p35.13"></span>);
speaks of another ([Luke 3.22](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#022)<span
id="iv.i.i-p35.14"></span>[Luke iii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#022)<span id="iv.i.i-p35.15"></span>);
glorifies another ([John 17.5](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#005)<span
id="iv.i.i-p35.16"></span>[John xvii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#005)<span id="iv.i.i-p35.17"></span>);
confers with another ([Gen. 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#026),
[Gen. 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#007)<span
id="iv.i.i-p35.18"></span>[Gen. i.
26](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#026)<span id="iv.i.i-p35.19"></span>;
xi. 7); plans with another ([Is.
9.6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006)<span
id="iv.i.i-p35.20"></span>[Is. ix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006)<span id="iv.i.i-p35.21"></span>);
rewards another ([Phil. 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#005), [Heb.
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#009)<span
id="iv.i.i-p35.22"></span>[Phil. ii.
5-11](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#005)<span id="iv.i.i-p35.23"></span>;
[Heb. ii. 9](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#009)<span
id="iv.i.i-p35.24"></span>).

<span id="iv.i.i-p36"></span>Such are some of the salient features of
this important treatise upon the Trinity. It has its defects; but they
pertain to the form more than to the matter; to arrangement and style
more than to dogma. Literary excellence is not the forte of the
patristic writers. Hardly any of them are literary artists. Lactantius
among the Latins, and Chrysostom among the Greeks, are almost the only
fathers that have rhetorical grace. And none of them approach the beauty
of the classic writers, as seen in the harmonious flow and diction of
Plato, and the exquisite finish of Horace and Catullus.

<span id="iv.i.i-p37"></span>Augustin is prolix, repetitious, and
sometimes leaves his theme to discuss cognate but distantly related
subjects. This appears more in the last eight chapters, which are
speculative, than in the first seven, which are scriptural. The material
in this second division is capable of considerable compression. The
author frequently employs two illustrations when one would suffice, and
three or more when two are enough. He discusses many themes which are
not strictly trinitarian.

<span id="iv.i.i-p38"></span>Yet the patient student will derive some
benefit from this discursiveness. He will find, for example, in this
treatise on the Trinity, an able examination of the subject of miracles
(Book III); of creation *ex nihilo* (III. ix); of vicarious atonement
(IV. vii-xiv); of the faculty of memory (XI. x); and, incidentally, many
other high themes are touched upon. Before such a contemplative
intellect as that of Augustin, all truth lay spread out like the ocean,
with no limits and no separating chasms. Everything is connected and
fluid. Consequently, one doctrine inevitably leads to and merges in
another, and the eager and intense inquirer rushes forward, and outward,
and upward, and downward, in every direction. The only aim is to see all
that can be seen, and state all that can be stated. The neglect of the
form, and the anxiety after the substance, contribute to the
discursiveness. Caring little for proportion in method, and nothing for
elegance in diction, the writer, though bringing forth a vast amount of
truth, does it at the expense of clearness, conciseness, and grace. Such
is the case with the North African father—one of the most voluminous and
prolix of authors, yet one of the most original, suggestive, and
fertilizing of any.

<span id="iv.i.i-p39"></span>And this particular treatise is perhaps as
pregnant and suggestive as any that Augustin, or any other theologian,
ever composed. The doctrine of the Trinity is the most *immense* of all
the doctrines of religion. It is the foundation of theology.
Christianity, in the last analysis, is Trinitarianism. Take out of the
New Testament the persons of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit,
and there is no God left. Take out of the Christian consciousness the
thoughts and affections that relate to the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Spirit, and there is no Christian consciousness left. The Trinity is the
constitutive idea of the evangelical theology, and the formative idea of
the evangelical experience. The immensity of the doctrine makes it of
necessity a mystery; but a mystery which like night enfolds in its
unfathomed depths the bright stars—points of light, compared with which
there is no light so keen and so glittering. Mysterious as it is, the
Trinity of Divine Revelation is the doctrine that holds in it all the
hope of man; for it holds within it the infinite pity of the Incarnation
and the infinite mercy of the Redemption.

<span id="iv.i.i-p40"></span>And it shares its mysteriousness with the
doctrine of the Divine Eternity. It is diffi<span id="page_11">p.
11</span> <span id="iv.i.i-Page_11"></span>cult to say which is most
baffling to human comprehension, the all-comprehending, simultaneous,
successionless consciousness of the Infinite One, or his trinal
personality. Yet no theist rejects the doctrine of the Divine eternity
because of its mystery. The two doctrines are antithetic and
correlative. On one of the Northern rivers that flows through a narrow
chasm whose depth no plummet has sounded, there stand two cliffs
fronting each other, shooting their pinnacles into the blue ether, and
sending their roots down to the foundations of the earth. They have
named them Trinity and Eternity. So stand, antithetic and confronting,
in the Christian scheme, the trinity and eternity of God.

<span id="iv.i.i-p41"></span>The translation of this treatise is the
work of the Rev. Arthur West Haddan, Hon. Canon of Worcester, who,
according to a note of the publisher, died while it was passing through
the press. It has been compared with the original, and a considerable
number of alterations made. The treatise is exceedingly difficult to
render into English—probably the most so of any in the author’s
writings. The changes in some instances were necessary from a
misconception of the original; but more often for the purpose of making
the meaning of the translator himself more clear. It is believed that a
comparison between the original and revised translation will show that
the latter is the more intelligible. At the same time, the reviser would
not be too confident that in every instance the exact meaning of
Augustin has been expressed, by either the translator or reviser.

<span id="iv.i.i-p42"></span>The annotations of the reviser upon
important points in the treatise, it is hoped, will assist the reader in
understanding Augustin’s reasoning, and also throw some light upon the
doctrine of the Trinity.

<span id="iv.i.i-p43"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iv.i.i-p43.1"></span>                                         
                        William G. T. Shedd.</span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p44"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iv.i.i-p44.1"></span>New York</span>, *Feb*. 1, 1887.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1"></span>[4:2](1030005.htm#fr_1) <span
id="iv.i.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p6"></span> Westminster Confession, II. iii.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[4:3](1030005.htm#fr_2) <span
id="iv.i.i-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p8"></span> That Augustin had considerable acquaintance
with Greek is proved by his many references and citations throughout his
writings. In this work, see XII. vii. 11; XII. xiv. 22; XIII. x. 14;
XIV. i. 1; XV. ix. 15. His statement in III. i. 1, is, that he was “not
*so* familiar with the Greek tongue (*Græcæ linguæ non sit nobis tantus
habitus*), as to be able to read and understand the books that treat of
such \[metaphysical\] topics.” In V. viii. 10, he remarks that he does
not comprehend the distinction which the Greek Trinitarians make between
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.i.i-p8.1"></span>οὐσία and
ὑπόστασις</span>; which shows that he had not read the work of Gregory
of Nyssa, in which it is defined with great clearness. One may have a
good knowledge of a language for general purposes, and yet be unfamiliar
with its philosophical nomenclature.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[5:4](1030005.htm#fr_3) <span
id="iv.i.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p10"></span> For an analysis of Augustin’s
Trinitarianism, see Bauv: *<span id="iv.i.i-p10.1"></span>
Dreieinigkeitslehre* I. 828–885; Gangauf: *<span
id="iv.i.i-p10.2"></span>Des Augustinus speculative Lehre von Gott dem
Dreieinigen*; Schaff: *History*, iii. 684 sq.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[7:5](1030005.htm#fr_4) <span
id="iv.i.i-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p19"></span> The Mohammedan conception of the Divine
Unity, also, is deistic. In energetically rejecting the doctrine of the
Trinity, the Mohammedan is the Oriental Unitarian.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[8:6](1030005.htm#fr_5) <span
id="iv.i.i-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p26"></span> “That view of the divine nature which
makes it inconsistent with the Incarnation and Trinity is
*philosophically* imperfect, as well as scripturally incorrect.” H. B.
Smith: *Faith and Philosophy*, p. 191.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[9:7](1030005.htm#fr_6) <span
id="iv.i.i-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p30"></span> Upon the necessary conditions of self
consciousness in God, see Müller: *On Sin*, II. 136 sq. (Urwick’s Trans
); Dorner: *Christian Doctrine*, I. 412–465; Christlieb: *Modern Doubt*,
Lecture III.; Kurtz: *Sacred History*, § 2; Billroth: *Religions
Philosophie*, § 89, 90; Wilberforce: *Incarnation*, Chapter III; Kidd:
*On the Trinity*, with Candlish’s *Introduction*; Shedd: *History of
Doctrine*, I. 365–368.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Translator’s Preface.](1030006)
