[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sbc06)  [Next](sbc08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Survivals in Belief Among the Celts*, by George Henderson, \[1911\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Wanderings of Psyche (part 3)

(*g*) *The Water-horse* (cf. the Boobrie as water-horse in a preceding
section).—After the bull one thinks next of the water-horse, which is
not, at least in all its phases, to be classified under the
theriomorphic-soul. For in part it goes back on nature-myth, and is
perhaps a personification of the destroying waters. A portion of this
phase belongs

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

to the Celtic Dragon-Myth, which is a water-myth in so far as some
aspects of the monster met with is concerned. It would be difficult to
say what lochs in the Highlands were formerly not associated with the
water-horse. A *linne na badhbh* is met with in many places. The Black
Glen river in Morvern was once the resort of a water-horse. A recent
writer says:

“In Arisaig there is a loch, which, according to tradition, there lived
at one time a sea-horse. Boswell, in his *Journal of Johnson's Tour to
the Hebrides*, informs us that an old man told the following fabulous
story of one of the lochs of Raasay:

“There was once a wild beast in it, a sea-horse, which came and devoured
a man's daughter, upon which the man lighted a great fire and had a sow
roasted in it, the smell of which attracted the monster. In the fire was
put a spit. The man lay concealed behind a low wall of loose stones. The
monster came, and the man with the red hot spit destroyed it.

“It is reported that a horse used to frequent the road near Loch Ness,
till a stout, brave Highlander, meeting the monster one night, drew his
sword in the name of the Trinity, and finished the supposed kelpie
forever. Hugh Miller relates some very weird stories about the uncanny
doings of a sea-horse or water-wraith that frequented the waters of the
River Conon, Ross-shire. The Black Glen kelpie very early one morning
was seen near the source of the river, making very unusual sounds. After
a little while it left the waters of the river altogether; and at last,
with fearful bellowings, it ran in the direction of Loch Uisge and
Kingair-loch,

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

and has neither been seen nor heard of any more to this day.

"This glen also used to be much frequented by wild boars and wolves.
Owing to its evil reputation in this respect, people were afraid to pass
through the glen."

For the water-bull in the Isle of Man, see Moore's *Folk-Lore of the
Isle of Man* (p. 59). And for Scotland, the Rev. J. G. Campbell's
*Superstitions*.

In many districts we are told of "the lurking place of the water-horse,
which, under the form of a handsome youth, won and kept a maiden's heart
until, by chance, she found him asleep on the hillock where they were
wont to meet, and on bending over him noticed a bunch of rushes in his
hair. Then she knew with what she had to deal, and fled in terror to her
father's house, reaching it just in time to bar the door in the kelpie's
face, whose voice she heard crying:

Ann an là ’s bliadhna,  
Mo bhean òg, thig mi dh’ iarraidh.

In a day and a year,  
I'll come seeking my dear.

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> So she was warned
never to go near the hillock again; her parents found her a more
eligible suitor; and all went well till her wedding day, when on leaving
the church after the ceremony was over, a big black horse came suddenly
upon them, seized the bridle and galloped off with her. Since that time
no one has ever seen the horse or its burden, unless, indeed, at the
fall of night, some passer-by catches a glimpse of a white face rising
out of the water, and hears a low sweet voice croon the

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

love song she was singing when first she saw her kelpie lover."

I give two accounts which I have from the late Rev. Allan Macdonald of
Eriskay. They indicate how universal this folk-belief was in the
Highlands:

"*Water-horse*.—There was a young woman in Barra who met a handsome
looking man on the hill. They chatted together, and at last he laid his
head on her lap. She noticed when he slept that his hair was mixed with
'rafagach an locha,' a weed that grows in lakes, and she became
suspicious that her friend was the water-horse in disguise. She cut off
the part of her clothes on which his head rested, and slipped away
without wakening him. A considerable time after, on a Sunday after Mass,
a number of people were sitting on the hill and she along with them. She
noticed the stranger whom she had met on the hill approaching, and she
got up to go home so as to avoid him. He made up to her,
notwithstanding, and caught her, and hurried off and plunged with her
into the lake, and not a trace of her was ever found but a little bit of
one of her lungs on the shore of the lake.—*Anne M‘Intyre*."

"In the island of Mingulay a young woman had a similar adventure, only
in her case the stranger appeared often to her, and they became at last
so fond of each other that they agreed to marry at the end of a year and
a day, and till then the stranger was not to be seen by her. The girl
went home, and as the year was drawing to an end, she was observed to be
fast sinking in health and losing her good colour, yet she would not say

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

what it was that made her fall away so. Her father at last extorted an
unwilling confession of the truth from her, and word was given to the
islanders as to what was causing the girl such trouble. She was very
beautiful and a great favourite, and when the people heard what was to
happen to her, they made up their minds that they would allow no harm
befall her. When the day came all the men of the place were armed with
clubs, and the young woman was put sitting on the wall of the house,—the
young men forming a guard round the house. All were in a state of
expectancy when the stranger was seen appearing above the great cliff of
Mingulay and coming down swiftly towards the village. One of the
islanders stepped forward to meet the stranger and asked him his errand.
'Such as it is,' said the stranger, 'you are not the man to stand in my
way, strong though you be, and you may as well not detain me.' He went
forward and reached the guard round the house, and, in the twinkling of
an eye, seized the young woman by the hand, and, before the guard had
made up their minds to pursue him and rescue the girl, he had so far
retraced his way with his prize. The islanders started in pursuit, but
in vain. They saw him and the woman disappear at a certain well, and
when they reached this the well was full of blood and of shreds of her
garments. The well is still called 'Tobar na Fala' = the well of
blood.—*Calum Dhomhnuill*, 1895."

(*h*) *The Soul in Serpent-form*.—I will illustrate by a story: A man
and wife in Ardnamurchan went out to the hill for heather. When tired
pulling it

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

the wife lay down and slept. The husband sat down, and when his eyes
were about to close, on looking towards his wife he saw a serpent
disappearing down her mouth. He wakened her and they went home, but he
did not tell her what he had seen. On getting home he went to the
doctor, who advised him to feed his wife well and to give her plenty
flesh meat, so that the serpent, getting sufficient food in this way,
might not begin to gnaw herself. The woman was surprised at the change
in her fare, and she ate well. In due course she was delivered of a
child, and round the child's neck was coiled the serpent.

The true members of the Clan Iver, says Principal Mac Iver-Campbell in
his *Memoir of Clan Iver*, were supposed to be invulnerable to serpents:
he quotes a rhyme supposed to have been uttered by a serpent or adder:

Mhionnaich mise do Chlann Imheair  
S mhionnaich Clann Imheair dhomh,  
Nach beanainn-se do Chlann Imheair  
’S nach beanadh Clann Imheair dhomh,

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *i.e.*, 'I have
sworn to Clan Iver and Clan Iver have sworn to me, that I would not
injure Clan Iver and that Clan Iver would not injure me.' As another
explanation, Principal MacIver-Campbell thought the lines commemorated
an alliance between Clan Iver and some race symbolised by the serpent
with "every probability that the alliance referred to is that which is
known to have existed between the MacIvers in Perthshire and the Clan
Donnachaidh or Robertsons, one of whose cognisances was the serpent
which still appears as one of the supporters

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

in the arms of their chief, Robertson of Strowan." Another form of the
rhyme he gives thus:

Latha an Fhéille-Bríde  
Their an nathair as an tom:  
Cha bhi mise ri Nic Imheair,  
’S cha mho bhios Nic Imheair rium,

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *i.e.* 'On St.
Brigit's Day the serpent will say from off the knoll: I will not injure
Nic Imheair, neither will Nic Imheair injure me.' In Skye at least I
have heard of these lines having been repeated on St. Brigit's Day, the
woman doing so having placed a burning peat in one of her stockings, and
pounding at it the while on the threshold of the outer door (a specially
sacred place) as a precaution against the entrance of evil spirits. The
Clan Iver are of Norse origin, <span id="fr_197"></span>[1](#fn_196) but
whatever the origin of this belief I am satisfied it is a phase of
manism in the wide sense. MacIver-Campbell was in his day Principal of
Aberdeen University, and related to Campbell, the poet of *The Pleasures
of Hope* and of *Hohenlinden*. At a time when totemism was not as yet
much thought about, he notes as one interested in family origins and
crests that certain animals were symbolical of particular clans: the
magpie as friendly to the Campbells (for its wearing argent and sable,
the old Campbell colours?), the horse a symbol or friend of the MacIvers
of Glassary. Further, there were certain nick-names, *e.g*.:

Crodh maol Chnapadail,  
Eich chlòimheach Ghlasairigh,  
Fithich dhubh Chraiginnis,  
Is Coilich Airigh Sceodnis,

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

*i.e.*, 'The polled oxen of Cnapdale, the shaggy horses of Glassary, the
black ravens of Craignish, the cocks of Airigh Sceodnish, meaning the
folk of these parts.'

It is proper to add, however, that another variant of the serpent rhyme
typifies the serpent as queen: *Là fhéille Brìghde thig an rìghinn as an
tom*, *i.e.* 'On St. Bride's (Brigit's) Day the queen will come from the
knoll,' and its association with the act of pounding a burning peat on
the threshold <span id="fr_198"></span>[1](#fn_197) involuntarily
reminds one of the Siberian 'Fiery Snake' or *zagovor* (invoked for
kindling amorous longing), with which has been compared the folk-belief
that with the beginning of every January—*i.e.* at the end of the
festival in honour of the return of the sun towards summer—the Fiery
Snake begins to fly, enters into the *izbá* through the chimney, turns
into a brave youth and steals by magic the hearts of fair maidens. In a
Servian song a girl who has been carried off by a 'fiery-snake' calls
herself his 'true love,' and it is thought that in mythical language the
'Fiery Snake' is one of the forms of the lightning. "The blooming earth,
fructified by the rains poured forth during the first spring storms, is
turned in the myth into the bride of the Fiery Snake. But the wedder of
nature became looked upon at a later period as the patron of weddings
among the children of men, and so the inducing of love-pangs naturally
became ascribed to the Fiery Snake." <span
id="fr_199"></span>[2](#fn_198) This explanation is founded upon
nature-myth,

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

but on Celtic ground I incline to postulate ancestor worship, if not by
the Celts, on the part of pre-Celtic tribes in Britain. There is a
serpent mound in Glenelg, on the way to Scalasaig Farm; also in Lorne;
there are serpents figured on some stones; and a folk-cure for serpent
bite is to wash the parts with water in which a serpent's head has been
boiled. On a Gaulish altar of the first century of our era there is
sculptured a serpent with a ram's head. We may perhaps infer a
serpent-totem among the Gauls. <span id="fr_200"></span>[1](#fn_199)
Greek vase-paintings portray the occupants of graves in the form of
snakes. <span id="fr_201"></span>[2](#fn_200) In Virgil we meet Aeneas
pouring libations on his father's tomb, when a gorgeous serpent
appeared, either the genius of the place or an attendant on his father
in the other world:

Silent, amazed stood Aeneas; but the serpent its long length trailing  
Glided among the cups and the polished vessels of service,  
Tasted the viands and back to the depths of the tomb receded,  
Mindless of harm and left the tasted food and the altars.  
                                             *Aeneid*, v. 90-93.

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> One parallel from
the lower cults will show that the belief in the serpent-soul may be
very real:

"In S. Africa the dead may re-appear in the form of animals, but only
for pure mischief. Widows are often held in bondage and terror by their
lords returning in the guise of a serpent. This brute will enter the
house, hide in the thatch, and look at its victim from between the
rafters. It will coil itself by the fire and steal into the beds; it
will glide over

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

articles of food and explore the interior of cooking utensils. For this
persistent persecution there is but one remedy, and that is to kill the
serpent, when there is nothing left but 'pure spirit,' which cannot
appear in material form any more." <span id="fr_202"></span>[1](#fn_201)

(*i*) *The Soul in Wolf-form*.—The existence of this belief in animal
parentage is seen from the *Leabhar Breathnach*. Here we read: "The
descendants of the wolf are in Ossory (*síl in Faelchon i n-Osraigib*).
There are certain people in Eri, viz. the race of Laighne Faelaidh, in
Ossory; they pass into the form of wolves whenever they please, and kill
cattle according to the custom of wolves, and they quit their own
bodies; when they go forth in the wolf-forms they charge their friends
not to remove their bodies, for if they are moved they will not be able
to come again into them (their bodies); and if they are wounded while
abroad, the same wounds will be on their bodies in their houses; and the
raw flesh devoured while abroad will be in their teeth." <span
id="fr_203"></span>[2](#fn_202) This belief was current in the days of
Fynes Moryson, who mentions the report that in Upper Ossory and Ormond
men are yearly turned. into wolves. And long before then Gerald, the
Welshman, had heard a story of two wolves who had been a man and woman
of the Ossorians. They were transformed into wolves every seven years
through a curse imposed by St. Naal or Natalis, abbot of Kilmanagh,
Kilkenny, in the sixth century. They were banished to Meath, where

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

they met a priest in a wood, shortly ere Earl John came to Ireland in
the days of Henry II. They retained the use of language and were fabled
with having foretold the invasion of the foreigner. The Latin legend
declares the substance of what the wolf said to the priest: "A certain
sept of the men of Ossory are we; every seventh year through the curse
of St. Natalis the Abbot, we two, man and woman, are compelled to leave
our shape and our bounds." Then having been divested of human form,
animal form is assumed. Having completed their seven years, should they
survive so long, if two other Ossorians be substituted instead of these,
the former return to their pristine form and fatherland.

In personal and tribal names the wolf meets us, *e.g*. Cinel Loairn,
whence modern Lorne in Argyll, after which is named the marquisate in
the ducal family, from Gadhelic *Loarn*, 'wolf.' In Ireland it is told
of Laignech Fáelad that he was the man "that used to shift into
wolf-shapes. He and his offspring after him used to go whenever they
pleased, into the shapes of the wolves, and, after the custom of wolves,
kill the herds. Wherefore he was called Laignech *Fáelad*, for he was
the first of them to go into a wolf-shape." <span
id="fr_204"></span>[1](#fn_203)

The Celtic god *Dis Pater*, from whom, according to Caesar's account,
the Gauls were descended, is represented as clad in wolf-skin, and
holding a vessel, also a mallet with a long shaft, which, Monsieur
Reinach thinks, recalls the image of the Etruscan Charon. "A low-relief
at Sarrebourg,

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

in Lorraine," says this eminent authority, "proves that one of the
epithets of this Gaulish god was *Sucellus*, signifying 'one who strikes
well.'" The wolf skin leads to the presumption that the god was
originally a wolf, roving and ravaging during the night time. This god
has been identified with the Latin Silvanus, the woodman or forester who
gave chase to the wolves—of old a wolf himself. On this view, which M.
Reinach favours, at least a section of the Gauls had a national legend
identical with that of the Romans: like Romulus they were the children
of the wolf, and M. Reinach suggests that perhaps it was on this account
that the Arverni called themselves brethren of the Latins. <span
id="fr_205"></span>[1](#fn_204) If so, we have a close parallel to
Gadhelic tradition.

Spenser says that "some of the Irish doe use to make the wolf their
gossip"; and Camden adds that they term them "Chari Christi, praying for
them, and wishing them well, and having contracted this intimacy,
professed to have no fear from their four-footed allies." Fynes Moryson
expressly mentions the popular dislike to killing wolves. Aubrey adds
that "in Ireland they value the fang-tooth of an wolfe, which they set
in silver and gold as we doe ye Coralls." <span
id="fr_206"></span>[2](#fn_205)

At Claddagh there is a local saint, Mac Dara, whose real name according
to folk-belief was Sinach, 'a fox,' <span
id="fr_207"></span>[3](#fn_206) a probably non-Aryan name. The Irish

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

*onchú*, 'leopard,' also 'standard,' whence G. *onnchon*, 'standard,'
from French *onceau*, *once*, 'a species of jaguar,' seems preserved in
Wester Ross with the change of *n* to *r*, as *o’r chu*, written *odhar
chu*, in the sense of 'wolf': the howl of the creature thus named
inspired the natives of old with a fear and awe which had their origin
in days when the wolf prowled of evenings among the flocks.

(*j*) *The Soul in Dog-form*.—The dog is *taboo* in almost the whole of
Europe: it was a totem animal; and to eat tabooed food brings down the
anger of the spirits. The occurrence of dog-names among the Celts, such
as Cu-roi, Cu-chulainn would lead one to include this phase likewise
among the transformations of the soul. Eating of dog flesh was forbidden
Cuchulainn, and the breaking of the taboo brought him death. The West
Mayo tradition quoted above, under section (*e*), states that Oisin was
half-brother to Bran, Fionn's Hound; that Bran was the daughter of Fionn
by a lady who came to him as an enchanted hound. There are names of
animal origin to be met with among Highland surnames, *e.g*. Matheson is
MacMhathain, older Macmaghan, 'son of the bear'; Mac-Culloch is
Mac-Culloch, 'son of the boar.' Though wild stories of supernatural
dogs, such as the Black Dog of Kinlochbervie and the wild black dog with
fiery eyes that came from the river at Eskadale may be now ascribed in
folk-lore to demonic influence, yet the demon at an earlier stage is an
aspect of the theriomorphic soul. *Cuilean*, 'whelp,' is used in the
Highlands as a form of endearment. The

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

black dog (Manx: *Moddey Doo*, *Manthe Doo*) that was seen at Peel
Castle, Isle of Man, was believed to be an evil spirit, which only
waited permission to do the soldiers hurt, and for that reason they
forbore swearing and all profane discourse while in its company. <span
id="fr_208"></span>[1](#fn_207) None of them liked to be left alone with
such a companion. Now as the Manthe Doog used to come out and return by
the passage through the church, by which one of the men had to go to
deliver the keys every night to the captain on duty, the men used to do
the duty in couples, and never would a man do it alone. One of the
soldiers, however, on a certain night, having taken more drink than was
good for him, insisted on going with the keys alone, although it was not
his turn. His comrades in vain tried to dissuade him from what they felt
to be a dangerous and foolhardy freak. Some time afterwards a great
noise disturbed the men in the guard-house, and, while they were sitting
wondering and awe-stricken, the adventurous soldier broke in upon them.
He was inarticulate with horror and fright. He could not even make signs
to convey to his comrades what had happened to him. The man was
distracted, mentally paralysed, and in an hour or two he died, with his
features distorted, obviously in mental agony. After this no one would
go through

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

the passage, which was soon closed up. The apparition was never seen
again!

(*k*) *The Soul in Seal-form*.—For an account of this phase the reader
is referred to my *Norse Influence on Celtic Scotland*. It is unlucky to
kill the seal: it is a human being under spells.

(*l*) *Boar-form*.--The association of Diarmad's death with his act of
measuring the poisonous boar against the bristle leads to an inference
that the hero's life was bound up with that of the boar. Yet here there
might be another explanation. But the fact that swine's blood is held to
be a sovereign cure for warts by laving the parts therein, along with
the great aversion to eating pork in any form which I have met with in
old Highlanders, seems to point to swine as sacred. The Gauls had a god
Succellos, from \**sukku*, 'a pig.' In Campbell's *West Highland Tales*
there is an obsolete phrase *an t-sreath chuileanach*, left
untranslated: it should read 'an treith chuileanach s a dà chuilean
deug,' *i.e.* 'the mother sow with her litter of twelve.' See Cormac's
*Glossary*, *sub* Orc treth. Ultimately the word seems the same as
*triath*, 'lord, chief,' from \**treitos*, which Stokes compared with L.
*tritavos*, an ancestor in the sixth degree. The Turc Trwyth of Welsh
romance and emblems on the so-called Boar-stones are probably in origin
to be derived from a belief in kinship with the boar.

A story is told of a he-goat having been seen very often in a certain
part of the islands and of people who met with violence and sometimes
with death when they came to the spot frequented by him. There was a
suspicion that the goat was only a form

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

assumed by a weaver (*breabadair*) in the place. A man called at the
weaver's one day on his way through the country. The weaver asked where
he was going to. The man told him. The weaver asked if he were not
afraid of passing the spot where the goat was seen,—a spot fatal to
many. The man replied that he was not, that he bore his help on his hip
('tha cobhair chruachainn agam'). When he came to the spot the goat
stood above him and began to attack him. The man was being worsted when
the goat said: 'Cà ’eil do chobhair air chruachainn a nisd?' 'Where is
the help on your hip now?' The man replied as he drew forth a dagger he
had on his hip: '’S ann air a chuimhne bha’n diùlanas,' 'It was thy
memory that had the fortitude.' He killed the goat, and when he returned
to the weaver's house the blood of the weaver had frozen ('bha fuil a’
bhreabadair air reothadh').—Hugh M‘Lennan, Dec. 7, 1895.

(*m*) *The Soul in Semi-theriomorphic Form*.—Here the transition is made
to the half-human aspect of the soul in god-form. Creatures of the
imagination which have their basis in nature-myth, *e.g*. the
*glaistig*, the *Bodach Glas*, *Peallaidh*, perhaps the *Gruagach*, and
such as the *Ūruisg*, are not to be included here. In point are the
demons which were said to haunt particular families as their good or
evil genius. The family of Rothiemurchus was said to have been haunted
by *Bodach an Dūin*, the Goblin or Ghost of the Dūne; the Baron of
Kinchardine's family by Red Hand (*Lāmh* *Dhearg*), or a 'ghost,' one of
whose hands was bloody red; Gartinbeg by Bodach-Gartin; Glenlochie

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

by Brownie, as was also Belladrum House; Tullochgorm by Māg Molach,
*i.e.* Hairy Hand or 'one with the left hand all over hairy,' as Lachlan
Shaw's *History of the Province of Moray* put it. "I find," says Shaw,
"in the Synod Records of Moray, frequent orders to the Presbyteries of
Aberlaure and Abernethie, to enquire into the truth of Maag Moulach's
appearing. But they could make no discovery, only that one or two men
declared they once saw in the evening a young girl whose left hand was
all hairy, and who instantly disappeared." <span
id="fr_209"></span>[1](#fn_208) This famous apparition is referred to
also in the Laird of Macfarlane's *Geographical Collections*. Hairy Hand
was supposed to come down the chimney and to take children away. The
nearest parallel I find in the Russian Domovy, an hirsute creature the
whole of whose body save the eyes and nose is covered with hair. The
tracks of his shaggy feet may be seen in winter time in the snow; his
hairy hand is felt by night gliding over the faces of sleepers. <span
id="fr_210"></span>[2](#fn_209) The Domovy is the house-spirit, and
specially haunts the stove; the cultus was connected with the burning
fire on the domestic hearth. In the Highlands too the hearth-fire is
held in awe, as witness the fact that it is forbidden to pass between an
epileptic and the fire; to do so was to draw upon one's self the
disease.

The names given to some appearances show us gods in the making, as when
in Inverness-shire the small-pox is called The Good Wife (*A’ Bhean
Mhath*), and the Devil is elsewhere euphemistically spoken

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

of as *Caomhan*, 'the dear one, darling.' Among Greeks and Slays
small-pox is personified as a female; the Servians call her *bogine* or
goddess. The conception of the Hairy Hand of the Highlands is met with
to a fuller extent in the *Fynnodderee* of the Isle of Man; the word
'satyr' of *Isaiah* xxxiv. 14 is rendered in the Manx Bible as *yn
Phynnodderre*e; the name signifies 'the hairy-dun one,' and this satyr
is conceived as "something between a man and a beast, being covered with
black shaggy hair and having fiery eyes"; he is prodigiously strong, is
credited with giving aid in lifting heavy stones for mansion-buildings,
and with help in mowing the meadow grass; some think of him as a fairy
expelled the Fairy Bower for having loved a nymph as she sat beneath a
tree in Glen Aldyn; "the scythe he had was cutting everything, skinning
the meadow to the sods, and if a leaf were left standing he stamped it
down with his heels." <span id="fr_211"></span>[1](#fn_210)

His was the wizard hand that toiled  
At midnight's witching hour;  
That gathered the sheep from the coming storm  
Ere the shepherd saw it lower.  
Yet asked no fee save a scattered sheaf  
From the peasants’ garnered hoard,  
Or cream-bowl kissed by a virgin lip  
To be left on the household board.

From the thought of the nymph beneath the tree in dalliance with the
Phynnodderree (there has not been a merry world since he lost his
ground, the old Manxman said) I pass now to the spirit of the tree or
tree-soul.

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

(*n*) *The Tree-Soul*.—The Strathspey story given above in illustration
of the tree-soul tells also of a tree as taken to witness, which points
to a belief in the tree-soul. The soul of the dead was believed to pass
into the tree. Herbs and flowers were fabled to grow from the blood of
the dead and so to re-embody his spirit. Such metempsychosis is
connected with solemn sayings.

How a man's word of truth, if not his soul, may be thus linked with a
tree is shown from the belief current in my boyhood as to a tree which
grew from the spot on which was the pulpit of Mr. Lachlan Mackenzie, the
gifted and eminent minister of Lochcarron. Some said it was out of his
grave that the tree grew, and that Mr. Lachlan's solemn words to his
people were that they were not to believe a word of what he preached
unless after his death a certain tree should grow on the spot on which
he stood or would be buried in. I have seen slips cut from that tree at
Lochcarron taken several days’ journey in memory of one regarded as a
prophet. And I may quote the following from a successor of his:

"A large and beautiful red elder-berry tree,—after the roof was taken
off the church,—grew out of the stone foundation of Mr. Lachlan's
pulpit. After the tree grew it was reported that Mr. Lachlan had stated
that when a tree, growing out of the spot where he stood, grew to the
height of the church walls, popery would be in the ascendant in the
district. That was how I heard it reported when the Duke of Leeds, whose
Duchess was a keen Roman Catholic, owned the property.

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

"It was thought there was not another tree of the kind in the world. My
father, however, had one in front of the manse close by, and I have now
more than one here, grown from slips cut off Mr. Lachlan's the year I
left Lochcarron." <span id="fr_212"></span>[1](#fn_211) Folk-belief ever
reflects the shadows of its own fears and fancies, and likewise of its
hopes. Iseult, in Cornish legend, after the loss of her lover, died
broken-hearted and was buried in the same church with Tristram. Ivy, or
else a rose and vine, sprang from either grave until it met its fellow
at the crown of the vault roof.

Under this heading one might place a good deal of the folk-lore of the
rowan tree. Everywhere in Celtdom it is semi-sacred. In Wales "it was
considered lucky to have a mountain ash growing near your premises. The
berries brought into the house were followed by prosperity and success.
A bunch of the berries worn in girdle or bodice kept women from being
bewitched." <span id="fr_213"></span>[2](#fn_212) In the Highlands
crosses of rowan twigs are placed under the milk-pans, and one has
sometimes seen them tied with red thread to a cow's tail. Pieces of
rowan wood are stuck in the turf from the inside above the byre door,
with the intent of keeping the cattle and their milk from being
bewitched. And it is thought lucky to have a rowan tree growing near the
house. In the Highland version of the legend of Fraoch, given in the
Dean of Lismore's book, the rowan tree is a sort of tree of Life; it
bears fruit every month and every

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

quarter, and the virtue of its red berries when tasted was such as to
stave off hunger for long.

Its berries’ juice and fruit when red  
For a year would life prolong.  
From dread disease it gave relief  
If what is told be our belief.  
Yet though it proved a means of life  
Peril lay closely nigh;  
Coiled by its root a dragon lay  
Forbidding passage by.

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> And Queen Mève
feigned sickness and said:

That ne’er would she be whole  
Till her soft palm were full  
Of berries from the island on the lake— <span
id="fr_214"></span>[1](#fn_213)

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> And of old, in the
case of the oak, when stripped of its leaves, its spirit was held to
have gone into the mistletoe, and thus became a means of blessing and of
fertility.

The Teutons and the Celts, and other peoples, seem, with regard to the
tree-soul, to think alike. When the innocent are put to death, white
lilies grow out of the graves, three lilies on that of a maiden, <span
id="fr_215"></span>[2](#fn_214) which no one but her lover may pluck.
From the mounds of buried lovers flowering shrubs spring up, whose
branches intertwine,—a belief illustrated in the Barra version of the
story of Deirdire: "The wicked king ordered her body to be lifted out of
the grave and to be buried on the other side of the loch. It was done as
the king commanded, and the grave was closed. Then a

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

young pine branch grew from the grave of Deirdire, and a young pine
branch from the grave of Naoise, and the two branches twined together
over the lake. Then the king commanded that the two young pine branches
should be cut down, and this was done twice, till the wife whom the king
married made him to cease from the bad work and his persecution of the
way of the dead! <span id="fr_216"></span>[1](#fn_215) With this I would
compare the lilies and limes said to grow out of graves in Swedish
songs; also Percy's ballad of Fair Margaret and Sweet William:

Out of her breast there sprang a rose  
And out of his a briar:  
'They grew till they grew unto the church top,  
And there they tied in a true lover's knot.

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> There originally
underlay this the idea of the instantaneous passage of the soul into a
flower, a bush, a tree, just as Daphne and Syrinx, when they cannot
elude the pursuit of Apollo or Pan, change themselves into a laurel or a
reed.

Virgil makes the cornel and myrtle which grew on the grave of Polydorus
at once bleed and speak when torn up by the hand of Aeneas. <span
id="fr_217"></span>[2](#fn_216) And Ovid speaks of an ancient oak,
itself a grove, with votive tablets hung and grateful gifts for vows
accomplished. <span id="fr_218"></span>[3](#fn_217) Underneath its shade
the dryads wove their festal dance. Theocritus tells how at the
consecration of Helen's plane tree at Sparta the choir of maidens hung
consecrated wreaths of lotus flowers upon the tree, with costly
spikenard

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

anointed it, and attached to it the dedicatory placard: <span
id="fr_219"></span>[1](#fn_218) "Honour me all ye that pass by for I am
Helen's tree."

We may compare the fortune of the Hays of Errol, bound up with an
immemorial oak:

While the mistletoe bats on Errol's aik,  
  And the aik stands fast,  
The Hays shall flourish, and their good grey hawk  
  Shall nocht flinch before the blast.

But when the root of the aik decays,  
  And the mistletoe dwines on its withered breast,  
The grass shall grow on Errol's hearth-stane  
  And the corbie roup in the falcon's nest.  
                            *Thomas the Rhymer*.

At Glasgow it seems probable that Christianity was grafted on
pre-Christian faith. The oak, the salmon, and the red-breast on the arms
of the city of Glasgow allow of this interpretation. Upon a tree in the
forest clearing, St. Kentigern is said to have hung his bell. The pet
red-breast of Servanus, his teacher at Culross, he restored to life; the
signet ring of Queen Langweneth he found in the belly of a salmon.
Kentigern's oak had a sanctity of its own, apart from its use as a
Christian belfry. Compare the oaks of Brigit and of Colum Cille. <span
id="fr_220"></span>[2](#fn_219)

Let me give in few words an instance of tree-lore from living tradition,
not far from the capital of old Pictland. Pīreig, it says, was a woman
who was murdered, and a tree planted in remembrance of her grew near
Cononbank, in the parish of Kirkhill,

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Inverness-shire.
It was an uncanny place. A grey beast used at times to be seen there; it
was cat-like in appearance, and thought by some to be a *tannasg* or
*tāsg*, 'apparition, ghost.' <span id="fr_221"></span>[1](#fn_220) Such
a creature followed in the track of a cart which was going to town at an
early hour. My informants said it followed them until dawn, when, on
coming to a bridge, it gave an unearthly yell, it being a property of
the ghost or apparition to give a loud cry as it passes over running
water. <span id="fr_222"></span>[2](#fn_221) An intelligent
correspondent, whose memory goes back to the first quarter of the
nineteenth century, writes me: "Your enquiry about Craobh Pīreig put me
in mind of old times. I knew the tree well. It was considered an unlucky
place to be about that tree before the ground round about was brought
into cultivation. I used to be frightened if passing there at night;
fairies, ghosts, and robbers were said to be dwellers in the locality,
but all this is changed now. The railway whistle and the plough have
chased all the bogies away. In my younger days the road passing Craobh
Pīreig was a desolate place, surrounded by trees and bushes of

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

all kinds, but this is now all under cultivation and clear of all
romance. I may say Craobh Pīreig was what I may call a geen (cherry)
tree of good average size, growing at the road side between Beauly and
Inverness, and hardly used by the boys on their way to Kirkhill parish
school, as long as a single Been could be found on it. It was in my
younger days a lonely tree on a lonely muir about five miles from
Beauly. There was no sign of any stone circle about it. The country
people did not like to be in the locality after sunset."

The name of the ancient sacred tree was *Bile*, wrongly translated in
Lord Archibald Campbell's *Records of Argyll* (p. 123). The tradition
there narrated clearly points to a sacred tree, near the well called
Tobar Bhile na Beinne. Any one who drank its water left some equivalent
to the fairy who was supposed to guard it. "Beside it was a very old elm
tree with a hole in the side and a hollow in the middle, and into this
hole was thrown anything given; and in my young days I remember it being
full of all sorts of things—coins, pins, buttons, beads, of which it has
all been emptied long ago. There is also beside it a little unenclosed
graveyard, where none were put but infants who died before being
baptized; and to this day the little graves are seen lying thick and
close in their resting-place."

Another Tobar na Bile is between Torran and Inverliver, by the road side
two miles or so from Ford. Its water had some connection with the
owner's life. For legend tells us that when some Inverliver chieftain
was abroad, that the family

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

jester one day noticed the water beginning to sink and by-and-by
disappearing. But one happy morning he found the well again full of
water, and ran to the house crying out that his master was in Scotland,
which afterwards proved to be the case. In the cemetery near hand there
'fell from the sky' a bone that cured madness, Barbreck's bone, now in
the Antiquarian Museum, Edinburgh.

Manx *billey-glas*, 'a growing or green tree,' occurs in the Manx Bible
(Jer. xi. 16). In Scotland it is met with at Benderloch in *Tobar bhile
nam miann*, 'the well of the wishing tree.' There were formerly some
stones near the place, as if a little graveyard had been there at one
time (cf. *The Oban Times*, 4th and 18th March, 1907). I believe it is
the word in *Balavil*, near Kingussie; there is an exceedingly old elm
tree at the house, and also a well quite near it. The sacred
associations are there absent, but they are met with in *Cladh Bhile*,
Kintyre.

There is an ancient burying ground termed *Cladh Bhile*, near Ellary,
Loch Caolisport, Knapdale, "situated about mid-way down the western side
of Loch Caolisport, at the height of over 200 ft. above the sea-level,
and nearly in the centre of the steep hill slopes immediately abutting
upon this portion of the loch, between Eilean-na-Bruachain at Ellary,
and Rudha-an-Tubhaidh." <span id="fr_223"></span>[1](#fn_222) There is
an absence of recumbent stones, everything upon the ground that can in
any way be ranked as memorials of the dead being exclusively
pillar-stones, intended

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

not to be flat but to be set upright upon the grave. The burying ground
is of ancient date. Here we meet with the old Gaelic word *Bile*, 'a
tree.' "The word was generally applied," says Joyce, "to a large tree
which, for any reason, was held in veneration by the people; for
instance, one under which their chiefs used to be inaugurated, or
periodical games celebrated. Trees of this kind were regarded with
intense reverence and affection; one of the greatest triumphs that a
tribe could achieve over their enemies, was to cut down their
inauguration tree, and no outrage was more keenly resented, or, when
possible, visited with sharper retribution. . . . These trees were
pretty common in past times; some of them remain to this day, and are
often called *Bell* trees, or *Bellow* trees, an echo of the old word
*bile*. In most cases, however, they have long since disappeared, but
their names remain on many places to attest their former
existence." <span id="fr_224"></span>[1](#fn_223) Magh-Bile, modernised
Movile, is 'the plain of the \[sacred\] tree,' where St. Finian founded
his monastery in Co. Down, in the sixth century; *Domnach-Bile*, on the
banks of Loch Foyle, where was a monastery said to have been founded by
Patrick (Archdall's *Monasticon Hib*. p. 103); *Bile-Chuais*, now
Ballyhoos, Clonfert, Galway; *Clochán-Bile-teine*, now Cloghaunnatinny,
Kilmurry, Clare, is interpreted by Joyce, 'the stepping stones of the
fire-tree,' from a large tree which grew near the crossing, under which
May fires used to be lighted; *Bile-teineadh*, 'the old tree of the
fire,' identified by O’Donovan as near Moynalty, in Meath, and now

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

called *Coill-a’-bhile*, the wood of the bile or old tree, anglicised
Billywood; *alt-a’-bile*, now Altavilla, in Limerick and Queen's County;
*Rinn-bhile*, now Ringville; *Tobar-Bile*, 'the well of the ancient
tree,' "some wells taking their names from the picturesque old trees
that overshadowed them, and which are preserved by the people with great
veneration," as at Tobervilly, Antrim, and at Tobervilla, Westmeath;
Garran-a’-bhile, Garnavilla, Tipperary; *Rathbile*, now Rathvilly,
Carlow.

Mr. Galloway, in a note, adds that it was under these trees that the Lia
Fāil or Stone of Destiny, pertaining to the tribe, was placed,—to break
it up or carry it away being a necessary complement to the destruction
of the tree. Dr. Stuart suggests that Edward I. may have been actuated
by analogous motives in carrying off the Scottish Stone of Destiny from
Scone. <span id="fr_225"></span>[1](#fn_224)

There was another tree that I know of which was regarded with awe, viz.
an old ash tree (*A’ Chraobh Uinnsinn*), now no longer standing, on the
Eskadale estate in Kiltarlity; a light seen therein from time to time
was looked on as a foreboding of death. As the Norse influence extended
to this district, clearly evident in the name Eskadale, *i.e.*
'Ash-dale,' from the Norse, the ash-tree associations may not be quite
native. Old Icelandic legend tells that at Mödhrufell there stood a
mountain-ash which sprang from the blood of two innocent persons who had
been executed there. Every Christmas eve the tree was to be seen covered
with lights, which the strongest gale could not extinguish.

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

From St. Rodan's tree, called Tylia, there dropped a fluid on which his
monks lived. And, again, one recollects the celebrated tree of
Glastonbury, said to have been sprung from Joseph of Arimathea's staff.
King James I. and his Queen gave large sums for cuttings from this
variety of hawthorn—the *crataegus* *oxyacantha praecox*, a winter
flower.

                       the winter thorn  
Which blossoms at Xmas, mindful of our Lord.

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> In Ireland there
were specially celebrated trees such as the oak of Mugna, the ash of
Usnech, the ash of Tortu, mentioned as having fallen in the days of Aed
Slane. <span id="fr_226"></span>[1](#fn_225)

An unpublished Gadhelic tale, *Cailleach Na Riobaig*, which is the same
story as that of the witch in the *Lady of the Lake*, shows the
tree-soul associated with the element of water. <span
id="fr_227"></span>[2](#fn_226)

"The Bile Tortan stood in Magh Tortan in Meath, near Ardbreacan, and was
blown down in the reign of the sons of Aedh Slaine, about the middle of
the seventh century. This tree was one of the three wonderful trees of
Eirinn, and had stood at the time of the Milesian conquest, more than a
thousand years." <span id="fr_228"></span>[3](#fn_227) "Bile Tortan, Eo
Rossa, Craebh Mughna, Craebh Dathi, Bile Uisnigh were five ancient trees
which sprang up in Erin in the reign of Conaing Begeglach (Anno Mundi
4388). Conaing held a certain assembly at Tara . . . and they

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

saw coming towards them from the west a man of wonderful size, carrying
in his hand a branch of a tree bearing apples, nuts, acorns, and
berries. . . . He told them he had come from the place of the sun's
rising in the east to the place of its going down in the west, to know
why it had stood still for a day, and having obtained the cause of this
irregularity that he was now on his return again to the east. He shook
the produce of this branch on the ground; and these being taken up by
various persons and planted in various localities, produced these
wonderful trees which were all blown down in the seventh century. The
Bile Tortan near Ardbreacan, in the Co. Meath, was ash. The Eo Rossa
near Leith-Ghleann (Leithlin) was a yew tree, and became the property of
St. Molaise of Leith-Ghlenn, from which St. Moling obtained as much of
it as made shingles for his Duirthech or Oratory, at Tech Moling, now
St. Mullin's, on the river Barrow in Co. Carlow, and which was built for
him by . . . Goban Saor. According to an Irish life of St. Moling . . .
the Craebh Mughna was oak, and stood near Bealach Mughna in Magh Ailbhe,
in the southern part of Co. Kildare. The Craebh Dathi was ash, and stood
in the district of Fir Bile (now Ferbil), to which it gave name, in Co.
Westmeath. The Craebh Uisnigh was ash, and stood on the hill of Uisnech,
in Co. Westmeath." <span id="fr_229"></span>[1](#fn_228)

In passing one may query whether the Sanskrit *bilva* in *uru-bilva*,
the wide-spreading Bel- or wood-apple tree, be cognate with G. *bile*.
Indian legend says that at the moment of Buddha's birth his future

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

wife was born, and also the sacred Bo-tree, under which he was destined
to attain Buddhahood,—a form of the Life-tree.

"King Conchobair had three houses, namely, the Craebh Ruaidh, and the
Téte Brec, and the Craebh Derg \[that is, the 'Royal Branch' or Court,
and the Speckled Branch, and the Red Branch\]. In the Red Court were
kept the skulls \[of the enemies\], and their spoils and trophies. In
the Royal Court sat the kings; that is, it was Ruadh \[or royal\]
because of the kings. <span id="fr_230"></span>[1](#fn_229) In the
Speckled Court were kept the spears and the shields and the swords; that
is, it was speckled from the hilts of golden-hilted swords, and from the
glistening of the green spears, with their rings or collars and their
bands of gold and silver; and the scales and borders of the shields,
composed of gold and of silver; and from the lustre of the vessels and
\[drinking\] horns, and the flagons." Now *Ruad ro-fhessa*, which has
been rendered 'Lord of great knowledge,' is another name for the Dagdha
in Cormac's *Glossary*, so that the suggestion strikes one that here we
have to do with a tree sacred to the Dagdha, or to some one of the name
Ruad. Are we to think of a blood or life-tree, much as in Scotland a
tree is associated with the 'luck' of the Hays of Errol, and as one
wishes 'freshness to the hawthorn tree of Cawdor,' now about five
hundred years old? O’Clery has *ruad .i. trén*, 'strong,' which may be
but a secondary sense. For meaning one might compare the Sanskrit
*raudh*,

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 'blood'; but
consider Church Slavonic *rodu*, 'birth,' and the Russian *rod*, 'clan.'
A satisfactory solution would be found in the life of the king being
united to the life of the tree, an incarnation of the Dagda or
Oll-athair. Certain it is that a sacred tree figures in Irish legend,
*e.g*. 'the apple tree of Emain.' When Bran, the son of Febal, awoke
from his entranced sleep, he saw beside him a branch of silver with
white blossoms; thereafter the woman in strange raiment sang and
said: <span id="fr_231"></span>[1](#fn_230)

A branch of the apple-tree from Emain  
I bring, like those one knows;  
Twigs of white silver are on it,  
Crystal brows with blossoms  
      .       .       .       .       .  
An ancient tree (*bile*) there is with blossoms  
On which birds call to the Hours.

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The passage occurs
in a context which undoubtedly describes a vision of the Happy Land.
Again, in the Sickbed of Cuchulainn, <span
id="fr_232"></span>[2](#fn_231) three trees of bright purple (*tri bile
do chorcoir glain*) are described as a feature in the Other-World
landscape.

Near that house to the westward  
   Where sunlight sinks down,  
Stand grey steeds with manes dappled  
  And steeds purple-brown.

On its east side are standing  
  Three bright purple trees,  
Whence the birds' songs oft ringing  
  The king's children please.

From a tree in the fore-court <span id="page_193">p. 193</span>  
  Sweet harmony streams,  
It stands silver yet sunlit  
  With gold's glitter gleams.

The silver bough <span id="fr_233"></span>[1](#fn_232) is a feature of
Gadhelic legend, as the golden bough is of Italic. Just as Jupiter was
originally worshipped in the form of a lofty oak tree which grew on the
Capitol, and as Dodona was the haunt of deity among the Greeks, so the
Celts, as Maxim of Tyre tells us, worshipped Zeus under the image of an
oak. Only rare fragments survive now to remind us of the god-tree, as
when on the first of May the pilgrim to St. Mary Well, near Culloden,
has not fulfilled his duty until he has bound some rag on the adjoining
tree, even if he has no coin to put into the holy well. To leave
something on the tree or bush near by the well was an essential; this
bound one's offering to the habitation of the deity of the spring; it
took the tree-spirit to witness. And in my own recollection, when a
death occurred among the cattle in spring, the *earchall* or misfortune
was put away by conveying, in secrecy and in silence, the hooves of the
animal and other portions preferably across a water-boundary to a
neighbouring estate or to a wood, where they were buried under the roots
of some great tree not likely to be soon moved.

In the Tristran saga the tree whispers the secret told it, viz. that
King Mark had horse's ears,—another instance of the tree-soul; and some
reflex of the tree-spirit survives in the branch of laurel

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

given to a bride at Carnac, in Brittany, with which one may compare the
decorated pine-bough brought to the house of a bride in parts of Russia.
The tree is a thing of life; the wind in the leaves, from the mystic
whisper to the roaring blast, seems to come from some mind or spirit.
The Australians took these for the voices of the spirits communing with
one another, and some of their tribes held that it was through
understanding these voices that their medicine-men got supernatural
knowledge by communicating with the world of spirits. <span
id="fr_234"></span>[1](#fn_233) Similarly, the Greeks spoke of the
oracular oak of Zeus and the Semites of a tree of knowledge. And sundry
Persian families traced their descent from a tree. Primitive man, it has
been said, was arboreal. A hollow tree was his home, its branches his
place of refuge, its fruit his sustenance. Naturally, the tree became
associated with his earliest religious thoughts. It represented his
protecting deity. He would not willingly injure it. When the Mandans cut
a pole for their tents, they swathe it in bandages so that its pain may
be allayed. The Hidatsas would not cut down a large cotton-wood tree
because it guarded their tribe. The Algonquins decked an old oak with
offerings suspended to its branches, for the same reason. Trees, from
their dripping foliage, and because their shade was associated with the
grey of a cloudy day, were believed to make the rains, and thus to
refresh the fields and to fertilise the seeds of the vegetable world.
The step was easily taken to extend this to all germs, animal as

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

well as vegetable. Thus the tree came to symbolise the source of
life. <span id="fr_235"></span>[1](#fn_234)

Tacitus describes the Germans as building no temples, but worshipping
their mysterious divinity, *secretum* *illud*, in the gloom of the
forest.

Not otherwise would it have been with the Celts. The same root as in
τέμενος, 'a sacred precinct,' seems to occur in the word *Temair*, of
which there are many instances in Ireland, *e.g*. Temhair Luachra, a
celebrated royal residence in Munster, and others cited by Hennessy in a
footnote to his edition of the *Mesca Ulad*. Temair Erand was the burial
place of the Clanna Dedad, who occupied a great part of Cork and Kerry.
Most readers have heard of the Temair in Meath, the celebrated Tara of
the Kings. The word is thus explained:

"*Temair*, then, every place from which there is a remarkable prospect,
both in plain and house," *temair na tuaithe*, the *temair* of the
country, *i.e.* 'a hill,' *temair in tige*, the *temair* of a house,
*i.e.* 'an upper room.' It is still the name of several conspicuous
hills in Ireland; it is defined in the *Dinnsenchas*: "omnis locus
conspicuus et eminens sive in campo sive in domu, sive in quocumque loco
sit, hoc vocabulo quod dicitur Temair nominari potest." <span
id="fr_236"></span>[2](#fn_235) Dr. Joyce observes that every Temhair in
Ireland is conspicuously situated; the great Tara in Meath is a most
characteristic example. It is the genitive form, *teamhrach*, that is
the origin of the name Tara. The other names given to the great Tara by
the *Firbolg*, viz. *Druim-Caein* \[Drumkeen\],

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

'beautiful ridge,' and also *Liathdruim* (Leitrim), may point to a time
when it was not used for temple purposes, or may at least indicate that
the chosen temple sites were places that invariably commanded a good
view. The instinct which led the Christian priests and monks to select
beautiful sites for their churches, we may pre-suppose as active in
those who chose the positions of the pre-Christian temples. Yet the idea
at the root was not 'good view'—a secondary though accompanying
thought—but a precinct, a sacred enclosure cut off, perhaps for purposes
of royal burial at first, as is allowable to infer from *Senchus nan
Relec*.

I will conclude by mentioning the legend Keating narrates of Labhraidh
Loingseach, who had ears like those of a horse. He had his hair cropped
yearly, and thereafter killed whosoever chanced to cut it. It was
necessary to cast lots to determine who should perform this office. On
one occasion the lot fell on a widow's son, and the king granted him
life if he promised to keep the secret till his death. But having
cropped the king, the youth was obliged to lie on a bed of sickness, and
no medicine availed him. A druid found that the cause was the burden of
a secret, and that he would not be well till he revealed his secret to
something; and he directed him, since he was bound not to tell his
secret to a person, to go to where four roads met, and to turn to his
right and to address the first tree he met, and to tell his secret to
it. He did so, and the pain left him. It was a willow tree; and it
chanced soon after that Craiftine's harp got broken, and he went to seek
the material for a harp. He

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

came upon this very willow, and when the harp was made of it, as often
as it was played its burden of song was: 'Two horse's ears on Labhraidh
Lorc.' The king then repented of having put so many people to death,
showed his ears ever afterwards openly. It is clearly an instance of the
tree-soul. <span id="fr_237"></span>[1](#fn_236)

I may add that parallels to the idea of the tree-soul are abundant. In
the Malay Peninsula the name of every child is taken "from some tree
which stands near the prospective birth-place of the child; as soon as
the child is born, this name is shouted aloud by the wise woman in
attendance, who then hands over the child to another woman, and buries
the after-birth underneath the birth-tree or name-tree of the child; as
soon as this has been done, the father cuts a series of notches in the
tree, starting from the ground and terminating at the height of the
breast." <span id="fr_238"></span>[2](#fn_237)

This tree, or any of its species, the child must not in after life
injure or eat the fruit of. This points to an early theory of
conception, from which Dr. Frazer would explain Totemism. For human
souls grow upon a soul-tree in the Other World: the birds which fetch
them from thence are killed and eaten by the expectant mother. The
consistency of this belief is seen in the fancy that if the mother does
not eat the soul-bird during her lying-in, the child will be still-born
or die shortly after being born. Such ideas should be remembered

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

when one reads of the flock of birds into which Dechtere and her maidens
are transformed in the Cuchulainn Saga. <span
id="fr_239"></span>[1](#fn_238)

In Greece, where Zeus and Dionysos are conceived as dwelling in
trees—ἔνδενδροι—the transition was made from the tree to the tree-column
or pillar as the depository of divine life, and rites of invocation took
place at the shrines. In Gaul inscriptions <span
id="fr_240"></span>[2](#fn_239) such as **SEX ARBORIBUS ET FATIS
DERVONIBUS**, dedicated to the genii of the oaks, point to tree worship:
**DEA ABNOBA** and **DEA ARDVINNA**, the Black Forest and the Ardennes
respectively, confirm this, and are parallel to the *nigra dea*, 'black
goddess,' which Adamnan gave as a rendering for Lōchy, the river and
loch of the name in Lochaber.

(*o*) *The Soul in Stones* or *the God-stone*.—Stones were formerly
believed to have a soul, and certain large ones not readily moved were
held to be in intimate connection with spirits. In the Highlands it is
regarded as a source of danger to make use of pillared stones (clachan
carraghan) in building human or other dwellings. Ill-luck or death
follows any one

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

who meddles with such 'druidical' stones as are found in the numerous
stone circles in Inverness-shire. After ceremonies for averting the evil
eye' (G. *cronachduinn*, Gr. ἀποτροπή), what remains of the water
ritually used is poured over a block of stone that is either immovable
or not likely to be interfered with; when cracks make their appearance
in such stones the explanation given is that envy will split the rocks
(*sgoiltidh farmad a chlach*). When one is narrating some untoward
disaster, or even making mention thereof, a Highland woman of the old
school will add under her breath, 'telling it to the stones' (*ga
innseadh dha na clachan*), and proceed with her narrative with much
dignity and solemnity. The use of this phrase is supposed to avert any
harm arising either to the speaker or the listener.

For Ireland I find that Keating <span id="fr_241"></span>[1](#fn_240)
mentions the striking of the head against a stone as a ceremony boding
success. Stones such as the Līa Fāil, known as 'the stone of destiny,'
possibly 'the stone of light' if Welsh *gwawl* be cognate, would know
their rightful owner. This involves animistic belief, which would
explain the late form of the tradition in Keating <span
id="fr_242"></span>[2](#fn_241) that on the Līa Fāil 'were enchantments,
for it used to roar under the person who had the best right to obtain
the sovereignty of Ireland.' Among the four jewels of the Tuatha De
Danann a certain poem <span id="fr_243"></span>[3](#fn_242) mentions the
Līa Fāil, 'which used to roar under a king of Ireland.' The stone is
said to

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

have come from the island of Foal to abide for ever in the land of
Tailtiu.

In Scottish records it is mentioned in 1249 at the coronation of
Alexander III. at Scone; in 1296 it was carried off by Edward I. and
placed in the chair of the celebrant priest in St. Edward's Chapel in
Westminster Abbey. It is a stone of magic in origin, and the prophecies
associated with it were thought to have been in part at least fulfilled
when James VI. of Scotland acceded to the English Crown. Stones were
often ascribed prophetical and healing virtues among the Celts. It was
owing to the crystal stone which the Brahan Seer possessed that he had
the gift of prophecy: such was also the case with his Irish parallel,
Red Brian O’Cearbhan, who owned a precious jewel (*āilleagan*). Magic
stones were associated with healing and were known to be in the
possession of wizards: dipped in water they were held potent to avert
the evil eye, to my own knowledge. In a book which appeared a few years
ago by the late Rev. Mr. Macdonald, for long a clergyman in West
Ross-shire, he writes: "The stitch-stone was a charm supposed to give
relief in cases of severe pain from sciatica up to acute pleurisy. It
was common property, and always kept by the person who used it last till
required by another. The last specimen of which I heard about 30 years
ago was in Erradale, parish of Gairloch. Mr. Matheson, F.C. minister,
got hold of it and took it to the pulpit one day. At the close of the
service he held it up before the congregation, remarking that the god of
Erradale was the smallest god of which he had ever heard or read. It was
a small piece of

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

flint stone, 3 or 4 in. long, found on the shore and highly polished by
the action of the waves. . . . Mr. Matheson broke it in their presence,
and yet no dire results followed." <span id="fr_244"></span>[1](#fn_243)

Pennant mentions the belief as current in the Highlands of the
eighteenth century. He writes:

"*Elf-shots*, *i.e.* the stone arrow-heads of the old inhabitants of
this island, are supposed to be weapons shot by Fairies at cattle, to
which are attributed any disorders they have: in order to effect a cure,
the cow is to be touched by an elf-shot, or made to drink the water in
which one has been- dipped. The same virtue is said to be found in the
crystal gems, and in the adder-stone, our *Glein Naidr*; and it is also
believed that good fortune must attend the owner; so, for that reason,
the first is called Clach bhuaidh, or the powerful stone (recte, stone
of virtues). Captain Archibald Campbell showed me one, a spheroid set in
silver, which people came for the use of above a hundred miles, and
brought the water it was to be dipt in with them; for without that, in
human cases, it was believed to have no effect.

"These have been supposed to be *magical* stones or gems used by the
Druids to be inspected by a chaste boy, who was to see in them an
apparition informing him of future events. This imposture, as we are
told by Dr. Woodward, was revived in the last century by the famous Dr.
Dee, who called it

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

his *shew stone* or holy stone, and pretended, by its means, to foretell
events. I find in Montfaucon that it was customary in early times to
deposit balls of this kind in urns or sepulchres; thus twenty were found
at Rome in an alabastrine urn, and one was discovered in 1653, in the
tomb of Childeric at Tournai; he was king of France, and died A.D. 480."

Further illustration of stones in ritual I will give later on. Suffice
it to add that such magic use presupposes that the stone was believed to
have a soul. It is an idea not confined to uncivilised man. Bertholet
remarks that in ancient Athens, with its famous culture, if a man was
killed by a falling stone, a special court was held to pass sentence
upon the offending object, which was condemned and transported beyond
the frontier!

All over the Celtic area the stone-cult is met with. In parts of France
newly-born children are placed on or passed over certain stones in the
vicinity of or in certain churches. I need only refer to the innumerable
instances given by M. Salomon Reinach <span
id="fr_245"></span>[1](#fn_244) of the respect and awe inspired still by
menhirs, dolmens and other sacred stones from which we may form some
idea of the reverence in which they were held of old in Gaul. In parts
of Brittany it is believed that certain stones go once a year, or once
in every century, to be laved in the sea or in a river, and speedily
return. Sacred stones when removed are held to come back of themselves
in the night. The number of stones in the dolmen at Essé are held to
change continually, to have the gift of going and coming like the Roman
Penates which,

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

according to Varro, were transported from Lavinium to Alba, but returned
of their own accord to their ancient domicile. When sacred stones are
credited with soul, *i.e.* with life and motion, they may be inferred to
possess the gift of going and coming,—or as it is put regarding the
stones of Callernish, Lewis, they cannot be counted, for they are never
the same.

'Telling it to the stones' then is a phrase implying that certain sacred
stones have souls. Elsewhere a stone may represent the image of earth as
the common Great Mother: such, by the testimony of Arnobius, <span
id="fr_246"></span>[1](#fn_245) was the image brought from Phrygia to
Rome, merely a small black stone rough and unhewn. Some races (the
Mexicans, the Indians of Colomba) think that all men were once stones;
in Guatamela they placed polished stones in the mouth of the dying to
supply a permanent abode for the soul; in New South Wales the blacks
gave each novitiate at manhood ceremonials a white stone or quartz
crystal <span id="fr_247"></span>[2](#fn_246) as an accompaniment to his
new name, the women being forbidden to look at it on pain of death
(Angas's *Savage Life*, ii. 21). In many quarters of the globe the
decrees of fate are held to be revealed to the seer gazing into his
crystal; higher races have in their past had their stone of Bethel and
holy Kaaba. Tomb-stones erected for the dead chief gave further impetus
to belief in the god-stone; decked with flowers and garlands, to the
accompaniment of invocations and of dancing, the way was paved for the
ceremonial cult of the idol (G. *arracht*),

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

which among the Irish Celts we meet with on the Plain of Adoration (*Mag
Slecht*) around Crom Cruach, to whom they used to offer the firstlings
of every issue, and the chief scions of every clan. The name Crom may be
cognate with the Teutonic *hrúm*, 'soot,' and if so Crom Cruach may mean
'the black one of the pile (heap or stack).' As the central idol was
surrounded by twelve smaller ones in a circle, I take it that Crom
himself was on an elevated heap in the centre. I shall return to him in
treating of sacrifice, premising here that the modern name is *Crom
Dubh*, *i.e.* Black Crom, and that the epithet 'black' (*dubh*) was only
added by the moderns to make the archaic name *Crom*, which I infer to
have signified 'black,' intelligible to a later age. Crom in folk
tradition is said to have been accompanied by a *leannan-sídhe* or fairy
sweetheart, who imparted him of her wiles as he required. He was as
fleet as the wind and as nimble as the March hare, and he is depicted
along with his two sons and their two mastiffs as careering the country
to levy tribute; Crom came in the rear as a sort of chariot into which
he stowed away the levies. So far he reminds one of the Wild Huntsman of
Odin. But in Irish folklore the god-idol Crom Cruach or Crom Dubh has
been humanised. In Mayo story he appears as a ruler, who had his own
will in everything: "and that was the bad will, for he was an evil
disposed man, venemous, fierce and morose." He is credited with two
sons, Téideach and Clonnach, the former a folk-invention from a place
named Poll a’ t-Séididh, 'the blowing hole,' the latter from *clonn*, 'a
pillar, a chimney piece' (as it is given in O’Reilly). Crom,

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

it is said, levied tribute on his people according to their means: any
one who refused was brought into his presence as he sat at the fireside
to pass judgement, and thereafter the recusant was cast into the
fire. <span id="fr_248"></span>[1](#fn_247) This seems a reminiscence of
the sacrifices and holocausts offered formerly to the god-idol. At his
death, says legend, he was devoured by gnats and worms, and multitudes
of people congregated in honour of St. Patrick's achievement over Crom,
and were baptised at a well near hand, at Kilcummin, at the western end
of Killala Bay (Benwee), where on Garland Sunday the anniversary is
still kept up. The name not long ago survived in Lochaber, and is met
with in the lines

Di-Domhnaich Slat-Pailm ’s ann ris tha mo stoirm,  
Di-Domhnaich Crom-Dubh, plaoisgidh mi’n t-ubh,

which Nicolson <span id="fr_249"></span>[2](#fn_248) renders: 'On Palm
Sunday is my stir; on crooked black Sunday I'll peel the egg.' He writes
the word with the *u* vowel, Crum-dubh, "apparently for 'Crom-dubh,' and
is known in Ireland as the title of the first Sunday of August, but in
Lochaber it is applied to Easter." The *u*-form is due to the genitive
*Cruim-duibh*. But there is no authority for taking the word to be the
same as G. *crom*, 'crooked, bent.' From the account we get in the
*Tripartite Life of St. Patrick* it was to all appearance a stone-idol,
and falls thus to be included under the god-soul in stone, as to
conception. As to the rites more anon. It would not do to destroy the
old worship-stones (*clachan aoraidh*), said a

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Perthshire man to
the Rev. Mr. Mackenzie, Kenmore. There had been one near his own door
which was very much in the way, but he had with great labour dug a hole
into which he had let it drop and covered it up, for it would never do
to incur the anger of the spiritual beings by breaking it up. This was
more than 30 years ago. <span id="fr_250"></span>[1](#fn_249)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_196"></span>[167:1](sbc07.htm#fr_197) v. a chapter in my
*Memoirs of a Highland Gentleman*, E. MacIver of Scourie.

<span id="fn_197"></span>[168:1](sbc07.htm#fr_198) Cf. Irish phrase: *ní
bhéidh fios an rúin ag an fhár-doras*, implying that a secret is well
kept when even the lintel stone of the doorway is. unaware of it.

<span id="fn_198"></span>[168:2](sbc07.htm#fr_199) Ralston, *Songs of
the Russian People*, p. 370.

<span id="fn_199"></span>[169:1](sbc07.htm#fr_200) Reinach, Cultes.

<span id="fn_200"></span>[169:2](sbc07.htm#fr_201) Cf. Harrison, p. 325.

For Hebraic belief, *v*. *Exod*. 7:9-12; *Numb*. 21:9; 2 *Ki*. 18:4,
etc.

<span id="fn_201"></span>[170:1](sbc07.htm#fr_202) Macdonald's 'East
Central African Customs' in *Journ. Anth. Inst*. 22, p. 114.

<span id="fn_202"></span>[170:2](sbc07.htm#fr_203) Todd's *Irish Version
of Nennius*, p. 204.

<span id="fn_203"></span>[171:1](sbc07.htm#fr_204) *Cóir Anmann*, ed.
Stokes, p. 399. For further references to the man-wolf compare *Eriu*,
iv. p. 11.

<span id="fn_204"></span>[172:1](sbc07.htm#fr_205) S. Reinach's
*Orpheus*, 5th French ed., Paris (Alcide Picard), 1909, p. 172.

<span id="fn_205"></span>[172:2](sbc07.htm#fr_206) *v*. references in
Gomme, *ib*. p. 277. He also gives Geraldus Cambrensis *re* St. Natalis.

<span id="fn_206"></span>[172:3](sbc07.htm#fr_207) Cf. Crimthann,
'wolf,' a name of Columba.

<span id="fn_207"></span>[174:1](sbc07.htm#fr_208) Moore, *Folk-Lore of
the Isle of Man*, p. 62, where the account in Waldron is quoted. If dog
names be non-Celtic, even then a parallel is got on non-Aryan ground in
the Sacred Dog of China, the Pekeingese. The aunt of the reigning
Chinese Emperor in 1860-61 committed suicide on being unable to keep her
canine pets out of reach of the foreigner.

<span id="fn_208"></span>[177:1](sbc07.htm#fr_209) Shaw's *Province of
Moray*, ed. 1775, pp. 306-307.

<span id="fn_209"></span>[177:2](sbc07.htm#fr_210) Ralston's *Songs of
Russian People*, p. 120.

<span id="fn_210"></span>[178:1](sbc07.htm#fr_211) Moore, *Folklore of
the Isle of Man*, pp. 54, 57.

<span id="fn_211"></span>[180:1](sbc07.htm#fr_212) Letter from Rev. Dr.
K. A. Mackenzie, minister of Kingussie, dated 5th July, 1900. His father
was minister of Lochcarron after Mr. Lachlan Mackenzie's death.

<span id="fn_212"></span>[180:2](sbc07.htm#fr_213) Trevelyan, 103.

<span id="fn_213"></span>[181:1](sbc07.htm#fr_214) See the writer's
rendering of the Lay in the *Celtic Dragon Myth*, pp. 20-22 (Edinburgh:
J. Grant). For another tale wherein the quicken tree figures, see
Joyce's *Old Gaelic Romances*.

<span id="fn_214"></span>[181:2](sbc07.htm#fr_215) Uhland's
*Volkslieder*, 241.

<span id="fn_215"></span>[182:1](sbc07.htm#fr_216) *Deirdire and the Lay
of the Children of Uisne*, ed. A. Carmichael, p.111.

<span id="fn_216"></span>[182:2](sbc07.htm#fr_217) *Aeneid*, iii. 27-34.

<span id="fn_217"></span>[182:3](sbc07.htm#fr_218) *Metamorph*. viii.
741.

<span id="fn_218"></span>[183:1](sbc07.htm#fr_219) *Idyll*, Xviii. 48.

<span id="fn_219"></span>[183:2](sbc07.htm#fr_220) For a curious custom
of telling the trees of certain things in Cornwall, see Couch, *History
of Polperro*, p. 168.

<span id="fn_220"></span>[184:1](sbc07.htm#fr_221) A celebrated one was
Tāsg Sheumais Mhóir. The shepherd and the farmer and the miller heard
it. All agreed it was Tāsg Sheumais Mhóir. And they were right (they
thought).

<span id="fn_221"></span>[184:2](sbc07.htm#fr_222) Cha chreid mi gur h-e
beathach ceart th’ann; aig an drochaid thug e sgal chruaidh thug fuaim
air na creagan aig Meile-fitheach. Cha'n urrainn tāsg dhol seachad air
uisg gun sgrìamhail. Theid an tāsg a réir pearsa an duine: sgread
chruaidh bhiorach: bheireadh e air a h-uile gaoistean fuilt umad seasamh
air a cheann = I do not believe that it was a right (*i.e.* natural)
creature: at the bridge it gave a harsh yell that resounded among the
rocks of Meile-fitheach. A ghost cannot go across water without
screeching. The ghost bears a proportion to the human personality; a
hard piercing yell (in this instance, of Big James's ghost); it would
make every hair on thee stand on end.

<span id="fn_222"></span>[186:1](sbc07.htm#fr_223) *Proceed. Soc. Antiq.
Scotland*, vol. xii., year 1876-1877, by Mr. William Galloway,
architect.

<span id="fn_223"></span>[187:1](sbc07.htm#fr_224) Joyce's Irish Names
of Places.

<span id="fn_224"></span>[188:1](sbc07.htm#fr_225) *Proceed. Soc. Antiq.
Scot*. viii. 104

<span id="fn_225"></span>[189:1](sbc07.htm#fr_226) Cf. poem on three
celebrated trees of Ireland in *Celtische Zeitschrift*, v. 21.

<span id="fn_226"></span>[189:2](sbc07.htm#fr_227) Campbell of Islay,
*MS. Collection*, Advocates' Library, vol. x., last tale.

<span id="fn_227"></span>[189:3](sbc07.htm#fr_228) *Leabhar na g-Ceart*,
151<sup>n</sup>, and *v*. *Battle of Magh Leana and Tochmarc Momera*,
ed. O’Curry, p. 67<sup>n</sup>.

<span id="fn_228"></span>[190:1](sbc07.htm#fr_229) O’Curry's *Magh
Leana*, 95<sup>n</sup>, after MS. H. 2, 16 (Roy. Ir. Acad.).

<span id="fn_229"></span>[191:1](sbc07.htm#fr_230) Issin Chroeb-ruaid,
imorro, no bitis narríg, edhon ba ruad do na rigaib. See O’Curry's
trans., *Manners and Customs*, ii. p. 332, from *Bk. of Leinster* = H.
2, 16, fol. 69 b.b.

<span id="fn_230"></span>[192:1](sbc07.htm#fr_231) *Voyage of Bran*, ed.
Meyer, pp. 4 and 6.

<span id="fn_231"></span>[192:2](sbc07.htm#fr_232) *S.C.* § 33 and
Leahy's translation.

<span id="fn_232"></span>[193:1](sbc07.htm#fr_233) Cf. E. Hull, 'The
Silver Bough', in *Folk-Lore*.

<span id="fn_233"></span>[194:1](sbc07.htm#fr_234) Curr, *The Australian
Race*, ii. 199; and Palmer in *Journ. Anthr. Inst*. xiii. 292.

<span id="fn_234"></span>[195:1](sbc07.htm#fr_235) Brinton's *Religion
of Primitive Peoples*, p. 150.

<span id="fn_235"></span>[195:2](sbc07.htm#fr_236) Cormac's *Glossary*,
ed. Stokes, p. 155.

<span id="fn_236"></span>[197:1](sbc07.htm#fr_237) Keating's *History of
Ireland*, ed. Irish Texts Society, vol. ii. 173-175.

<span id="fn_237"></span>[197:2](sbc07.htm#fr_238) Skeat and Blagden's
*Pagan Races of Malay Peninsula*, i. 13.

<span id="fn_238"></span>[198:1](sbc07.htm#fr_239) Such concepts fit in
with the matriarchal stage of society. Mr. Gomme remarks: "The soul-bird
belief and the tree-naming custom are different phases of one conception
of social life, a conception definitely excluding recognition of
blood-kinship, and derived from the conscious adoption of an experience
which has not reached the stage of blood-kinship, but which includes a
close association with natural objects" (*Folk-Lore as an Historical
Science*, p. 248). Thus among the Arunta tribe in Australia the child is
thought to be the reincarnation of one of the spirits which haunted the
spot or totem-centre where the mother first felt herself quickened.
There is sympathetic association with the object or external soul.
Totemism is really no product of any conceptual theory, as Dr. Frazer
argues for; it falls under the wider category of Manism.

<span id="fn_239"></span>[198:2](sbc07.htm#fr_240) H. Gaidoz, *Esquisse
de la Religion des Gaulois*, p. 12.

<span id="fn_240"></span>[199:1](sbc07.htm#fr_241) Bk. ii. 53 (ed.
Dinneen).

<span id="fn_241"></span>[199:2](sbc07.htm#fr_242) *Ib*. i. 101.

<span id="fn_242"></span>[199:3](sbc07.htm#fr_243) *Ib*. 209; cf.
O’Grady's *Silva Gadelica*, ii. 264; Meyer and Nutt's *Bran*, i. 187,
and the tale of 'Baile an Scāil' in the same work.

<span id="fn_243"></span>[201:1](sbc07.htm#fr_244) Rev. K. Macdonald of
Applecross, *Social and Religious Life in the Highlands*, p. 34
(Edinburgh, 1902). Mr. Lang (*Hist. of Scotland*, ii. 560) speaks of a
seat with a stone in it as still existing in Glasgow, and of a black
capping-stone at St. Andrews, and asks: Is this a relic of fetichism?'

<span id="fn_244"></span>[202:1](sbc07.htm#fr_245) *Cultes*, iii.
365-433.

<span id="fn_245"></span>[203:1](sbc07.htm#fr_246) *Contra Gentes*, vii.
49.

<span id="fn_246"></span>[203:2](sbc07.htm#fr_247) For association of a
white stone with a new name, cf. *Rev*. 2:17.

<span id="fn_247"></span>[205:1](sbc07.htm#fr_248) *Lúb na Caillighe*
(ed. Lloyd), Connradh na Gaedhilge, 1910, p. 34.

<span id="fn_248"></span>[205:2](sbc07.htm#fr_249) *Proverbs*, p. 167.

<span id="fn_249"></span>[206:1](sbc07.htm#fr_250) *Proc. Soc. Antiq.
Scot*. for 1900.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III. The Earthly Journey](sbc08)
