[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wgp01)  [Next](wgp03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Middle Ages and Renaissance

This brings us to the close of the fourteenth century, and shows us how
long the outward worship of the generative powers, represented by their
organs, continued to exist in Western Europe to such a point as to
engage the attention of ecclesiastical synods. During the previous
century facts occurred in our own island illustrating still more
curiously the continuous existence of the worship of Priapus, and that
under circumstances which remind us altogether of the details of the
phallic worship under the Romans. It will be remembered that one great
object of this worship was to obtain fertility either in animals or in
the ground, for Priapus was the god of the horticulturist and the
agriculturist. St. Augustine, declaiming against the open obscenities of
the Roman festival of the Liberalia, informs us that an enormous phallus
was carried in a magnificent chariot into the middle of the public place
of the town with great ceremony, where the most respectable matron
advanced

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

and placed a garland of flowers "on this obscene figure;" and this, he
says: was done to appease the god, and "to obtain an abundant harvest,
and remove enchantments from the land." <span
id="fr_19"></span>[20](#fn_19) We learn from the Chronicle of Lanercost
that, in the year 1268, a pestilence prevailed in the Scottish district
of Lothian, which was very fatal to the cattle, to counteract which some
of the clergy--*bestiales, habitu claustrales, non animo*--taught the
peasantry to make a fire by the rubbing together of wood (this was the
need-fire), and to raise up the image of Priapus, as a means of saving
their cattle. "When a lay member of the Cistercian order at Fenton had
done this before the door of the hall, and had sprinkled the cattle with
a dog's testicles dipped in holy water, and complaint had been made of
this crime of idolatry against the lord of the manor, the latter pleaded
in his defence that all this was done without his knowledge and in his
absence, but added, 'while until the present month of June other
people's cattle fell ill and died, mine were always found, but now every
day two or three of mine die, so that I have few left for the labours of
the field.'" Fourteen years after this, in 1282, an event of the same
kind occurred at Inverkeithing, in the present county of Fife in
Scotland.

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

\[paragraph continues\] The cause of the following proceedings is not
stated, but it was probably the same as that for which the cistercian of
Lothian had recourse to the worship of Priapus. In the Easter week of
the year just stated (March 29-April 5), a parish priest of
Inverkeithing, named John, performed the rites of Priapus, by collecting
the young girls of the town, and making them dance round the figure of
this god; without any regard for the sex of these worshippers, he
carried a wooden image of the male members of generation before them in
the dance, and himself dancing with them, he accompanied their songs
with movements in accordance, and urged them to licentious actions by
his no less licentious language. The more modest part of those who were
present felt scandalized with the priest, but he treated their words
with contempt, and only gave utterance to coarser obscenities. He was
cited before his bishop, defended himself upon the common usage of the
country, and was allowed to retain his benefice; but he must have been
rather a worldly priest, after the style of the middle ages, for a year
afterwards he was killed in a vulgar brawl.

The practice of placing the figure of a phallus on the walls of
buildings, derived, as we have seen, from the Romans, prevailed also in
the middle ages, and the buildings especially placed under the influence
of this symbol were churches. It was believed to be

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

 

<span id="img_pl05"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/pl05.jpg)  
PLATE V  
SHELAH-NA-GIG MONUMENTS

 

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

a protection against enchantments of all kinds, of which the people of
those times lived in constant terror, and this protection extended over
the place and over those who frequented it, provided they cast a
confiding look upon the image. Such images were seen, usually upon the
portals, on the cathedral church of Toulouse, on more than one church in
Bourdeaux, and on various other churches in France, but, at the time of
the revolution, they were often destroyed as marks only of the depravity
of the clergy. Dulaure tells us that an artist, whom he knew, but whose
name he has not given, had made drawings of a number of these figures
which he had met with in such situations. A Christian saint exercised
some of the qualities thus deputed to Priapus; the image of St. Nicholas
was usually painted in a conspicuous position in the church, for it was
believed that whoever had looked upon it was protected against
enchantments, and especially against that great object of popular
terror, the evil eye, during the rest of the day.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_19"></span>[31:20](wgp02.htm#fr_19) S. Augustini *De Civit.
Dei*, lib. vii, c. 21.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Shelah-na-Gigs](wgp03)
