[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wgp06)  [Next](wgp08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Sexual Demons

There were personages connected with the worship of Priapus who appear
to have been common to the Romans under and before the empire, and to
the foreign races who settled upon its ruins. The Teutonic race believed
in a spiritual being who inhabited the woods, and who was called in old
German *scrat*. His character was more general than that of a mere
habitant of the woods, for it answered to the English hobgoblin, or to
the Irish cluricaune. The scrat was the spirit of the woods, under which
character he was sometimes called a *waltscrat*, and of the fields, and
also of the household, the domestic spirit, the ghost haunting the
house. His image was probably looked upon as an amulet, a protection to
the house,

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

 

<span id="img_pl11"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/pl11.jpg)  
PLATE XI  
LEADEN ORNAMENTS FROM THE SEINE

 

as an old German vocabulary of the year 1482, explains *schrætlin*,
little scrats, by the Latin word *penates*. The lascivious character of
this spirit, if it wanted more direct evidence, is implied by the fact
that *fcritta*, in Anglo-Saxon, and *scrat*, in old English, meant a
hermaphrodite. Accordingly, the mediæval vocabularies explain *scrat* by
Latin equivalents, which all indicate companions or emanations of
Priapus, and in fact, Priapus himself. Isidore gives the name of
*Pilosi*, or hairy men, and tells us that they were called in Greek,
Panitæ (apparently an error for Ephialtæ), and in Latin, Incubi and
Inibi, the latter word derived from the verb *inire*, and applied to
them on account of their intercourse with animals. They were in fact the
fauns and satyrs of antiquity, haunted like them the wild woods, and
were characterized by the same petulance towards the other sex. Woe to
the modesty of maiden or woman who ventured incautiously into their
haunts. As Incubi, they visited the house by night, and violated the
persons of the females, and some of the most celebrated heroes of early
mediæval romances, such as Merlin, were thus the children of incubi.
They were known at an early period in Gaul by the name of Dusii, from
which, as the church taught that all these mythic personages were
devils, we derive our modern word *Deuce*, used in such

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

phrases as "the Deuce take you!" The term *ficarii* was also applied to
them in mediæval Latin, either from the meaning of the word *ficus*,
mentioned before, <span id="fr_58"></span>[59](#fn_58) or because they
were fond of figs. Most of these Latin synonyms are given in the
Anglo-Saxon vocabulary of Alfric, and are interpreted as meaning "evil
men, spirits of the woods, evil beings." One of the old commentators on
the Scriptures describes these spirits of the woods as "monsters in the
semblance of men, whose form begins with the human shape and ends in the
extremity of a beast." They were, in fact, half man, half goat, and were
identical with a class of hobgoblins, who at a rather later period were
well known in England by the popular name of Robin Goodfellows, whose
Priapic character is sufficiently proved by the pictures of them
attached to some of our early printed ballads, of which we give
facsimiles. The first  <span id="fr_59"></span>[60](#fn_59) is a figure
of Robin Goodfellow, which forms the illustration to a very popular
ballad of the earlier part of the seventeenth century, entitled "The mad
merry Pranks of Robin Goodfellow;" he is represented party-coloured, and
with the priapic attribute. The next  <span
id="fr_60"></span>[61](#fn_60) is a second illustration

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

of the same ballad, in which Robin Goodfellow is represented as Priapus,
goat-shaped, with his attributes still more strongly pronounced, and
surrounded by a circle of his worshippers dancing about him. He appears
here in the character assumed by the demon at the sabbath of the
witches, of which we shall have to speak a little further on. The Romish
Church created great confusion in all these popular superstitions by
considering the mythic persons with whom they were connected as so many
devils; and one of these Priapic demons is figured in a cut which seems
to have been a favorite one, and is often repeated as an illustration of
the broadside ballads of the age of James I. and Charles I. <span
id="fr_61"></span>[62](wgp08.htm#fn_61) It is Priapus reduced to his
lowest step of degradation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_58"></span>[76:59](wgp07.htm#fr_58) See before, [p.
70](wgp06.htm#page_70).

<span id="fn_59"></span>[76:60](wgp07.htm#fr_59) See [Plate XII, Fig.
5](wgp08.htm#img_pl12). From a copy of the black-letter ballad in the
library of the British Museum.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[76:61](wgp07.htm#fr_60) [Plate XII, Fig.
2](wgp08.htm#img_pl12). From the same ballad.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Phallic Festivals](wgp08)
