[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wgp11)  [Next](wgp13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Other Festivals

Besides these great and general priapic festivals, there were doubtless
others of less importance, or more local in their character, which
degenerated in aftertimes into mere local ceremonies and festivities.
This would be the case especially in cities and corporate towns, where
the guilds came in, to perpetuate the institution, and to give it
gradually a modified form. Most towns in England had once festivals of
this character, and at least three representatives of them are still
kept up, the procession of Lady Godiva at Coventry, the Shrewsbury show,
and the guild festival at Preston in Lancashire. In the first of these,
the lady who is supposed to ride naked in the procession probably
represents some feature in the ancient priapic celebration; and the
story of the manner in which the Lady Godiva averted the anger of her
husband from the townsmen, which is certainly a mere

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

fable, was no doubt invented to explain a feature of the celebration,
the real meaning of which had in course of time been forgotten. The
pageantry of the Shrewsbury show appears to be similarly the unmeaning
reflection of forms belonging to older and forgotten practices and
principles. On the Continent there were many such local festivals, such
as the feast of fools, the feast of asses (the ass was an animal sacred
to Priapus), and others, all which were adapted by the mediæval church
exactly as the clergy had taken advantage of the profit to be derived
from the phallic worship in other forms.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_69"></span>[103:70](wgp11.htm#fr_69) See the authorities
for these statements in Dulaure, pp. 254-256.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mediaeval Secret Societies](wgp13)
