[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wgp12)  [Next](wgp14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Mediaeval Secret Societies

The leaden tokens, or medalets, which we have already described, <span
id="fr_70"></span>[71](#fn_70) seem to point evidently to the existence
in the middle ages of secret societies or clubs connected with this
obscene worship, besides the public festivals. Of these it can hardly be
expected that any description would survive, but, if not the fact, the
belief in it is clearly established by the eagerness with which such
obscene rites were laid to the charge of most of the mediæval secret
societies, whether lay clubs or religious sects, and we know that secret
societies abounded in the middle ages. However willing the Romish clergy
were to make profit out of the popular phallic worship, they were

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

equally ready to use the belief in it as a means of exciting prejudice
against any sects which the church chose to regard as religious or
political heretics.

It is very evident that, in the earlier ages of the church, the
conversion of the Pagans to Christianity was in a vast number of cases
less than a half-conversion, and that the preachers of the gospel were
satisfied by people assuming the name of Christians, without inquiring
too closely into the sincerity of their change, or into their practice.
We can trace in the expressions of disapproval in the writings of some
of the more zealous of the ecclesiastical writers, and in the canons of
the earlier councils, the alarm created by the prevalence among
Christians of the old popular festivals of paganism; and the revival of
those particular canons and deprecatory remarks in the ecclesiastical
councils and writings of a later period of the middle ages, shows that
the existence of the evil had continued unabated. There was an African
council in the year 381, from which Burchardus, who compiled his
condensation of ecclesiastical decrees for the use of his own time,
professes to derive his provisions against "the festivals which were
held with Pagan ceremonies." We are there told that, even on the most
sacred of the Christian commemoration days, these rites derived from the
Pagans were introduced, and that dancing was practiced

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

in the open street of so infamous a character, and accompanied with such
lascivious language and gestures, that the modesty of respectable
females was shocked to a degree that prevented their attendance at the
service in the churches on those days. It is added that these Pagan
ceremonies were even carried into the churches, and that many of the
clergy took part in them.

It is probable, too, that when Paganism itself had become in offence
against the state, and those who continued attached to it were exposed
to persecution, they embraced the name of Christians as a cover for the
grossest superstitions, and formed sects who practised the rites of
Paganism in their secret conventicles, but were placed by the church
among the Christian heresies. In some of these, especially among those
of an early date, the obscene rites and principles of the phallic
worship seem to have entered largely, for, though their opponents
probably exaggerated the actual vice carried on under their name, yet
much of it must have had an existence in truth. It was a mixture of the
licence of the vulgar Paganism of antiquity with the wild doctrines of
the latter eastern philosophers. The older orthodox writers dwell on the
details of these libidinous rites. Among the earliest in date were the
Adamiani, or Adamites, who proscribed marriage, and held that the most
perfect

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

innocence was consistent only with the community of women. The chose
*latibula*, or caverns, for their conventicles, at which both sexes
assembled together in perfect nakedness. This sect perhaps continued to
exist under different forms, but it was revived among the intellectual
vagaries of the fifteenth century, and continued at least to be much
talked of till the seventeenth. The doctrine of the [(*one line
missing*--JBH)](errata.htm#3) sexual intercourse in their meetings, were
ascribed by the early Christian controversialists to several sects, such
as the followers of Florian, and of Carpocratian, who were accused of
putting out the lamps in their churches at the end of the evening
service, and indulging in sexual intercourse indiscriminately; the
Nicolaitæ, who held their wives in common; the Ebionei; and especially
the Gnostics, or followers of Basilides, and the Manichæans. The
Nicolaites held that the only way to salvation lay through frequent
intercourse between the sexes. <span id="fr_71"></span>[72](#fn_71)
Epiphanius speaks of a sect who sacrificed a child in their secret rites
by pricking it with brazen pins, and then offering its blood. <span
id="fr_72"></span>[73](#fn_72) The Gnostics were accused of eating human
flesh as well as of lasciviousness, and they also are said to have held
their women in

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

common, and taught that it was a duty to prostitute their wives to their
guests. <span id="fr_73"></span>[74](#fn_73) They knew their fellow
sectarians by a secret sign, which consisted in tickling the palm of the
hand with the finger in a peculiar manner. The sign having been
recognized, mutual confidence was established, and the stranger was
invited to supper; after they had eaten their fill, the husband removed
from the side of his wife, and said to her, "Go, exhibit charity to our
guest," which was the signal for those further scenes of hospitality.
This account is given us by St. Epiphanius, bishop of Constantia. We are
told further of rites practiced by the Gnostics, which were still more
disgusting, for they were said, after these libidinous scenes, to offer
and administer the *semen virile* as their sacrament. <span
id="fr_74"></span>[75](#fn_74) A similar practice is described as
existing among women in the middle ages for the purpose of securing the
love of their husbands, and was perhaps derived from the Gnostics and
Manichæans, whose doctrines, brought from the East, appear to have
spread themselves extensively into Western Europe.

Of these doctrines, however, we have no traces at

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

least until the eleventh century, when a great intellectual agitation
began in Western Europe, which brought to the surface of society a
multitude of strange creeds and strange theories. The popular worship
displayed in the great annual festivals, and the equally popular local
*fêtes*, urban or rural, were hardly interfered with, or any secret
societies belonging to the old worship; the mediæval church did not
consider them as heresies, and let them alone. Thus, except now and then
a provision of some ecclesiastical council expressed in general terms
against superstitions, which was hardly heard at the time and not
listened to, they are passed over in silence. But the moment anything
under the name of heresy raised its head, the alarm was great.
Gnosticism and Manichæism, which had indeed been identical, were the
heresies most hated in the Eastern empire, and, as may be supposed, most
persecuted; and this persecution was destined to drive them westward. In
the seventh century they became modified into a sect which took the name
of Paulicians, it is said, from an Armenian enthusiast named Paulus, and
they seem to have still further provoked the hatred of the church by
making themselves, in their own interests, the advocates of freedom of
thought and of ecclesiastical reform. If history be to be believed,
their Christian feelings cannot have been very strong, for,

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

unable to resist persecution within the empire, they retired into the
territory held by the Saracens, and united with the enemies of the Cross
in making war upon the Christian Greeks. Others sought refuge in the
country of the Bulgarians, who had very generally embraced their
doctrines, which soon spread thence westward. In their progress through
Germany to France they were known best as Bulgarians, from the name of
the country whence they came; in their way through Italy they retained
their name of Paulicians, corrupted in the Latin of that period of the
middle ages into *Populicani*, *Poplicani*, *Publicani*, &c; and, in
French, into *Popelican*, *Poblican*, *Policien*, and various other
forms which it is unnecessary to enumerate. They began to cause alarm in
France at the beginning of the eleventh century, in the reign of king
Robert, when, under the name of Popelicans, they had established
themselves in the diocese of Orleans, in which city a council was held
against them in 1022, and thirteen individuals were condemned to be
burnt. The name appears to have lasted into the thirteenth century, but
the name of Bulgarians became more permanent, and, in its French form of
*Bolgres*, *Bougres*, or *Bogres*, became the popular name for heretics
in general. With these heresies, through the more sensual parts of
Gnosticism and Manichæism, there appears to be left hardly room for

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

doubt that the ancient phallic worship, probably
[somewhat](errata.htm#4) modified, and under the shadow of secret rites,
was imported into Western Europe; for, if we make allowance for the
willing exaggerations of religious hatred, and consequent popular
prejudice, the general conviction that these sectarians had rites and
practices of a licentious character appears too strong to be entirely
disregarded, nor does it present anything contrary to what we know of
the state of mediæval society, or to the facts which have already been
brought forward in the present essay. These early sects appear to have
professed doctrines rather closely resembling modern communism,
including, like those of their earlier sectarian predecessors, the
community of women; and this community naturally implies the abolition
of distinctive affinities. One of the writers against the mediæval
heretics assures us that there were "many professed Christians, both men
and women, who feared no more to go to their sister, or son or daughter,
or brother, or nephew or niece, or kin or relation, than to their own
wife or husband." They were accused, beyond this, of indulging in
unnatural vices, and this charge was so generally believed, that the
name of Bulgarus, or heretic, became equivalent with Sodomite, and hence
came the modern French word *bougre*, and its English representatives.

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

In the course of the eleventh century the sectarians appeared in Italy
under the name of Patarini, Paterini, or Patrini, which is said to have
been taken from an old quarter of the city of Milan named Pataria, in
which they first held their assemblies. A contemporary Englishman,
Walter Mapes, gives us a singular account of the Paterini and their
secret rites. Some apostates from this heresy, he tells us, had related
that, at the first watch of night, they met in their synagogues, closed
carefully the doors and windows, and waited in silence, until a black
cat of extraordinary bigness descended among them by a rope, and that,
as soon as they saw this strange animal, they put out the lights, and
muttering through their teeth instead of singing their hymns, felt their
way to this object of their worship, and kissed it, according to their
feelings of humility or pride, some on the feet, some under the tail,
and others on the genitals, after which each seized upon the nearest
person of a different sex, and had carnal intercourse as long as he was
able. Their leaders taught them that the most perfect degree of charity
was "to do or suffer in this manner whatever a brother or sister might
desire and ask," and hence, says Mapes, they were called Paterini, *a
patiendo*. Other writers have suggested a different derivation, but the
one first given appears to be that most generally accepted. The
different sects or congregations

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

in Italy and the south, indeed, appear generally to have taken their
names from the towns in which they had their seats or head-quarters.
Thus, those who were seated at Bagnols, in the department of the Gard,
in the south of France, were called by the Latin writers Bagnolenses;
the same writers give the name of Concordenses, or Concorezenses, to the
heretics of Concordia in Lombardy; and the city of Albi, now the capital
of the department of the Tarn, gave its name to the sect of the
Albigenses, or Albigeois, the most extensive of them all, which spread
over the whole of the south of France. A rich enthusiast of the city of
Lyons, named Waldo, who had collected his wealth by mercantile pursuits,
and who lived in the twelfth century, sold his property and distributed
it among the poor, and he became the head of a sect which possessed
poverty as one of its tenets, and received from the name of its founder
that of Waldenses or Vaudois. From their [possession](errata.htm#5) of
voluntary poverty they are sometimes spoken of by the name of *Pauperes
de Lugduno*, the paupers of Lyons. Contemporaries speak of the Waldenses
as being generally poor ignorant people; yet they spread widely over
that part of France and into the valleys of Switzerland, and became so
celebrated, that at last nearly all the mediæval heretics were usually
classed under the head of Waldenses. Another sect,

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

usually classed with the Waldenses, were called Cathari. The Novatians,
a sect which sprang up in the church in the third century, assumed also
the name of Cathari, as laying claim to extraordinary purity (καθαροι),
but there is no reason for believing that the ancient sect was revived
in the Cathari of the later period, or even that the two words are
identical. The name of the latter sect is often spelt Gazari, Gazeri,
Gaçari, and Chazari; and, as they were more especially a German sect, it
is supposed to have been the origin of the German words *Ketzer* and
*Ketzerie*, which became the common German terms for a heretic and
heresy. It was suggested by Henschenius that this name was derived from
the German *Katze* or *Ketze*, a cat, in allusion to the common report
that they assembled at night like cats, or ghosts; or the cat may have
been an allusion to the belief that in their secret meetings they
worshipped that animal. This sect must have been very ignorant and
superstitious if it be true which some old writers tell us, that they
believed that the sun was a demon, and the moon a female called Heva,
and that these two had sexual intercourse every month. <span
id="fr_75"></span>[76](#fn_75) Like the other heretical sects, these
Cathari were accused of indulging in unnatural vices,

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

and the German words Ketzerie and Ketzer were eventually used to signify
sodomy and a sodomite, as well as heresy and a heretic.

The Waldenses generally, taking all the sects which people class under
this name, including also the older Bulgari and Publicani, were charged
with holding secret meetings, at which the devil appeared to them in the
shape, according to some, of a goat, whom they worshipped by offering
the kiss *in ano*, after which they indulged in promiscuous sexual
intercourse. Some believed that they were conveyed to these meetings by
unearthly means. The English chronicler, Ralph de Coggeshall, tells a
strange story of the means of locomotion possessed by these heretics. In
the city of Rheims, in France, in the time of St. Louis, a handsome
young woman was charged with heresy, and carried before the archbishop,
in whose presence she avowed her opinions, and confessed that she had
received them from a certain old woman of that city. The old woman was
then arrested, convicted of being an obstinate heretic, and condemned to
the stake. When they were preparing to carry her out to the fire, she
suddenly turned to the judges and said, "Do you think that you are able
to burn me in your fire? I care neither for it nor for you!" And taking
a ball of thread, she threw it out at a large window by which she was
standing, holding the end of the thread in her hands, and exclaiming,
"Take it!" (*recipe*).

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

\[paragraph continues\] In an instant, in the sight of all who were
there, the old woman was lifted from the ground, and, following the ball
of thread, was carried into the air nobody knew where; and the
archbishop's officers burnt the young woman in her place. <span
id="fr_76"></span>[77](#fn_76) It was the belief of most of the old
sects of this class, as well as of the more ancient Pagans from whom
they were derived, that those who were fully initiated into their most
secret mysteries became endowed with powers and faculties above those
possessed by ordinary individuals. A list of the errors of the
Waldenses, printed in the *Reliquiæ Antiquæ*, from an English
manuscript, enumerates among them that they met to indulge in
promiscuous sexual intercourse, and held perverse doctrines in
accordance with it; that, in some parts, the devil appeared to them in
the form of a cat, and that each kissed him under the tail; and that in
other parts they rode to the place of meeting upon a staff anointed with
a certain unguent, and were conveyed thither in a moment of time. The
writer adds that,

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

in the parts where he lived, these practices had not been known to exist
for a long time. <span id="fr_77"></span>[78](#fn_77)

Our old chroniclers exult over the small success which attended the
efforts of these heretics from France and the South to introduce
themselves into our island. <span id="fr_78"></span>[79](#fn_78) These
sects, with secret and obscene rites, appear, indeed, to have found most
favour among the peoples who spoke a dialect derived from the Latin, and
this we might naturally be led to expect, for the fact of the
preservation of the Latin tongue is itself a proof of the greater force
of the Roman element in the society, that from which these secret rites
appear to have been chiefly derived. It is a curious circumstance, in
connection with this subject, that the popular oaths and exclamations
among the people speaking the languages derived from the Romans are
almost all composed of the names of the objects of this phallic worship,
an entire contrast to the practice of the Teutonic tribes--the vulgar
oaths of the people speaking Neo-Latin dialects are obscene, those of
the German race are profane. We have seen how the women of Antwerp, who,
though perhaps they did not speak the Roman dialect, appear to have been
much influenced by Roman sentiments, made their

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

appeal to their genius Ters. When a Spaniard is irritated or suddenly
excited, he exclaims, *Carajo*! (the virile member) or *Cojones*! (the
testicles). An Italian, under similar circumstances, uses the
exclamation *Cazzo*! (the virile member). The Frenchman apostrophizes
the act, *Foutre*! The female member, *cono* with the Spaniard, *conno*
with the Italian, and *con* with the [Frenchman](errata.htm#7), was and
is used more generally as an expression of contempt, which is also the
case with the testicles, *couillons*, in French--those who have had
experience in the old days of "diligence" travelling will remember how
usual it was for the driver, when the horses would not go quick enough,
to address the leader in such terms as, "*Va, donc, vieux con*!" We have
no such words used in this manner in the Germanic languages, with the
exception, perhaps, of the German *Potz*! and *Potztausend*! and the
English equivalent, *Pox*! which last is gone quite out of use. There
was an attempt among the fashionables of our Elizabethan age of
literature, to introduce the Italian *cazzo* under the form of *catso*,
and the French *foutre* under that of *foutra*, but these were mere
affectations of a moment, and were so little in accord with our national
sentiments that they soon disappeared.

The earliest accounts of a sect which held secret meetings for
celebrating obscene rites is found in

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

\[paragraph continues\] France. It appears that, early in the eleventh
century, there was in the city of Orleans a society consisting of
members of both sexes, who assembled at certain times in a house there,
for the purposes which are described rather fully in a document found in
the cartulary of the abbey of St. Père at Chartres. As there stated,
they went to the meeting, each carrying in the hand a lighted lamp, and
they began by chaunting the names of demons in the manner of a litany,
until a demon suddenly descended among them in the form of an animal.
This was no sooner seen, than they all extinguished their lamps, and
each man took the first female he put his hand upon, and had sexual
intercourse with her, without regard if she were his mother, or his
sister, or a consecrated nun; and this intercourse, we are told, was
looked upon by them as an act of holiness and religion. The child which
was the fruit of this intercourse was taken on the eighth day and
purified by fire, "in the manner of the ancient Pagans,"--so says the
contemporary writer of this document,--it was burnt to ashes in a large
fire made for that purpose. The ashes were collected with great
reverence, and preserved, to be administered to members of the society
who were dying, just as good Christians received the viaticum. It is
added that there was such a virtue in these ashes, that an individual
who had once tasted them would

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

hardly ever after be able to turn his mind from that heresy and take the
path of truth.

Whatever degree of truth there may have been in this story, it must have
been greatly exaggerated; but the conviction of the existence of secret
societies of this character during the middle ages appears to have been
so strong and so generally held, that we must hesitate in rejecting it.
Perhaps we may take the leaden tokens already described, and represented
in one of our plates, <span id="fr_79"></span>[80](#fn_79) as evidence
of the existence of such societies, for these curious objects appear to
admit of no other satisfactory explanation than that of having been in
use in secret clubs of a very impure character.

It has been already remarked that people soon seized upon accusations of
this kind as excuses for persecution, religious and political, and we
meet with a curious example in the earlier half of the thirteenth
century. The district of Steding, in the north of Germany, now known as
Oldenburg, was at the beginning of the thirteenth century inhabited by a
people who lived in sturdy independence, but the archbishops of Bremen
seem to have claimed some sort of feudal superiority over them, which
they resisted by force. The archbishop, in revenge, declared them

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

heretics, and proclaimed a crusade against them. Crusades against
heretics were then in fashion, for it was just at the time of the great
war against the Albigeois. The Stedingers maintained their independence
successfully for some years. In 1232 and 1233, the pope issued two bulls
against the offending Stedingers, in both of which he charges them with
various heathen and magical practices, but in the second be enters more
fully into details. These Stedingers, the pope (Gregory IX.) tells us,
performed the following ceremonies at the initiation of a new convert
into their sect. When the novice was introduced, a toad presented
itself, which all who were present kissed, some on the posteriors, and
others on the mouth, when they drew its tongue and spittle into their
own mouths. Sometimes this toad appeared of only the natural size, but
sometimes it was as big as a goose or duck, and often its size was that
of an oven. As the novice proceeded, he encountered a man who was
extraordinarily pale, with large black eyes, and whose body was so
wasted that his flesh seemed to be all gone, leaving nothing but the
skin hanging on his bones. The novice kissed this personage, and found
him as cold as ice; and after this kiss all traces of the Catholic faith
vanished from his heart. Then they all sat down to a banquet; and when
this was over, there stepped out of a statue,

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

which stood in their place of meeting, a black cat, as large as a
moderate sized dog, which advanced backwards to them, with its tail
turned up. The novice first, then the master, and then all the others in
their turns, kissed the cat under the tail, and then returned to their
places, where they remained in silence, with their heads inclined
towards the cat. Then the master suddenly pronounced the words "Spare
us!" which he addressed to the next in order; and the third answered,
"We know it, lord;" and a fourth added, "We ought to obey." At the close
of this ceremony the lights were extinguished, and each man took the
first woman who came to hand, and had carnal intercourse with her. When
this was over, the candles were again lighted, and the performers
resumed their places. Then out of a dark corner of the room came a man,
the upper part of whom, above the loins, was bright and radiant as the
sun, and illuminated the whole room, while his lower parts were rough
and hairy like a cat. The master then tore off a bit of the garment of
the novice, and said to the shining personage, "Master, this is given to
me, and I give it again to thee." The master replied, "Thou hast served
me well, and thou wilt serve me more and better; what thou hast given me
I give unto thy keeping." When he had said this, the shining man
vanished, and the meeting broke up.

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Such were the secret ceremonies of the
Stedingers, according to the deliberate statement of Pope Gregory IX,
who also charges them with offering direct worship to Lucifer. <span
id="fr_80"></span>[81](wgp14.htm#fn_80)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_70"></span>[104:71](wgp13.htm#fr_70) See before, [p.
60](wgp05.htm#page_60), and [Plate IX](wgp05.htm#img_pl09).

<span id="fn_71"></span>[107:72](wgp13.htm#fr_71) Epiphanii *Panarium*,
vol. I, p. 72.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[107:73](wgp13.htm#fr_72) Epiphanius, vol. i, p.
416.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[108:74](wgp13.htm#fr_73) On the secret worship
and character of the Gnostics, see Epiphanii *Panarium*, vol. i, pp.
84-102.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[108:75](wgp13.htm#fr_74) See details on this
subject In Epiphanii *Panarium*, ib. Conf. Prædestinati Adversus
Haeres., lib. i, c. 46, where the same thing is said of the Manichæans.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[114:76](wgp13.htm#fr_75) Bonacursus, [*Vita
Haereticorum*](errata.htm#6), in D'Achery, *Spicilegium*, tom. i, p.
209. This book is considered to have been written about the year 1190.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[116:77](wgp13.htm#fr_76) Radulphus
Cogeshalenfis, In the *Amplissima Collectio* of Martene and Durand. On
the offences with which the different sects comprised under the name of
Waldenses were charged, see Gretser's *Scriptores contra Sectam
Waldensium*, which will be found in the twelfth volume of his works,
Bonacursus, *Vita Haereticorum*, in the first volume of D'Achery's
*Spicilegium*, and the work of a Carthusian monk in Martene and Durand,
*Amplissima Collectio*, vol. vi, col. 57 et seq.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[117:78](wgp13.htm#fr_77) Wright and Halliwell,
*Reliquæ Antiquae*, vol. i, p. 247.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[117:79](wgp13.htm#fr_78) See, for example,
Guil, Neubrigensis, *De Rebus Anglicis*, lib. ii, c. 13, and Walter
Mapes, *de Nugis Curialium*, p. 62.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[120:80](wgp13.htm#fr_79) See before, [p.
60](wgp05.htm#page_60), and [Plate IX](wgp05.htm#img_pl09).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Knights Templar](wgp14)
