[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wgp15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Inniskea

The worship of the reproductive organs as representing the fertilizing,
protecting, and saving powers of nature, apart from these secret rites,
prevailed universally, as we have traced it fully in the preceding
pages, and we only recur to that part of the subject to state that
perhaps the last traces of it now to be found in our islands is met with
on the western shores of Ireland. Off the coast of Mayo, there is a
small island named Inniskea, the inhabitants of which are a very
primitive and uncultivated race, and which, although it takes its name
from a female saint (it is the *insular sanctæ Geidhe* of the Hibernian
hagiographers), does not contain a single Catholic priest. Its
inhabitants, indeed, as we learn from an interesting communication to
*Notes and Queries* by Sir J. Emerson Tennent, <span
id="fr_108"></span>[109](#fn_108) are mere idolaters, and their idol, no
doubt the representative of Priapus, is a long cylindrical stone, which
they call *Neevougee*. This idol is kept wrapped in flannel, and is
entrusted to

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

the care of an old woman, who acts as the priestess. It is brought out
and worshipped at certain periods, when storms disturb the fishing, by
which chiefly the population of the island obtain a living, or at other
times it is exposed for the purpose of raising storms which may cause
wrecks to be thrown on the coast of the island. I am informed that the
Name *Neevougee* is merely the plural of a word signifying a canoe, and
it may perhaps have some reference to the calling of fishermen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_108"></span>[195:109](wgp16.htm#fr_108) *Notes and
Queries*, for 1852, vol. v, p. 121.
