[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wgp10)  [Next](wgp12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Plants and Flowers

Plants and flowers were, indeed, intimately connected with this worship.
We have seen how constantly they are introduced in the form of garlands,
and they were always among the offerings to Priapus. It was the
universal practice, in dancing round the fire on St. John's eve, to
conclude by throwing various kinds of flowers and plants into it, which
were considered to be propitiatory, to avert certain evils to which
people were liable during the following

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

year. Among the plants they offered are mentioned mother-wort, vervain,
and violets. It is perhaps to this connection of plants with the old
priapic worship that we owe the popular tendency to give them names
which were more or less obscene, most of which are now lost, or are so
far modified as to present no longer the same idea. Thus the well-known
arum of our hedge-bottoms received the names, no doubt suggested by its
form, of cuckoo's pintle, or priest's pintle, or dog's pintle; and, in
French, those of *vit de chien* and *vit de prestre*; in English it is
now abbreviated into cuckoo-pint, or, sometimes, cuckoo-point. The whole
family of the orchides was distinguished by a corresponding word,
accompanied with various qualifications. We have in William Coles's
*Adam in Eden*, (fol. 1659) the different names, for different
varieties, of doggs-stones, fool-stones, fox-stones; in the older
*Herbal* of Gerard (fol. 1597) triple ballockes, sweet ballockes, sweet
cods, goat's-stones, hare's-stones, &c.; in French, *couillon de bouc*
(the goat was especially connected with the priapic mysteries) and
*couille*, or *couillon de chien*. In French, too, as we learn from
Cotgrave and the herbals, "a kind of sallet hearbe" was called *couille
à l'évêque*; the greater stone-crop was named *couille au loup*; and the
spindle-tree was known by the name of *couillon de prêtre*. There are
several plants which

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

possess somewhat the appearance of a rough bush of hair. One of these, a
species of *adiantum*, was known even in Roman times by the name of
*Capillus Veneri*s, and in more modern times it has been called
maiden-hair, and our lady's hair. Another plant, the *asplenium
trichomanes*, was and is also called popularly maiden-hair, or
maiden's-hair; and we believe that the same name has been given to one
or two other plants. There is reason for believing that the hair implied
in these names was that of the pubes. <span
id="fr_67"></span>[68](#fn_67) We might collect a number of other old
popular names of plants of a similar character with these just
enumerated.

In an old calendar of the Romish church, which is often quoted in
Brand's *Popular Antiquities*, the seeking of plants for their hidden
virtues and magical properties is especially noted as part of the
practices on the eve of St. John (*herbæ diversi generis quærantur*);
and one plant is especially specified in terms too mysterious to be
easily understood. Fern-seed, also, was a great object of search on this
night; for, if found and properly gathered, it was believed to possess
powerful magical properties, and especially

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

that of rendering invisible the individual who carried it upon his
person. But the most remarkable of all the plants connected with these
ancient priapic superstitions was the mandrake (*mandragora*), a plant
which has been looked upon with a sort of feeling of reverential fear at
all periods, and almost in all parts. Its Teutonic name, *alrun*, or, in
its more modern form, *alraun*, speaks at once of the belief in its
magical qualities among that race. People looked upon it as possessing
some degree of animal life, and it was generally believed that, when it
was drawn out of the earth, it uttered a cry, and that this cry carried
certain death or madness to the person who extracted it. To escape this
danger, the remedy was to tie a string round it, which was to be
attached to a dog, and the latter, being driven away, dragged up the
root in its attempt to run off, and experienced the fatal consequences.
The root was the important part of the plant; it has somewhat the form
of a forked radish, and was believed to represent exactly the human form
below the waist, with, in the male and female plants, the human organs
of generation distinctly developed. The mandrake, when it could be
obtained, was used in the middle ages in the place of the phallic
amulet, and was carefully carried on the person, or preserved in the
house. It conferred fertility in more senses than one, for it was
believed that

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

as long as you kept it locked up with your money, the latter would
become doubled in quantity every year; and it had at the same time all
the protective qualities of the phallus. The Templars were accused of
worshipping the mandrake, or *mandragora*, which became an object of
great celebrity in France during the reigns of the weak monarchs Charles
VI. and Charles VII. In 1429 one Friar Richard, of the order of the
Cordeliers, preached a fierce sermon against the use of this amulet, the
temporary effect of which was so great, that a certain number of his
congregation delivered up their "mandragoires" to the preacher to be
burnt. <span id="fr_68"></span>[69](#fn_68)

It appears that the people who dealt in these amulets helped nature to a
rather considerable extent by the means of art, and that there was a
regular process of cooking them up. They were necessarily aware that the
roots themselves, in their natural state, presented, to say the least,
very imperfectly the form which men's imagination had given to them, so
they obtained the finest roots they could, which, when fresh from the
ground, were plump and soft, and readily took any impression which might
be given to them. They then stuck grains of millet or barley into the
parts where they wished to have hair, and again

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

put it into a hole in the earth, until these grains had germinated and
formed their roots. This process, it was said, was perfected within
twenty days. They then took up the mandrake again, trimmed the fibrous
roots of millet or barley which served for hair, retouched the parts
themselves so as to give them their form more perfectly and more
permanently, and then sold it. <span
id="fr_69"></span>[70](wgp12.htm#fn_69)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_67"></span>[100:68](wgp11.htm#fr_67) Fumitory was another
of these plants, and in a vocabulary of plants in a MS. of the middle of
the thirteenth century, we find its names in Latin, French, and English
given as follows, "*Fumus terrae, fumeterre, cunteboare*." See Wright's
*Volume of Vocabularies*, p. 17.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[102:69](wgp11.htm#fr_68) *Journal a'un
Bourgeois de Paris*, under the year 1429.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Other Festivals](wgp12)
