[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ptpl00)  [Next](ptpl02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029U2W0U/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Principal Teachings of The True Sect of Pure Land*, by Yejitsu Okusa,
\[1915\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_i">p. i</span>

### PREFACE.

The doctrine of Amida represents the practical phase of Buddhism, and in
the True Sect of Pure Land we see the deep meaning of salvation by faith
most [thoroughly](errata.htm#0) revealed; and it is in this that the
essence of Buddhism as religion, apart from its philosophical and
ethical aspects, consists.

Thus, the ultimate aim of the appearance of Sākyamuni on earth was to
teach us this doctrine of Amida. Most of the Buddhist priests or savants
in all the Eastern Buddhist countries, who studied their religion from
scholarly points of view, practically professed their faith in the
doctrine of Amida. Among the various forms of this doctrine, we
recognise in the True Sect of Pure Land as taught and established by our
Shinran Shōnin about seven hundred years ago, the most pure, perfect,
and incomparable one. The True Sect is, indeed, the efflorescence of
Japanese Buddhism. Everywhere we perceive

<span id="page_ii">p. ii</span>

such signs as to justify our belief that his teaching is being better
appreciated not only by his own countrymen but by foreigners, and that
the number of those foreigners who express their sincere desire to know
more deeply the signification of the True Sect is steadily increasing.

In the present year, our Illustrious Emperor is to perform His
coronation in the old palace of this City. We have therefore revised
this pamphlet to commemorate the great event, while we desire to
elucidate herein briefly the teaching of our Shōnin for the benefit of
our general readers. No happiness will be greater than ours if this
excites our readers’ interest in Buddhism better than ever, be it
sympathetic or antagonistic.

The original of this pamphlet was compiled by late Yejitsu Okusa, to
commemorate the six hundred and fiftieth anniversary of the death of our
founder, Shinran Shōnin. It was just five years ago, so that a revision
was necessarily made in the narration.

<span class="smallcaps">Ōtaniha Hongwanji</span>.

*Kyōto, October 13, 1915*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](ptpl02)
