[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ptpl03)  [Next](ptpl05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029U2W0U/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Principal Teachings of The True Sect of Pure Land*, by Yejitsu Okusa,
\[1915\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### II. THE HONGWAN-JI.

<span class="smallcaps">After</span> the entrance of Shinran Shōnin into
Great Nirvāna, the True Sect of Pure Land gradually gained followers,
and has at present become the most influential one among the various
Buddhist sects in Japan. And the True Sect itself has come to be
differentiated into ten minor branches, which, however, do not mean so
many different ways of interpreting its main faith or doctrine. The
differentiation has grown only out of some historical

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

or external relations that came to be established between the principal
churches in charge of their devotees. The history of each of these
several churches, among which the Hongwanji, is quite complicated; and
the following tabular view gives only a general scheme of the pedigree
of the ten principal branches of the True Sect of Pure Land:

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

<span id="img_02700"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![A Schematic View
of the Ten Branches of the True Sect of Pure Land](tn/02700.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/02700.jpg)  
A Schematic View of the Ten Branches of the True Sect of Pure Land  
</span>

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

Among these ten [branches](errata.htm#4), those most flourishing at
present are the Ōtani and the Hongwanji. They trace back their origin of
existence to the two brothers, Kyōnyo and Junnyo, and formerly composed
one Hongwanji Branch. The reason why it came to have the largest number
of followers under its charge, is because its successive Hosshus
(literally, "masters of the law", that is, head-priests) trace their
line of descendance directly to Shinran Shōnin, the Founder of the True
Sect, and also because its eighth Hosshu, Rennyo, was a most remarkable
spiritual power, exercising great influence over his followers. Let us
now go on at some length with the history of the Hongwanji.

It was in the winter of the ninth year of Bunyei (1272) that the tomb of
the Shōnin at Ōtani, Higashiyama, was removed to the western part of the
same grounds, where a hall was constructed, and his image was enshrined
in it. The

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Emperor Kameyama
ordered it to be named the "Kuon Jitsujō Amida Hongwan-ji," whence comes
the name "Hongwanji" which is an abbreviation. Kakushin-ni, or Iyahime,
the youngest daughter of the Shōnin, was made the guardian of the
shrine, while Nyoshin, son of Zenran, became the Jyūshoku or "residing
priest" of the Hongwanji. Thus, we have Shinran Shōnin for the founder
of the Hongwanji and Nyoshin Shōnin for the second patriarch.

Kakunyo, grandson to Kakushin-ni, succeeded Nyoshin, and it was he who
compiled "A Life of Shinran, the Hongwanji Shōnin, with
Illustrations," <span id="fr_17"></span>[17](#fn_17) in two volumes,
which is also known as the "Godenshō" simply, meaning the "Honorable
Biography." The author was then twenty-six years old. His other works
are: "The Shūyi-kotoku-den," <span id="fr_18"></span>[18](#fn_18)

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "The
Kuden-shō," <span id="fr_19"></span>[19](#fn_19) "The Gai-ja-shō," <span
id="fr_20"></span>[20](#fn_20) "The Shū-dzi-shō," <span
id="fr_21"></span>[21](#fn_21) "The Hon-gwan-shō," <span
id="fr_22"></span>[22](#fn_22) "The Gwan-gwan-shō," <span
id="fr_23"></span>[23](#fn_23) "The Sai-yō-shō," <span
id="fr_24"></span>[24](#fn_24) "The Shus-se-gwan-i," <span
id="fr_25"></span>[25](#fn_25) "The Ho-on-kō-shiki," <span
id="fr_26"></span>[26](#fn_26) etc.

In those days, Japan was divided between two rival dynasties, Northern
and Southern, and their struggles for the ascendency reduced the
country, especially the Capital, into a state of constant disturbance;
and the shrine at Ōtani was burned to the ground by the

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

soldiers in 1336. Kakunyo Shōnin, therefore, retired to the Kuon-ji in
Yamashiro, where he stayed for two years until the shrine was rebuilt in
1338, and in the year following he came back to Ōtani. For some one
hundred and twenty years thence, the shrine suffered no misfortune.

The eldest son of Kakunyo was called Zonkaku, and being a great scholar
wrote many works, of which the most important is "The Roku-yō-shō" <span
id="fr_27"></span>[27](#fn_27) in ten volumes, which is a commentary on
Shinran Shōnin's "Kyō-gyō-shin-shō." Among other writings of his, we may
mention the following: "The Sen-jyaku-shū-chū-ge-shō" <span
id="fr_28"></span>[28](#fn_28) in 5 vols.; "The Haja-kenshō-shō" <span
id="fr_29"></span>[29](#fn_29) in three vols.; "The

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span>
Jōdo-shin-yō-shō" <span id="fr_30"></span>[30](#fn_30) in two vols.;
"The Sho-jin-hon-gwai-shū" <span id="fr_31"></span>[31](#fn_31) in two
vols.; "The Kecchi-shō," <span id="fr_32"></span>[32](#fn_32) 2 vols.;
"The Hokke-mondō," <span id="fr_33"></span>[33](#fn_33) 2 vols.; "The
Busen-shō," <span id="fr_34"></span>[34](#fn_34) 2 vols.; "The
Hō-on-ki," <span id="fr_35"></span>[35](#fn_35) 2 vols.; "The Kemmyō-shō
" <span id="fr_36"></span>[36](#fn_36); "The Jimyō-shō" <span
id="fr_37"></span>[37](#fn_37); "The Zonkaku-hō-gō <span
id="fr_38"></span>[38](#fn_38); "The Nyonin-wōjō-kikigaki" <span
id="fr_39"></span>[39](#fn_39); "The Jōdo-kemmon-shū" <span
id="fr_40"></span>[40](#fn_40); "The Tandoku-mon" <span
id="fr_41"></span>[41](#fn_41);

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

etc. This learned author, however, did not succeed Kakunyo as Jyūshoku
(or "residing priest") of the Hongwanji. Zennyo, Shakunyo, Gyōnyo, and
Zonnyo are the names appearing in the patriarchal line after Kakunyo;
and it was not until after these "residing priests" that the eighth
[patriarch](errata.htm#5), Rennyo Shōnin, who was the eldest son of
Zennyo, came on the stage to give a new impetus to the development of
the True Sect in Japan. Before the appearance of this remarkable
personage, the Hongwanji was far from being an influential Buddhist
denomination. Without him, it was perhaps impossible for the Hongwanji
to achieve such a phenomenal progress and gain its full strength as it
really did.

Rennyo Shōnin was born at Ōtani on Feb. 25 in the twenty-second year of
Oyē (1415). His boyhood name was Hotei-maro, and he proved even in his
early life to be a remarkable genius.

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> On December 28,
1420, his mother mysteriously disappeared, leaving an advice for her now
six years old boy, saying, "My dear child, make it your life's duty to
revive the True Sect of Pure Land." Nobody knows where she retired, but
her instruction left such a deep [impression](errata.htm#6) upon the
boyish mind of Hotei-maro that he well remembered it later; and when he
was fifteen years old he firmly made up his mind to carry out actually
what his mother commanded him before.

When he attained seventeen years of age, he had his head shaved at the
Shōren-in and assumed the Buddhist name, Kenju. After he had first
studied the philosophy of the Hossō Sect at Nara, he returned to Ōtani,
and confining himself in a monastery there, he applied himself most
assiduously to the study of the doctrine of his own Sect until he was
thirty years old. In 1447, he travelled in the Eastern districts of

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Japan, and in
1449, in the North, every' where visiting those historical landmarks
associated with the memory of his forefather, the founder of the True
Sect; and whenever he went, he was never tired of preaching the Good Law
and giving a new life to the decadent faith of his followers.

In 1457, his father Zonnyo died, and as Rennyo Shōnin he now succeeded
him at the age of forty-three and became the Jūshoku ("residing priest")
of the Hongwanji. In June, 1460, he wrote a book entitled the
"Shō-shin-getaii" <span id="fr_42"></span>[42](#fn_42) at the request of
his disciple, Dōsai. It was about this time that lie began writing the
"Letters" (called in Japanese *Ofumi*) explaining the doctrine and faith
of the True Sect in most plain language in order to make even the
plainest seekers of the truth comprehend what he wishes to convey to
their simple hearts. These "letters" are numerous,

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

and it can be said without exaggeration that the revival of the faith of
the True Sect is mainly due to the writing of these "letters" by the
Shōnin. His influence, thus, gradually gained the ground all over Japan,
and the increasing number of pilgrims steadily pressed on to the
founder's shrine at Ōtani. The growing popularity, however, of Rennyo
attracted the envious attention of the monks on the Hiyesan, whose
bitter hatred of the rival finally induced them to destroy the Ōtani
shrine by fire on January 10, 1465.

This compelled Rennyo to flee front Ōtani carrying the image of Shinran
with him. For a while he settled in Ōtsu where he made his residence at
the Chikamatsu-dera, a temple belonging to the Miidera. He did not stay
long here, and moved from one place to another until in April, 1471, he
made a trip to the northern district of Japan; and after preaching at
various places

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

in Echizen and Kaga Provinces, he built a temple at Yoshizaki, Echizen.
Here again he attracted numerous followers from all the neighboring
districts, who came to him earnestly inquiring about the faith of the
True Sect and asking for his personal instructions. His success was most
phenomenal.

The governor of Kaga Province, Togashi by name, however, who had been
harboring an antagonistic feeling towards the Hongwanji and its
supporters, made a sudden attack by force upon the temple at Yoshizaki
in August, 1475. The Shōnin had to run away from his abode to the
neighboring province, Wakasa, where he reached by boat. The True Sect
followers of Kaga grew most indignant at this unjustifiable conduct on
the part of their governor, and rose one man, declared war on him, and
having succeeded in overturning his government, they took possession of
the entire province of Kaga as under

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

the dominion of the Hongwanji. This violent action of his devotees,
however, did not please Rennyo, and they were severely reprimanded.

After this, he went on with his preaching without disturbance; and in
1477, aided by Dōsai, his disciple, he made up a plan to build the main
temple of the True Sect at Yamashina. The Hall of Image was completed in
August, 1480, where the image of Shinran was removed from its temporary
shelter at the Chikamatsu-dera. The main hall was finished in June of
the following year.

When, in 1489, Rennyo Shōnin was seventy-five years old, he resigned his
position as "residing priest" of the Hongwanji, whose duty now fell upon
his son, Jitsunyo. In 1496, he built a branch temple at Ōsaka in Settsu
Province, which was made his residence for four years. In February,
1499, he again removed to the main

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

temple at Yamashina, and on March 25 of the same year he died at the
advanced age of eighty-five.

Rennyo Shōnin was a rare religious genius. He may be regarded as an
avatar of Shinran Shōnin, the Founder of the True Sect, who came on
earth over again from his abode in Pure Land to save his faith from
decline and fall. His preaching, the outcome of an overflowing heart,
was full of love and kindliness, and was like water for the thirsty,
like medicine for the sick. After his death, Jitsugo wrote a biography
of his illustrious predecessor in one volume, called "Rennyo Shōnin
Goichidai Ki Kikigaki," while another biography, "Rennyo Shōnin Yitoku
Ki," was compiled by Rengo, another son of Rennyo. His letters, eighty
in number and in five volumes, were collected by Yennyo, son of
Jitsunyo, under the title of "Ofumi," which means the "Honorable
Letters." Since then, the followers

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

of this Hongwanji Branch have made it their daily religious practice to
sing the "Shōshin Nembutsu Ge" and "Wasan" and to recite the "Letters"
before their family shrines of the Buddha.

Thus was the Hongwanji established by Rennyo, at Yamashina. After him
came Jitsunyo, who, in 1525, handed over his high-priesthood to Shōnyo,
son of Yennyo. During the latter's office, that is, in August, 1532,
Rokkaku Sadayori, helped by unruly followers of the Hokke Sect, assailed
the Hongwanji and burned it to the ground. Thereupon, Shōnyo, carrying
the image of the founder with him, removed to the branch temple in Ōsaka
(at Ishiyama), where he died in 1554.

He was succeeded by his son, Kennyo. In 1570, he was forced to wage war
on Oda Nobunaga, the famous general, who frequently hurled his strong
army against the Hongwanji, but with no perceptible success; for the
followers

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

of the True Sect were so devoted to their cause that they were ready to
sacrifice their lives whenever necessary.

In 1580, Kennyo Shōnin, in accordance with the Imperial command,
contracted terms of peace with Oda Nobunaga and removed to Sagi-no-mori
in the Province of Kii. In 1582, however, the [unfaithful](errata.htm#7)
General planned an unexpected assault upon Sagi-no-mori with a large
army. To capture Kennyo as prisoner of war, his soldiers were about
ready to force the gate of the Hongwanji on June 3, when the news of the
assassination of the General by his retainer, Akechi Mitsuhide, reached
the attacking enemy, which thereupon beat a hasty retreat. Kennyo Shōnin
and his temple were thus miraculously saved from the impending peril.

In 1583, Kennyo moved to Kaidzuka in Idzumi; in 1591, Toyotomi
Hideyoshi, the illustrious general, donated

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

a tract of land at Nishi-Rokujō in the city of Kyōto for the rebuilding
of the Hongwanji. Kennyo lived only one year after his last removal to
Kyōto, for he died in the year following (1592). The mantle of the
residing priesthood now fell upon the shoulders of Kyōnyo, the eldest
son of Kennyo.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_17"></span>[29:17](ptpl04.htm#fr_17) "The Life of Shinran,
the Holy Sage of the Hongwanji with Illustrations."

<span id="fn_18"></span>[29:18](ptpl04.htm#fr_18) A supplementary work
to the "Life of the Old Sage." The Old Sage is the master of Shinran
Shōnin. 9 fasciculi.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[30:19](ptpl04.htm#fr_19) "Sayings and doings of
Shinran, which were orally transmitted" by Nyoshin to Kakunyo. 3
fasciculi.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[30:20](ptpl04.htm#fr_20) "Refutation of
(twenty-one) false views (against the teaching of Shinran)." 2
fasciculi.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[30:21](ptpl04.htm#fr_21) A work treating of
Nembutsu (the reciting of Amida's name), of which the first four
chapters record some sayings and doings of Shinran, while the last one
chapter is devoted to the statement of the author's own views on the
holding fast (*shūdzi*) to the doctrine of Nembutsu.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[30:22](ptpl04.htm#fr_22) A collection of such
passages as relating to the original prayers (*hongwan*) of Amida.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[30:23](ptpl04.htm#fr_23) A book explaining the
five essential ones out of the fortyeight prayers of Amida.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[30:24](ptpl04.htm#fr_24) A work explaining the
significance of the eighteenth prayer of Amida.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[30:25](ptpl04.htm#fr_25) A work on the
fundamental meaning of the appearance of Shākyamuni on earth.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[30:26](ptpl04.htm#fr_26) "A manual for the
memorial service of the Founder."

<span id="fn_27"></span>[31:27](ptpl04.htm#fr_27) A commentary work on
the *Kyō-gyō-shin-shō*. 10 fasciculi.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[31:28](ptpl04.htm#fr_28) "A commentary work on
Hōnen's *Sen-jyaku-shū*." 5 fasciculi.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[31:29](ptpl04.htm#fr_29) A work refuting
seventeen erroneous views as regards the teaching of the True Sect, and
revealing its truth. 3 fasciculi.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[32:30](ptpl04.htm#fr_30) "A treatise on the
essential truths of the doctrine of Pure Land." A revised work of the
*Jōdo-monrui-shū*, given by the author to his disciple, Ryōgen. 2
fasciculi.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[32:31](ptpl04.htm#fr_31) "A treatise on the
fundamental intention of all the gods." A revised work by Zonkaku of a
book bearing the same title. 2 fasciculi.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[32:32](ptpl04.htm#fr_32) A book recording the
successful debate with the followers of the Nichiren Sect in the first
year of Rekiō. 2 fasciculi.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[32:33](ptpl04.htm#fr_33) "Questions and answers
in the controversy with the Nichiren Sect." 2 fasciculi.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[32:34](ptpl04.htm#fr_34) A work in which the
teaching of Pure Land is compared to travelling on water by boat and
that of the "Path for the wise" to walking on foot, showing how easier
it is to travel by the first method. 2 fasciculi.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[32:35](ptpl04.htm#fr_35) A book explaining how
deeply grateful we should feel towards our parents and teachers. 2
fasciculi.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[32:36](ptpl04.htm#fr_36) A book revealing the
merit contained in the name of Amide.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[32:37](ptpl04.htm#fr_37) A work urging to hold
the name of Amida.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[32:38](ptpl04.htm#fr_38) "A religious discourse
by Zonkaku," written especially for Kaiyen.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[32:39](ptpl04.htm#fr_39) A book treating of
women's salvation.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[32:40](ptpl04.htm#fr_40) A book describing the
loathsomeness of the defiled world and the joys of Pure Land.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[32:41](ptpl04.htm#fr_41) A tract praising the
virtues of Shinran Shōnin.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[35:42](ptpl04.htm#fr_42) A short commentary
work on Shinran's *Shō-shin-ge*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III. The Eastern Hongwanji](ptpl05)
