[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ptpl05)  [Next](ptpl07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029U2W0U/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Principal Teachings of The True Sect of Pure Land*, by Yejitsu Okusa,
\[1915\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

### II. TEACHINGS OF THE TRUE SECT OF PURE LAND.

#### I. THE CANONICAL BOOKS.

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> Buddha Shākyamuni left no writings of
his own, and all we have of his teachings come from what his disciples
retained in their memory and committed to writing after his death. These
writings are called "sūtras" or canonical books, of which a large number
is still in existence. Among them, there are three sūtras giving a full
account of Amitāyus Buddha who brought his effective name into
perfection in order to save all sentient beings from sinking into the
abyss of sin. The following are the three:

1\. The Amitāyus-sūtra or Sukhāvativyūha-sūtra. Two volumes. In this the
venerable Shākyamuni talks to Ānanda and Maitreya on the Mount

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Gṛdhrakūta
concerning the spiritual history of Amida. It was translated into
Chinese in 252 A.D., by Samghavarman.

2\. The Amitāyur Dhyāna-sūtra. One volume. This records what Shākyamuni
preached for Ānanda and Vaidehī at the Royal Palace in Rājagṛha
concerning the possibility of all sentient beings to be born in the Pure
Land of Amitāyus Buddha after the deliverance from this world of
suffering. It was translated into Chinese in 424 A.D., by Kālayashas.

3\. The Amitāyus sūtra, or Sukhāvativyūha-sūtra. One volume. In this is
recorded what Shākyamuni preached for Shāriputra at the garden of
Anāthapindika, Shrāvastī, concerning the magnificence of the land of
happiness and the virtues of Amitāyus Buddha. It was translated into
Chinese by Kumārajīva in 402 A.D.

Of these three sūtras, what is most

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

important is the Amitāyus sūtra in two volumes; for it is in this sūtra
that the true signification of Amida to save all sentient beings is
explained with thoroughness, and the teaching of the True Sect of Pure
Land is no more than the doctrine enunciated in this sūtra. As to the
signification of the other two sūtras, we assume a double
interpretation, apparent and inward. The apparent signification of these
sūtras, then, is that they supply us with a provisionary means whereby
we are finally led to the ultimate reason of salvation by faith in
Amida, while inwardly they unfold the real purport of salvation by faith
in Amida, which is also the teaching of the Amitāyus sūtra in two
volumes. Thus, all these canonical books constitute the sacred lore of
the True Sect, whose essential doctrine is to show the way of salvation
through the grace of Amida.

There were a great many Indian,

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Chinese and
Japanese predecessors of Shinran Shōnin, who like him preached the true
doctrine of salvation by faith. And of these we regard the following
seven as most contributing to the development of the teaching of the
True Sect: that is, in India we have Nāgārjuna and Vasubandhu; in China,
Donran (T’an-luan), Dōshaku (Taoch’ao), and Zendō (Shan-tao); and in
Japan, Genshin and Genkū (also called Hōnen). They are designated the
Seven Fathers (*Kōsō*, meaning "great patriarchs") of the True Sect.
Each one of them left special writings elucidating the faith and
philosophy of it; they are:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Nāgārjuna—"Dashabhūmi-vibhāsha-shāstra," the ninth chapter on "The Easy
Practice."

Nāgārjuna—"The Twelve Reverences" (*Jyūni-rai*).

Vasubandhu—"Discourse on Pure Land."

Donran—"Commentary" on the

</div>

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

above work by Vasubandhu. 2 vols.

Donran—"Hymn Praising Amida Buddha."

Dōshaku—"On Peace and Joy" (*Anrakushū*). 2 vols.

Zendō—"A Commentary on the Amitāyurdhyāna-sūtra." 4 vols.

Zendō—"The Jōdo-hōji-san."

Zendō—"The Kwannen-hōmon."

Zendō—"The Wōjō-raisan."

Zendō—"The Hanju-san."

Genshin—"The Wōjō-yōshū." 3 vols.

Genkū—"The Senjaku-hongwan-nembutsu-shū; 2 vols.

</div>

From this, it is evident that the fundamental truth of the True Sect was
first taught by Shākyamuni himself, which was later developed in detail
and made more manifest by these seven fathers of the Sect, while Shinran
Shōnin synthesised all these teachings severally brought forward by his
predecessors into one system and gave it the name of the

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> True Sect of Pure
Land, whereby the doctrine of salvation by faith gained a new and deeper
and clearer significance. In this sense, therefore, he is the founder of
the True Sect, and his work on the "Doctrine, Practice, Faith, and
Attainment" of the True Sect is its fundamental book. As to the other
authoritative books published later than the one just mentioned, we have
had occasion to refer to them in a previous chapter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II. Systematisation](ptpl07)
