[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ptpl10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029U2W0U/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Principal Teachings of The True Sect of Pure Land*, by Yejitsu Okusa,
\[1915\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

#### VI. LIFE.

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> True Sect of Pure Land is a religion
for the home, teaching to be loyal to master, filial to parents,
affectionate to wife and children, to be industrious in work, doing all
things that contribute to the general welfare, and believing in Amida's
will to save. There is no necessity, according to the doctrine of the
True Sect, to flee from the world and to discipline oneself in certain
religious austerities; one may lead an official life, engage in
business, or be a soldier, or farmer, or fisherman, each diligent in his
chosen occupation, and believing in Amida with devoted heart. The life
of the follower of the True Sect is not difficult; only let him, while
continuing on his sinful and ignorant life, be most deeply grateful for
the grace of Amida, who

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

loves us so much as he is willing to save us as we are, ignorant and
sinful; let us then recite his name from fulness of heart and be ever
industrious in our daily work.

The will of the Buddha is manifest everywhere and in everything, it is
present in the person of our teacher, parents, brother, wife, children,
friends, and also in the State or community to which we may belong; the
Buddha is protecting, nourishing, consoling, and instructing us in every
possible way. What we owe to the Buddha is not only when we are carried
into his Pure Land, but even when we are living our daily life on earth,
for which latter fact we must also be deeply grateful. Let us not forget
how much we are owing to our present surroundings, and to regard them
with reverence and love. We must endeavor as much as we can to execute
our duties faithfully, to work for the growth of Buddhism, for the good

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

of the family, state, and society, and thus to requite even a thousandth
part of what we owe to Amida. To work thus for the world with a sense of
gratitude is the true life of the Buddhist.

The Buddhist never loses an inward feeling of joy as he most deeply
believes in his rebirth in Pure Land through the grace of the Buddha;
but as far as his outward appearance go, let him have nothing
particularly to distinguish himself as such from other people. A
Buddhist officer, or Buddhist soldier, or Buddhist man of business has
nothing remarkable about him as to single him out as Buddhist from among
his fellow-workers; he obeys the moral laws, moves according to the
regulations of the state, does nothing against habits or customs of his
times and country, so long as they are not morally offensive; the only
thing that distinguishes him most conspicuously from his non-Buddhist

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

fellow-beings, is his inward life filled with joy and happiness, because
of his faith in Amida's love to save all beings. For what constitutes
the true Buddhist is his inner life, and not his outward features.

 

 

<span id="img_sep02"></span> ![](img/sep02.jpg)

 

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

<span id="img_09000"></span> ![](img/09000.jpg)
