[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Shinto](../../shi)  [Index](index)  [Previous](gbf06)  [Next](gbf08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029F2GHE/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Gleaings in Buddha-Fields*, by Lafcadio Hearn, \[1897\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

# VI

### NINGYÔ-NO-HAKA

   MANYEMON had coaxed the child indoors, and made her eat. She appeared
to be about eleven years old, intelligent, and pathetically docile. Her
name was Iné, which means "springing rice;" and her frail slimness made
the name seem appropriate.

   When she began, under Manyemon's gentle persuasion, to tell her
story, I anticipated something queer from the accompanying change in her
voice. She spoke in a high thin sweet tone, perfectly even,—a tone
changeless and unemotional as the chanting of the little kettle over its
charcoal bed. Not unfrequently in Japan one may hear a girl or a woman
utter something touching or cruel or terrible in just such a steady,
level, penetrating tone, but never anything indifferent. It always means
that feeling is being kept under control.

   "There were six of us at home," said Iné,—"mother and father and
father's mother, who

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

was very old, and my brother and myself, and a little sister. Father was
a *hyôguya*, a paper-hanger: he papered sliding-screens and also mounted
kakemono. Mother was a hairdresser. My brother was apprenticed to a
seal-cutter.

   "Father and mother did well: mother made even more money than father.
We had good clothes and good food; and we never had any real sorrow
until father fell sick. "It was the middle of the hot season. Father had
always been healthy: we did not think that his sickness was dangerous,
and he did not think so himself. But the very next day he died. We were
very much surprised. Mother tried to hide her heart, and to wait upon
her customers as before. But she was not very strong, and the pain of
father's death came too quickly. Eight days after father's funeral
mother also died. It was so sudden that everybody wondered. Then the
neighbors told us that we must make a *ningyô-no-haka* at once,—or else
there would be another death in our house. My brother said they were
right; but he put off doing what they told him. Perhaps he did not have
money

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

enough, I do not know; but the haka was not made ... . . .

   "What is a *ningyô-no-haka*?" I interrupted.

   "I think," Manyemon made answer, "that You have seen many
*ningyô-no-haka* without knowing what they were;—they look just like
graves of children. It is believed that when two of a family die in the
same year, a third also must soon die. There is a saying, *Always three
graves*. So when two out of one family have been buried in the same
year, a third grave is made next to the graves of those two, and in it
is put a coffin containing only a little figure of straw,—*wara-ningyô*;
and over that grave a small tombstone is set up, bearing a
kaimyô.<sup>\[1\]</sup> The priests of the temple to which the graveyard
belongs write the kaimyô for these little gravestones. By making a
*ningyô-no-haka* it is thought that a death may be prevented. . . . We
listen for the rest, Iné."

\[1. The posthumous Buddhist name of the person buried is chiseled upon
the tomb or *haka*.\]

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

   The child resumed:—

   "There were still four of us,—grandmother, brother, myself, and my
little sister. My brother was nineteen years old. He had finished his
apprenticeship just before father died: we thought that was like the
pity of the gods for us. He had become the head of the house. He was
very skillful in his business, and had many friends: therefore he could
maintain us. He made thirteen yen the first month;—that is very good for
a seal-cutter. One evening he came home sick: he said that his head hurt
him. Mother had then been dead forty-seven days. That evening he could
not eat. Next morning he was not able to get up;—he had a very hot
fever: we nursed him as well as we could, and sat up at night to watch
by him; but he did not get better. On the morning of the third day of
his sickness we became frightened—because he began to talk to mother. It
was the forty-ninth day after mother's death,—the day the Soul leaves
the house;—and brother spoke as if mother was calling him:—'Yes, mother,
yes!—in a little while I shall come!' Then he told us that mother was
pulling him by the sleeve. He

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

would point with his hand and call to us:—'There she is!—there!—do you
not see her?' We would tell him that we could not see anything. Then he
would say, 'Ah! you did not look quick enough: she is hiding now;—she
has gone down under the floor-mats.' All the morning he talked like
that. At last grandmother stood up, and stamped her foot on the floor,
and reproached mother,—speaking very loud. 'Taka!' she said, 'Taka, what
you do is very wrong. When you were alive we all loved you. None of us
ever spoke unkind words to you. Why do you now want to take the boy? You
know that he is the only pillar of our house. You know that if you take
him there will not be any one to care for the ancestors. You know that
if you take him, you will destroy the family name! O Taka, it is cruel!
it is shameful! it is wicked!' Grandmother was so angry that all her
body trembled. Then she sat down and cried; and I and my little sister
cried. But our brother said that mother was still pulling him by the
sleeve. When the sun went down, he died.

   "Grandmother wept, and stroked us, and

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

sang a little song that she made herself. I can remember it still:—

*Oya no nai ko to  
Hamabé no chidori:  
Higuré-higuré ni  
         Sodé shiboru.*<sup>\[1\]</sup>

   "So the third grave was made,—but it was not a ningyô-no-haka;—and
that was the end of our house. We lived with kindred until winter, when
grandmother died. She died in the night,—when, nobody knew: in the
morning she seemed to be sleeping, but she was dead. Then I and my
little sister were separated. My sister was adopted by a *tatamiya*, a
mat-maker,—one of father's friends. She is kindly treated: she even goes
to school!"

\[1. "Children without parents, like the seagulls of the coast. Evening
after evening the sleeves are wrung." The word
*chidori*—indiscriminately applied to many kinds of birds,—is here used
for seagull. The cries of the seagull are thought to express melancholy
and desolation: hence the comparison. The long sleeve of the Japanese
robe is used to wipe the eyes as well as to hide the face in moments of
grief. To "wring the sleeve"—that is, to wring the moisture from a
tear-drenched sleeve—is a frequent expression in Japanese poetry.\]

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

   "*Aa fushigi na koto da!—aa komatta ne?*" murmured Manyemon. Then
there was a moment or two of sympathetic silence. Iné prostrated herself
in thanks, and rose to depart. As she slipped her feet under the thongs
of her sandals, I moved toward the spot where she had been sitting, to
ask the old man a question. She perceived my intention, and immediately
made an indescribable sign to Manyemon, who responded by checking me
just as I was going to sit down beside him.

   "She wishes," he said, "that the master will honorably strike the
matting first."

   "But why?" I asked in surprise,—noticing only that under my unshod
feet, the spot where the child had been kneeling felt comfortably warm.

   Manyemon answered:—

   "She believes that to sit down upon the place made warm by the body
of another is to take into one's own life all the sorrow of that other
person,—unless the place be stricken first."

   Whereat I sat down without performing the rite; and we both laughed.

   "Iné," said Manyemon, "the master takes

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

your sorrows upon him. He wants—(I cannot venture to render Manyemon's
honorifics)—"to understand the pain of other people. You need not fear
for him, Iné."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VII. In Ôsaka](gbf08)
