[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m03280) 
[Next](m03282) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# SECTION CCLXXXI

"Markandeya said, 'It was on the breast of that very hill where Rama was
seated with those foremost of monkeys that great monkey chiefs at the
command of Sugriva, began to flock together. The father-in-law of Vali,
the illustrious Sushena, accompanied by a thousand crores of active
apes, came to Rama. And those two foremost of monkeys endued with mighty
energy, *viz*., Gaya and Gavakshya, each accompanied by a hundred crores
of monkeys, showed themselves there. And, O king, Gavakshya also of
terrible mien and endued with a bovine tail, showed himself there,
having collected sixty thousand crores of monkeys. And the renowned
Gandhamadana, dwelling on the mountains of the same name, collected a
hundred thousand crores of monkeys. And the intelligent and mighty
monkey known by the name of Panasa mustered together fifty-two crores of
monkeys. <span id="fr_93"></span>[1](#fn_93) And that foremost and
illustrious of monkeys named Dadhimukha of mighty energy mustered a
large army of monkeys possessed of terrible prowess. And Jamvuvan showed
himself there with a hundred thousand crores of black bears of terrible
deeds and faces having the *Tilaka* mark. <span
id="fr_94"></span>[2](#fn_94) And these and many other chiefs of
monkey-chiefs, countless in number, O king, came there for aiding Rama's
cause. And endued with bodies huge as mountain-peaks and roaring like
lions, loud was the uproar that was heard there made by those monkeys
running restlessly from place to place. And some of them looked like
mountain-peaks,

<span id="page_553">p. 553</span>

and some looked like buffaloes. And some were of the hue of autumnal
clouds and the faces of some were red as vermillion. And some rose high,
and some fell down, and some cut capers, and some scattered the dust, as
they mustered together from various directions. And that monkey army,
vast as the sea at full tide, encamped there at Sugriva's bidding. And
after those foremost of monkeys had mustered from every direction, the
illustrious descendant of Raghu, with Sugriva by his side, set out in an
auspicious moment of a very fair day under a lucky constellation,
accompanied by that host arrayed in order of battle, as if for the
purpose of destroying all the worlds. And Hanuman, the son of the
Wind-god, was in the van of that host, while the rear was protected by
the fearless son of Sumitra. And [surrounded](errata.htm#186) by the
monkey-chiefs, those princes of Raghu's house with fingers cased in
*guana* skin, shone, as they went, like the Sun and the Moon in the
midst of the planets. And that monkey host armed with stones and *Sala*
and *Tala* trees, looked very much like a far-extending field of corn
under the morning sun. And that mighty army, protected by Nala and Nila
and Angada and Kratha and Mainda and Dwivida, marched forth for
achieving the purpose of Raghava. And encamping successively, without
interruption of any kind, on wide and healthy tracts and valleys
abounding with fruits and roots and water and honey and meat, the monkey
host at last reached the shores of the [briny](errata.htm#187) sea. And
like unto a second ocean, that mighty army with its countless colours,
having reached the shores of sea, took up its abode there. Then the
illustrious son of Dasaratha, addressing Sugriva amongst all those
foremost monkeys, spoke unto him these words that were suited to the
occasion, 'This army is large. The ocean also is difficult to cross.
What contrivance, therefore, commends itself to thee for crossing the
ocean?' At these words, many vain-glorious monkeys answered, 'We are
fully able to cross the sea.' This answer, however, was not of much use,
as all could not avail of that means. Some of the monkeys proposed to
cross the sea in boats, and some in rafts of various kinds. Rama,
however, conciliating them all, said, 'This cannot be. 'The sea here is
a full hundred *Yojanas* in width. All the monkeys, ye heroes, will not
be able to cross it. This proposal, therefore, that ye have made, is not
consonant to reason. Besides we have not the number of boats necessary
for carrying all our troops. How, again, can one like us raise such
obstacles in the way of the merchants? Our army is very large. The foe
wilt make a great havoc if a hole is detected. Therefore, to cross the
sea in boats and rafts doth not recommend itself to me. I will, however,
pray to the Ocean for the necessary means. Foregoing food, I will lie
down on the shore. He will certainly show himself to me. If, however, he
doth not show himself, I will chastise him then by means of my great
weapons that are more blazing than fire itself and are incapable of
being baffled!' Having said these words, both Rama and Lakshmana touched
water <span id="fr_95"></span>[1](#fn_95) and duly laid themselves down
on a bed of *kusa* grass on the seashore. The divine and illustrious
Ocean then

<span id="page_554">p. 554</span>

that lord of male and female rivers, surrounded by aquatic animals,
appeared unto Rama in a vision. And addressing Rama in sweet accents,
the genius of the Ocean, surrounded by countless mines of gems, said, 'O
son of Kausalya, tell me what aid, O bull among men, I am to render
thee! I also have sprung from the race of Ikshwaku <span
id="fr_96"></span>[1](#fn_96) and am, therefore, a relative of thine!'
Rama replied unto him, saying, 'O lord of rivers, male and female, I
desire thee to grant me a way for my troops, passing along which I may
slay the Ten-headed (Ravana), that wretch of Pulastya's race! If thou
dost not grant the way I beg of thee, I will then dry thee up by means
of my celestial arrows inspired with *mantras*!' And hearing these words
of Rama, the genius of Varuna's abode, joining his hands, answered in
great affliction, 'I do not desire to put any obstacle in thy way. I am
no foe of thine! Listen, O Rama, to these words, and having listened, do
what is proper! If, at thy command, I get a way for the passage of thy
army, others then, from strength of their bows, will command me to do
the same! In thy army there is a monkey of the name of Nala, who is a
skilful mechanic. And endued with great strength, Nala is the son of
*Tashtri*, the divine artificer of the Universe. And whether it is wood,
or grass or stone, that he will throw into my waters, I will support the
same on my surface, and thus wilt thou have a bridge (over which to
pass)!' And having said these words, the genius of the Ocean
disappeared. And Rama awaking, called Nala unto him and said, 'Build
thou a bridge over the sea! Thou alone, I am sure, art able to do it!'
And it was by this means that the descendant of Kakutstha's race caused
a bridge to be built that was ten *Yojanas* in width and a hundred
*Yojanas* in length. And to this day that bridge is celebrated over all
the world by the name of *Nala's bridge*. And having completed that
[bridge](errata.htm#189), Nala, of body huge as a hill, came away at the
command of Rama.

"And while Rama was on this side of the ocean, the virtuous Vibhishana,
the brother of the king of the Rakshasas accompanied by four of his
counsellors, came unto Rama. And the high-souled Rama received him with
due welcome. Sugriva, however, feared, thinking he might be a spy. The
son of Raghu, meanwhile perfectly satisfied (with Vibhishana) in
consequence of the sincerity of his exertions and the many indications
of his good conduct, worshipped him with respect. And he also installed
Vibhishana in the sovereignty of all the Rakshasas and made him his own
junior counsellor, and a friend of Lakshmana's. And it was under
Vibhishana's guidance, O king, that Rama with all his troops crossed the
great ocean by means of that bridge in course of a month. And having
crossed the ocean and arrived at Lanka, Rama caused its extensive and
numerous gardens to be devastated by his monkeys. And while Rama's
troops were there, two of Ravana's counsellors and officers, named Suka
and Sarana, who had come as spies, having assumed the shape of monkeys,
were seized by Vibhishana. And when those wanderers of the night assumed
their real Rakshasa forms, Rama showed them his

<span id="page_555">p. 555</span>

troop and dismissed them quietly. And having quartered his troops in
those woods that skirted the city, Rama then sent the monkey Angada with
great wisdom as his envoy to Ravana."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_93"></span>[552:1](m03281.htm#fr_93) There is a difference
of reading here. Some texts read fifty seven,

<span id="fn_94"></span>[552:2](m03281.htm#fr_94) A difference of
reading is observable here.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[553:1](m03281.htm#fr_95) As a purificatory
[ceremony](errata.htm#188), called the Achamana. To this day, no Hindu
can perform any ceremony without going through the Achamana in the first
instance.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[554:1](m03281.htm#fr_96) Traditions represents
the sons of king Sagara of the Ikshwaku race as the excavator of the
ocean. Hence the ocean is called Sagara.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CCLXXXII](m03282)
