[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m03225.md) 
[Next](m03227.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# SECTION CCXXVI

"Markandeya continued, The planets with their satellites, the *Rishis*
and the Mothers, Agni and numerous other blazing courtiers and many
other dwellers of heaven of terrible mien, waited on Mahasena along with
the Mothers. And the illustrious sovereign of the gods, desirous of
victory but believing success to be doubtful mounted his elephant
Airavata and attended by the other gods advanced towards Skanda. That
mighty being followed by all the celestials was armed with his
thunderbolt. And with the object of slaying Mahasena, he marched with
terrible celestial army of great-splendour, sounding their shrill
war-cry and furnished with various sorts of standards, with warriors
encased in various armour and armed with numerous bows and riding on
various animals. When Mahasena beheld the gloriously decked Sakra,
attired in his best clothes, advancing with the determination of slaying
him, he (too on his part) advanced to meet that chief of the celestials.
O Partha, the mighty Vasava, the lord of the celestials, then

<span id="page_459">p. 459</span>

uttered a loud shout, to encourage his warriors and marching rapidly
with the view of killing 'Agnis' son and praised by Tridasas <span
id="fr_74"></span>[1](#fn_74.md) and great *Rishis*, he at length reached
the abode of Kartikeya. And then he shouted out with other gods; and
Guha too in response to this, uttered a fearful war-cry resembling the
roaring of the sea. On hearing that noise, the celestial army behaved
like an agitated sea, and was stunned and fixed to the spot. And that
son of *Pavaka* (the Fire-god) beholding the gods come near to him with
the object of killing him, was filled with wrath, and gave out rising
flame of fire from within his mouth. And these flames destroyed the
celestial forces struggling on the ground. Their heads, their bodies,
their arms and riding animals were all burnt in that conflagration and
they appeared all on a sudden like stars displaced from their proper
spheres. Thus afflicted, the god renounced all allegiance to the thunder
bolt, and sought the protection of Pavaka's son; and thus peace was
again secured. When he was thus forsaken by the gods, Sakra hurled his
thunder-bolt at Skanda. It pierced him on the right side; and, O great
king, it passed through the body of that high-souled being. And from
being struck with the thunder-bolt, there arose from Skanda's body
another being--a youth with a club in hand, and adorned with a celestial
amulet. And because he was born on account of the piercing of the
thunder-bolt, he was named Visakha. And Indra, when he beheld that
another person looking like the fierce destroying Fire-god had come into
being was frightened out of his wits and besought the protection of
Skanda, with the palms of his hands joined together (as a mark of
respect). And that excellent being Skanda, bade him renounce all fear,
with his arm. The gods were then transported with joy, and their hands
too struck up."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_74"></span>[459:1](m03226.htm#fr_74.md) Another name of gods,
so named from their having only three stages of life--*viz*., infancy,
childhood, and youth--and being exempt from the fourth--old age.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CCXXVII](m03227.md)
