[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m03217) 
[Next](m03219) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# SECTION CCXVIII

"Markandeya continued, 'Vrishaspati had a wife (called Tara) belonging
to the lunar world. By her, he had six sons partaking of the energy of
fire, and one daughter. The fire in whose honour oblations of clarified
butter

<span id="page_447">p. 447</span>

are offered at the Paurnamasya and other sacrifices, was a son of
Vrishaspati called Sanju; he was of great ascetic merit. At the
*Chaturmasya* (four-monthly) and *Aswamedha* (horse) sacrifices, animals
are offered first in his honour, and this powerful fire is indicated by
numerous flames. Sanju's wife was called Satya, she was of matchless
beauty and she sprang from Dharma (righteousness) for the sake of truth.
The blazing fire was his son, and he had three daughters of great
religious merit. The fire which is honoured with the first oblations at
sacrifices is his first son called Bharadwaja. The second son of Sanju
is called Bharata in whose honour oblations of clarified butter are
offered with the sacrificial ladle (called Sruk) at all the full moon
(*Paurnamasaya*) sacrifices. Beside these, three sons of whom Bharata is
the senior, he had a son named Bharata and a daughter called Bharati.
The Bharata fire is the son of *Prajapati* Bharata *Agni* (fire). And, O
ornament of Bharata's race, because he is greatly honoured, he is also
called the great. Vira is Bharadwaja's wife; she gave birth to Vira. It
is said by the Brahmanas that he is worshipped like *Soma* (with the
same hymns) with offerings of clarified butter. He is joined with Soma
in the secondary oblation of clarified butter and is also called
Rathaprabhu, Rathadhwana and Kumbhareta. He begot a son named Siddhi by
his wife Sarayu, and enveloped the sun with his splendour and from being
the presiding genius of the fire sacrifice he is ever mentioned in the
hymns in praise of fire. And the fire *Nischyavana* praises the earth
only; he never suffers in reputation, splendour and prosperity. The
sinless fire Satya blazing with pure flame is his son. He is free from
all taint and is not defiled by sin, and is the regulator of time. That
fire has another name Nishkriti, because he accomplished the *Nishkriti*
(relief) of all blatant creatures here. When properly worshipped he
vouchsafes good fortune. His son is called Swana, who is the generator
of all diseases; he inflicts severe sufferings on people for which they
cry aloud, and moves in the intelligence of the whole universe. And the
other fire (Vrihaspati's third son) is called Viswajit by men of
spiritual wisdom. The fire, which is known as the internal heat by which
the food of all creatures is digested, is the fourth son of Vrihaspati
known through all the worlds, O Bharata, by the name of Viswabhuk. He is
self-restrained, of great religious merit, and is a *Brahmacharin* and
he is worshipped by Brahmanas at the Paka-sacrifices. The sacred river
Gomati was his wife and by her all religious-minded men perform their
rites. And that terrible water-drinking sea fire called Vadava is the
fifth son of Vrihaspati. This Brahmic fire has a tendency to move
upwards and hence it is called *Urdhvabhag*, and is seated in the vital
air called *Prana*. The sixth son is called the great Swishtakrit; for
by him oblations became *swishta* (*su*, excellently, and *ishta*,
offered) and the *udagdhara* oblation is always made in his honour. And
when all creatures are claimed, the fire called Manyauti becomes filled
with fury. This inexorably terrible and highly irascible fire is the
daughter of Vrihaspati, and is known as *Swaha* and is present in all
matter. (By the respective influence of the three qualities of *sattwa,
rajas* and *tamas*, Swaha had three sons). By reason of the first she
had a son who was equalled by none in heaven in personal beauty, and
from this fact he

<span id="page_448">p. 448</span>

was surnamed by the gods as the *Kama*-fire. <span
id="fr_64"></span>[1](#fn_64) (By reason of the second) she had a son
called the *Amogha* or invincible fire, the destroyer of his enemies in
battle. Assured of success he curbs his anger and is armed with a bow
and seated on a chariot and adorned with wreaths of flowers. (From the
action of the third quality) she had a son, the great *Uktha* (the means
of salvation) praised by (akin to) three Ukthas. <span
id="fr_65"></span>[2](#fn_65) He is the originator of the great
word <span id="fr_66"></span>[3](#fn_66) and is therefore known as the
Samaswasa or the means of rest (salvation).'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_64"></span>[448:1](m03218.htm#fr_64) Kama is the name of
the god of love, Indian Cupid.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[448:2](m03218.htm#fr_65) The body, the exciting
Cause of our actions is an *uktha*, the soul of the vivifier of the body
is the second *uktha*, and the Supreme Spirit, the inciter of the soul
is the third.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[448:3](m03218.htm#fr_66) The word of God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CCXIX](m03219)
