[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m03312) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# SECTION CCCXIII

Vaisampayana continued,--"Commanded by the Lord of justice to thus spend
in disguise the thirteenth year of non-discovery, the high-souled
Pandavas, observant of vows and having truth for prowess, sat before
those learned and vow-observing ascetics that from regard were dwelling
with them in their exile in the forest. And with joined hands they said
these words, with the intention of obtaining permission to spend the
thirteenth year in the manner indicated. And they said, 'Ye know well
that the sons of Dhritarashtra have by deceit deprived us of our
kingdom, and have also done us many other wrongs! We have passed twelve
years in the forest in great affliction. The thirteenth year only, which
we are to spend unrecognised, yet remaineth. It behoveth you to permit
us now to spend this year in concealment! Those rancorous enemies of
ours Suyodhana, the wicked-minded Kama, and Suvala's son should they
discover us, would do mighty wrong to the citizens and our friends!
Shall we all with the Brahmanas, be again established in our own
kingdom? Having said this, that pure-spirited son of Dharma king
Yudhishthira, overwhelmed with grief and with accents choked in tears,
swooned away. Thereupon the Brahmanas, together with his brothers began
to cheer him up. Then Dhaumya spake unto the king these words fraught
with mighty meaning,--'O king, thou art learned and capable of bearing
privations, art firm in promise, and of subdued sense! Men of such stamp
are not overwhelmed by any calamity whatever. Even the high-souled gods
themselves have wandered over various places in disguise, for the
purpose of overcoming foes. Indra for the purpose of overcoming his
toes, dwelt in disguise in the asylum of Giriprastha, in Nishadha and
thus attained his end. Before taking his birth in the womb of Aditi,
Vishnu for the purpose of destroying the *Daityas* passed a long time
unrecognised, assuming

<span id="page_614">p. 614</span>

the form of the *Haya-griba* (Horse-necked). Then how disguising himself
in the form of a dwarf, he by his prowess deprived Vali of his kingdom,
hath been heard by thee! And thou hast also heard how Hutasana entering
into water and remaining in concealment, achieved the purpose of the
gods. And O thou versed in duty, thou hast heard how Hari with the view
of overcoming his foes, entered into Sakra's thunder-bolt, and lay
concealed there. And, O sinless one, thou hast heard of the office the
regenerate *Rishi* Aurva at one time performed for the gods, remaining
concealed in his mother's womb. And O child, living in concealment in
every part of the earth, Vivaswat, endued with excellent energy, at last
entirely burnt up all his foes. And living disguised in the abode of
Dasaratha, Vishnu of dreadful deeds slew the Ten-necked one in battle.'
Thus remaining in disguise in various places, high-souled persons have
before this conquered their enemies in battle. Thus cheered by these
words of Dhaumya, the virtuous Yudhishthira, relying on his own wisdom
and also that acquired from the scriptures regained his composure. Then
that foremost of strong persons, the mighty-armed Bhimasena endued with
great strength encouraging the king greatly, spake these words, 'Looking
up to thy face (for permission), the [wielder](errata.htm#212) of the
*Gandiva*, acting according to his sense of duty hath not yet, O king,
shown any rashness! And although fully able to destroy the foe, Nakula
and Sahadeva of dreadful prowess have been ever prevented by me! Never
shall we swerve from that in which thou wilt engage us! Do thou tell us
what is to be done! We shall speedily conquer our enemies! When
Bhimasena had said this, the Brahmanas uttered benedictions on the
Bharatas, and then obtaining their permission, went to their respective
quarters. And all those foremost of *Yatis* and *Munis* versed in the
Vedas, exceedingly desirous of again beholding the Pandavas, went back
to their homes. And accompanied by Dhaumya, these heroes, the five
learned Pandavas equipped in vows set out with Krishna. And each versed
in a separate science, and all proficient in *mantras* and cognisant of
when peace was to be concluded and when war was to be waged those tigers
among men, about to enter upon a life of non-recognition, the next day
proceeded for a *Krose* and then sat themselves down with the view of
taking counsel of each other.

*The End of Vana Parva*
