[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pdh61)  [Next](pdh63.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486431614/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Poems from the Divan of Hafiz*, by Getrude Lowthian Bell, \[1897\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## XXI

*Stanza 1*.—Sir Henry Layard gives the following account of a party of
dervishes with whom he travelled, from which it would appear that the
contempt of Hafiz for the dervish habit was not wholly uncalled for:
"They were a picturesque and motley crew. One or two of them were what
the Persians call *luti*, young men with well-dyed curls, long garments,
and conical caps embroidered in many colours—debauched and dissolute
fellows, who, under the guise of poverty, and affecting abstinence and
piety, were given to every manner of vice. Others were half-naked
savages, with hair hanging down their backs, and the skins of gazelles
on their shoulders—barefooted, dirty, and covered with vermin. They
carried heavy iron maces, and seemed more disposed to exact than to ask
for charity. As they went along they shouted 'Yah Allah! yah Muhammad!
yah Ali!' They all had slung from their shoulders the carved cocoa-nut
shell, which is indispensable to the dervish, and serves for carrying
food and for drinking purposes. Round their necks they wore charms and
amulets, with beads and coloured strings and tassels."He goes on to say:
"Most Persian dervishes, although they have great pretensions to
sanctity, by which they impose upon the people, high and low, are
without any religion. They are, however, credited with working miracles,
and with being able to give efficacious charms. . . . Although these
dervishes are rank impostors, and generally arrant scoundrels, they
maintain their influence over the ignorant and superstitious Persians of
all classes, who greatly fear, and do not dare to offend them.
Consequently no one ventures to refuse them admission into their houses,
and even into the women's apartments, where those who go stark-naked,
and are looked upon as specialty holy and protected by Allah and Ali,
can enter with impunity. Sometimes they will demand a specific sum of
money from a rich man, and if he refuses to pay it, will establish
themselves in the gateway or porch of his dwelling, or outside close to
it, and enclosing a small plot of ground, sow wheat or plant flowers,
and remain until what they ask for is paid them, hooting hideously day
and night, calling upon Mohammad, Ali, and the Imams, or blowing on a
buffalo's horn so as to disturb the whole neighbourhood. The owner and
inmates of the house are helpless. They do not dare to remove by force
the holy men."—*Early Adventures*.

*Stanza 2*.—That is to say, the prayer-carpet of the orthodox Mussulman
had not enough value to procure for him so much as one glass of Sufi
wine. Nor was he worthy to lay his head even upon the dusty steps of the
tavern—the place of instruction in Sufi doctrine.

*Stanza 3*.—To be clothed in one colour is the Persian idiom for
sincerity. He means that the single purple robe of the grape is worth
more than the hypocritical garment of the dervish, all torn and patched
with long journeying-in the wrong road.

*Stanza 5*.—So far I have endeavoured to give the mystical
interpretation of the poem. There is, however, a story attached to it
which turns it into a historical rather than a theological document. It
is related that the King of the Deccan, Mahmud Shah Bahmani, had heard
of the fame of Hafiz, and having a pretty taste in literature, was
desirous of attracting him to his court. Accordingly he ordered his
Vizir, Mir Feiz Allah Inju, to send the poet a sufficient sum to pay for
his journey from Shiraz. Hafiz resolved to accept the invitation. He
wound up his affairs in his native town, using some of the money the
Sultan had sent him in paying his debts and in making gifts to his
sister's children, and set forth upon his journey. But when he reached
the town of Lar he found there an acquaintance in very bad case, having
been plundered by robbers and reduced to a state of beggary. Hafiz was
moved to compassion and gave him the remainder of the money which Mahmud
Shah had sent to him. He was now himself unable to continue his journey
for want of means, and perhaps it was bitter experience that taught him
that in very fact his prayer-carpet would not fetch him a glass of wine,
and that without the necessary silver pieces he would be thrust from out
the tavern doors. From these straits he was rescued by two friendly
merchants, who were also on their way to India, and who offered to pay
his expenses to Hormuz, and there place him on a vessel of Mahmud Shah's
which was coming to fetch them. Hafiz accepted the offer, went to
Hormuz, and embarked on the ship. But before they had left the port a
violent storm arose, and persuaded the poet that no advantages he might
reap from the journey would be worth the sorrow of the sea. Under
pretext of bidding farewell to some friends, he disembarked, and in all
haste made the best of his way back to Shiraz, sending to Feiz Allah
this poem as an excuse for failing to keep his engagement. The Vizir
read it to Mahmud Shah, who was transported by the beauty of the verses
and the philosophic dignity in which Hafiz had cloaked his fears of the
dangers of the road and the discomforts of seasickness. With singular
generosity he sent the defaulting poet a further present, consisting of
some at least of the riches of his lands and seas.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXIII](pdh63.md)
