[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Native American](../index) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# The Walam Olum

#### *excerpt from* The Lenâpé and Their Legends, by Daniel G. Brinton.

##### \[1885\].

###### Scanned at Intangible Textual Heritage, 1998. Reformatted July, 2003

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Contents](#contents)    [Start Reading](wa00)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

This controversial work is purportedly a translation of a sequence of
pictographs which give the epic of the Delawares, a tribe which lived in
the central Eastern seaboard. Taken at face value, this would be one of
the few actual written texts from Native North America, including a
clear account of an eastward migration over the 'stone-hard water'. The
source of the document, as well as aspects of the Delaware text, and
some of the historical episodes have been called into question. I'm not
going to rehash this discussion here, but offer some comments based on
the content of the text.

Most likely, the Walam Olum was forged in the 19th Century by someone
who was attempting to provide a mythological underpinning for the theory
that Native Americans migrated from Asia at some point in the recent
past. It is now believed that this migration took place between ten and
fifteen thousand years ago. Instead of a *mass emigration* over a
*frozen ocean*, it was a gradual infiltration by small groups. They
weren't out to discover a new world, but simply following their food
sources. Initially they moved over a land bridge that connected Asia and
America (Behringia), which was exposed at the time by the the greatly
lowered Ice Age sea levels. When the glaciers contracted at the end of
the Ice Age, the conventional theory is that a 'corridor' through
western Canada was created, which served as a migration route south into
North America. Another theory is that people could have taken a sea
route along the Canadian coast to bypass the ice sheets. In any case,
the archeological record indicates that it took hundreds or thousands of
years for people to get from Siberia to the shores of the Atlantic.

Not only does seems unlikely that any record of this migration would
have been preserved to this day (let alone in writing), but this account
is at odds with most other Native American origin stories. The typical
Native American mythology assumes that 'the people' have *always lived
here*, or emerged from one or more worlds underneath the earth. For this
reason, many traditionalist Native Americans regard the Asian land
bridge migration theory in the same way that fundamentalist Christians
feel about Darwinism.

Other aspects of the narrative mark this as a contaminated text. The
Walam Olum origin myth involves an act of creation of all things by a
'Manitou', who subsequently battles an evil 'Magician' who brings death,
disease and bad weather into the world. A genesis at the hands of a
single masculine deity, and an ensuing cosmic struggle between good and
evil, so central to Old World mythology, are, simply put, foreign
concepts in Native American mythology.

For instance, in many Native American cultures, the world is created by
an animal who dives to the bottom of the ocean and brings up land bit by
bit, or by a pantheon of fathers and mothers. There is usually a
trickster figure (in the Southwest, Coyote) who commits transgressive
acts. However, the trickster is not considered 'evil' in the
Judeo-Christian sense, but comic or stupid. Death, disease and so on are
often brought into the world through an accident or misunderstanding,
not as an intentional punishment by some entity. Another aspect of
Native American mythology is the fluid boundary between the animal and
human worlds, of which there is no evidence in the Walum Olum.

There may be some actual indigenous content in this text, but in
retrospect this is either a unique outcropping of Old World mythology in
an improbable location, or a 19th Century forgery. There are some
similar and better documented pictographic records from the Plains area,
but these have nowhere near the epic scope of the Walum Olum. In any
case, this remains one of the lasting mysteries of Native American
literature.

--J.B. Hare <span id="contents"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Title Page](wa00)  
[Part I](wa01)  
[Part II](wa02)  
[Part III](wa03)  
[Part IVa](wa04)  
[Part IVb](wa05)  
[Part IVc](wa06)  
[Part Va](wa07)  
[Part Vb](wa08)  
[Part Vc](wa09)  
