[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Critical Views](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](scb01.md) 
[Next](scb03.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002FU5O3Q/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Self-Contradictions of the Bible*, by William Henry Burr, \[1860\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# MORAL PRECEPTS

<span id="an_24">24</span>.

ROBBERY COMMANDED.

When ye go, ye shall not go empty; but every woman shall *borrow* of her
neighbor, and of her that sojourneth in her house, jewels of silver, and
jewels of gold, and raiment; and ye shall put them upon your sons, and
upon your daughters; and ye shall *spoil the Egyptians*. (Ex. 3:21, 22.)

And they *borrowed of the Egyptians* jewels of silver, and jewels of
gold, and raiment. . . . And they spoiled the Egyptians. (Ex. 12:35,
36).

ROBBERY **FORBIDDEN**.

Thou shalt not defraud thy neighbor, *neither rob* him. (Lev. 19:13.)

Thou *shalt* *not steal*. (Ex. 20:15.)

 

<span id="an_25">25</span>.

LYING APPROVED AND SANCTIONED.

And the woman \[Rahab\] took the two men and hid them and said thus:
There came men unto me, but I wist not whence they were; and it came to
pass about the time of shutting of the gate, when it was dark *that the
men went out; whither the men went I wot not;* pursue after them
quickly, for ye shall overtake them. But she had brought them up to the
*roof of the house* and hid them with the stalks of flax. (Josh. 2:4, 5,
6.)

Was not Rahab, the harlot, *justified* by works, when she had received
the messengers, and had sent them out another way? (James 2:25.)

And the king of Egypt called for the midwives, and said unto them, Why
have ye done this thing, and have saved the men-children alive? And the
midwives said unto Pharaoh, Because *the Hebrew women are not as the
Egyptian women;* for they are lively, and are *delivered ere the
midwives come in unto them. Therefore God dealt well* with the midwives.
(Ex. 1:18-20.)

And there came forth a spirit, and stood before the Lord, and said, I
will persuade him. . . . I will go forth and be a *lying spirit* in the
mouth of all his prophets. And he said, *Thou shalt persuade him* and
prevail also; *go forth and do so*. (1 Kings 22:21, 22.)

LYING **FORBIDDEN**.

Thou *shalt* *not bear false witness*. (Ex. 20:16.)

Lying lips are an *abomination* to the Lord. (Prov. 12:22.)

All *liars* shall have their part in the *lake which burneth with fire
and brimstone*. (Rev. 21:8.)

 

<span id="an_26">26</span>.

HATRED TO THE EDOMITE SANCTIONED.

He \[Amaziah\] slew of Edom, in the valley of Salt, ten thousand . . .
And he did that which was *right* in the sight of the *Lord*. (2 Kings
14:7, 3.)

HATRED TO THE EDOMITE **FORBIDDEN**.

Thou shalt not *abhor* an Edomite, for he is thy *brother*. (Deut.
23:7.)

 

<span id="an_27">27</span>.

KILLING COMMANDED.

Thus saith the Lord God of Israel, Put every man his sword by his side,
and go in and out from gate to gate throughout the camp, and *slay every
man his brother*, and every man his *companion*, and every man his
*neighbor*. (Ex. 32:27.)

KILLING **FORBIDDEN**.

Thou *shalt* *not kill*. (Ex. 20:13.)

 

<span id="an_28">28</span>.

THE BLOOD-SHEDDER MUST DIE.

At the hand of every man's brother will I require the *life* of man.
Whoso sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his *blood* be *shed*. (Gen.
9:5, 6.)

THE BLOOD-SHEDDER MUST **NOT** DIE.

And the Lord set a mark upon Cain, *lest* any finding him should *kill*
him. (Gen. 4:15.)

 

<span id="an_29">29</span>.

THE MAKING OF IMAGES FORBIDDEN.

Thou shalt *not* make unto thee any graven *image*, or any *likeness* of
*anything* that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath.
(Ex. 20:4.)

THE MAKING OF IMAGES **COMMANDED**.

Thou shalt make two *cherubims* of gold. . . . And the cherubims shall
stretch forth their wings on high, covering the mercy seat with their
wings, and their faces shall look to one another. (Ex. 25:18, 20.)

 

<span id="an_30">30</span>.

SLAVERY AND OPPRESSION ORDAINED.

Cursed by Canaan; a *servant of servants* shall he be unto his brethren.
(Gen. 9:25.)

Of the children of the strangers that do sojourn among you, of them
shall ye *buy*. . . . They shall be your *bondmen forever;* but over
your brethren of the children of Israel, ye shall not *rule with rigor*.
(Lev. 25:45, 46.)

I will *sell* your sons and daughters into the hands of the children of
Judah, and they shall *sell* them to the Sabeans, to a people afar off;
for the *Lord* hath spoken it. (Joel 3:8.)

SLAVERY AND OPPRESSION **FORBIDDEN**.

*Undo* the heavy burdens . . . let the oppressed go free, . . . *break
every yoke*. (Is. 58:6.)

Thou shalt *neither vex* a stranger, *nor oppress him*. (Ex. 22:21.)

He that *stealeth* *a man*, and *selleth* *him*, or if he be *found* in
his *hand*, he shall surely be put to death. (Ex. 21:16.)

Neither be ye called *masters*. (Matt. 23:10.)

 

<span id="an_31">31</span>.

IMPROVIDENCE ENJOINED.

Consider the *lilies* of the field, how they grow; they *toil not*,
neither do they spin. . . . If God so *clothe the grass* of the field .
. . shall he not much more *clothe you?* . . . Therefore, *take no
thought*, saying, what shall we *eat?* or What shall we *drink?* or
Wherewithal shall we be *clothed?* . . . Take no thought for the morrow.
(Matt. 6:28, 31, 34.)

*Give to every man that asketh* of thee, and of him that taketh away thy
goods, *ask them not again*. . . . And lend, hoping for *nothing again*,
and your reward shall be great. (Luke 6:30, 35.)

*Sell* that ye have and give alms. (Luke 12:3.)

IMPROVIDENCE **CONDEMNED**.

But if any *provide not for his own*, and especially for those of his
*own house*, he hath denied the faith, and is *worse than an infidel*.
(1 Tim. 5:8.)

A *good* man leaveth an *inheritance* to his childrens’ children. (Prov.
13:22.)

 

<span id="an_32">32</span>.

ANGER APPROVED.

*Be ye angry* and sin not. (Eph. 4:26.)

ANGER **DISAPPROVED**.

Be not hasty in thy spirit to be angry; for *anger resteth in the bosom
of fools*. (Eccl. 7:9.)

Make no friendship with an *angry* man. (Prov. 22:24.)

The wrath of man worketh *not* the righteousness of God. (James 1:20.)

 

<span id="an_33">33</span>.

GOOD WORKS TO BE SEEN OF MEN.

Let your light so shine *before men*, that they may see your *good*
works. (Matt. 5:16.)

GOOD WORKS **NOT** TO BE SEEN OF MEN.

Take heed that ye do not *your* alms *before men*, to be *seen* of them.
(Matt. 6:1.)

 

<span id="an_34">34</span>.

JUDGING OF OTHERS FORBIDDEN.

*Judge not*, that ye be not judged. For with what judgment ye judge, ye
shall be judged. (Matt. 7:1, 2.)

JUDGING OF OTHERS **APPROVED**.

Do ye not know that the saints shall *judge the world?* And if the world
shall be judged by you, are ye unworthy to judge the smallest matters?
Know ye not that we shall *judge angels?* How much more things that
pertain to this life? If, then, ye have judgments of things pertaining
to this life, *set them to judge* who are least esteemed in the church.
(1 Cor. 6:2, 3, 4.)

Do not *ye judge* them that are within? (1 Cor. 5:12.)

 

<span id="an_35">35</span>.

CHRIST TAUGHT NONRESISTANCE.

*Resist not evil*, but whosoever shall *smite* thee on thy right cheek,
*turn to him the other also*. (Matt. 5:39.)

All they that take the *sword* shall *perish* with the sword. (Matt.
26:52.)

CHRIST TAUGHT AND PRACTICED **PHYSICAL RESISTANCE**.

He that hath no *sword*, let him sell his garment and buy one. (Luke
22:36.)

And when he had made a *scourge* of small cords, he *drove* them all out
of the temple. (John 2:15.)

 

<span id="an_36">36</span>.

CHRIST WARNED HIS FOLLOWERS NOT TO FEAR BEING KILLED.

Be *not afraid* of them that *kill* the body. (Luke 12:4.)

CHRIST HIMSELF AVOIDED THE JEWS FOR **FEAR** OF BEING KILLED.

After these things Jesus walked in Galilee; for he would *not* walk in
Jewry, because the Jews sought to *kill* him. (John 7:1.)

 

<span id="an_37">37</span>.

PUBLIC PRAYER SANCTIONED.

And Solomon stood before the altar of the Lord in the presence of *all
the congregation* of Israel, and spread forth his hands toward heaven.
\[Then follows the prayer.\] And it was so, that when Solomon had made
an end of praying all this *prayer and supplication* unto the Lord, he
arose from before the altar of the Lord, from kneeling on his knees,
with his hands spread up to heaven. . . . And the Lord said unto him, I
have heard thy prayer and thy supplication that thou hast made before
me. (1 Kings 8:22, 54; & 9:3.)

PUBLIC PRAYER **DISAPPROVED**.

When thou prayest thou shalt not be as the hypocrites are; for they love
to pray *standing in the synagogues* and in the corners of the streets,
that they may be *seen of men*. . . . But thou, when thou prayest, enter
into thy *closet*, and when thou hast *shut thy door*, pray to thy
Father which is in *secret*. (Matt. 6:5, 6.)

 

<span id="an_38">38</span>.

IMPORTUNITY IN PRAYER COMMENDED.

Because this widow troubleth me, I will avenge her, lest by her
*continual* coming she *weary* me. . . . And shall not God avenge his
own elect, which cry *day* and *night* unto him? (Luke 18:5, 7.)

Because of his *importunity* he will rise and give him as many as he
needeth. (Luke 11:8.)

IMPORTUNITY IN PRAYER **CONDEMNED**.

But when ye pray, use not vain repetitions as the heathen do; for they
think that they shall be heard for their *much speaking*. Be ye not
therefore like unto them; for your Father knoweth what things ye have
need of before ye ask him. (Matt. 6:7, 8.)

 

<span id="an_39">39</span>.

THE WEARING OF LONG HAIR BY MEN SANCTIONED.

And *no razor* shall come on his *head;* for the child shall be a
Nazarite unto God from the womb. (Judg. 13:5.)

All the days of the vow of his separation there shall *no razor* come
upon his *head;* until the days be fulfilled in the which he separateth
himself unto the Lord, he shall be holy, and shall let the *locks of the
hair* of his head *grow*. (Num. 6:5.)

THE WEARING OF LONG HAIR BY MEN **CONDEMNED**.

Doth not even nature itself teach you, that if a man have *long hair*,
it is a *shame* unto him? (1 Cor. 11:14.)

 

<span id="an_40">40</span>.

CIRCUMCISION INSTITUTED.

This is my covenant which ye shall keep between me and you and thy seed
after thee: Every man and child among you shall be *circumcised*. (Gen.
17:10.)

CIRCUMCISION **CONDEMNED**.

Behold, I Paul, say unto you, that if ye be circumcised, *Christ shall
profit you nothing*. (Gal. 5:2.)

 

<span id="an_41">41</span>.

THE SABBATH INSTITUTED.

Remember the *Sabbath* day to keep it holy. (Ex. 20:8.)

THE SABBATH REPUDIATED.

The new moons and *sabbaths*, the calling of assemblies, I cannot away
with; it is *iniquity*. (Is. 1:13.)

One man esteemeth one day above another; another esteemeth *every day
alike*. Let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind. (Rom. 14:5.)

Let no man therefore judge you in meat and drink, or in respect of a
*holy day*, or of the new moon; or of the *sabbath* *days*. (Col. 2:16.)

 

<span id="an_42">42</span>.

THE SABBATH INSTITUTED BECAUSE GOD RESTED ON THE SEVENTH DAY.

For in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that in
them is, and *rested on the seventh day;* wherefore the Lord *blessed*
the Sabbath day and *hallowed* it. (Ex. 20:11.)

THE SABBATH INSTITUTED **BECAUSE GOD BROUGHT THE ISRAELITES OUT OF
EGYPT**.

And remember that thou wast a servant in the land of Egypt, and that the
Lord thy God *brought thee out thence* through a mighty hand and a
stretched out arm; *therefore* the Lord thy God commanded thee to *keep
the Sabbath day*. (Deut. 5:15.)

 

<span id="an_43">43</span>.

NO WORK TO BE DONE ON THE SABBATH UNDER PENALTY OF DEATH.

Whosoever doeth *any work* on the Sabbath day, he shall surely be *put
to death*. (Ex. 31:15.)

And they found a man that *gathered sticks* upon the Sabbath day. . . .
And all the congregation brought him without the camp and *stoned* him
with stones, and *he died;* as the Lord *commanded Moses*. (Num. 15:32,
36.)

JESUS CHRIST **BROKE** THE SABBATH AND **JUSTIFIED HIS DISCIPLES** IN
THE SAME.

Therefore did the Jews persecute Jesus, and sought to slay him, because
he had *done these things* on the *Sabbath day*. (John 5:16.)

At that time Jesus went on the *Sabbath day* through the corn; and his
disciples were a hungered, and began to pluck the ears of corn, and to
eat. But when the Pharisees saw it they said unto him, Behold, thy
disciples do that which is *not lawful* to do upon the Sabbath day. But
he said unto them, . . . . Have ye not read in the law, how that on the
Sabbath days the priests in the temple *profane* the Sabbath, and are
*blameless?* (Matt. 12:1, 2, 3, 5.)

 

<span id="an_44">44</span>.

BAPTISM COMMANDED.

Go ye therefore and teach all nations, *baptizing* them in the name of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. (Matt. 28:19.)

BAPTISM **NOT** COMMANDED.

For Christ sent me *not to baptize*, but to preach the gospel. . . . I
thank God that I *baptized none* of you but Crispus and Gaius. (1 Cor.
1:17, 14.)

 

<span id="an_45">45</span>.

EVERY KIND OF ANIMAL ALLOWED FOR FOOD.

Every *moving thing* that liveth shall be meat for you. (Gen. 9:3.)

Whatsoever is sold in the shambles that *eat*. (1 Cor. 10:25.)

There is *nothing unclean* of itself. (Rom. 14:14.)

CERTAIN KINDS OF ANIMALS **PROHIBITED** FOR FOOD.

Nevertheless, these shall ye *not eat*, of them that chew the cud or of
them that divide the cloven hoof; as the *camel* and the *hare*, and the
*coney;* for they chew the cud, but divide not the hoof; therefore, they
are *unclean* unto you. And the *swine*, because it divideth the hoof,
yet cheweth not the cud, it is unclean unto you; ye shall *not eat* of
their flesh, nor touch their dead carcass. (Deut. 14:7, 8.)

 

<span id="an_46">46</span>.

THE TAKING OF OATHS SANCTIONED.

If a man vow a vow unto the Lord, or swear an oath to bind his soul with
a bond, he shall not break his word; he *shall do* according to all that
proceedeth out of his mouth. (Num. 30:2.)

Now, therefore, *swear* unto me here by God. . . . And Abraham said, I
will *swear*. . . . Therefore, he called the place Beersheba \[the well
of the oath\]; because there they sware both of them. (Gen. 21:23, 24,
31.)

And Jacob *sware* by the fear of his father Isaac. (Gen. 31:53.)

Because he \[God\] could swear by no greater, he *sware* by himself.
(Heb. 6:13.)

THE TAKING OF OATHS **FORBIDDEN**.

But I say unto you, *swear not at all;* neither by heaven for it is
God's throne; nor by the earth for it is his footstool. (Matt. 5:34.)

 

<span id="an_47">47</span>.

MARRIAGE APPROVED.

And the Lord God said, It is not good that the man should be alone: I
will make a help-meet for him. (Gen. 2:18.)

And God said unto them, Be *fruitful* and *multiply*, and *replenish*
the earth. (Gen. 1:28.)

For this cause shall a man leave father and mother and shall *cleave
unto his wife*. (Matt. 19:5.)

Marriage is *honorable in all*. (Heb. 13:4.)

MARRIAGE **DISAPPROVED**.

It is good for a man *not to touch* a woman. (1 Cor. 7:1.)

For I \[Paul\] would that all men were even as *I myself*. . . . It is
good for them if they abide even as *I*. (1 Cor. 7:7, 8.)

 

<span id="an_48">48</span>.

FREEDOM OF DIVORCE PERMITTED.

When a man hath taken a wife and married her, and it come to pass that
she found *no favor* in his eyes, . . . then let him write her a bill of
*divorcement*, and give it in her hand, and send her *out of his house*.
(Deut. 24:1.)

When thou goest out to war against thine enemies, and the Lord thy God
hath delivered them into thy hands, and thou hast taken them captive,
and seest among the captives a beautiful woman and hast a desire unto
her, then thou shalt take her home to thy house; . . . and after that
thou shalt *go in* unto her and be *her husband*, and she shall be *thy
wife*. . . . And if thou have *no delight* in her, then thou shalt *let
her go* whither she will; but thou shalt not sell her at all for money;
thou shalt not make merchandise of her. (Deut. 21:10, 11, 14.)

DIVORCE **RESTRICTED**.

But I say unto you, that whosoever shall put away his wife, saving for
the cause of *fornication*, causeth her to commit *adultery*. (Matt.
5:32.)

 

<span id="an_49">49</span>.

ADULTERY FORBIDDEN.

Thou shalt not commit *adultery*. (Ex. 20:14.)

Whoremongers and *adulterers* God will judge. (Heb. 13:4.)

ADULTERY **ALLOWED**.

But all the *women children* that have not known a man by lying with
him, keep *alive* for *yourselves*. (Num. 31:18.)

And the Lord said unto Hosea, Go, take thee a wife of whoredoms. . . .
Then said the Lord to me \[Hosea\], Go, yet, *love a woman*, beloved of
her friend, yet *an adulteress*. . . . So I *bought* her; . . . and said
unto her, Thou shalt *abide for me* many days; thou shalt not play the
harlot, and thou shalt not be for another man; so will I also be for
thee. (Hos. 1:2, & 2:1, 2, 3.)

 

<span id="an_50">50</span>.

MARRIAGE OR COHABITATION WITH A SISTER DENOUNCED.

Cursed is he that lieth with his *sister*, the daughter of his father.
(Deut. 27:22.)

And if a man shall take his *sister*, his father's daughter, or his
mother's daughter, . . . it is a wicked thing. (Lev. 20:17.)

ABRAHAM MARRIED HIS SISTER AND GOD **BLESSED THE UNION**.

And Abraham said, . . . She is my *sister;* she is the daughter of my
*father*, but not the daughter of my mother. (Gen. 20:11, 12.)

And God said unto Abraham, as for Sarah thy wife, . . . I will *bless*
her, and give thee a *son* also of her. (Gen. 17:16.)

 

<span id="an_51">51</span>.

A MAN MAY MARRY HIS BROTHER'S WIDOW.

If brethren dwell together, and one of them die and have no child, the
wife of the dead shall not marry without unto a stranger; her *husband's
brother* shall come in unto her bed and take her to *wife*. (Deut.
25:5.)

A MAN MAY **NOT** MARRY HIS BROTHER'S WIDOW.

If a man shall take his *brother's wife*, it is an *unclean thing*, . .
. they shall be childless. (Lev. 20:21.)

 

<span id="an_52">52</span>.

HATRED TO KINDRED ENJOINED.

If any man come unto me, and *hate not* his *father*, and *mother*, and
*wife*, and *children*, and *brother*, and *sisters*, yea, and his own
life also, he cannot be my disciple. (Luke 14:26.)

HATRED TO KINDRED **CONDEMNED**.

Honor thy *father* and *mother*. (Eph. 6:2.)

Husbands love your *wives*. . . . For *no* man ever yet *hated* his *own
flesh*. (Eph. 5:25, 29.)

Whosoever *hateth* his *brother* is a *murderer*. (1 John 3:15.)

 

<span id="an_53">53</span>.

INTOXICATING BEVERAGES RECOMMENDED.

Give *strong drink* to him that is ready to perish, and *wine* to those
that be of heavy hearts. Let him *drink* and forget his poverty, and
remember his misery no more. (Prov. 31:6, 7.)

Drink no longer water, but use a *little wine* for thy stomach's sake,
and thine often infirmities. (1 Tim. 5:23.)

*Wine maketh glad* the heart of man. (Ps. 104:15.)

INTOXICATING BEVERAGES **DISCOUNTENANCED**.

Wine is a *mocker*, strong drink is a *raging*, and whosoever is
deceived thereby is not wise. (Prov. 20:1.)

*Look not* thou upon the wine when it is *red;* when it giveth his color
in the cup. . . . At the last it *biteth* like a *serpent* and
*stingeth* like an *adder*. (Prov. 23:31, 32.)

 

<span id="an_54">54</span>.

IT IS OUR DUTY TO OBEY OUR RULERS, WHO ARE GOD'S MINISTERS AND PUNISH
EVIL DOERS ONLY.

Let every soul be *subject* unto the *higher powers*. For there is *no
power but of God;* the powers that be are *ordained of God*. Whosoever,
therefore, *resisteth* the power, resisteth the *ordinance of God;* and
they that resist shall receive to themselves *damnation*. For rulers are
not a terror to *good works*, but to *evil*. . . . For this cause pay ye
tribute; for they are *God's ministers*, attending continually upon this
very thing. (Rom. 13:1, 2, 3, 6.)

The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses’ seat; all, therefore, whatsoever
they *bid* you observe, that *observe and do*. (Matt. 23:2, 3.)

*Submit* yourselves to *every ordinance of man* for the Lord's sake;
whether it be to the king as supreme, or unto the governors as unto them
that are *sent of him* for the *punishment of evil doers*. (1 Pet. 2:13,
14.)

I counsel thee to *keep the king's commandment*. . . . Whoso keepeth the
commandment shall *feel no evil* thing. (Eccl. 8:2, 5.)

IT IS **NOT** OUR DUTY ALWAYS TO OBEY RULERS, WHO **SOMETIMES** PUNISH
THE GOOD, AND RECEIVE UNTO THEMSELVES **DAMNATION** THEREFOR.

But the midwives feared God, and *did not* as the king of Egypt
*commanded them*. . . . Therefore God dealt well with the midwives. (Ex.
1:17, 20.)

Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego answered and said. . . . Be it known
unto thee, O king, that we *will not serve thy gods, nor worship the
golden image* which thou hast set up. (Dan. 3:16, 18.)

Therefore, king Darius signed the writing and the decree. . . . (that
whosoever shall ask a *petition of any God* for thirty days . . . he
shall be cast into the den of lions). . . . Now, when Daniel knew that
the writing was signed, he went into his house and . . . *kneeled* upon
his knees three times a day and *prayed* . . . as he did aforetime.
(Dan. 6:9, 7, 10.)

And the *rulers* were gathered together *against the Lord* and against
his Christ. For of a truth, *against thy holy child Jesus*, whom thou
has anointed, both *Herod and Pontius Pilate*, with the Gentiles, and
the people of Israel, were gathered together. (Acts 4:26, 27.)

Beware of the Scribes, which love to go in long clothing, and love
salutations in the market places, and the *chief seats* in the
synagogues. . . . These shall receive *greater damnation*. (Mark 12:38,
39, 40.)

And *Herod* with his men of war *set him at naught*, and mocked him, and
arrayed him in a gorgeous robe, and sent him again to Pilate. . . . And
*Pilate gave sentence*. . . . And when they were come to the place which
is called Calvary, there they *crucified him*. . . . And the people
stood by beholding. And the *rulers also* with them *derided* him. (Luke
23:11, 24, 33, 35.)

 

<span id="an_55">55</span>.

WOMEN'S RIGHTS DENIED.

And thy desire shall be to thy husband, and he shall *rule over thee*.
(Gen. 3:16.)

I *suffer not a woman to teach*, nor to usurp authority over the man,
but to be *in silence*. (1 Tim. 2:12.)

They are commanded to be *under obedience*, as also *saith the law*. (1
Cor. 14:34.)

Even as *Sarah obeyed Abraham*, calling him Lord. (1 Pet. 3:6.)

WOMEN'S RIGHTS **AFFIRMED**.

And Deborah, *a prophetess, . . . judged Israel* at that time. . . . And
Deborah said unto Barak, Up, for this is the day in which the Lord hath
delivered Sisera into thy hand. . . . And the Lord discomfited Sisera,
and all his chariots, and all his host, with the edge of the sword
before Barak. (Judg. 4:4, 14, 15.)

The inhabitants of the villages ceased; they ceased in Israel, until I,
*Deborah, arose, a mother in Israel*. (Judg. 5:7.)

And on my hand-maidens I will pour out in those days my spirit, and they
*shall prophesy*. (Acts 2:18.)

And the same man had four daughters, virgins, which *did prophesy*.
(Acts 21:9.)

 

<span id="an_56">56</span>.

OBEDIENCE TO MASTERS ENJOINED.

Servants, *obey in all things your masters* after the flesh. . . . And
whatsoever ye do, do it as heartily as to the Lerd. (Col. 3:22, 23.)

Be *subject to your masters* with all fear; not only to the *good and
gentle*, but also, to the *froward*. (1 Pet. 2:18.)

OBEDIENCE DUE TO GOD **ONLY**.

Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and *him only* shalt thou *serve*.
(Matt. 4:10.)

Be not ye the servants of men. (1 Cor. 7:23.)

Neither be ye *called masters;* for *one* is your *master*, even
*Christ*. (Matt. 23:10.)

 

<span id="an_57">57</span>.

THERE IS AN UNPARDONABLE SIN.

He that shall blaspheme against the Holy Ghost hath *never forgiveness*.
(Mark 3:29.)

THERE IS **NO** UNPARDONABLE SIN.

And by him *all* that *believe* are justified from *all things*. (Acts
13:39.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Historical Facts](scb03.md)
