[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Critical Views](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](scb00) 
[Next](scb02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002FU5O3Q/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Self-Contradictions of the Bible*, by William Henry Burr, \[1860\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THEOLOGICAL DOCTRINES

<span id="an_1">1</span>.

GOD IS SATISFIED WITH HIS WORKS.

And God saw everything that he had made, and behold it was *very good*.
(Gen. 1:31.)

GOD IS **DISSATISFIED** WITH HIS WORKS.

And it *repented* the Lord that he had *made man* on the earth, and it
*grieved* him at his heart. (Gen. 6:6.)

 

<span id="an_2">2</span>.

GOD DWELLS IN CHOSEN TEMPLES.

And the Lord appeared to Solomon by night, and said unto him: I have
heard thy prayer, and have chosen *this place* to myself for a *house*
of sacrifice. . . . For now have I chosen and sanctified this house,
that my name may be there forever; and mine eyes and my heart shall be
*there perpetually*. (2 Chron. 7:12, 16.)

GOD DWELLS **NOT** IN TEMPLES.

Howbeit the Most High *dwelleth* *not* in temples made with hands. (Acts
7:48.)

 

<span id="an_3">3</span>.

GOD DWELLS IN LIGHT.

Dwelling in *light* which no man can approach unto. (1 Tim. 6:16.)

GOD DWELLS IN **DARKNESS**.

The Lord said he would dwell in thick *darkness*. (1 Kings 8:12.)

He made *darkness* his secret place. (Ps. 18:11.)

Clouds and *darkness* are round about him. (Ps. 97:2.)

 

<span id="an_4">4</span>.

GOD IS SEEN AND HEARD.

And I will take away my hand, and thou shalt *see* my backparts. (Ex.
33:23.)

And the Lord spake to Moses *face to face*, as a man speaketh to his
friend. (Ex. 33:11.)

And the Lord *called* unto Adam, and said unto him, Where art thou? And
he said, I *heard* thy *voice* in the garden, and I was afraid. (Gen.
3:9, 10.)

For I have *seen* God *face to face*, and my life is preserved. (Gen.
32:30.)

In the year that King Uzziah died, I *saw*, also, the Lord sitting upon
a throne, high and lifted up. (Is. 6:1.)

Then went up Moses and Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, and seventy of the elders
of Israel. And they saw the God of Israel. . . . They *saw* God, and did
eat and drink. (Ex. 24:9, 10, 11.)

GOD IS **INVISIBLE** AND **CANNOT** BE HEARD.

No man hath *seen* God at any time. (John 1:18.)

Ye hath *neither heard* his *voice*, at any time, *nor seen* his
*shape*. (John 5:37.)

And he said, Thou *canst not see* my face; for there shall *no* man
*see* me and live. (Ex. 33:20.)

Whom no man hath *seen nor can see*. (1 Tim. 6:16.)

 

<span id="an_5">5</span>.

GOD IS TIRED AND RESTS.

For in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, and on the seventh day
he *rested*, and was *refreshed*. (Ex. 31:17.)

I am *weary* with repenting. (Jer. 15:6.)

GOD IS **NEVER** TIRED AND **NEVER** RESTS.

Hast thou not heard that the everlasting God, the Lord, the Creator of
the ends of the earth, *fainteth* *not*, neither is weary? (Is. 40:28.)

 

<span id="an_6">6</span>.

GOD IS EVERYWHERE PRESENT, SEES AND KNOWS ALL THINGS.

The eyes of the Lord are in *every place*. (Prov. 15:3.)

Whither shall I flee from thy *presence?* If I ascend up into heaven,
thou art *there;* if I make my bed in hell, behold, thou art *there*. If
I take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the uttermost parts of the
sea; even *there* shall thy hand lead me, and thy right hand shall hold
me. (Ps. 139:7-10.)

There is no darkness nor shadow of death, where the workers of iniquity
may *hide* themselves. For his eyes are upon the ways of man, and he
*seeth* *all his goings*. (Job 34:22, 21.)

GOD IS **NOT** EVERYWHERE PRESENT, **NEITHER** SEES **NOR** KNOWS ALL
THINGS.

And the Lord *came down to see* the city and the town. (Gen. 11:5.)

And the Lord said, Because the cry of Sodom and Gomorrah is great, and
because their sin is very grievous, I will *go down* now and *see*
whether they have done altogether according to the cry of it, which is
come unto me; and, *if not*, I will know. (Gen. 18:20, 21.)

And Adam and his wife *hid* themselves from the *presence of the Lord*,
amongst the trees of the garden. (Gen. 3:8.)

 

<span id="an_7">7</span>.

GOD KNOWS THE HEARTS OF MEN.

Thou, Lord, which *knowest* *the hearts of all men*. (Acts 1:24.)

Thou knowest my down-sitting and mine up-rising; thou understandest my
thought afar off. Thou compassest my path and my lying down, and art
*acquainted with all my ways*. (Ps. 139:2, 3.)

GOD TRIES MEN TO **FIND OUT** WHAT IS IN THEIR HEARTS.

The Lord, your God, *proveth* *you, to know whether* ye love the Lord,
your God, with all your heart and with all your soul. (Deut. 13:3.)

The Lord thy God led thee these forty years in the wilderness, to humble
thee, and to *prove thee, to know what was in thy heart*. (Deut. 8:2.)

For *now I know* that thou fearest God, seeing that thou *hast not
withheld thy son*, thine only son, from me. (Gen. 22:12.)

 

<span id="an_8">8</span>.

GOD IS ALL-POWERFUL.

Behold, I am the Lord, the God of all flesh; is there *anything too hard
for me?* (Jer. 32:27.)

With God *all* things are *possible*. (Matt. 19:26.)

GOD IS **NOT** ALL-POWERFUL.

And the Lord was with Judah, and he drave out the inhabitants of the
mountain; but *could not drive out* the inhabitants of the valley,
because they had chariots of iron. (Judg. 1:19.)

 

<span id="an_9">9</span>.

GOD IS UNCHANGEABLE.

With whom is no *variableness, neither shadow of turning*. (James 1:17.)

For I am the Lord; I change not. (Mal. 3:6.)

I, the Lord, have spoken it; it shall come to pass, and I *will do it*.
I will not go back, neither will I spare, neither will I *repent*.
(Ezek. 24:14.)

God is not a man, that he should lie; neither the son of man, that he
should *repent*. (Num. 23:19.)

GOD IS **CHANGEABLE**.

And it *repented* the Lord that he had made man on the earth, and it
grieved him at his heart. (Gen. 6:6.)

And God saw their works, that they turned from their evil way; and God
*repented* of the evil that he had said he *would do* unto them, and he
*did it not*. (Jonah 3:10.)

Wherefore the Lord God of Israel saith, I said, indeed, that thy house,
and the house of thy father, should walk before me forever; but now the
Lord saith, *Be it far from me*. . . . Behold, the days come that I will
*cut off* thine arm, and the arm of thy father's house. (1 Sam. 2:30,
31.)

In those days was Hezekiah sick unto death. And the prophet Isaiah, the
son of Amoz, came unto him, and said unto him, Thus saith the Lord, set
thy house in order; for thou *shalt* *die*, and not live. . . . And it
came to pass afore Isaiah was gone out into the middle court, that the
word of the Lord came unto him, saying, Turn again and tell Hezekiah,
the captain of my people, thus saith the Lord, . . . . I have heard thy
prayer, . . . and I will *add* unto thy days, *fifteen* years. (2 Kings
20:1, 4, 5, 6.)

And the Lord said unto Moses, Depart and go up hence, thou and the
people. . . . For I will not go up in the midst of thee. . . . And the
Lord said, I will do this thing, also, that thou hast spoken. . . . *My
presence shall go with thee*, and I will give thee rest. (Ex. 33:1, 3,
17, 14.)

 

<span id="an_10">10</span>.

GOD IS JUST AND IMPARTIAL.

The Lord is *upright*, . . . and there is no unrighteousness in him.
(Ps. 92:15.)

Shall not the Judge of all the earth *do right?* (Gen. 18:25.)

A God of truth, and without iniquity, *just* and *right* is he. (Deut.
32:4.)

There is *no respect of persons* with God. (Rom. 2:11.)

Ye say the way of the Lord is not *equal*. Hear now, O house of Israel;
is not my way *equal?* (Ezek. 18:25.)

GOD IS **UNJUST** AND **PARTIAL**.

*Cursed* be Canaan; a *servant of servants* shall he be unto his
brethren. (Gen. 9:25.)

For I, the Lord thy God, am a *jealous* God, visiting the iniquity of
the *fathers* upon the *children* unto the *third and fourth
generation*. (Ex. 20:5.)

For the children being *not yet born, neither having done any good or
evil*, that the purpose of God, according to election, might stand, . .
. it was said unto her, *The elder shall serve the younger*. As it is
written, Jacob have I *loved*, and Esau have I *hated*. (Rom. 9:11, 12,
13.)

For whosoever *hath*, to him shall be *given*, and he shall have *more
abundance;* but whosoever *hath not*, from him shall be *taken away*
even *that he hath*. (Matt. 13:12.)

 

<span id="an_11">11</span>.

GOD IS THE AUTHOR OF EVIL.

Out of the mouth of the Most High proceedeth not *evil* and good? (Lam.
3:38.)

Thus saith the Lord, Behold I *frame evil* against you and *devise a
device* against you. (Jer. 18:11.)

I make peace and *create evil*. I the Lord *do all* these things. (Is.
45:7.)

Shall there be *evil* in the city, and the *Lord* hath not done it?
(Amos 3:6.)

Wherefore I gave them also *statutes that were not good*, and judgments
that they *should not live*. (Ezek. 20:25.)

GOD IS **NOT** THE AUTHOR OF EVIL.

God is not the author of *confusion*. (1 Cor. 14:33.)

A God of *truth and without iniquity, just and right* is he. (Deut.
32:4.)

For God cannot be tempted with evil, neither *tempteth* he any man.
(James 1:13.)

 

<span id="an_12">12</span>.

GOD GIVES FREELY TO THOSE WHO ASK.

If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, *that giveth to all men
freely* and upbraideth not, and it shall be given unto him. (James 1:5.)

For every one that *asketh* *receiveth* and he that *seeketh* *findeth*.
(Luke 11:10.)

GOD **WITHHOLDS** HIS BLESSINGS AND PREVENTS MEN FROM RECEIVING THEM.

He hath *blinded their eyes and hardened their heart* that they *should
not see* with their eyes, nor understand with their heart, and be
converted, and I should heal them. (John 12:40.)

For it was of the Lord to *harden their hearts*, that they should come
against Israel in battle, that he might destroy them utterly, and that
they might have *no favor*. (Josh. 11:20.)

O Lord, why hast thou made us to *err* from thy ways and *hardened our
heart?* (Is. 63:17.)

 

<span id="an_13">13</span>.

GOD IS TO BE FOUND BY THOSE WHO SEEK HIM.

Everyone that asketh receiveth, and he that *seeketh* fmdeth. (Matt.
7:8.)

Those that *seek me early shall find me*. (Prov. 8:17.)

GOD IS **NOT** TO BE FOUND BY THOSE WHO SEEK HIM.

Then shall they call upon me but I will *not answer*; they shall seek me
early but shall *not find me*. (Prov. 1:28.)

 

<span id="an_14">14</span>.

GOD IS WARLIKE.

The Lord is a man of *war*. (Ex. 15:3.)

The Lord of *Hosts* is his name. (Is. 51:15.)

GOD IS **PEACEFUL**

The God of *peace*. (Rom. 15:33.)

God is not the author of confusion but of *peace*. (1 Cor. 14:33.)

 

<span id="an_15">15</span>.

GOD IS CRUEL, UNMERCIFUL, DESTRUCTIVE, AND FEROCIOUS.

I *will not pity*, nor *spare*, nor *have mercy*, but *destroy*. (Jer.
13:14.)

And thou shalt *consume all the people* which the Lord thy God shall
deliver thee; thine eye shall have *no pity* upon them. (Deut. 7:16.)

Now go and smite Amalek, and utterly destroy all that they have, and
spare them not, but slay both *man and woman, infant and suckling*. (1
Sam. 15:2, 3.)

Because they had looked into the ark of the Lord, even he *smote of the
people fifty thousand, and three score and ten men*. (1 Sam. 6:19.)

The Lord thy God is a *consuming fire*. (Deut. 4:24.)

GOD IS **KIND**, **MERCIFUL**, AND **GOOD**.

The Lord is *very pitiful* and of *tender mercy*. (James 5:11.)

For he doth not *afflict willingly*, nor *grieve* the children of men.
(Lam. 3:33.)

For his mercy *endureth* *forever*. (1 Chron. 16:34.)

I have no *pleasure* in the death of him that dieth, saith the Lord God.
(Ezek. 18:32.)

The Lord is *good to all*, and his tender mercies are over *all his
works*. (Ps. 145:9.)

Who will have *all men to be saved*, and to come unto the knowledge of
the truth. (1 Tim. 2:4.)

God is *love*. (1 John 4:16.)

*Good* and upright is the Lord. (Ps. 25:8.)

 

<span id="an_16">16</span>.

GOD'S ANGER IS FIERCE AND ENDURES LONG.

And the Lord's *anger was kindled* against Israel, and he made them
wander in the wilderness *forty years* until *all the generation* that
had done evil in the sight of the Lord was *consumed*. (Num. 32:13.)

And the Lord said unto Moses, Take all the heads of the people and hang
them up before the Lord against the sun, that the *fierce anger* of the
Lord may be turned away from Israel. (Num. 25:4.)

For I have kindled a fire in mine anger which shall *burn forever*.
(Jer. 17:4.)

GOD'S ANGER IS **SLOW** AND ENDURES BUT FOR A **MOMENT**.

The Lord is merciful and gracious, *slow to anger* and plenteous in
mercy. (Ps. 103:8.)

His anger *endureth* *but a moment*. (Ps. 30:5.)

 

<span id="an_17">17</span>.

GOD COMMANDS, APPROVES OF AND DELIGHTS IN BURNT OFFERINGS, SACRIFICES,
AND HOLY DAYS.

Thou shalt offer every day a *bullock* for a sin offering for atonement.
(Ex. 29:36.)

On the tenth day of this seventh month, there shall be a *day of
atonement;* it shall be a *holy convocation* unto you, and ye shall
afflict your souls and offer an *offering made by fire* unto the Lord.
(Lev. 23:27.)

And thou shalt burn the whole *ram* upon the altar; . . . *it is a sweet
savor;* an offering made by fire unto the Lord. (Ex. 29:18.)

And the priest shall burn it all on the altar to be a *burnt sacrifice*,
an offering made by fire, of a *sweet savor* unto the Lord. (Lev. 1:9.)

GOD **DISAPPROVES** OF, AND **HAS NO PLEASURE** IN BURNT OFFERINGS,
SACRIFICES, AND HOLY DAYS.

For I *spake* *not* unto your fathers, nor commanded them in the day
that I brought them out of the land of Egypt, concerning burnt
*offerings* or *sacrifices*. (Jer. 7:22.)

Your burnt offerings are *not acceptable, nor your sacrifices sweet*
unto me. (Jer. 6:20.)

Will I eat of the flesh of *bulls*, or drink the blood of *goats?* Offer
unto God *thanksgiving*, and pay thy *vows* unto the Most high. (Ps.
50:13, 14.)

Bring no more *vain oblations;* *incense* is an *abomination* unto me;
the *new moons* and *sabbaths*, the calling of *assemblies I cannot away
with;* it is *iniquity*, even the *solemn meeting*. . . . To what
purpose is the multitude of your *sacrifices* unto me? saith the Lord. I
am full of the burnt offerings of rams, and the fat of fed beasts, and I
*delight not* in the blood of bullocks, or of lambs, or of he goats.
When ye come to appear before me, *who hath required this* at your hand.
(Is. 1:13, 11, 12.)

 

<span id="an_18">18</span>.

GOD ACCEPTS HUMAN SACRIFICES.

The king \[David\] took the two sons of Rizpah, . . . and the five sons
of Michal; . . . and he delivered them into the hands of the Gibeonites,
and they *hanged* them in the hill *before the Lord*. . . . And after
that God *was entreated* for the land. (2 Sam. 21:8, 9, 14.)

And he \[God\] said, Take now thy son, thine only son Isaac, whom thou
lovest, and get thee into the land of Moriah, and *offer* him there for
a *burnt offering*. (Gen. 22:2.)

And Jephthah vowed a *vow* unto the *Lord*, and said, If thou shalt
without fail deliver the children of Ammon into my hands, then it shall
be, that whosoever cometh forth of the doors of my house to meet me when
I return in peace from the children of Ammon, shall surely be the
Lord's, and I will offer it up for a *burnt offering*. So Jephthah
passed over unto the children of Ammon to fight against them; and the
Lord delivered them into his hands. . . . And Jephthah came to Mizpeh
unto his house and behold, his daughter came out to meet him. . . . And
he sent her away for two months; and she went with her companions and
bewailed her virginity upon the mountains. And it came to pass at the
end of two months that she returned unto her father, who *did according
to his vow* which he had made. (Judg. 11:30, 31, 32, 34, 38, 39.)

GOD **FORBIDS** HUMAN SACRIFICE.

Take heed to thyself that thou be not snared by following them \[the
Gentile nations\]; . . . for every abomination to the Lord which he
hateth have they done unto their gods; for even their *sons* and their
*daughters* have they *burnt in the fire to their gods*. (Deut. 12:30,
31.)

 

<span id="an_19">19</span>.

GOD TEMPTS MEN.

And it came to pass after these things, that God did *tempt Abraham*.
(Gen. 22:1.)

And again the anger of the Lord was kindled against Israel and *he
moved* David against them to say, Go number Israel and Judah. (2 Sam.
24:1.)

O Lord, thou has *deceived* \[marginal reading, *enticed*\] me, and I
was deceived \[enticed\]. (Jer. 20:7.)

Lead us not into *temptation*. (Matt. 6:13.)

GOD TEMPTS **NO** MAN.

Let no may say when he is tempted, I am *tempted of God;* for God cannot
be tempted with evil, *neither tempteth he any man*. (James 1:13.)

 

<span id="an_20">20</span>.

GOD CANNOT LIE.

It is impossible for God to lie. (Heb. 6:18.)

GOD **LIES BY PROXY;** HE SENDS FORTH **LYING SPIRITS** TO DECEIVE.

For this cause God shall *send them strong delusion*, that they should
believe a *lie*. (2 Thes. 2:11.)

Now, therefore, behold, the Lord hath *put a lying spirit* in the mouth
of all these thy prophets, and the Lord hath *spoken evil* concerning
thee. (1 Kings 22:23.)

And if the prophet be deceived when he hath spoken a thing, I the Lord
*have deceived* that prophet. (Ezek. 14:9).

 

<span id="an_21">21</span>.

BECAUSE OF MAN'S WICKEDNESS GOD DESTROYS HIM.

And God saw that the *wickedness* of man was *great* in the earth, and
that every *imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil
continually*. . . . And the Lord said, I will *destroy* man whom I have
created. (Gen. 6:5, 7.)

BECAUSE OF MAN'S WICKEDNESS GOD WILL **NOT** DESTROY HIM.

And the Lord said in his heart, I *will not again* curse the ground any
more for man's sake; for the *imagination of man's heart is evil from
his youth; neither will I smite any more every living thing*. (Gen.
8:21.)

 

<span id="an_22">22</span>.

GOD'S ATTRIBUTES ARE REVEALED IN HIS WORKS.

For the *invisible things* of him from the creation of the world are
*clearly seen*, being understood by the *things that are made*, even his
*eternal power and Godhead*. (Rom. 1:20.)

GOD'S ATTRIBUTES **CANNOT B**E DISCOVERED.

Canst thou by searching *find out God?* (Job 11:7.)

There is no searching *his understanding*. (Is. 40:28.)

 

<span id="an_23">23</span>.

THERE IS BUT ONE GOD.

The Lord our God is *one* Lord. (Deut. 6:4.)

THERE IS A **PLURALITY** OF GODS.

And God said, Let *us* make man in our image. (Gen. 1:26.)

And the Lord God said, Behold the man is become as one of us. (Gen.
3:22.)

And the Lord appeared unto him \[Abraham\] in the plains of Mature. . .
. And he lifted up his eyes and looked, and lo, *three men* stood by
him; and when he saw them he ran to meet them from the tent door, and
bowed himself toward the ground, and said, *My Lord*, if now I have
found favor in thy sight, pass not away, I pray thee, from thy servant.
(Gen. 18:1, 2, 3.)

For there are *three* that bear record in Heaven, the Father, the Word,
and the Holy Ghost. (1 John 5:7).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Moral Precepts](scb02)
