[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md)  [New
Thought](../../nth/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](cm00.md) 
[Next](cm02.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0757000398/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Creative Mind, by Ernest Shurtleff Holmes \[1923\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_iii">p. iii</span>

# INTRODUCTION.

THE hand of eternal progress is brushing the cobwebs from the corridors
of time and is again revealing to the human race the mysteries of being.
As there is "nothing new under the sun," the searchlight of Truth is
bringing to light only what has been known to the few in all
generations. The time has now come when the few must become the many.
The whole world, from the least to the greatest, must know the Truth, so
that man may understand the great laws that govern his life. He must
learn to control his own destiny, to heal his own body and bring
happiness to his own soul. Ignorance must vanish and understanding must
be ushered in. Man is no longer to be governed by anything outside
himself. Creeds, doctrines, churches, institutions, organizations,
governments are all being changed to give place to the realization of
the individual. There is a power in and through all that is working this
great transformation. All that will not measure up to the standard must
fall by its own weight; all that is in line with the Truth must still
prosper. The time is at hand; we are in the greatest age of all history;
we are in the age of the unifying of all people and all things into the
"Ever Present One." "The temple not made with hands" is now being
silently builded by the emancipated souls of this planet.

<span id="page_iv">p. iv</span>

This little book is an attempt to explain what each soul must discover
for himself, that he stands in the midst of an eternal creative power
which presses itself around his own thought, and casts back to him
glorified all that he thinks. If it awakens within the consciousness of
one single individual the realization that the mind of the Universe
(which is the only mind that there is) is his own mind; that the
creative power of this mind is his also; that the manifestation of this
mind is his own individuality; that the love and power and peace of this
mind is within himself, it will not be written in vain. May it then do
much in simplifying and bringing to light some of the deeper mysteries
and meanings of life.

ERNEST SHURTLEFF HOLMES,

October 1, 1918.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](cm02.md)
