[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index)  [New
Thought](../../nth/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](cm03) 
[Next](cm05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0757000398/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Creative Mind, by Ernest Shurtleff Holmes \[1923\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

# PART II.

## PRACTICE.

### INTRODUCTORY.

THE one who wishes to practise metaphysics must first, last, and all the
time realize that he himself is a center of the divine. activity; he
must know that whatever God is in the Universal, he is in the world in
which he lives. He must know that all things are made out of Spirit,
which is First Cause; nothing comes before Spirit. Operating upon itself
out of itself, it makes what it will out of its own perfect desire. He
must think of the Spirit as the Father of his own life, eternally bound
to him, eternally binding him to it.

He must know that the Spirit not only can manifest through him, but that
it wishes to do so; "The Father seeks such to worship Him." The
practitioner who understands the truth knows that as long as God exists,
he will exist; that he could no more become non-existent than God could.
Walking, talking, moving in God, he must not only see the Divine Being
as the great unknown Cause, but he must go a step further and see God as
the great self-knowing, understanding power of Infinite Intelligence,
thinking through his own thought and willing into his own life all power
and all good. More than this, God must become

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

within his own soul the greater self, the inner life, the inner light
that is to light his path with sure step to the attainment of the
greater ideals. God is to become the great friend of his life,
understanding him, and helping him at all times to understand all
things.

No more books, no more teachers, no more preachers, creeds or
candlesticks will he ever need. The old methods must vanish into their
native nothingness, as the great realization that God is all in his life
dawns upon his awakened thought.

"Naught is the squire, when the king's at hand;  
Withdraw the stars, when dawns the sun's brave light."

He must know that not height, nor depth, nor any other thing, can come
between the soul and its perfect Creator. Too long have we listened to
people; now our own soul shall speak in a language that is unmistakable;
now shall we ourselves become masters of all life and interpreters of
all mysteries. Now my Father and I are one.

As the word of God goes forth and sets in motion the all law, so must we
realize because we are one with the word that our own thought has the
power of expression. The one who wishes to heal must come to see all
evil as impersonal, fastening it to no one, but realizing that it is
simply false thought; the healer knows that the word which he is to
speak will destroy this false impression; and by erasing it, it will
vanish.

There should be absolutely no sense of responsibility beyond speaking
the word in positive faith, knowing. All struggle belongs to the Old
Order; in the New peace takes

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

the place of confusion, faith answers the cry of doubt and fear, and the
Word is supreme.

We must know that our word is law, and cannot be set aside by the false
thought of the world. Every time that we state a truth, we must know
that that truth destroys all that is unlike itself and frees the thought
of the one whom we wish to help and to heal.

This word must become the new Law which frees. People are sick because
they think sickness and will be healed only when they turn from this
kind of thought and begin to think in terms of health.

### THE SAME POWER USED IN TWO WAYS.

THERE is only One power, but we use it in two ways, either to destroy or
to save. The blessing and the curse are one and the same thing; the
power of mind used either affirmatively or negatively; the word used in
fear and doubt or in faith and assurance.

You do not have to understand material philosophy or be learned in the
books of the human race. All these things may be good in their place,
but to one who understands the greater laws of life they are as simple
babblings--

"An infant crying in the night,  
An infant crying for the light.  
And with no language but a cry."

We no longer cry, we Know. We no longer ask if there be a God, or if we
dare to speak to Him lest we die; we do not analyze, dissect, affirm, or
deny, *We know*.

We trust our own word because first we "Know in whom

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

we have believed." The sooner the one who is striving to attain will
realize that truth must become revealed through his own soul, and not
that of another, the sooner he will attain. We must then become immune
from the race suggestion of an hypnotic power that sets itself up as an
authority. There is no other authority than your own soul, as "There is
no law but that your soul has set." Leave authorities to smaller minds,
and to those who need a leader because of this their own self-confessed
weakness, and be *Free*. Dare to "*Stand* amidst the eternal way" and
proclaim your own *Atonement* with all the power that there is, was, or
ever will be.

Practically the whole human race is hypnotized, thinking whatever it is
told to think. We get our concepts from our physical environment, we
say, "See sin, sickness and death, misery, unhappiness and calamity."
And this concept we are giving to the creative, impersonal Mind, and so
we are making a law for ourselves that will produce what we believe in.
Do we really know what law means? *It means that which will exact the
utmost farthing from our thought*.

Like produces like, attracts like, creates like. If we could see our
thought and take a picture of it and of our conditions we would see no
difference between the two, for they are really but the inside and the
outside of the same thing.

We cannot make affirmations for fifteen minutes a day and spend the rest
of our time denying the thing which we have affirmed, and affirming the
thing which we have denied, and obtain the results which we seek. We
send out the word and it sets the power in motion; then we think the
opposite thing which neutralizes the first word, and zero is the result.

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

We cannot demonstrate one iota beyond our mental ability to conceive and
steadfastly to embody. Infinite as Creative Power is, receptive and
quick as it is, it can only become to us what we first think into it.
God can do for us only what He can do *through* us.

Dare to say, "Behold I am he. Great men have come and gone, and behold a
greater now stands here where I stand, and I am that one." The world
will laugh and perhaps scorn. The Christian world will hold up its hands
in holy horror, lest you blaspheme; the unchristian world will smile
knowingly. Neither the one nor the other will understand, but the
understanding of either counts for nothing. You are now free, and your
freedom will yet save the world from itself. The great soul finds within
himself the Divine companionship which he needs. He finds within himself
the "Peace which passeth all understanding" and the power to do all
things. *All Power!* He speaks, his word is Law and it is done unto him
of all the power there is. His word knows itself to be the law of life
unto all for whom it is spoken and who receive it.

### HEALING THE SICK.

WE shall be called upon to heal all manner of disease, to comfort the
sorrowing and to bring peace to the distressed. First we must heal
ourselves. When we are healing others we are also healing ourselves. A
healer's work takes place within himself. This idea of "sending out
thought" and "holding thought" is all a mistake. Think, come into being
not only by "taking thought" but *by knowing that the Word is infinite*.
This word is in your own

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

mouth, and there alone can it be spoken. Here your responsibility begins
and here it ends, *in your own mouth*. You must feel no responsibility
for the recovery of your patient, for it brings confusion and
disturbance to be always wondering if it is working. It must work, if
you have the sure faith, and your patient is receptive. You are dealing
with the same power that said, "Let there be light" and there was light.

If your patient is suffering from a belief that he is dying of some
dread disease, you must know that when you speak the word it will
destroy this false belief and set him free. There must be no doubt about
the power in the word which you speak. It should be said in perfect
calm, in peace, and with absolute faith that it will work. This word
then establishes the law of life unto the patient, it casts out all
fear, it destroys all false sense of a material life and realizes that
all is an expression of a perfect God; and so leaves nothing that can
sin, be sick, suffer or die. When you are as sure of this as that von
breathe, when you truly know within yourself, your patient will be
healed, provided he also believes. If he does not believe it is not your
fault, and you will have done for him all that can be done.

### DENIALS.

SOME people teach the use of denials. This must be settled by each
individual for himself. Here and at all times we must settle every
question from within and not from without. No living soul can say how
another should or should not work. Beware of the danger of a
self-appointed authority; this danger is as apt to come into New

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Thought as it was
in the Old. *No one is your authority on anything*. Let us look into the
philosophy of denials. We find that many people teach and practise them,
and we do not wish in any way to criticize them. Their reasoning is
this: "All disease is an image of thought held in mind until it appears
in the body." It is true that without the ability to think man could not
be sick. If he thinks a sick thought it will make him sick; when he
changes his thought and thinks health, he is healed. It is taught that
since sickness is negative thought, it must be counteracted by a
positive thought, and that the best way is to deny the sick and affirm
the positive thought; for instance, "There is no matter, and nothing can
be the matter. This man has no material stomach, he is spiritual and not
material; his lungs are not made of matter, they are spiritual ideas; I
deny that man can be sick or suffer or die." All this may be accurate;
man is a spiritual idea, and so must be perfect in his real nature; but
there is a question if this is the *better* way. When we look into the
creative way of the spirit we find it impossible for denial to enter, as
the Spirit recognizes no opposite to its own nature.

It knows that "*I Am* and beside me there is no other." The Spirit does
not deny anything, it simply affirms itself to be that which it desires
to be. Seeing and recognizing no opposite to itself, it finds no need of
denial, indeed, this thought need not enter the mind; if we are working
with the Spirit we need not deny but state the affirmative attitude of
mind, realizing that we are dealing with the only power that exists.
There is a subtle danger in using denials; we may deny to such an extent
as to erect a barrier or build a mountain to overcome. Once realize

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

that God makes things out of Himself simply by speaking, and you will
never again use denials in treating. All that needs changing is the
false thought, and by affirming that your word destroys everything but
itself you will embody all that a denial could. In those systems that
teach denials we find that the more enlightened ones are gradually using
the affirmative method, and as this is the growth of experience there
can be no doubt that it is the better method. Of one thing we may be
sure, the Spirit *never denies*. *It simply knows that I am*.

### THE USE OF AFFIRMATIONS.

THE affirmation is the great weapon of the healer; it is in alignment
with the way of the original creative spirit and is the true use of the
Word of All Power. We need only to say that our word is the law unto the
case and calmly state what we want to be done, and then say and do
nothing that contradicts it and wait for the fulfillment of that word.
There is a power that operates on what we say, and it is done unto us,
and we need have no fear about the results.

If I am treating Mary Jones I need only say I am helping her, and go to
work within myself to realize that she is now a perfect being, made in
the image of God. I must know that I am destroying all imperfection;
when I know within myself that I am speaking the truth and realize that
she is perfect, the healing is done as far as I am concerned. If she
receives she is healed; I am not responsible for her receptivity. Know
that there is a power that corresponds to your own mental attitude and

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

you will see that the way you are believing is what makes things happen
the way they do. Always believe in what you are doing; never see the
negative side of life, never talk about it, or listen to talk of other
people, and never think about or see imperfection; and you will have no
trouble in making demonstrations.

### THE HIGHEST ATTITUDE OF MIND.

THE highest attitude of mind, from which all else springs, is one of
perfect calm and absolute trust in the Spirit. The one who can with
perfect confidence look into the future and with perfect ease of mind
rest in the present, and who never looks backward, but who has learned
to be still in his own soul and wait upon the Spirit, *he* is the one
who will the most completely demonstrate the supremacy of spiritual
thought over all so-called material resistance. "Be still and know that
*I Am God*."

### NON-RESISTANCE.

"RESIST not evil and it will flee from you." Here is a statement of one
of the great laws of our being. When we resist we make a mental image of
the thing we are fighting, and that tends to have it created for us.
When we learn to look only at what we watt and never at what we do not
want, we will no longer resist anything. "Suffer it to be so now." You
need not try to change the world. Let it alone; all people are doing the
best they can. No one needs to be saved but yourself, and the sooner you
realize this the sooner you will attain. Get over that "holier

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

than thou" attitude. It is an illusion that many people suffer from,
especially in the religious world. The world is all right; it is not
going to Hell; it is on the way to Heaven. It is getting good so fast
that in the process many things are being overturned and confusion
appears to be on the surface. A great change is taking place, and on the
surface the results are as yet a little mixed, but underneath, the power
is at work destroying all unlike itself. In time all will come to see
this. What a load of responsibility we assume that we were never meant
to carry.

Remember that in the Divine plan no mistakes are made and that if God
could have done it in a better way he would have done it differently. No
souls are lost, for all "Live and move and have their being in Him" and
"God is not a God of the dead but of the living, for in His sight all
are alive." Too long have we believed in the negative simply because we
have allowed ourselves to become hypnotized by a few strong-minded
people, and by those who have imposed upon the race a mass of false
philosophy.

### BE ALIVE.

THERE is no place in the New Order for "dead ones." The true
metaphysician is alive to all that is useful. Filling his place in the
events of the human race, he takes part in all its labor and in all its
fun. Pessimism must be relegated to the scrap heap. There is no place
among the living for the dead. "Let the dead bury their dead." "Follow
thou me." Do not hesitate to enter into the game of life, but do so with
a zest and an enthusiasm that over- flows with life. Fill yourself with
the radiance of a life

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

running over with power and usefulness. Then shall the world see your
light.

People in the New Thought above all others should enter into the
business world, into educational vocations, into politics, into every
walk of life, and there prove before a waiting world, tired of itself,
that a "man's a man," with this difference: not a "son of man" but a
"Son of God."

### BE HAPPY.

HOW can we hope to make the world see the right way unless we overflow
with joy? The world has now too many sad faces. We see them everywhere,
that resigned look that seems to say, "One rebuff more or less makes no
difference; I am already so sad that nothing matters; I can bear it."
This was all right when we thought everything was all wrong, but now we
know that "all's well with the world" we must get over this depression
which robs us of the power of attraction of the good things of life, and
"enter in."

The man who is always glad will surround himself with people who are
happy, and life will be a continual enjoyment, This robs no one; it does
not make a race of irresponsible people; it makes a world of joy, a
world that is good to live in.

No one wants to associate with the dead. People are looking for a more
abundant expression of life, not for depression and fault-finding. Find
fault with no one, and more than this find no fault with yourself. Get
over the thought of condemning people and things. People and things are
all right; let them alone and enjoy life. Your

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

very atmosphere will cheer and uplift the people who contact you, and a
new life will enter into them. Overflow.

"As it's given me to perceive,  
I most certainly believe  
When a man's glad plumb through,  
God's pleased with him same's you."

### LIVE IN THE PRESENT.

LIFE is for us to-day. There will be no change for to-morrow unless we
do the changing to-day. To-day we are setting in motion the power of
to-morrow. To-day is God's day, and we must extract from it what of life
we are to live. To-morrow in the divine course of events will care for
itself. The soul that learns to live in the great gladness of to-day
will never weary of life but will find that he is living in an eternal
here and now. Now, all good is his; now, all life, truth and love are
his; now, he has entered in, and the good things of life are his to-day.

"Lord, for to-morrow and its needs I do not pray,  
Make me to do thy will just for to-day."

Let your soul sing to-day and the song that comes to-morrow will be all
the sweeter, will ring out over the vistas of time with an unmistakable
clearness. Here is a soul who knows himself and has found life. within
himself, who has met God to-day. No more waiting, no more longing, no
more weary roads to travel. He has arrived. The goal is won and peace
has come at last. To-clay.

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

### SEE THE GOOD IN ALL THINGS.

LEARN to see God in all manifestation, in all people, through all
events. The ordinary person sees only the lump of matter. Not so with
the awakened soul. He sees in all things the Divine Mind at work molding
out into expression what it feels itself to be of life, of color, of
form and beauty. There are some illusioned ones who claim that what we
see is all false, and that the so-called material universe is an
unreality. What a mistake! What we see is the body of God, full, free,
complete, whole.

"A primrose by the river's brim,  
A yellow primrose was to him,  
And it was nothing more."

He never saw the idea behind--it was seen only as matter, matter,
matter; yet what he could have seen was God's thought of himself coming
out into wonderful beauty, and color, and form; The Infinite One
manifesting in an infinite variety of forms. What do you see when you
look upon the human form, the crowning glory of God's perfect creation?
Matter, matter, matter? Flesh, blood and bones? Indeed, these may be
passing into expression, but what of the idea, what of the reality of
the body? This body of ours is as real as God is real. It would not be
if it were an illusion. The very touch of the flesh should send a thrill
through the whole body, bringing up its vibration to a higher pitch, to
a finer form. The body is not one "mass of pollution," it is the temple
of the *living God* and should be so thought of. Too long have we
condemned it, and

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

now we must free it by reversing the process. Of all things on earth the
human body is the most beautiful, the most wonderful and the most
God-like.

"If you do not love your brother whom you have seen, how can you love
God whom you have not seen?" Human magnetism is not hypnotism, it is the
divinity of man in expression; and when we learn to convert human
passion into divine love, to transmute the lower into the higher, we
shall have with us a power of attraction against which nothing can
stand.

"He who hath ears to hear, let him hear."

When we behold a beautiful sunset we should see the wonderful thought of
God, the radiance of his presence. In the strength of the hills we
should see the strength of the Spirit; and seeing all things as
spiritual ideas, we should learn to love them, because God has made them
and given them to us to use. The soul who in ecstasy can rush up to a
tree and embrace it realizes more of God than all the bigoted priests
who have ever lived. The one who can sniff the ocean breeze with delight
feels the presence of the divine being more keenly than does the one who
kneels in despair before an awful God of Justice.

Learn then how to appreciate Nature and Nature's God. Spend much time in
the out of doors; look up at the stars; let them be your companions;
tread the pathless ways of the trees and the giant forests and see God
in everything that you look upon, the God of the everywhere.

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

### BE EXPECTANT.

EXPECT the best to happen. Don't sit around waiting for trouble; have
absolutely nothing to do with it. It is no part of the divine plan. It
is an illusion of the material sense. One who has learned to trust will
not be surprised even when he finds things coming from the most
unexpected sources. All things are man's to use and then let go of. What
more can we ask? We want nothing that we have to keep; things are to use
not to hold. Expect that everything is to come your way. Be content and
cheerful if you wish to attract from out the store of the infinite. Open
up your whole consciousness to the greater possibilities of life. Line
up with the big things. When you speak the word expect it to happen.
Know that it must be as you say. This will not be fooling yourself, it
will simply be using the law as it is meant to be used.

### EXPANDING OUR THOUGHT.

ALL things come to us through the use of our thought. If we have a small
concept of life we will always be doing small things. First in the
creative series is the Word, but the Word carries us no further than our
consciousness back of it. Unless we are constantly expanding our thought
we are not growing. Growth is the law of life and it is necessary. We
cannot stand still. If you want to do a new thing, get a new thought and
then you will have the power of attraction which has the possibility of
drawing to you the circumstances which will make for the fulfillment of
your desires. Get over the old idea of limitation.

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

Overcome all precedents and set yourself in the new order of things. If
you want to build a railroad, you will never do it unless you get over
the idea that the most you can hope for in life is to sell peanuts. Let
the people sell peanuts for a living who think in the terms of peanuts.
Get out of the rut. God has created you for a glorious future; dare to
fling out into mind the greater assurances about yourself.

### THE POWER OF A TREATMENT.

A TREATMENT has as much power as we put into the word which we speak
when we are giving it. This does not mean screwing up our mind or using
our will power, or using force from the material standpoint. It means
simply knowing that what we say will be done unto us of a Power which
can do anything that is given It to do. We must know that our word
breaks down every material law and sets the patient free to express God.
We must know that the word would endure even though all else should
fail. "Heaven and earth will pass away but my word will accomplish." In
calm confidence and perfect faith, speak and wait upon the perfect law.
Get that mental attitude that never wavers. Be sure and it will be done.

### REPEATING THE TREATMENT.

ONE treatment would heal anything if it were not for the fact that
people are constantly receiving false suggestions from the outer life.
As it now stands we should treat until we get results, always expecting
that it will

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

happen at once. Every treatment should be complete, and at the close we
should always realize that it is done.

The word spoken once from the mind that knows is immediately taken up by
the Mind in which we live, and this Mind begins to create around the
word, which is the seed, the thing thought of. We must speak that word
with authority. There can be no wondering if it is going to work. When
we plant a seed in the ground and water and care for it, we never doubt
but a plant will spring into being. So it is with the word. It is acted
upon by some power which we do not see, but that the power is
there there is no doubt, since all who go about it get results. As
Thomas Edison says of electricity, "It Is; use it;" so we say of mind,
"It Is; use it." Always remember that your every thought is the way that
you are treating, since it is the way that you are thinking.

### IMPERSONAL HEALING.

THE very presence of one that understands the truth will have a great
power of healing. The reason for this is that we are all in Mind, and we
have with us at all times our thought, and since all manifestation is
the result of mind in action, and we are thinking beings and are always
causing mind to act, the very presence of our thought will have some
power to act upon whatever we are thinking about. We are dealing with a
power which in itself is limitless. We limit it, and so it cannot become
to us the bigger thing. Of itself the power is the same that made the
worlds, and it cannot realize any sense of limitation. "They could not
enter in because of their

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

unbelief and because they limited the Holy one of Israel." Stop limiting
things. Things are as big as we make them, no more, no less. There is
room at the top. Get on top of everything, and dare to dominate the
earth. All things are given us to use; make use of them. Everything is
limitless, and we must see the truth that the fault is not in the Law
but in ourselves when we fail. Not with God but with man. *Dare, Dare,
Dare*.

Think of the bigness of things in the universe, think of the number of
grains of sand, the profusion of all life, and never again limit
anything. *All is yours to use*. Jesus would never have become the
Christ unless he had had the courage to say, "Behold, *I Am He*." You
will never attain until in some degree you are able to say the sane
thing of yourself.

We must learn to reach out and take what is meant for us, the greater
life, the all good. People say, "Yes, but how do you do it?" Simply know
that God makes things out of Himself by speaking the word, and that in
your own life you can do the same. All people can think, and all people
can speak, at least mentally; this is all that you need to begin on. The
word is at the center of all creation and is first cause, the starting
point of all that you see. The word is in your own mouth, and all that
you have to do is to speak it. The trouble is that we are speaking the
word, and in the next breath we are denying its power by seeing
something that contradicts It. If the word is the way that God creates,
it is the right way. If it works for God, shall it not work for us? As
yet our word is more or less imperfect; but more and more it will become
perfect, and so the outer condition will be brought up to the inner

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

word. All words have as much power as we put into them when we speak.
"The word is already in our own mouths." That word is all that you will
ever need to bring happiness, health and success to you.

Do you wish to live in a perfect world peopled with friends who love
you, surrounded by all that is beautiful and pleasing? Do you wish to
have the good things of life? There is but one way and that way is as
sure as that the sun shines. Forget all else and think only upon what
you want. Control all thought that denies the real, and as the mist
disappears before the sun so shall all adversity melt before the shining
radiance of your own exalted thought.

The prodigal son remained a prodigal only so long as he chose to do so.
When the thought came to him to return he was greeted by the Father with
outstretched hands. So shall we find that when we turn to that world
which is perfect there will be something that will turn with us, and we
shall behold the new heaven and the new earth; not in some far off place
somewhere beyond the clouds, but here and now shall we become free.

We must do away with all that hinders the true growth, all the little
thoughts that hinder us from becoming. Human strife comes from the
thought that there is not enough to go around. Forget it; we cannot use
even what we see, and what we do not see is infinite. You will rob no
one by becoming prosperous, and the laws that [underlie](errata.htm#4)
this state of being are simple and easy to understand, and not hard to
attain for the one who is willing to let go of the negative state of
being.

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

### PROSPERITY.

HERE are a few simple rules for prosperity that are as sure of working
as that water is sure to be wet. First remember that nothing happens by
chance. All is law and all is order. You create your own laws every time
you think. There is something, call it what you will, but there is a
Power around you that knows and that understands all things.

This Power works like the soil; it receives the seed of your thought and
at once begins to operate upon it. It will receive whatever you give to
it and will create for you and throw back at you whatever you think into
it.

This means that the practitioner should be very careful how he is
thinking at all times. Not alone in the moments of the deeper silence
are we treating our patients, but perhaps more than this we are treating
them in an impersonal way at all times. When we take a patient into our
thought for a treatment there will be a constant stream of consciousness
flowing out to him, during all the time that he is in our care. We
should be very careful of our thoughts as we realize the deep truths of
mental action and reaction.

### WHAT IS THE SPIRITUAL MIND?

WHAT is true spirituality? Many people have asked this and as many have
answered it. I do not pretend to know more about this all important
topic than others, but to the thinking person who has come to realize
that all is love, yet at the same time all is governed by law, there
must be a different answer given than the one we ordinarily

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

hear. The average religious person thinks that spirituality must
manifest in some unnatural way, such as giving up all personal pleasure
and becoming resigned to whatever happens; that we must give up most of
what life holds here; that in some far-off future perhaps we may attain.
This was not the case with the man Jesus. We have more accounts of his
being at feasts and weddings and similar gatherings than at other
places. His first miracle was performed at a wedding feast, and we must
remember that here he even turned water into wine for the pleasure of
the guests of the house. Perhaps we have made a mistake about what true
spirituality means.

Other people think we must live some kind of an excluded life in order
to obtain. Perhaps this may be true of the weak ones. But what of the
wood? What of the busy street? Is it not to be saved also? Jesus spent
much time with the common people as well as with the rich. And it is
certain that he also spent much time alone with the Spirit.

What is the Spirit, anyway? We all answer, "Why of course, it is God."
Where is the Spirit? It is present at all times and in all places. *True
spirituality must simply mean coming to realize the presence of this
Spirit*. It must be coming to rely upon it more than anything else. The
one then who is the most spiritual is simply the one who *relies the
most;* that is all. No matter where he is, he must rely, he must trust,
he must believe. We do not have to give up anything but negative thought
and act. We do not want to do anything that contradicts the forward
march of the unfoldment of the Spirit, so all that we think and do must
be in line with that which is right. But who shall say what is and what
is not right? *Remember this forever*,

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

*only your own soul shall say what is right and what is wrong*. "To
thine own self be true, and it shall follow as the night the day, thou
canst not then be false to any man." Look to no one for guidance. This
is the "blind leading the blind." The Almighty has put the truth into
your own soul; look there and there alone for it. Many people seem to
think that for a man to look spiritual he must have no color in his
face, have some kind of far-away truth; he must be peculiar either in
looks, or in the way he dresses.

To one who knows the truth, both praise and blame sound alike, but from
the human standpoint at least a person cannot help being amused at the
way in which the world judges true spirituality. My idea of true
spirituality is that a man should live a perfectly normal life, entering
into and enjoying all in life that is clean and good. He should place
himself absolutely under the divine guidance. Other than this he will
seem just like other people, neither better nor worse. Get over all
kinds of unnatural thought and remember that all is good. Neither
criticize nor condemn people or things. You are spiritual in so far as
you trust in the Spirit, at all times, in all places, under all
conditions. In order to do this you do not have to seclude yourself from
the world. To do so is an open confession of your own weakness and lack.
There are moments when it is best to be alone with the Power. From these
moments we gather strength. To keep that strength to ourselves is pure
selfishness. Walk, talk, live with the human race, hand in hand with all
people and unified with all events, live and love and learn. Be natural
and normal. If you seek to enter some other way it must all be done over
again, for no one lives or dies unto himself but unto all people.

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

### THE CHURCH OF GOD.

THE Church of God is not built with hands, it is eternal in the heavens;
it is not lighted with candles; its dome is heaven and it is lighted by
the stars of God's illumined thought, and each member in his separate
star "shall draw the thing as he sees it, for the God of things as they
are." Here all people recognize the God within their own souls and ask
for and see no other God. When you can look upon all creation as the
perfect work of a perfect God, you will become a member of this church.
I doubt very much if the church universal admits members from the church
individual. When you can see in the saint and the sinner one and the
same person, when you can realize that the one who kneels before the
altar and the one who lies drunk in the street is the same one, when you
can love the one as much as you do the other, no doubt you will be able
to qualify. As it now is we have too many preachers who do not
understand, that have no purpose; too many prayers, too many creeds, too
many teachers, that have no message; too many churches, too many
"learned" people, and too few *thinkers*. "The Kingdom of Heaven cometh
not by observation." It is the "Still, small voice" within the soul that
speaks. The expanded thought will never wish to join or be joined to.
Nothing human can contain it. It feels the limitation of form and
ceremony and longs for the freedom of the Spirit, the great out of
doors, the Great God of the everywhere. Alone in the desert, the forest
or by the restless ocean, looking up at the stars, man breathes forth
these words, "With only my Maker and me."

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

### THE PATH TO PROSPERITY.

THE healing of conditions is no different from other healing. All
healing is the constructive use of a mental law which the world is
gradually beginning to understand something of. Again we must reiterate
the principle of all life. We are surrounded by a thinking medium from
which all things come. We think into it; it does the rest. Since we are
thinking beings and cannot stop thinking, and since Creative Mind
receives our thought and cannot stop creating, it must always be making
something for us. What it will make depends absolutely and only upon
what we are thinking, and what we will attract will depend entirely upon
our holding thought to the complete exclusion of all that would
contradict it. It is not enough that we should sit down and say, 'I am
one with Infinite Life." This must mean more than mere words; it must be
felt, it must become an embodiment of a positive mental attitude. It is
not claiming something to be true which is going to happen; it is not
sending out an aspiration, or a desire, or a supplication, or a prayer;
it must be the embodiment of that which knows that *now it is*. This is
more than holding a thought. Our ability to attract will depend upon the
largeness of our thought as we feel that it flows out into a great
Universal Creative Power. We are dealing with the form in thought, and
not with the form in matter. We have learned that when we get the true
form in thought and permeate it with the spirit of belief we will see
the thought made flesh without any further effort on our part.

Thought can attract to us only that which we first

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

mentally embody. We cannot attract to ourselves that which we are not.
We can attract in the outer only that which we have first completely
mentally embodied within, that which has become a part of our mental
make-up, a part of our inner understanding.

A man going into business will attract to himself that which he thinks
about the most. If he is a barber he will attract people who want to be
shaved or have their hair cut. If he sells shoes he will attract people
who want to buy shoes. (See *Creative Mind and Success*, by the author
of the present volume.) So it is with everything; we will not only do
this, but we will also attract as much of anything as we mentally
embody. This is apt to be overlooked in the study of metaphysics. It is
not enough to say that we attract what we think; *we become what we
think*, and what we become we will attract.

Do not become merely sentimental about this. Your life is governed by
more than a sentiment; it; is governed by law, something that cannot be
broken, something that picks up every mental attitude and does something
with it.

This fundamental proposition of the law should then work out into our
conditions. Always remember that it does just as we think. It does not
argue, it simply does the thing as we think it. Now how are we thinking?
Never ask a patient how he is feeling; ask, how are you thinking to-day?
This is the only thing that matters. How are we thinking about life and
our conditions? Are we receiving the race suggestion; are we saying that
there is not enough to go around? If we are saying this, it is our
belief, and there is something that will see that it becomes a part of
our expression. Most people, through ignorance of the higher laws of
their

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

being, are suffering from the thoughts imposed upon them from a negative
and doubtful world. We who are claiming the use of the greater law must
emancipate ourselves from all sense of limitation. We are not to be
governed by the outer confusion but by the inner realization. We are to
judge life not from the way that things in the past have been done, but
from the way that the Spirit does things.

### THE WAY OF THE SPIRIT.

AGAIN let us say that the Spirit creates by becoming the thing that it
thinks. There is no other possible way in which it could work. Since it
is all and there is no other, the thought of opposing forces never
enters into its mental working; when we are judging from the outer we
are not working in line with the power that we should be using. We must
come to see that there is only *One Power* and that we are touching it
at all points, for there is not a power of poverty and a power of
prosperity. There is the one becoming the many; it makes and it unmakes
that a higher form may appear to express through it. All that is not in
line with its forward movement will soon pass away, for it recognizes no
opposite. As far as we are concerned what we are and what we are to
become depends only upon what we are thinking, for this is the way that
we are using creative power. The sooner we get away from the thought
that we have to create, the sooner we will be able to work in line with
the Spirit. Always man uses; he never creates anything. The united
intelligence of the human race could not make a single rose-bud; it does
not know enough. But our slightest thought adrift in mind

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

causes the same power that makes all things to create for us. The great
error of the race is, and always has been, that men have thought to give
a physical reason for things. When that reason has not answered the
problems of life they have sought out some other reason just as
physical. The fact that they are all wrong is shown in that every
generation has found a different reason. When truth is found it will
also be found that it never changes to suit the whims of the human
fancy. This is proven by the fact that whatever of the real truth the
race has discovered has never been changed. The truth that was revealed
to the prophets of old has never changed; it is the same to-day as it
was thousands of years ago. Whoever touches truth, no matter in what
generation, will always get the same answer. The great truth that was
revealed from Moses to the time of Jesus is the same truth that is still
revealed to all who will accept it; it is simply this: we are now living
in a Spiritual Universe governed by mental laws of cause and effect.
Moses saw it mostly from the standpoint of the Law of cause and effect,
an eye for an eye. What does this mean? It means, as Jesus said, "As a
man sows, so shall he reap." Moses saw the law. Jesus saw not only the
law ("I am come not to destroy but to fulfill"), but he saw behind the
law the reason for it, and revealed behind all law the Great Law-giver,
a God of love working out the great inner concepts of His own being in
harmony and in beauty, filled with peace, causing the sun to shine alike
upon the just and the unjust. Jesus did not try to overcome the use of
law; He understood all law and He well knew that all law was at His
command; He did not break the law, He fulfilled it. So we must find that
all is at our

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

command through these same laws. The man who understands law and
complies with it will have no difficulty in demonstrating that it is as
true for him as it ever was for any one else. What, then, are the laws
underlying prosperity? The first is this, and we must not try to escape
it: "Thou shalt have no other Gods before me." This Me is Spirit. We
are, then, to trust only in the activity of Spirit for what we need. But
the world will say. "Human things come through human agencies." This may
be true, but we must realize that the power we are dealing with also has
within its own mind all people and all things. We do not have to treat
people; what we have to do is to embody principle. Principle may use
people, but that is no part of our responsibility. Ultimately all is
Spirit, and Spirit which is the beginning is also the end of all
manifestation. "I am the Alpha and the Omega." Our life, then, is to be
governed by Spirit. We need look no further. It will do for us all that
we will ever ask, provided we believe. Why, then, has it not done so?
The answer is that it has already done so, but we have not received it.
The Spirit may offer, but we must accept the gift before it can be made.
"Behold, I stand at the door and knock." We must understand that this
receiving is a mental process; it is one of mentally taking.

The way, then, that we are using mind through our thought is the way
that we are treating ourselves for prosperity. So simple, and yet we
have not understood it! If a man says, "I have not." he will not
receive; if he says, "I have," he will receive. "To those who have shall
be given, and to those who have not shall be taken away even that which
they have." This is a veiled statement

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

of the law of cause and effect. When you send out into mind the thought
that you have not, it accepts the idea and takes away from you even that
which you have. Reverse the process and say, "I have," and it will at
once set to work to create for you even more than you now possess. You
will readily see then that you are not dealing with two powers but with
one, and that it operates through your own thought, doing unto all even
as they believe.

### THE LEVEL OF CONSCIOUSNESS.

SINCE all is mind, and it is done unto us as we mentally think, all life
is simply a law of thought--activity of consciousness. In our life the
power flows through us. If we provide a big receptivity, it will do a
big thing; if, on the other hand, we only believe in a small way, the
activity must be a small one. The Spirit can do for us only what it can
do through us. Unless we are able to provide the consciousness, it
cannot make the gift. Few people have a great consciousness, and this
explains why so few excel. The power behind all things of itself is
without limit; it is all-power; in us it has to become what we make it.
We carry within our own soul the key to all expression, but few enter
in. The door is not seen with the physical eye, and as yet but few have
gained the ability to see; the majority merely look. Realizing, then,
that while the power is limitless it must become operative through our
own thought, we shall see that what we need is not some greater power,
but that what we really need is a greater [consciousness](errata.htm#5),
a deeper realization of life, a grander concept of being. We must unify
ourselves with the great whole. The man

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

who dares to fling his thought out into universal intelligence with the
positive assurance of one who knows and dares to claim all there is will
find that it will be done. God will honor his request. On the other
hand, the one who fears to speak lest God will smite will find himself
smitten of the law, not because God is angry, but because it is done as
he believes.

We have a right to have and should expect to have in this world all that
will make for the comfort and for the luxuries of life. What matter how
much we have, if we rob no other soul to get it? Shall not the Power
that so lavishly spreads Itself out into nature give to us Its highest
expression, all that we can ask? We dishonor God when we claim less than
all. Until we can expand our thought so that we shall be able to say
also, "*I am*," we need not expect to get great results.

The soul that knows its own Divinity is the great soul; before it all
else must bend; to it all else must gravitate. Enlarge your thought
processes. Away with the little personal thoughts of things, and dare to
think in universal terms about all things. The universe is running over
with good, it is for you, but you must believe and then take it. Do you
dare to believe that your own word is invincible? When you speak it how
do you feel? Is it limitless, is it all power, is all power given to you
in heaven and on earth. are you one with the only power that there is?
Until you can say yes to all these questions and not simply believe them
but know them, you can not hope to attain. It is useless in making a
demonstration to beg for things; as well beg that water should be wet or
that fire should be hot. Things are, we must take them. Your word has
only the

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

power that you put into it, no more and no less. We are all held
accountable for every word that we speak because all is the action and
the reaction of mind. Man is his own heaven and his own hell.

We start a new enterprise and wonder what the chances of success are;
have we realized that the outer is simply the inner manifested? When we
go to a new place we shall find there only what we have taken with us.
If we have taken success we will find success; if, on the other hand, we
have taken failure we will find failure. This is the law; none can avoid
it, none need try. Every living soul is a law unto his own life. "There
is no law but my own soul shall set." Nothing can come upon the path of
the soul but that thing that the soul attracts.

### PRACTICE FOR PROSPERITY.

PROSPERITY is in our own hands to do with as we will, but we will never
reach it until we learn to control our thought. We must see only what we
want and never allow the other things to enter. If we wish activity we
must be active in our thought, we must see activity and speak it into
everything that we do. The spoken word shall bring it to pass. We speak
the word, it is brought to pass of the Power that we speak it into. We
can only speak the word that we understand, the activity will correspond
to our inner concepts. If they are large the results will be large. The
thing to do is to unify ourselves with all the biggest ideas that we can
compass; and realizing that our ideas govern our power of attraction, we
should be constantly enlarging within ourselves. We must realize our

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

at-one-ment with All Power and know that our word will bring it to pass.
We speak the word, it is brought to pass of As consciousness grows it
will manifest in enlarged opportunities and a greater field of action.
Most people think in the terms of universal powers. Feel that you are
surrounded by all the power that there is when you speak and never doubt
but that what you say will spring into being.

We should speak right out into mind all that we desire, and believe that
it will be done unto us. Never take the time to listen to those who
doubt. We observe that their philosophy has done but little to save the
world or themselves. here again let the dead bury the dead and see to it
that you maintain in your own thought what you want, letting go of all
else. Think only what you want to happen and never let yourself get
mentally lazy and sluggish taking on the suggestions of poverty and
limitation. See your-self as being in the position that you desire,
mentally dwell upon it and then speak with perfect assurance that it is
done; and then forget it and trust in the law. This will answer all
needs. If you want to do this for someone else, all that you will need
to do is to think of them and go through the same process of mind
action. You will be sending out the truth for them, and mind being
always active will not contradict what you have said.

Remember that you cannot hope to get results unless you keep but the one
idea and do not mix thoughts in your mind. All is yours, but you must
take it. The taking is always a mental process; it is believing
absolutely. This is divine principle.

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

### CONCLUSION.

PRINCIPLE itself is simplicity, yet it is infinite--it is Infinite Mind
and manifestation of Mind. We live in a Spiritual universe governed
through thought, or the word which first becomes law; this law creates
what we call matter. Jesus Christ discerned the truth about spiritual
principles more than any other man who ever lived, and he proclaimed the
eternal reign of law and understanding, absolute, complete, perfect; and
he found that law to be operative through his own thought and the power
of his own word. And when you and I shall cease looking outside
ourselves to any person and shall realize that whatever truth and
whatever power we shall have must flow through us; when we begin to
interpret our own natures, we shall begin to understand God and law, and
life, and not until then.

We live and move and have our being in what we call an Infinite Mind, an
Infinite Creative Mind, also infinitely receptive, operative,
omnipotent, and all-knowing; and we have learned that this mind presses
against us on all sides, flows through us, and becomes operative through
our thinking. The human race, ignorant of the laws of this mind,
ignorant of the power of its own thought, has through its ignorance
misused and abused the creative power of its thought, and brought upon
itself the thing it feared. This is true because all thought is law, and
all law is mind in action, and the word which you speak to-day is the
law which shall govern your life to-morrow, as the word which you spoke,
ignorantly or innocently, consciously or unconsciously

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

yesterday, is absolutely governing your life to-day. As metaphysicians,
then, we are not dealing with a material, nor denying a manifest
universe, but we are claiming that the manifestation is the result of
the inner activity of the mind; and if we wish for a definite
manifestation, we must produce a definite inner activity. *You and I,
then, are not dealing with conditions, but with mental and spiritual
law*. We are dealing with the power of thought, the power of mind, and
the more spiritual the thought the higher the manifestation. The more
our reliance upon what we call God, the greater the power.

It is the new education because it strips all the false from the old
belief and reveals the individual. It is the new age, because as sure as
God is, it will usher in and express the perfect life, the revelation of
this truth, and our ability to use it; and it is your own fault when you
know this and do not prove it.

If, knowing the infinite power flowing through you, you still remain
sick and unhappy, miserable and poor, my friend, it is your own fault.
Do not blame God, do not blame man, and do not say it is of the devil.
*It is your own fault*. Every time you say *I Am*, you are recognizing
the eternal infinite presence of omnipotent power within your-self,
which is God operating through your thought, and that is why you bring
upon yourself the thing you fear, and why you bring to yourself the
thing you want.

When fifty-one per cent. of your thinking is health and life and power,
that day the fifty-one per cent. will swallow up, erase, kill out the
rest. The day you, as an individual, through fifty-one per cent. of your
thought, pass beyond the perception of limitation, you will draw out of
the universe

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

everything you desire; poverty will desert you and you will be
emancipated forever. The day you think fifty-one per cent. of happiness,
misery shall depart and never return. Is it not then worth your time and
your effort, and should it not be the greatest purpose in the life of
any awakened soul so to depict this principle as to emancipate himself?

The way can be shown, but each individual must him-self walk the way. We
are so bound by suggestion and hypnotized by false belief, so entangled
by the chaotic thinking of the world, thinking which is based upon the
principle of a dual mind, that we become confused and are not ourselves.
Wake up! Your word is all-powerful, your consciousness is one with
Omnipotence. Your thought is infinite. Your destiny is eternal and your
home is everlasting heaven. Realize the truth--I am living in a perfect
universe, it always was perfect and always will be perfect. There never
was a mistake made, there are no mistakes being made, and there never
will be. I live in the great and eternal universe of perfection from
cause to effect, from beginning to end, and "The world's all right, and
I know it."

Majestic and calm, waiting with eternal and divine patience, the Great
Principle of Life is ready to give to us all that it has. And while we
listen and wait we will cast from us everything that hinders its
complete expression through us, we will let go of all struggle and all
strife and be at peace with Life.

Perfect peace to the soul as we rest in the realization of our unity
with all that there is, was or ever will be. One with the Infinite Mind.
All the power of the Spirit is working through our thought as we believe
and receive.

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Now we will ask
for and take that thing which we desire; it is done, it is complete, now
and forever. Perfect life, perfect healing, perfect harmony, Divine
guidance, Infinite strength and joy forever.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Questions and Answers](cm05)
