[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Procopius](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](shp26)  [Next](shp28) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/076617039X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Secret History of Procopius*, tr. by Richard Atwater, \[1927\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

### XXIV. UNJUST TREATMENT OF THE SOLDIERS, AND HOW JUSTINIAN TRICKED THE "STUDENTS" OUT OF THEIR PAY BY THREATENING TO SEND THEM TO WAR

I MUST not pass over his treatment of the soldiers, over whom he
appointed paymasters with instructions to hold out as much of their
money as they found possible, on the understanding that one twelfth of
what they thus collected was theirs. Their method each year was as
follows. It was the regulation that different ranks in the army receive
different pay: the young and newly enlisted received less, those who had
seen hard service and had advanced half way up the list received more,
and the veterans who should soon

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

retire from service had a still higher rating, so that they could live
on their savings as private citizens, and when their span of life was
complete, might be able to leave some consolation to their families. In
this way, the soldiers step by step arose in rank as their older
comrades died or retired, and each man's pay fitted his degree of
seniority.

But the paymasters forbade the erasing from the lists of the names of
soldiers who died, even when many perished together, as frequently
happened in the constant wars. Nor did they fill the vacancies in the
lists, even after considerable time.

The result of this was that the number of soldiers grew continually
less, and those who survived their dead comrades were deprived of their
proper advancement in rank and pay; while the paymasters handed over to
Justinian the money that should have gone to these soldiers all this
time.

Furthermore, they fined the soldiers for other personal and unjust
reasons, as a

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

reward for the perils they underwent in the battlefield: on the charge
that they were Greeks, as if none of that nation could be brave; or that
they were not commissioned by the Emperor to serve, even when they
showed his signature to that effect, which the paymasters did not
hesitate to question; or that they had been absent from duty for a few
days.

Later, some of the palace guards were sent throughout the whole Roman
Empire to investigate how many on the military lists were unfit for
service; and some were relieved of their uniform for being old and
useless, so that for the rest of their lives they had to beg their meals
of the charitable in the public Forum, exhibiting their tears and
lamentations to passersby; and the rest, lest they might suffer a
similar fate, handed over their savings as a bribe, with the result that
all the soldiers lost heart for their profession, were reduced to
poverty, and had no further enthusiasm for campaigning.

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

This was ruinous to the Romans and their authority in Italy; and the
paymaster Alexander, sent thither, had the audacity to reproach the
soldiers for their poor morale; while he exacted further money from the
Italians, on the pretext of punishing them for their negotiations with
Theodoric and the Goths. The common soldiers, indeed, were not the only
ones to be reduced to poverty and helplessness by these commissioners;
for all the staff officers, under the generals, who had formerly been in
high esteem, were utterly impoverished and in danger of famine, as they
had no money left with which to buy their customary provisions.

Speaking of the soldiers reminds me to add further details. The Roman
emperors hitherto had stationed large armies on all frontiers of the
State to protect its boundaries; and particularly in the East, to repel
incursions of the Persians and Saracens. These border troops Justinian
used so ill

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

and meanly from the start that their pay became four or five years
overdue; and when peace was declared between the Romans and Persians,
these poor men, instead of sharing in the fruits of peace, were forced
to contribute to the public treasury whatever was owed them; after which
they were summarily discharged from the army. Thereafter the boundaries
of the Roman Empire were unguarded, and the soldiers were left suddenly
on the hands of charity.

Another corps of not less than three thousand, five hundred other
soldiers, originally mustered for the palace guard, and called the
Scholars, had always received higher pay from the public treasury than
the rest of the army. Originally they were chosen to this preferred
company by special merit, from the Armenians; but from the time when
Zeno became Emperor, it was possible for anyone, no matter how poor or
cowardly a soldier, to wear this uniform.

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Now when Justin
came to the throne, this Justinian distributed the honor among a large
number upon their paying him a considerable price for it. And when he
saw there was no further possible vacancy, he enrolled two thousand
more, whom he called Supernumeraries. When he himself took over the
throne, he immediately disbanded the Supernumeraries, without giving
them back any of the money they had paid him.

This, however, is what he schemed with reference to the Student Corps.
Whenever an army was about to be sent against Libya, Italy, or the
Persians, he ordered them to pack for service with the regulars, though
he knew well they were utterly unfit for the campaign. And they,
trembling at the possibility of active service, surrendered their pay
for the period of the war. The Students had this unpleasant experience
more than once. Also Peter, during all the time he was Master of
Offices,

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

worried them daily with unheard-of thefts.

For he was a gentle seeming and unassuming man, but the biggest thief
alive, and simply bursting with sordid meanness. It was this Peter whom
I mentioned before as responsible for the murder of Amasalontha,
Theodoric's daughter.

There were also others in the palace guard of much higher rank; and the
more they paid into the treasury for their commissions, the higher was
their military rating. These were called Domestics and Protectors, and
had always been exempt from active service. Only as a matter of form
they were listed in the palace guard. Some of them were regularly
stationed in Constantinople, others had always been assigned to Galatia
or other provinces. Justinian scared these, too, in the same way, into
forfeiting their pay to him.

Finally, it was the law that every five years the Emperor should give
each soldier a bonus of a fixed sum in gold. And every

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

five years commissioners had been sent over all the Roman Empire to give
each soldier five gold staters. Not to comply with this custom was
simply unthinkable. Yet from the time that this man managed the State,
he never once did this, nor had any idea of doing it, though he reigned
for thirty-two years: so that the very custom was finally forgotten by
everyone.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXV. How He Robbed His Own Officials, Merchants, Sailors,
Workmen, and Everybody Else](shp28)
