[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Procopius](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](shp33) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/076617039X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Secret History of Procopius*, tr. by Richard Atwater, \[1927\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span> <span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

# GLOSSARY

<span id="page_280">p. 280</span> <span id="page_281">p. 281</span>

### GLOSSARY

PAGE [26](shp03.htm#page_26)

BELISARIUS, *according to one learned guess, is a Latin transliteration
of the Slavonic "Beli-Tsar," or "White Prince." Procopius elsewhere says
Belisarius came from Germania, a village "on the border of Thrace and
Illyria." Thus both the Germans and the Hungarians have been able to
claim this general as an early hero of their race*.

PAGE [28](shp04.htm#page_28)

SILVERIUS'S later destruction, promised on page [28](shp04.htm#page_28),
*seems to have been overlooked by the impetuous historian*.

PAGE [28](shp04.htm#page_28)

JOHN OF CAPPADOCIA, *pretorian prefect, was highly unpopular because of
his extreme cruelties, but Justinian refused to remove him from an
office he made so financially successful. Discovering he was plotting to
make the Emperor distrustful of her, Theodora had Belisarius's wife,
Antonina, lure John into a nocturnal assignation "to discuss a
rebellion." An ambuscade of the Empress's guards nearly captured the
prefect; he escaped with his life, but was permanently disgraced and
became a priest*.

<span id="page_282">p. 282</span>

PAGE [30](shp04.htm#page_30)

CONSTANTINE. *An officer under Belisarius*.

PAGE [32](shp04.htm#page_32)

PRESIDIUS, *a loyal Italian, was despoiled of two jewelled daggers by
Constantine, then military governor of Spoleto. Presidius complained to
Belisarius. In a resulting dispute between the general and his
subordinate, Constantine drew his sword against his commander. This act
of mutiny resulted in his being put to death at the general's command*.

PAGE [32](shp04.htm#page_32)

PHOTIUS. *Son of Antonina by a former marriage*.

PAGE [32](shp04.htm#page_32)

CENTENARY. *One centenary equaled one hundred pounds of gold*.

PAGE [35](shp05.htm#page_35)

CHOSROES. *King of Persia, sometimes called Nushirvan the Just*.

PAGE [41](shp05.htm#page_41)

LAZICA. *Country of the Lazi on the isthmus between the Euxine (Black)
and the Caspian Seas; also known anciently as Colchis, the fabled land
of Medea and the Golden Fleece*.

PAGE [49](shp06.htm#page_49)

THEODOSIUS'S *death. Gibbon nicely prefers a more romantic end than the
Greek allows: "Theodosius*

<span id="page_283">p. 283</span>

*expired in the first fatigues of an amorous interview"!*

PAGE [59](shp07.htm#page_59)

GELIMER. *Vandal King of Africa*.

PAGE [59](shp07.htm#page_59)

VITIGES. *Visigoth King of Italy*.

PAGE [60](shp07.htm#page_60)

ANASTASIUS. *Nephew of Theodora. The Greek word usually means
"daughter's son" only, while the same noun with a feminine ending means
"daughter's daughter" but sometimes "niece." Gibbon argues that Theodora
according to other records had no grandson, and that in any case he
could not have reached the age of puberty at this time. Furthermore, if
Theodora killed a natural son on his coming to court, so that Justinian
would not know of him, it is unlikely she would acknowledge the second
fruit of her early misdeeds (her only issue by the Emperor, a girl, died
soon after birth). The translation "nephew", since it often carries a
possible romantic connotation, seems the most diplomatic escape from the
indicated problem*.

PAGE [61](shp07.htm#page_61)

ANTONINA *sixty years old. Gibbon would like, by "a forced but more
polite construction", to make Antonina's age refer to the moment when
Procopius is writing. This chronology, he thinks, "would be compatible
with the manhood of Photius* 

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span>

*in 536." I suspect that Gibbon's emendation is historically preferable,
and that Procopius's statement as I have translated it was a tempting
sarcasm which his conscience would have corrected in the later revision,
had he lived to make it*.

PAGE [67](shp08.htm#page_67)

THEODORA'S fear of death. *She suffered from cancer, which presently
proved fatal*.

PAGE [69](shp08.htm#page_69)

BELISARIUS'S end. *A picturesque but discredited later fable tells how
the ungrateful Justinian finally accused Belisarius of a conspiracy
against his life, stripped him of his possessions and put out his eyes,
so that he was forced to beg in the streets, "Give a penny to Belisarius
the general!"* 

PAGE [70](shp08.htm#page_70)

SOLOMON. *Known as "the beardless general": an accidental eunuch, who on
Belisarius's recall from Africa, was by him entrusted with the command
of that province, and had proved a capable successor. Another eunuch,
Narses, similarly reached a merited military command for a time of the
armies in Italy*.

PAGE [75](shp09.htm#page_75)

QUAESTOR. *Chancellor, or Secretary of State*.

PAGE [80](shp10.htm#page_80)

BLUES AND GREENS. *Colors of rival hippodrome teams, whose partisans
eventually differed* 

<span id="page_285">p. 285</span>

also in matter of politics and even, Gibbon suggests, religion: the
Greens, in the time of Anastasius, favoring that defender of (Unit—)
Arianism; the Blues, when Justinian came to notice, following him and
Athanasian orthodoxy.

PAGE [86](shp10.htm#page_86)

TYRANNY. *Tyrant, to a Greek, meant specifically a monarch who had
usurped the throne by force and not by normal succession*.

PAGE [103](shp12.htm#page_103)

THEODORA and the Geese. *This skit was apparently a burlesque of Leda
and the Swan*.

PAGE [110](shp13.htm#page_110)

MARRIAGE *permitted between men of senatorial rank and courtesans. The
nominal object of the new law was to save the girls by offering them
this reward for "a glorious repentance."* 

PAGE [159](shp19.htm#page_159)

AMASALONTHA. *Gothic Queen of Italy, who had been imprisoned by her
husband Theodatus*.

PAGE [160](shp19.htm#page_160)

INSTRUCTIONS given Peter by the Emperor. *Demanding Amasalontha's life
and liberty be kept inviolate*.

PAGE [160](shp19.htm#page_160)

THEODATUS eliminates Amasalontha. *She was strangled in her bath*.

<span id="page_286">p. 286</span>

PAGE [160](shp19.htm#page_160)

PAPHLAGONIAN, *by a familiar Greek pun, frequent in Aristophanes, also
suggests "a blusterer."* 

PAGE [168](shp20.htm#page_168)

THREE OBOLS. Ten cents.

PAGE [178](shp21.htm#page_178)

A TRILLION PEOPLE. *"A myriad myriads of myriads," is the text, a
myriad, or 10,000 being the highest number in Greek arithmetic. The
commentator Alemannus computes the total as two hundred millions; and by
an even stranger and more economical figuring, the translator for the
Athenian Society makes two millions of it. Gibbon suggests dropping one
of the myriads, to give one hundred million: "a number not wholly
unpermissable."* 

PAGE [227](shp27.htm#page_227)

SCHOLARS *(Latin, scholares) was their actual nickname; but the
reference is to their life of ease, not to their erudition*.

PAGE [246](shp29.htm#page_246)

SCISSORS. *The nickname refers, of course, to his economical clipping of
gold coins*.

PAGE [275](shp33.htm#page_275)

BARBARIAN, *to a Greek, meant anyone who spoke a foreign language; not
till late Roman times did the word take on its modern significance.
Considering Procopius's occasional levities, I suspect he was aware of
the humor of his phrase*.

 

 

 

 
